THE JESUITS MORALS. COLLECTED By a DOCTOR of the COLLEGE OF Sorbon in Paris.
WHO HAS Faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books, which are
printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their Society.

Written in French, and exactly Translated into English.

But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all
Men. 2 Timothy Chapter 3. V. 9.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet Street, near
Temple Bar, MDCLXX.

I Have perused a Book, Entitled The Jesuits Morals, Translated into English,
and compared diverse of the Quotations therein mentioned with the Original
Authors, as they are in Sion-College-Library, London: and do find them
faithfully and exactly recited. Viz. Laymannus. Lessius. Filliutius. Sanchez.
Azorius, cum aliis.


April 27. 1670. John Spencer Library Keeper.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Miter in
Fleet Street near Temple Bar.
Folio's.
THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries; whereunto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo, from Persia, into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in
1640. the whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
Originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy; Englished by J. Davies
of Kidwelly. The second Edition in Folio, price bound 18 shillings. The Present
State of the Ottoman Empire in three Books; containing the Maxims of the
Turkish Polity, their Religion, and Military Discipline: illustrated with
diverse Figures. Written by Paul Rycaut Esquire late Secretary to the English
Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The third Edition in Folio, price bound
10 s. The History of Barbado's, St Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight;
in two Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described. Written by an ingenious Hand, in Folio, price bound
10 s. Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa, or the History of the Cardinals of the
Roman Church, from the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the
last Pope Clement the IX. with a full account of his Conclave, in three Parts.
Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and faithfully
Englished, in Folio, price bound 8 s. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor
of the College of Sorbon in Paris, who has faithfully extracted them out of
the Jesuits own Books which are printed by the permission and approbation of
the Superiors of their Society. Written in French, and exactly translated into
English, in Folio, price bound 10 s. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chymiatricae,
or Royal and Practical Chemistry, in three Treatises; being a Translation of
Oswald Crollius his Royal Chemistry; augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To
which is added his Treatise of Signatures of internal things, or a true and
lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser World. As also the Practice of
Chemistry of John Hartman, M.D. augmented and enlarged by his Son, with
considerable Additions; all faithfully Englished by a Lover of Chemistry, in
Folio, price bound 10 s. The World Surveyed, or the famous Voyages and Travels
of Vincent le Blanc of Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu,
Fez, Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of
Europe, price bound 10 s. A Practical and Polemical Commentary or Exposition
upon the 3d. and 4th. Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. By
Thomas Hall, B.D. price bound 10 s. A General Collection of Discourses of the
Virtuosi of France, upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other
Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the
most ingenious Persons of that Nation. Englished by G. Havers, in two Volumes,
price bound 30 s. A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and
Number of them, of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of
their Books. Written in French by David Blundell. Englished by J. Davies, price
bound 7 s. Bentivolio and Urania, a Religious Romance, in six Books, Written by
Nathanael Ingelo, D.D. The second Edition. To which is added, the
Interpretation of the hard Names imprinted in the Margent, throughout the Book,
price bound 12 s. I Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus; in
two Centuries: With the Politic Touchstone. Written originally in Italian, by
Trajano Bocalini, and Englished by the Earl of Monmouth. The second Edition
corrected, price bound 8 s. An Advertisement of diverse Cases and Resolutions of
the Common Law, Alphabetically digested under several Titles, by Henry Rolls,
Sergeant at Law; published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all
the Judges, price bound 40 s. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight; in three
Volumes, in English: Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition,
carefully corrected by the Original, price bound 45 s. The second Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England; containing the Exposition of Magna Charta,
and many ancient and other Statutes: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke.
The third Edition; with an Alphabetical Table added, price bound 14 s. The
third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning High Treason,
and other Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition; written
by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, price bound 6 s. The fourth Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts:
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The fourth Edition; with an
Alphabetical Table not heretofore printed, price bound 9 s. Brief
Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to the
fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Prynne Esquire price bound 12 s. Action upon the
Case for Slander; or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law,
of what words are Actionable, and what not; by William Sheppard Esquire price bound
6 s. Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts
of Judicial Writs in the Common-Bench; together with their Retorns. By Rich.
Brownlow, price bound 10 s. Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved
Forms of Original and Judicial Writs in the Kings Bench; with their special
Directions. By J.C. price bound 6 s.
Quarto's.
The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of William
the Conqueror. By Sylas Tailor, price bound 3 s. Andronicus Comnenius, a
Tragedy. By John Wilson, price stitched 1 s. Heraclius Emperor of the East, a
Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel Esquire price stitched 1 s. A brief Account of Mr.
Valentine Greatrakes, the famous Stroker, and diverse of the strange Cures by
him lately performed. Written by himself to the Honorable Robert Boil, price
stitched 1 s.
Octavo's.
A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to the
Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed
by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the years 1663, and 1664.
Written by an Attendant on the Embassies, in Octavo, price bound 4 s. Il
Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time of Sixtus
the IV. 1471. to the death of the last Pope Alexander the VII. 1667. Written in
Italian, and Englished by W.A. Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo, price
bound 3 s. The Art of Chemistry as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault Chemist to the French King; and Englished by W.A. Doctor in Physic,
and Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo, price bound 3 s. A Relation of the
Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French Forces to its
Surrender the 27th. of September 1669. Written in French by a Gentleman who was
a Voluntier in that Service, and faithfully Englished. In Octavo, price bound 1
s. The History of Algiers, and its Slavery; with an account of that City, and
many remarkable particularities of Africa: Written by Sicur d'Alranda, sometime
a Slave there. Englished by J. Davies, price bound 3 s. An Historical and
Geographical Description of the great Country, and River of the Amazons in
America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French, price bound 1 s.
6. d. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague Esquire price bound 1
s. 6 d. Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English, price
bound 1 s. 6 d. The Works of the famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, treating of the
Lives of Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly added the Life of
the Author. Translated out of French into English, by Sir Thomas Vrchard
Knight, price bound 5 s. An Exact Abridgment in English, of the Cases reported
by Sir Francis Moor Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of Law therein by
the Judges: By W. Hughes, price bound 2 s. 6 d. Plowden's Queries, or a
Moot-Book of choice Cases in the Common Law, Englished, Methodized, and
Enlarged; by H.B. price bound 2 s. 6 d. An Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes
in Force and Use, made in the 16th. 17th. and 18th. of King Charles the First,
and in the 12th. 13th. 14th. 15th. and 16th. of King Charles the Second: By
William Hughes Esquire price bound 2 s. 6 d. Tho. Hall, Apologia pro Ministerio
Evangelico. Lat. price bound 2 s. -- Translation of the Second Book of Ovid's
Metamorph. price bound 1 s. His Treatise against the Millenaries, price bound 1
s. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles
of the Art of Physic; with the Insufficiency of the Vulgar Way of preparing
Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation: By
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. price bound 1 s.
Twelves.
The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors by W.A. Fellow of the Royal Society.
In Twelves, price bound 2 s. 6 d. Accidence Commenced Grammar, and supplied
with sufficient Rules; or a new and easy Method for the learning the Latin
Tongue. The Author John Milton. In Twelves, price bound 8 d. A Relation of the
Coasts of Africa called Guinnee, with a Description of the Countries, Manners,
and Customs of the Inhabitants, of the Productions of the Earth, and the
Merchandise and Commodities it affords, with some Historical Observations on
the Coasts, being collected in a Voyage made by the Sieur Villault Escuyer
Sieur de Bellefond in the years 1666, and 1667. faithfully Englished. In
Twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d. The present State of the Princes and Republics
of Italy; written originally in English by J. Gailhard, Gent. price bound 1 s.
The present State of the Republic of Venice; with a Relation of the present
War in Candia: By John Gailhard, Gent. price bound 1 s. 6 d. A Guide for
Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways,
Treasurers of the County-stock, Masters of the House of Correction, Bailiffs of
Manors, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. showing the extent and power of the several
Offices; Collected by George Meriton, price bound 1 s. 6 d. A Relation of the
French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish Netherlands in the years 1667,
and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his Title thereunto, and an Account
of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May 2. 1668. Englished by G. H. In
Twelves, price bound 1 s. The Voyage of Italy, or a Complete Journey through
Italy; in two Parts: with the Characters of the People, and the Description of
the Chief Towns, Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues,
Antiquities; as also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all
the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels Gent. who
traveled through Italy 17 times as Tutor to several of the English Nobility:
Opus Posthumum. Corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller,
S. W. Never before extant. In Twelves, price bound 4 s.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the Publication of this Work.
THE Greatness of God has never been more resplendent than in the particulars,
wherein the Benefit of his Church has been concerned. Herein he is so
absolute, that he alone disposes of all Events, which have any respect of
tendence toward it, and overturning all the measures which humane prudence
has made for it self, he permits them not to appear in the eyes of men, but
clothed with such circumstances, as he judges most proper for his designs, and
wherein they are least expected.

Such is the conduct he pleased to observe about this Book which we have now
published. The Author took it in hand in a time which appeared of all that ever
were the most favorable for it. The Morality of the Jesuits then happening to
be in the greatest aversation and horror to all them who had any light or
piety. The ingenious Letters of Montalte to the Provincial, and the learned
Writings of the Parochial Rectors of Paris having discovered the corruption of
the greater part of their Maxims; and a great number of the Prelates celebrious
for their ability and piety, having already censured them. So that it seemed,
that the Church had no farther need in that particular, than of some prudent
and clearheaded person, who might collect together in one and the same Writing
all the Principles of these corrupted Morals, and who therein might represent
their excesses, to the end that thereby the rest of its Pastors might be
animated fully to banish from its bosom all those pernicious Novelties which
disfigure the purity of its manners.

This was the cause which moved the Author of these Books with an incredible
care and labor to apply himself thereunto, having extracted out of the Books
of the Jesuits all the principal Errors which they had introduced into
Christian Morality, and having reduced them unto certain heads with a very neat
and pure order, which may be worthy to have the name of the particular
Character of his Spirit. But God permitted that when he had finished this so
important Work, he delivered it into the hands of a Doctor, one of his Friends,
that he might communicate it unto others, who were of known Learning and Zeal.
This Doctor acquitted himself faithfully in this Commission: but those to whom
he committed this Book, that they might examine it, being diverted therefrom,
by a multitude of affairs, returned no answer unto him of a long time; so that
the Author continuing sick, saw himself nigh unto death, without knowing in a
manner what was become of his Book, and only understood that they judged it
most worthy to be printed, and that the Church might draw therefrom very great
advantages, if it pleased God to give it his blessing.

As therefore he proposed unto himself in this Work no other thing than to
serve the Church, this answer sufficed to banish out of his mind all the
disquiet which he could have had thereabouts, and he very easily, and without
farther trouble, did wholly commit the care of it to Divine providence, to
which he had been always most submissive. This submission notwithstanding
hindered not, but that some time before his death he recommended it unto another
of his friends, whom he knew to be very greatly concerned, for every thing
whereunto he had relation. But this Friend being not able to address himself to
any other save that Doctor, who had not the Book any longer in his own hands,
and who could not himself learn thereof any news at all, saw himself speedily
after out of condition to serve both the Church and his Friend in such manner
as he earnestly desired.

Some years past over in this uncertainty of what was become of this so
precious a Work, at which time God, who had reserved unto himself the disposal
thereof, caused it to fall happily into the hands of a person who had no
correspondence with its Author, but seeing that it might be profitable to the
Church, thought himself obliged to contribute all his credit and power to its
publication.

Here you have what was thought meet for the Readers to know concerning the
History of this Book. It were to be desired that we might speak here more
openly concerning its Author; but the Society of the Jesuits have accustomed
themselves so to use those who endeavor to serve them by discovering unto them
the excesses wherein they engage themselves, and such is the implacable fury
with which they pretend to have right according to their Maxims to persecute
them, as will not permit us to render unto his name the glory he has therein
deserved. All that we can say therein, to the end we may not leave those who
come after us without knowing at least something of a person to whose zeal they
will esteem themselves so much obliged, is only this, that he seemed to have
been raised to combat and confound the Errors of these Fathers.

He had a mind facile, clear, and solid; a sweetness and moderation in all
respects charming, an humility ingenuous beyond all that can be imagined,
stealing away the splendor of his other virtues from the eyes even of his most
intimate Friends. His education was admirable, and contributed not a little to
the beauty of his Spirit, the purity of his Learning, and the innocence of his
Manners. For he was born of a Father who had a care altogether peculiar to him
to fortify happily his Children against popular Errors, to inspire into them
the most pure Maxims of the Gospel, and to enlarge their minds with the fairest
speculations.

This so sage and so Christian conduct helped very much to augment the
inclination which he had unto piety; so that he had no sooner finished his
course in Philosophy than he proceeded of himself to the study of Divinity, to
which he applied himself with so great success, that being received into the
College and Society of Sorbonne, he performed all his acts with universal
applause, and thereupon received there the Doctors Cap.

The only thing he had to combat with in this his laudable enterprise, was the
passionate affection which he had for the Mathematics. For as this Science is
the most assured of all humane Sciences, and almost the only one in which may
be found any certainty capable to satisfy a Spirit which loves the truth; the
love which he had even to this truth it self, wrought in him so violent an
inclination to this Science, that he could not withhold himself from applying
and busying his thoughts therein for the inventing some or other new machine.
But at length the Holy Spirit, which did conduct his Studies, made him overcome
in a little time the propension he had to these innocent inquiries and
curiosities, and he thought that it was not sufficient for a Divine to despise
the divertisements of the world, but that he ought also to deprive himself of
those of his mind, and he did only search after the truth where it was to be
found, that is to say, in the Holy Scripture and in the Books of the holy
Fathers. So that we may well say of him what S. Gregory Nazianzene said in
commendations of his Brother Caesarius, who had greatly loved Astrology and the
Mathematics, that he had the ingenuity to draw out of these sorts of Sciences
all that was profitable therein, learning thence to admire the invisible
greatnesses of God, which were resplendent in his works, and knew to defend
himself from that which was pernicious in them, which is the adherence they
have, who apply themselves thereunto, to their conjectures and to those truths
which they pretend to discover therein.

This generous disengaging himself from all other things, advantaged him not a
little in the progress which he made in Ecclesiastical knowledge, and in that
part of Divinity which they call Scholastic, which conducts Reason by the
light of Faith and Tradition. This his progress appeared more especially in the
troubles which agitated the Faculty of Divinity of Paris in the year 1656. for
he there defended the truth with so great moderation, that he did not render it
odious, but on the contrary he did astonish and surprise his enemies.

The zeal he had for it was ardent, but this ardour was tempered by his
prudence: and his knowledge was not less modest than his sweetness was
courageous, that there might be seen equally lightning in his discourse, the
regard which he had not to disoblige any person, and the inflexible firmity
which God had given him for the defense of his truth.

The wounds which that renowned Body received then in its Discipline, entered
very deep into his heart; and the grief which he received therefrom, increased
by the consideration of the mischiefs which the Church was threatened with, and
which it resents unto this day, began to alter his health, and to indispose him
toward that sickness whereof he dyed.

But nothing touched him more to the quick than the corruption which the
Jesuits had introduced into the Morality of the Church. He was a mortal enemy
to their compliances, and he could not bear with their presumption which bent
them to consult no other in their Divinity than their own proper light. He
declared against their looseness in all the Ecclesiastic Conferences whereunto
he was invited, and he gave himself up particularly in the Sermons and
Instructions which he made in the Churches, to fortify the Faithful against
their pernicious Maxims.

His Discourses made so much deeper impression upon their Spirits, because they
were sustained by his own examples, and the truths of Christianity were no less
visible in his manners, than they were intelligible in his words. He handled
all sorts of matters with such exactness and solidity, as if he had employed
all his life only in study of some one of them alone; and it might be perceived
that he studied in all his Discourses only to clear the understanding, to touch
hearts, and heal diseases; and not to puzzle the mind, please the ears, and
flatter the diseased.

But the love which he had for the purity of Christian Morals was too great for
to suffer him to rest so contented. He believed that to heal well the mischiefs
which the Jesuits had done the Church, it was necessary to have a perfect
knowledge thereof, and to imitate Physicians who addict themselves to know the
bottom of diseases before they apply themselves to any remedy. He gave himself
for this cause to read the Books of these Fathers, and to extract out of them
the principal Errors, of which he has composed this Book which we now
publish, but at length he could not but sink under so painful and afflicting a
labor. His patience found it self exhausted. The grief he had to see the
Morality of Jesus Christ so horribly disfigured, seized his heart, and cast him
into such a languor as dried him up by little and little, and ravished him away
from the Church, after he had received with great resentments of Piety and
Religion all the Sacraments at the hands of his upper Pastor.

I will not take in hand to give here an Idea of the design which this
excellent Man has had in this Work, of the order which he has observed, of
the reasons which he has had to undertake it, and of those in particular which
have engaged him to cope with the Doctrine of the Jesuits, because he has
himself given satisfaction in all these points in his Preface.

I shall only answer here to those who have wished that he had not discovered
the Errors which are represented in this Work, without refuting them by the
true Principles of Christian Morality, which are Scripture and Tradition. They
avow that this had been advantageous to the Church; and it was the very design
of the Author. But this hinders not but that his labor, although separated
from the more large Refutation, may have also its utility. For they who are
acquainted with the Affairs of the Church, understand that it is no new thing
simply to set down the Errors which the Corrupters of Faith and Manners have
attempted to introduce into the Church, without undertaking to combat them by
long Reasoning, and that S. Epiphanius (as also S. Austin observed) Historics
narratione commemorans omnia, nulla disputatione adversus falsitatem pro
veritate decertans, S. August. de Hares.
has only represented by way of History the pernicious Opinions of the greater
part of Heretics, without taking in hand to refute them in particular;
rehearsing all things with an Historical Narration, but not contending for the
truth against falsehood by any disputation.

I know well that there is cause to believe, by that which S. Austin adds
presently after, that he had only an Abridgment of the Books of S. Epiphanius.
But I know also, that if this Saint had seen them all entire, he would still
have discoursed after the same manner, and that this Judgment may very justly
be passed on them; for that of eighty different Sects, of which Epiphanius has
undertaken to report the Errors, he only tracks the foot, as I may say, of
them one by one, and refutes in the manner of a Divine only four or five,
contenting himself in a few words, and as it were on his way passing by them,
to show the absurdity of the Conceits of those Heretics, and how far they were
distanced from the truth. See how he interprets himself in his Preface
concerning the manner in which he had designed to handle these things: In which
truly this one thing we shall perform, that we shall oppose against them as
much as in us lies, in a few words, as it were an Antidote, whereby we may
expel their poisons, and by Gods help may free any one who either wilfully or
unawares happens to fall into these Heretical opinions, as it were into the
poison of some Serpents. In quo quidem hoc unum praest^bimus, ut adversus illa
quitquid in nobis situm erit paucis uno atque altero verbo velut antidotum
apponamus, quo and illorum venens propulsemus, and secundum Deum quemlibet qui
vel sponte vel invitus in haeretica illa dogmata velut serpentum virus
inciderit, si quidem velit ipse, liberare possimus.


This is the same thing which the Author of this Book of Morals, which is now
made public, has given us to see therein with a mavelous address and
vivacity of Spirit. For though he undertake not to refute these Errors of the
Jesuits, but only to discover them, he does notwithstanding discover them
without making their excesses to appear most plainly, and the opposition also
which they have to the truth and sound doctrine. So that according to the
progress by which we advance in reading this Book, we find our selves
insensibly convinced of the falsities of all the Maxims which are therein
related; and our minds filled with the opposite truths; and our hearts piously
animated against these so horrible corruptions, and edified by the violence
which we observe this Author has done upon himself for to moderate his zeal,
and to keep himself back from refuting opinions so contrary to the common sense
of the Faith. For unto such evils deep sighs and groans are more agreeable than
long discourses. Cum talibu^ malis magis prolixi gemitus and fletus quam
prolixi libri debeantur. S. Aug. Epist. 122.


Indeed the arguings of the Jesuits which he relates, and whereof they make use
to authorize their monstrous opinions, are so evidently contrary to the
Principles and Maxims of the Gospel, and to the light of Nature; the abuse to
which they put the words of Scripture and the Fathers, is so visible and so
gross, and there needs so little discerning to see that they take them in a
sense contrary to what they do indeed contain, that these Authors destroy
themselves, and are refuted themselves by themselves, and it suffices simply to
report their Doctrine, to make appear that it overturns the Foundations of
Religion, and that it is not only opposite to the Wisdom of the Cross and
Christian Philosophy, but also to Reason and the Philosophy of the Heathens.

It is true that this corruption is not equally evident in all their Maxims,
and that to surprise more easily those who have some fear of God, they do
propose these unto them with some kind of temperament, covering them with some
specious pretenses, which serve for reasons to engage them to follow them
without scruple. But the Author of these Morals has so dexterously unfolded all
these Artifices, and all these studied subtilties, and has so neatly
discovered their malignity, that there is no fear that those who read them will
suffer themselves to be deceived by them, nor that they can have any confidence
in the people, whom he has made clearly to appear to have a privilege to
speak every thing that they please, and not to contradict themselves at all in
speaking things altogether contrary, according to the diversity of places,
times, and the interest of their Society; who give themselves the liberty and
the right, not only of two contrary opinions, to choose that which is most for
their commodity, but even to follow both the two according to diverse occasions,
and the different relishes of those who consult with them; finally, who content
not themselves only to refute the holy Fathers, the Popes, and the Councils,
when they are not for their convenience, but who also take the confidence to
make them speak what they please, altogether contrary to what they do speak.

It is true also, that this Author having undertaken to make us see the general
corruption which the Jesuits have spread all over the Morals, could not avoid
to speak of those matters, which S. Paul says ought not to be proceeded in so
far as to be named by Christians; and that he is forced to show how they would
make Marriage, which is the Image of all pure and all holy Union of Jesus
Christ with the Church, and which ought to be handled with all honor, to give
right to shameful filthinesses, which even the Pagan Philosophers themselves
have condemned, according to these excellent words of an ancient Author:
Adulter estuxoris amator acrior. He is an Adulterer who is too eager a Lover of
his Wife.

Notwithstanding he has been careful not to transcribe those ordures, with
which Sanchez has filled whole Volumes, among which some have been so
scandalous, that they have been left out in some Editions, which yet have been
no hinderance to Tambourin and Amadeus to renew them; where he speaks of these
excesses and other such like, it is with such temperance, that discharging the
Reader of a good part of the confusion which he might have received thereby, he
does not forbear at all to instruct him sufficiently, and make him conceive all
that horror wherein he ought to have these miserable Writers, who seem
principally to be composed to satiate their imagination with most enormous
unheard of crimes.

Finally, That which does yet more justify the design of the Author of these
Morals, and the manner wherein he handles these things, is that now of a long
time all these excesses which are herein rehearsed, have been made public by
the Jesuits themselves, who have caused them to be printed and sold, and who
have delivered them into the hands of an infinite of Religious persons and
Directors of others not very clear sighted, who think that they cannot better
learn the Maxims of Christian Morality than in reading the most famous Authors
of so celebrated a Society. So that it will be of very great importance to make
the corruptions of these Authors so known, that no man may hereafter be
mistaken in them. And this cannot be better executed than by proposing those
very same Maxims as impious and detestable, which the Jesuits have propounded
in their Books as good and safe; this alone being sufficient to work effects
altogether contrary in men's spirits, as may be seen in the Example of Escobar,
who having been imprinted thirty nine times, as a very good Book, has been now
imprinted the fortieth time, as one of the most mischievous Books in the whole
World; which has so wrought, that whereas the first thirty nine Editions were
very prejudicial to the Church, this fortieth has been very beneficial unto it.

And the same we believe may happen in the publication of these Morals, which
the alone zeal and love of the purity of the Morality of Jesus Christ has
induced us to make public. It is hoped that this Publication will prevail to
remove the scandal which the Jesuits have caused from the Church, to which they
gave place to the Heretics to attribute those Opinions for which it has the
greatest horror; and that these unhappy persons who are separated from its
communion, shall not impute them unto it any more, after so public a
disavowing of these Maxims altogether abominable as they are; not giving them
yet any advantage above the Jesuits themselves, because it is not hard to make
appear that the Principles of their Morality are no less corrupted nor
pernicious than those of these Fathers.

It is hoped that this Publication will stir up the Pastors of the Church to
renew the zeal which they have already made appear against the Authors of so
many corruptions; that they will interdict in their Diocesses the reading of
these Books; that they will take the ways which the Sacred Canons have
prescribed them, (2 Timothy 2.17.) to repress so pernicious Novelties, and that
they will hinder them that they spread not over men's spirits, as Gangrenes
which waste and corrupt by little and little that which was sound; and that
they will fear, lest while they dissemble these excesses, and pass by those who
are their Authors, they make themselves culpable of the loss of a great number
of Souls, which these blind Guides seduce and train along with them into the
pit.

We despair not even of the Jesuits themselves, that they also may draw from
thence the advantage which this Author has earnestly desired to procure them.
For although it seems by their conduct, which they have hitherto held herein,
that they are resolved to persevere in maintaining these damnable Maxims, and
to despise the wholesome advertisements which the whole Church has given them,
to abandon them; yet notwithstanding it may be said, that if they have used
them in this sort, it has been perhaps, because they were not yet sufficiently
convinced of the justice of the reproaches which have been cast on them, and
that some secret interest has hindered them from perceiving them in the
Writings of those whom they looked upon as their Adversaries. But now that a
person whom they cannot suspect, and who has never been engaged against them,
has presented unto them so distinctly the concatenation of the Maxims and
Conclusions which their Authors have taught, it will be very hard for them not
to be surprised therein, and not to be powerfully struck by so many detestable
Opinions. Who knows but God, hearing the prayers, which have now for a long
time been ordained by the whole Clergy of France, and which have been made
publicly in some particular Diocesses, to beg for them, that he would open
their eyes, may touch them and bring them on highly to disowne the Authors of
so many abominations, and to make it appear by their condemning them themselves
as public Plagues and declared Enemies of all Truth and Justice, that the
Crimes with which they have been reproached belong only to some private men,
and not to the whole Society.

The approbation of the Doctors has not been sought after for the Publication
of this Book. For besides that there was no apparent need to expose the
Approbators to the indignation of a Society, who hold it for a Maxim, that
they may with a safe conscience kill them who pretend to hurt them in their
reputations, it was believed that this precaution would not be necessary on
this occasion. Indeed the Author producing nothing of his own in this Book, and
having prescribed unto himself only therein to represent faithfully those
Maxims alone of the Jesuits Morals which are notoriously wicked, and which are
the very same against which all the Parochial Rectors of the most considerable
Towns of the Realm have been stirred up; so that the Pope, the Bishops, the
Sorbonne, and the other Catholic Faculties have condemned by their Censures
the Apology of the Casuists; and that the Faculty of Divinity in Paris have now
very lately censured in the Books of Vernant and Amadeus, we believe all these
Censures to be as so many Approbations of this Book, and that for that cause
the Pope, the Bishops, the Sorbonne, and the other Faculties, and the Parochial
Rectors of the principal Towns of France may pass for its Approbators, or at
least of the Doctrine contained therein. For as to the knowing whether the
Author has been a faithful Relator of the Propositions of the Authors whom he
cites every one in particular, may well be allowed to judge thereof, because
indeed better Judges of this sort of differences than the eyes of those who
shall have any scruple in this point, cannot be had.

But if the Jesuits and some of the Partisans of their Society complain of this
Author, because he has so exactly represented their Extravagances, there is
cause to hope that all other faithful people will be satisfied therewith,
because that one may say in truth that he gives by his Book unto every one that
which belongs unto him, and which the Casuists of the Society have used their
utmost force to ravish from them. He gives unto God the love, the
acknowledgment, and the worship which belongs unto him; to the Church the
belief and submission of the Faithful; to worldly Powers their honor and the
fidelity of their Subjects, safety to their Estates; to Fathers and Mothers the
obedience and respect of their Children; to Children the love and tenderness of
their Fathers and Mothers; Conjugal fidelity to Husbands and Wives; to Masters
the fidelity of their Servants; to Servants kindness of their Masters; to the
Ecclesiastics Piety and Religion; equity and integrity to Judges; true honor
unto the Nobility; fair dealing unto Merchants. Finally, he establishes in the
World all those Virtues which the Jesuits seem resolved to banish from thence,
that they might entertain and cause to reign there all the disorders which the
malice of men or the Devil himself was capable to invent.

The Translators Conjecture concerning the Author of this Advertisement, and of
the Book it self.
THis Advertisement seems to be Father Arnolds, the Preface and Work his Nephew
Monsieur Pascals, who is also supposed to have written the Porvincial Letters,
not without his Uncles privity and assistance; whose head and hand could not be
wanting to this Work also, if his. The style much differing, and Lewis Montalt
affirming himself to be no Doctor, makes me suspect a third hand to have been
made use of in drawing up those Letters; however these Doctors, as I am
credibly informed, were the Head-contrivers of them. There are also many
passages in the Provincials, which seeming to promise this Work, confirm my
Conjecture.

The Preface of the Author.
The Design and Order of this Work.
THE end of Morality, not only among Christians, but also among the Pagans,
has always been to make known that which is good, and to separate it from the
bad; to carry men on to virtue and to good actions, and to turn them away from
vice and from sin; and in pursuit thereof to teach them the means to proceed
from the one to the other. It cannot be showed, more easily and more evidently,
how dangerous and prejudicial the Moral Divinity of the Jesuits is, than by
making it appear that it tends and leads to a quite contrary end; and that it
walks in ways opposite to Reason and to the Law of Nature, as well as those of
Christian Piety; that it confounds good and evil, or to use the words of
Scripture, it calls evil good, and good evil; that the more part of the
resolutions which it gives upon the points and particular cases which respect
conscience, tend to the stopping up in men the lights and motions of conscience
it self, and favors lust which corrupts it; that the Principles from which
they draw their Resolutions, and the Reasons of which they make use for to
support them, are so many means and expedients proper for to authorize vice, to
sustain sin, to excuse the most criminal actions, and to entertain looseness and
disorder in all sorts of Professions.

This is that which I have a design to make appear in this Book. And to the end
that I may beforehand give a general Idea of all that which I handle therein,
and represent most clearly the Method and consequence of the means whereof I
make use to justify that which I pretend, I will expose here in a few words
the whole order and disposition of my Discourse.

I reduce all these matters to certain principal Points, which I handle after
such manner and in such order as seems to me most clear and most proper to make
appear the consequence of the Moral Doctrine of the Jesuits, the connection of
their Principles with their Conclusions, and the conformity of their practice
with their Opinions. For the consort and the resemblance which is between their
Doctrine and their Conduct is so perfect, that it is visible it proceeds from
the same Spirit, tends to the same end, which is to please men, to satisfy
them by flattering their passions and their interests, and to train them up in
vice and disorder.

To see clearly the truth of this point, which is the whole subject of this
Book, it must first be considered that there seems not possible to be found a
way more proper to authorize vice and sin, than to approve and tolerate all
that which nourishes them, and to abolish all that which is opposite to them,
and may destroy them.

2. That the things which beget and nourish vice and sin, are partly within
man, as corrupt seeds from whence proceed all the evil which he commits; and
partly without man, as outward objects, which beating upon his senses and his
mind, carry his will to consent unto evil and sin, which abides and acts
incessantly within him.

3. That the things which are within man, as the corrupt fountain from whence
comes all the disorders and sins which he commits, are lust, ignorance, and
evil habits, and hypocrisy, or the secret malice of the heart covered with a
veil of good intention; and that the outward things which carry him on unto
evil are the occasions of sin, the objects which draw on the evil examples, the
evil customs which excite them and nourish them; and above all, humane
Authority and humane Reason corrupted by sin, which furnishes Inventions for
continuance in evil, and in the occasions of evil wherein he is engaged, and to
justify or excuse the most criminal actions by imaginary probabilities.

4. That the things which destroy or expel sin are likewise of two sorts, some
as if it were internal, and others external. I call those internal which
attract to and establish in the heart of man the Grace of God, by which sin is
destroyed, such as are Faith, Prayer, Repentance, good Works, and a right use
of the Sacraments. I call these external, which do from without represent sin
unto a man, whether it be by the knowledge which they give him of its malice,
of the hatred which God bears toward it, of the punishments which he has
prepared for it in the other life, and those with which he punishes it
sometimes even in this very life; or which in any other like manner may give
him an aversion from it, and hinder him from committing it; as are the
Commandments of God, those of the Church, and generally all the holy Scriptures
old and new, which contain all the Promises which God has made to good men,
and all the evils with which he does threaten sinners.

There is no person, I am confident, who will not easily agree to these Truths
and general Principles. So that I have nothing to do, but apply them to the
particular Subject which I handle, to acquit my self entirely of what I have
undertaken to prove, to wit, that the Divinity of the Jesuits is as favorable
to vice and sin as possibly it can be. It suffices me for this purpose to make
appear that it nourishes lust, ignorance, evil habits, and the corruption of
the will, covered with a veil and pretense of a good intention.

That it entertains men in occasions of sin, in evil customs, in licenses and
abuses, as well public and common to all, as peculiar to every Profession,
making use of humane and corrupt Reason for authorizing these disorders, and to
make them pass as good and indifferent, and gives for a Rule of Christian life
and the Foundation of eternal life, not Faith and the Word of God, but the
Authority of Men, and all the imaginations and thoughts which present
themselves unto their minds, provided they can render them probable, and give
them some color and appearance of truth.

That it abolisheth or corrupts Repentance, Prayers, good Works, the
Sacraments, the Commands of God, of the Church, and the Holy Scriptures.

That finally it introduces and confirms corruption and looseness in all
sorts of Professions Seculars and Ecclesiastics, attempting to justify and
excuse those vices and sins which are most opposite thereto, and which are to
them for all that most common, as injustice in the Courts, unfaithfulness in
Traffic, and other such like.

If I can justify all these things, I have all my design accomplished, and I
shall have showed that the Jesuits Divinity favors and nourishes vice and sin
as much as men can do, and that they seem to be become thereof the Advocates
and Professors.

Which I hope to do in this Writing with so much clearness, that no person
shall be thereof unconvinced, and with such perfect fidelity, that those who
are the least equitable, because they are too scrupulous or too passionate,
shall have nothing to reproach me with on this Subject. For I will do nothing
else but report simply the Opinions of the Authors Jesuits as they have
expressed themselves in their Books. I will frequently add their proper
Reasons, and in the more important Points I shall sometimes ascend to the
Principles from whence they draw their Conclusions.

I undertake not to refute their Errors, but only to discover them, and make
them appear. This is the cause why without engaging my self to produce the
places of holy Scripture or of Tradition, any more than the Reasons which may
be alleged to refel them, I content my self to consider and represent them in
such sort, that they may be understood what they are; and many times I content
my self to rehearse them as they themselves express them, when that is
sufficient to raise an horror against them. When the malice is more concealed,
I endeavor to discover it, and to make it evident by some Reflections or some
Observations, or by Examples and sensible Comparisons: and if I make use of any
Reasons, I take them in a manner always from themselves, or from Principles of
Faith and natural Light, which are altogether indubitable, and so evident, that
to oppose them, were to renounce common sense, as well as Christian Piety and
Religion.

I meddle not here with matters of Faith, nor Mysteries of Religion, where it
was as easy to make appear that the Jesuits are no less transported than in
the Maxims of Morality, as will appear clearly by one Example out of the
Chapter (of Jesus Christ) which I thought should be added to that of Grace.
There may be seen in what manner they speak of the Son of God, of his
Incarnation, of his Humanity, of his Divine Person, and that they have thereof
thoughts so base, so unworthy, so shameful, that they are not more proper for
any end than to expose our Mysteries to the scorn and contempt of Infidels and
Libertines, and to raise horror and aversation in the Faithful themselves by
their impious expressions and reasonings, by which they profane Holiness it
self, and destroy the respect and veneration which ought to be given it.

I insist upon Moral matters only, and even without design to contain them all.
I should need many Volumes only to make an Extract of that which may be found
in their Books contrary to good Manners and to Christian Piety. I intend only
to collect some principal Propositions by which Judgment may be made of the
rest. I report them simply as they are in their Books. And when I translate
them, I will set the passages on the Margent in Latin, to the end that the
fidelity and sincerity with which I recite them may appear.

If amongst many passages which I commonly produce on the same Subject, there
be some which appear not clear enough, there may be found in others that which
seems to be wanting in them. But I have reason to believe that there is no
cause to reproach me herein, for I have taken a particular care not only to
speak things, so as I understood them, but also to enter as far as I could into
the very thoughts of the Fathers whom I have alleged, knowing that it is never
lawful to wound Justice or Charity under a pretense of combating Error, and
defending Truth, and that Error it self may not be assailed, nor Truth
defended by lying and disguisement.

I am so far from desiring to augment this evil, or to exaggerate these things,
that I oftentimes abstain from speaking as I could without departing from my
design. They that have any love or knowledge of the Truth, will easily perceive
this my moderation, and they will oftentimes find nothing else to reprove me
for in many important points, but that I have not spoken enough therein, and
that I give over many times where they would cry out to me that I ought to go
on, and follow my Subject to the utmost.

If there be any who find herein expressions which seem to them to be too
vehement, and far removed from that sweetness and moderation which they love; I
beseech them not to judge according to their disposition, but according to the
things whereof I speak. The passion or the praeoccupation they may be under,
either for the pernicious Maxims which I represent, or for the Authors, or for
the Defenders of them, may be capable to persuade them that I ought to have
spoken of them with so much respect and moderation, as belongs to the most
serious and holy things. But the reason and the nature even of the things
themselves may easily undeceive them, if they consider that expressions ought
to correspond with their subjects, and that it would introduce a disproportion
to represent those things which are ridiculous and contemptible as seriously as
if they were not, and that this were to give too much advantage to presumption
and insolence, which speaks proudly to make Error triumph over Truth, and to
give it in some sort the victory, to treat it otherwise than with such force
and vigor as is capable to repress and humble it.

So it is that Truth would be defended, and has it self declared that it will
one day revenge it self on them that have assailed it with scorn and obstinacy,
not only bruising their heads, but also insulting over them, that they may be
covered with confusion.

So that I have some cause to fear in this point on the behalf of Truth, that I
have been rather too reserved than too free. And it seems that they who have
any love for it, may complain of me, that I have not defended it with force and
ardour enough in an encounter where it has been assaulted by a very
extraordinary Conspiracy of persons who for their own interest, sufficiently
well known, have endeavored to blot out of the memory of the Faithful, and
Books of the Church the most pure and safe Maxims concerning the Regulation and
Conduct of Christian life and Manners.

And I may perhaps have some trouble to defend my self from this reproach, and
to hinder that it be not believed, That I have not defended the Cause of the
Church and of Truth with the zeal which they deserved, but that I have already
declared that I have not at all undertaken properly to defend it, or refute
those who have assailed and hurt it so cruelly; but to make appear only the
Errors and the pernicious Maxims by which they have overturned all Discipline
and all the Rules of Manners and Christian life, even the most holy and best
established upon the Scriptures and Books of the Saints, and also by their
Examples.

Hereunto I have limited and obliged my self in this Work. It may be God will
raise up some other who shall go on where I leave, and will undertake to refute
fully the Errors which I have discovered, and to establish by the Principles
of Faith and Tradition the Truths which I have only noted in my passage. The
manner in which this first Book shall be received, and the profit which will
come thereon, may procure a disposition to receive also yet better another of
greater importance, and be a motive to engage God to stir up some other person
to labor therein. We are all in his hands, our travels and our thoughts,
whereof the first and principal ought to be never in any thing to have other
than his designs. He knows that which he has given me in this Work, is no
other than to perform some Service to his Church and my Neighbor. I beseech
him to bless it with success, leaving it to his Providence to dispose of it
according as he shall please, and I do for the present accept with all respect
and submission whatsoever he shall ordain thereof.

The Necessity and Utility of this Work.
IF the pernicious Maxims of the Jesuits Morality should for the present be
presented no otherwise than in an extract, without adding any thing thereto but
what is found in their Authors, the World is at this day so indifferent in
things which respect their Salvation and Religion, there would be found very
few persons who would be touched therewith, or who would take any pains to
consider them.

But it is come to pass by the particular order of Divine Providence, that he
who has enterprised to discover them some years ago, has expressed them in a
manner so taking, that has attracted the whole World unto him to read them by
the grace of his style, and thereupon has made them easily to appear odious
and insupportable by their proper excesses and extravagancies.

This so happy beginning had has success much more happy; for men's minds being
touched with a desire to know particularly things so important and so
prejudicial to their Consciences and Salvation, my Masters the Parochial
Rectors of Rouen and Paris have in pursuit thereof published with a zeal worthy
of their Charge many learned Writings, which have given to all the World enough
of instruction and light to conceive the distance and horror they ought to
keep toward that wicked Doctrine, and the danger whereinto they put them who
follow these Guides who pursue or practice them.

But as their design was only to make a speedy order against an evil which then
did but begin to appear, they believed that it was sufficient to advise their
people thereof in general terms, in notifying unto them some of the more
pernicious propositions, without extending them further to discover their
principles, consequences, and unhappy effects, as it had been easy for them to
do; and they thought that to strangle them in their birth, it would have been
sufficient only to expose them to the view of the whole World, being in
themselves so odious and monstrous, and to oppose themselves to those that
teach them, as the Shepherds obliged to resist the Wolves who would devour
their stock. Yet they omitted not to have recourse to the Authority of the
Church, and to address their complaints and requests to my Lords the Bishops
and to the General Assembly of the Clergy of France, in the year 1656. who
seeing that it was not at all in their power at that time to do them justice,
did at least make it known to the whole Church, that opportunity only was
wanting unto them. And for that cause ordained that the Instructions of S.
Charles should be imprinted by the order of the Clergy, with a circular Letter
to all my Lords the Prelates, which served to prejudge their opinions, and to
give as it were a commencement to the condemnation of all these Maxims in
general, expecting till some opportunity were offered to do it more solemnly.

The voice of these charitable Pastors was heard and faithfully followed by
their sheep, who by the submission they owed to them, and through the
confidence which they had in their honesty and sufficiency, entered into an
aversion against this new Doctrine, as soon as it was declared unto them, that
it was contrary to the Doctrine of the Church and that of the holy Fathers.

It were also to be wished, that this same voice which came from Heaven, being
Jesus Christ speaks in the Church by its Pastors, had turned, or at leastwise
stayed the Authors of this Doctrine, and had kept them in silence, and that
they had themselves also suppressed these strange opinions and pernicious
Maxims, against which they saw the whole World to rise with a general
indignation, and with a most just zeal.

But this did nothing but provoke them yet more, so that instead of receiving
Christian-like the charitable correction of these worthy Pastors of Souls, they
had the confidence to appear in public to maintain so great Errors by
Writings yet more wicked; imitating those fierce beasts, who issue in fury out
of the Forests and Dens to defend their young when they are about to be taken
from them.

My Masters the Parochial Rectors had by an extraordinary temperance and
moderation suppressed the names of the Jesuits, and not distinguished them from
the other Casuists, attacquing the Doctrine only without touching the persons
of any particular Order. But these good Fathers could neither lie hid; nor keep
silence, and judged themselves unworthy of the favor which they had received
upon this occasion. And as if this Doctrine had been their own particularly,
they would needs declare themselves the Defenders of it, as indeed they are the
principal and even the first Authors thereof in many of its most important
points. They made for it an Apology, wherein so very far were they from
disavowing and retracting those pernicious Maxims wherewith they were
reproached, that they did highly maintain them: and to testify that they never
intended to recant them, they have declared that in many matters wherein their
excesses are most visible, they can yet speak more, and give yet more license
to their spirits.

An evil so public and so obstinate cannot be healed nor stayed by simple
words. Which thing has obliged my Masters the Parochial Rectors, to renew
their complaints and their instances to my Lords the Prelates.

Some of them have already worthily acquitted themselves in this their duty to
the Church and People who depend on their charge. And it is hoped that the zeal
and charity of the rest will press them to give the same testimony unto the
truth, and that if some of them, for some particular reasons, cannot do it so
solemnly as they desire, yet they will not cease to condemn in their hearts,
and upon occasions which shall be offered, this novel Doctrine, and to keep
those whom they can at a distance from it, as a most pernicious Divinity.

After all this, it was thought to be high time farther to discover this
Doctrine, and to represent it in the whole extent it has in the Books of the
Jesuits, that the corruption and the venom of it might be better known. It had
been to little purpose to have done it sooner, because that the excess and
overthrow it has given to all the true Rules of Morality and Christian piety,
are so great and so incredible, that the world having yet never heard any thing
like unto it, would have been surprised at the novelty and impiety of the
principal Maxims of these dreadful Morals: so that many would have been
troubled to believe it; others would have been offended at it; and many would
have altogether neglected it, and would not so much as have taken the pains
only to have informed themselves so far as that they might not suffer
themselves to be surprised therein.

The Jesuits themselves would not have failed to have broken out into
complaints, calumnies, and impostures, which are common with them in use
against such as discover their secrets, and the shame of their Divinity: and
they would have employed all their artifices and disguises to elude or obscure
the most clear things wherewith they should have been reproached, though they
had been represented simply as they are expressed in their Books.

But yet notwithstanding that these pernicious Maxims had been confounded and
decryed by my Masters the Parochial Rectors, fulminated by the censures of the
Bishops, there is cause to hope that exposing them to the day will be useful to
many of the Faithful, and hereby will be seen more clearly the justice and
necessity of the pursuits which the Parochial Rectors made for obtaining a
censure of them, the equity of the Judgment of the Prelates made in pursuance
thereof, and the obligation which all the Faithful have upon them to stiffle
these Monsters of Error and Impiety, which multiply continually, and prey upon
the Church. So that this will even contribute very much to redouble the
submission and confidence which they ought to have toward their Pastors,
seeing from what mischiefs their vigilance and their zeal has preserved them,
and with what prudence and wisdom they have conducted them in this affair,
having not discovered the greatness of the evil to them before, as it may be
said, they had delivered them from it.

And it may also come to pass, that the Authors and Defenders of these wicked
Doctrines may themselves be surprised and have horror, when they see together
in a sequence of Principles and Conclusions the opinions which they have
maintained to this present. Because it is very common for things good or evil,
which apart make no great impression upon the spirit, surprise and touch it
powerfully when as they are united and joined together.

There is also cause to believe that many of those who have followed unto this
present these novel Maxims of the Jesuits, only because they did not perceive
all the unhappy consequences and pernicious effects of them, now coming to know
them, as this Book will give them means to do, will relinquish them with joy,
and those who shall adhere to them, through passion or interest may be brought
to testify the horror they have conceived against them, by the renunciation
which they shall make of them, or at least by the silence they shall keep, and
wherein they shall bury them, so as neither to hold nor teach them any more for
the future.

But if they shall not draw hence the fruit which is desired, and they persist
both the one and the other to maintain the same Maxims, they testify openly
hereby, that they also admit all the consequences, whereof they cannot be
ignorant any longer. And by consequence they shall make themselves responsible
for all the consequences and all the unhappy effects which are therefrom
inseparable. And if after all this they make an outcry in the world, and hold
themselves offended when such disorders are imputed to them, and when they are
declared the Authors and Cherishers of these Irregularities, of Corruption, of
Libertinism, which are spread over all conditions in these last times, they
cannot attribute it to any other than themselves, because they are reproached
with nothing but what they have avowed themselves, in that they would not
disavow it, after it has been represented unto them, and they have been
condemned by the Church.

The Faithful shall at least draw hence this advantage, that they may hereby
discover the false Prophets and false Pastors from the good and true ones, and
take heed of those who under a pretense of piety do corrupt piety it self,
seducing simple and innocent Souls, so far as to endeavor to hale them out of
the bosom of their true and lawful Pastors, and to turn them away from their
conduct, and engage them in horrible precipices.

Reasons wherefore we take the Morals of the Jesuits for the Subject of this
Book rather than those of other Casuists.
THat I produce in this Work no other Authors than those of the Society of the
Jesuits, is not through any passion toward them, or toward others. For though
I speak not of other Casuists; yet do I not neglect them entirely, as neither
do I approve them, nor excuse them, in their opinions which they have common
with the Jesuits, and which are conformable to those which I reprove.

But as he who would cut down a Tree, amuses not himself in cutting off the
branches one after another, but betakes himself to its body and root, which
being cut, the branches must necessarily fall; and so, I believe, that
destroying the pernicious Doctrine of the Jesuits, touching Manners, and Cases
of Conscience, I overturn all at once, whatsoever there is conformable unto it
amongst the new Casuists, because they are in a manner all their Disciples;
having learned that which they say in their Schools, or in their Books.

After all this, the Jesuits declare themselves the Masters of this sort of new
Learning, and they give this name to their principal Authors, whom they would
have pass for the Doctors and Masters of the whole World. And they would, even
that they might assure themselves of the possession of these Titles, eject the
holy Fathers therefrom, endeavoring to hinder men from hearing them, from
following them, and from imitating the example and holiness of their lives by
this pernicious Maxim which they have invented and established, as a Principle
of their Divinity; that it is not the ancient Fathers, but the new Divines and
Casuists of these times, who must be taken for the Rule of Manners and
Christian life.

It is with the same Spirit that did testify so great an esteem for Novelty,
they profess to follow it, and many amongst them, as Posa, Celot have taken in
hand to defend it, to praise it, and to make Apologies for it. Quae circa fidem
emergunt difficultates consons veteribus sancienda; quae vero circa mores
homine Christiano dignos a novetiis scriptoribus. Reginald. Praesat. ad lect.
And hereby without doubt they designed to make the presumption pass for
current, that they borrowed nothing at all from others, and especially nothing
from the Ancients, but that they produced their Opinions themselves, and found
them in their own heads; and that they have no other Rule for their conduct and
their knowledge, but their own sense and humane reason, and not the Authority
of the Saints; and that being as it were Independents, they ought not to pass
for Children of the Fathers, and for Disciples of the holy Doctors, but Masters
of Novelties amongst the Authors of these times.

But although they think hereby to exalt their Doctrine, and to acquire more
honor unto it, they disgrace and ruin it themselves in effect; because that
Novelty has always been blamed as a mark of Error, not only by the
Catholics, but also by the Heretics, who have always affected and attempted
to make people believe, that their Doctrine, as well as their Religion, were
ancient, so that there were never any found, who would suffer themselves to be
reproached, much less who would boast themselves to advance new Maxims, as is
to be seen in the Example of the Lutherans and Calvinists, who vaunt
themselves, though falsely, to follow the Doctrine of the ancient Church and of
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, and hold it for a great injury to be called
Innovators, though indeed they be such.

The Jesuits, on the contrary, seem to affect this odious Title, since they
despising the Authority of the holy Fathers, and renouncing the Doctrine of the
Ancients, prefer Novelty before them, and make open profession to follow and
invent new Opinions, which none had over produced before them, as is manifestly
seen in the proper declaration of Molina, Posa, Amicus, Maldonat, and as may
easily be proved by many other Casuists of the Society.

As they are the chief Masters in this novel Science, so they are sollicitous
to make themselves many Disciples, who in time becoming Masters, make up a Body
so puissant, and an Assembly of probable Doctors so numerous, that it would be
hard to find so many in all other Societies taken altogether. So that whether
we consider the Votes, or compute them, they will still prevail above all
others, and remain the sole Arbiters and Masters of this new Morality.

And the better to maintain themselves for ever in this advantage above other
Casuists and novel Doctors, knowing that Empire and Dominion amongst the
Learned as well as amongst the Vulgar, is supported by union, and ruined by
division, they are expressly ordered by their Superiors to agree in the same
opinions, and to maintain them all at least as probable, and above all, when
they are advanced by some of the Heads and principal Authors of the Society,
and they believe that the interest and honor of their whole Body is in
question.

This Conspiration in the same Opinions whereto the Glory of the Society has
engaged them, does hold them fastened thereto with so much obstinacy, that no
Consideration nor Authority whatsoever, no not even of the Church, can oblige
them to acquit them; or if they quit them, being forced thereunto by the
public Complaints and Censures, it is only in appearance, and for a time, and
they afterward resume their very same opinions, and maintain and publish them
as before, as one may see in the Books of the English Jesuits, of Sanctarel, of
Bauny, of Celot, and of Posa, and of diverse others, who having been censured by
the Church, they have disavowed and suppressed them for a season, but have
shortly after produced them with the same opinions, which had been condemned in
them, and with the approbation of the Superiors of their Company.

They have also established upon the same foundation the insupportable
confidence which they have had unto this present to handle the Cases of
Conscience, and to govern Souls, not only in an imperious manner, but in a kind
of Tyranny, and to pass over all the primitive and true Laws of Christian
Morality and Discipline, that they may regulate all things according to their
own proper reason and sense, and sometimes against their own proper thoughts,
by their will only, regarding nothing but their own interest, and the
satisfaction of the world, whom they endeavor to please, by conducting them
rather according to their desires, than according to the Rules of Truth, and
for their Salvation.

It is by this confidence joined to so great complacency, that they labor to
introduce themselves in the world more than all others who hold their Maxims,
and endeavor to get credit with all persons, great and small, who finding
their Divinity favorable to their interest and their passions, do easily
follow their advice and their conduct. And so they easily diffuse every where
the venom of their pernicious Doctrine, which brings looseness and corruption
into all sorts of conditions, as we shall make it evidently appear at the end
of this Extract.

These reasons have obliged me to take the Jesuits Morals for my Subject in
this Book, rather than those of others who are in the same opinions,
considering that they are the first Masters of this new Science; that they
surpass others in number of Writers, as well as they believe themselves to
surpass them in knowledge; that they are the Inventors of many Opinions, and
those the most pernicious; that they are all of a piece, and agree together to
sustain them; that they are most obstinate in defending them, even then when
they are condemned; that they are most advenurous and most insinuating to
diffuse them unto the world, and most complacent to cause them to be received.

So that I believe I shall combat all the corruption which Novelty has
introduced into Christian Morality, by fastening upon the Divinity of the
Jesuits, since it is all enclosed therein, as in the fountain from whence it
diffuseth it self into the Spirits of other new Casuists, who imitate them, and
into the consciences of the people of the world who follow them, because of the
facility of their conduct, who permit them every thing that they will, and
sometimes more than they durst hope for.

The Order of the Matters of this Book.
I Distribute all this Book into three Books. In the first, I will handle the
Principles of Sin, to make appear that the Jesuits do establish and nourish
them. In the second, I will speak of the Remedies of Sin, to show that they
abolish or alter them. In the third, I will examine the particular Duties of
every Profession, and the Sins which they do ordinarily commit, to show that
they excuse and favor these last, and dispense with the first, by abolishing
and obscuring them in such manner, that they appear not at all.

The first Book shall have two Parts. The first shall be of the Interior
Principles of Sin, and the other of the Exterior. I will divide every Part into
so many Chapters as there are Principles of Sin, which I shall take notice of.
And when the abundance of matter, or the diversity of questions shall require
it, I shall divide also the Chapters into Articles, the Articles into Points,
and the Points into Paragraphs; I shall keep the same order in the other Books.

THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of the Internal and External Principles of Sin.
The First Part. Of the Internal Principles of Sin.
CHapter I. Of Lust in General. Page 1 Article I. Of Hatred. That the Divinity
of the Jesuits maintains aversions against our Neighbor: that it allows us to
wish and do him hurt, and even to kill him, though it be for temporal concerns,
and also when we are assured that by killing him we damn him. Bauny, Escobar,
Emanuel Sa, Molina, Amicus, Lessius. Page 2 Article II. Of Pride. That the
Jesuits cherish pride and vainglory in all sorts of persons, even in the most
holy actions; and that according to their Divinity it is almost impossible to
sin mortally by pride or vainglory. Filliutius, Escobar, Sa, Sanchez. Page 7
Article III. Of fleshly Pleasure and Uncleanness. Page 11. I. Point. Of
dishonest Discourses, Looks, and Touches. Filliutius, Escobar. ib. II. Point.
Of the Servants and Mediators of unchaste Commerce, as are they who bear
Messages or Letters, and make appointments with Whores, and who lodge or
protect them. Sanchez, Hurtado, Molina, Escobar. Page 15 III. Point. Of
dishonest thoughts and desires, of Fornication, Adultery, and other such like
sins, and of the pleasure that may be taken therein. Sa, Sanchez, Filliutius,
Layman, Azor. Page 22
Article IV. Of Gluttony. The Opinions of the Jesuits concerning the excess of
Eating and Drinking, and the bad effects which arise therefrom. Escobar, Sa,
Azor, Sanchez. Page 26 The Sum Of the foregoing Article. Page 30 Article V. Of
Covetousness. I. Point. That the Jesuits authorize all sorts of ways to get
wealth; and dispense with restitution of what is procured by the most unjust
and infamous ways. Escobar, Filliutius, Lessius, Layman, Sanchez. Page 31 II.
Point. Diverse motives and particular expedients to dispense with restitution,
though a man be obliged thereto. Escobar, Lessius. Page 35
Article VI. Of Unfaithfulness. Page 38 I. Point. Of diverse sorts of
Unfaithfulness, and of Deceit, which may be committed in things by altering
them, selling them by false weights and measures, and taking those which are
another without his privity. Escobar, Lessius, Amicus, Filliutius, Tambourin,
Sa, Dicastillus. Page 39 II. Point. Of Infidelity in Promises and Oaths. Page
46 Section I. Several ways of mocking God and Men without punishment, and
without sin, according to the Jesuits, in promising that which they never
intend to do, and not doing that which they have promised, although they are
obliged thereto by Vow and by Oath. Filliutius, Sanchez, Tambourin, Sa,
Escobar. ibid. Section II. The contrivance of the Jesuits to elude Vows made
unto God, Promises and Oaths made to a Confessor, and to lie and deceive even
in Confession. Escobar, Sa, Sanchez, Filliutius. Page 52
III. Point. Of Unfaithfulness in Conversation and common Discourse. Page 54
Section I. An expedient which the Jesuits give for to deceive the World, and to
take a false Oath, even before a Judge, without perjury. ibid. Section II.
Rules and Examples of Equivocation, taken out of the Books of the Jesuits.
Escobar, Filliutius, Sanchez. Page 55 Section III. When and on what occasions
one may make use of Equivocations. Sanchez, Filliutius. Page 57 Section IV. The
Jesuits Method to frame Equivocations, and to use them commodiously.
Filliutius. Page 60 Section V. The Method of the same Jesuits, to hinder their
Equivocations from being ever discovered, and that no person may be deprived of
his liberty to make use of them. Sanchez. Page 62

The last Article. A general proof that the Jesuitical Authors favor and
nourish the lust of men in all things; and the common principle from which they
draw all that they say in favor of it. Escobar, Amicus, Tolet, Celot, Posa.
Page 65
CHAPTER II. Of Sins in Habit, or habitual Sins. That there are scarcely any
habitual Sins, according to the Jesuits; and that custom of sinning may make a
man incapable of sinning. Sanchez, Escobar, Filliutius, Layman. Page 72 Chap.
III. Of Sins of Ignorance. That ignorance excuses sins committed without
knowing them; and even those which are committed afterward; And that there are
properly no sins of ignorance, according to the Jesuits. Bauny, Sanchez,
Filliutius, Amicus, Escobar. Page 75 Chap. IV. Of good and bad Intention. Page
84 Article I. That the Jesuits teach that we may fulfill the Commandments of God
and the Church, not only without intention, but with an intent contrary and
altogether criminal. Escobar, Lessius, Layman, Filliutius, Celot, Bauny. ibid.
Article II. That according to the Divinity of the Jesuits we sin not if we have
not an intention to sin. Sa, Filliutius, Sanchez, Bauny. Page 88
Chap. V. Of the Matter of Sin. Page 94 Article I. That the Jesuits enhanse and
debase as they please the goods of this world, which are the usual object or
matter of sin; and so nourish vice, and dispense with the Law of God. Bauny,
Escobar, Sa, Sanchez. ibid. Article II. The consequence and explication of the
same subject by two examples, and two sequels which the Jesuits draw from their
Principles concerning the matter of sin. 1. That God can no more than men
command or forbid a matter that is in it self slight, under the penalty of
mortal sin. 2. That he that has a design and will to commit all venial sins if
he were able, sins only venially. Sa, Amicus, Escobar. Page 98


The Second Part of the First Book. Of the external Principles of Sin.
THat the Jesuits nourish them, that they may gratify the passions of men, and
by consequence excite them to sin. Page 103 Chap. I. Of the Maxims of Reason
and humane Authority. ibid. Article I. That the Jesuits make profession to
follow novel Maxims, and to contemn Tradition and Antiquity. Posa, Maldonat,
Escobar, Azor, Filliutius, Reginaldus. Page 104 Article II. Of the Doctrine of
Probability. Page 111 I. Point. The principal Maxims of the Jesuits concerning
Probability. Page 112 Section I. The Opinions of Layman and of Azor, concerning
Probability. ibid. Section II. The Opinions of other Jesuits conformable to the
preceding for making all things probable, and to give liberty to follow all
sorts of Opinions. Filliutius, Escobar. Page 120 Section III. The Opinion of
Sanchez concerning the probability of Opinions. Page 123
II. Point. The pernicious consequences and effects of the Jesuits Doctrine of
Probability. Page 133 Section I. That the Jesuits Doctrine of Probability
favors disorderly persons, Libertines, and Infidels. Caramuel, Escobar, Petrus
Michael de Sanroman, Sanchez. Page 134 Section II. That this Doctrine of
Probability favors the Heretics, and nourishes them in Heresy. Celot,
Sanchez, Filliutius, Caramuel. Page 137 Section III. That the Jesuits Doctrine
of Probability destroys the Commands of God and the Church, and teaches to
clude all Laws divine and humane, even that which forbids to do unto others
that which we would not have done unto our selves. Caramuel, Escobar,
Tambourin, Mascarenhas. Page 142 Section IV. That the Jesuits Doctrine of
Probability ruins entirely the Authority of the Church, of Pastors, and
Superiors of all sorts. Caramuel. Page 150 Section V. That an opinion probable
being once received, all the Prelates of the Church, and all the men in the
World, cannot hinder that it should be probable, and safe in conscience,
according to the Jesuits. Caramuel, Celot. Page 153

Article III. That the Divinity of the Jesuits is obsequious and mercenary.
Escobar, Filliutius, Amicus, Celot. Page 157 Article IV. That the Jesuits
Divinity is subject to contradiction and change in opinions. Dicastillus,
Tambourin. Page 163
Chap. II. Of evil Customs. That the Jesuits allow those which corruption has
introduced into all sorts of conditions, and make use of them to excuse sins
and vices. Escobar, Bauny, Layman. Page 168 Chap. III. Of the Occasions of Sin.
That the Jesuits retain men in them, and that according to their Maxims there
can be no next occasions of sin. Sanchez, Bauny, Layman, Escobar. Page 171 An
Abridgment of the Doctrine of the Jesuits, about the next occasions of sin.
Page 177 The last Chapter. Of the Accessories of Sin. Tambourin. Page 178
The Second Book. Of the Inward and Outward Remedies of Sin.
The First Part. Of the Inward Remedies of Sin.
CHap. I. Of the Grace of Jesus Christ. Page 185 Article I. That the Jesuits
destroy the Grace of Jesus Christ by their Divinity. Celot, Amicus, Escobar.
ibid. Article II. That Jesus Christ might have sinned, might have been subject
unto vices, might have fallen into error and folly, according to the Jesuits
Divinity. Amicus. Page 189
Chap. II. Of Repentance. Page 194 Article I. Of Sorrow for Sin. That according
to the Jesuits we may be justified by the Sacrament of Penance by a natural
sorrow, and even without any true sorrow for sin. Filliutius, Amicus, Sa,
Escobar, Bauny. Page 195 The Sum Of the Doctrine of the Jesuits related in this
Chapter, concerning the sorrow which is necessary to blot out sins in the
Sacrament of Penance. Page 201 Article II. Of Confession and Accusation of
Sins. That the Jesuits do destroy the integrity thereof. Layman, Bauny,
Filliutius, Escobar, Sa. Page 202 Article III. Of Absolution. That the Jesuits
make it depend on the Opinion and the Will of the Penitent, rather than the
disposition and judgment of the Confessor. Sa, Layman, Amicus, Filliutius,
Sanchez, Bauny. Page 211 Article IV. Of Satisfaction. That the Divinity of the
Jesuits destroys this part of Penance. Page 217 Article V. Rules of Conduct for
a Confessor, according to the Jesuits. Page 223 I. Point. Rules to examine
Penitents according to the Jesuits. Bauny, Filliutius, Dicastillus, Tambourin,
Escobar. ibid. II. Point. Of the Advice which a Confessor ought to give his
Penitent, according to the Jesuits. Escobar, Amicus, Filliutius, Tambourin,
Petrus Michael de Sanroman. Page 225 III. Point. Of the inward disposition of
the Penitent, and of sorrow for sin, according to the Jesuits. Filliutius,
Tambourin, Sa, Bauny, Dicastillus. Page 226 IV. Point. Rules for imposing
Penance or Satisfaction, according to the Jesuits. Escobar, Bauny, Filliutius.
Page 227 V. Point. Rules of the same Jesuits for giving Absolution. Filliutius,
Sa, Bauny, Sanchez. Page 228 VI. Point. The Jesuits advice to Penitents to make
the yoke of Confession sweet and easy. Bauny, Escobar, Sa, Layman, Amicus.
Page 229

Chap. III. Of Prayer. That the Jesuits destroy Prayer, in teaching that the
Laity and the Ecclesiastics themselves may satisfy their obligation to Prayer
by praying without attention, without reverence, and even with voluntary
distraction, and diverting themselves with all sorts of wicked thoughts.
Filliutius, Escobar, Coninck, Bauny. Page 231 Chap. IV. Of good Works. That the
Jesuits Maxims destroy them. Escobar, Tolet, Sa, Lessius. Page 238 Chap. V. Of
the Sacraments. Page 244 Article I. Of Baptism and Confirmation. ibid. I.
Point. That the Jesuits take away the necessity of Baptism; and destroy the
dispositions required thereto. Escobar, Tambourin. ibid. II. Point. That the
Jesuits divert the Faithful from Confirmation, by discharging them from the
obligation to receive it. Filliutius, Escobar, Mascarenhas. Page 246
Article II. Of the Eucharist and Penance. What sort of dispositions the
Jesuits demand for these two Sacraments, and that they teach men to profane
them by sacrilege. Filliutius, Mascharenhas. Page 251 Article III. Of the
Sacrament of Marriage. Tambourin, Dicastillus. Page 256 Article IV. Of them who
administer the Sacraments. That the Jesuits permit Priests to administer the
Sacraments, to say Mass, and to preach, principally for vainglory or lucre of
money, and in an estate of mortal sin. Filliutius, Sa, Amicus, Sanchez. Page 260

The Second Part of the Second Book. Of the Outward Remedies of Sin.
THat the Divinity of the Jesuits abolishes or corrupts them. Page 266 Chap. I.
Of the Corruption of Scripture. That the Jesuits corrupt the Scriptures diverse
ways. Celot, Coninck, Sirmond, Lessius. Page 267 Chap. II. Of the Commandments
of God. Page 274 Article I. Of the Commandment, which is that of Love and
Charity. ibid. I. Point. Of the Command to love God. ibid. Section I. That
there is no Command to love God, according to the Maxims of the Jesuits
Divinity. Sirmond. Page 275 Section II. That according to Father Sirmond, the
Gospel speaks hardly any thing at all of divine Love and Charity, and that
Jesus Christ has not much recommended it. Page 276 Section III. The mixture
and agreement of Self-love with the Charity invented by Father Sirmond the
Jesuit. Page 278 Section IV. The changing and transforming of Charity into
Self-love, by Father Sirmond. Page 279
II. Point. That the Jesuits by destroying Charity which man owes unto God,
destroy also that which be owes himself. Filliutius, Amicus, Molina, Celot, Sa.
Page 280 The Sum Of the Doctrine of the Jesuits concerning the Love of Charity
which a man owes unto God and to himself. Page 285 III. Point. Of the Command
to love our Neighbor, that the Jesuits utterly destroy it. Bauny, Sa, Amicus.
Page 286 IV. Point. That the Jesuits allow of Magic and Witchcraft. Tambourin,
Sancius. Page 289
Article II. Thou shall not swear by God in vain. That the Jesuits destroy this
Commandment by diminishing, excusing, weakening the sins of Swearing and
Blaspheming. Bauny, Escobar, Sanchez, Filliutius. Page 291 Article III. Of the
Commandment of God, HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER. Dicastillus, Tambourin.
Page 297 Article IV. Of the Command of God, THOU SHALL NOT KILL. That the
Jesuits absolutely overthrow this Commandment, and authorize all sorts of
Murders. Lessius, Molina. Page 302 I Point. Lessius his Opinion concerning
Murder. Page 303 Section I. How far he enlarges the permission of Killing in
defense of his own life: that he holds that a Priest at the Altar may break off
the Sacrifice to kill him who assails him. ibid. Section II. That according to
Lessius, it is lawful to kill in defense of our Honor. Page 304 Section III.
That it is lawful to kill in defense of ones Goods, according to Lessius. Page
306
II. Point. The Opinions of Amicus concerning Murder, respecting the Religious.
That he permits them to kill in defense of their Honor, him who impeaches them
of false Crimes, or only threatens to discover those they have indeed
committed. Page 312 III. Point. The Opinions of other Jesuits concerning
Murder. Molina, Vasquez, Filliutius. Page 317 IV. Point. The Opinion of Escobar
concerning Murder. Page 324 V. Point. The Conformity of the Jesuits, who in our
days have taught in their Colleges, with the more Ancient, in the Doctrine of
Murder. Page 328
Article V. Of Uncleanness, which the Jesuits allow against the Command of God
and natural Reason. Layman, Lessius, Tolet, Sa, Escobar. Page 332 Article VI.
Of Theft. That the Jesuits authorize it, and abolish the Commandment of God
which forbids it. Sa, Escobar, Amicus, Bauny, Layman. Page 340 Article VII.
THOU SHALL NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS. Dicastillus, Tambourin. Page 344
Chap. III. Of the Commandments of the Church. Page 347 Article I. Of the
Sanctification of Festivals. Page 348 I. Point. Section I. That the Jesuits
despise the Authority of the Church, and destroy the Commandment by which it
forbids to work on Feast-days. Layman, Escobar, Filliutius. ibid. Section II.
Expedients which the Jesuits propose to elude the Commandment which forbids
working on Feast-days. Escobar, Sa, Filliutius. Page 352
II. Point. Section I. That for the Sanctification of the Lord's Day it
suffices, according to the Jesuits, to bear one low Mass; that we may hear it
where we will, the whole or part, and at as many parcels as we please. Layman,
Tambourin, Dicastillus, Coninck, Azor, Tolet, Escobar. Page 355 Section II.
That according to the Jesuits, the Precept of hearing Mass may be satisfied, by
hearing them without internal Devotion, Attention, Intention, even with an
express intent not to satisfy, and whilst we entertain our selves alone or
with others with other discourse and wicked and dishonest thoughts. Coninck,
Azor, Tambourin, Dicastillus, Filliutius, Celot. Page 360

Article II. Of Fasting, and the Commandment to Fast. Page 364 I. Point. That
according to the Jesuits Divinity we may prevent the hour of Repast, make it as
long and great as we please, eat more than on another day, and break out into
all excess and intemperance, without breaking our Fast. Escobar, Tambourin,
Tolet, Sanchez, Azor, Bauny. ibid. II. Point. That according to the Jesuits
Divinity, we may on Fast-days drink as much as we please during our Refection,
or after it, and take, every time we drink, a morsel of bread or some other
thing, and be drunk also without intrenching on the Fast. Page 368 III. Point.
That according to the Jesuits Dispensations which they give in Fasting, hardly
any person is obliged to fast. Layman, Bauny, Escobar, Sa. Page 371
Article III. Of the Commandment to communicate at Easter, and of the
Confession to be made every year. That according to the Jesuits Divinity, these
Commandments may be satisfied by true Sacriledges. Sa, Escobar, Filliutius,
Amicus, Celot, Coninck, Azor. Page 378 Article IV. That the Jesuits teach that
the Church cannot command spiritual and internal Actions; that its Laws and
Guidance are humane; that it is it self only a Politic Body. Sanchez,
Filliutius, Layman, Amicus, Escobar, Celot. Page 385

THE FIRST BOOK. Of the Inward and Outward Principles of SIN.
THE FIRST PART: Of the Inward Principles of Sin.
These Principles are Lust, Ignorance, Ill Habits, the Intention, and the
Matter, or the Object of Sin. I will treat severally of these five internal
principles of Sin, in so many different Chapters.

CHAPTER I. Of Lust in general.
CHarity and Lust divide our whole life: these are the two Trees of the Gospel,
of which the one produces always good fruits, and the other can produce none
but bad. As all the good which we do comes from the Spirit of God, who works it
in us, and causes us to do it, forming in our hearts those good desires which
are as it were the seed thereof: in the same manner Concupiscence, which every
one beats within him, is the general source of all the temptations which we
feel; or, to speak better, it is a continual temptation, which carries us on to
evil and sin, in drawing us without ceasing, Leo to say, Nullum peccatum sine
cupiditate committitur, and omnis illicitus appetitus illius aviditatis, est
morbus. S. Leo Sermon. 9. de Passione, cap. 4.
That he committed no sin without lust; and that every unlawful desire is a
sickness and disorder, which comes from that violent motion which carries us
on unto evil.

So that to justify that the Divinity of the Jesuits makes an entertainment
for sin, we need no other proof, neither can any better be brought, than to
show that it favors and nourishes the lusts of men as much as it can upon
all occasions, as I shall make clearly appear in the whole progress of this
Book, by the simple representation of their Opinions and their Maxims.

This Chapter of Lust in general will notwithstanding not be unprofitable; for
that as our bodies are so composed of four qualities and four humors, that
there is always one which is predominant and prevails above all others, and
which at length gives the name unto the temperament, and causes one to be
styled melancholique, and another cholerique; thus likewise our souls are so, I
will not say composed, but corrupted, by the lusts and passions which sin has
produced therein, that there is no person who carries them not all in his
bosom enclosed in concupiscence, which is thereof the spring and principle,
although they appear not, nor act altogether equally in all sorts of persons;

For this cause, that I may completely accomplish the design I have undertaken,
to prove that the Divinity of the Jesuits does favor the lusts and passions of
men so much as is possible for it, and consequently those sins which are the
products and effects thereof, I will make it appear that in every condition and
profession they cherish the lust and vice which is peculiar thereunto; as
namely, the covetousness and frauds of Merchants, the Ambition and Vanity of
the Nobility, the in justice of Officers. But first of all I will say something
in general of the more common lusts and passions, which are found in all men,
and are in them as it were the spring of corruption, the matter of vices, and
the cause of all sins, as Hate, Pride, Covetousness, Uncleanness, Gluttony, and
Injustice. For this purpose, I will divide this first Chapter into 6. Articles.

ARTICLE I. Of Hatred. That the Divinity of the Jesuits entertains aversions
against our Neighbor: that it permits to wish, and do him ill, and even to
kill him, though it be for temporal concernments; yea, though also you be
assured that in killing him you damn him.
BAuny in his Sum, after he had delivered unto us the marks of an
irreconcilable hatred in these terms: Bauny in his Sum, chapter 7. p. 81.
The third mark of hatred against our neighbor, is not to be willing to
accompany him, to have such an alienation, and so violent from him, as not to
refuse to talk with him upon any matter whatsoever, nor to assist him in his
business, or not to pardon him at all when he acknowledges his fault, and
offers reasonable satisfaction. And after he has reported two authorities and
two passages, one of St. Ambrose, and the other of St. Austen, in which these
holy Doctors show us the obligation we have to love, and wish well to one
another, and to serve one another as members of the same body, he concludes
boldly in this manner; Notwithstanding I believe it is no mortal sin to be
wanting in these points, if it be not in case of scandal; that is to say, it is
never, or almost never, mortal sin, according to the doctrine which he
establishes, Chap. 39. p. 623. that a man is not capable of the sin of
scandal, but when by a formal design he does some thing to destroy his
neighbors soul; which is a design of hell, and which seems not easily to come
into the spirits of other persons than the damned and Devils.

Anthony de Escobar says the same thing briefly in his Moral Divinity, where,
An indignatio non volentis videre vel audire eum cui irascitur, sit mortale
peccatum? Communites veniale esse Toletus affirmat. De Escob. Tract. 2. Exam.
2. de peccatis, n. 98. p. 304.
If that indignation, which is the cause that a man will neither see nor speak
with him against whom he is angry, be a mortal sin? He answers, that Tolet
assures us, That ordinarily this is but a venial sin.

The words of this Jesuit are of great weight with his Society, because first
of all he professes to advance nothing of his own, and withal to borrow
nothing of Authors that are strangers; but only to report in every matter the
opinion of the Doctors and Writers of the Society. Hoc ingenue profitear, me
nihil toto libello scripsisse, quod Societatis Jesu non acceperim ex Doctore.
Quas enim proprias passim resolutiones innuo, ex schola Societatis aperte
deductas existimaverim. De Escobar in Idaea operis, in fine.
I sincerely declare, says he, that I have written nothing in all this Book,
which I have not taken out of some Doctor of the Society of Jesus; and I would
not have it believed that the resolutions which I have ordinarily given as my
own, are any other than conclusions evidently drawn from the principles of the
School of the Society.

2. Of all the Casuists of the Society he chose 24. particularly, the most
knowing and experimented, whom he considered and hearkened to as his Masters, or
rather as the Masters of all the World, and he represents them as sitting upon
24. Thrones, to teach the whole Church, abusing in this that place of the
Revelation, where 24. Elders sitting about the Throne of God are spoken of.
Consident lectiores 24. Jesuitae seniores quidem, non aetate solum, sed
scientia, videlicet Sanctius, Azorius, Toletus, etc. Ibid. in principio.
I present unto you, says he, 24. Jesuits sitting on so many Thrones, having
chosen them as the most ancient and most elevate of the Society, not only for
age, but also for knowledge, that is Sanctius, Azor, Tolet, etc.

3. Qualibet in materia inprimis authorum Societatis exbaurio medullam
Confessariorum in examen exponendam. Ibid. ad finem.
In every matter, says he, I have kept close peculiarly to the principal
Authors of the Society, and I have chosen out of them the best, and as it were
the marrow of their discourse, leaving it to the discretion of Confessors to
make use thereof, as they shall judge to be convenient.

4. And that he might give all kind of repute to these 24. Elders of the
Society, whom he compares to the 24. Elders of the Revelation, he proposes
their Resolutions in matter of Conscience, as so many Revelations made unto
them, and which they had received from the mouth of God and Jesus Christ. Here
are his terms; Ego solummodo memoro reserationem factam ab Agno suis authoribus
Jesuitis, quorum scripta absumere curavi. Ibid. ad finem.
I only report the Revelation which the Lamb has made to the principal Jesuits
whom he has chosen for his Secretaries, whose Writings I have devoured; like
as St. John in the Revelation devoured the Book presented to him by the Lamb.

After this none can easily judge, but that the Resolutions of these Authors
ought to pass in the Society, not only for common and assured Opinions, but
also for Oracles, and almost for Articles of Faith, of which they are not
permitted to doubt. And indeed the Book of this Jesuit is in so great
reputation in the Society,

Emanuel Sa, who labored near upon 40. years in the study of Moral Divinity,
and to compose a Book, which he has published in form of Aphorisms, as he
says himself in his advice to the Reader, treating of Charity, is not
contented to say with Bauny and Escobar, that one may without mortal sin desire
never more to behold ones Enemy; but he adds thereto, that it is permitted to
desire his death, and to be well pleased that it is come upon him. Potes optare
hosti tibi alioqui valde nocituro mortem, non odio, sed ad vitandum damnum
tuum: item de morte ejus gaudere ob bonum inde secutum. Emanuel Sa, verbo
Charitas, n. 5. p. 46.
You may, says he, desire the death of an Enemy that is capable of doing you
much hurt, provided you do not this out of hatred, but only to avoid the evil
which he would do you. It is also permitted you to rejoice in his death,
because of the good which may come to you thereby.

We need only, according to this Author, love our own Interest, that we may
without crime desire the death of our Neighbor, and rejoice in it when it
befalls him. That is to say, that Covetousness or Ambition may justify a
murtherous and inhumane soul; and that instead of being doubly culpable, it
ought to pass for innocent. For he condemns only these who desire the death of
a man in a frolic, and without being transported by any interest.

There is no Murderer nor Parricide who may not very well fit unto himself this
maxim, and who may not easily make use thereof to cover his crime and his
passion. If you reproach him, that in the fight of God he has killed his
Brother by the will and desire he has had to see him dead, he will tell you
with this Jesuit, that he had not desired his death, but that he feared he
would do him some mischief: non odio, sed ad vitandum damnum, not out of
hatred, but to avoid damage; or because he might hinder him from enjoying some
good, ob bonum inde secutum. So almost all mortal hatreds, and all revenges
shall be permitted, because they do not arise commonly but from worldly
interest of Ambition, Covetousness, and Pleasure; and it belongs only to Devils
and Desperadoes to desire the death of men of pure malice, and without design
of drawing therefrom any worldly advantage.

Bauny extends this maxim indifferently to all sorts of persons, and gives the
self-same liberty to a Mother, who, according to him, may desire the death of
her Children. One may, says he in the 6. Chapter of his Sum, p. 73. desire
evil to befall his Neighbor without sin, when he is urged thereunto by any
good motive. So Bonacina on the First Commandment, d. 3. q. 4. n. 7. exempts a
Mother from all fault who desired the death of her Daughters, Quando ob
deformitatem aut inopiam nequeat juxta animi sui desiderium eas nuptui tradere;
quia occasion earum male secum agitur a marito, aut injuriis afficitur. Non
enim proprie detestatur filias ex dispticentia earum, sed in detestationem
proprii mali.
when she could not dispose of them in marriage according to her desire, because
of their deformity and poverty; or because for their sakes she was abused by
her Husband, or injured. For she did not properly detest her Daughters out of a
displeasure toward them, but in detestation of her own evil.

He terms a lawful motive to carry a Mother on to desire the death of her
Daughters, the want of beauty, for that they were not handsome, ob
deformitatem, or because they were not rich enough, aut inopiam: and because
she could not marry them according to her desire, that is, not after her
ambition, or so advantagiously as she would.

I leave it to the Reader to reflect upon this abominable maxim, Bauny did not
carry it yet farther, and said not, that this Mother might procure the death of
her Daughters, as well as desire it, provided she might do it without scandal.
For this seems to be the necessary consequence of his opinion; for she may do
that which she may desire; the things which are lawful to be desired cannot be
other than good and lawful. And indeed this is the Doctrine of the Society,
and almost of all the Jesuits, asserting and maintaining it in other matters,
changing only the examples and not the maxim, as I shall show when I come to
speak of Murder. I will here only report as it were by way of advance one
passage of Lessius, who assures us, Dico secundo fas etiam est viro honorato
occidere invasorem, qui fustem vel alapom nititur impingere, ut ignominiam
inserat, si aliter haec ignominia vitari nequit. Lessius de just. and jure l.
2. c. 9. dub. 12. n. 77. p. 81.
That it is permitted to a man of Honor to kill an enemy, who with intent to
affront him, attempts to give him a blow with a cudgel, or a box on the ear, if
he cannot otherwise avoid this dishonor. And a little after, repeating the
reason for which one may attempt the life of another, and deprive him thereof,
he speaks in this manner; Quartus modus est, si nomini meo falsis
criminationibus apud Principem, Judicem, vel viros honoratos detrahere nitaris,
nec ulla ratione possim illud damnum famae avertere, nisi te occulte
interficiam. Petrus Navartus n. 375. inclinat licitum esse talem e medio
tollere: eandem tanquam probabiliorem defendit Bannes, q. 64. art. 7. d. 4.
addens idem dicendum etiamsi crimen sit verum, si tamen est occultum. Lessius
ibid. n. 81.
The fourth case in which you may kill without sin, is when by false reports
attempt is made to decry you in the spirit of a Prince, a Judge, or other
persons of Honor, and that you cannot otherwise hinder this wrong they would
do you in your reputation, than by killing him secretly, who is the author
thereof. P. Navarre n. 375. inclines very much to agree, that it is lawful to
kill this Enemy. Bannes holds the same opinion the more probable, q. 64. art.
7. d. 4. And he adds, That we may affirm the same thing, though the crime
whereof he accuses us were true, so it be secret.

In this case, and these examples of Bauny, Escobar, Sa, and Lessius,

After this that might be justly said of those who teach these pernicious
maxims, as well as of those that practice them upon their word, which our
Savior Christ said of Tyrants; Occidunt corpus, and post haec non habent
amplius quid faciant. Luc. c. 12. v. 4.
They kill the body, and after there is nothing that they can do; if they did
not proceed yet farther, and gave power to make souls perish also as well as
bodies, in permitting to kill him from whom we fear to receive any displeasure,
or any damage in reputation or temporal good, though we be assured that he
shall be damned.

This is the opinion Quod autem circumstantia illa aete^nt interitus injusti
aggressor is non impediat, affi^miat Caiet. 2.2. q. 64. art. 7. Molina de just.
commut. tr. 3. d. 13. n. 1. p. 1762. Tunc lege charitatis non est necesse
praeponere vitam illius spiritalem nostrae propriae corporal^, imo vero neque
nostrohonori, aut bonis nostris externis quae ille injuste velit a nobis
auserre.
of Molina, who says, that this circumstance ought not to hinder from killing
him; and that there is no Law of Justice, noreven of charity it self, which
obliges us to spare the eternal life of his soul, Quid si invasor sit ebrius
vel amens ad tempus, quem ante amentiam mihi certo constet fuisse in peccato
mortali, and cum co in amentiam incidisse? Respondeo ex Silvio eodem art. 7. q.
3. adhuc in ejusdem amentia licite posse invasum contra invasorem suae vitae
cum moderaoune inculpatae tutelae, usque ad necem invadent is se difendere.
Amicus tom. 5. de just. and jure. d. 36. sect. 5. n. 85. p. 408.
of Amicus, who, that he might better express his mind upon this case,
proposes an example of a man who had committed a mortal Sin, and afterward was
drunk, or fallen into madness: he assures us that if he assail us in this
estate, we ought not to make any difficulty to kill him, though we know
assuredly that he is in mortal sin, and by consequence that he shall be damned.

This is also the Doctrine of the four and twenty Elders of the Society, or
rather it is the opinion of all the Society reported by Escobar, who has
placed this decision amongst the Oracles which the Lamb has pronounced by the
mouth, and written by the pen of the Jesuits, whom he has chosen to be his
interpreters: Malefactores possunt occidi, nocturni, diurni fures, and alii
quicumque malefactores, etiam certo damnandi, De Escobar tr. 1. exam. 7. c. 2.
page 1154. sect. 1. number. 21.
We may kill, says Escobar, all those that do us wrong, as those that rob by
night or by day, and all other sorts of persons, who offend us, though we be
assured that they shall be damned, dying in this estate.

Observe these words, quicumque malefactores, whatsoever offenders or
malefactors. Whence it follows, that though this assailant were our friend, or
our kinsman, it were permitted to kill him though he should be damned. Yea,
even a Monk might kill his Superior, and a Son his Father in a like case. For
that is the sense of these words, quicumque malefactores possunt occidi; any
malefactors whatsoever may be killed. And although this explication of it self
be clear and natural enough, yet for fear it should trouble any one, and appear
suspected because of the strange excess which it contains, Amicus has made a
particular conclusion of it, and declares in formal terms, that this liberty of
killing any one whosoever it be that is ill-affected toward us, or any thing
that belongs to us, is a right which suffers no limitation or exception
whatsoever. Hoc jus tuendi propriam vitam non solum habet privata persona
contra privatas, sed etiam privata contra publicam, subditus contra Superiorem,
silius contra patrem, parens contra filium, Clericus aut Religiosus contra
secularem, and contra, absque ulla irregularitat is contractione. Amicus de
just. and jure disp. 36. sect. 5. n. 76. p. 407.
This right, says he, of thus defending ones life does not appertain only to
one private man against another private man, but to a private man against a
public person, to a Subject against his Superior, and to a Son against his
Father, to a Father against his Son, to an Ecclesiastique or Monk against a
Secular, and to a Secular against an Ecclesiastique or a Monk, without
incurring any irregularity therefore.

It is true that this Jesuit seems not here to give power to kill a Father,
Convenient supradicti fas esse ad propulsandam ignominiam, quam mihi aliquis
infer conatur, illum praeveniens occidere; si^ut fas est ad declinandam
mortem quam mihi injustus invaser molitur, illum occidere antequam mibi mortem
vel mutilationem inferat. Ibid. sect. 7. n. 106. p. 410.
The Authors of whom I have already spoken, says he, are all agreed in this
point, that to defend our selves from some affront that would be put upon us,
it is permitted to prevent the aggressour by killing him: as well as when a man
endeavors to deprive us unjustly of our life, or of any member, we may kill
him before he be able to execute his mischievous design.

It is not needful, according to this Author, to stay until your Father or
Master smites you, maims you, or makes you lose your honor. For if he attempt
only to do it, and you know his evil design, he permits you to prevent and
kill him: Potes illum praeveniendo occidere. And a little after speaking
concerning goods. Sicut mihi licet pro tutela vitae meae and honoris, ita and
pro bonorum meorum quae ad vitam, vitaque statum and honorem conservandum
necessaria sunt, aggressorem, si alia via illa desendere non possum,
interimere. Ibid. sect. 8. n. 127. p. 413.
As I may, says he, slay him who assaults me in the defense of my life and my
honor,

But if this crime appear too horrible to be undertaken upon the word of this
Casuist, I will make it appear in that which follow in this work, that his
opinion is the common sense of the Society. In the mean while this charitable
man and lover of the peace of consciences, to remove from them all scruple
about this point, makes no difficulty to testify that he is ready incase of
necessity to do the same himself first of all which he advizeth unto others.
Licet mihi pro tutela vitae meae and honoris, etc. aggressorem interimere, etc.
It is lawful for me, says he, as well as any other whosoever he be, for the
defense of my life and my honor, etc. to kill any one without exception
whosoever assails me.

So that a Monk himself ought not to make any difficulty upon this point,
unless he will be so presumptuous as to think himself a man of better abilities
or more honest than a Jesuit, who assures him that he is permitted to kill all
those in general who would attempt any thing against his honor, against his
estate, or against that of his Society. For he does not attribute this unto his
Company as a particular privilege; but he assures us that it is a common right
to all the Religions of what Order or reformation soever they be. Licebit
Clerico vel Religioso calumniatorem gravia crimina de se vel de sua Religione
spargere minantem occidere, quando alius defendendi modus non suppetit, uti non
suppetere videtur si calumniator sit paratus ea velipst Religioso, vel ejus
Religioni public and coram gravissimis viris impingere, nisi occidatur. Amicus
ibid. sect. 7. n. 118. p. 544.
It shall be lawful, says he, for an Ecclesiastique or a Monk to kill a
slanderer who threatens to produce great crimes against him, or against his
Order of Religion, if he have no other way to defend them therefrom; as indeed
it seems that he has no other, when the slanderer is ready to reproach him, or
his Order of Religion with those crimes publicly, or before some person of
great Authority, if he be not slain before. To kill such a man it is not
needful to stay till he attempts, si calumniator sit paratus, etc. it is enough
that he threatens to defame and to speak much evil, gravia crimina spargere
minantem. And to assure the Monks yet more in an enterprise of this
consequence, these Divines declare that herein they do not only nothing
against Justice; but also that it may so happen that Justice it self, charity
and the affection which they owe unto themselves and their Society may oblige
them to use this remedy so sweet and so charitable. It is Amicus who urges this
discourse also for the rest. Hunc honorem poterunt Clerici ac Religiosi cum
moderamine inculpatae tutelae, etiam cum morte invasoris defendere. Quin etiam
interdum, leg^ saltem ch^itatis, videntar ad illum defendendum teneri, si ex
violatione propriae famae integra Religio infamaretur. Amicus ibid.
The Ecclesiastiques and Monks may also defend their honors, even at the cost
of their lives who attempt to deprive them thereof, provided they pass no
farther then to what is simply necessary to defend themselves; and they may be
even obliged, at least by the Law of Charity, thus to maintain their
reputation,

This is a very strange charity, since it has the effects of the most violent
hatred: and rather it is a most monstrous hatred which brings one to kill in
cold blood, and to take away life in charity from him, for whom he ought to lay
down his own, since our Savior has said, that charity obliges us to lay down
our life for our friends; and that it requires us not only to love our
friends, but our nenemies also, and those who wish or do us hurt.

There remains now, as it seems, only one difficulty in this important
subject, which is, that possibly every one knows not how to kill men; and have
not hearts hard enough to embrue their hands in the blood of a Superior, or of
a Father in such cases, in which the Jesuit assures him that in conscience he
may do it. But he himself and his companions furnish him with many very easy
expedients to berid of them as by ambushes, and by other secret and sure ways,
which may be learnt of them when I come to rehearse more largely their opinions
upon the Commandment of God which forbids murder.

ARTICLE II. Of Pride. That the Jesuits countenance Pride and Vanity in all
sorts of persons, even in the most Holy actions: and that according to their
Divinity it is almost impossible to sin mortally by pride or vanity.
I Take Pride in this place generally, containing under this name ambition,
vanity, boasting, presumption, and all lust and desire of honor, glory and
esteem amongst men.

Ambition is the vice of the Great ones, and of the Nobility; and one of the
subjects, in which it does most appear, and in which the effects and
consequences of it are most deplorable, especially in France, are Duels.

Although Filliutius dare not absolutely authorize these unhappy combats which
are made for an imaginary point of honor, Quid juris de quarta causa, ob honor
is defensiovem? Respondeo, and di^o videri posse probabilem opinionem id
affirmantem. Filliut^us tom. 2. mor. q. tract. 29. c. 8. n. 145. p. 294.
It is demanded, says this Cafuist, what is to be said of the fourth pretense
which they make for those who fight duels, saying that it is to defend their
honor? I answer, that the opinion which assures us that this reason is
sufficient, may pass for probable. He makes this opinion so probable by the
reasons wherewith he strengthens it, and which we may elsewhere deduce from
other places of his book, that the contrary opinion which he teaches
afterward, as the more true, appears much less probable in his writtings.

Escobar who writ after Filliutius is bolder than he, because he is authorized
by his Society. He answers absolutely and clearly to this question: For after
he had demanded Potesine quis vir nobilis acceptare duellum in nobilitatis
defensionem? Potest si ex ^llius recusatione honorem aut munia publica esset am
ssurus. De Escobar tr. 1. Exam. 7. n. 96, 97, 98. p. 134. sect. 12.
Whether a Gentleman might accept a Challenge to defend his Nobility? he says,
he may, if, in refusing the Combar, he run the hazard of losing his honor, or
Office. He may even, according to this Divinity, challenge him that attempt any
thing upon his honor, as well as against his life, and even against his goods,
as I shall make it appear by the testimony of this Jesuit, and many others of
his Society, when I shall handle the matter of Duels, in expounding the duties
of the Nobility, and the vices which are common amongst them.

If Ambition be the vice of persons of honor, who live after the Laws of the
World, vanity is that of Women, and they give themselves thereto especially in
what concerns their beauty. Emanuel Sa justifies the first sort, and renders
the sin of the other slight. Oruari potest soemina ad tegendam turpitudinem:
quod si fiat ob vanitatem, adfingendam pu^chritudinem, mortale non est. Sa
verb. orn. n. 1. p. 385.
A Woman, says he, may dress her self to hide her deformity; and if she do
this through vanity to cause her self to appear fair when she is not, it is no
mortal Sin.

Escobar speaks yet more clearly and more resolutely: Ornatus corporis si fiat
non malo fine, sed ob naturalemfaslus inclinationem, veniale tantum erit, aut
aliquando nullum, De Escobar tract. 1. Exam. 8. n. 5. p. 139.
When a Woman adorns her self without any wicked design, by a natural
inclination which she has unto pride, it is but a venial sin, and sometimes it
is no sin at all. He troubles not himself as others do to palliate and excuse
the vanity of women, the luxury of their habits, and the too much care and art
which they use to dress themselves upon diverse pretenses, as their quality,
the custom, the desire to please their Husbands: he absolutely justifies the
natural passion which they have unto pride and vanity, as a thing which in it
self is not ill, and which cannot pass, according to the Laws of Divinity for
an evil end. And if there be found some, whose consciences are somewhat
scrupulous, who make difficulty to follow so strange a Doctrine, he can easily
accommodate himself to their humor, by assuring them that if it be any sin, it
can be at most but a venial one: Veniale tantum erit, aut aliquando nullum. It
will be only a venial one, or sometimes none at all.

Emanuel Sa gives the same license to Nuns. For having before said generally,
Ornari potest soemina ad tegendam turpitudinem: quod si fiat ob vanitatem ad
fiagendam pulchritudinem, mortale non est, etiam in Religiosa, si moderate so
or^t. Sa verb. orn. n. 1. p. 381.
that a woman may adorn her self to hide her deformity: and if she do this of
vanity, to cause her self to appear fair when she is not, there is in that no
mortal sin; he adds, that this is true even in reference to a Nun, provided
always that she dress her self with moderation. That is to say, as he expounds
himself afterward, Illud verum si in eo expendatur quod esset necessario
dandum pauperibus, peccari mortaliter. Ibid.
It is true, says he, that if she employ that which she is obliged to give
unto the poor, she sins therein mortally.

But when she gives occasion of sin to some who see her adorned in that sort,
does she offend mortally or not? This Jesuit thinks that they who would make
her responsible for this crime, would be too severe, and he loves rather to
conclude with others more favorable and more complacent, who discharge her
from mortal sin. Quod si quis alius sumat inde occasionem peccandi mortaliter;
tunc mortalle esse quidam aiunt: Sed melius al^i negant. Ibid.
But if any one, says he, take from thence an occasion to offend God mortally,
there are some who say that in this case the Nun sins mortally, but others have
more reason to deny it.

Sanchez in this point accords with Emanuel Sa. For proposing this question: An
foemina conspectui viri se offerens, a quo se turpiter amari novit, peccet
mortaliter peccato scandali? Sanchez op. mor. lib. 1. c. 6. n. 16. p. 19.
Whether a Woman who presents her self to the view of a Man whom she knows to
love her dishonestly, do commit a sin of scandal which is mortal? After he has
reported the common opinion of the Casuists in these terms: Communiter Doctores
eam peccare mortaliter censent, quando nulla necessitate ducitur, sed ut suae
voluptati satisfaciat, indifferenter hac and illac discurrit. Ibid.
The Doctors commonly answer, yea, when she does it without any necessity, and
when she courses about without discretion only for her pleasure. Afterward he
relates the opinion of some persons, A'iis tamen placet hanc non peccare
mortaliter. Ibid.
Yet there are others who hold that this woman does not sin mortally. And after
he has deduced their reasons, or rather those which he invented himself for to
justify this vicious liberty, he concludes in this manner: Et ideo quamvis
prim^n opinionem probabilem credam, existimo. etc.
And therefore although I believe that the first opinion is probable, yet
nevertheless I believe the second is the truer; and therefore that this reason
is not sufficient to conclude that a woman is obliged to deprive her self of
the liberty of standing at a door or a window, or to walk forth into the Town.

His principal reason is, because this woman does nothing in this, but make use
of her right and of her liberty: and that if one would constrain this woman, as
some do, whom he terms scrupulous, to deprive her self of the pleasure which
she takes in walking abroad, and going out to be seen when she pleases,
although she have no occasion; quando nulla necessitate ducitur, sed ut
voluptati satisfaciat, this would give her too much trouble, and she should be
too much disquieted, if she were obliged to consider when she had reason to go
out, and when she had not. And therefore she ought not to torment her own
spirit, nor trouble her self about that which may befall her, being it is
lawful for her Jure suo and liberate sibi concessa utitur, nec ea commode
privari potest quin mill scrupulu aditus pateat circa egressum e domo,
necessarius sit, nec ne. Ibid.
to make use of her right and of her liberty, which she cannot be deprived of,
without making way for a thousand scruples, which would come into her mind
whenever she had a desire to go abroad, for to understand whether she had any
necessity for it or not. So that to take away these scruples, he would have the
rains let loose to passions and other disorders. But this Divinity, does not
accord with that of our Lord, who says in the Gospel,

After they have thus authorized apart amongst men and women these two vices
of ambition and vanity, they authorize them jointly amongst Ecclesiastiques and
persons consecrated unto God. I have already touched something of Ambition in
the precedent Treatise, and I have showed how the Jesuits give unto the
Ecclesiatiques and the Religious, Monks and Nuns, the same license which they
give to the Seculars, to preserve their worldly honor by all sorts of
effectual ways, and even to prevent and kill, if need be, those who would
deprive them thereof. Therefore I will not touch this point here, of which I
must also speak elsewhere. I will only relate some passages of their Casuists:
to make it appear that they justify vanity amongst the Ecclesiastiques, and
that they do introduce it into the most high and holy functions of their
ministry.

See how Emanuel Sa speaks in this business. Vanae gloriae causa praecipue
praedicare, Missam celebrare, peccatum esse mortale quidam atunt, quidam
negant. Sa, verb. vana gloria, number. 2. page 485.
There are that say that it is mortal sin to say a Mass, or to Preach
principally for vain glory; and others say the contrary. Minds being divided
in this point, the one and the other opinion are at least probable, and by
consequence one may follow which likes his conscience best, according to the
constant maxim of the Jesuits School.

He says elsewhere simply that there are some who at least do excuse this
action from mortal sin, Mortale quidam c^nsent praedicare sine l^gitima
licentia, etc. non esse autem si quis ob gloriam aut pecuniam principaliter
praedicet, aiunt nonnulli. Sa verb. praedicare. n. 4. p. 405.
Some Casuists, says he, hold that it is a mortal sin to Preach without
allowance; others say that it is not to Preach Principally for the glory of
this world or for money.

Escobar speaks more confidently, and says that by his advice, which is that
of the Society, there is not in this any appearance of mortal sin. Scio non
esse grave crimen fabellam ^ecitare, imo si ^d fit animo exci andi auditores ad
pie audiendum, nullum peccatum est. Porro praedicare quem principaliter ob
gloriam aut pecuniam, mortale non esse affirmo. Escebar tract. 6. Exam. 7. n.
132. page 769.
I am assured, says he, that it is no great crime to relate a fable in a
Sermon or relation, which one has invented; and if it be done to excite the
spirits of the Auditors to hear with more devotion, it is no sin at all; but I
maintain it, that one may without mortal sin Preach out of vanity, or for
money, although one should regard vanity or money as the principal ends.

Sanchez says the same thing, and taking it yet higher, he expounds it also
with advantage in this manner: Res quantumvis sacras principaliter ob vanam
gloriam efficere, ut Sacramenta omnia ministrare vel recipere, Sacrum
celebrare, non excedit culpam venialem. Sanch. l. 1. oper. Mor. c. 3. n. 1. p.
9.
To do the most sacred actions out of vanity, as to administer all the
Sacraments, or to receive them, or to celebrate the Holy Mass for vain glory,
can be but a venial sin, though vain glory be proposed as the principal end:
They are not content to excuse as much as may be the vanity of the Clergy and
the Friars, but they pretend also that they may make it their principal end in
the most Holy and Divine Functions of Religion, To Preach, say they, or say
Mass principally for vain glory, is no more then a venial sin. But to Preach,
and to say Mass principally for the glory of this World, is to sacrifice the
Body of Jesus Christ to vanity, to the World, and to the Devil, who is the
Prince of the World and the Father of pride and vanity; and this is no great
matter according to the Divinity of the Jesuits; this is at most but a venial
sin; non excedit culpam venialem.

Sanchez discovers in a few words the foundation of this Doctrine, establishing
for his first conclusion, that Si jactantia and vana gloria de aliquo bone fit,
est sola oulpa venialis. Sanch. loco citato.
if boasting and vain glory have for its object any good, it is only a venial
sin: That is to say, that one may vaunt and glory as much as one will of things
which are good in themselves and advantageous, without committing a great sin.

Escobar flies higher than Sanchez. For he does not only free them from
mortal sin who glory in the good qualities which they have, or which they
think they have, but those also who would make men believe that they have such
as they have not, and who go about to establish their honor and reputation
amongst men by a false appearance of Sanctity which they affect and counterfeit
on this design. For after he has given this definition of hypocrisy:
Hypocrisis est manifestatio propriae excellentiae per facta ficta, and falsa.
Po^ro hypocrisis semper est peccatum, quia mendacium semper perniciosum est;
mortale quidem erit si intus vult esse malus, and foris tantum bonus apparere:
veniale autem si aliqua praestet exterius ut sanctus appareat. Escobat tr. 2,
Exam. ^. n. 11. p. 291.
It is a manifestation of ones proper excellence by fained and deceitful
actions, he adds, This is always a sin, because a lie is always prejudicial; and
this sin is mortal, when one would be wicked within, and appear good without:
but it is only a venial sin, if one do only something before men to appear
Holy.

He proceeds yet farther, Perrocum quis se jactat flagitium grave gessisse, si
non adsit scandali occasio, aut facti ve^ conficti operis non admiscetur
complacentia, vel faciendi voluntas, veniale est. Ibid. n. 9. p. 291.
When, says he, a man boasts himself to have committed some enormous crime,
provided that he does this without scandal, and without compleasance in this
action true or fained, and without desire to commit it, it is but a venial sin.
That is to say, that if a man only vaunt himself of a crime, it is but a light
fault, and that he ought only to take heed to avoid scandal; modo non adsit
scandali occasio. So that if a man who does glory in the most enormous crimes,
have but only the discretion not to speak thereof before persons who may
thereby be scandalized, he may vaunt thereof freely before debauched people,
who will only laugh and take pleasure thereat.

He speaks in the same same manner of novelties, and of those who invent new
fashions and new opinions, that they may as well content their own curiosity
and vanity, as that of others, whom he also exempts from mortal sin. For having
proposed this question: Quidnam inventio novitatum? Est manifestatio prepriae
excellentiae per facta quaedam, puta novas opiniones, novas vestes exponere.
Quae quidem inventio nisi aliunde gravius vittetur, ex se venialis tantum culpa
est: quia communiter ejusmodi inventione quis solummodo geslit aliorum laudem
comparare. Escobar, ibid. n. 10.
What is it that is called invention of novelties? He answers, It is a
demonstration of ones own excellence by certain actions, as in inventing new
opinions or new sorts of Garments. This invention of novelties is of it self
but a venial sin, Provided then that a man set his soul and heart only on the
desire of worldly honor and glory, this desire is either not evil at all, or
it is but a small fault according to these Divines; and what ever one does or
says for this end well or ill, with truth or falsehood, he shall not lose the
grace of God, nor fall short of Salvation.

If this be no heinous fault, to boast himself, even of crimes, to invent novel
opinions, to counterfeit actions of piety and virtue, to gain honor in the
world, it must needs be that neither is it a great fault to desire honor even
with a desire irregular and vicious. For this cause Escobar concludes well,
according to his own principles, in that place, where after he has given us
this definition of that haughtiness of mind, which they commonly call Pride:
Superbia est appetitus propriae celfitudinis perverse voluntarius. Escobar Tr.
2, Exam. 2. n. 4. p. 290.
Pride is no other thing then an irregular desire of ones own greatness: he
makes this question: Quandonam appetitus ille graviter vulnerat conscientiam?
Quando cum D^i contemptu copulatur. Ibid. n. 5.
When is it that this desire does notably hurt conscience? And he answers: When
it is joined with contempt of God. And that he may leave no doubt nor
difficulty in this so nice a point, he adds also by way of demand: Exprime
quandonam superbia cum Dei contemptu admissceatur. Ibid. n. 6.
Express your self, that we may know when this contempt is contained in Pride.
And as if he had a design to satisfy the desire,

First, Quando quod a Deo habet, a seipso habere existimat.

Aut vult ab aliis tanquam a seipso bona habens existimari.

Aut vellet a seipso and non a Deo bona sua possidere.

Aut dolet quod bujusmodi bona a Deo, and non a seipso receperit.

Aut cum quis existimat quidem se bona habere a Deo, sed non gratis ei
obvenisse, verum ex justitia sibi debita propter jejunia, eleemosynas, etc.
Escobar ibid. n. 6. p. 290.


When he thinks to have of himself that which he receives from God.

Secondly, When he would have others think that he has those good things from
himself.

Thirdly, When he desires to have them from himself, and not from God.

Fourthly, When he is sorry that he has received them from God, and not from
himself.

Fifthly, When one believes indeed that he has received from God all that he
has, but he thinks that he holds them not by his mere grace, but that he ows
them to him of Justice, and because of his Fasts, Alms, and other good works,
which he has done.

And a little after n. 9. summing up all the ^ks, and all the effects of
contempt of God, which alone according to his opinion makes a mortal sin of
Pride, and contracting them together into one point alone which contains all
the rest, he concludes in these words: Tanc autem ad mort^le^ accederet, quando
graviter aut Dei reverentia laederetur, aut proximisama. Ibid. n. 9.
If Pride does notably wrong the honor of God, or the reputation of ones
Neighbors, it may be mortal sin, or at least it comes near thereto, ad
mortalem accederet.

He will not absolutely avow that this great irreverence against God is mortal
sin, but only that it may be, F^t equidem cum gravi Dei i^reverentia, cum in
morem Regis Tyri dixerit fatuus: Ego sum Deus. Ibid. n. 9.
That the honor of God is greatly injured by Pride, when a man is so foolish
as to say like the King of Tyrus: I am a God.

So that to offend God mortally in matter of Pride, according to the Divinity
of the Jesuits, it is required that this passion be so strange, that it carry a
man to the utmost extravagance, and make him lose all sense and reason.

And moreover they hold not this excess of Pride, which transports a man so
far as to put himself in the place of God, to be always mortal sin; but only
that it may be, and that it comes nigh unto it, accederet ad mortale: of which
it seems that he could not allege any better reason, then to say that an
imagination so foolish could never come into any but a spirit altogether
perverted, and almost incapable of sin as well as reason. So that to speak
properly, according to these Doctors, it will be true that a man who has his
judgment found, can never offend God mortally by Pride, in what manner soever
his heart be puffed up and elevated.

ARTICLE III. Of Fleshly pleasure, and dishonesty.
First. WE will speak in this Article, first of dishonest Discourses, Looks,
and Touches. Secondly, Of Panders, and maintainers of debauched Women,

I. POINT. Of dishonest Discourses, Looks, and Touches.
AS the spring and seat of all carnal impurity is in the pleasure of the
senses, so all other senses and all other pleasures serve that of the touch,
and are related unto it as their end, and that wherein impurity is attained and
finished, because it is the most material and base of all the senses. This is
the reason that the Divinity of the Jesuits, which is all methodical, observes
well to keep the order of the means, and the end in his matter; it gives all
sorts of liberty to the senses, and justifies in a manner all sorts of pleasure
which it can taste, as if they had a design to excuse or to diminish with all
their power the crime which is committed, with the lowest and most infamous
pleasure of the flesh.

Filliutius after he had said that dishonest words, though they represent the
most filthy actions and matters, are of themselves indifferent, he establishes
this for a conclusion, that Dico 2. loquutionem corundem factam ex levitate and
curiesitate quadam, non excedere p^ccatum veniale. Filliutius tom. 2. mor.
^ract. c. 10. n. 227. p. 325.
discourses even of filthy things, though they proceed from curiosity and
levity, do not go beyond a venial sin.

He says moreover that when one adds unto the pleasure of curiosity, Si
locutio sit de rebus turpibus, solum ob voluptatem quae praecise oritur ex ipsa
narratione, absque ulteriore intention ipsarum rerum, sic non excedit culpam
venialem. Ibid. n. 209.
To speak, says he, of filthy things, for the pleasure that is taken in those
discourses, without having a design to pass on to dishonest actions, is but a
venial Sin.

He is no less indulgent to those that hear these filthy discourses, then to
those who utter them: Quares de auditiene rerum turpium? Responde^ codem mode
ex^se esse rem indifferentem, si andiantur ex levitate quadam and curiositate
vana, non excedit peccatum veniale. Ibid. n. 212.
You will ask, says he also, what we ought to think of those that hear these
filthy discourses? I answer as before, that it is in it self an indifferent
thing; and that if it be done through curiosity or lightness, it is but a
venial Sin.

He is not more rigourous in condemning those who take pleasure in reading
filthy books, concluding by his principles, Ex his infertur, idem dicendum de
leg entibus libros turpes and tractantes ex professo de obscoenis amoribus. Ob
solam enim curisitatem and delectationem quodam medo speculativam ex artificio
and miro modo rerum sic narraturum; non excedit veniale. Ibid. n. 213.
That the same thing is to be said of those who read filthy books, and which
have dishonest loves for their principal subject. For to read these books
simply of curiosity, and for the pleasure they take to consider the art, and
strange encounters of the discourses which they contain, is but a venial Sin.

He gives the same liberty to the sight as to the hearing, to satiate it self
with filthy things, without sinning otherwise then venially: Aspectus rerum
turpium ob delectationem naturalem and sensitivam tantum, sublato periculo
transeundi ad delectationem veneream, non videtur excedere culpam venialem,
Ibid. n. 215.
The beholding of filthy things for natural and sensual delight only, without
design, and without danger of passing on to the pleasure of the fleshly act,
seems to me to be only a venial sin. Parts quaecumque corpori^ propriae vel
alienae, quae communiter and honest in humano convictu ostendi solent, ut
brachia, pectus, crura, absque pecc^ ullo aspici possunt. Ibid. n. 217.
That one may without any Sin behold all the parts of his own or another body,
which are commonly uncovered, without indecency in the converse of the world,
as the Arms, Bosom, and the Legs.

He declares that it is ordinarily lawful to go with the Breast open, and to
walk in company with the arms and legs uncovered. And he adds thereupon that
Totum etiam corpus coopertis pudendis in balneo vel flumine si necessitas vel
utilit as aliqua, vel etiam commoditas vel delectati^ ob sanitatem intercedat,
absque ullo peccato aspici potest. Ibid.
When one bathes, whether privately or in the River, for any necessity or
benefit, or even for any convenience or pleasure, which serve for health, one
may behold all his own or another body naked without any Sin, as he said
before, provided that they hide their shame.

After so many motives and pretenses of necessity, profit, convenience,
pleasure, or health, for which he gives full liberty to behold ones own or
another body naked, he condemns in this respect curiosity alone; Ex sola
curiositate non exced^t culpam venialem.
but yet with so great indulgence, that he holds it only for a venial sin. And
because vice, unto what excess soever it may arrive, cannot take away that
natural confusion, which ^lls on a man and woman in beholding one another all
naked; to the intent he ^ight remove from them this shame, if he could, which
else might hinder them from contenting their curiofity, and to take this
shameful pleasure which he permits them when occasion presents it self, he lays
down for his second conclusion; Personae diversi sexus nudae e remoto loco
brevissimo tempore, it a ut non detur occasio notabilis emotionis, ob solam
curiositatem aspici possunt. Ibid. n 218.
that one may behold the naked bodies of persons of different sexes of more
curiosity without mortal Sin, provided that one behold them at a distance and
for a short time, in such manner that place be not given to some notable
emotion.

But a little after he overturns these clauses and these restrictions, E loco
proximo longiori tempore communiter and regulariter loquendo ob probabile
periculum in praxi, censeo absque mortali sectari eas non posse, quidquid
speculative alii excusent a me^tali; qua in re quisque satisfacia^ suae
conscientiae. Ipse enim aspectus damnatur tantum quia periculosus moraliter.
Ibid. n. 218.
I believe that they cannot be beheld nearhand and for a long time, without
mortal Sin, considering these things practically, and as they ordinarily
happen, by reason of the danger to which such would probably be exposed;
notwithstanding, there are others who considering this case only in general,
and in the theorie, exempt them from mortal Sin. In this every one ought to
follow the judgment of his own conscience. For this beholding cannot be
condemned but because it is commonly dangerous.

That is to say, that although his own opinion be favorable enough to corrupt
passions, yet notwithstanding the contrary opinion, which is yet more
favorable, is also probable at the least, considered in it self and in general,
without particular circumstances, which may make it evil; and that it may be
defended in dispute and in discourse, and which indeed some do defend, and
consequently may be followed without sin, according to that maxim and
reasoning which is common with this sort of people. This is the reason why this
Jesuit complying therewith, as he that knows not what it is to torment any
person, after he had simply spoken his own thought, leaves every one to his own
conscience; qua in re quisque satisfaciat suae conscientiae:

And that he might yet give more assurance to carnal curiosity and
concupiscence, he attempts to cover it with this reason: Ipse enim aspectus
damnatur tan^um quia periculosus moraliter.
Looking is not blamed, but that it is ordinarily dangerous.

Escobar has recollected and couched in a few words all that which Filliutius
has written upon this point. For he says generally, that Locutio rerum
t^rpium ex se res indifferens est..... ob curiositatem tantum vellevitatem,
sublato periculo, aut alie malo fine, veniale peccatum est; ob delectationem
ver^ ex narratione non excedit venialem culpam. Escobar tract. 1. Exam. 8. c.
1. n. 2. p. 1348.
to speak of dishonest things, is a thing indifferent in it self. And a little
after: speaking out of more curiosity and lightness, taking away the danger,
or other evil end, is but a venial Sin. And in the end he concludes, that to
talk thereof for the pleasure we take or receive by the discourse of such
things, can be but a venial Sin.

And in the following page n. 4. demanding what evil may he in dishonest looks,
he answers: Aspectus rerum turpium ob delectationem tantum naturalem, omni
pericule sublato transeundi ad veneream, venialis culpa tantum est. Ibid. n. 4.
p. 139.
To behold dishonest things for natural pleasure only, is but a venial Sin,
provided that one bring not himself in danger to go on forward unto carnal
pleasure. And some lines after: to behold these of curiosity is but a venial
Sin, provided one be out of danger of proceeding unto carnal pleasure.
Filliutius who permits, or at least passes by as small faults, all sorts of
beholding all parts of the body, except those which nature obliges us to cover.
For he declares that this exception is not absolutely necessary: Enimvero si
essit aspectus partium, quas pudor velat, vel ipsius concubitus, speculative
quidem non damnarem, practice tamen sub mortali dam^andxm existimo, ob
periculum faciliter transeundi ad illicita. page 139.
As for me, says he, if one look on those parts of the body which natural
modesty obliges us to hide, or even a man in the act with a woman, I will not
condemn him, considering the thing in it self and in general, all be it that,
in the practique, I believe that it ought to be condemned of mortal Sin,
because there is therein danger to pass to that which is unlawful. If he
condemn this look, it is not because he does acknowledge it to be absolutely
evil, but only because of the danger therein of committing, and passing on
from an action lawful to that which is not lawful.

And to show yet better the conformity of the opinions of these Jesuits, who
agree also with the most part of the rest who have written on this subject, it
is worthy to be observed, that as Filliutius after had said what he could to
take away or diminish the sin of impurity, which is found in these dishonest
looks, leaves every one to his own judgment and to his own conscience to do
that which he pleases; qua in re o uisque satisfaciat suae conscientiae: in
the same manner Escobar leaves every one to his liberty in particular to follow
his own sense in a matter so dangerous, and to rule himself by his complexion
and age: consulatur cujusque complexio and aetas.

There is nothing that carries men more strongly to imp^rity then Stage Plays,
and particularly those which represent dishonest things. For in other sensual
objects and divertisements there are but one or two senses commonly that are
satisfied: but in Stage Plays all the senses in a manner are affected, by
sensible images and representations, which has obliged the Saints to condemn
them so often, and to turn men away from them as one of the most dreadful
inventions of the Devil, and most capable to destroy souls.

For this cause Escobar speaks according to the truth, where he says,
R^praesentantes comedias res turpes conti nentes, vel eo modo ut ad venerem
excitent ut plurimum, mortaliter peccant. Escobar tr. 1 Exam. 8 c. 1. n. 3. p.
138.
They who act Comedies wherein dishonest things are contained, or represented
in such manner as ordinarily to excite impurity, sin mortally.

But if the Comedians find this proposition at first sight to be rigorous, I
am assured that they will receive it without much trouble when they shall
understand that which follows. For after he had condemned of mortal sin those
who act Comedies, he adds that Porro audientes obserentiam, ob abquem bonum
sinem, non peccant, ob curiositatem aut levitatem, venialiter delinquunt. Ibid.
p. 3. p. 13^9.
those that go thither to learn something, or for any other good end, sin not
at all; and if they go thither of curiosity or lightness, they sin only
venially.

These Stage Players will easily satisfy themselves by this last proposition,
seeing it destroys the former, and shows clear enough that their Profession is
in effect good, ar at least indifferent, for there is no appearance that one
can be a partaker in an other man's sin, or be present voluntarily without
cause, by lightness, or only to please his curiosity at a wicked action, and
an exercise which of it self is a mortal sin, and draws on to sin, being St.
Paul does testify, that not only they who do evil are worthy of death, but
they also who consent thereto; that is to say, they who act Stage Plays sin
mortally, as Escobar says in his first proposition, it follows according to
St. Paul, that those who go to bear them expressly upon lightness, and
curiosity, make themselves partakers of their sin. And if on the contrary, they
who go to them sin not at all, or sin venially, as the same Escobar says,
though they go thither through lightness, and more curiosity, it will follow
that they who act the Comedies do not sin at all neither, or sin but venially,
contrary to what Escobar affirms in his first proposition, and against the
judgment of all the Saints.

Filliutius in the place which I have cited, speaks of Stage Plays almost like
Escobar; Si ob solam curiosiatem audiantur vel delectationem representationis,
non rerum representatarum, and alioquin non sit probabile pericu'um lapsus in
mortale, non excedit veniale. Filliutiu, mor. tom. 2. Tr. 30. v. 10. n. 212.
If one goes thither, says he, only for curiosity, or for the pleasure he
takes in beholding good Actors, and not of the things which they represent,
this is but a venial sin; provided that he come not thereby in apparent
danger of falling into mortal sin.

And to show that he esteems this venial sin to be a very small one, and that
commonly there is even none at all in attending on these filthy and dishonest
Stage Plays; he permits this to the Ecclesiastiques. Non etiam Clerici peccant
sublato scandalo, quod sere non intercedit, ex Sanchez, quia srequentissime
intersunt. Ibid.
The Ecclesiastiques themselves, says he, sin not in going to a Stage Play,
provided that it be without scandal, which hardly happens at all, says
Sanchez, because they go thither very frequently.

He says, that Ecclesiastiques sin not in going to Stage Plays, provided they
can go thither without scandal; and at the same time he declares that there is
no scandal therein, because they go thither very frequently. It is true,

For what concerns dishonest touches, Escobar says generally, that they are
permitted betwixt persons espoused, and relates this as the opinion of Sanchez
and many others. Sanchez and alu multi affirmant licere, si absit pollutionis
and consensus in rem illicitam periculum. Escobar tr. 1. Exam. 8. n. 74. d.
149. sect. 3.
Sanch^ says he, and many others assure us that they are permitted, provided
that no danger of falling into pollution come thereby, nor of giving consent
unto any unlawful thing.

He also makes Sanchez speak more boldly in this point, citing him again the
second time: Sanchez citatus ait licere oscula and tactu^ externos, etiam si
secutura pollutio praevideatur dummodo adsit justa causa sponso, scilicet ad
vitandum inurbanitatis seu austeritatis not am. Ibid. n. 74.
Sanchez, whom I have already cited, says, that kisses, and touches of the
body are permitted to persons betrothed, though they foresee that pollution
will follow thereon; provided the man be moved to it by some just reason; as
namely, that he may not appear to be of an ill humor, or too austere. It is
better, according to Sanchez and Escobar, to give a man's self up to impurity
and unnatural excess, than to pass for an uncivil person before men or women.

Filliutius reports it as an opinion of the same Sanchez, Non esse mortale, nec
saepe veniale exosculari molles infamium carnes. Filliutius moral. tom. 2.
tract. 30. c. 9 n. 171. p. 321.
that it is no mortal fin, nor commonly a venial one, to kiss the tender and
delicate flesh of children.

Etiamsi fiant ob solam delectationem naturaliter consequentem, crunt ad summum
peccata venialia. Ibid. n. 176.
And speaking of touches and kisses which are given for pleasure only, Erunt ad
summum peccata venialia. And a little after having made this question, Au
amplexus nudi cum nudo pertineat ad hoc genu^ tactus, an vero possit etiam esse
inter tactus causa benevolentiae^ Ibid. n. 174.
If the embraces of two persons all naked, be of the same nature with these
touches, (he speaks of Criminal touches) or if one may well place them also in
the rank of touches which are to testify good will, which before he had said
were innocent and lawful? He answers, Respandeo si speculative loquamur etiam
illa est res indifferens, and potest sine peccato fieri. Ibid. n. 174.
that considering things in the theory and in general, these embracings
themselves are things indifferent, and may be done without sin.

And a little after pushing on the question yet farther, and to the uttermost
extremity that it can go, without entirely accomplishing the crime; he says,
Si tamen fieret inter personas diversi sexus, vel adolescentes ejusdem sexus,
praesertim in locis clausis and remotis ab aliorum aspectibus, practice vix
ficri crediderimus absque peccato mortasi. Ibid. n. 174.
that if these embraces of bodies all naked be made by persons of different
sex, or of young people of the same sex, he believes they can hardly be done
without mortal sin, considering them practically, especially in places secured
and removed from the view of the world.

He dares not absolutely condemn of mortal sin and action so shameful, so
immodest, and which leads manifestly to the extremity of sin, under pretense
that it was done out of love and friendship; honoring with the name of amity a
passion so loose and infamous: And although he says, that it is hard as to the
practice not to commit sin in these embracements, and even mortal sin; yet he
forbears not at the same time to give us to understand, that it may be done
without any sin at all; so that what he affirmed in the beginning, continues
always true: according unto him, that this action is good or indifferent in it
self: si speculative loquamur, etiam illa est res indifferens, and potest sine
peccato fieri: which suffices to give unto men the liberty of embracing in that
manner,

II. POINT. Of the Ministers and Panders in the trade of Whoredom, such as they
are who carry messages, bear letters, appoint meetings to debauched Women, or
who lodge or protect them.
I Suppose that I have sufficiently proved that the Jesuits do cherish the Vice
of Impurity, in making it manifest that they justify it, or at least they
discharge from this crime dishonest readings, looks, touches and embraces,
which are the most common and nearest dispositions unto it. But I will not stay
there, because their Divinity goes yet farther, and it favors and approves
more than any person that has any little of honor or reason can believe, the
accomplishment of this crime which is Fornication, Adultery, Incest, and other
such like crimes.

First, in permitting to cooperate with, and be aiding to the commission of
these crimes.

In the second place,

And, in the third place, in giving means to perpetrate these infamous actions,
or at least to justify them after they are done, and to take as much pleasure
in the remembrance of them as if they had been innocent actions.

For the first point, Sanchez speaking generally of those who make themselves
partakers of other men's sins by cooperating therein, establishes this rule as
a principle whereon depends the resolution of all difficulties which may occurr
in this matter. Dicendum est licere quaecunque indifferentia vendere, aut
obsequia indifferentia exhibere, quamvis constet alterum abusurum, dummodo
desit intentio co-operandi ad malum alterius usum, and adsit proportionata
excusens causa. S^nchez oper. moral. lib. 1. c. 7. n. 13. page 21.
We must answer, says he, that it is lawful to sell all things which are
indifferent; as also to perform all sorts of services which are in themselves
indifferent, though we know certainly that they will be abused; provided that
we have no intention to cooperate to he ill use whereunto they are put by
others, and we have some reasonable motive to excuse us.

If it be lawful to sell and to lend all indifferent things, and also, in
serving another, to do every indifferent thing, it will follow, that it is
lawful to sell, to lend, and to do almost all sorts of things, because every
thing that may be sold or lent, is not only indifferent, but good in it self,
being the creature of God, who has made nothing but what is good. And although
one cannot say that all the actions of men are good, yet notwithstanding, the
greater part even of those which are bad, Sanchez, that they be indifferent in
themselves, and considered in general; though in particular, with their evil
circumstances and effects which arise from them, they are very criminal, and
this be certain and known by him who does these actions, or sells these things;
because he sees clearly, that he for whom he does them, or to whom he sells
them, will abuse them: quamvis constet alterum abusurum.

So that according to this Divinity, if one see a man who seeks for a precipice
to throw himself down, or a sword wherewith to kill himself or some other, one
may help him to a sword, or show him a precipice, and even lead him thither, if
it be needful, without partaking in his crime, provided only that he have no
intention to cooperate with him therein; modo desit intentio co-operandi ad
malum alterius usum, though he do in this manner actually cooperate with him
therein.

The Jesuits serve themselves of this rule to justify the greatest crimes.
And indeed if this be to be received, a man that gives a ladder to robb his
neighbor, that lends his Chamber wherein to deliberate and resolve to murder
him, who sells poison for this intent, or provides a sword to kill him, shall
have no part in any of all these crimes, if he in this manner knowingly and
willingly cooperate therein, dummodo desit intentio cooperandi; especially if
having no formal intention of doing ill, he have some reason which may excuse
the ill he does actually; and adsit justa causa proportionata excusans.

And the best reason, or at least the most common one, and which the Jesuits
approve, and allege most usually in these occurrents, is that of some temporal
interest or worldly reputation. So they allow a Gentlewoman of good quality not
to refuse a man to enter into her house with whom she has offended God, if she
cannot so do it but that the world will talk thereof; a maidservant not to
depart from the house of her Master who abuses her, if he will not pay her her
wages; a servant not to quit the service of his Master who imployes him in his
debauches, if he receive or hope therefrom any good recompense.

These are the consequences which the Jesuits themselves draw from this
principle, with many other which we shall see in their Casuists. Sanchez who is
the principal author of this maxim, after he has established it upon diverse
soundations which he proposes, amongst many Conclusions which he draws
therefrom, puts this same for the fifth: Quinto, deduc^ur posse famulos
sternere equum, herum comitari and expectare, quando non custodiae causa, de
quo numcro sequenti dicemus, quamvis nor^nt ipsum ad fornicandum abire. Sanchez
op. mor. l. 1. c. 7. n. 22. p. 23.
It follows from this principle, that a servant may saddle the horse of his
Master, accompany and attend him, if it be not to defend him or stand centry
for him, of which we speak in the next following numbers, although he well know
that he goes to visit debauched women. quando non custodiae causa comitantur;
He adds in the sequel: Si enim comitantur ut rivales illius mulier is in vadant
cum eis pug^aturi, nulla ratione licet, quod sit intrinsece malum. Si autem ut
a rivalibus aggredientrbiu horum tueantur, vel ut admoneant herum advenience
aliquo qui ipsum offendere possit, ut sic incolumis evadat, adhuc rarissime
erit licitum, and urgentissima necessitate concurrenti. Ibid. n. 23.
For if they go with their Master with a design to assault and combat his
Corrivals, that is not lawful, because it is an action evil of it self: but if
they go only to defend their Master against those who shall assail him, or to
give him notice of any come to offend him, to the end that he may save himself
without receiving any hurt, it is lawful, though this very rarely, and only
upon great necessity.

It is therefore true, according to Sanchez, that a servant may be innocent in
all these occurrences, because that he pretends that all these offices he does
for his Master, Quia etsi hae actiones indifferentes sint, utpote q^ae bono and
malo usui possunt deserv^re, and ideo posse aliquando licitas esse affirmo.
Ibid. n. 23. p. 24.
are things of themselves indifferent, and which may be well or ill used. This
is his general principle and his principal reason, whereby he maintains that
these things are lawful for servants: only he wills that they be done rarely
and upon great extremities, because he avows that they are dangerous, and easy
to be abused, the servants who are employed on these occasions having commonly
more courage than discretion and moderation: So that instead of contenting
themselves to defend their Master, as is lawful for them, they are easily
transported to assault and outrage those who would interrupt their dishonest
pleasures. For this cause he is wise, and considers that he shall not give
warranty to their excessive heat, if he be content to maintain, that all this
is permitted because it is lawful and indifferent in it self; Quia famuli hi
manifesto se non solius def^nfionis, sed pugnae ineundae periculo exponunt,
atque herus ea severitate animosior ad peccandum redditur, ac majorl libidine
peccat. Ibid.
because the servants that are employed on these occasions expose themselves to
the danger, not only of barely defending their Masters, but also of fighting
and assayling, which makes their Masters more bold and confident in their sin.

He draws also this Conclusion from this Principle; Sexto deducitur licere
famulis cibos condire, ad mensamque ministrare, lectum sternere concubinae
heri. Ibid. n. 24.
That it is lawful for a servant to make meat ready, to wait at the Table, and
to make the bed for his Masters Concubine: And he quotes for this opinion
Ledesma and Emanuel Sa, whom be makes to say, with some others, Fas est ornare
beram meretricem. Ibid.
That it is no fault for one that serves a Whore, to help her to dress her
self: which is not found so expressed in Emanuel Sa. But the secret passion
which Sanchez has for this affair, has drawn him on to borrow the quill of
another to write that which he durst not publish in his own proper name,
contenting himself with a reason deduced from his principle, which is, Quia
haec omnia sunt ex se indifferentia, and valde remote se habent ad peccatum.
Ibid. n. 24.
that all these things are of themselves indifferent, and have no reference to
sin but from afar off.

He finds, that to prepare a banquet for debauched men and women, to attend
them at the table, to make their bed, are actions far remote from sin, though
it follows so close thereupon: and therefore they are lawful to men and
maid-fervants; and that there needs no other reason to justify them in these
affairs, than the service they owe to their Masters and Mistresses; to perform
all these good offices to his Master without fear of sin, it is enough that he
be hired to serve him: But for a friend or any other person that would do so
much, it behooves that he have some particular reason, as he declares in
express terms, saying, At in non famulis aliqua justa causa desideraretur.
ibid.
that if they are not serwants, it behooves that they have some just reason for
to do it; which thing seems to agree very well with his principle. For if these
actions in themselves be indifferent, as he presupposes, they may as well be
lawful for a friend as a servant, the quality of a friend giving no less
liberty to serve a friend; than that of a servant a Master.

So that Hurtado is more reasonable, and acknowledging the natural consequence
of this principle, he gives absolutely the same liberty to a friend, a son, and
to any other, as to an household servant. For after he had said, Famulus potest
jussu heri videre quo foemina aliqua eat, and ubi habitet, eique munuscula
defer, herumque comitari ad domum concubinae, sive causa honoris, sive
desensionis heri, and ei pedem sustinere ad ingrediendum per senestram domus
concubinae, and ei picturam concubinae emere, and ire ad concubinam, and ei
dicere: herus meus te vecat, and eam ad domum heri comitari, and januam
aperire, and eis lectum sternere; non tamen potest eam invitare ad actum ipsum
inhonestum cum hero. Gaspar Hurtado apud Dian. part. 5. p. 435. in addendis
atque emend and is in par. 5. resp. mor. in tr. 7. de Leand.
That a servant might watch a woman whither she went, or where she abode, if
his Master command him, and carry her little presents, and accompany his
Master, whether it be to honor him, or to defend him when he goes to see her,
hold him by the foot when he goes in to her through the window, buy for him the
pourtraiture of his Mistress, go to tell her that his Master prays her to
come to meet him, accompany her, and conduct her to the place where he is, open
the door for her, make the bed, but not incite her to sin with him. After all
this, I say, he adds; Et eadem omnia potest filius ad mandatum patris,
praesertim si ex omissione indignationem patris timeat. Et eadem omnia quae
possunt famulus and filius, etiam potest quilibet alius titulo alicujus
considerabilis utilitat is sibi accrescentis, and multo melius titulo vitandi
aliquod grave incommodum aut damnum. Ibid.
That a son may do all the same things if his father command him, especially if
he fear he shall draw on him his indignation if he refuse. What a servant or a
son may do in these occurrents, any other may do as well as they, if he hopes
that thereby there may some considerable benefit come to him, and much more for
avoiding some great loss, or some great evil.

It remains only that we affirm the same thing of a daughter toward her
father, and a wife toward her husband; For it is not worse for a wife to do
these dishonest offices for her husband, than for a son or a daughter to
perform them for a father or mother; and the reasons of this Casuist prove it
equally, or they prove nothing at all.

And although shame, as it seems, kept him back from this, yet he has
notwithstanding sufficiently discovered his thoughts by these general terms;
etiam potest quilibet alius; also any other may do it; shows plainly, that what
he speaks expressly of a son in regard of his father, ought also to be extended
to a wife toward her husband; and he condemns not, it may be, these good
offices even in a Monk or Priest, since he excepts no person at all: etiam
potest quilibet alius.

As for carrying of presents to dishonest persons, Sanchez makes no difficulty
thereof for servants; And he draws this also from his principles: Nono
deducitur licere famulis jussu heri poitare aliqua munuscula aut esculenta ad
concubinam, cum haec sint indifferentia. Sanchez l. 1. c. 7. n. 29. p. 25.
It follows, says he, that it is lawful for a servant to carry, at his
Masters commandment, to a woman whom he keeps, little presents, and things to
eat: and the reason of his principle always returns; because these things are
indifferent.

He is a little more troubled to permit servants to deliver messages, Quidam
hoc tanquam intrinsece malum damnant. Ibid. n. 26.
Some, says he, do condemn this as a thing evil in it self; and not only as
evil, but also as shameful; saying, that those who meddle with this commerce
are decried and noted with an infamous name, which is at this day of so little
credit in France, that we must content our selves to rehearse it in Latin, as
Sanchez also has set it, quod communis existimatio testatur, hos lenones
appellans; which the common opinion testifies, whilst these are called panders
and bauds.

But there is cause to believe, that it is rather the name than the thing which
displeases him: For after he had cited some Authors who condemned justly these
infamous servants, he adds in their favor, that Alii vero excusant a peccato
famulos qui ratione famulatus haec internuntia aut scripta deferunt, in quibus
herus petit a concubina ut ea nocte ad se veni^t, ^tsi norint velle ut veniat
ad sornicandum. Ibid. n. 26.
Others exempt from sin these servants, who because of the service they owe
their Masters do these messages, and carry these Letters, by which their Master
commands a woman to come meet him in the night, although they know that he
causes her not to come in the night but that he may sin with her. And to make
us perceive that this is his opinion, though he dares not say it openly, Quod
haec rem indifferentem contineant, cum non ad sornicationem, sed ad adventum
inducan^. Ibid.
Because, says he, these letters and these messages are indifferent things,
inducing the person only to come, without speaking of the sin. He believes that
this mental distinction and restriction is sufficient to shelter this crime and
any other, how great soever they may be.

Molina says, that in places where Whores are tolerated, Peccatum non est
locare eis demum modo locator non intendat fornicationem earum ibi, sed locare
solum domum ad habitationem illarum, sciens eas abusuras ea habitatione ad
peccata. Molina de just. tom. 2. tr. 2. disp. 500. p. 1122.
It is no sin to let them a house, provided that he who sets it have only an
intention to let it them to lodge in, and not to prostitute themselves therein,
though he knows that they will abuse his house to sin in it. According to this
resolution, it is lawful to lend or sell a sword to a man who is known to
demand it for no other reason than to kill himself or some other, provided only
there be no express intention to cooperate with his sin.

Escobar makes Valentiae to say the same thing. For demanding, Licet ne ex
justa causa locare domum meretrici, vel alicui peteuti ad fornicandum? Valentia
docet licere, quia locare domum est res per se indifferens, quae ex sola prav^
abutentis intention ad malum ordinatur. Escobar tract. 1. Exam. 8. n. 98. p.
155.
If it be lawful to let ones house to Common Women, or to any who desires it
to keep such therein? He answers, That Valentia holds that this is lawful;
because to set ones house is a thing in it self indifferent, which is not evil,
but through the evil intention of these who abuse it. And because the question
is important, he puts it again the second time in these terms: Number liceat
locare meretrici aut usurario domum. Escobar tract. 3. Exam. 9. c. 4. n. 28. p.
441.
Is it lawful to let ones house to a Whore, or an Usurer? After he had
testified that Mendoza made some difficulty therein, he answers, Valentia tom.
3. disp. 5. qu. 21. part. 4. docet locari posse, etiamsi alteri commode posset
locari. Ibid. n. 28.
That Valentia holds that he may let them it, that is to say, provided a person
find any Temporal advantage therein, it concerns him not though God be offended
in his house, and that to offend God is also an indifferent thing with him, as
well as the letting of his house to persons whom he knows do hire it to offend
God therein.

There is no son so unnatural who dares so much as think of letting a house
which he holds of his father, to persons whom he knows to require it for no
other end than therein to offend his own father, and to abuse his own sister,
or his mother; and if any son were capable of this excess, there is no father
who could suffer this affront, and who would not think himself in this more
injured even by his son, than by his enemies, and those who attempted to
dishonor him in this sort; and yet according to the Divinity of the Jesuits,
God is not offended by such unworthy usage; and he will not take it ill, that a
man who is related to him by so many titles of Son, Servant, and Creature, who
holds all he has of him, and who depends absolutely upon him, lets out his
house to offend him, and to commit crimes and abominations against him.

It is hard to have such thoughts of God without renouncing faith, and even
reason it self, and without representing God as an Idol of wood, or stone, to
believe that he is unsensible of such outrages and infamous actions as these;
and to imagine that he would not take it ill,

So it is that Sanchez, who is the Master in this subject, after he had said,
that Navarre was therein too exact and too scrupulous, satis scrupulo^e
locutus; commends Valentia and Azor for having been more bold, and for having
surpassed all others in the defense of so good a cause; Sed ultra alies optime
Valentia 2.2. disp. 5. q. 20. puncto 5. col. 5. verse. Ex hoc autens, Et melius
q. 21. puncto. 4. col. penult. and Azor Tom. 2. Instit. Moral. l. 12. c. ult. q
3. censent etiam nulla causa justae excusante licere locare domum meretrici.
Sanchez op. mor. l. 1. c. 7. n. 20. p. 23.
But Valentia, says he, speaks in this better than all the rest. And in
another place he says, that he has surpassed himself, and that Azor and he
held that one might let out his house to a Whore, though he had no just reason
to do it.

These are three Jesuits who speak together after this manner, and these three
the most famous of their Society, Azor, Valentia, and Sanchez, who reports the
opinions of the former to confirm his own.

It is with the same spirit that Sanchez does all he can to excuse those who
take such infamous persons into their protection, who retain them, who pay them
money, who furnish them with garments, who keep them in their houses, and walk
with them to defend them when they go abroad. For though at first he confesses
that he finds some difficulty in giving absolution to these persons; yet for
all that he afterward facilitates the things in such manner, that a Confessor
who has but a little contrivance, and is well entered in his opinions, shall
have therein no trouble at all. He builds always upon the same foundation, and
draws from the same principles all the conclusions which he advances upon this
matter. Duodecimo deducitur patronos meretricum difficillimo negotio posse
absolvi. Ibid. n. 32. p. 25.
It is very hard, says he, to absolve them who make themselves the protectors
of Common Women. See here a formed difficulty; but he weakens and dissipates it
in the same moment, saying, Quamvis enim id munus obire liceat, quando non ut
meretricio faveant id obeunt, sed ut incolumes meretrices servent. Ibid. 3.
It is lawful to perform this office to them when there is no design to favor
their debauchery, but only to hinder that any wrong be done them.

He would say that it is not lawful to entertain nor protect debauchery, but
only debauched women. As if it were as easy to separate these things in
effect, as in the distinctions of the Schools; and as if this were not to
protect debauchery, to hinder those who would take from them the liberty and
license without which it could not subsist. The Whore may take the same excuse
for her self, which is alleged for her protector, and say that she loves not
the debauch, but the profit; that she her self has the same aversion from
these disorders, but necessity has therein engaged her, having not whereupon
to live without prostituting her self. It is sufficiently clear, that this
answer justifies her no less than her protector, and the same gives us well to
perceive, that subtilties of spirit and metaphysical abstractions are bad rules
for the conduct of men's manners and conscience.

I will relate one conclusion more of Sanchez before I return to the rest.
Undecimo deducitur licere alicui dare mutuo nummos alteri, aut cubiculum
accommodare petenti ad fornicandum, quando absque gravi detrimento proprio
proportionato denegare nequit. Ibid. n. 31.
It follows, says he, that it is lawful to lend money, yea or a Chamber to
sin with women, when it cannot be refused without great damage, which has some
proportion to this evil. There needs only a promise of some notable sum,
Valentia cited and approved by Sanchez, Etiam nulla justa causa excusante.
although you have no just reason which may serve you for an excuse.

Escobar speaks of the same case in the same sense, and almost in the same
words. For having supposed it as a thing altogether certain and manifest; Scio
co-operari peccato alterius, peccatum esse, and qui concurrit ut causa remota,
a peccato excusari. Rogo an quis dicatur proxime peccato co operasse dum
commodat v.g. cubiculum amico sornicaturo, ut magnum incommodum vitari possit?
Negative respondeo ex Doctorum meorum mente. Escobar tr. 2. Exam. 1. n. 58. p.
215.
that it is sin to cooperate to the sin of another, and that he that
contributes to it only at distance sins not at all. He inquires, Whether it may
be said that he co-operates to the sin of another as a near cause, who lends
his Chamber to his friend to corrupt himself with women, to the end that he may
avoid some great evil? I answer, no; says he, according to the opinion of my
Masters.

He would have us know that this is not his particular private opinion, nor of
two or three, but of all his Fraternity, and especially of the 24. elders whom
he had taken for his Masters, and whom he makes profession to follow: ex
Doctorum meorum mente. And the reason of this answer is, Quia tal is comm^datio
tubiculi ex se est indifferens, and sola abutent is voluntate vitiatur. Ioid.
because to lend a Chamber in this manner is a thing of it self indifferent,
and is rendered bad only by the evil intention of him that abuses it.

This Author speaks yet more largely, Tredtise 1. Examen 1. page 285. But I
pass all this in silence, as many other things, which I could relate out of
other Jesuits, to cut short as much as I can a matter whereof I desire not to
speak at all.

I will only observe farther that which he says in the 7th. Treatise, Examen
4. chap. 8. p. 835. which is as it were an abridgement of all that which he had
said, and is in a manner all that can be said or done in this matter according
to the rules and morals of the Jesuits. For the 7. and 8. Chapters of the book
which I have now cited are entitled: The first: Praxis cir^a materiam de
poenitentia ex Societatis Jesu Doctoribus.
The practice upon the matter of penance taken out of the Doctors of the
Society of Jesus. And the other which follows immediately; Practicae adbue
specia^es resolutiones Confessarium ad munus recte obeundum instruentes.
Other decisions of particular cases for the instruction of Confessors, how
they may well discharge their offices. In the latter of these two Chapters he
makes this question concerning the Confessor? Quonam modo se geret cum
libidials mediatore? n. 223. p. 835.
How shall he deal with those persons who mediate betwixt debauched persons?
First he makes some distinctions about things which a Confessor ought to
tolerate, and those things which he is to forbid these persons; after he says
that all indifferent things are lawful for them, and by consequence, that they
ought not be forbidden them. And to relieve the Confessor, he observes unto
him, in particular, many actions he calls indifferent.

Indica^o quaenam actiones communiter a famulis assumptaeind fferentes siat:
parare equum quo dominus prosecturus est ad amasiae domum; cum mibi commorantem
foris cuslodire; amasiae mensam apponere, chos praeparare, ad domum reducere,
epistolas des^re, de quarum turpitudine gravi non moraliter conslet. Escobar
tract. 7. Exam. 4. n. 223. p. 835.
I will observe unto you, says he, in particular, what actions are indifferent
amongst the services which Masters are wont to receive from their servants, to
saddle the horse on which their Master must go to see his Mistress, to stand
at the door, and keep it so long as his Master stays with her; to make ready
diet, to cover the table and wait at it; to bring his Master home again, to
carry Letters, if he be not assured that they are extremely dishonest. That is
to say, that it suffices that the servant be not assured that they are full of
words and discourses manifestly filthy, but that he believes that his Master
will content himself to testify discreetly to her whom he loves the affection
which he bears her, which he expresses by these words which he adds: Licot
affectu sint exaratae. Ibid. 832.
Though they be written with passion.

He also sets down in the number of services which servants may do their
Masters on these occasions; Dona f^rre ac reserre, ostia aut fen^stias aperire,
domum amasiae ostendere, auxilium domino paaestare ut ascendat. Ibid. p. 832.
To carry and bring back presents, to show her house whom his Master loves; to
open the doors or windows for him, to help his Master to get over a wall, or to
pass through a window, as he says expressly in another place; and to hold the
ladder if the wall or the window be too high.

There may be many of those people whom he calls mediatores libidinis,
mediators for lust, who are grown old in the mystery, without ever having known
or practiced all that which he teaches; and I am assured that he will not find
any so hard, or so untoward, who will not be content, and serve himself very
advantageously of what he allows him. But I doubt whether the most obdurate and
desperate can give credit unto his word, and that of his Fraternity, which
permits them to do that in Conscience, and before God, which the light of
reason alone, and the resentments of honor, unto them as so shameful and
infamous, that they are constrained to hide themselves therein from men, and to
blush secretly in the presence of God.

He has only forgotten to speak in this place of the appointments which a
servant may make with a Curtesan on the behalf of his Master, if it be not that
he believed that this was sufficiently comprised in the words which I have
related; epistolas defer, licet affectu sint exaratae: to carry letters,
though they be passionately written: or in these others a little above, Literae
quibus advocatur amasia, indifferentes sunt. Ibid. n. 223.

Tract. 2. Exam. 2. n. 61. p. 286.


The letters which a man writes to her whom he loves, or whom he keeps, to
desire her to come and meet him, are indifferent things. Notwithstanding, for
the convenience of a Confessor, whom he pretends to instruct, as well as for
the repose of the conscience of these honorable mediators, it seems to him
that he ought to explicate it a little more clearly, or at least to remit them
to the place where he decides this controversy more clearly, and places it in
the rank of things indifferent; and by consequence lawful in this traffic:
Dicere nomine heri concubinae: Dominus dicit ut hac nocte expectes, aut in
domum accedas, aut signare locum ubi sit concubina. tr. 2. Exam. 2. n. 61. p.
286.
For a servant to say on the behalf of his Master to a woman; my Master
commands me to tell you that you should attend him this night, or that you come
meet him at his lodging, or at least to show him the house of this woman.

It seems to me after this there is nothing more to say, nor to desire, for the
clearing up of all points and all the difficulties of a profession so honest,
and for the entire satisfaction of them who engage therein, but only to
advertise them, Hurtado and others will not excuse them from sin: Porro hasce
omnes actiones; Hurtadus 2.2. d. 10. did. 9. solius utilitatis ratione
excusat. Ibid.
Hurtado, says he, will not excuse these, but by reason of their gain alone.

This is the conclusion of Escobar after the words which I have now related;
that is to say, that to avoid, or rather to cover a crime, another must be
committed; and that a man may nor be accounted impudent, according to the rules
of the Jesuits Divinity whereby they shamefully serve lechery, a man may help
himself by avarice, and looking to the lucre he gets in the service he performs
to Lust.

III. POINT. Of dishonest thoughts and desires: Of Fornication, Adultery, and
other such like sins, and of the pleasure that may be taken therein.
THe Jesuits are not yet come so far as to deny that Fornication and Adultery
are sins. The Commandment of God and the Law of Nature are very express in
this point. All that they could do herein, is, to separate by their rules and
by their metaphysical abstractions, the pleasure which is found in these
crimes, from the Criminal actions, that by this means they may give the spirit
that satisfaction which they believe they cannot allow unto the Body. But yet,
being they could not authorize the action considered absolutely in it self,
they have permitted it under a condition, and hold that one may desire it,

Amongst the Aphorisms of Emanuel Sa we find these very terms; Non est mortale
cogitare sic apud se: si peccatum non esset furtum aut adulterium, illud
facerem. Sa ver. peccatum n. 2. p. 560.
It is no mortal sin to think and say in ones self; If Theft or Adultery were
no sin, I would commit it. He that is thus disposed, has his will not far
removed from Adultery, though the Law alone and the fear of punishment seems to
keep him back from committing it: For if it had been the deformity of the
action and the hate of sin had held him back, and kept him off from Adultery,
wrong had been done in saying that he had only not sinned mortally; for he had
not sinned at all: and it had been on the contrary a good disposition, and an
act of virtue to have eschewed an action, because it is evil.

This is without doubt an excellent means and a very easy expedient to do
without fear, or at least to desire and will to do all things whatsoever they
be, if they may be made lawful by representing them as lawful; and if for to
remove truly the evil from the most criminal actions, it be sufficient to
separate it by thought only, and by an abstraction merely imaginary, or to add
to them in the same manner that which is necessary to make them lawful.

Sanchez serves himself of this expedient, more freely than Emanuel Sa, for the
defense of dishonesty, giving by this rule to all persons a liberty to fill
their spirits with the thoughts, and their wills with the pleasures, which they
may have in the enjoyment of any women, whom they please to represent to
themselves as if they were their own wives. Delectatio voluntatis de objecto
condition^li, quod seclusa condition esset peccatum mortale, non autem ea
posita, non est illicita. Sanch. op. mor. l. 1. c. 2. n. 34. p. 9.
That the pleasure which the will does take in an object considered under a
certain condition, which without this condition had been mortal sin, and was
not such therewith, is not unlawful being taken with that condition put upon
it. He brings for proof and clearing of that his proposition, this example: Ut
gaudium voluntatis de concubita, si esset uxor. Ibid.
As the pleasure which a man has to desire to lie with a woman if he had
married her. He had already said the same thing before, and he repeats it
again, whether for the pleasure he takes therein, or because he thinks it to be
important; as if any one desire to lie with a woman, whatsoever she be, a
married woman, kinswoman, or a Nun. For he removes the evil which might be
therein in regard of the one as well as of the other, by this condition, which
he puts in their imagination; Si esset sua uxor.
if she were my wife; si uxor mea esset, Ibid. And the reason he alleges
thereupon proves it very well according to his principles; for adding only this
condition, in his thoughts, Est praecisio malitiae a copula quae consistit in
ea habita cum non sua, apponendo conditionem, si esset sua, ibid. n. 33.
if she were my wife, or if I had married her, it takes away the sin that had
been in lying with her; because sin consists only in lying with a person whom
we have not married.

Filliutius says the same thing, and he expounds and extends it yet farther.
He proposes first this general maxim, which may serve for a principle to
resolve many difficulties in this and other matters; Dico primo, quando
conditio tollit matitiam ab actu, ut comederem carnem in Quadragesima nisi
esset vetitum, cognoscerem Titam si esset uxor, tunc puest absque peccato
desiderari res ex objecto mortali^, sub tali condition, si liceret. Filliutius
mor. tom. 2. tract. 21. c. 8 n. 269. p. 27.
That when the condition whereupon an action is desired does remove the evil
that is in it of it self, as when a man says, I would eat flesh in Lent were
it not forbidden me; And although this condition, being altogether voluntary
and subsisting only in the imagination, be also impossible in it self in an
ordinary way according to those laws which God has established in all things:
it will not fail for all that, according to these Doctors, to make innocent the
most Criminal action. As when a man says seriously and with disposition to do
as he says; Vindictam sumerem si liceret; accederem ad mulierem nisi peccatum
esset. Ibid. number. 298.
I would revenge my self, if it were lawful; I would embrace this woman, if it
were no sin.

And the reason for which he justifies these motions, is, Nam ea conditio si
poneretur per quemcunque modum divinae potentiae, tolleret malitiam ab actu.
Ibid.
that if the omnipotence of God should in any manner whatsoever cause this
condition to be accomplished, it would remove all the evil that is in the
action. And though this were also impossible in regard of Gods omnipotence; and
that he could not in any manner hinder the thing to be evil, it would be of no
importance at all: Quamvis malitia esset intriaseca actui, tamen qui ita vult
objectum, non habet affectum ad malum, sed potius cohibet voluntatem a malo ^b
divinam prohibitionem. Ibid.
For although that malice were so intimately annexed to the action and entirely
inseparable from it, yet notwithstanding he who desires this thing under this
condition directs not his affection toward the evil, but rather restrains his
will from moving toward it, because God has forbidden it.

And this is so reasonable and certain according to the Jesuits Divinity, that
by making only this mental abstraction and restriction in the mind; If it be
not sin, if it be lawful, A man may without scruple not only suffer himself to
run out to some transient and imperfect motion; but also to humor himself with
a perfect and efficacious desire of the most filthy and criminal things and
actions. Et quidem in desiderio efficaci concedit ettam Sanchez, n. 25. Alii
etiam in desiderio absoluto cum tali condition. Ibid.
Sanchez agrees, says Filliutius, that one may also desire these things with
an efficacious desire, and others, even with a complete desire, only with this
condition which he set above; if it were lawful; if it were no sin; if I had
married her.

This maxim explicated and practiced in this manner does seem unto them so
innocent, that they permit the Monks and Nuns themselves to follow it. Unde
etiam voluntas aut desiderium ejusmodi in Religioso, qui desideraret uxorem
ducere sub condition, si liber esset a voto, non esset peccatum, Ibid. n. 297.
Whence it follows, says also Filliutius, that this desire and this will would
be no sin in a Monk who should desire to marry if he were free from his vow. Or
one might well solace himself with this thought or this desire, as he says
above: I would lie with such a woman, if she were my wife. And by consequence,
a Monk may take this pleasure without scruple. The reason of this Jesuit is;
Quia cum delectatur caelebs vel Religiosus de accessu ad mulierem si liceat,
voluntas seu appetitus rationalis fertur sub ea condition praescindendo
malitiam a copula, and a coupla cum non sua, quo pacto non est malnm objectum,
and coincidit ejusmodi delectatio vo untatis cum simplici complaceutia. Quare
sicut desiderium sub condition licet, it a etiam licebit delectatio quae
propriae gaudium dicitur in voluntate. Ibid. n. 229.
Because when a man who is not married, or no Monk, pleases himself with
thinking of the pleasure which he might have in lying with a woman if it were
lawful for him, his will or reasonable appetite carries him not out to that
carnal action, but under a condition, after he has first of all removed from
it all the evil that is therein, when it is done with a woman not lawful for
him. For considering if in this manner it is not evil,

And though Layman be not entirely of the same opinion with Filliutius and
Sanchez, because he saw there was danger in it, yet he proposes it as a true
opinion, but whereof the practice is difficult. Quamvis haec speculative vera
esse ponamus, tamen in praxi vix locum habent. Layman. l. 1. tract. 3. c. 6. n.
12. p. 41.
Though we suppose, says he, these things to be true in general in the theory,
yet it happens rarely that they can be so done in practice. Yet for all this he
explicates and fortifies the reason of Sanchez better than Sanchez himself,
reducing it into the form of a syllogism. Complacentia voluntat is cujus
apprehensum bonum est, non est mortale peccatum: concubitus autem cum muliere
apprehensa sub condition conjugii non est malum, sed bonum objectum. Ergo
simplex voluntat is complacentia and non solum desiderium, ut Cajetanus
existimat dub. 1. de tali objecto apprehenso, a mortali peccato excusatur.
Ibidem.
The pleasure, says he, that the will takes in a thing which is represented
to it as good, is not mortal sin. But to lie with a woman considered as ones
own wife, is a good and not an evil object. By consequence the will may without
mortal sin, not only desire this action considered in this manner, as Cajetan
also affirms, but may also regard it simply with pleasure.

If this decision seem too large, you must believe notwithstanding that this
Jesuit does yet restrain himself in this point, and that he has not said all
that he could say therein. For if it be true, Concubitus cum muliere ap
prehensa sub condition and sub statu conjugii, non est malum, sed bonum ob.
jectum.
that to lie with a woman whom he represents unto himself as under a
condition, and as if he were married to her, is a thing which is not evil, and
which on the contrary is good. One may infer thence not only, as he does, that
it is no mortal sin; but also, that it is no sin at all to please ones self
with this desire, and to apply ones self to this object, because it is good in
it self.

Another expedient proposed by Sanchez for to justify the desire of
fornication, or to take therein all the pleasure that can be taken, is that
which he teaches in the resolution which he gives in this case, viz. Si
rusticus a viro existimato docto and pio audiisset fornicationem and furtu^
externa esse peccata, at licere fornicandi aut furandi desiderium. Sanch. op.
mor. l. 1. c. 16. p. 71.
If a rustique have heard it said by a man that is in reputation for a knowing
and honest man, as are in a manner all those of their Society, and especially
in the judgment of the Peasants of whom he speaks, that fornication and theft
are sins, but that the desire of the one and the other are lawful. For after
he had said, that even amongst the Modern Casuists there are some who would not
excuse this Peasant of mortal sin, if following the advice of this man whom he
believes to be learned and pious, he should voluntarily entertain such a desire
of fornication; he adjoyns in favor of this Peasant, or rather of fornication;
Quibusdam neotericis doctis videtur banc ignorantiam minime excusare; at
quamvis hoc probabile sit, probabilius tamen credo actum internum excusari
omnino a malitia. Ibid.
though that opinion be probable, yet I believe that it is more probable that
this interior act is exempt from all sin.

These two expedients may be made use of indifferently, albeit the first is
more proper for men of understanding, who know how to make metaphysical
abstractions, and the second for simple and ignorant persons, such as are
Peasants, who may also draw this advantage from the Divinity of the Jesuits
above persons of wit and understanding; that because of their ignorance, they
may even commit fornication it self without sin: Filliutius and some others
assure us, that one may be ignorant that fornication is a sin, without being
guilty. Septimo quaero an dari possit ignorantia invincibilis fornicationis?
Respondeo posse dari. Filliut. mor. q. tom. 2. tr. 30. c. 2. n. 50. p. 389
It may be demanded, says Filliutius, if a man may be invincibly ignorant that
fornication is a sin? And he adds immediately after: I answer, that one may.
Azor having taught the same thing before him, putting into the number of things
which a man may be invincibly ignorant of, Ad scortum accedere, Azor. tom. 1.
l. 1. c. 13. p. 34.
to go to a Whore. Whence it follows, according to them, that one may in this
estate of ignorance commit fornication without sin.

It is true, that they are constrained to acknowledge that it is hard to find
this invincible ignorance amongst Christians; but then they return presently to
their general proposition: Dari potest ignorantia inviacibilis fornicationis.
Multi enim vulgares bomines sunt, qui nesciunt distinguere inter peccata
permissa vel non prohibita quoad poenam, ut ex^o quod non punitur fornicatione
simplex, sed impune permittuntur meretrices, putant etiam non esse peccdtum ad
eas accedere, quod etiam in civitatibus alioquin been institutis in fide and
religione persaepe locum habet, ut ii qui confessiones excipiunt rite norunt
Filliut. ibid. n. 51.
That for all this it is not impossible, that one may be invincibly ignorant
even amongst Christians that fornication is a sin, for there are many persons
amongst the Common people, who know not how to discern amongst certain sins,
those which are tolerated or not forbidden, which though they be not punished,
yet their disorders are not approved: And by consequence, those persons may by
the favor of their ignorance innocently commit fornication, and particularly
with common women.

Men of ingenuity and understanding may also enjoy the same privilege with
these ignorants, when they are not in a condition to make use of their
knowledge and wit. For Filliutius gives them his liberty to commit the acts,
not only of fornication, but also of adultery, of incest, and of all other
crimes, or at least he will excuse those that they have committed in that
estate: and if after they come to remember what they have done, he permits them
to take pleasure and to rejoice, as if they had done the most honest and most
lawful actions. Quaro quinto on delectatio de re mortali ratione somni,
ebrietatis, amentiae, vel ignorantiae excusetur? Filliut. ib. tr. 21. c. 5. n.
290 p. 34.
I demand, says he, whether fleep, drunkenness, madness or ignorance frees
from sin, the pleasure that one takes in a criminal action which one committed
in that estate? He relates on this matter two contrary opinions, of which the
first condemns this pleasure of sin; the second frees it therefrom. He in the
following discourse decides this controversy, and concludes in these terms;
Delectationes illae etiamsi malae non essent, tamen indicant imperfectum
affectum ad castitotem, Ibid. n. 291.
I say first, that the former opinion is probable,

But as for common persons and such as lead an ordinary course of life in the
world, he establishes for them this other conclusion: Dico 2. secundam
sententiam videri probabilem and absolute tutam: quia non est dilectatio de
opere malo: sed ex indifferenti. Ibid.
The second opinion seems to me more probable than the former, and absolutely
one may follow it with confidence. The reason is, because this pleasure has
not for its object any evil action, but an indifferent one. Which he repeats
also a little while after, answering the principal reason of the contrary
opinion: which was, that it is not lawful to take pleasure in an evil action.
Unde ad rationem oppositam respondetur factum de se non esse mortale, quia hoc
ipso quo sit absque liberate, res quaedam est indifferens, sicut occisio ammal
is, and concubit no brutorum inter se, Ibid. 293.
I answer, says he, to the reason alleged against this opinion, that this
action is not a mortal sin in it self, because being done without liberty, it
follows that it is indifferent; as the killing of a beast, or the coupling of
beasts.

He makes great use of this comparison to this purpose, in imitation of the
Holy Scripture, which compares those who are addicted to fleshly pleasure, to
Horses and Mules: but he conceives amiss of the sense of the Scripture; for in
that he so boldly justifies these infamous persons, he must condemn it, which
condemns them. Hi nempe qui conjugium ita suscipiunt, ut Deum a sua mente
excludant, ut suae libidini vacent, sicut equus and mulus quibus non
intellectus, habet potestatem daemonium super eos Tobiae c. 6. v. 17.
When men proceed unto marriage, says the Angel Raphael talking with Tobit,
without thought of God, to take their own pleasure, and satisfy their passion,

If the Holy Scripture speaks after this manner of persons that enter into a
married estate only to find their pleasure therein, what will it say of those
who having chased God and reason it self out of their minds by drunkenness,
take that pleasure out of marriage, and commit adultery or fornication? and
after being come to themselves, instead of bewayling their excess, do approve
it, and entertain with pleasure the thoughts thereof which remain with them, or
the remembrance whereby they do call to mind that they have committed it.

ARTICLE IV. Of Gluttony. The opinions of the Jesuits concerning the excess of
Eating and Drinking, and the bad effects which arise therefrom.
THe first rule, which the Divinity of the Jesuits does prescribe in this
matter is, that it is lawful to eat and drink as much as one will, and as one
can, without any necessity, only to satisfy the sensual appetite and taste.
Escobar puts this question: An comedere and bibere usque ad satietatem absque
necessitate ob solam voluptatem, sit peccatum. Escobar, tract. 2. Exam. 2. number.
102. p. 304.
whether it be lawful to eat and drink ones fill without necessity for pleasure
only? He answers generally and without hesitation: Cum Sanctio respondeo
negative; modo non obsit vatetudini.
I answer, with Sanctius, that it is no sin. As if health were more dear unto
them then conscience. The reason is, Quia licite potest appetitne naturalis
suis actibus frui. Ibid.
Because the natural appetite may be suffered to move according to its own
inclinations, and enjoy the pleasure it finds therein; That is to say, that we
may grant nature, or to speak better, to sensuality whatsoever it demands,
relating all to pleasure only, ob solam voluptatem, and regulating only our
pleasure by our health and bodily advantage: modo non obsit valetudini.

The Epicures may easily be content with this maxim, Licite potest appetitus
naturalis suis actibus foui.
and it expresses very well the foundation of their errors and all the disorder
of their life. The end which they propose to all their actions in general, is
that which this Jesuit approves in eating and drinking, which is, Absque
necessitate, ob s^lam voluptatem, modo non obsit valetudini.
to be carried thereto without consideration of the necessity, and for pleasure
only, only taking heed that health receive no prejudice; and not to lose the
greatest of all pleasures, which is that of health and life, for a lesser
pleasure, as that of the taste, or any other particular sense.

But if it happen that one hurts his health by not being content to eat his
fill usque ad satietatem, to speak in the language of this Jesuit, and that one
takes in more then one can carry, so that he be forced to vomit, this will be
no great harm according to him, provided that his health be not thereby notably
prejudiced. Quodnam peccatum gula est? Ex genere suo ventale, etiamst absque
utilitate se quis and cibo and potu usque ad vomitum inguagitet, nisi ex
ejusmodi vomitione gravia saluti incommoda experiantur. Ibid. n. 56. p. 298.
What sort of sin is gluttony? in it self it is but a venial sin, though one
without necessity fill himself in eating and drinking till he vomit, if it be
not so that he be notably incommodated in his health. He adds in his moral
Divinity, Mo^tale non est, imo quamvis advertenter id faciat ac evomat. Escobar
ibid.
That there is no mortal sin therein, no though one even commit this excess
with a design to commit it and to vomit.

And as for drinkings he gives there in the same liberty as in eating, although
he takes not his measures from the same rule. The rule of temperance in eating,
according to this Jesuit, is to eat as much as you will, provided you do not
vomit, and hurt your health; and the rule of temperance in drinking is
according to the same, to drink as much as you can without losing your
judgment. Whence it comes that, according to this principle, after he had made
this doubt: Immoderato potu quis non quidem inebriatur, sed aut dolor capitis
laborat, aut capite tentato a vino non sibi omnino constat: attamen usus ration
is perseverat qui se nimis potui indulgere cognoscit: quodnam hoc peccatum?
Venialem intemperanaiam dixero. Ibid. n. 62. p. 299.
One drinks to excess, not so far as to be drunk, but in such manner that his
head aches, or the Wine disturbes him in such sort, that he knows not very well
what he does; but yet he has reason enough to know that he has drunk too
much. What sort of sin is it? He answers definitively: I find no difficulty at
all but that I may say, it is but a venial Sin of intemperance. And the reason
is, Quia absolute usum rationis non tollit.
he has not wholly lost the use of reason.

The Heathen Philosophers have spoken with more moderation, and they have been
ashamed to give so great liberty unto drunkards. But as the Jesuits make more
account of the usage of reason then of the rules of virtue, so also they
respect health above reason, and the interest of the body above that of the
Soul. They maintain that provided, that reason continue found, temperance
cannot be hurt; and they hold on the contrary, that reason may be stifled as
well as temperance, to preserve health.

This is the opinion of Escobar, when he demands Licetue se ve! alium pro
salute corporis recuperanda inebriare, cum aliud remedium non superest?
Probabiliter quis licere opinabitur, v. c. si opus sit ad vomitum creandum.
Ibid. n. 63
whether it be lawful to make a man's self or an other drunk to recover the
health of the body? The answer is, that one may probably believe that it is
lawful when there is no other remedy. As if for example it were necessary to
vomit.

This is also Azors opinion: Si sumatur ut est potus aptus ad vomitionem, sano
quidem immodicus, sed non male habenti, peccatum non est. Azor. Instit. mor. l.
7. c. 22. p. 694.
It is no sin, says he, to take it (a potion to make one drunk,) when it is
taken because it is proper to make one vomit, though it be taken in a quantity
excessive for a sound man, but not for a sick man.

Adjecit: Toletus tune licere quande non timetur ex ebrietate aliquod malum
secuturum, quod assolet ebrietatem comitari.
Tolet says the same thing, adding notwithstanding a condition to exempt him
from sin who makes himself drunk by a maxim of health: that there be no cause
to fear that there arise from his drunkenness any of those evils which are
wont to accompany it. But Escobar, who relates this limitation of Tolet,
refutes it at the same time. Quam quidem limitationem, tanti viri pace dixerim,
inutilem judico; quia cum direct valetudini consulitur, cuncta mala sequentia
accidentaria reputantur. Escobar ibid. n. 63. page 299.
This great man, says he, shall pardon me, if I say that in my judgment this
limitation is needless; for when a man does any thing with a formal design to
provide for his health, all the evils that happen in consequence thereof are to
be esteemed as coming by accident.

And without doubt it is for this very cause, and in consequence of this
principle, that he says a little after, that though a man know that he shall
fall into pollution by excessive eating and drinking, it is no great fault.
Gulae indulges nimis venialiter: and ex ejusmodi nimietate praevides futuram in
somnis pollutionem; number sit grave gulae ex hoc capite flagitium? Escobar tr. 2.
ex. 2. n. 101. page 304.
You sin venially, says he, in suffering your self to exceed in gluttony. But
you foresee that this excess will cause you to fall into nocturnal pollution.
Thus you have the case. He demands, if for this cause this excess of Gluttony
be a great sin? And taking Lessius for his warrant, he answers with him, Ex
Lessio respondeo, non esse culpam mortalem si pollutionem per se non intendant,
and per hujnsmodi cibum and potum non procurent.
that it is no mortal sin, if one have not a formal design to procure pollution
by eating and drinking excessively in that manner.

He had already said the same thing, and that also with advantage in the first
Treatise. For here he speaks of pollution which comes by a venial intemperance,
but there he speaks of that which arises from an excess which is mortal.
Peccat quis mortaliter in nimio cibo and potu; teneturne se reum sequent is
pollutionis habere?
A person, says he, sins mortally by eating and drinking too much; is he
obliged to hold himself guilty of the pollution which follows upon it? This is
the second time that he proposes this difficulty. He answers expressly in the
sequel of the discourse: Minime, si praeter intentionem accidit. Escobar tr. 1.
ex. 8. n. 76. p. 151.
If it happen unto him besides his intention, he is not guilty, though he did
foresee that it would befall him upon it; as he had said already. And Sanchez
says the same expressly, upon the same difficulty: Pollutio praevisa in causa,
nec intenta, quae ex sola gula mortali provenit, non est mortalis. Sanch. op.
mor. l. 1. c. 16. n. 44. p. 75.
When pollution comes through an excess of gluttony, which is a mortal sin, it
is not a mortal sin though it were foreseen, if one had no intention to
procure it.

He does not only excuse this crime, but all others likewise, Quando quis culpa
sua morta li inebriatur, and ebrius factus committit peccata, quae defectu
rationis non est in sua potestate vitare: difficult as est, an baec peccata
ratione impotentiae aut ignorantiae excusentur. Ibid. n. 41.
When a man is drunk by his own fault, and being drunk commits sins which
are yet in his power to avoid, because he has lost his reason: the difficulty
is to know, whether his impotence and ignorance excuse these sins? After he had
reported the opinion of many, of whom some answer with distinction, and others
condemn absolutely as mortal sins all the crimes which are committed in
drunkenness, he concludes: Dicendum est, etiamsi eventus soleat esse
frequenter ei qui inebriatur: si tamen tempore quo voluit inebriari, non habuit
prorsus ullam dubitationem aut cogitationem de illis, nec in specie, nec in
genere, minime imputari culpae. Ibid.
that we must affirm, that though these accidents do commonly befall a person
when he is drunk, yet they are not imputed to him for sin, if when he designed
to be drunk, he had no suspicion nor any thought of these things, neither in
general, nor in particular.

But for fear that drunkards should abuse that liberty which he gives them, or
rather that they may make use thereof with more assurance and without scruple,
he gives them this charitable advice, that when they have a mind to be drunk
they take along with them such pre-cautions as possible they can for hindering
those evil accidents to which they know by experience that they are subject
whilst they are drunk, that they may not befall them; Ea autem adhibita, etsi
postea eveniam, non imputabuntur.
because that otherwise they would be answerable for them: whereas after this
pre-caution, all the crimes and abominations which they can commit, being
drunk, shall not be imputed unto them at all, according to him; no more than if
when they went to be drunk, it never came in their mind to foresee that such
consequences might follow from their drunkenness; for this cause he says
purposely, si advertat, if he perceive it.

And though the same thought should come into his mind, drunkenness. Duo tamen
observanda sunt; prius est, ebrios non communiter perpetrare ea quae alias
peccata essent, nisi ab altis irritatos; and ita communiter esse a casu nec
teneri ebrios ea praecavere, quod irritantium culpae id potius tribuendum est,
ac respectu ebriorum casu accident. Ibid. number. 42.
Notwithstanding here are two things to be observed, says he: The first is,
that men who are drunk do not ordinarily those actions, which are sins when
they are committed by other persons, if they be not provoked; in such manner
that they are commonly accidental actions in respect of drunkards; and they are
not at all obliged to use precaution to avoid them, because they are to be
attributed to them who provoke them, and not to the drunkards themselves to
whom they happen by misfortune. Sanchez indeed endeavors to use some
moderation in this, or rather put a mask upon these words, after he had said
this is the opinion of Vasquez: but it is his own opinion also, as it appears
by this his second advertisement.

Posterius est, plurima ebriorum dicta vel facta de se iniqan, non reputari
culpabilia, etiamsi praevideantur, quia vel nallum damaum affecunt, atque in
ebrietate commissa, destituuntur prorsus rat one malitiae quam habent in mente
sana facta, ut verba vel facta contumeliosa. Ibid. n. 44.
The second thing to be herein observed, is, that the drunkards say and do many
things which are not to be imputed unto them for sins, though they have
foreseen them, for either they indeed hurt no body, for being done without
knowledge, they are without all malice, which had been in them if they had been
done with the use of reason, such as are outrageous words or actions. He
contents not himself to justisie these crimes by two reasons, which he gives in
so few words: to wit, that they hurt no body; Quia vel nullum damnum inferunt,
atque in ebrieiate commissa destituutur nomni prorsus ratione malitiae.
and that they commit them without reason and liberty. He adds also a third
reason, which is, that Quippe tempore ebrietatis talia in communi aestimatione
hominum non reputantur contumeliosa, sed tanquam facetiae admittuntur: atque it
a ipsimet adversus quos dicuntur vel fiunt, tantum abest ut loco contumeliae ea
accipiant ad iramque excitentur, ut potius oblectentur and rideant. Ibid. n. 44.
this excess which befalls a man when he is drunk, does not commonly pass in
the opinion of men for injury, but rather for the most part for drollerie. So
that they themselves whom they fall upon, instead of being offended with them,
only laugh and make sport at them. As if the rule of sin were the opinion of
Men, and not the Law of God. There are many Fathers and Mothers who do but
laugh at the debauches of their Children; and there are many crimes in which
God is no less offended, though men be not offended at all, but esteem them as
honorable actions.

He adds also in favor of these excesses, Vel quia postulant scientes fieri
uti imputentur, ut sunt blaspbemiae, infidelitas, perjuria. Ibid.
That to make them imputed as sin, it is necessary that they be done on purpose
and with knowledge, pretending that the sins which respect God directly, cannot
be committed but by a design formed on purpose and with full knowledge; but
Quae vero damnum proximo inferunt, imputantur si praevideantur. Ibid.
when we have to do with men's interest and things which hurt them, he holds
that it is sufficient to foresee them, to make them culpable in what sort
soever they commit them, Q^irnon minus laedunt in ebrietate, quam sanae mentis
tempore commissa. Ibid.
because, says he, it is no less prejudice being committed by a man that's
drunk, then if he had done it with judgment.

So that, according to this Doctor, it is not so easy to offend God as Man;
and there is less evil in sins against God then Men; against the Creator, then
those that are against his creatures; so that a little temporal interest of a
man appears unto him more considerable than the honor of God; and the loss of a
little Wealth, of more importance than blasphemy it self.

He also rehearses, under the name of Vasques, an opinion, which justifies all
the blasphemies of drunkards, saying that he would not absolutely maintain it,
but he only dissents from it in words, and not in reality. But it follows
manifestly from his principles, and he has indeed propounded and expounded them
with clearness enough in many places of his writings; and Escobar maintains
them openly. Ebrie^s excusat ab omni peccato in his quae insana mente fiunt,
injuriosa, ac proinde quae sana quidem mente peccata essent, Item blasphemia,
infidelitas, perjurium in ebrio, etc. Escobar tract. 2. Exam. 1. c. 12. n. 56.
page 285.
Drunkenness, says he, excuses from all sin the actions which are done without
judgment, although they hurt others, and by consequence they had been sins if
they had been done with knowledge; as also blasphemy, treachery, and perjurie,
which are committed by a man that is drunk. See here an abolition, or rather a
justification of all sins in general, which a drunken man can do while he is
drunk.

THE SUM Of the foregoing ARTICLE.
IT will be hard to allege any thing in the favor of drunkards and
drunkenness, which the Jesuits have not said for their defense. For Usque ad
satictatem sine necessitate, ob solam voluptatem. Escobar tr. 2. Exam. 3. n.
102. p. 304.
to eat and drink as much as one will, unto satietie, as speaks Escobar,
without necessity, and for pleasure only, they do not acknowledge for any ill.

Etiamsi absque utilitate se quis cibo and poto usque ad vomitum ingurgitet.
Ibid. n. 56. p. 298. Immoderato potu quis, non quidem inebriatur, sed aut
dolor capitis laborat, aue capite tentate a vino non sibi omnino constat,
venialem intemperantiam dixero, quia absolute usum rat onis non tollit. Ibid.
n. 62. p. 299.
Those who eat and drink more then they can bear, so that they are constraind
to vomit, or that they are thereby damnified, so that their head aches, or they
are reduced to the state wherein they know not what they do or say, according
to them, commit but a small fault and easy to be pardoned.

Licet se vel alium pro salute corporis temperanda inebriare? Probabiliter quis
licere opinabitur. Ibid. n. 63. Etiamsi eventue soleant esse frequentes ei qui
inebriatur, si tamen tempore quo inebriari voluit, non habuit prorsus ullam
dubitationem aut cogitationem de illis, nec in specie, nec in genere, minime
imputari culpae dicendum est. Sanchez op. mor. l. 1. c. 1.16. n. 42. p. 75.
If it be needful for a man to be quite drunk to recover his health, or to be
better in health, they hold that it may be done without sin, and that even when
one is drunk for pleasure, and with a formal design,

Ea adhibita diligentia, etsi postea eveniant, minime imputabuntur. Ibid.

Non teneri ebrios praecavere. Ibid. number. 43.


But if one think of these incoveniences and has foreseen them, they pretend
that he is quit thereof, provided that he bestow only some little precaution,
though to no purpose, whatsoever evil may happen thereupon; and that one is not
at all obliged even unto this precaution, when one is urged to these disorders
by others.

Quippe tempore ebrietatis talia in communi hominum aestimatione non reputantur
contumeliosa; sed tanquam facetiae admutuntur. ibid. n. 44.

Nisi grave malum corporis sequatur. Escobar tr. 2. exam. 2. n. 72. p. 302.
modo non obsit valetudini. Ibid. n. 102. p. 304. Quando vero damnum proximo
inforunt, imputabuntur si praevideantur. Sanch. supra.


As to the injuries, or follies, and insolences which are committed against our
Neighbors in drunkenness, they count them as nothing, and let them pass for
divertisements, as well as blasphemies and impieties against God, because they
provoke laughter for the most part, as well as other excesses of drunkards. In
a word, they permit all things unto drunkards whilst they are drunk, provided
that they do not notably prejudice their own health, nor quite lose their
reason, and that they do not cause some temporal damage unto men.

Gluttony of it self is with them but a venial sin, and they believe that it
becomes a mortal sin but only in some certain cases, and with circumstances
very rare, Quando in ea ultimus fiuis bominis collocatur. Escobar supra n. 58.
p. 298.
as when a man makes it his last end, says Escobar. It is true that this
excess is very great; and notwithstanding, it seems that this word escaped him,
or that he did not consider well what he said himself a little after, An
comedere and bibere usque ad satietatem absque necessitate ob solam voluptatem
sit peccatum? Cum Sanctione negative respondee. Ibid. n. 103. p. 204.
It is some sin, but venial, drink as much as one will for pleasure only,
without proposing to ones self any other end, of which he renders this reason;
Quia licite potest appetitus naturalis suis actibus frui. Ibid.
That the natural appetite may be suffered to go according to its own proper
motions, and to enjoy the pleasure it finds therein. For according to the
common language of Philosophy, as well as of the Holy Scripture, Frui animo
meo mihi bonum est. Frui corpore mihi bonum est.
to love a thing, to desire it, to look after it, and to rejoice in it for love
of it self, and for it self, is no other thing than to establish it for his
last end.

The Holy Fathers have spoken very earnestly against the Stoics for their
impiety, in saying that their happiness consisted in the enjoyment of their own
spirits; and against the Epicures, who placed theirs in the enjoyment of their
own bodies. They condemned these two kinds of Philosophy, as making their
spirit and their body, their God. What judgment then would they have made of
those who say at this day, and teach it to libertines Edere and bibere usque ad
satietatem, propter solam voluptatem: Frui actibus mei appetitus naturalis mihi
bonum est.
that to eat and drink to ones fill, for the pleasure only which they take
therein, and to give themselves up to their natural appetites, and to enjoy the
pleasure which they sind therein, is their contentment and their happiness. It
is clear that these Saints, following the rule of the Church, would have
condemned them, as they did condemn the Stoics and the Epicures, of making
their God of their bodies, and of the pleasure which they have in eating and
drinking, and in the actions of their senses; and in doing this they had
followed the judgment which Saint Paul had pronounced on persons which
appeared yet less criminal than those whom the Jesuits maintain as innocent,
whom notwithstanding the Apostle Paul calls Dogs, and says expressly, Quorum
Deu^ venture est. Ad Philip. 3. v. 19.
that they make their God of their bellies.

ARTICLE V. Of Covetousness.
I. POINT. That the Jesuits authorize all sorts of ways to get wealth;
1. COvetousness consists in loving temporal wealth for its own sake. Escobar
will not acknowledge this C'est a dire en s'arrestant a luy and au plaisir
qu'on y trouve.
affection for any vice nor for any fault, if there occure therein no notable
excess, nor any other evil end. Quidnam est avaritia? Inordinatus divitiarum
amor. Escobar, tr. 2. ex. 2. c. 2. n. 29. p. 293.
What is Covetousness, demands he? To which he answers presently, that it is a
disordered love of riches; That is to say, that its irregular either in it
self, because it is excessive, or in its end, because one refers it to some
thing that is evil in it self, Inordinatus quidem amor culpabilis est, non
ordinatus, sive ad rectum finem directus.
for without this he pretends that it is innocent and lawful,

2. Whatsoever disorder there be in the love of wealth; whatsoever passion one
can have for riches, he holds that it cannot be more than a venial sin. If to
get them or preserve them, he do no point of injustice, Certe in optandis
divitiis inordinatio nisi conjuncta sit cum injustitia retinendi vel au serendi
alienum invito domino, vel cum duritia non tribuendi egeno graviter laboranti,
solummodo venialis est culpa. Ibid.
This is certain, says he, that the disordered love of riches is but a venial
sin, if it be not found joined with injustice, and a will to take or retain the
goods of another, without his consent to whom they pertain; or with a hardness
of heart unsensible of the miseries of the poor, which hinders from relieving
them in their great necessities.

Following this principle, not only covetousness is no mortal sin any longer,
but also it cannot at all be any of it self; and for it to become criminal, it
behooves that it part from its own proper matter, and that it enter upon that of
unjustice. So then we see the whole crime of Covetousness reduced to injustice;
but even in this estate and in this extremity it shall not want protectors
amongst these new Divines; they find inventions to justify injustice it self,
that they might not condemn covetousness with it.

For it seems that injustice cannot proceed into a greater excess then to sell
and buy the honor of women, the lives of men, and Justice it self for money,
and yet notwithstanding Filliutius, with many others, justifies this gain,
which is gathered by this infamous and criminal traffic, saying expressly,
that Turpiter acceptaab aliquo pro faciendo actu turpi, qui vel sit contra
justitiam, ut pro faciendo homicidio, vel non sit, ut pro consentiendo in
fornicationem, si actus factus sit, retineri possint. Filliutius moral. 22.
tom. 2. tract. 32. c. 4. n. 103. p. 364.
the recompense which one receives for doing any dishonest action, whether it
be against justice, as to cause a man to be killed, or against honesty only,
as for committing fornication, may conscionably be retained, if the action be
already done. Whence he draws this conclusion, Ex his sequitur non esse
restituenda accepta ab assassinis, a Lenone, ab infamante, a milite pugnante in
bello injusto, a test dame falsum testimonium. Ibid. number. 104.
that which is received for an assassination committed, for being a pander to
the debauched persons; for defaming ones neighbor; for bearing arms in an
unjust war, for being a false witness, is not to subject any restitution.

Lessius says the same thing, and he says it also generally. Si solum jus
naurae spectetur, acceptum ob turpem causam, seu propter opus quod est
peccatum, opere impleto non necessario est restituendum, sive opus sit contra
justitiam, sive non. Lessius de just. and jure l. 2. c. 14. d. 8. n. 52. p. 145.
If one regard, says he, the Law of Nature, that, which one has received in a
dishonest affair, or for an action which is a sin, is not subject to
restitution after that the thing is done, whether it offends against Justice or
not. And a little after he adds; Ver^us etiam videtur nec jure positivo
necessario id restuuendum.
And it is more conformable to the truth, that positive right also does not
oblige thereunto.

So far is it off that injustice hinders Covetousness in these affairs,
according to these Doctors, that on the contrary they hold, that it favors
it. For if these persons have not executed these crimes unto which they were
obliged, in taking the money, they will be engaged, according to them, to
render it back, because they gave it them only on condition, that they should
accomplish that which they had promised; so that the true means to be able to
retein conscionably that which they have taken, without being bound to make
restitution, is to execute readily this crime and this unjustice, which serves
to cover injustice and its traffic.

Layman follows this opinion, Promisisti ficario daturum december aureos si
hominem occiderit: nulla nascetur obligatio nisi postquam facinus non sine
labor ac periculo suo in tui gratiam patrarit. Tunc enim spectato jure
naturali tener is solvere, vel si solvisti, repetere non potes. Layman l. 3.
tract. 4. c. 6. n. 8. p. 377.
If you have promised, says he, ten crowns to a murderer to kill a man, you
are not bound to pay it, until such time as to oblige you to it he has done
this crime, not without pain and danger; but after he has done the fact,

So that, if after you had done a murder by a man unto whom you had promised
ten crowns for his pains, you had Confessed your self unto Layman before you
had performed your promise, he would have sent you away without Absolution, if
you did not give him assurance, that you would speedily discharge your promise
made unto him who killed this man to do him a pleasure; and he tells you, for
his reason, that Spectato jure naturali teneris.
the law of nature which is undispensable, obliges you to do it. And to content
your mind to engage you yet further to consider his pains, and to pay for this
villainy of the murderer, he adds this second reason: Propterea quod molestia
and periculum ab illo in tui gratiam susceptum, pretio aestimabile sit. Ibid.
That the pains which he had taken, and the danger that he had exposed himself
to for your sake, deserves very well to be recompensed with money.

And a little after, pursuing the same matter, he proposes this Question; Si
cum Judice pactus fueru, ut non sine periculo suo, in tui gratiam suscepto,
iniquam sen^ tiam ferat, ea elata, probabilis est opinio Navarrae, obligationem
saltem naturalem exinde oriri: ut quod ob eam causam a Judice acceptum fuit,
restitutioni obnoxium non sit in conseuntiae soro. Ibid. n. 8.
If you have drawn a promise from a Judge, that he will pass sentence for you
unjustly, with any kind of danger te himself; The opinion of Navarre is
probable, that this judge having performed his promise, you are obliged, at
least by common right, to satisfy him, and he is not at all bound in
conscience to restore that which he had received from you.

Lessius is also of the same opinion, and assures us that a Judge who has
taken money for an unjust judgment, is not obliged to make restitution, no
more than a murderer who has taken money to commit a murder. Notandum est
Covarruviam and Casetanum excipere id quod acceptum est a Judice ut injustam
sententiam serat. Hoc enim putant jure naturae esse restituendum. Quia injusta
sententia and perversio judicii non est res vendibil is. Sed baec ratio non est
firma. Nulla enim est causa cur mag is debeat jure naturae restitui quod
acceptum fuerit pro iniqua sententia, quam pro iniqua occisione. Lessius de
just. and jur. l. 2. c. 14. d. 8. n. 54. p. 145.
It must be observed, says he, that Covarruvias and Cajetan make here an
exception, and believe that a Judge is obliged by the Law of nature to restore
that which he has taken for an unjust sentence, because that the overthrow of
Justice and an unjust Judgment is a thing that cannot be sold. But this reason
is very feeble. For there is no more cause to say that one is obliged by the
Law of nature to restore that which he has received for an unjust sentence,
than for an unjust murder.

Therefore we must conclude by the advice of these Divines, who are the most
famous amongst the Jesuits, that by the Laws of Justice this Judge deserves a
reward for an action of unjustice, for which he deserves not only to lose his
soul, but to lose his Office if Justice be done on him: and by consequence that
he deserves punishment and reward both at once for one and the same action, and
that same also an unjust action. But it must be said to make these things agree
together, or to understand this contradiction, that he deserves reward
according to the Divinity of the Jesuits, and that he deserves punishment
according to the Laws of God, of Men, and of natural equity.

If we consider the crime of Judas, according to this Divinity, who treated
with the Jews, to betray our Savior unto them for money, Filliutius, Lessius,
and Layman would have concluded that he was not obliged at all to restore the
money which he received, having executed that which he had promised, and in
this they would have shown the world that they had more large consciences than
that Traitor himself.

And to the end that the Doctrine of these Jesuits may seem yet more strange,
Nulla est causa cur debeat jure naturae restitui quod acceptum fuerit pro
iniqua sententia. Lessius supra.
that a Judge who has taken money to pass an unjust sentence is not obliged
to restore it, and they assure us at the same time Hinc sequitur 1. Judicem
teneri restituere id quod accepit ut justam sentiam ferret. Lessius ibid. d. n.
n. 64.
that he who has received it to pass a just sentence is obliged thereto. Ex
his sequitur non esse restituenda accepta a dicente falsum testimonium.
Filliu^ius supra n. 104. Hinc sequitur Judicem teneri ad restituendum id quod
accepit ut justam sententiam ferret. Idem de test qui aliquid accipit ut verum
testimonium dicat. Ibid. n. 102.
That a false witness is not obliged to restore that which he has taken, but a
true witness is bound thereto.

Lessius observes very well that Saint Augustine is contrary to this so strange
a maxim; and that he wrote to Macedonius, that a Judge who received money to
pronounce an unjust Sentence, commits a greater crime than he who takes it to
do justice; But he quotes not this great Saint but only to refute him, without
fear that he should rise against him in the last judgment, when he shall
judge, with God, not only the unjust, but also the just themselves, according
to the Scriptures.

Layman makes also a third question, which he answers at the same time; Si cum
alique pactus sis, pecunia promissa, ne te accuset de crimine patrando, qui te
jure accusare potest, turpis quidem est pactio; Sed postquam crimen patratum
fuit, utrinque obligatio oritus, and pretium acceptum ante Judicis senteatiam
restituendum non est; St quidem jus illud accusandi quo ille se sri^at, pretio
aflimabile est. Layman, ubi supra.
If you have treated, says he, with a man and promised him money, that he
shall not accuse you of a crime which you are to commit, and of which he has a
right to accuse you; this bargain is indeed shameful; but after this crime is
committed, you continue both obliged to one and the other,

It must be observed, that he says that Et pretium acceptum ante Judicis
senten tiam restituendum non est.
he who has received money to keep secret the crime of another, is not obliged
to restore it before that the Judge has ordained him to do it. He presupposes
then that if he be accused before an equitable Judge, he will condemn him to
restore it. But how can he do it without injustice, if it be true according to
the Divinity of the Jesuits that this man has a right to the money that he
has received, if he has got it lawfully, and if he may keep it justly?

Lessius is of the same advice; and after he had made the same question, he
adds also another new difficulty thereunto, saying; Quod si ei qui minabatur
accusationem non erat animus accusandi, sed solum terrendi, poteritne id quod
sic extorsit retiuere? Less. l. 2. c. 17. d. 6. number. 42.
And if he who threatened to accuse him had no intent to do it, but only to
fright him, can he retain that which he had drawn from him by this artifice? He
fortifies this difficulty by reasons, continuing thus. Videtur quod non possit,
quia dolus dedit locum contractui. No luisset enim alter dare n si suisset
deceptus. Deinde quia dedit ut deponas animum quem non hab^s. It aque titulus
non subsistit. Ibid.
It seems that he cannot, because he caused the contract by fraud. For he who
had given him the money, would have resolved not to have given it him if he had
not been deceived. Besides, he has given it to oblige this man to quit the
design, which indeed he never had at all. And for this cause the title upon
which he founds the receiving of the money, is null.

He supports this opinion also by saying that it is Molina's, who otherwise is
not overscrupulous. But after all this he concludes in these terms; Haec
sententia est probabilis, contrariam ta. men credo veriorem. Ibid.
This opinion is probable; but the contrary notwithstanding is the more true,
according to my opinion. Ratio est, quia etsi non habeat animum, habet tamen
jus accusandi, eoque jure uti potest, quod jus est pretio aestimabile, sive
habeat animum eo utehdi, sive non. Itaque si quid des ut eo jure non utatur,
proterit ld retinere. Ibid.
The reason is, because this corzenage and dissimulation whereof this man makes
use to draw money from the criminal in threating to accuse him, takes not from
him the right which he has actually to accuse him. The reason is, says he,
because, though he had no design to accuse him, he had notwithstanding power
and right thereto, and he might make use of this right which may be valued by
money, whether he had a design to use it or not. And for this cause, if you
give him any thing not to use his right, he may detain that which you have
given him.

He quotes Sanchez for this opinion, which Escobar approves also in the Preface
of his Moral Divinity, and grounds it upon the reason of Lessius, which is the
same with that of Layman; because Jus accusandi est pretio aestimabile, sive eo
uti intendat, sive non. Unde accedens dolus non est injustus. Escobat in
precomio Exam. 2. c. 6. n. 36. p. 12.
the right of accusing of which he deprives himself, is valuable by money. And
he adds, that the artifice of that deceit of him who made use of a semblance of
intending to accuse him, to the end he might draw some money from him is not
unjust, for that he had indeed a right, though he had no will thereto.

Bauny shows himself yet more favorable to those who would not make
restitution. For his brethren dispense from that Duty those who take on them to
kill or ruin a person in his goods, by taking money to commit these crimes:
and he dispenses also with those who give them these commissions, from the
obligation which lies on them to repair the wrong which they have done to their
neighbor by these violences. See here the question which he proposes in his
sum c. 17. q. 10. p. 201. Whether one be obliged to recompense the damages
which are befallen our Neighbor by an action which a third person had done at
our instance. For example, one has desired a Soldier to strike or beat his
Neighbor, or to burn the Farm of one who has offended him. It is demanded
whether the Soldier failing, the other who had desired him ought to make good
all the evil which has proceeded therefrom out of his own estate?

He alleges at first, some Doctors who hold that he is obliged to make
restitution. But he adds in disavowing them; My judgment is not according to
theirs. For none is bound to restore if he has not violated justice. Does one
do this when he submits himself to another? when he requests a favor;
whatsoever desires he had to obtain it by his means, whatsoever demands he
makes to have it done for him, he continues still free to grant or to deny it;
to what part soever he incline, it is his own will which moves him, whether it
be the sweetness or the easiness of his own spirit, there is nothing obliges
him, but his own good will. If therefore he makes no amends for what he has
done, if he restore not things unto their former estate, you must not compel
him to it, at whose request he was induced to offend the innocent.

He will have one believe that it is but demanding a favor of a Soldier to
pray him to beat a man, or to burn a Farm, for to revenge himself on him, that
this revenge is no injustice, that so he may dispense with him for the
restitution who is the Author and has caused the thing to be done by another.

Secondly, speaking of the Soldier who outrages a person, or burns his Farm at
the request of another, he says that nothing obliged him thereto, but the
goodness, sweetness, and easiness of his Spirit. If this action so cruel and so
inhumane can pass among the Jesuits for goodness and sweetness, its hard to
judge who will pass among them for cruel and barbarous,

But if this man who by the counsel of Banny finds himself discharged of the
obligation to make restitution, be so happy as to meet with Sanchez, or some
other who is well instructed in his maxims, he may perhaps learn also from him
that there is no sin at all in commanding to kill, to burn, or to commit all
those other excesses, especially, if he be ignorant or ill instructed in the
things that belong unto salvation and conscience. For the same Sanchez draws
also this conclusion from his principles. Deducitur scientem aliquam actionem
esse mortastm, ac invicibiliter ignorantem peccare imperando illam, excusari a
culpa imperando. Sanchez l. 1. op. mor. c. 16. number. 19. page 71.
That he who knows well that an action is a mortal sin, but is invincibly
ignorant that it is any sin at all to command it, is excused from all fault in
that commandment.

II. POINT. Diverse motives and particular expedients to dispense with
restitution, though a man be obliged thereto.
WHen a person is obliged unto restitution, even by the nature of the action
which he has done, or in the matter in which he has offended, the Jesuits
will yet find many expedients to dispense with him therein.

First, If he have acted without any ill intention. Quodnam damnum inferens ad
restitutionem teneatur? Si non fecit ex iuentione, neque scienter, nullam subit
restituendi obligationem. Escobar Tract. 3. exam. 2.n.8. p. 348.
When is it that he who has done wrong, is obliged to make restitution,
demands Escobar, and he answers quickly, If he have not done it expressly on
purpose and with knowledge, he is no wise obliged to make restitution. There
are therefore, according to him no sins but those of malice, which bring after
them this obligation. Humourousness and sottishness which is found in the
conduct of a headstrong and rash person are a sufficient cause wherefore an
innocent person, to whom he has done wrong, only because he was not aware of
him, must bear the punishment of his sottishness, or his imprudence; It is
enough that he knew not,

2. Ignorance also, of what sort soever it be, does excuse him who has another
man's goods from making restitution thereof, Excusat ignorantia facti aut juris,
si probabilis sit. Ibid. c. 4. n. 37. p. 353.
Ignorance of the fact or of the Law, if it be probable, excuses, says the
same man; and when a man doubts that he has another man's goods, and after he
has well considered and examined all things, he finds that it is more probable
that the things whereof he doubts are none of his own, in this very case he is
not obliged to make restitution according to Palaus Palaus putat ad nihil
teneri: quia possessio omnibus ratioaibus contrari is non convincentibus
praeponderat. Ibid. n. 105. p. 362.
cited by Escobar.

3. Notabilis jactura decentiae status. Ibid.c.4. n. 37. p. 353.
One of the principal causes, whereby to dispense with restitution, according
to these Doctors, is, the impossibility of doing it without diminishing ones
retinue and expense, so as to be taken notice of abroad.

4. Whatsoever wrong one has done or caused to be done, Impedio nequis
consequaturhaereditatem, officium, aut beneficium quandonam teneor ad
restitutionem? Teneris ex Vasquez quando vi vel fraud impedis. Non tener is ex
Lessio quando precibus, blanditi is, muneribus, impedisti, quiapreces,
blanditiae and munera non repugnant libertati. Ibid. n. 160. p. 376.
I hinder one, says Escobar, from obtaining an inheritance, an Office or
benefice, when it it I am obliged to make restitution? He answers: you are
obliged according to Vasquez when you use violence, or deceit to hinder him,
You are not bound, according to Lessius, when you have hindered him by prayers,
flatteries, presents; because that prayers, flatteries, presents are not
repugnant unto liberty.

He had proposed before in a manner the same question, and he had given the
very same answer a little above, nu. 84. Scio debere fieri restitutionem ex
action injusta, bello scil. furto, usura, impedimento boni alterius,
homicidio, stupro, etc. Rogo quandonam restituere tencretur impediens bonum
alterius. Ibid. n. 84. p. 358.
I know well, says he, that one is obliged, to compensate the damage that
comes by unjust actions, as the violences of war, of theft, of usury, of
hindering another from obtaining some geod thing, of murder, of rape, etc. I
demand in what case he that hinders the good of another is obliged to make him
restitution? See here the question; to which he answers in these terms: Si quis
impedit bonum ad quod alter jus habet, action injusta contra justitiam, uempe
vi, fraud, mendacio, etc. tenetur ad restituendum si id faciat action mala
contra charitatem, vel aliam virtutem, nempe precibus, blanditiis, etc. Etiam
ex odio alterius non tenetur. Ibid.
If man do any thing either by fraud, or by lying, etc. for to hinder another,
from having that good to which he has right, he is bound to make restitution.
It is upon this principle that Father Banny supports himself principally to
maintain that the man who employs a Soldier to burn the Farm of another to
whom he bears ill will, is not bound to make restitution.

This is also the principle of Lessius, and Escobar testifies sufficiently that
he took it from him, in making use of his authority to establish it, and he
reports it in a manner in the same terms! Qui sine vi aut frande, precibus,
blanditiis, muneribus impedivit dignum vel digniorem ab officio, beneficio, vel
similibus, non tenetur illis ad ullam restitutionem; etiamsi illud malo animo
ex odio faciat. Lessius de just. and jur. l. 2. c. 12. d. 18. n. 128. p. 128.
He, says Lessius, who without using violence or deceit, but only prayers,
flatteries, presents, has hindered one from entering into an employment, or
benefice, or the like things, that is a worthy persou, or him that is more
worthy, is not obliged to make restitution to the one or the other, though he
did it upon an evil design through the hatred which he had against him.

In like manner when one would revenge himself, or do wrong to his Neighbor in
his goods, or undo him without being obliged to make him any compensation, he
is only to take heed that he uses no violence toward them whom he makes use
of to be the servants of this his passion. And the true means to have no need
of violence, and to make them resolve themselves on this crime, will be to use
prayers and flatteries; and to add, if need be, thereunto promises of good
recompense, if he behaves himself well in his commission, according to the
lesson of this Jesuit. I know not if Lessius, Escobar, and Banny, will
undertake to answer before God, for a man to whom they have given this counsel
and this expedient for revenging himself on his enemy, as they answer for him
in their Fraternity within their Schools, and in their books, discharging him
from the obligation of making restitution. But I am assured that they would
never be bold enough, to answer for him before any equitable person, or defend
him in Justice. For if they were convinced of having made their neighbor to be
beaten, or having their neighbors Farm to be burnt, or to have procured sum
other wrong or outrage to be done him by a Soldier, or by any other person
whom they should employ, there would be found no equitable Judge, who would not
at least condemn them in the whole damage charges and interest of the violence
he caused to be done, though he made use of no violence, but only of prayers,
flatteries, and promises; so true it is, as we have already observed, and as we
shall here after also see very often, that the maxims of the Jesuits Divinity
do not always agree with the most common rules of natural equity, and of humane
Justice, any more then with those of Christian and Divine Faith and Justice.

5. But if any Man have been borrowing in all hands to supply his debaucheries,
Escobar will furnish him with a good expedient, to frustrate all his creditors,
and to continue to live in luxury, by renouncing his estate. Rogo an cedens
bonis tuta conscientia possie sipi and familiae suae ne indecore vivat,
necessaria retinere? Escobar, ibid. number. 163.
It is demanded, says he, if a man who renounces his estate, may with safety
to his conscience retain that which is necessary for him, and for his Family
to live in honor? He does not only demand whether he may keep that alone
which is necessary for him to live on, but to live without honor. Cum Lessio
respondeo posse.
And he answers, with Lessius, that he may, though he have already lost both
his honor and his conscience, which Escobar also declares sufficiently, adding
Qaod quidem verum est beet debita pro quibus cedit sint ex injustitia and
notorio delicto contracto. Ibid.
that his answer is true,

6. The Usurer will also find no less favor with the Jesuit. For among many
expedients which they will give him to dispense with himself for the
restitution he ought to make of what he has ill got, he will find in Lessius,
that Si res illae nomiur usurae acceptae, ita miseeantur rebus usurarii
fimilibus, ut non possint ab eis distingui, tunc dominium censetur transtatum.
Lessius de just. and jur. l. 2. cap. 20. d. 18. number. 136. page 354.
if the things he has got by usury be so mingled with others, their like which
belong to the Vserer, that one cannot distinguish them, it must be presumed
that the Usurer is become a lawful possessor of them.

Escobar extends this answer so far as to reach a Merchant who has received
more than was due unto him, saying that after he has mingled other men's money
which he has received with his own, if he to whom the money pertained demands
it back again, this Merchant is not obliged to restore it him, according to
Vasquez. Venditor accepit bona fide pecuniam, and cum sua commiscet, teneturne
comparente Domino restituere? Escobar. Ibid. n. 107. p. 362.
A Seller, says he, receives in simplicity more money than he ought, and he
has mingled it with his own; is he obliged to restore it, when he who has
given it him comes to him to demand restitution thereof? He does not ask if
this Merchant be obliged to see and to certify himself that he has received
more money than he ought, he supposes without any difficulty that he ought not;
he enquires only, if this being true and known, he be obliged to restore this
money which is not his, and which he has already mingled with his own; and he
serves himself of the authority of Vasquez to add weight to his resolution.
Negat Vasquez de restitutione c. 9. sect. 2. dub. ult. quia non tenetur ratione
iujustae acceptionis, qui bona fide accepit: nec ration^r^i acceptae, cum
pecuniam acceperit in pressed im and bona fide assumpserit. Ibid.
Vasquez, says he, denies it; he is not obliged thereto neither by any unjust
manner, by which he has received this money, he having received it in honest
simplicity, nor by the substance of the thing which he received, because he
received it in payment, and so took it on a good account, and honest.

But if these two reasons founded upon simple good meaning, which serves for a
cloak to the greatest crimes that are, according to the Divinity of the
Jesuits, as we shall shortly behold more clearly, content you not, and you
answer this Casuist, that this Merchant is destitute of honest simplicity,
because that he who gave him the the money came again, and made him know that
he had given him more then he ought to have done; he will tell you for your
last answer that he is come too late, that the Merchant has already mingled
his money with his own, and by this medley he is become thereof the legal
possessour: ET CUM SUA COMMISCENDO, SUAM FECIT.

I know not what secret virtue he ascribes to the money of a covetous and
unjust man to convert into his proper goods that which is another. This is not
according to that which they say commonly and most truly, that those of another
mingled with our own proper goods, consume them and destroy them. He had spoken
more truly had he said that it was not the mixture, but injustice and
covetousness that had purchased and appropriated the others money unto this
Merchant.

Covetousness and injustice show themselves most manifestly, 1.

The Jesuits teaching their Disciples to love their own goods, better then
their Neighbors lives, say that it is lawful to kill him, when he attempts to
take them from us, as we have already made appear, and shall discover more
largely when we come to speak of that commandment of God which forbids murder.

They teach to usurp and unjustly to invade another goods, in maintaining
usury, and in justifying or excusing the most part of the treacheries and
fraud, which are used in Merchandise or Traffic. They teach to retain and not
to restore them as I have made appear already; and by thus much it is easy to
judge with what exactness and fidelity they maintain the causes which they
undertake; being they have omitted nothing which might favor covetousness, and
gratify the greedy desire which men have for the goods of this world.

ARTICLE VI. Unfaithfulness.
COvetousness carries to injustice, and both the one and the other engage men
in infidelity. For as according to Scripture, the just man lives by Faith; that
is to say, that the exercise of Faith and fidelity is as it were the bread
which nourishes us; as the air which we breathe, and which is the continual
employment and entertainment of this life: one may say, on the contrary,

It is not only true in the Church, that just and honest men live by Faith,
but one may also say the same thing of all men who live together in any sort of
humane Society. Faith is not only the foundation of religion and of Christian
life, but also that of Estates, of Corporations, and of civil life. It is not
properly to live, to live amongst dissemblieg and treacherous persons, no more
than to live among enemies, being obliged to keep our selves always upon our
guard, and to be in a continual distrust, and disquiet, for fear of being
surprised upon every occasion, and of losing our goods, honor, and life.

In the mean while we shall see our selves reduced to this point if we suffer
our selves to be conducted by the advice of the Jesuits, and if we regulate our
lives by the maxim of their Divinity, which does openly allow and teach
dissimulation, deceit, and infidelity, as I shall make clearly appear by this
Article.

Infidelity may be committed first of all in things, by the sale and by the
exchange of things. 2. In contracts and promises. 3. In discourses, treaties,
and generally in words. I will make three Points of this Article according to
these three sorts of infidelity.

I. POINT. Of diverse sorts of unfaithfulness, and of deceit, which may be
committed in things by altering them,
Unfaithfulness and deceit, of which we speak here, is a true theft disguised
and covered with some false pretense of apparent reason. There are many persons
who are disposed to deceive; but they to whom there remains some little
conscience, are troubled in doing it; the light of nature alone, which is not
entirely exstinguish'd in them, makes them to see clear enough in the bottom of
their hearts, that this is not lawful, they must needs first deceive
themselves, that they may deceive others. And as for the most part, men have
not spirit and invention enough for this, they want some body to aid and
furnish them with reasons to blind and persuade themselves that they may with
a good conscience do that which even their conscience it self teaches them they
cannot do, when they consult and hearken to it without preoccupations.

The Jesuits of all the persons of the world are most capable to do these good
offices, and sufficiently inclinable of themselves to pleasure the whole world.
It must needs be a very strange and extraordinary case in this matter, if they
find not expedients to resolve it to the content of him who consults with them.

First of all, if a Child be tempted to take something of his Father and
Mothers goods secretly, and that the fear of God or Man restrain him in any
sort; Escobar takes away this scruple from him, and makes him see that he may
do it with good conscience, especially if he do any service to his Father, as
there is no child but is obliged to do, and who does not do it according to his
condition, when they are of age and in capacity to do their duties.

He proposes this question: Filius mercatoris patris bona administrat, and
potest a patre salarium exigere quantum alicui extraneo deberet. Siistud non
possit a patre pretium impetrare, potestne clam accipere? Potest quidem ad
justam aestimationem labor is and industriae fuae, computat is tamen in dicta
aestimatione expensis quas pater in ipso fecit alendo. Escobar tract. 1. exam.
10. n. 31. p. 163.
A Merchant has a Son whom he employs in the manage of his estate, and who may
by reason thereof demand of him as much for his salary as he would give unto a
stranger. See here the thesis supposed, and upon which he founds the case. If
his Father will not give him that which he earns, may he take it himself in
secret? He answers clearly, that he may, according to the proportion of his
labor and his industry. He permits him to estimate and rate his own labor and
pains, and pay himself with his own hands, deducting only out of his pretended
wages what his Father has laid out in his education and maintenance; in such
manner that this estimation depends upon his own judgment and will, for that
he dare not inquire of his Father how much he has expended therein.

Bauny in his sum chapter 10. 2. 4. p. 138. says the same thing in these terms:
When Fathers for whom their children are employed, and employ themselves
continually, do not content them, Leo number. 81 a^deth, that it is lawful for
them by all sorts of reason, deducting the charges their Fat^er has been at in
their education, to take so much for their labor and industry as they would
give to a stranger, unless they intend to serve freely.

This answre is an Oracle and contains a mystery, which it were not convenient
to reveal to all the world; says my Author; and to cover this mystery, it was
needful, says he, to pronounce it in Latin, (the last clauses are so in the
Original,) that they might be tempted thereby who understand not that language,
and to oblige them to go and demand the knowledge and practice thereof from
them that understand it.

2. Lessius speaking of theft, says in favor of men and maid servants:
Adverte, furta esculentorum and poculentorum quae committuntur a famulis and
ancill is, etiamsi sensim perveniant ad notabil^m quantitatem, non esse peccata
mortalia, si furentur ea, ut ipsimet consumant. Lessius de just. and jur. lib.
2. c. 12. d. 8. n. 48. p. 118.
Observe, that theft which men and maidservants commit in meats and drinks are
not mortal sins, though insensibly they amount unto a notable quantity, if they
steal them only to eat and drink them themselves.

Escobar says the same thing, and takes it of him. Coal^scuntne furta minuta
famulorum de rebus comestibilibus quae claudi non solent? Minime si non
vendenda sed comedenda abripent. Escobal tract. 1. ^xam. 9. n. 25. p. 162.
These petty thefts, inquires he, which servants make of things to eat, and
which are not wont to be locked up, can they by accumulation become a great
sin? He answers, No,

I will not stay to make reflections upon these petty thefts, nor to rehearse
many other cases in which children may, according to the Jesuits Divinity, take
the goods of their Fathers and Mothers, and Servants those of their Master,
reserving that to be done in its proper place, when I shall handle that command
of God which forbids them, and the duties of children and servants in
particular. I will only here rehearse another passage of Lessius, which of it
self is sufficient to authorize all sorts of theft which a child, or a servant,
or any other sort of person may commit.

First of all, he says, Crediderim non esse peccatum mortale quando sciret vel
bona fide putaret inferior, eum esse eiga se Superioris affectum, ut libenter
esset concessurus si ipsum sciret tali re egere, vel tale quid desiderare. Tunc
enim censetur habere ex voluntate Superioris, saltem virtuali quae in affectu
illo latet..... Pari modo in furto non est peccatum mortiferum quando quis scit
affectum Domini in se talem esse, aut certe quando Dominus rem parvi aestimat;
aut ita in aliquem esse affectus, ut nollet illum gravi obligatione teneri.
Lessius de just. and jur. lib. 2. c. 41. d. 9. n. 79. p. 496.
That he believes not that a religious person sins, at least not mortally, in
taking something without asking it of his Superior, believing that he would
have given it him if he had asked it, or if he had known that he had need of
it, or only that he deserved it. From hence he draws this consequence, and
this maxim general, in the matter of theft: So it is no mortal sin to steal,
when he knows that his Master has the very fame affection for him as the
Superior of the Religionary has for him, or when his Master makes no account
of that which is stolen from him, or when he is of such a disposition that he
would not have him who had stolen it from him, obliged therefore to any great
punishment.

In these few words Lessius has put together three reasons to excuse, in a
manner, almost all sorts of thefts from mortal sin, and has given liberty to
commit them without fear of sinning mortally.

Quando quis scit affectum Domini in se talem esse, etc.
First of all when any one persuades himself that his Father or his Mother, or
his Master, or his friend or his neighbor, or any one whomsoever, might give
that which he steals if it were asked, or if he knew that he had need of it. A
child may easily promise himself this of his Father, or a servant of his
Master, and generally every one whosoever of him whom he believes to have some
inclination or affection toward him.

2. Aut certe quando Dominus rem parvi aestimat; aut ita in aliquem est
affectus ut nollet illum gravi obligatione teneri.
When the person from whom something is stolen, makes small account thereof; or
has not much affection for it, or gives not himself much to it, this gives
liberty to rob persons that are gentle, prodigal, and good people above all,
who because they sit loose from the things of this world do make no great
matter thereof.

3. When a person is of that disposition, that he would be loath that the thief
should therefore be subjected unto great pains, as to fall into mortal sin, and
by consequence into eternal damnation.

There are no persons so barbarous as to desire to engage him to eternal
damnation who has robbed him of something, and much less a Father, a Master,
a Friend, a Neighbor, if he be not bereft of all sense, of Christianity, and
altogether unnatural.

4. Potestne Thesaurarius vel Procurator Principis Domino inscio, cum ipsius
pecuniis in suum commodum negotiari? Potest ex Doctrina Lessii, modo nullum
incommodum aut gericulum domino obveniat. Escebar tract. 3. cxam. 4. n. 95. p.
392.
They hold that a Treasurer, a Factor, a Sollecitor, a Servant and such like,
may traffic with their Masters money, without his privity and retain the
profit for themselves.

5. They teach that a Vintner who has better wine then ordinary, for that he
may not sell it by reason of some politic order above the common price, may
recompense himself therein by mingling water therewith. This is also the
opinion of Escobar, who after he had reported the opinion of those who condemn
this deceit, he adds that notwithstanding their opinion and their reasons,
Attamen Lessius posse dilui affirmat, quia nu^la injuria infertur emptori.
Escobar tract. 3. exam. 6. n. 70. p. 423.
Lessius maintains that it is lawful, because those that buy this Wine have no
prejudice thereby.

Amicus says the same thing of grain as well as of Wine; Infertur posse
veaditorem qui vinum vel triticum venale habet optimum, tantum aquae in vino
and s^ligin is intritico miscere quantum sat is est ad reducendum vinum vel
triticum ad eam qualitatem cujus est aliud vinum vel triticum quod eodem pretio
venditur. Amicus de just. and jur. dispen. 21. Sect. 6. n. 87. p. 282.
That a man who sells Wine or Grain which is very good, may mingle so much of
water with his Wine, and Rye with his Wheat, as will reduce one with the other
to the quality of the common Wine and Grain which are sold at same price with
his.

6. Tailors also may find their advantage in Escobar, who justifies that deceit
which is very common amongst them. Sartor cui cura emendi pannos and serica pro
vestibus conficiendis committi solet, si unius mercator is officinam
frequentans invenit pretia mitiora: potesine pretii illius excessum sibi
remissum retinere? Negat Salas dub. 45. n. 6. quia mercalor revera nihil ei
dimittit, sed dimittere mentitur, ad eum alliciendum. Porro Filliutius tom. 2.
tr. 35. c. 6. n. 149 affirmat. Escobar tract 3. exam. 6. n. 60. p. 421.
He demands whether a Tailor, who has been accustomed to buy Cloth or Silk by
command from another for to make his Clothes, and goes on this occasion most
commonly to a Shop of a Merchant, who for this reason sells him a good penny
worth, may retain to himself the benefit of his good market? He confesses
presently that Salas condemns this as a manifest cheat, because the Merchant
gives nothing of his own to this Tailor, and that which he makes show of
abating him, is effectually paid by him for whom he bought it. But he concludes
at last for the Tailor, with Philliutius. The reason upon which they do both
ground this is, because this practice is past into a custom: Quia revera
assolet mercator aliquid remittere ob officinae frequentionem.
For, says he, the Merchant is indeed accustomed to abate something to the
Tailor, because he comes usually to his Shop.

Filliutius reports also another reason in this matter, which is never a whit
better. Non apparet ulla injustitia in accipiendo illo pretio. Revera enim
magni refert mercatorem ut sartores potius ad suam officin am veniant, quam ad
alis. Filliutius supra.
It does not seem, says he, that the Tailor sins against Justice in taking
this money which comes by the good pennyworth which the Merchant affords him:
because the Merchants are greatly concerned that Tailors should rather come to
their Shops than to other men's.

He pretends that because the Merchant finds his advantage therein, therefore
the Tailor ought also to have his benefit thereof. It seems to him reasonable
that they divide that which comes of this deceit between them, and that the
Merchant should give the Tailor that which he has promised, he believes that
he is obliged thereto: and this is without doubt by the same law that obliges
him who has employed a man to commit a murder to pay the murderer what he had
promised him, as Layman maintains. Also the Tailor may in good conscience
receive that which the Merohant gives him upon Filliutius his words, who says,
Non apparet ulla injustitia in accipiendo illo pretio.
that he sees no injustice therein. Preoccupation hinders him to see it, which
yet is not so strong as to take from him altogether the sense thereof; for the
check of his own conscience makes him say after he had approved this traffic,
Dissuadenda tamen est ejusmodires ante factum.
that they must notwithstanding endeavor to break it off, and to counsel
Tailors to use it no more for the future.

7. Butchers and Vintners who sell by false weights and measures, will find
this favorable conclusion in Amicus; Si publica lege taxatum sit certum pondus
carnis aut mensura vini, quae non respondeat expensis, laboribus and justo
stipendio venditoribus debito; potest ex taxato pondere vel mensura detrahere
quantum sufficit ad haec omnia compensanda. Amicus de just. and jur. d. 21.
Sect. 6. n. 87. p. 282.
If the Magistrates have regulated the price and the weights of Flesh, and the
measures of Wine, so that the price is not sufficient for the charge, and for
their pains, and the ways of those who sell these Merchandises, they may
diminish the weight and the measure so far, as is necessary to satisfy all
these things, That is to say, that if a Butcher or a Vintner be disorderly,
expensive, an ill Husband, or an ill Chapman, or suffer himself to be cheated,
or buy too dear, the public must pay for all this; because if a Merchant be
an ill buyer, he may be a wicked seller, and cheat in selling, because he was
cheated in buying. Verum haec non tam facile evulganda, ob periculum
injustitias facile committendi,
These things, says he, notwithstanding must not be told all the world,
because of the danger there is therein, of falling easily upon injustice, As if
that were sufficient, Filliutius proceeds to say, in the other case which
concerns Tailors, that they ought to be counseled not to do a thing which he
maintains is lawful for them, Nec apparet ulla injustitia in accipiendo illo
pretio.
and in which he says that he sees no injustice at all.

He might much better have surpressed these questions and maxims, than to hold
them thus in secret. And it is no other then to mock the world to give counsel
that they be not published, after they have been made public by writing them
and causing them to be printed. One may even say, that it were the utmost
favor that could be done these cheats, to conceal that Doctrine which exempts
them from sin; because they could not deceive so many persons, if it were known
that it were lawful for them to deceive in that manner. One trusts a Merchant
that deceives him, because he believes him to be a man of conscience: otherwise
he would not trust him, and consequently would not be deceived, if he knew that
this Merchant who may be is under the conduct of some Jesuits, or has
consulted these good Fathers about these matters; (upon which its morally
impossible that he should not endeavor to be satisfied) may cheat with a safe
conscience, and without doing any injustice.

Sanchez goes yet farther; and maintains that as in these occasions one may
sell by false weights and false measures; he may also without wronging truth,
deny that he has done it, when he is questioned in justice by a Judge, who
has power to examine him. Quando taxa alicujus rei est injusta si pluris
vendens aut defraudans in pondere aut mensura, ita ut sibi satisfaciat pro
pretii injustitia, and reddat correspondentes merces pretio dicto; potest hic
regatus a Jadice anplur is vendiderit vel defecerit in pondere aut mensura, id
negare, asserereque se pretio taxato vendidisse, and integre pondus and
mensuram tradidisse, intell gendo sic, ita ut pluris vendeno, aut deficiens in
pondere aut mensura deliquerit, quippe absque delict^ ut^umque fecit, atque ita
vere dicit se integre tradidisse, nempe quantum tenebatur eo pretio actepio,
neque excessisse de^inquendo. Sanchez op. mor. l. 3. c. 6. n. 29. p. 28.
When a tax laid on any Merchandise, says he, is unjust,

Escobar who makes profession to know and to choose the opinions which are best
and most reasonable in every matter, out of all the Authors of the Society, has
not forgot this of Sanchez of which he speaks in these terms: Si probabilis est
opinio quod taxa alicujus rei sit injusta, and p^opterea vendi^or falsis
ponderibus, vel alias im^st^tiam sib^comp^nsnt; a Judice postea iaterogatus
potest id totum jurejurando negare. Escobar Tract. 1. Exam. 3. number. 34. page 75.
If one thinks and probably believes that the price which is set upon any
Merchandise is unjust, and that for this reason he who sells recompenses
himself for this injustice by selling by false weights, or by some other way;
being afterward examined by a Judge upon these facts, he may deny it all upon
an Oath. Intelligendo se injuste non egisse.

Finally he permits him to make use of these artifices, provided that he can
ground them upon some appearance and probability; Si est opinio probabilis.
Which will be always easy to do, because in all the most odious and unjust
causes, to make an opinion probable according to the Jesuits, it suffices to
have the approbation of some one who passes for an able man, as I shall make
appear hereafter.

8. The deceits among Merchants are authorized by Escobar in these terms;
Teacturne venditor de sutura copia mercium, de monetae accretione aut
diminutione conscius aperire veritatem? Potest inun ^e se nescive. Escobar
Tract. 3. exam. 6. number. 74. page 423.
A Seller, says he, knows that there will be shortly great store of
Merchandise, that money will rise or fall; is he obliged to confess it? He
answers, that he may affirm that he knows nothing of it. And if this disguise
suffice not to surprise him that does deal with him, he holds, Aut potest
negative respondere, laesa quidem veritate, sed non justitia.
he may openly affirm the contrary to that he knows. And that in answering
thus, he may well injure the truth, but not Justice. As if a man could injure
truth without wronging Justice in an action of justice,

I know very well that this Author grounds himself upon this that he pretends,
Quia non tenetur veritatem aperire.
that the Merchant is not obliged to tell him the truth. But I know not what it
is that can dispense with him in this case if it be not the disordered
adherence to his own proper interest, which seems so favorable to the Jesuits,
that they suffer them to conserve them at the charges of truth and sincerity;
that is to say, at the expense of humane Society, since without verity and
sincerity the confederacy of thieves and robbers themselves cannot subsist. It
is many times lawful not to utter the truth; But it is never lawful to tell a
lie; and if my Neighbor have not always right to be informed of those things
which concern him not, he has always a right not to be couzened, principally
in those things which concern him.

9. There is another sort of cheat among the Merchants which the same Author
Justifies also. Alios impedit quis ne merces ab al^is emant qui eas portant,
sed eas emit anticipate, itaut alii cogantur postea eas de manibus ipsius
charius emere; obligaturne ad restituendum? Rebellius obligari docet, licet
Molina and alii eum posse excusari affirment. Escobar ibid. number. 81. page 415.
A Merchant, says he, hinders that others cannot buy Merchandise from them who
bring them from far, by forestalling them and buying them up at first hand; so
that others are constrained to buy them of him more dear afterward; is he
obliged to restitution; Rebellius holds that he is obliged: but Molina and
others assure us that he may be dispensed with herein. upon him for having
advanced the Doctrine which opens a door to all the monopolies which are
practiced this day, which authorizeth the injustice of all those who make
hoards of Merchandises, Grain, Provisions, and other things necessary for ones
life for exhausting and ruining the Provinces.

10. Courtiers also and the favorites of Princes may advance their affairs, by
making use of the expedient which Filliutius has given them. For supposing
that it is lawful for them to buy a good debt a great deal more cheap than it
is worth, of him who is in trouble fearing not to be paid, he draws from thence
this consequence: Hinc infertur 1. posse aulicum gratiosum apud Principem emere
creditum privati hominis quod habet adversus Principem dimidio mivoris vel
etiam minus, si prudeater aestimetur minus valere; quia in illo privato
creditore parva sit spes illud recuperandi, and ita arb triop^udent is
judicetu. Filliutius tom. 2 tract. 35. c. 5. n. 107. p. 457.
That a Courtier who is near unto a Prince may buy a debt of a private person
due to him from the Prince, for half the value, and yet at a lower rate if he
thinks that it is not so much worth, because of the little hope that this
private person had for to be paid,

Tamburin in his book upon the decalogue, which was lately published by the
order of the general of the Jesuits, and with the approbation of the Divines of
that Society, holds that one may Si illam facultatem satisfaciendi hospitali
impetrasti, postquam minori pretio emisti ab hospitali creditum, licite
praedictam industriam excogitasti. Tambur. in lib. 8. decalogi, tract. 3. c. 7.
sect. 8. n. 7.
buy in this manner, even the charity which a King has granted to an Hospital,
provided that they be bought before the King give order to pay the sum which
he has promised to the Hospital; adding that Lugo allows this purchase to be
made even after the order is given to pay this entire sum.

11. A Judge that sells justice for money or presents, is discharged from
restitution by Escobar, who takes Lessius for his warrant. He presupposes that
Circa litem ea est varietas sententiarum, ut possit judex utramlibet par tem in
judicando sequi, unus litig^tium uti gratum sibi magis conciliet ei offert
munus. Requiro number peccet Judex contra justitiam illud accipiens, ut sequatur
hanc partem potiu^ quam istam?
the opinions are so divided in some affair that it is in the Judges power to
follow which he pleases. In the mean time one of the parties makes him a
present to gain him to his side; it is demanded, if the Judge sin against
Justice, in receiving that which is given him to follow one of the two parties
rather then the other? See here the case clearly propounded, to which he
answers as clearly in a few words. Ex sententia Lessit respondeo non peccare
contra justitiam. Escobar tract. 6. Exam. 6. n. 44.
I answer, following the advice of Lessius, that he sins not again Justice.

It is easy to see what gap this answer opens to the corruption of Justice,

This Jesuit had before propounded the same question; and had resolved it in
the same manner in his 3. Tract. Suppono causam esse aequatem, potestne judex
aliquid accipere? Docet Fagundez, dec. tract. 2. lib. 8. c. 26. aliquid posse
accipi non solum ab electoribus ad majoralum, cathedram, capellam, sed etiam a
Judice quando, ut supponitur, Sententiam profert in casu aequali, seclusa lege
positiva in contrarium: quia pro suo arbitratu potest cuitibet parti dare
victoriam, quare datur locus gratificationi quae est pretio aestimabilis,
utpote quae plerumque cum jactura amicitiae alterius partis conjuncta est.
Escobar Tract. 3. exam. 2. n. 111. p. 363.
Suppose, says he, that the right of the parties be equal, may the Judge take
any thing for judging? Fagundez says that this is Lawful, not only to the
electors who are to name a man to a majorality, to a Chair, or a Chapel, but
also for a Judge, when the right seems equal on both sides, if there be no
positive Law to forbid it; because that in this case the Judge may give the
advantage to whether he pleases. And this is the reason, because he may do a
favor, and this favor may be valued by money, because for the most part he
loses the friendship of one of the parties.

It is in the self same manner, and for the same reason, that Layman said
before, speaking of a man who had been employed as an assassinate, Molestia and
periculum ab illo in tuam gratiam susceptum pretio aestimabile est.
that the painy which he took and the danger whereunto he was exposed to do
this favor, is a thing which may be valued by money. and the same Layman make
use of the same reason to justify him who takes money, for concealing the
crime of another. Siq^dem jus accusandi, quo ille se privat^ pr^ti^ aestimibile
est.
Because that the right which he has to accuse, whereof he deprives himself,
is valuable by money. So that these people subject all things to interest, and
set every thing to sale at a price for money, the lives of men, Justice, and
even which they that call favor, which cease to be a favor when it is
bought or sold out. The reason for which Escobar proves that judgment may be
sold is considerable. Utpote quae plerumque cumjactara amicitiae alterin^
partis conjuncta est.
For, says he, it does commonly make him lose the friendship of one of the
parties. For according to this strange rule of Justice, a Judge may almost
always take money, because it happens almost always that he cannot do Justice
to the one party without offending the other; so that he may cause himself to
be recompensed in money, by him who gains his cause, for that which he believes
he shall lose by losing the friendship of him whom he condemns.

I speak not of these injustices here, but only so far as they contain
unfaithfulness in them, and deceit, reserving it to another place, that is to
say, to that wherein I shall handle the duties of Judges, to make appear that
the Divinity of the Jesuits extends this power, which it gives them for money,
to prefer one party before the other in equal right, even unto that case also
wherein the right of him who is to be preferred is less probable.

12. Finally he furnishes the Ecclesiastics as well as others with expedients
to cheat men in their profession, and in the exercise of their charge. I do lay
aside an infinite of disguisements and juggling tricks which they teach and
practice themselves in the conduct of souls, and in the administration of
Sacraments, of which abundance of examples will be found in this extract,
particularly when we speak of confession. I shall produce here only one or two
of the most sensible and gross.

Sapientissimus quondam Pater de Sa nostrae Societatis Gabrielis Vasquez
Magister, and de re Theologica in Complutensi Academia optime meritus, dixit
non peccare eum qui finxit talem se genere seu genealogia, qualem requirit
Religio aliquaa, vel qualem ad praebendas and dignitates requirit aliqua
Ecclesia; quia causa ad admittendum in Religionem debet esse Dei vocatio and
desiderium perfectoonis, and ad praebendus merita candidatorum, Dicastillus l.
2. tract, 2. disp. 6. dub. 5. n. 106.
Dicastillus assures us that it is the opinion of Father Sa, Master of Gabriel
Vasquez, one of the most wise Fathers of their Society, Doctor of the
University of Alcala, to whom Divinity is greatly obliged; that he sins not at
all who says that he is so noble as is requisite for him to enter into certain
orders of religion, or to certain dignities and prebendies. Because, says he,
the cause for which persons ought to be admitted into a religious order, should
be the calling of God, and a desire to be religious. And as for prebends, it
ought to be merit in those who demand them. 1. This great man will have none
enter into a religious order for his nobility, as a necessary condition, but he
consents well enough that he enter therein by lying and cousenage. 2. If a man
may enter into an order of Religion and into Ecclesiastic offices by vocation,
as he says, which is most true; it follows, that if he be permitted to enter
thereunto by lying, God calls liars and cheats into the Ecclesiastic state.

Escobar propounds this question; Licetne peccatori occulto indisposito, ad
vitandum scandalum par iculam non conse^ratam ministrare? Posse aliqui docent.
Escobar tract. 7. exam 6. number. 41. page 867.
Whether it be lawful in administering the communion, to give to a sinner not
disposed, but who is not known for such an one, an Host which is not
consecrated, to the end he might avoid scandal? He answers, there are some who
holds he may do it. But to make this Invention to succeed the better, he
adjoyns thereunto another for avoiding a great inconvenience which without that
might happen there upon. Posse aliqui docent, modo particula ita occultetur, ut
nec videatur, nec adoretur.
There are who say that this may be done, says the Jesuit, provided that this
Host which is not consecrated be so well hid that no body see it or worship
it. But what means is there to put this Host that is not consecrated, into the
mouth of him who communicates, that neither he nor those who are near him may
see it. And when none do see it, how can you hinder him who receives it,
believing that it is the body of Jesus Christ, that he adore it not, since none
receive the Host without adoring it.

I know not whether Escobar have seen these inconveniences which follow upon
this new practice. For though he does not disapprove it absolutely, he gives
therein another practice, which likes him better. Ast ego cum Henriquez l. 6.
c. 22. n. 4. satius censerem simulare Sacerdotem se particulam in os peccatoris
immisisse. Ibid.
For me, says he, I believe with Henriquez that it were better for the Priest
to make show of putting the Host into the mouth of the sinner. It behooves him
to have a slight of hand to do this; and he that knows to play this trick
without being perceived, may very well do others. But what means is there to
hinder him who is mocked in this sort, and opens his mouth to take nothing,
that he should not perceive it, and that he should not complain, and not make
any scandal? for this is that which the Jesuits especially fear, to discontent
men, and to give them cause of complaint. Notwithstanding this Escobar assures
us that he has made use of this expedient many times, and that it succeeded
well with him. Quod non semel absque periculoscandali praesliti.
Which I have done, says he, oftener than once, without danger of scandal.

I stay not to examine this conduct, I only admire at the cunning and rarity
thereof. For surely there is nothing like it to be found in the Books of the
Saints, who have governed the Church unto our age, Judas the communion.

But if this deceit has been found out only to hinder that Sacrilege might
not be committed, does the sinner who is wholly resolved, and ready to commit
it in presenting himself to the communion, cease to commit it before God, when
he receives that Host which he believed to be consecrated, though it be not at
all; as Herod endeavoring to put to death the Son of God newly born, committed
so many murders of God as he made Infants to be killed with a design to involve
our Lord in the universal massacre.

But although this sort of deceit were not criminal in it self; yet it would
not cease to be pernicious in the consequences thereof. Where may we presume to
find fidelity among the Jesuits, if we cannot be assured of it in the most
Holy actions? will they make us know by this that there is nothing of proof
against their wit and subtilty,

II. POINT. Of Infidelity in Promises and Oaths.
SECT. I. Several ways of mocking God and Men without punishment, and without
Sin, according to the Jesuits, in promising that which they never intend to do,
and not doing that which they have promised, although they are obliged thereto
by Vow and by Oath.
GOd having brought the World out of nothing by his word, and having
established Religion in the world upon his promises; men also have not
associated themselves, and do not preserve the union and peace, either of
states or Religion, but by their faith which they give unto one another, and by
their promises which they make unto God. Without the Word of God there would
neither be World nor Religion, and if men were not faithful to keep their
words, the Church and the World would soon become a desert and a confusion;
Cities would be without Government, Kingdoms without Laws, and civil and
religious Corporations without discipline; and for that cause there would be
nothing but disorder, division, unjustice, and treachery. So that one may say,
in a sense most true, that the world subsists not only by the Word of God, but
also by that of men; and that if God should withdraw his blessing from his
Word, the world would be reduced to nothing; in the same manner if men were
destitute of fidelity in theirs, it would fall into ruin and desolation.

Hereby it may be judged what mischiefs and miseries they are capable to cause
in the world who teach men to fail of their words,

All these inventions and all these subtilties of the Jesuits may be referred
to equivotation in words, and want of intention in promises; the one is a means
to say what one will, without lying; and the other, an expedient to promise all
things, without being obliged.

Filliutius to authorize and facilitate all at once the practice of
equivocations, amongst many examples which he brings, sets this down in the
first place. Afferri solent exempla aliqua; ut primo ejus qui promisit exterius
and absque intemione promittendi. Si enim interrogetur an promiserit, negare
potest, intelligendo se non promisisse promissione obligaute, and fic etiam
jurare; alioquin argeretur solvere quod non debet. Filliutius tom. 2. tract.
25. n. 323. p. 161.
They allege, says he, commonly some examples of equivocations, as first of
all of him that promises something outwardly, without intention of promising.
For if one ask him if he have promised, he may say no, intending that he had
not promised by any promise that obliged him: and by consequence he may also
swear, for otherwise he should be constrained to pay that which he owes not.

He pretends that he owes not that which he has promised,

If it be true that men are not obliged neither by their words nor oaths, no
more then by the Laws of God and Man, which command them to keep both the one
and the other; but only by the secret intention which they have in promising
and swearing; it is clear that we can never be assured of any person, nor give
any person any assurance by any protestations or oaths whatsoever. Libertines
and cheats may boldly cousen the whole world, following these principles
without injustice: and they cannot be justly condemned to perform their words,
because they are obliged to nothing, having had no intention to be obliged.

Sanchez has found another means to disingage him who has truly had an
intention to promise, saying that he should be dispensed with to retain that
which he had promised, provided that in promising he had only a design to
promise and not to perform that which he had promised. Teta difficultas eo
pertinet, quando jurans babet animum jurandi, at n^latenus juramento se
obligandi, an tunc revera obligetur.
All the difficulty is reduced to this, to know if he that has sworn had an
intent to swear, but not be obliged in swearing, if he be truly obliged? After
he had reported the opinions and the reasons of those who hold that this oath
obliges, he adds: Posterior sententia, quam probabiliorem puto, ait tunc
juramentum non obligare. Sanch. op. mor. l. 3. c. 10. n. 7. and 8. p. 42.
The second opinion, which I hold more probable, holds that in this case the
oath obliges not at all,

Tambourin proceeds yet farther. For he believes that it is probable that he
who doubts whether he had any intention to oblige himself in making a vow or a
promise is not obliged to observe his vow or his promise. Si certo vevisti vel
jurasti, aut ambig is an animum te obligandi babuer is per ill a verba, seu per
illud juramentum; an tua verba invecationem Dei, quae est de essentia
juramenil, saltem tacit continuerint....: Puto non esse improbabile te
nequaquam oblingari. Tambur. decal. l. 1. c. 3. sect, 7. lit. V^n. 6.
If you be assured, says he, that you have made a vow or an oath, and you
doubt whether you had an intent to oblige your self, or if the words which you
used in your oath contained an invocation of God, at least a tacit one, I
believe it is probable that you are no^ obliged to keep it.

Scio Valentiam 2. 2. d. 6. q. 6. p. 1. censere: Si promittas animo qaidem te
obligandi, sed cum voluntate rem promissam nullatenus exequendi, tunc nullam
exurgere obligationem; quia si nullam habes voluntatem rei faciendae, nullum
emittis votum. Tambur. decal. l. 3. c. 12. sect. 1. n. 4.
Valentia, by the relation of the same Author, holds that a person even who
has an intention to oblige himself, is not obliged, provided he had no
intention to execute that which he promised. There is need only of common
sense, to see evidently that these strange maxims are favorable to cheaters
and deceivers, and that they give them all liberty to exercise their cheats;
since, according to these principles, all fidelity of promises, and obligation
to keep them,

Tambourin gives also this rule for vows: Illud nota^: Sic simulate etiam in re
gravi verbo tenus vovere, non transcendere peccatum veniale, quia solum est
mendacium, nec redundadans in gravem Dei irreverentiam Tambur. decal. 3. cap.
12. sect. 1. number. 3.
That to feign in an important matter, and to vow only with ones lips is but a
venial sin; because it is only a lie which contains no great irreverence
toward God. This were to deride a man, to promise him that which we have no
design to perform, and the offense will be so much the greater, if the person
who promises be base in condition and merit, and much below him to whom he
makes the promise; and this Jesuit pretends that a man, who is nothing before
God, may promise and vow unto him an important thing, with a formed design not
to do that which he promises him, without committing any great irreverence
against him. That is, that it is lawful for him to bear a greater respect unto
a man then God, and to scorn him without committing any great sin.

But if these two subtilties, to promise without intention to promise, and to
promise without intention to do what is promised, be not sufficient to cause
cheatery to prosper, and that it will not so be trusted, these Doctors hold
that it is lawful to add an oath. And for this effect

First of all, Emanuel Sa says that there are many ways to speak and to
affirm, Juramenta non sunt: in mea side, in mea conscientia, in side
Christiani, in side Religiosi, in veritate: Emanuel Sa, Verbo Juram. n. 1. p.
295.
It is no oath, says he, to say by my faith, or my conscience, on the faith of
a Christian, on the faith of a Monk, in truth.

Escobar approving the opinion of Emanuel Sa, and advancing it yet higher above
him, adds; Alios loquendi modos adinvenit desiderium non pejerandi; Scilicet,
possum jurare per Deum, per Christum: jurabo per Deum. Si juro per Deum, quare
mihi fidem non praestas. Escobar tr. 1. ex. 3. n 17. p. 72.
That he who desires not to swear indeed may find other forms of speaking, as I
may swear by God, by Jesus Christ, I Will swear by God; if I swear by God,
wherefore do you not believe me? This is not to desire not to forswear a man's
self, but to desire to deceive others without being discovered, which has
caused these new manners of peech to be found out, which are no other thing but
traps to catch the simple, and those who are not accustomed to disguises, and
to the languages of these mastereheats, as he declares himself, adding. Qui
quidem loquendi modi licet imperitis vel incautis juramenta videantur, vere cum
nibil assirment, sed suspensa sit oration, juramenta non sunt. Ibid.
That though the ignor ant and those who do not look nearly to them, take these
sort of speeches for oaths, it is true notwithstanding that they are not,
because they assert nothing, and they are imperfect discourses, and have no
determined sense.

If these expressions which pass in common usage for true oaths, are not such
indeed, as these Jesuits say, they who make use of them to make believe that
they swear indeed, are like them who make or put off false money to surprise
gross witted persons who receive them for good; or who make use of a
counterfeit deed in a suite, because they are well counterfeited, and may pass
for true. Emanuel Sa and Escobar approve, were not invented, but to entrap the
simple and the ignorant, as they themselves do teslifie.

Sanchez imploys almost a whole Chapter to rehearse different forms of speech
and asseveration, which may pass for oaths though they be none, according to
his judgment; as when one says: ut sum Christianus, Religiosus, Sacerdos, vir
bonus, it a est. n. 16. non credo in Deum, v^ abnego Deum, non est potestas in
Deo si hac non est; ita, coram Deoita est; Deus son ita esse, vel Deus videt
ua^sse n. 20.
It is true, as it is true that I am a Christian, a Priest; if this be not, I
have no faith in God, I rehounce God: Hoc veritas est instar Evangel^i, hoc est
verum sicut Evangelium. n. 19. Sanch. op. mor. l. 3. c. 2. n. 16.17.19 20. p. 8.
This is as true as the Gospel, before God this is so: God knows it is so.

Yet he confesses that Saint Augustine assures us that these forms of speech are
true oaths; and that he might not condemn them openly, he says that there is
indeed an equivocation in these words, and that for this reason they may or may
not be taken for oaths. He says the same thing of this expression, In side
mea, per meam fidem, regiam, viri boni, aut notabilis. n. 32.
On my faith, by my says, the faith of an honest man, the faith of a King, a
Priest, a Religious man: As also of this which is common enough: Testis est
mihi Deus, n. 21.
God be my witness.

He concludes from the principles which he has established in the same place,
that, Nono deducitur non esse juramentum cum quis per Deum vel per propriam
vitam interrogatus an it a se res babeat, respondet absolute it a se rem
habere. number. 22.
When one demands of a man by the name of God, or by his own proper life, if
that which he asks of him be true; And a litte after he teaches to thrust
together in one proposition all the oaths that can be made; in such manner that
it may appear that one swears, yet without swearing. See the words: 1.
Deducitur non esse jusjurandum quod communiter aliqui juramentum vitare
volentes dicere soleat, Per totum id, vel per vitam ejus quod jurare possum.
Ibid. n. 23.
It is no oath to say those words which some are accustomed to make use of When
they would not swear at all.: I swear by all that can be sworn of, by the life
of all those things.

Who can be subtle enough to apprehend that it is possible not to swear in
swearing by all things that may be sworn by? we must then learn this secret of
Sanchez: Nam, ut expe: rientia didici, id tantum votunt dicere, cum per nullam
rem liceat absque necessitate jurare per nihil juro. 76.
For I have learned by experience, says he, that those who are accustomed to
say they swear by all that may be sworn, intend to say nothing else, but that
they indeed will not swear by any thing, being it is not lawful for them to
swear by any thing without necessity. Thus it is that one becomes subtle by
conferences with Jesuits, and learn to make sport with all other men as
ignorant of the act of deceiving by lies and perjuries.

In the second place, when one is resolved to swear, one may choose words of
double meaning, and make use of a mental restriction, the better to deceive.
Dissicultas est quando jurans suit in dolo, utens verbis callidis and
amphibologicis, aut conditionem aliqu^m mente retinuit ad deeipiendum cum cui
jurat existentem in bona fide. Quibusdam placet juramentum tunc obligare juxta
senfum quem debite intellexit is cui jucamentum praestitit.
The difficulty is, says Sanchez, when he who swears intends to deceive using
words that are captious and have double meaning; He first reports the opinion
of those who hold that this oath obliges in the sense in which he to whom it is
made had reason to take it; to which he adds the authority of some Fathers and
Canons which are express for this opinion. But notwithstanding all this he
concludes, At dicen^mest, jurameatum non obligare tuac ex vi and religione
juramenti, ultra dolosi illius jurant is intentionem. Sanch. op. mor. lio. 2.
c. 10. n. 12.13. p. 49
that this deceiver is not obliged beyond his intention by virtue of his oath;
and he grounds it only on this reason; Qua juramentum nequit in soro
conscientiae obligare ultra jurant is intentionem; atque adeo si jurans non
intendat, ad nihil tenetur.
That an oath cannot oblige in conscience beyond the intent of him that swears;
and by consequence, he that has no intention to swear, cannot be obliged to
any thing at all.

All sorts of perjures, as it seems, cannot be authorized more openly, nor can
there a more large or easy entrance be made to all manner of false oaths; and
there would be no more perjuries in the world, if the most desperate persons
that give themselves up to this crime, could believe this maxim as far removed
from reason and common sense, as from justice and natural equity, and imagine
that for them not to perjure themselves, nor to be obliged in swearing contrary
to what they know, and what they destre to do, it were sufficient to have no
intention to swear even then when they swear indeed.

In the third place, if any one be ignorant in the art of making mental
restrictions, this Jesuit will teach him that also, and how to use them with
address in swearing. For having demanded: An liceat tune jurare retinendo
mentr hanc condationem; jure me daturum, si secluso juramento sum debtor. ld
ibid. c. 6. n. 38. page 29
If it were lawful to swear to give a thing, I must plainly avow that there are
some that hold that this reservation is but a cozenage, and that it hinders not
at all the oath from being obligatory; but he malntains against them, At
retenta nostra sententia n. 15. tradita, dicendum est id licere, quia nihil
refert verba eam amphibologiam non pati, and cogit necessitas ea uti. Ibid.
that abiding in the opinion that I have already taken up numb. 15. I must say
that it is lawful; for it matters nothing that these words cannot bear that
double equivocal sense, necessity constraining to make use of them. This
necessity consists in this, that otherwise the man would not be deceived.

And though this oath were made in public before many persons who would be
scandalized seeing it not accomplished, he holds that this should not trouble
any man: Poterunt enim and debebant credere juramentum in a ium sensum suisse
detortum. Ioid.
For they ought and might believe that the oath was wrested to some other
sense, by some slight of wit and mental reservation; which he confirms by the
authority of Valentia his fellow Jesuit, supposing with him that the whole
world has read and studied their equivocations and maxims of lies and
perjuries, and that there is none who ought not to know the ways to defend
himself against them, as well as to use them.

In the fourth place, that none may be ever caught unprovided of equivocations,
he teaches this, which may be almost always made use of. Decimo deducitur, si
per injuriam extorqucatur promis sio jurata alieujus pecuniae dandae, lio^r^
jaranti uti hac aequivocatione: J^o tibi me numeraturum pecuniam, intelligende
ut ille casus tibi regatur a verbo juro, ita ut sit sensus: tibi juro fore ut
numerem pecuniam, five tibi, sive alteri, quod ea oration patiatur utrumque
sensum. Ibid. n. 37. p. 29.
It follows, says he, that if a promise by oath to pay a certain sum of
money, be drawn from a man unjustly and by force, he that swears in this manner
may use an equivocation in these terms, I swear to you that I will give this
money: intending that he would give it to him to whom he swears, or some other,
because these words may receive either of these two senses.

If this form of equivocation seem not subtle enough, behold another: If in the
tongue in which one expresses ones oath, the name of God signify diverse
things, it will be lawful to swear by the name of God, taking it in some other
signification, according to this rule one may without fear swear by the name of
Jesus Christ, because there are others named Jesus besides the Son of God; and
that this word Christ is attributed to diverse persons in Scripture, and that
not only to Christians, but also to Jews.

He adds also in the same place a third way to swear by equivocations, which is
very easy and very favorable to stammerers that cannot pronounce certain
letters. Similiter non esset plus quam veniale mendacium dicere, uro, ablato i.
cum vere nrn urat. Ibid;
Likewise, says he, it is but a venial sin at most to say, uro, which
signifies I burn, instead of saying jnro, I swear, to make the proposition
false and useless, though one burn not at all. And fearing in some sort that
it should be too great a severity to condemn of venial sin him that made use of
so pleasant a subtilty, he adds: Imo eredo nullum fore mendacium si illud
verbum, uro, accipiatur materialiter ad n^hil significandum, sicht nume^o 10.
diximus de ali is jurdamenti verbis materialiter acceptis.
I believe that it will be no lies if the word, uro, be taken materially,
pronouncing it with a design to signisie nothing in the manner I have opened in
the 10. number, Now in the place whereunto he referres the reader, he says,
that when one is required to make oath unto a person in a case in which he
believes that he is not obliged to swear, he may meverthelesse do it without
fear of perjury, though that he says be false, and that to cover himself from
perjury, he make use of one or the other of these two expedients. I. To take
the words which he uses in swearing, and which are false in their true and
natural sense, in a quite different sense such as he pleases, provided it be
true. II. To give no sense at all to his words and to take them materially,
that is to say as sounds that signify nothing. He pretends that he that swears
in one of these two ways does no great evil, though that he says be false in
the ordinary senfe.

But if a man have an intention to assert that which is false, and to confirm
it with an oath, he avows, that he sins mortally. Si jurat salsum, velitque
illa juramenti verba refer ad materiam folsam confirm^ndo illam in ex externo
juramento, est mortale. Si autem interiori animo nolit illa ad materiam falsam
refer; nec potest ob aliquas rei circumstantias rationabiliter ab ali is
putari id velle, ut inde scandalizentur: sed tantum jure suo utens usurpat ea
verba ad significandum aliud interius conceptum quod verum sit, non peccat
mortaliter.
But if in his own mind he refer not his words to that which is false, though
that be the proper and natural sense of his words, and others cannot for some
particular circumstances reasonably believe that this is his intention, so that
thereby they are scandalized; and that only his right, which is to use
equivocations to deceive, he makes use of these words to signify some other
thing which is true, See here the first secret, to which he adds another like
it, proceeding in these terms: Vel usurpat ea verba materialiter, nihil per
ista confirmare volens, non peccat mortaliter; imo credo nec hunc venialiter
peccare, quia nullum est mendacium. Sanchez. op. mor. l. 3. c. 6 n. 10. p. 24.
But, if he take these words only materially, without design to use them to
signify any thing at all, he sins not mortally. He fears to be yet too exact
and rigorous in this point. For which cause he corrects and sweetens his
answer, saying; I believe that he sins not at all, no not venially, because
there is nolye in that which he says. Strange reasoning! This man confirms by
an oath words that are false, and yet he is not perjured; he expresses one
thing, and thinks another. And yet notwithstanding according to these Doctors
he lies not at all, because that he would not lie, though he lies effectually
speaking contrary to his own conscience.

These shifts are so gross that the most simple and most ignorant may easily
perceive them. They are so base and so ridiculous, that they are capable to
surprise, and make the most serious break out into laughter, if Christian
charity as well as modesty do not with hold and rather draw compassion from
their hearts, and tears from their eyes, to lament the blindness of those who
invented them, and the lost condition of those who follow them.

But if we would believe these Masters of equivocations, there is no need at
all of so many shifts and fallacies, for they declare plainly that those who
have not wir enough to understand these disquizes and mental restrictions, or
not to make use of them upon occasion, may swear plainly without obliging
themselves in any sort whatsoever, provided they have no intent to swear, nor
to promise that which they swear. Fictae promissioni juramentum adjeci,
teneorne adimplere? Asserit Lessius, at alii negant. Escobat tr. 1. ex. 1. n.
37. p. 76.
I have made a fained promise, says Escobar, and I have added an oath thereto,
am I obliged to accomplish it? After he had cited Lessius alone for the
affirmative, he adds; but others deny it. He pronounces nothing absolutely upon
this point, but he leaves to his reader his choice of two opinions, testifying
for all that sufficiently that the latter is his own; since having only cited
Lessius for the former, he attributes this to many others, there is ground to
believe that he concludes according to his guise by plurality of voices, and
for the more sweet and favorable opinion. And this only, that it is the more
favorable, and that it is followed by the greater part, is justitious to make
it the more probable, and by consequence it may be followed with a good
conscience, according to the Jesuits rules of probability.

SECT. II. The contrivance of the Jesuits to elude vows made unto God, promises
and oaths made to a Confessors, and to lie and deceive even in confession.
THese Doctors are not content to teach men to deceive men, but to teach them
also to deceive God in their vows, and the Ministers of his Church in the
declarations and promises which they make them. So that if God were capable to
be deceived he should not escape from these surpsises of the Jesuits.

Escobar in his great Moral Divinity says, Virtute Bullae potest votum nou
peccandi commutare. Escob. Theol. mor. tom. 1. lib. 7. c. 20. n. 281. Votum non
fornicandi aut abstinendi a certo actu venereo, potest ex Bullae indulto
commutaei. C. 21. n. 298. Votum vitandi aliquod peccatum, non eget magna
commutatione. C. 22. n. 318.
that one may change by means of a Bull the vow which he has made not to sin,
and so avow not to commit fornication. He says that even these sort of vows
need not be changed into any great things; as if the sin of fornication were no
great matter, and did not greatly dishonor God, or if it were lawful to deceive
him, taking away a great thing which we have promised him, for to give him a
slight thing and of small consequence.

The same Author in the entrance of his book where he establishes the
principles of his Moral Divinity proposes this doubt; Vovet quis sub
peregrinationis poena non fornicari: immemor voti delinquit; tencturne ad
poenam voti? Respondet Sanch. sum. tom. 1. l. 4. c. 22. n. 18. non ieneri, quia
oblivio seu inadvertentia inculpota aequipollet ignorantiae. Escobar in
preoemio ex. 2. c. 6. n. 24. p. 9.
A person makes a vow not to commit fornication, upon pain of some Pilgrimage;
and afterward not remembering his vow he suffers himself to go on in this sin;
is he obliged to accomplish his vow? He makes Sanchez to answer in these terms;
Sanchez answers, that he is not obliged, because this blameless forgetfulness
is equivalent to ignorance.

Emanuel Sa proposes two other cases touching the continence and chastity of
married persons: Potest, qui non vovit, petere debitum ab altero qui etiam se
consentiente vovit caflitatem. Sanch. ver. debitum conjug. n. 2. page 101.

Cumuterque vovit non petere, possunt copulari, non petendo tamen, cum alter
intelligit alterum, si posset petiturum. Ibid. number. 3.


A person married, says he, who has not made a vow of continence may demand
the duty of marriage of another, though the other have made the same vow with
consent. And a little after, when the Husband and the Wife have made a vow not
to demand of one another the duty of marriage, it is lawful for them to
accomplish it effectually, provided it be without demanding it, He would say
that the vow was indeed made not to demand this duty, but not, not to use it
without demanding it; as if this were not enough to demand a thing, to testify
to him who can give it us the desire which we have to receive it. It is in this
manner that the Saints do demand from God in the most excellent way what they
desire from the bottom of their hearts. It is this desire which the Scripture
testifies that God hears and accomplishes, as the most excellent and powerful
prayer, where he says; Desiderium pauperum exaudivit Dominus. The Lord hears
the desire of the poor. It is then earnestly to demand a thing to testify that
it is desired, though it be not demanded in words. And to take and use it
without demanding is more then to desire it.

Sanchez treating of an oath, establishes certain principles from whence he
draws this conclusion. Duodecimo deducitur cadem ratione foeminam morti
proximam ac excommunicatam, eo quod viro non cohabitet, quem novit ob
impedimentum occultum non esse suum, coactamque jurare ut absolvatur, fore ut
adepta sanitate ei cobabitet. Pesseid jurare, intelligendo intrase, si teneor,
vel postea placuerit mihi. Sanchez op. l. 3. cap. 6. number. 40. page 30.
It follows, says he, that if a woman be excommunicate for departing from her
Husband, because she knows of some secret impediment which makes the marriage
void, being at the point of death she is obliged, that she may receive
absolution, to swear, that if she recover her health she will return to her
Husband, she may promise and swear it, intending it in her mind in this manner;
if I be obliged, or if it please me then. It is not enough to permit her to
retain this condition; If I be obliged, of which she will take advice in her
health. This were perhaps too much to engage her to, it is fit also to permit
her to add thereto: if it please me at that time; that if she found her self
obliged, it might be sufficient that she was not pleased therewith to dispense
withher, for doing that which she had promised and sworn to her Confessor at
the point of death.

A little after the same Author continuing to speak out of the same principle,
addeth^ Idem intelligendum de mu^ liere non cohabitante viro, co quod conscia
sit adulterii viri, at proinde justam divortii causam habeat: quippe jurare
compulsa se viro cohabitaturam, potest id jurare, intelligendo intrase; si ad
id tencor. Ibid.
The same thing must be said of a woman who is separate from her Husband,
because she knows that he has committed adultery, which is a just cause of
separation. For if she be pressed to swear that she will return to her Husband,
she may swear that she will do it, understanding in her mind; if I be bound
thereto.

Escobar proposes another case touching confession. Rub^re quis afficitur de
aliquo crimine; porest generalem confessionem facere, and illud peccatum suum
confiteri, non explicando an alias confessus sit; quia id parum variat
Confessarii judicium. Escobar in procemio exam. 2. n. 73. p. 19.
A person, says he, is ashamed of some crime committed; he may make a general
confession, and accuse himself of this sin amongst others, without saying
whether he have confessed it otherwise at onother time. Because this disguise
does not much change the judgment of the Confessor. This is nothing but a
slight to deceive a Confessor, and to preserve ones reputation with him, by
betraying ones conscience. But this same Jesuit passes yet farther, and says
formally, that one may lie in confession. See here his words: Dicit quis
Confessario se velle cum eo confessionem generalem gercre: non ideo tenetur
omnia mortalia exprimere: quia quamvis mentiatur; id tament parum refert ad
Confessarii judicium. Escebar tr. 7. ex. 4. n. 118. p. 818.
A person addresseth himself to a Confessor, and says that he would make a
general confession to him:

But if they who have any sense of God and Religion cannot resolve to use these
kind of surprises and disguisements, and these lies in a Sacrament in which
they speak to God in the person of his Priest, who holds his place, the same
Jesuit will give them also another expedient to deceive the Confessor
familiarly, that they may continue in his good opinion; which is, not to
discover to him other then their sleighter faults, and to have another
Confessor whom they may chose at their pleasure, to confess to him their great
crimes.

Duos quis adis Confessarios, quorum alteri venialia confitetur, ut bonam famam
apud Confessarium ordinarium tueatur. Rogo number delinquat?
A person, says this Jesuit, has two Confessors, to whom he applies himself,
to the one he confesses his mortal sins, and to the other his venial, that he
may continue in good opinion with his ordinary Confessor. The question is,
whether he does ill? The case is important, he must take a sociate to resolve
it, that he may be more confidently believed. Cum Suario assero non delin.
qacre. Qui^est consessio integra, nec est ver a hypocrisis, nec mendatium.
Ibid. n. 135. p. 821.
I maintain, says he, with Suarez, that this person does noevil at all. His
reason is not less strange then his answer, since he pretends that it is
neither lie nor hypocrisy to conceal his sins from his Confessor, and to make
h im believe he has no great ones, though he has committed such, to maintain
himself in good reputation with him.

Emanuel Sa approves this practice, provided it be not common. Habere ordinary
duos Confessarios, alteruns cui gravia dicas, alterum cui levia, ut probus
babearis. Quidam dicunt esse peccatum mortale ob illusum Cons^ssorem; secus
vero esset si semel aut iterum fiat, ob pudorem, and verecundiam. Emanuel Sa,
verbo Confessor, ^um. 16 page 76.
There are that hold, says he, that it is a mortal sin to have two Confessors
in ordinary, to confess to one his great sins, and to the other his small
sins, that he may pass with him for an honest man, because this is to deceive
the Confessor, and to mock him. But there is no sin in doing this only once or
twice through bashfulness. That is to say, that it is lawful to deceive a
Confessor, ut probus habearis. That thou may bo esteemed an honest man.

Filliutius who examines and handles this case most exactly, acknowledges that
many condemn it for mortal sin. Some for hypocrifie, which is a kind of lie,
which cannot be a small fault in a matter so holy, and so important as
confession is: others, because at least the custom and will to continue in this
practice is a note of great corruption, and a very wicked disposition in him
who is in this estate, and which cannot be excused from mortal sin. To which
may be added the motive which leads to this disguisement, which is a Vanity and
Pride so much more criminal and unsufferable, in that it is practiced upon
design, and in an action which ought to be the most sincere and humble of all
that are Religious: but notwithstanding all these considerations he forbears
not to maintain, with his fraternity, that there is no evil to use this
practice so much and so often as one will, or that it is no great evil. Quaeres
an sit contra integritatem Confessori ordinario tantum venialia peccata
confiteri, alteri vero extraordinario gravia quae occurrunt l' Respondco, etsi
Sylvester conf. 1. q. 6. dicat esse peccatum mortale ob hypocrisin and virtuale
mendacium; and Victoria in Summa, n. 169. asserat esse mortale quando id sit
animo perseverandi in tali consuetudine: tamen dicendum est non esse absolute
contra integritatem, neque peccatum mortale, Filliutius. tom. 1. tract. 7. c.
4. n. 75. p. 175.
You will inquire of me, says he, if it be against the integrity of
confession, to confess only your slight faults to your ordinary Confessors,
and to have another extraordinary one to whom to confess your great sins, when
you happen to fall into them. I answer, that Sylvester says, that though there
be nothing herein that is contrary to the integrity of confession; yet there is
mortal sin therein, because of the hypocrisy and virtual lying that is in it.
And Victoria assures us also that this is mortal sin, when it is done with
design to continue in this custom. But we must say absolutely that there is no
mortal sin in it, nor any thing contrary to the integrity of confession.

He proves by a pleasant reason that he that treats his confessor in this sort
is not properly a hypocrite, and that he deceives him not at all properly; a
liar, Non est proprie mendax, quia dicit falsum, sed tantum permittit alium
decipi. Ibid.
because he relates no falsity neither to one nor other of his Confessors, but
only permits one of his Confessors to be deceived, though there be no
deceiver. For he that confesses himself is none according to him, and the
Confessor cannot be any, because he could not deceive himself; and he must
have, at least, a gift of Prophecy, to be able to divine that one surprises
him by hiding his principal sins, and confessing only his small ones.

It would be easy to report yet many more examples of like shifts, of like
foolish, childish, and ridiculous sleights, by which the Jesuits do teach
people to mock God, and the Ministers of his Church, in abusing the Sacraments,
and making void their vows, but an occasion to speak hereof yet more to purpose
will be presented when we treat of confession, and of the vows of Religion.

III. POINT. Of Unfaithfulness in conversation, and common discourse.
SECT, I. An expedient which the Jesuits give for to deceive the World, and to
take a false Oath, even before a Judge, without perjury.
THe Jesuits have the reputation commonly to be Masters of equivocations, and
one may see it indeed, that it is not without cause. For to establish this kind
of knowledge in the world, and to facilitate the practice amongst all sorts of
persons, they do all that an affectionate Master can do for his profession, and
for his disciples, to make them perfect in his Trade.

1. First of all they give rules of equivocations, then they note diverse forms
of making them; and finally, to facilitate the knowledge and practice of them,
they make themselves some equivocations which they propose as models and
examples whereby to teach others to make the like.

2. They determine the occasions wherein they may be made use of; or rather
without bounds or restraint, they give liberty in almost all sorts of
occasions, to make use of them and some times even without any occasion or
reason.

3. They show how they are to be made use of, and give the method, as well for
persons of discretion, as for more simple and more gross.

4. They give an invention to maintain the possession and use of equivocation,
so that there is no sort of person that can by any means whatsoever hinder from
making use of them, without any scruple. These four points shall be so many
fections of this title, which is of Unfaithfulness in words and common
discourse.

SETC. II. Rules and Examples of equivocation taken out of the Books of the
Jesnits.
FIrst of all they declare that if one inquire whether the Prince be at Court,
Jurare verbis aequivocis sine justa causa, v. c. quod Princeps sit in aula,
intelligendo pictum, lethale peccatum affirmat Lessius, probabilius Sanchez
negat. Escobar tract. 1. exam. 1. number. 35. page 76.
it is permitted to assure him, without any necessity, and even to swear
without any great sin, that he is there, though he be not there, intending that
he is there in picture. This is the opinion of Sanchez and Escobar, who declare
plain enough that one may affirm it simply without any sin, because they
acknowledge it not to be other than a venial sin, to affirm it with an oath
without any just cause, sine justa causa, so that a small occasion would
suffice them, to discharge this oath of all sin.

Filliutius speaking of mental restriction which is permitted according to the
rules of Divinity; brings many examples which he took out of Suarez, which he
gives for a model. Talem ait Suarez esse illam: Non comedi, intelligendo hodie,
cum interrogans putet alioqui non comedisse rem illam.
Behold here an example, says he, which Suarez reports. You may say; Another
example is this; Item illam: Petrus non est domi, cum tamen revera sit. Verbum
enim est, sumitur a dicente pro, comedit. Denique dici potest de aliis
similibus. Filliutius qq. mor. tom. 2. tract. 25. c. 11. n. 327. d. 204.
You may say, Peter is not at home: Petrus non est domi, which signifies
ordinarily that he is not in the house, though he be there, taking this word,
est, for to signify, he eats, so that you have a design to say, that he does
not eat in the house. And we may judge of other like sorts of speaking
equivocally in the same manner.

And a little before, proposing some examples of equivocation in the same place
whence they were taken, which I reported before, he has put this foremost.
Afferri solent exempla aliquot. Et primo ejns qui promisit exterius aliquid
sine intention promittendi, Si enim interrogetur an promiserit, negare potest,
intelligendo se non promisisse promissione obligante, and sic etiam jurare.
Ibid.
They are accustomed, says he, to relate some examples of equivocations, (for
to make their Doctrine and rules to be better understood) as in the first place
of him who outwardly promises a thing, without an intent to promise. For if one
asked whether he had promised or no, he may deny it, meaning that he had not
promised with a promise obliging, and with this restriction he may also swear.
He presupposes without doubt that perjury cannot be committed more to purpose
then to support an equivocation,

Sanchez says the same thing, and yet more; and for to be better understood,
he reduces the general thesis to a particular case. Quoties quit sive vere,
sive ficte promittens matrimonium, immunis est ab aliquam cansam ab implendi
obligatione, potest a Judice vocatus jurare se non promisisse, intelligendo, it
a ut teneatur implere. Sanchez op. mor. l. 3. c. 6. n. 32. p. 29.
So often as, says he, a person who has promised marriage to another, whether
it were made sincerely, or only in appearance, is discharged by any reason
from holding his promise, being called before a Judge, he may swear he has not
made this promise, meaning he has not so made it as to be obliged to observe
it. And that it may be known what reason he requires for this, he holds Non
tantum quando causa est certa non im plendi, and etiam quoties sapient is
judicio est proba bile, non teneri servare, quia potest amplectendo opinionem
probabilem existimare se tuta conscientia non obligatum. Ibid.
that it is not necessary that the pretense upon which he grounds his belief
that he is not obliged to marry her to whom he has passed his word, be true or
certain; but it suffices that it have some appearance of truth, and that it be
probable: Because, says he, following a probable opinion, he may persuade
himself in conscience that he is not obliged. He had reported before an example
taken out of other Authors, who teach, Qui docent cum qui nummos mutuo acceptos
solvit, posse a Judica rogatum de mutuo, jurare se illud non accepisse,
intelligendo it a ut teneatur illud solvere. Atque idem dicendum est si
quacunque alia ex causa ab eo mutuo solvendo liber esset. Atque idem credo si
tunc non teneretur solvere, eo quod terminu^ ad quem mutuum datum suit non est
impletus, vel prae paupertate excusatur debtor a ^unc solvendo. Ibid.
That a person who has paid the money which he borrowed, being examined by a
Judge if he borrowed the money, may swear that he has not, intending, not so as
to be obliged to pay it. Which he extends to other cases,

This last overture is very favorable to many persons, who by this rule may
deny all their debts, having never any money to pay them and for them that are
poor, to cover by this pretense their ingratitude and injustice toward those
who assist them in giving them that which was necessary for them. But if these
people who have against their consciences sworn that they owed nothing, come
afterward into an estate able to pay what thy owe, what counsel will the
Jesuits give them? on the one side there is no more any pretext which might
dispense with them for not paying: and on the other side, if they pay after
they have sworn that they owed nothing; they declare themselves perjured, and
they ruin their honor and credit after they have ruined their conscience; and
which is more considerable, they will disgrace the Doctrine of equivocations,
and the mystery of those who teach them. It will not be hard to resolve these
difficulties by the consequence of the principles of the Jesuits Divinity; but
because I have no design but only to report things,

Sanchez proposes another example and another equivocation upon this very
matter. Decimoquinto deducitur, eum a quo mutua pecunia petitur, quam revera
habet, posse jure jurando affirmare se eam non habere, intelligendo intra se ut
mutuo det, quando non tenetur mutuare. Ibid.
It follows, says he, that if one demands of a man to borrow money, which he
indeed has, but which he will not, and which he is not obliged to lend; he may
swear that he has it not at all, meaning not to lend him.

This clause, that this man is not obliged to lend, is not Sanchez's; but of
some other Casuist more religious then he, and in his judgment too scrupulous.
Which is the reason that he approves it not, adding, Quare ad veritatem hujus
juramenti vil refert an ille teneatur mutuare neone. Ibid.
that it matters not as to the truth of the oath, whether he be or be not
obliged to lend it.

He gives also another advertisement; how to make use of mental reservation on
this same occasion, when one is troubled to put off a person who asks to
borrow money, Similiter dicendum est si intra se intelligat noa habere pecunias
in alio loco ab eo in quo ^evera habet. Ibid.
which is to say, and even to swear, if it be needful, that one has it not,
that is to say, not in another place then in that where it is laid up to be
kept.

For that which respects examination of Judges, the way to delude and deceive
them without oaths which are taken before them, is very easy, according to the
same Author. Tertio deducitur licere testi juridice interrogato an aliquid
sciat, non tamen rogato an audierit, jurare se nefcire si solum ^ lierit. Ibid.
c. 7. number. 5. page 31.
It follows, says he, that if a witness be interrogated juridically, if he
know a thing; As if it were not true that one knows that which he has received
from persons worthy of credit; though he have not seen it himself.

Finally to give yet more free course to equivocations, he would authorize them
by the example of Saint Francis. 14. Deducitur licitam fursse amphibologiam qua
usus sertur D. Franc^scus, qui a ^udicis ministris interrogatus an illac quidam
reus transiisset; manus in vestis manicas introducens, dixit sic: Non transiit
hac, intelligendo de loco in quo manus habebat. Ibid. c. 6. n. 42. p. 30.
Itaque similiter posset dicere fic: Non transiit hac, intelligendo locum
individnum quom pede vel manu tang^t. Ibid.
It follows, says he, that Saint Francis might make use of the equivocation
which is attributed unto him, when being interrogated by the Officers of
Justice, if a malefactor whom they sought after went that way; he answered
putting his hands in the sleeves of his Gound, he is not come this way, meaning
not that way where he had his hands. And after he had justified this action of
S. Francis of which there is no witness, nor any likelihood to believe that it
was ever done by him, he will yet raise it higher; n He might also have
answered in this manner, adds he, he is not passed this way, intending the
particular and determined place where his foot or his hand was.

Layman who is not so passionate as Sanchez, for equivocations, appears not so
unjust as he against S. Francis. For he justifies him, or at least wise if he
suffers others to affirm and assure us that Saint Francis never used this
equivocation which is ascribed to him, Either Saint Francis is not the Author
of this answer, which is so attributed to him falsely; or that holy man
believed that it was lawful, says Soto cited by Layman.

The Books of the Jesuits are full of these equivocations, and sometimes of
others farther fetched and more ridiculous. I was desirous only to represent
some few of the more sensible and the more common ones, which they do
ordinarily propose to serve for example and model to simple and gross witted
persons. They who desire to know more thereof may read their books themselves.

SECT. III. When and on what occasions one may make use of equivocations.
AMong those who teach to make equivocations, there are some who speak with
less passion, and who say they ought not to be used but in necessity, soberly
and with great discretion. Others make as it were a party for them, and
maintain them indifferently and blindly, giving all liberty to put them in
practice, holding that the least reason suffices to make use of them; and that
when they are made use of even without reason and without necessity, there is
in a manner no sin in them, or that it is but very little.

Sanchez expounding the opinion of Soto, who holds that one may make use of
equivocations in sport or drollery, says that it is true, provided that no
oath be added there unto. Dum Sotus de Secreto, memb. 3. q. 3 in fine it non
esse culpam amphibologiis uti joco and in ridiculis, intelligo quando absque
juramento id sieret. Sanch. op. mor. l. 3. c. 6. n. 22. p. 27.
When Soto holds, says he, that it is no sin to make use of equivocations in
making merry and drolling, this he understands to be when it is done without
swearing. But it suffices not this professor of equivocations, to say that
there is no sin in taking this divertisement, he will have it also to be
honest; and therefore it is sufficient to make an equivocation honest, to take
divertisement therein. Tunc enim honestus ille ludus recreationis pustae causa
exercitus honestum redderet amphibologiae usum. Ibid.
For then, says he, this honest sport and recreation renders the equivocation
honest. At si juramentum adesset, est manifesta culpa propter vanam and
indiscretam divini nominis usurpationem: at solum esset venialis. Ibid.
But if it happen that one swear in this recreation with or without design,
when one swears by the name of God, there may well be some fault in it, as he
avers; but he pretends its but small and venial. But if one swears not at all,
above all not by the name of God, he maintains that this honest sport and
recreation makes the equivocation honest.

He had already said the same thing more at large before, p. 25.4. where after
he had established this rule: Possunt absque mendacio usurpari etsi verba ex
sua significatione ambigua non siat, nec cum sensum habeant, etc. Ibid.
That one may without lying make use of words which in themselves are not
ambiguous, and which have not the sense which he takes them in, etc. He adds in
the following number, Possunt quoque absque mendacio ea verba usurpari, etiamsi
ex sua significatione non sint ambigua, nec cum sensum admittant ex se, nec ex
circumstantiis occurrentibus, sed tantum eum sensum reddant ex aliquo
additomenio proferentis retento, quodcunque illud fit: ut si qnis vel solus vel
coram aliis, sive interrogatus, sive propria sponte, sive recreationis gratia,
sive quocunque alio fine juret se non fecisse aliquid quod revera fecit,
intelligendo intra se aliquid altud quod non fecit, vel etiam diem ab eo in quo
fecit, vel quodcunque aliud additamentum, revera non mentitur nec perjurus est,
sed tantum non diceret unam veritatem determinatam quam audientas concipiunt,
ac verba illa ex se significant: sed altam veritatem disparatam. Ibid. number. 15.
That one may make use of such words,

Many observations may be made on this one passage of Sanchez, wherein there
are many things for them to learn who are curious of the science of
equivocations. I will only pass over it cursorily and lightly.

First of all he speaks of an equivocation the most strange and distant from
humane reason that can be imagined. Possunt absque mendacio ea verba usurpari
etiamsi ex sua significetione noa sint ambigua, nec eum sensum admittant ex se,
nec ex circumstantiis occurrentibus.
One may, says he, without lying make use of these words, though in their
signification they be not ambigious, and which of themselves, and with their
present circumstances cannot bear the sense which is given them. Whence it
follows that these words are indeed not equivocal, but openly false,

Also Sanchez affirms and testifies sufficiently himself that this word is no
equivocation, in saying that it is not ambiguous, for an ambiguous and
equivocal word are one and the same thing. So that what he adds, that though
these words which he supposes not to be equivocal, could not receive the sense
he gives them; Sed tantum eum sensum reddant ex aliquo ^dditomento proferen^is
retento.
yet they will never the less bear it, by adding that which he who speaks them
reserves in his thoughts. This say I is destroyed by it self, the thought of a
man which is altogether inward and invisible, cannot at all change the sense of
words, which are all-together outward and sensible, nor give them that which
they cannot receive: otherwise every one may by his will and according to his
fantasy give every sort of words all sorts of senses, and make them signify
any thing. And so it will be impossible for one to understand another, and
those of the same country shall be as strangers to one another.

This Doctor gives the same liberty to circumstances as to the substance of
words, saying that one may give them by thought alone such sense as one will,
in such time, and in such manner, and on such subject and motive as one will,
without other motive or necessity then because he will. Ut si quis solus vel
cum altis, sive interrogatus, sive propria sponte, sive recreationis gratia,
sive alio quocunque fine juret se non fecisse oliquid quod revera fecit.
As if one, says he, being alone or in company, whether he be asked or speak
of his own accord, for recreation or for some other motive whatsoever it be,
swear that he has not done a thing, which notwithstanding he has done indeed.
It is not sufficient for him to lie formally, he will also join perjury to
lying, in saying that one may swear that he has not done that which he has
done; and he would cover this lie and this perjury by the thought of a man
only in what estate and in what circumstances soever he be; alone or in
company, speaking for recreation or for other motive whatsoever it be,
pretending that he may swear that he has not done which he has done, without
fear of taking a false oath, provided Intelligendo intra se aliud revera fecit.
that he intend only in his mind some other thing that he had not done.

See here Sanchez first method, which serves for nothing but to learn to lie
purely, simply, and without equivocation, by using words that are not equivocal
in themselves, at all, and which cannot signify that which one says, nor that
which is in ones mind at all, as he affirms himself. So that such words are
contrary to the thoughts which he has, and he says really other things then
he thinks; which is to lie formally and simply.

The second method is no better then the former, for he says one may Vel
intelligendo aliam diem ab ea aqua fecit.
understand (or supply out of ones mind) that he has not done the thing on an
other day then that on which he did it; Vel intelligendo aliud quodvis additum
verum, quodcunque illuct sit.
Or intending, says he, some quite other thing, and quite other circumstance
which he pleases to add, which is true, of what sort soever it be. And with
these precautions, if you will believe him, Revera non mentitur nec perjurus
est.
he lies not at all in effect; and is not perjured, imagining and pretending to
make us believe that he has spoken no false thing, and that he has spoken the
very truth, though he say not that which is demanded of him, nor that which the
words he utters signify of themselves, but an other truth altogether
different; sed aliam veritatem disparatam.

This is a true way to be able to justify all manner of lies and perjuries;
the greatest liar and the greatest impostor may make use hereof to justify and
to maintain himself in these crimes, in saying that his meaning was other than
his saying; and that so Revera non mentitur nec perjurus est; sed tantum non
dicit unam veritatem determinatam qaam auditores concipiunt, ac verbo illo
significant; sed aliam veritatem disparatam.
He is really neither liar nor perjured; but only did not speak precisely a
truth, which they understood who did hear him, and which his words signified;
but another truth which had no thing ommon therewith. But that for this they
had no cause to complain of what he said to them and answered in this manner,
they having no right to question him. For he presupposes as a general maxim,
Quia alteri respondere non obligatus, nec obligatur respondere ad ejus mentem.
that when one is not obliged to answer a person, neither is he obliged to
answer according to his thoughts. Which he supports by a maxim of Logic which
says: A quo enim removetur genus, omnis quoque species removetur.
That when the general kind of any thing is removed, This reasoning he says he
learned from Navarre; who says that when one is not obliged to answer a
person, he may answer him in what manner he pleases: he is not obliged to give
him an honest, civil, true, sincere, faithful one, but that he may make one in
all points contrary, for that we may make him none if we please.

There is none that sees not clearly what follows from this, that incivil
conversation, especially amongst equals, where one has no authority over
others, nor right to question them nor to oblige them to answer to that which
is proposed or demanded of them, every one may say what he will, and understand
what he will by his words without apprehending that he lies, and believing that
he speaks the truth, because he represents it in his mind though he hide it,
or express even the contrary in his words. But there is great difference
betwixt conceiving or thinking the truth and speaking or signifying it to
others. Those who will follow this Jesuit, shall have the truth in their
thoughts, but not in their words; they conceive it well, but they do not speak
it at all; and in this they are liars and perjured, notwithstanding all their
intentions and secret thoughts, for to lie is no other thing then to speak
otherwise then a man thinks, and to say one thing having another in his
thoughts.

Filliutius seems at first sight not to agree with Sanchez in this point.
Quinto quaeritur quale peccatum sit uti amphibologia absque rationabili causa?
Filliutius qq. mor. tom. 2. tract. 25. c. 11. n. 330. p. 204.
It is demanded, says he, what sin it is to make use of equivocations without
any reafonable cause. His first answer is, Respondeo and dico primo, probabile
esse quod sit mendacium, atque adeo perjurium si confirmetur juramento.
It is probable that it is a lie, and by confequence perjury when it is
confirmed with an oath. But a little after, his inclination which he has for
looseness, and to flatter the lust and corruptions of men, make him say, Dico
2. probabilius videri non esse mendacium nec perjurium. Ibid.
That it seems more probable that in rigor it is no lie, nor any perjury.
His principal reason is, Quia qui sic loquitur and jurat, non habet intentionem
dicendi falsum, vel jurandi salsitatem, ut supponimus, Ibid.
because that he who talks and swears after this manner has no intention, as
is presupposed, to speak nor to swear false; though he indeed both speak and
swear so. He pretends then, as Sanchez, that the inward will of man alone can
change the signification of words, and give to them such as he pleases. It is
true that Sanchez gives not this power to the intention alone, without joining
some mental restriction unto^t, by which he forms in his mind a true sense, in
saying in himself that he will neither lie nor forswear.

Filliutius notwithstanding fails not to approve these restrictions and mental
additions of Sanchez. Et quod profertur in rigore habet aliquem sensum verum
quem talis intendit.
Because, as he says, he who talks thus follows rigorously the true sense
which he has an intention to give to his words. Whence he concludes absolutely
as Sanchez, Ergo non mentitur. Ibid.
that by consequence he lies not at all. And he pretends not only that he lies
not all, but that what he says, though it be captious and false, Non repugnat
autem veritati and fidelitati, quia non opponitur illi per defectum veritatis,
sed nimiam veritatis occultationem. Filliutius ubi sup.
yet nevertheless is not repugnant to truth and faithfulness; because it is not
opposite to it by way of diminishing it, but only in concealing it. So that
all disguises, Absque rationali causa.
without any reasonable cause. From which Sanchez is not far, when he says
that one may do it by way of divertisement; and a little before, Etsi nulla
justa causa ducatur proferens.
without any just cause.

This lesson is very proper to fill the world with lies, deceits, and
trecheries, without scruple and without fear of lying, or deceiving any person:
because the Jesuits assure us that a man may do all these things without being
guilty of these crimes, even when there is no reason nor necessity to make use
of these artifices, and they are used only for divertisement, and to show the
liberty and freedom of ones spirit. So that there will be no more lies nor
cheats in the world for them that have once been at School with them, and who
will make use of the strange privileges which they give them.

SECT. IV. The Jesuits method to frame equivocations, and to use them
commodiously.
IT is not enough to know the rules of any mystery, if it be not known how to
reduce them into practice. Of all those who have written of equivocations,
there is none who has advanced farther therein then Filliutius in the place we
have cited already. For he gives two instructions and two advices to men of
wit,

Quarte quar^ (...) and dico 1. assignari possunt duo modi pro personis judicio
praeditis. Filliutius qq. mor. tom. 2. tract. 25. c. (...), 328. p. 204.
They inquire, says he, with what precaution equivocations may be made use of?
He answers: that two rules may be given, and two methods for persons of
jugement, that they may have change, and make use sometimes of one, and
sometimes of the other.

Primus est habere intentionem prospetendi verba materialiter. Ibid.
The first is to have an intention to pronounce the words materially. That is
to say, as if they signified nothing, and to take from them in his mind their
proper and natural signification, not desiring they should have any at all. And
to make this method easy to understand, he proposes one example as it were a
model by which one may see the use of this mavelous art. Et ad majorem
socuritatem, cum incipit. v. gedicere juro, debet interponere submisse
restrictionem mentalem (ut hodie), and deinde addere alta voce; non commedisse
rem illam. Ibid.
For greater security, says he, when a man begins to say: I swear that it is
good that he add, low to himself, this clause and this mental restriction,
(this day,) and that he continue after to say all aloud, I have not eaten of
such a thing, So that he says indeed, I swear that I have not eaten to day, or
in such manner. Vet jura, and interpone (me dicere), tum absolute alta item
voce, quod non feci hoc vel illud. Sic caim verissima est tota oration.
I swear, adding secretly as it were in a parenthesis, (that I say) and after
following all aloud, that I have not done such a thing, for so all the
discourse will be true.

The other method which is also for subtle persons, is this. Secundus hibere
intentionent non absolvendi or ationem tantum per verba externa, sed simul cum
restrictione mentali. Liberum est enim homini exprimere mentem suam totaliter
vel partialiter. Ibid.
The second method is to have an intention to compose ones discourse, not only
of words which are audibly pronounced, but also of those which are secretly
reserved in ones mind, it being free for those who speak to express their
thoughts wholly or only in part.

One of these means to frame equivocations is by addition, and the other by
mental restriction. I stay not to expound them farther, because Filliutius
propounds them only to persons of judgment, who are capable to understand
them, and dexterous to practice them; or rather if they have but a little
judgment and good sense, they will in reading them only sufficiently perceive
that these subtleties are ridiculous to be practiced.

He gives but one means for simple and grosse-witted persons to make
equivocations, for fear of confounding them, and he gives one so easy that
there is no person who may not make use thereof. Pro rudibus vero qui nesciunt
in particulari concipere amphibologiam, satis est habeant intentionem
affirmandi vel negandi in sensu qui contineat reipsa veritatem.
But for slow-witted persons, says he, who know not of themselves how in
particular to frame an equivocation; it is enough for them that they have an
intention to affirm or deny that which they say in a sense which contains in
effect some truth. Ad quod necesse est ut saltem in universum sciant se posse
negare in aliquo vero sensu. Ibid.
And for this it is necessary, says he, that they be advertised, and that they
know at least in general that they may deny that about which they are
questioned, in some true sense, though they know not what this sense is.

After this he must be very dull who cannot make use of this invention, since
it is not of necessity, no not to know in particular, nor what he does nor what
he says, whether it be true or not indeed, and that it is sufficient to
believe, or suppose in general that it may be so, and that a nimble witted man
may find some sense in which he can make the words true, which are false in
their natural and only sense, and which by consequence are not equivocations,
though he who pronounces them cannot do it.

SECT. V. The method of the same Jesuits,
AFter they have made the use of equivocations so free, so common, and so
easy, that all the world may make use of them indifferently on all occasions,
there remains nothing for the Masters of this art, that is to say the Jesuits,
to do, but to establish well the practice, and to fortify themselves in such
sort against all opposition, that whatsoever precaution they use; no person may
be able to hinder them from making use thereof when they will, nor to discover
it when they have used it.

This Sanchez has attempted to do, and in this he has labored with great
care, and he has proceeded therein beyond all other who have written on this
matter. After he has established many rules, given many advices about
equivocations and the manner to form and make use of them, he concludes with
this advice, as the last and most important: Tandem id observandum est, quotier
licitum est ad se tuendum uti aliqua aequivocatione; id quoque erit licitum,
etsi interrogans urgeat excludens illam aequivocationem. Sanch. op. mor. l. 3.
c. 6. n. 45. p. 30.
That so often as it is lawful in our own defense to use equivocations, they
may be used, though he who examines us do press us to answer him without
making use of this very equivocation. That is to say, that so often as you
believe that you may use equivocations (which is always lawful according to this
Casuist and his Fraternity, as we have already reported) on all occasions, and
even without necessity and reason, though you be admonished not to make use of
it, when it is forbidden you, when you are caused to promise and even to swear
that you will make no use of it; notwithstanding all these precautions, these
defenses, these promises, and the oath that you have made, you have always the
liberty to make use thereof.

None can speak more clearly and more favorably. Atque idem docent de reo qui
rogatus de delicto secreto, urgetur, ut dicat sive fecerit public, sive
occulto; sive ipse Judex juridice interroget, sive noa, dicentes posse adhuc
respondere se non fecisse, intelligendo, non ut tu in iniquitate tua rogas, sed
ut teneris tanquam Judex rogare. Ibid.
The Casuists say the same thing, of a man accused, who being axamined upon any
secret crime, is pressed to answer, whether it be publicly, or privately,
whether it be before a Judge juridically or not. For they hold in this very
case that he may answer, that he has not done it, intending his answer not in
that manner as the Judge examines him maliciously; but in the manner he ought
to examine him in the quality of a Judge.

It is sufficient that a malefactor or a witness form within himself a probable
opinion that the Judge who examine him juridically, ought not to examine him in
the manner that he does, for to mock him, and to elude his interrogatories by
equivocation; or by confidently denying most clear and certain things, so that
this mischief cannot possibly be hindered or prevented by him, what precaution
soever he uses.

The Judge is malicious, and he interrogates this malefactor maliciously
according to Sanchez, because that in examining he uses the precautions which
he believes necessary to draw the truth out of his mouth. This malefactor is
not malicious, he answers not malicously, but reasonably and wisely, according
to the Divinity of this Father; because he observes exactly the rules of the
equivocations, and omits no juggling slight of mind, to obscure the truth, and
to deceive the Judge who interrogates him by lying and perjury.

He brings also another example of the same subject. Atque idem docet de rogato
a custodibus urbis, aliqaem locum peste infectum esse falso ex stimantibus, and
rogantibus quempiam an ex co loco venerit: sive infectus peste sit, five non,
nempe posse ipsum respondere non venire ex eo, intelligendo, non ut vos
rogatis, sed ut deberetis rogare. Ibid.
He holds the same thing, says he, speaking of Navarre, touching him who is
interrogated by a Town-guard, who believe falsely, that the Town from whence he
comes is infected with the plague, and demands from him if he came from thence;
whether it be infected or it be not infected, he may answer that he came not
thence; making this mental restriction in his mind; I came thence not
according to the question you make, but according to the question you ought to
make. This method is not very favorable to civil government, nor gives it much
weight to the authority of Magistrates and their Officers; also it is not very
favorable for the establishment of Laws, and for assuring the obedience which
people owe unto Princes. When a Sovereign commands any thing to his subjects,
there is no private man who shall receive his orders, who may not promise to
obey him, though he be resolved to do nothing of that he shall command him, by
making use of this mental restriction, and saying in himself; Non ut tu
imperas, sed ut deberes imperare.
I will do this, not according as you command me, but as you ought to command
me.

Also in like manner when he is demanded any thing whereunto he imagines that
he is not obliged, to answer according to truth, he may speak contrary to that
which he thinks, and to that which is true, by the favor of this equivocation,
and of this secret thought which he bears in his mind; Non ut tu^ogas, sed ut
deb^es interraga^e.
In answer, says he in himself, not to that which you demand of me, but
according to that you ought to have demanded of me.

One may say,

Sanchez joins a reason to the example and authority, that he may yet more
confirm the possession and use of these equivocations. Quorum omnium ea est
ratio; qui^etsi interrogans excladat eo ipso omnem alium modum sciendi; and
responsio ex se id significet; id tamen verum est ex formali iniqua interrogant
is intention; cui imputari debet repugnantia in ipsis verbis and
interrogatione. Ibid.
The reason of all this, says he, is because, though he who interrogates in
this sort reduces his demand to one sole sense, excluding all others, and that
the answer has in it self a reference unto this sense; notwithstanding this is
true only because of the ill intention of him who interrogates, to which ought
to be imputed the discordance betwixt the Author and the interrogations. It
suffices not him to justify him who forswears himself before the civil
Officers, or before a Judge that examines him juridically: but he casts this
perjury and crime upon the Judge himself. He confesses that there is falsity,
and by consequence perjury in the answer of those who make use of these
equivocations in the manner he teaches them to illude the intergatories of a
Judge; and he notes himself this falsity and perjury, though he express it
modestly enough, calling it Repugnantia in ipsis verbis and interrogatione.
a repugnance and discordance from the answer of the persons that are forsworn,
and the intergatories which a Judge or other Magistrate puts to him. And
because he will not have this crime fall on them who commit it by his counsel
and his order, he casts it upon the Officer or the Judge, Cut imputari debet
repugnantiain ipsis verbis and interrogatione.
to whom must be imputed, says he, the discordance which is found betwixt the
answer and the interrogation.

And this is that, without doubt, for which he imputes the malice to the Judge,
that he would hinder the accused from using his right that he has, and cause
him to speak sincerely, where he has right to speak equivocally, and by
consequence to condemn him of injustice and malice who would hinder him from
using this right. He then sets the Judge in the place of the malefactor, and
the malefactor in the place of the Judge, making the malefactor Judge of his
Judge himself, and giving him liberty to judge and condemn him even when he
forswears himself in his presence, by answering according to his own fancy, and
not according to the Judges interrogatory; and makes him say unto his Judge
unawares to him: (for this is the secret and the retentum of the equivocation,
which passes inwardly in his mind:) Non ut tu in iniquitate tua rog^o; sed ut
teneris tanquam Judex interrogare.
I answer thee not in the manner which thou do examine me maliciously, but in
the manner thou ought to examine me as a Judge. Which he testifies yet more
clearly, when he says that all this disguisement, himself, Ex formali iniqua
interrogantis intention, cui imputari debet repugnantia in verbis ipsis and
interrogatione.
comes from the wicked intention of him that examines him, to which ought to be
imputed the discordance which is found betwixt the answer and the
interrogation. But he justifies highly the liar and the perjurer saying, Utitur
jure suo respondendo ad mentem legitimam quae inesse debet. Ibid. page 31.
he makes use of his right in answering his Judge following the lawful thought
which he ought to have, and not following that which he has maliciously. That
is to say, not only reforming the Sentence of his Judge, but in condemning his
judgment, his thoughts, his proceeding, as of a mischievous or ignorant man,
who knows not how to execute his charge, and he does all this lawfully, if we
believe Sanchez, as having a particular right which this Jesuit has given
them; utitur jure suo.

From these principles and conclusions Sanchez draws this conclusion to
establish these equivocations: Quare idem consco ob candem rationem,
quantumcunque reduplicet inquus interrogator ut juret se nulla aequivecatio^e
uti, and absque omni prorsus aequivocatione id intelligere. Adhuc enim jurare
potest, intelligendo ita ut plane debeat loqui and explicare: vel aliud mente
concipendo, quo verum id reddatur. Ibid. p. 31.
For this cause I am always of this judgment for this same reason, whatsoever
the Judge urges who interrogates unjus^ly^, so fareven as to make the
examinant swear that he does not make use of equivocations, and that he intends
that which he says without any equivocation. For he may also swear
understanding secretly that he does it as far as he is obliged to speak clearly
and to expound himself; or by forming some other thought which may make his
answer true. So that what instance soever the Judge can make, or other person
that examines him, and conjures him to speak the truth; although he oblige him
to promise, and even make him to swear that he will answer sincerely, and not
make use of any equivocation; Intelligendo ita ut plaene debeat loqui and
explicare. Vel aliud mente concipicendo quo vtrum id reddatur.
understanding always that he speaks and answers him as he ought; that is,
according to the right he thinks he has, if he know no other occasion, or if
there come in his mind no other sense, to which he may secretly refer his
words, to give them some color and some appearance of truth.

His reason is the self-same which he has already made often use of: Quia cum
non teneatur ad formalem interrogantis mentem respondere, sed ad debitam, illa
responsio juxta debitam ejus mentem vera est. Ibid. page 31.
because he is not obliged to answer to the intention and the thoughts which he
has who examines him, but to that which he ought to have, his answer is true,
following this intention and this thought which he ought to have.

This man does not say that which he thinks, also he answers not that which he
thinks, and which he demands who examines him, but to that which he pretends he
ought to ask him, and to the thought which he thinks he ought to have in
examining him. And this thought which he imagines that he who examines him
ought to have, is his own, and that which he forms in his own mind, to deceive
and elude the question of him who examines him. So that he speaks truth in
lying, and swears false without perjury; because although he answers contrarily
to what he was questioned, and to what he has promised to answer even with an
oath: notwithstanding he answers conformably to his own intention, and to the
secret thought which he has formed in his mind, which is that which he ought
to have following his own judgment, not that of him who examines him, which
makes his answer to be true. Illa responsio juxta debitam ejus mentem vera est.

So when one is urged by his Father, his Superior, or by his Confessor, to tell
something which he would not discover unto them, he needs only to form a
thought different from theirs, and to imagine that they ought to have it; and
answering unto them comformably to this thought, he shall be covered from lying
and falsehood, Illa responsio juxta debitam ejus mentem vera est.

The last counsel which Sanchez gives for securing and sacilitating
equivocation is this; At oportet ut utens quacunque ex dictis amphibologiis
intendat s^ns^m quem verba vera possunt habere; and sic opus est ut sciat se
aliquo vero sensu posse d^cere, quamvi^ in sp^cie illum ignoret. Ibid. n. 46.
p. 31.
It behooves him who will make use of any of these equivocations, which we are
about to speak of, to have an intention to give unto his words the sense which
they may truly receive, and by consequence he must know that he may speak them
in any sense which is true, though he know not in particular what that sense
is. That is to say, that a man speaking a falsehood so evident, that he himself
sees no means to excuse or cover it under any equivocation, which might give it
only some color of truth, he may nevertheless speak it; and for to put his
conscience in surety, it is sufficient for him to believe that which he says
may absolutely be capable of some true sense, though he knows it not.

By this rare Doctrine all deceivers and liars have gained their cause, and
this Jesuit has given them more than ever they durst hope for, for according
to this Doctrine they may not only deceive without punishment,

Sanchez attributes this expedient unto Suarez. But to keep always his
advantage, even above his Fraternity, and to hold the rank of a Master in this
matter, he proposes also another invention, or at least he stretches that of
Suarez, and he expounds it yet more easily. At sat erit ut intendat sensum quem
doctus vir illi consulit, aut intelligit. Ibid.
It suffices, says he, that he has an intention to give that sense to his
words which a learned man has counseled him to give it, or might understand
it in. He wills therefore that he should not trouble himself so much as to know
whether the evident falsity which he speaks and which he sees himself, may be
covered by any ordinary or easy equivocation; and he believes that it behooves
him only to have an intention to speak in such a sense as a learned man, who
is experienced in equivocations, can give him, though it be altogether unknown
from common people. So important a matter is it to have the counsel of a man
who knows all the slights of this mystery, and who has proper ones for all
sorts of affairs. For we may not only make use of his counsels when he is
present, and when we have time to consult him; but also in his absence when we
make our reference unto him in all sorts of difficulties which we meet with in
this matter,

The last ARTICLE. A general proof that the Jesuitical Authors favor and
nourish the lust of men in all things; and the common principle from which they
draw all that they say in favor of it.
BEyond all which we have spoken hitherto, it may be known clearly, by a
general proof, that the Jesuits nourish and favor as much as they can the
lusts of men, by considering what they say to the disadvantage of charity. For
as charity and lust are two contrary motions and loves which divide our heart,
in such manner that it is allways possessed and moved by the one or the other;
and it has so much more of lust, as it has less of harity; lust cannot be
favored more nor established more forcibly in the heart of man to cause it to
reign continually through his whole life and all his actions, with such a
consent of their Authors, that it seems that a general conspiracy and
resolution has been taken about in, in so general assembly of all their
Society.

There are some who pretend that a man is never obliged, upon any occasion, nor
at any determinate time, to love God, in all the course of his life, nay, nor
even at death. The more religious reduce this great and first commandment to a
certain time, and certain occasions which are very rare and distant. Quonam
tempore per se obligat praeceptum charitatis ad Deum? Escob. tr. 5. exam. 4. n.
8. p. 624.
At what time, inquires Escobar, does the precept of loving God oblige a man in
it self? He rehearses diverse opinions, and expresses his own in these terms;
Mitto sententiam Azorii octo tempora assignantis, and Sanchez unicum.
I pass by the opinion of Azor who alleadges eight times, or eight occasions;
and that of Sanchez, who acknowledges but one alone wherein this precept
obliges: (he leaves the one as too large, and the other as too severe and too
exact;) Sequor autem Henriquez tria ad hoc praeceptum tempora assignantem.
Primum quidem est morale principium rationis: Secundum, mortis articulus:
Tertium, tempus vitae intermedium, saltem singulis quinque annis. Addo ex
Filliutio, probabile esse won quinquennis singulis rigorose obligare, sed
sapientum arbitrio. Ibid.
But I follow Henriquez who observes three times in which this precept obliges.
The first is, when a man begins to have the use of reason; the second is upon
the point of death; the third is all the time of a man's life between those two,
at the least from five years to five years. But I say farther, following
Filliutius, that it is probable that this precept does not oblige in rigor
every five years,

If a man be obliged to love God but upon one occasion, as Sanchez would have
it, or at the beginning of his use of reason, and at death, and now and then
during his life, as Henriquez believes; or from five to five years, and even
less as Escobar adds, or at most upon eight occasions only which may happen
during a man's whole life, according to Azor, all the rest of his time, that is
to say, almost all the life of a man shall be for lust, and one may employ it
to love any other thing besides God, that is to say, to love the creatures,
temporal things, the goods of this world, without being obliged to turn away
his mind and his heart from them to love God; it being certain that the heart
of man cannot be without some love, and that that of the world and of the
creatures does occupy all that which the love of God does not possess.

Amicus not daring to oppose himself absolutely to the opinion of Divines who
hold that to satisfy the precept of loving God we are obliged to have actually
more love for him than for the Creature, expounds this opinion in such sort
that he does indeed defend it. Secunda sententia docet Deum esse diligendum
super omnia tantum appretiative, seu praelative. Est communis Thelogorum opinio
quae vera and sequenda. Amic. tom. 4. disp. 29. sect. 2. n. 15. p. 388.
The second opinion holds, says he, that it behooves to love God above all
things, in preferring him above them, and esteeming him more; but not in loving
him with more tenderness. This is the common judgment of Divines, which is
true and which ought to be followed. And for to expound this more clearly, he
adds; Omnis appretiatio nascitur ex judicio comparativo unius prae alio. Ex
eo enim quod judico unum esse melius and perfectius alio. Ibid, number. 18.
All preference comes from a judgment by which after we have compared two
things, we choose the one and leave the other. For because I judge that the one
thing is worth more than the other, I prefer that which I judge to be the
better. He distinguishes here two acts; the one is that by which we compare two
things together; and the other, to Judge, that God is better and more perfect
then all the Creatures. But this may be done by the greatest Sinner as well as
by the greatest Saint, this judgment being more in the head than in the heart,
and proceeding more from knowledge and light of mind than from affection.

Also it is clear that one may esteem them much whom he loves not at all, and
also more than those whom he loves. And there is nothing more common then to
esteem those for whom one has no true affection at all, but an entire
indifference. So that this esteem and this judgment cannot be named love but
improperly; he he who sets not his love which is due unto God, above all
things, otherwise then in in this judgment and in this estimation, which makes
him prefer him above all things, as deserving to be beloved above all things,
does not at the bottom attribute unto him any true love at all, and holds in
effect that there is no love due to him at all.

But if these Doctors who know to give to their own words, as well as to those
of others, such sense as they please, even that which they have not, and which
they cannot have naturally, as we have made appear in the former Chapter; I
say, if these Doctors that they may not seem to abolish entirely the
commandment of love to God,

Quod autem sola dilectio appreciativa Dei super omnia sufficiat ad implendum
praeceptum charit it is erga Deum, etsi remissima sit, probatur. Ibid. number. 19.
I will prove unto you, says Amicus, that although the love of God
appretiative above all things be in a very low degree; It suffices for to
accomplish the precept of love toward God. This is to abolish entirely the
commandment of loving God, by maintaining that we are not obliged to love him
as it does command, for God does demand all our love, since he demands all our
heart. And Amicus says and attempts to prove that the lowest degree of love
suffices to accomplish the precept of love toward God. And that he might not
leave any place to doubt of his thought upon this point, he repeats the same
thing in the following number, and he speaks thereof as of a truth which
follows from his principles. Quod autem talis dilectio possit esse etiamsi in
gradu remississimo sit, const^ ex principiis, quoniam possumus talem
aestimationem de Deo habere, ut propter increatam suam bonitatem praeserendus
sit in amore omnibus rebus creatis, and tumen non nisi remiss in talem actum
tendere. Ibid. n. 20.
It is manifest, says he, following the principles which I have established,
that this love of God may be had, though it be weak in the lowest degree,
because we may have such an opinion and esteem of God,

If this be to love God to judge that he merits to be beloved, the greatest
sinners, Infidels, and Devils themselves be capable of this love, and if to
love as he commands, it be sufficient to be moved but slenderly, and to have
for him an affection weak to the lowest degree; We must raze out or correct the
commandment which requires that we love him with all our strength and with all
our heart.

Thus these Divines, destroying the love of God in the hearts of men, cause the
love of the world to reign there; and reducing the love which is commanded us,
to the utmost point and lowest degree that it can be in, they give all liberty
to lust, and leave it all the extent of the heart and of the affections.

We need not therefore wonder if they strongly maintain, that it is lawful to
love temporal good things, as riches, honor, and pleasure. Licet gloriam and
famam ob bonum sinem optare quantum quisque meretur. Escobar tr. 2. ex. 2. cap.
8. n. 92. p. 303.
It is no evil to desire glory and reputation for a good end, as much as one
deserves, says Escobar after Tolet. But Tolet expounds himself better than
Escobar, in the place which he cites, where after he had said, Differt vana
gloria a superbia. Superbia enim appetit excellentiam, vana autem gloria
manifestationem excellentiae, praecipue apud alios.
The difference which is betwixt Pride and vain Glory is this, that Pride
transports men with a desire and love of their own excellency; and vain Glory
has a desire to manifest his own proper excellency particularly before others;
He adds in favor of vain glory, that m to desire it is not a thing bad in it
self, but indifferent, as to desire money.

They cannot better justify vanity then by avarice, by approving them at the
same time and in two words. And that which they say is most repugnant to the
judgment of Saint Paul writing to Timothy, Qui voluns divites fieri incidunt
in tentationem and in laqueum diaboli 1. ad Timoth. 6. v. 9.
That those who would be rich fall in to temptations and the snares of the
Devil. And to that of Saint John, who speaking generally of the world, and of
the love of temporal goods which are in this world, gives this advice or rather
command from God. Nolite diligere mundum, neque ea quae sunt in mando. Si quis
diligit mundum, non est charitas Patris in eo. 1. Joan. c. 2. v. 15.
Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: for if any love the
world the love of God is not in him. This language of the Holy Ghost is
sufficiently different from that of the Jesuits. Yet they cease not to pretend
that what they say, that one may love the goods of this world, is supported by
the authority of the Saints and their examples, and even of JESUS CHRIST
himself.

Saint Chrysostom, in his VII. Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, says,
that a secular person ought in all things to live like a Monk, save that he may
cohabite with his wise if he be married. Number secularis homo debet aliquid
amplius habere monacho, quam cum uxore habitare tantum? hic enim habet veniam,
in aliis autem nequaquam, sed omnia aequaliter sicut monachi debet agere. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Ep. ad Hebraeos.
Thesecular, says he, ought he to pretend that more is lawful to him then to a
Monastic excepting only cohabitation with his wife? It is true that in this
point he has a particular power, but not in other things,

Celot alleging these words of Saint Chrysostom, expounds them, or rather
corrects them in this sort: Cum uxoris co-habitationem concedit laico scribit
Antistes, educationem liberorum, reique familiaris curam, moderatum dignitatis
and secularis honoris desiderium, liberum suae voluntatis usum, quaesluosos
labores: uno verbo, e^que hierarchico, dividuas distinctasque vitas and
imaginationes iili permissas admonet. Celot p. 573.
When this Prelate writes that it is lawful for a secular to cohabite with his
wife, he would say that it is lawful for him to bring up his children, to take
care of the affairs of his Family; to desire dignities with moderation, and the
honors of the world; to follow his own free inclinations, to take pains to
hoard no wealth; and to close up all in a word, but which is an hierarchique
and a Holy one, to lead his life altogether divided and distinct, disparting
his affections and thoughts to many different objects.

Saint Chrysostom says absolutely that a secular has no license more then a
Monk, except that he may co-habite with his wife. And Celot says that he may
love and desire the things of the world, though this be not allowed a Monk. God
permits to seculars, says this Jesuit, a moderate desire of dignities and
honors of the world. That is to say, in most clear terms, that God has
allowed him ambition and vanity so it be not excessive, he has permitted him
to follow his own proper will, which cannot be done without he be delivered
from the dependence which he has on him, and dispensing with him from saying,
with all Saints, They will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: so that instead
of this he permits them to demand that their own will may be fulfilled.

This estate of free disposing of our wills was that of Adam before he sinned:
but now it is that of sinners and of the damned, and God has not a greater
judgment to inflict on a man in this world then to give him up unto himself,
Celot has happened to speak better then he intended, when he said that God had
left to the people of this world, and to the lovers of this world, in savor of
whom he speaks, the free disposal of their wills, liberum suae voluntatis usum.
But this permission is not, as he pretends, a permission of approbation or
dispensation which gives them right; but a permission of judgment and of
renunciation, which imports and implies punishment and vengeance.

He says also that God permits secular persons to labor to gather wealth,
quaestuosos labores; which is the very consequence of his discourse and
opinion. For as the servants of God do labor to serve him and to gain eternal
wealth, which he has promised to those that serve him; even so the people of
the world serve the world, and labor for advancement in the world, and to get
temporal wealth.

Finally he says Uno verbo, coque hierarchico, dividuas distinctasque vitas
and imaginationes illi permissas admonet.
that to conclude all in one word, but which is hierarchique and holy, God has
permitted them to lead a life divided and distracted, parting their minds and
thoughts toward a multitude of different objects. I am not astonished at all
that he declares so openly, that he who is no professed Religious may divide his
mind and life betwixt God and the world; that is to say, that he may love the
world as well as God. This saying is worthy him, but not holy nor hierarchique
as he assures us. Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo. Nolite diligere
mundum, neque ea quae in mundo sunt. 1. Joan. 2. v. 15.
to love him with all our heart, and forbids us to love the world and all that
is in the world,

Nevertheless he forbears not to take Saint Chrysostom for warrant of this
saying, as if he could cover an error by an imposture. He makes this great
Saint to say, or rather he says for him, against his will, and contrary to his
thoughts and express words, that it is lawful for a secular person to lead a
life wholly divided and severed, parting his affections and thoughts on many
different objects. Which agrees not with what he himself has related of this
Saint; that a Christian who lives in the world is obliged to the same things
with a professed Religious, excepting the usage of marriage: Omnia aequaliter
sicut Monachi agere debet; unless he pretends that it is lawful also for the
Monks and Religious, as well as seculars, to part their lives betwixt God and
the world.

After he had thus abused the authority of the Saints, he abuses also their
example, to support his false principle, and to establish ambition, usury, and
the love of this world and the goods of this world amongst Ecclesiastiques and
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, as well as amongst the seculars. For he is bold
to assure us that the greatest personages of antiquity, as Saint Basil, have
suffered themselves to break out into passions, like those he allows the
people of the world, and have appeared vehemently concerned in occasions so
important as are the elections and ordinations of the Pastors of the Church.
See how he discourses; Magnis etiam viris humanas rations scimus non raro
ejusmodi parentum aut amicorum ordinationes persuasisse. Et a Sancto Basilio
Ecclesiasti^ae narrat historia Zazinis, vili ac despecto oppido, erectam
Episcopatus Sedem, ut in ea constitutus Gregorius Nazianz nus amici sui parts
adversus Anthemium secundae Cappadaciae Metropolitanum tueretur. Quo in facto
si unicam Dei spectasset gloriam, neque terreni desiderii quidquam
admiscuisset, facilius sine dubio cessisset Basilio Gregorius. Celot p. 947.
We know that humane reasons have often transported the greatest persons, to
seek to advance their kindred and their friends to the orders and charges of
the Church: Basil erected an Episcopali Seat at Zazime, which was but a
despicable and poor Town, that he might establish Gregory Nazianzen there, to
the end he might make use of him as his friend, against Anthemius Metropolitan
of the second Province of Cappadocia. In which if he had considered the glory
of God alone, and had not mingled therewith some Earthly desire, St. Gregory
had more readily and with less resistance yielded himself to the will of Saint
Basil.

He is not contented unjustly to condemn Saint Basil, he makes Saint Gregory to
condemn him also; supposing falsely that he had opposed him, because he
discovered some worldly desire in his design. But by this rule we must say that
all the Saints who at the first resisted other Saints, or the Church, or God
himself, when they were called to Ecclesiastique Offices and sometimes by
miracle, have observed some humane and terrestrial concern in the conduct and
vocation of the Church, the Saints, and God himself, upon which they grounded
their refusal, and resistance.

After that Celot had imposed this infirmity and defect upon Saint Basil, he
makes application thereof to his design, which is to authorize Lust by the
example of so great a Saint, Potuit ergo S. Basilius ut Ecclesiae suae
Metropolitanae dignitatem ampliflcaret, novos Episcopos sibi subditos, quos
suffraganeos appellamus, constituere.
Saint Basil then might create and establish under him new Bishops, whom they
call Suffragans, to augment the dignity and authority of his Metropolitan
Church. Non poterit Sanctus alius simili ex causa veteri Episcopatui fratrem
and consanguineum suum, aut amicum fidelissimum praesicere? Ibid.
May not another Saint upon like occasion give unto his Brother, his Kinsman,
his faithful Friend, the conduct of an ancient Bishopric?

1. We may observe in this discourse first of all the rashness wherewith he
imposes upon Saint Basil, without any ground, to have acted humanely, and to
have been carried by interest and a carnal desire, to make St. Gregory a Bishop.

2. The consequence he draws from this supposed fact, saying that by the
example of Saint Basil others may choose their kindred and friends, for
interest and humane consideration, to succeed them in their charges of their
Churches.

3. The conclusion and end of this reasoning and this example, which is only
to make use of it to authorize and justify the love of the world and the goods
of this world, and consequently to let loose the reins to lust, and to give men
the liberty to follow it without difficulty and without remorse of conscience.

Poza proceeds farther unto a greater excess in this same subject, attributing
even to Jesus Christ himself this manner of acting altogether humane, and
altogether from flesh and blood, in two the most Holy and Divine functions
which he has exercized, which are the distribution of his grace, and vocation
to an Apostleship. For in that Saint John Baptist was sanctified from the womb
of his Mother, Joachim and Saint Anne. Because that Saint Joachim and Saint
Anne were his Grandfather and Grandmother, whereas Saint John was but his
cousin. See here his words speaking of Jesus Christ. Ut Mariae adblandtretur
absque originaria macula concipiendae, illius parentem adhuc velocius quam
Joannem a macula haereditaria liberavit. Neque video quare effusior fuerit
beneficentia Christi in Joannem, quam in utrumque avum. Joannes erat quidem
consobrinus Deiparae; at multo minor est necessitudo haec a transversa linea
derivata, quam quae recto tramite descendit patrum and avorum. Joannes fuit
praecursor Domini, haec tamen dignitas urget minus clementiam Christi, quam
illa quae sumitur ex patrio munere per Mariam. Poza Elucidar^i l. 2. tr. 8. c.
3. sect. 2. p. 547.
For to make himself more complaisant toward Mary who was to be conceived
without original sin, he delivered her Father and Mother from the original
corruption more readily then Saint John. And I see not, says he, why the
liberality of Jesus Christ should be greater toward Saint John, then toward
his Grandfather and Grandmother. Saint John being Consin unto the Virgin: but
this proximity being only in the collateral line, it is less then that of
Fathers and Mothers and other Ancestors who are in the right line: Saint John
was the forerunner of our Lord: but this dignity is not so proper to press
the bounty of Jesus Christ, as that which arises from the quality of Father and
Mother in respect of Mary.

This is a great rashness, and a reasoning altogether carnal and gross, to
prefer the natural quality of Father and Mother of the Virgin, to the Holy
and eminent quality of the forerunner of Jesus Christ, by which Saint John
surpassed all the greatest Saints, and all the Prophets. But this is yet a
greater temerity, and a thought yet more carnal, to attribute the grace of God
to natural conditions of flesh and blood, against the most clear and certain
principles of Faith. Finally this is a third excess, to maintain, Saint
Joachim and Saint Anne had so much or more grace and Holiness then Saint John
Baptist, since it is formally to contradict Jesus Christ, who has declared
that amongst all the Saints who were born before John, Ut quibus magis secundum
naturam and debitum causae tenebatur (beata Virgo) illis abundantiorem gratiam
Christus impertiret. L. 3. tr. 10 c. 5. p. 617.
It was reasonable that Jesus Christ should give grace in more abundance to
those to whom his Mother was more obliged by the Laws of nature, and by the
particular engagements of her condition.

And speaking of the vocation of the Apostles, he says that Jesus Christ Hoc
carni and sangumi dedit, ut media fere part Apostolorum ex cognatis secundum
carnem pararetur.
to satisfy the Laws of Flesh and Blood, did choose almost half his Apostles
of the number of his kindred according to the flesh. He cannot say more openly,
that Jesus Christ was acted by carnal affection, and by humane considerations,
in the distribution of his Graces, and in the vocation of his Apostles to their
office, which are two actions of his power the most principal and Divine.

The Pelagians proceeded in their heresy no further than this point, to say
that God distributed his Grace according to the rules of flesh and blood. The
Pharisees who looked narrowly into all the actions of Jesus Christ to reprove
them, never found in all his life the least occasion to reproach him that he
acted humanely, and with acceptance of persons, Non est tibi cura de aliquo,
non respicis personam hominis. Mat. 22. v. 16.
You respect no man's person, and you have no regard unto men.

The same Author in the same place pursuing his discourse, discovers more
openly yet the thought which he has of our Savior in this matter; and makes
it more unexcusable, see how he speaks. Ne autem in consanguincos nimius
videretur amor, and ambitioni fraena laxarentur, nullum ex illis Apostolorum
Principem elegit: sed ^x aliena familia vicinae autem patriae Simonem Petrum.
Lib. 2. tr. 10. c. 4. p. 614.
But for fear that Jesus Christ should let loose the reins unto ambition, and
that the love which he had to his kindred might not appear too excessive, he
chose none of them, to make him Prince and Chief of the Apostles: but he chose
Saint Peter who was of another Family, and of another Neighboring Town. So
that, according to the thoughts of this Author, vanity, and the consideration
of men did a little hold back the ambition of Jesus Christ; so that if he had
not been afraid to discover, and make too much to appear that passion which he
had to make great his kindred, as he had already advanced many to the
Apostleship, he had also it may be chosen some one of them to make him head of
the Apostles. But if Jesus Christ could prefer his kindred before other men to
make them Apostles because of their kindred, as this Jesuit pretends; why could
not he by the same reason give them the primacy over the Apostles? If it had
been too great ambition to do the second, as he supposes, it had been also
ambition, according to him, though less, to do the former. The extremest point
of impiety of the Jews in the time of the Law, and of Tyrants since the coming
of Christ, has been to set Idols in the Temples,

The Holy Fathers have observed that the Devil never found any artifice or
means more efficacious to authorize vice, and give it a free course among
Pagans, then to let them see the examples of it in the actions of the false
gods, it being easy to carry them on to imitate those whom they adored. The
Jesuits do the same thing, In a manner more criminal, attributing to the
Saints, and even unto Jesus Christ himself, humane motions, and earthly
desires, and passions of flesh and blood, and persuading men also that they are
not evil, and that they may follow them in their conduct; or rather that they
are obliged to do them, since the Gospel teaches us to follow Jesus Christ in
all things, in the conduct of our lives, and the regulation of our manners.

We must avow, that it is not possible more to promote lust, nor more to debase
the Son of God.

CHAP. II. Of Sins in habit, or habitual Sins. That there is scarcely any
habitual Sins, according to the Jesuits;
AS in doing evil we accustom our selves thereunto, and in following lusts we
cause them to pass into habits, which strengthen and increase more the
inclination we had unto evil; the order of reason requires in the design we
have, to consider the springs and the principles of sin, to make appear how the
Jesuits nourish them, that after we have treated of Lust, we speak also of evil
habits.

I propose, for example, of habitual sins swearing and blasphemy: because these
sins of themselves produce neither pleasure nor profit, its only passion which
carries men to them, and evil custom which nourishes them. So that to speak
properly and according to their peculiar nature, they are sins of passion and
habit.

Bauny in his sum, chap. 4. page 60. speaking of a person accustomed to
swear, who for this reason is always in danger to be forsworn, gives this
counsel to their Confessors. The Confessor to hinder this evil, 3. of Oaths,
chap. 6, Sanchez in his Sum, l. 3. c. 5. n. 11. and by consequence without sin

This practice is very easy and very convenient, if it be so that one word of
disowning sins, which a Confessor can draw out of the mouth of a sinner, may
serve all at once to be a remedy for all the sins which he has committed, and
for the justification of all the sins he shall be able to commit for the future
by the violence of an evil habit, so the simple declaration which a man shall
make of his being sorry to see himself subject to such a vice, suffices to
excuse him from all the sins which he shall afterward commit by that habit
which he has of this vice; as the debauches and excesses of the mouth,
immodest speeches, lies, deceits, thefts, and other such like. And so almost
all vices of this sort shall be innocent, there being few persons that are not
sorry for being engaged in them, and being unable to avoid them, because of
their long accustoming themselves unto them, or who at least do not or will not
sometimes disallow them, and testify some displeasure against them in some
good interval.

And yet if this good Father had been well read in Sanchez whom he cites, I am
confident he would have been rendered yet more easy and complacent in this
point. For Sanchez acknowledges no particular sin in Oaths that proceed of an
habit though no disavowing them be made to excuse them, as Bauny requires. See
how he speaks herein: Posterior sententia, cui tanquam probabiliori accedo, ait
juramenta prolata sine advertentia formali and per se sufficienti ad peccatum
mortal, non esse in se novum ac proprium ac speciale peccat um propter solam
jurandi consuetudinem, qualiscumque fit, and nedum sit retracta. Sanchez op.
mor. part. 1. l. 3. c. 5. n. 28. p. 21.
The last opinion which I follow as the most probable,

Escobar is not far off from this opinion, where speaking of blasphemy, he
demands, Number aliquando venialis blasphemia? Consuetudo quidem absque
advertentia lethale peccatum non facit. Escobar tract. 1. exam. 3. cap. 6. number.
28. page 73.
If blasphemy be sometimes a venial sins? And he answers absolutely, according
to his use; That such a custom whereof one thinks not at all makes sin not to
be mortal; But for the most part hinders it from being mortal, as it would he
if he did swear without being accustomed. Filliutius speaks the same more at
large and more clearly. Octavo quaero de consuetudine blasphemandi ordine ad
malitiam. Respendeo and dico 1. si desit advertentia plena, and ca toriatur
blasphemia, etiamsi adsit consuetudo blasphemandi, non commit^itur peccatum
mortale. Filliutius, (...) qq. tom. 2 tract. 25. cap. 1. number. 27. page 173.
It is demanded what sin it is to blaspheme customarily? I answer, in the first
place that when a man blaspames without having full knowledge thereof, how much
soever he be accustomed thereto, he sins not mortally. He taken the reason of
this conclusion out of a general principle which he presupposes as assured.
Ratio est, quia, ut diximus de voluntario and libero, ad ^ccatum mortale
requiritur advertentia plen^, and undecunque oriatur defectus illius, excusat a
peceato. Ibid.
The reason is, says he, because, as we have said handling free and voluntary
actions, to six mortally it behooves to have a full knowledge,

He demands in the same place. An jurandi consu^tudo constituat hominem in
statu peccati?
If the custom of swearing put a man in the estate of sin? First of all, he
reports the opinion of those who hold the affirmative, afterward he speaks his
own in these terms; Dico 2. consu^tudinem jurandi sine necessitate vel
utilitate, sed cum veritate and sufficient advertentia, non esse peccatum
grave ex se, nec constituere hominem in statu peccati mortalis. Ibid. cap. 10.
n. 313.
I say, in the second place, that the custom of swearing without necessity and
without utility, but with verity and without sufficient knowledge and
reflection, is not of it self a great sin, and puts not a man into a state of
mortal sin.

He demands again on the same subject; Sitne perjurium cum in advertentia
naturali peccatum mortale ob consuetudinem perjurandi. Ibid. n. 316.
If perjury, which one commits through natural inadvertence be a mortal sin,
because of the custom he has to forswear. And rejecting the opinion of those
who believed it to be a mortal sin, he answers: Dico 2. Probabilius est non
esse peccatum mortale speciale, quando est sine advertentia naturali. Ibid.
I say, in the second place, that it is more probable that there is no mortal
sin particularly when one forsweareth himself without perceiving it at all, and
by a natural inadvertence. And a little after he adds: Etiamsi operans sit cum
habituali affectu ad peccatum. Ibid.
Though he who does it, has his will effectually addicted to sin by an evil
habit.

So that according to the judgment of this Divine, although he swear with full
knowledge, provided that it be not against truth: although he swear against the
truth and perjure himself, if he have not a full knowledge, being transported
with passion, and by the violence of some habit, it is no mortal sin, although
he does swear without necessity,

Bauny in the 6. chap. of his Sum, p. 73. speaks of persons accustomed to
curse creatures that are without reason, as Gentlemen that curse their Dogs and
Hawks, when they have no good Game; Carters their Horses when they put them to
trouble; Mariners the season and the wind when it is contrary to them. And
after he had reported the opinion of Navarre, and some others who condemn these
maledictions of venial sin, he adds: As for me, I believe that I may say with
truth, that setting aside choler by which such people suffer themselves to be
transported in such innocent exercises, it is no fault neither venial nor
mortal to curse Dogs, Horses, Hawks, or other irrational things. So that there
is nothing but choler, according to him that causes sin in these curses, he
that shall utter them in cold blood and without transport, or who shall make
use of them only as ornaments of language, as he says, speaking of Oaths,
chap. 5. p. 66. or who suffers himself to go on therein by an evil custom,
which is become natural, and makes him do it without violence, without
transportation, and even so that he perceives it not, he commits no sin in
the most strange curses and execrations.

But to hold to these principles of the Jesuits and others, and to follow their
arguments;

Layman comprizes in a few words all that Bauny, Filliutius, Escobar, and
Sanchez, have said concerning the custom of swearing and blaspheming. He speaks
also more precisely and more clearly then they, discharging absolutely of all
sin the blasphemies and perjuries which are made by an evil habit contracted by
long use, which he assures us of as a certain truth, and which follows
necessarily from the principles of his Divinity. See here his terms: Ex dictis
colligitur eum qui ex inveterata consuetudine, velut quadam necessario impetu
rem malam agit, v^c^ materiales blasphemias p^ofert, vel perjuria effundit,
tunc non peccare, nec p^oprie blasphemare, quia nullum peccatum sine rationis
deliberatione committitur. Layman l. 1. tr. 2. c. 3. n. 6. p. 20.
It follows from that which I have said, that he who from the impression of an
inveterate custom, as it were by a sort of impetuous necessity, is transported
to do evil, as to speak words of blasphemy, or perjury, sins not at all; and to
speak properly blasphemes not at all, because a man cannot sin at all without
rational knowledge and deliberation. Following his principles there are no
habitual sins at all, since evil custom not only does neither cause nor
augment sin, but also diminishes it, and sometimes takes it wholly away, and a
person who blasphemes, forswears, and does every other criminal thing that can
be, sins not according to this maxim, an evil inveterate custom, which is
become natural, which carries him on to the commission of all these crimes by a
kind of necessary impression, almost without any sensible apprehension.

So the condition of this man, altogether corrupt and altogether plunged in
vice, shall be better then of another less vicious, and exempt from wicked
habits. This man by often sinning shall be put into an estate of not sinning
any more, and into a kind of, for him, happy necessity, which will give him a
power to commit all sorts of crimes securely, freely and without being more
criminal, or even at all guilty. But if it be true that by multitude of sins a
man becomes incapable of sinning, and that multitude of sins make a man
innocent; this would be a powerful motive to carry men on to all sorts of vices
and excess, and to set men farther from virtues, whose exercise is more
painful, and never brings that advantage of being incapable of sinning, or to
have power to commit the greatest sins without sinning.

CHAP. III. Of Sins of Ignorance. That Ignorance excuses sins committed without
knowing them;
THere is a particular connection, and as it were a natural consequence betwixt
sins of evil habits, and sins of Ignorance. For one of the effects of an evil
habit is by little and little to stifle the remorses of sin, and by consequence
to remove all thoughts of it, and to take away the knowledge of it. For this
cause, having before viewed what the Jesuits say of habitual sin, order
requires that we represent their opinion of those which are committed by
ignorance.

Ignorance may be considered, either in regard of those sins which are
committed without knowledge of them, or in regard of those which have been
heretofore committed, without thinking to do evil. And it may be inquired if
the first be true sins: and what is to be done when we come to apprehend that
the second are so.

As to the latter point, Bauny (in his Sum, chap. 40. page 650. and 651)
holds that if any one of ignorance and simplicity has confessed his faults in
gross, without determining of any one in particular, it will not be needful to
draw out of his mouth the repetition of those faults, if it cannot be
commodiously done, because the Confessor is pressed so with penitents which
give him not leisure.

After this question he proposes another: And what may we say of those who in
their youth have committed muny actions of a vicious nature, which
notwithstanding they did not believe to be such? He answers definitively, that
they are not obliged to confess one word of them, when they know them and
understand their nature and conditions, much less to reiterate their
confessions made already. Whence it follows that Saint Paul might have
dispensed with himself to do penance for the sins he had committed in his youth
before his conversion, being he committed them through ignorance, as he tells
us himself: Ignorans feci incredulitate; I did them ignorantly in unbelief; and
David ought not to say: Delicta juventutis meae and ignorantias meas ne
memineris Domine. Ps. 24. v. 7.
Lord remember not the sins of my youth and of my ignorance. A sage Physician
will not give this counsel to a patient whom he knows to have of a long time
labored of some hidden disease, which now begins to appear, and to make it
self known by the pain to him who had it without knowing of it. He will not
counsel him to keep it always hid without speaking a word, but that he discover
it speedily, and that he cause himself to be cured.

But this opinion of Bauny may perhaps be founded upon a principle which
Filliutius proposes as probable; to wit, that even criminal ignorance does not
make confession invalid. Decimo quaeritur: An quando ignorantia non est per se
intentata, licet sit culpabilis mo^taliter, efflciat confessionem invalidam,
sed informem? Respondeo and dico probabilem esse opinionem quoe id afft^mat.
Filliutius mor. qq tom. 1. tract. 7. c. 5. n. 132. p. 183.
Tales conf^ssiones reputantur validae, and satis est se accusare de
negligantia. Ibid.
It is demanded, says he, if when ignorance is not directly voluntary, though
it be criminal, it make the Confession invalid; though without due form? He
answers that the opinion which holds it is, is probable. He would say, that
provided a man had no former design to conceal any thing in his confession,
though by a notorious negligence, Such confessions, says this Author, are held
for valid, and it suffices to accuse ones self of his negligence.

His reason is; Quiatalis confessio est ex intention dicentis integra. Nihil
enim omittit scieuter. Ibid.
For if we regard the intention of him who makes this confession, it is entire
there being nothing omitted upon design. As if Sin could not be committed
without express deliberation and a formed will.

His second reason is; Quare si contraria sententia practicanda esset,
redderetur onus confessionis valde grave. Ib.
For otherwise it would be necessary to repeat a multitude of confessions.
Whence he concludes, that if we ought to follow the contrary opinion in the
practice, this would make the charge and the yoke of confession too weighty.
Without doubt because that he could not confess so many people, and that he
should have therein too much pains, and also would give too much trouble to
those who are to confess if he obliged them to examine themselves seriously, or
confess themselves over again; when being not well examined they had forgot
some notorious crimes. So the commodity of confessors and of penitents are the
rules of conscience, according to the maxims of this new Divinity.

So much for sins which are forgotten in confession, Sanchez proposes a case
which he resolves in the same place in this manner. Si quis sagittam projiciat,
qua hostem necet, putans invincibiliter esse feram, ab ejus homicidii culpa est
omnino liber, etiamsi it a dispositus esset, ut agnoscent esse hostem liberius
perimeret. Sanch. op. mor. l. 1. c. 16. n. 13. p. 70.
If any one shoot an arrow by which he kills his enemy, supposing invincibly
that it was a beast, he is entirely innocent of this manslaughter, though he
was in such a disposition, that if he had known that it had been his enemy, he
would have killed him with more joy.

He proposes also another in the same place, and resolves it likewise in the
same manner: Cognoscens foeminam quam novit non esse suam, vel id culpabiliter
ignorans, at invincibiter ignorans esse consanguineam, erit sornicationis reus,
non tamen incestus. Ibid. n. 10.
A man enjoys a woman whom he knows to be not his own; or he knows it not, it
is his fault, but if he be invincibly ignorant that she is his Kinswoman; he is
guilty of fornication, but not of Incest. And if these two men shall afterward
come to know what they did in ignorance, the one may rejoice in his
manslaughter, and the other in his incest, without being guilty either of
manslaughter or Incest.

Filliutius will serve them also for security, where proposing the same
question, he demands, Quaero 5. an delectatio de mortali, ratio^e somni,
ebrietat is, amentiae, vel ignorantiae excusetur? Filliut. mor. qq. tom. 2. tr.
21. c. 8. n. 290. p. 26.
If the pleasure which is taken in an action of mortal sin, which is done in
sleep, drunkenness, or madness, or through ignorance, be void of sin? And two
lines after he gives an example of this case, Ut si quis delectetur de
fornicatione habita in somnis, vel ebrietate, vel amentia, vel ignorantia, cum
ea quam putabat esse suam uxorem. Ibid.
As if any one take pleasure in sin which he had committed in his sleep being
drunk or mad, Of which he reports many opinions, whereof the first is that
which holds it to be unlawful. But he prefers that which assures us that it is
lawful, saying; The second opinion seems to me more probable and absolutely
safe. And because he speaks of some actions which may be done without sin, he
adjoyns for farther explication of his thoughts: Dico 3 secundam sententiam, si
intelligatur de operationibus de se malis moraliter, sed factis sine peccato
modo explicato, adhuc videri probabilem, etiam in praxi. Ibid. n. 293. p. 31.
That if one would extend this second opinion to pleasure which is taken in an
action of it self wicked; but, which being done without sin, in such manner as
I have already now explicated it, it seems to me also probable, even in the
practique. These people give a mavelous force unto ignorance, because they
hold, that it does not shelter only the most enormous crimes; but it gives
also the liberty and power to rejoice, and take pleasure in them, as good
actions, when one comes to know them or call them to remembrance.

Sanchez proposes also this case, in the place I have already cited; An
invincibiliter ignorans actum mternum esse peccatum, cognosceus tamen actum
externum esse peccatum, excusetur a culpa, actum solum externum admittens?
Sanch. sup. n. 16. p. 71.
If he who knew that it were a sin to do an action outwardly, but were
invincibly ignorant that it were a sin to commit it inwardly and in his mind,
were excused from sin, committing it only inwardly? And that he might make
himself to be the better understood in a matter so important, he illustrates
this question by example: Ut si rusticus a viro existimate pio audivisset
somicationem and furtum externa esse peccata, at licere formcandi and furandi
desiderium. Ibid.
As if a pesant should hear it spoken by a man, reputed to be a pious and
knowing man, that it was a sin to steal and commit fornication outwardly; but
it was lawful to desire the one and the other. Qui busdam neotericis doctis
videtur hanc ignorantiam non excusare.
that some learned Doctors amongst the moderns believe not that this ignorance
does excuse at all. He reports their reasons, very considerable ones, to the
number of five. But he concludes for ignorance in these terms: At quamvis hoc
probabile sit, probabilius tamen credo illum actum internum excusari omnino a
malitia, ratione illius ignorantiae invincibilis. Ibid.
Though this be probable, I believe nevertheless that it is yet more probable
that this interior action is exempt from all sin, because of invincible
ignorance.

And a little after, following the principles which he has established to
maintain ignorance, and the sins which are committed by ignorance, he says,
Secundo deducitur, scientem aliquam actionem esse mortalem, at invircibiliter
ignorantem peccare imperando illam, excusari a culpa imperando. Ibid. n. 19.
It follows that he who knows that it is mortal sin to commit an action; but
knows not that it is a sin to command an other to commit it, through invincible
ignorance, is excused from sin in doing it.

Filliutius, as we have seen in the former Chapter, says that a man who has
an evil custom of sinning, for example of swearing and forswearing himself, and
who is continually in an habitual affection and disposition to commit this sin
upon occasions presented to him, cum habituali affectu ad peccatum, does not
sin nevertheless in any manner when he forswears himself without thinking of
it, not troubling himself if this want of knowledge or advertency comes from an
evil custom, which this person has contracted, or some violent passion which
transporteth him. Nec refert, says he, quod inadvertentia oriatur ex prava
consuetudine aut passione. And makes use of all these considerations and
circumstances, however of themselves evil, rather to excuse their sin then to
condemn it, Quiatum passio quam consuetudo tollit actulem usum rationis. Ibid.
Because passion as well as evil custom takes away the use of reason.

After he had resolved on this manner this case so well circumstanced, Au sit
peccatum quando videt consummatam esse consuetudinem, and advertit gravitatem
and periculum ejus? Filliutius mor. qq. tom. 2. tr. 35. c. 16. n. 318. p. 203.
if it be a sin when he sees this evil custom as it were consummate, and
perceives how dangerous and wicked it is, and notwithstanding all this he gives
way toit, and forswears himself.

This case proposed in this manner is very clear, and the evil too evident to
be excused openly. Which is the reason that he leaves the question for the
present indecided, and propounds it only as problematique, and containing some
difficulty and doubt on either side. Dubium esse potest, says he. But in the
issue returning to his principles and rights of ignorance, which he undertakes
to defend, he adds: Sed etiamsi tunc dicatur esse peccatum, non tamen postea
quando quis non advertat de novo peccat. But although it may then be called a
sin, yet does he not sin afterward afresh, when he does not any longer observe
it. That is to say, that though this man possibly may sin, for he does not
affirm he does, when he is forsworn, and actually remembers and sees the evil
estate and evident danger whereunto this evil custom does bring him: yet when
he has this thought no more, for that this evil custom and passion has taken
it away, he sins no more, whatsoever crime he may commit in this darkness;
though he have reduced himself to this miserable estate voluntarily, and that
the blindness, which him from seeing what he has done, Nec refert quod
inadvertentia oriatur ex prava consuetudine, aut ex passione.

So that it is not for nothing that this Jesuit would not speak clearly at
first, An sit peccatum quando quis videt consummatam esse con suctudinem, and
advertit gravitatem and periculum ejus?
whether a man sins when he sees that the evil custom which he has is
consummate, and he perceives the evil estate and danger whereunto it exposes
him, and it is with some reason that he leaves the thing doubtful: dubium esse
potest. Because according to his principles and those of his Fraternity, to
sin, at least mortally, it is not enough to see the evil that is done, and the
danger incurred in doing it: but he ought to have a full and perfect knowledge;
^d besides this, both time and means to deliberate on it. This is, according as
Sanchez speaks in this matter; Advertentia actualis necessaria est ut
ignorantia censeatur vincibilis, nec excuset. Sanch. op. mor. l. 1. c. 16. n.
21. p. 72. Nec sufficit ad mortale quaevis consideratio and deliberatio
malitiae objecti, sed debet esse plena, Ibid. n. 22.
It behooves, says he, to consider actually that which is done actually, for
to judge whether the ignorance be faulty and exempt not a man from sin. And a
little after: This is not enough to commit mortal sin to consider and to will
with deliberation the evil that is done, but this consideration and
deliberation must be full.

It is not sufficient, with him, to have a cognizance of the evil; but he wills
also that time be had to deliberate whether to do it or not; and he is not
contended even with this, but he pretends that this knowledge and this
deliberation ought to be full, in such sort that there be no darkness nor
clouds. For if you ask him what he intends by full deliberation and knowledge,
he makes use, for explication, of an example of a man who is perfectly awaked
in his right understanding, and in this estate thinks seriously of a thing.
Illa est quando hanc plene advertit instar perfect a somno excitatorum. Quippe
potest in vigilia adeo tenuis consideratio accidere, ut non sufficiat ad
mortale. Sanch. l. 1. op. mor. c. 1. n. 10. p. 2.
This full knowledge, says he, is that by which we see clearly and totally the
object with consideration and reflection; as when one is perfectly awaked. For
it may come to pass that even when one is awake, he may think so little of that
which he does as may not be sufficient to sin mortally.

His opinion therefore is, that the knowledge which is necessary to most
obdurate sinners, to make them consider and see the evil which they do, must be
as great and as perfect as it can be in the most virtuous persons, who have not
their passions nor their evil habits, and that without this knowledge they
cannot sin mortally; that is to say, he will have a man that is in darkness and
at midnight to see as clear as he who is at high noon, and a blind man to
perceive and judge colors as well as he who has his eyes sound and entire.
For passions and vices, and evil habits are properly the darkness and blindness
of the soul: and to pretend farther, as he does that for want of a full and
perfect knowledge, a man given up to vice and accustomed to sin, sins not
mortally, is as if he should say, that he could not sin mortally in that
estate, and the more this man advances in darkness and blindness continuing
this wicked life, by so much he shall be farther off from sin and from power to
sin, until that by the consummation of his evil custom, being also the
consummation of his blindness, he be made entirely and absolutely without power
to sin.

Layman quotes Sanchez and Vasquez for this opinion,

Amicus is of the same opinion, and says, that Advertentia ad peccatum mortale
requisita debet esse plena and perfecta per firmum judicium de malitia actus,
vel periculo illius. Amicus tom. 3. disp. 17. sect. 8. n. 172. p. 205.
the knowledge and reflection which is necessary to mortal sin ought to be full
and perfect, with the judgment assured of the evil or of the danger of doing
it. Sanchez demands only time and means for deliberation with the knowledge of
the evil; but Amicus will have one go on to do evil with a firm and assured
judgment.

Escobar follows his brethren, where he demands, Quidnam ad mortale peccatum
requiritur? Plena and expressa adverventia malitiae, aut saltem dubium. Escobar
tr. 2. Exam. 1. c. 3. n. 8. p. 275.
what is necessary to make a sin mortal? he answers, that there is requisite, a
full and actual knowledge, or at least an express and formal suspicion of the
evil which is done.

It is not sufficient, according to these new Doctors, to sin mortally that the
knowledge which they pretend to he necessary thereunto be full and perfect; but
they will also have it to be particular and determinate. So that if in one
action there occur many wickednesses, many sins, or many circumstances, which
augment or multiply sin, they must be known all distinctly. Ad unius generis
malitiam advertere non est satis, ad malitiam quoqualterius generis
contrah^ndam, sed oportet ad hanc quoque advertere aut debuisse advertere.
Sanchez supra number. 8. page ^.
When there occur, says Sanchez, in one and the same action two sorts of
different wickednesses; it is not sufficient, to perceive one to make himself
guilty of both; But we must have or be obliged to have an actual knowledge of
the other. Without this he holds that we are not guilty, but according to the
proportion of the knowledge we have, as he says expressly afterward: Si pars
malitzae cognita sit, aut vincibili. et ignorata, ca culpae imputatur. Ibid.
cap. 16. number. 10. page 70.
If we know one part of the malice, or if we be ignorant of it by our own
fault, it shall be imputed for a sin. Whence he draws this conclusion which we
have already reported; When a man sins with a woman whom he knows to be not his
wife, but is invincibly ignorant that she is his kinswoman, he is guilty of
fornication, but not of incest.

He stays not there. For it is not sufficient for them that a man has
heretofore known an action to be wicked, they hold that if he has forgotten
it, or if he yet know it, but does not actually think of it, and does not make
reflection upon it, so as to perceive, at the very time when it is committed,
that it is evil, he offends not God at all, at least not grieviously.

Cajetan retrenches a little the licentiousness of this opinion, declaring that
he who by inadvertence or forgetfulness commits a sin, which he knows to be a
mortal sin, ceases not to be guilty thereof, if he be not so disposed that if
he had thought of it, he would not have committed it. But Sanchez, on the
contrary, assures us that this condition is not at all necessary. And after he
has faithfully reported the Doctrine of Cajetan in these terms; Quinto
deducitur quid sentiendum sit de doctrina Cajetan^, jui 1. 2. q. 6. art. 8. ad
fiaem, and in Summa verb. Inconsideratio, verse. Adverte tamen, quem ^oi
sequitur Anvilla n. 1. ubi ait ineuntem contractum quem usurarium esse novit,
v. l opus aliquod prohibitum, prohibitienis conscium, sacientem: ac tuac cum
reco it actu, excusari a mortali: quod ita affectus erat, ut si recoluisset,
vitaret, utpote qui firmum cavendi mortalis propositum haberet.
He that has made a contract, which he knows to be usurarious, or who does
some other unlawful act, knowing well that it is forbidden, but not remembering
it to be such when he does it, is exempt from mortal sin, provided he were then
so disposed, In the sequel of his discourse he enters into a farther
explication of the opinion of this Doctor. ubi id propositum exigere videtur
quo obliver illa conseatur invincibi'is, and excuset. Sanchez oper. mor. l. 1.
c. 16. n 28. p. 73.
It seems to him, says he, that this resolution is required as absolutely
necessary, to render the forgetfulness innocent and to excuse the person. But
he meddles not with it but only to refute it, adding At jure ^pp^mo id
propositum nihil refer been docer Zumel. 1. 2. q. 76 art. 3 d. 2. diff. 6.
quippe solum attendendum est an aliqua cogitatio operanti in m^ntem v^ne^it co
tempore q^o praeceptum implere debeat. Si e^m ea non veniente in mentem immemor
juris vel facti praeceptum transg^ediatur, est obli^io invinc^bilu, and
excusat, Ibid.
that others hold with great reason that this resolution is to no purpose, and
we are only to consider if when we were obliged to observe the commandment we
had any thought thereof. For if we had none at all, and that without
considering either the right or fact we violate the commandment by neglect,
this forgetfulness is innocent and free from all sin.

Corduba approves this opinion no more then Cajetan, and would that at least he
who acts in so evil a disposition come not voluntarily thereinto, and that the
forgetfulness or inadvertency, which hinders him from thinking of the evil
which he does, comes not by his own fault. But Sanchez finds this also to be
too much, and he can no more approve of this than that of Cajetan. Nec
admittenda est sententia Cordubae in q. l. 2. q. 17. dub. 1. dicentis
oblivionem reduci ad ignorantiam invincibil^m quando oblivio non contingit ex
culpa. Hoc enim ita universaliter dictum non est: sed quando quis initio causam
oblivioni dedit cum periculi adve^tentia. Si enim periculum non ad errit,
oblivio est inculpabilis. Ibid. number. 30.
There is no more need, says he, to receive the opinion of Corduba, who faith
that when forgetfulness comes not by our fault, it ought to be esteemed as one
sort of innocent Ignorance; but not when it proceeds of our fault. we cast our
selves. For if we thought not of this danger, the ignorance can not be faulty.

He repeats a little after the same thing, and he makes a decree as it were
without appeal, and a principle unremovable. Quare stat ut causa ignorantiae
fuerit aliquod peccatum, and tamen in se ignorantia sit invincibilis. Ibid. n.
31.
It remains certain, says he, that although ignorance comes of some fin as of
its cause, it ceases not therefore to be excusable. To which he adds also, for
better explication. Tunc quamvis causa culpabilis sit, ignorantia tamen erit
inculpabilis. Ibid.
And in this case, though the cause of ignorance be culpable, yet the ignorance
is not.

And for maintenance of this principle, he undertakes to refute Saint Thomas,
under pretense of explicating that which he says; Euentum posse esse
^oluatarium in sua causa. Ibid.
An event may be voluntary in its cause. He expounds and at once overturns this
rule of right. Ubi hab tur, igno antiam facti non juris excusare. Ibid.
That ignorance of fact excuses, but not of right. As also the Doctors, who
teach, as he confesses, Ignorantiam legum ad statum and officium alicujus
pertinentem esse vincibilem, nec excusare, Ibid.
That ignorance of that which every one is obliged to do according to the rules
and Laws of his condition and calling is bleamable, and excuses not at all.
And generally he rejects it in the point of Law and Right; and he takes to him
as on his side the Doctors which expound them in their true sense, but not in
his. Ex his deducitur 1. esse sano modo intelligenda jura and Doctores dum
aequiparant scire and debere scire; passim dicunt esse indirecte voluntariam
ignorantiam cum qua vel scivit advertitve, aut debebat scire and advertere.
Ibid. n. 24
It follows, says he, that we must understand with discretion what the Doctors
and Laws say;

He witnesses sufficiently that Saint Thomas, with the more part of the School
Divines are not for him, in saying that Saint Thomas is received by all; Thomas
ad omnibus receptus, n. 25. and that the Laws themselves and those that expound
them are contrary unto him. And he thinks himself discharged herein by saying
that they are to be wisely understood: Esse sano modo intelligenda jura and
Doctores.

But if we demand of him also why he takes the liberty to reject so great and
so strong authorities? He can only repeat that which he has said already so
many times: Haec intelligenda sunt quando adfuit al qua actualis, plena and
sufficiens ad mortale advertentia, ad malitiam objecti, ejusve periculum, seu
dubium aut scrupulus saltem. Ibid. number 24.
That all this must be understood where we have an actual knowledge, full and
sufficient to sin mortally, of the evil we are about to do, or of the danger to
which it exposes us, or that at least we have had thereof some scruple or some
doubt.

Tambourin has also expounded all this Doctrine sufficiently at large,
according to the principle of Sanchez, establishing two general rules in favor
of ignorance. The first is, Si quis ex ignorantia inculpabili putet aliquid
esse veniale, quod aliunde mortale est, venialiter tantum peccabit. Ita S.
Thomas p. 2. q. 76. and 3. Idem erit si ignorantia sit culpabilis, tantun
veniali^er. Tambur. l. 1. Decal. c. 1. sect. 3. n. 35.
if any one think by ignorance which is not criminal that a mortal sin is but
venial, he sins only venially, this is Saint Thomas's opinion.

I say nothing of the rule which he proposes in favor of ignorance, to observe
the abuse he does to the authority of Saint Thomas, I see no way to excuse his
visible visible falfity unless by his ignorance, being he cites this Angel of
the School in making him say that which he says not, and whereunto he speaks
the contrary in his quodlibetary questions, where he says clearly, In his vero
quae pertinent ad fid^m and bones mores, nullum excusabi^e si sequatur erroneam
opinionem alitujus Magistri. In talibus enim ignorantia non excusat. S. Thomas
quod lib. 3. art. 10.
that in what concerns, faith and good manners, no man is excused if he follow
an erronous opinion of some Doctor. Because in these things ignorance excuses
not.

The other rule which he proposes is no less favorable to ignorance and sin
then the former. For he says that if Silegem scias, sed non poenam, adhuc
probabile est a te non incurri poenam. Ita Suarez, Sanchez, Coninck, apud
Castrop. Tambor. Decal. Tambur. Decal. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 10 n. 12
you have knowledge of the Law, and that you are ignorant of the penalty which
it ordains against those who violate it, it is probable you do not incurr the
penalty. He underprops his principle by the authority of three the most famous
Divines of their Society, Suarez, Sanchez, and Coninck: Ratio est quia ad has
incurrendas requi^tur delinquentem consenlisse saltem tacit in poenam quam
jubtre debeat ai obed^at. Ibid.
For to incur these penalties, the sinner must consent at least tacitly to
that which he is to undergo if he obey not.

But because he saw it would follow from hence that those who know not that
Hell is the punishment of mortal sins shall be in no danger of going thither;
and that in this case it should be ill done to go to Preach the Gospel to those
people who have never heard of Hell; and who know not that it is established by
Divine Justice to punish sins eternally, Se^ cur dictum est (extraordinaria?)
Ut intelligas cur is qui forte ignorant poenam inferni ^nnexam peccato mortali,
adhuc tamen illam incurrit, dommodo cognoscat peccatum suum mortale esse? Ibid.
n. 13.
that this is to be understood of extraordinary pains: to the end, says he,
that you may conceive wherefore he that is ignorant perhaps of the pains of
Hell, which are the consequences of mortal sin, incur them nevertheless,
provided that he know that he commits mortal sin. Which serves only to elude
the difficulty, and to confirm it rather then solve it. For those who know not
that there is a Hell, know not commonly that there are any mortal sins, since
mortal sin is not called mortal but because it kills the soul, depriving it of
spiritual life, which is the grace of God; which is altogether unknown to
infidels who know nothing of Hell.

How many persons are there also even amongst Christians themselves who are so
gross and ill instructed, that they know neither what mortal sin nor what Hell
is; or if they have heard of it they know not, nor can tell, when they commit
such mortal sins; and think sometimes that they do no ill in the most criminal
actions. But according to the rule of these Jesuits, there is no Hell for all
these persons, of which notwithstanding the number is but too great,
particularly in the Country. And by consequence we cannot complain of their
ignorance, nor of their Friends and Pastors for the little care they have taken
to instruct them: but rather we ought to envy these persons, and bless their
ignorance; and advertise their Pastors to be careful not to draw them out of
it, for fear of opening unto them the gate of Hell,

Bauny acknowledges that he who commits a crime by forgetfulness or
inadvertency, having fallen into this forgetfulness and this inadvertency by
his fault, though he be not guilty of the action and sin which he does, yet he
linneth by negligence. He that knows not, says he, though by his own fault,
yet that which he salth or does not only was unlawful for him, but also
forbidden even under grievous penalties, sins not against the commandment, if
he have no knowledge thereof. His sin is not contrary to the precept; but
against the diligence which he ought to use to know it. But in this he speaks
not according to the principles of his principal brethren, and it is apparent
that he would not have advanced thus far if he had well thought thereof, or if
he had read Layman attentively, who handling the same question, makes himself
this objection. Dicet aliquis: Qui non cogitat de malitia operis prohibiti,
debet tamen cogitare. Igitur cogitatio ejus temeritati and imprudentiae
imputatur.
We may say that he who thinks not that that is evil which he is about to do,
and forbidden, is notwithstanding obliged to think thereof; and by consequence
his action ought to be imputed to rashness and imprudence. This is the same
thing that Bauny now said; and he answers in the sequel, that Respondeo quod
omissio sive negligentia considerationis no^ imputatur ad p^ccatum, nisi
voluntaria sit. Non autem voluntaria est nis^ veniat in mentem cogitare de
obligatione examinandi. Layman l. 1. tr. 2. c. 4. n. 6. p. 20.
forgetfulness or negligence, which is the cause that we think not of the evil
we are about to do, is not imputed for sin, if it be not voluntary, and it is
not voluntary if we bethink us not to consider that we are obliged to examine
what we are about to do.

He avoucheth that he who commits a crime by a faulty heedlesness, he says
that it was needful for this that he should have had an other thought to
represent unto him that he was obliged to consider of his action and to examine
it, and because he had it not, neither his inadvertence nor his crime ought to
be imputed to him.

But if it be replied upon him that being he was obliged to examine his own
action, he was also obliged to know that he was obliged, and consequently to
apply himself to consider that he was obliged to think of what he does, Sanchez
will answer for his comrade, that we are not obliged hereunto, for that the
first thought that makes us consider that which we do, or that which we are
about to do, is not in our power. Ut quispiam circa operis bonitatem aut
malitiam consultare possit, opus est ut occurrat aliqua cogitatio naturalis in
nostra protestate non existens, quae talis consultationis possit esse
principium; nec erit in nostra potestate primam hanc cogitationem excitare.
Sanch. op. mor. l 1. c. 16. n. 21. p. 72.
To judge, says he, of good or evil of an action, it is required that we first
have a natural thought which is not in our power, which may be the beginning of
this deliberation, and it depends not on us to have this first thought excited.

This is the second time that he tells us that this first thought is not in our
power, that we might take better notice of this principle, and the application
he makes of it, which is this: At quamdiu non occurrit intellectui cogitatia
aliqua circa objecti malitiam, and circa illius pericutum: aut dubitatio
aliqua, aut scrupulus, quamvis de illius commoditate cons^ltus intellectus non
est principium sufficiens, deliberandi de malitia ipsa morali. Ibid.
When no thought comes in our minds which might represent unto us the evil, or
the danger which is in that which we are about to do, 2. n. 7. and 8. Whence he
draws this conclusion* Ergo non potest esse culpa quamdin haec cogitatio circa
malitiam non se offert. Ibid.
And therefore there can be no sin where the thought of the malice of the
action cannot be presented unto us.

But if those who would come out of this ignorance which holds them in sin,
inquire of this Jesuit what they ought to do to come to this thought, which
they cannot have of themselves, he will send them to Aristotle, who believing
with him that it is natural, has attributed it to fortune. Aristotle, says
he, attributes it to fortune, because it is presonted naturally to the mind,
without man's contributing any thing thereto by his industry and care.

He might pass only for a Pelagian if he would content himself to say that
this first thought, which is the principle of all the good we do, and of all
the evil we avoid, were natural, and that a man might acquire it by the powers
of nature; but he passes even beyond Pelagianisme it self, when he says that
we cannot therein contribute so much as our cares and industry, and that it
must come to us without any endeavor, and without any preparation, not by God,
but by fortune; falling also into the excess which the Pelagians falsely
imputed to the Catholics, accusing them to attribute grace and good works to
fortune and destiny; because the Catholics maintained that we could not have
it by our own proper forces. So that this Jesuit confirms the argument of
Pelagians, condemned by the Catholics,

It would have becomed the piety of a Religious man, and the light of a
Christian, to have given at least to God the first thought which is the
principle and foundation of all good works, and not to nature, and much less to
fortune, whose very name ought to be banished out of the Church, according to
the judgment of the Fathers, and left unto Aristotle and the Pagans, who knew
neither the providence of God, nor the perfection of his essence, nor the
liberty of man's will, and much less that of the grace of Jesus Christ.

It seems that he suffered himself to be transported unto this extravagance,
that he might wholly excuse the sins of ignorance. For if the first thought by
which we consider that which we do neither come from us nor God, but from
fortune; it follows clearly that we are not culpable neither for not having it,
nor for not demanding it of God, being it depends not upon the order of his
grace, but on fortune, to which there is no appearance that we ought to
address our prayers or vows for obtaining thereof. So that we can never sin by
ignorance, neither through forgetfulness, nor carelessness.

Which is confirmed by Filliutius, who gives many rules to show what a man is
obliged to do to remove ignorance, and to learn that which he ought to know in
his profession: Ad cognoscendum ad quid homo teneatur ut sciat necessacia, hae
regulae servandae suat. Filliutius, qq. mor. tom. 2. tr. 21. c. 10. n. 372. p.
44.
That we may know what every one is obliged to do to learn that which is
necessary for him to know in his condition, therein these rules are to be kept,
of which this is the third: Raro aut nunquam tenetur homo se praepapare ad
gratiam ut tellat ignorantiam. Ibid.
It happens rarely or never that a man is obliged to prepare himself for grace
to come out of ignorance and to render it excusable. That is, to speak
properly, that he who knows not what he is obliged to know, is rarely obliged
to prepare himself for that grace which is necessary for him that he may learn
it, nor to demand this grace of God, because prayer is the principal
disposition unto grace, and the first and the most general means to obtain it.
Which accords very well with what Sanchez now said, having learned out of
Aristotle that, the first thought which is necessary to know that which we are
obliged to do and to know, comes from fortune, and presents it self naturally
to us without our troubling our selves, and so that we cannot by our care and
industry contribute any thing at all to the attainment of it: so that in effect
it were to torment our selves in vain to labor in a thing which depends not on
us, and to mock God to demand it of him, being it comes by fortune, and not by
his grace and the order of his will.

It may seem that this is the utmost excess whereunto a man can be
transported, to excuse ignorance. For if it be not imputed unto us, even not
then when it comes of sin, and which is by consequent criminal in it self,
though we endeavor not to get out of it, nor take care only so much as to
pray unto God to deliver us out of it, it can never be sin, whence it will
follow according to this new Doctrine, that there is no more any thing to be
said properly of sins of ignorance, and that Saint Paul and David were
unlearned, and ill informed in the wisdom of the Jesuits, in praying to God to
pardon the sins of their youth, and their ignorances.

CHAP. IV. Of good and bad intention.
THe Jesuits speak very many things touching good and bad intention, to favor
men's vices and looseness; nevertheless they may be reduced to two principal
heads; whereof the one is, that to do evil there must be an evil intention; and
the other, that to do good it is not necessary to have a good intention. They
conclude from hence that the commandments of God and the Church may be
satisfied by an outward execution of what they ordain, though it be done
without intention to fulfill them, or with an evil intent and contrary to the
commandment, and even with an express intention not to fulfill it: and on the
contrary, to render a man guilty of having violated the commands of God, and
the Church, it is not sufficient to violate them, but it is required to have
thereof a formed design and express intention. For the greater facility, I
will handle these two points severally, and divide this Chapter into two
Articles.

ARTICLE I. That the Jesuits teach that we may fulfill the Commandments of God
and the Church, not only without intention,
THis is the express opinion of Bauny, in his Sum, chap. 20. page 335. where
after he had said with other Casuists, that the Ecclesiastiques satisfy the
precept of receiving their office, when they sing or read their hours, though
they do it without inward attention or devotion, provided they observe outward
modesty, whereof he gives this reason: For the outward action, says he,
wherewith we attend on God is of the same nature, retinue, and appertains to
the virtue of Religion. Then as he who without intention to Idolize it bends
his knee before an Idol, is nevertheless guilty of Idolatry: So we are to
believe that they pray who recite the office, although without intention,
though not without the outward decence and composement that such an action
requires.

So the outward appearance will be more necessary to prayer, and the actions of
Religion then the inward motion of piety, since they can subsist without this
inward motion, but not without the outward show. I wonder that he remembered
not this common maxim of the Schools. Bonum ex integra causa, malum antem ex
minimo defectu.
To do good all the good conditions must concur, but the least defect is
sufficient unto evil. This perhaps might have kept him from concluding so ill,
and he might have considered that there is more required to do good then to do
ill, and to an action of Religion then to an action of Idolatry. And if to do
good all conditions must concur thereto,

But Escobar says yet more then Bauny. For he maintains that it is not only
not necessary for satisfying the precept of reciting the office, to intend it:
but also that it is necessarily satisfied in the recital; though the intention
be express and formal not to satisfy it. For having demanded Requiriturne
satisfaciendi intentio? Alii prohabiliter jam defendunt intentionem ejus
necessariam non esse: immo satisfierietiam ab co qui cum expressa intention
non saciendi pro tune recitaret. e^osbar tr. 5. exam. 6. c. 13. n. 136. p. 677.
if an intention to fulfill it be required? He answers, that many Divines do now
hold that it is probable that this intention is not necessary; and though in
reading the office there even be a formal intent not to satisfy our duty, yet
we do not fail to fulfill it.

He says the same thing concerning an oath in his first Treatise, where after
he has said absolutely that to be discharged of a promise made with an Oath,
it is not necessary to intend it; he adds in the sequel, that Addit Lessius l.
1. c. 37. d. 10. n. 59. juram ntum impleri etiam i res jurata praestetur cum
animo expresso non satisfaciendi. Ibid. tract. 1. ex. r. c. 7. n. 41. p. 77.
Lessius says moreover that one is discharged of his Oath, though in doing
what he swore to do, he have an express intent not to fulfill it. That is to
say, that we may satisfy promises made unto God, with an oath in performing
outwardly that which we have promised, though we have a formal will not to
fulfill; but to elude it.

Lessius alleges for reason of this opinion, The reason is, says he, because
that which is commanded us is not, for example, to hear mass with intent to
accomplish the precept, but simply to attend the Mass with attention and
devotion; which is performed though it be done with design not to accomplish
the precept.

So that according to this mavelous Divinity we may hear the Mass with
attention and devotion, though we have a formal design not to obey the Church,
and to despise its commandment. They must have a strange Idea of devotion, who
believe that it can subsist with so great impiety.

Layman talks more openly, and more boldly then the rest. He says not only,
with them, that it is not needful that we have a will to obey the Church, in
observing her commandments, and that we may do them though we contemn her in
our heart: but also that we may accomplish her commands by doing ontwardly that
which she command, though we have an intention directly opposite to hers. See
his words: Si aliquis jejunet vanae gloriae causa, aut (...) and (...) is
Ecclesiasticum jejunii praeceptum non violat. Layman r. 1. tract. 4. c 4 n. 6.
p. 49.
If a man fast for vain glory, or to content his sensuality in eating and
drinking Wine, and so act contrary to the intent of the Church; yet he does not
violate her commands. And a little after: He that does in substance, that is to
say, outwardly that which is commanded satisfies truly the commandment,

I know not what Father or Master would be content with such obedience, and
that would not take it rather for true disobedience accompanied with contempt;
and thereby much greater and more offensive then if by simple negligence that
had been omitted which was commanded.

The same Author repeats the example of him who fasted for gluttony, and he
adds that of a child who hears Mass by force and constraint, of which he
speaks thus: Sed quid dicendum est st metus verberum sit puero causa
principalis audiendi Missam die festo; ita ut expressam intentionem habeat non
audiendi si paedagogus abesset ^ Et similis ratio est si oblectatiopiscium sit
causa principa is jejunandi: ita ut si tam boni pisces non haberentur nellet
quis jejunium servare. Respondeo tamen talem implere totum opus quod ab
Ecclesia praecipitur. Ibid. n. 12. p. 51.
But what shall we say of a child that goes to hear Mass, on a Festival day,
principally for fear of whipping, and who has an express will not to hear it,
if his Master were not with him? the same question respects him also who is
induced to fast, principally to satisfy the desire he has to eat fish: so
that if he could not have got good fish, he was resolved not to fast: I answer,
that this notwithstanding they both fulfill the Churches command.

Filliutius says in a manner the same thing, concerning the precept of hearing
Mass on Festival days and Lords days. Prava intentio adjuncta voluntati
audiendi Missiam, ut aspiciendi fo^min as libidinose, dummodo sit sufficiens
aetenlio, non est contraria pracept^; quare satisfacit. Filliutius, mor. qq.
tom. 2. tract.. c. 7. m 212. p. 128.
A bad intent, says he, joined to that of hearing Mass;

Q^i (...) secundum subflantiam praestat, etiamsi non babeat valuntatem
implendi praeceptum; immo contrariam habeat, revera satisfacit. Ibid. n. 7.
Escobar is of the same judgment. For speaking of a man who goes to Church
with an intention to hear Mass, he says, Non obest alia prava intentio, ut
aspiciendi libidinose foeminas, priori conjuncta. Escobar, tr. 1. exam. 11. c.
3. n. 31. p. 180.
that another wicked intent, as to behold women immodestly, joined to the
first, hinders not.

But Layman after all this which we have above reported from him, concludes
thus: Quare cum opus quod praecipitur impleas, etsi per ignorantiam vel errorem
te non implere existimes, vel etiam nolis implere, non potes tamen efficere
quoniam impleas: siquidem protestatio facta contraria vim nullam habet. Layman,
ubr supra.
wherefore when you do that which is commanded, though by mistake or ignorance
you think you have not satisfied the precept, or that you had even a will not
to fulfill it at all, it need not hinder you from taking satisfaction in the
effect: because the protestation you made, that you did it not willingly, had
no force.

He pretends then that a command of God or the Church is accomplished, not
only without any intention to do it; nor only with intention not to do it;
nor only with an intention directly opposite to that of God and the Church;
but also with an express protestation of being unwilling to satisfy it, and
with a persuasion that it is not satisfied: that is to say, that we may serve
God in despite of him and our selves; and be discharged of the obedience we
owe God and the Church in doing that which he would not have us to do, and
which we are not willing to do our selves, and which we believe is not
sufficient to obedience.

These are the rare and mavelous reasonings of these Divines, who seem to
have undertaken to debase Christians below the Jews, who honored God by outward
means, and testified by words and visible actions that they would obey him:
notwithstanding God complains of them, and rejects their services as of a
treacherous and hypocritical people. In stead whereof these Doctors pretend
that Christians may satisfy the commands of God and the Church, not only with
a contrary intention; but also with a protestation that they will not obey, and
not honoring God therein so much as with their lips only, as the Jews to whom
it served for reproof of their treachery.

The foundation of all these conclusions is found in Filliutius, who speaking
of the conformity of our wills with that of Gods which ought to be the rule of
all our thoughts and actions, says that we are not obliged to will all that
which God wills, Dico 2. in objecto formali, and in ratione volendi in communi,
necesse est voluntatem nostram esse conformem cum divina. Filliutius, mor. qq.
tom. 2. tr. 21. c. 11. n. 385. p. 45.
and that it is not necessary that our will should be conformable to the will
of God, By which he would say no other thing, then that it suffices us to be
induced to will that we will by any honest reason; and herein we are
conformable unto God who wills nothing any otherwise. For thus he expounds
himself in the proposition.

But this is to give no more unto God then to all reasonable men, even to
Pagans themselves. For to will a thing because it seems honest or reasonable is
to will that which Plato; Seneca, and Aristotle have willed, which is to be
conformable to their will, and to all those who ever made profession of
Philosophy and virtue, even amongst Pagans, because they are all agreed in
this general point, that they willed nothing, and that nothing ought to be
willed, but for some reason which they judged good and honest, though they knew
not one another, and their wills in particular were very different, and many
times opposite to one another.

According to this rule one may pretend to be conformable to the will of God in
the greatest sins, because many times he is induced thereto by reasons which
appear good unto him, and which he believes to be honest; as those who
persecuted the Apostles believed they did a thing well pleasing unto God;

Notwithstanding Filliutius doubting to have given too much unto God in his
answer, he corrects it by this limitation. D^xi (in commani) qu^ no^ ^st
a^cesse^ut nost a volun as sit conformis divinae voluntati in ratione volendi
particulari. Ibid.
I said (in general) because it is not necessary that our will be conformable
to Gods in the particular reasons, which he has to will that he wills. That
is, that we are not in any thing obliged to be conformable to the will of God,
nor to will all that which he wills, in the manner he wills it, and provided we
have in general some honest reason, we need not trouble our selves farther to
know more particularly what God would have us do. And because we should not
imagine that he talks without having well considered what he says, he
endeavors to prove it by four reasons in a few words.

The first is, Qu a ca ple^umque sit inceg^ita.
because this particular will of God is often unknown unto us. He would say
that as ignorance, as he has declared before, does generally discharge us from
every sort of obligation; so it dispenses with us from following the will of
God, when we know it not; whence it follows that Pagans and Infidels, who as
St. Paul says, know not God nor his will, and live in darkness of ignorance;
are not obliged to do the will of God, nor to know it; and are to be excused
when they blindly fight against it.

The second reason is, Qui^ si ^sset nota (divina voluntas) non extat
praeceptum quo teneatur velle sub ea ratione.
because when we do know the will of God, there is no precept which obliges us
to will things in the same manner he wills them. Strange Divinity, that we are
not only not obliged to know the will of God; but that we are not obliged to
follow it even when we do know it, that is to say, that we may reject it
without sin, and prefer our own before his. I wonder that these Doctors never
had that in their minds, at least, which our Savior Jesus Christ said in the
Gospel, Ille autem servus qui cognovit vo untatem Domini sui, and non fecit
secundum voluntatem ejus, vapulabit mult is, qui autem non cognovit and seeit
digna plagis, vaputabit paucis. Lucae 12. ver. 47.
that the servant who knew not his Masters will was to be chastised more
savourably:

The third reason is contained in these two words, nec ratio id dictat, which
signify that reason does no more oblige us to conform, our will in all things
to the will of God, then the Divine command. As if the light of reason did not
testify sufficiently, that we ought asways to follow the Sovereign Reason and
wisdom which is in God, and which is not distinguished from his will. And as
the light of nature shows sufficiently, that we are to follow at all times this
Sovereign Reason, as the rule of all our actions, and all our thoughts, it
shows also clearly that we are not to follow our own wills, unless we will
pretend to be more reasonable, and more wise then wisdom it self, who has
established it for a fundamental rule of all our lives, Post concupisc^ntias
tuas ne cas, and a voluntate tua avertere. Ecclesiasticl 18. ver. 30.
that we should not follow our desire, and that we ought to turn away from our
own wills.

The fourth reason is; Quia Deus omnia quae vult, ex charitate vult: nos antem
non tenemur omnia ex charitate velle. Filliutius. Ibid.
because all that God wills, he wills of charity: but we are not obliged to
will all of charity. It seems that he would say, that God wills, and does all
things in the World for charity; that is, for love of us and our good; but that
we are not obliged reciprocally to do all for charity,

But after he had maintained that there is no obligation upon us to conform our
wills to God in all things, he adds, that he would counsel us notwithstanding
to do it as far as we can, alleging for reason, Quia bona pars felicitatis
nostrae consistit in concordia nostrae voluntatis cum Divina. Ibid.
because a good part of our happiness consists in the conformity of our will to
that of God's Presupposing that another part of our happiness consi^s in doing
what we will our selves, or in doing what God has commanded us in such manner
as we please.

Celot expounding this same thing in other terms, and speaking of them that
live in the world, and of the privilege which he pretends God has given them
above the Monastiques, he makes it to be said by a great Saint expressly
against his intention, Antistes une verbo, eoque hierarchico dividuas
distinctasque vitas and imaginationes illi permissas admonet. Celot, page 573.
that God has permitted them to live a life divided and parted, in giving one
part of their life to God, and the other to the world, or affairs and pleasure
of it.

If it be permitted to lead in this world two sorts of lives different and
divided, dividuas distinctasque vitas, it must needs be that one of these lives
be for God, and the other not for him, else they could not be two lives, nor
would they be parted and divided if both these ways belonged unto God, and had
relation to him as to their end. It must needs be therefore that one of these
two ways,

So that, according to this Doctrine, we may divide our hearts and lives
betwixt God and the World, and do one part of our actions for the love of God,
and another part for the love of the World, and of our selves. These two
disorders are in effect but one, and are both contained in this principle of
Filliutius, of which we have spoken; That we are excused from conforming our
whole will to that of God, in willing all that he wills and commands, and in
willing it in such manner as he wills it.

There is none who may not see how this principle overthrows the dependence
which man ought to have upon God, at least in that which concerns the inward
part. For provided that he do that outwardly which God has commanded, he is
little or nothing concerned, in what manner, and upon what motive he do it;
they leave this to his liberty, and pretend that God has given no commandment
therein, and even reason it self demands it not of him.

If they would absolutely part betwixt God and Man, they should at least make a
more just and more reasonable partition; attributing to God that which is the
better and the more noble, to wit, the heart and the intention, instead of
giving it to man, and leaving unto God nothing properly but the outside, as if
he were not the God of the spirit, but only of the body.

ARTICLE II. That according to the Divinity of the Jesuits we sin not if we
have not an intention to sin.
IT is one general maxim in the Divinity of the Jesuits, that to sin it is not
sufficient to do the evil that is forbidden, or not to do that which is
commanded by the Law of God, Nature, or the Church: But it behooves also to have
a knowledge of the evil that we do, and an intention to do it. By this rule
they excuse the greatest sins, under a pretense that they have a good intention
in committing them, which commonly is but imaginary, or that we have no evil
intention, though commonly we have so without knowing it.

Bauny makes use of this pretense of an imaginary good intention to justify
the hatred of our Neighbor, and the good aversion we have from him, so far as
to wish him evil, and even death it self. Bauny in his Sum, chap. 6. conc. 4.
page 73. We may, says he, wish evil to our Neighbor without sin, when we are
induced thereto by some good motive. Which he endeavors to confirm by reason,
and by the authority of the ^asuists. So Bonacina upon the first commandment,
d. 3, q. 4. n. 7. exempts from all fault the Mother that desires the death of
her Daughters, because for want of beauty or portion she cannot match them
according to her desire, or perhaps because by occasion of them she is ill
treated by her Husband, or injured. For she does not properly detest her
Daughters through dislike of them, but from an abhorrence to her own evils. The
good intention which induces this Mother to desire the death of her Daughters,
Bauny, to excuse from all fault this Mother who desires the death of her
Daughters.

There is no crime in which we may not find such like good intention; and by
consequence which may not be excused by this reason. For this cause he proceeds
and says, that he who should maintain an heretical proposition without
believing it, who should be a communicant or Auditor (amongst the Hugenots)
without having his heart there, but out of pure derision, or to comply with the
times, and to accomplish his designs, he ought not to be esteemed an Hugenot
therefore, because his understanding is not infected with error. So that, not
only ordinary crimes, but heresy it self and Apostasy, and all sorts of
impieties, may be excused by the secret intention of the Jesuits School; and we
may do all these things without being heretics or Impious.

If he had not a privilege to propound things quite contrary when he pleases,
we might represent unto him that what he says here, accords not with what he
said above; that he who bows his knee before an Image is an Idolater, though he
have no design to adore the Idol, and only feignes to do it. But it was
necessary he should speak so in this place, where the question was how to prove
that we might fulfill the commands of God and the Church, in doing outwardly
that which they command,

A contradiction so formal and manifest in a subject so important to Faith and
Religion, as well as to manners, will hardly find shelter under the vail and
pretense of a good intention, how specious soever it may be; and it is certain
that at the bottom it could not proceed from any but the Father of lies and
errors, in favor of which he seems to have undertaken to speak, as well as of
the libertines and profane. For he and his Fraternity who are in the same
opinion with him, maintain that we may accomplish the commands of God and the
Church, without any inward will, and his opinion is that we cannot fulfill those
of the Devil in violating the commandments of God and the Church, if we have
not a design in our hearts thereto. So that the Devil must be served more
sincerely then God and the Church, and he has more power and more right upon
the inward actions and hearts of men then God and the Church have. For he
pretends, with other Divines of the Society, that the Church has no power over
the inward motions of our souls, and that the commands of God are not extended
so far as them, and comprize not the intention nor manner in which God wills
they should be fulfilled and executed.

But if he who propounds these heretical propositions and publicly
perpetrates these heretical actions, for the better mannaging his affairs, as
Bauny speaks, and taking up Religion only as a matter of merryment. See here
the motives and the good intentions whereby he excuses their crime who maintain
Heretical propositions, or receive the Supper with the Hugenots, without having
their hearts engaged thereto.

Emanuel Sa makes use of the same pretense of the intention to excuse an Oath.
Juramenta non sunt, in mea censcientia, in fide Christiani, nisi quis intendat
jurare. Quia juramentum pendet ab intention jurantis. Sa, verbo juramentum. n.
1. p. 295.
It is no Oath, says he, to say by my faith, in my conscience, on the faith of
a Christian, if we have not an intention to swear. His reason is, because an
oath depends on the intention of him that swears. They may as well say, that a
lie depends on the intention of him that lies.

And that is very nigh thereto, which Filliutius says, speaking of a man that
lies in using equivocation, without any necessity obliging him thereto, and who
swears to confirm his equivocation. For notwithstanding their opinion who hold
that this man is to be accounted both a liar and perjurer as he confesses, he
concludes for the contrary opinion, and says, Dico 2 pr^babilius videri in
rigore non esse mendacium neque perj trium. Ratio praecipua, quia qui sic
loquitur and jural, non habet intentionem dicendi falsum, vel
jurandifalsitatem. Filliutius, 10. 2 tr. 25. c. 11. n. 331. p. 205.
That it seems to him more propable, His principal reason is the same with that
of Sa; because he that speaks and swears in this sort has no intent to speak
nor swear falsely, though he does both in effect, and does it without necessity
and without reason, as he says expressly, absque rationabili causa. This
maxim is very proper to license the lies and oaths which Merchants do make use
of ordinarily to deceive others, and those who forswear themselves before
Judges; and I see not for what else it can be good, but to nourish and justify
these crimes and tr acheries.

That which Emanuel Sa and Filliutius say, of an oath, Bauny affirms of
blasphemy, having recourse to the intention of the blasphemer to excuse his
crime. In his Sum, c. 5. page 66. where he speaks of five sorts of
blasphemies, and he says that the fifth sort of blasphemy is when one names
with contumely, reproach and dishonor, the most venerable members of the Son of
God. Which yet they seem not to do who use them in their common discourse, as
some ornament of their language, saying Death, Head, Belly, and yet are
nevertheless guilty. Bonacina upon the first commandment d. 3. q. 8. p. 2. n.
2. It seems at first sight that he dares not justify these blasphemers,
considering the horror of their crimes; but he afterward makes use of their
intention to excuse them, adding in the sequel: Nevertheless some whom this
Author alleges in this dispute, hold that to call upon these parts (of Christ's
body) in choler, and not with rage against God, is no blasphemy.

And two pages after he proposes this opinion to Confessors, The Confessor,
says he, ought to inform himself of the penitent, who accuses himself of
blasphemy, whether he did it with a formal intention to blaspheme God. And a
little after; to assist them herein, we think that it is in every respect to
good purpose, that the Confessor know from his mouth his intention, and what
moved him to blaspheme; and if he answers that he was not touched with any
despite against God, but against Man, or against Beast, to whom they had a
pique, the Confessor shall not repute them to be Blasphemers, nor destitute of
Grace.

This man that blasphemeth against God and against Jesus Christ, though he does
it through transport of choler against Men, or against Beasts, though he does
it without passion, and in cold blood, making use of these blasphemies in
common discourse, as ornaments of his language, yet ought not, according to
Bauny, to be treated in his confession as a blasphemer, though the words and
blasphemies he utters be contumelious, opprobrious and dishonorable to the
most venerable members of the Son of God, if he have not truly had some
indignation against God, if he was not touched with some despite against God,
if he have not done it with a formal intent to dishonor God; and the Confessor
ought to refer himself, in all this, to what the blasphemer shall say, after
that he has been informed of the matter from himself, and has knowledge of it
from his own mouth.

If this be true, as this Casuist assures us; we must of necessity avouch that
there are hardly any blaspemies, or that to blaspheme we must have the heart of
a Devil, with a formal will to displease and dishonor him. And when a person
is so forlorn as to fall into this miserable estate, if he neither resent nor
acknowledge it, as it easily befalls him, because of that blindness and
hardness, which is the ordinary consequence and punishment of these great
crimes; and pretends not to have this evil intention of dishonouring God by
despite, and hatred toward him, which induces him to blaspheme, his ignorance
and freedom from evil intention, will be sufficient to every such person to
exempt him from crime, according to the Divinity of these Jesuits; and Bauny
will absolve him easily, and not repute him, for all this, for a blasphemer,
nor as one destitute of grace.

He speaks after the same manner of cursings, in the chap. 6. page 47. saying,
that to make cursing a mortal sin, it ought to proceed of a will deliberately
bent upon the ill which is desired to fall on others.

From the same principle, treating of scandal, in the chap. 46. page 719. and
speaking of a woman who adorns her self proudly, and who pranks and trims up
her self to please her Husband, or to observe the custom of the country, he
declares that allbeit the said woman knows well the evil effect which her
diligence in adorning her self will work upon the bodies and souls of those who
behold her adorned with rich and precious garments; yet she sins not in using
them. And to give a reason thereof, he maintains it as a maxim, nisi fuerint
intenti formaliter; that is to say, as he expounds himself; unless we
effectually seek, will or procure them.

Filliutius speaking also of scandal, proposes the same example and case, and
explicates it in the same manner. Sexto s^ famina sciat se turpiter ab aliquo
amart, non peccat quoties se offert ejus conspectui, modo non intendat hunc
provocare ad turpem sui amorem. Filliutius, tom. 2. tr. 28 c. 10. number. 232. page
331.
Though a woman, says he, knows that a man loves her dishonestly, she sins not
how often soever she presents her self before him, and in his view, so that she
have not an intention to stir up the dishonest love which he has toward her.

Sanchez having also proposed before this same question, namely An saemina
conspectui viri se offerens, a quo se turpiter amari no vit, peccat mortaliter
peccato scandalt, quando nullatenus cum ad sui amorem provocare intendit?
Sanchez, op. mor. lib. 1. cap 6. number. 16. page 19
whether a woman who presents her self to the view of a man whom she well knows
does love her dishonestly, do commit a mortal sin of scandal, when she has no
intention to stir him up to love her. He reports the common opinion, which
condemns this action of mortal sin. Communiter came Doctores peccart mortaliter
censent, quando nulla necessitate ducitur, sed ut s^ae voluptati satisfaciat,
indifferenter hac and illac discurrit. Ibid.
The common opinion, says he, of the Doctors is that she sins mortally,
when without any necessity, but only for her own pleasure and satisfaction she
gads indifferently into every place.

In the sequel he propounds the opinion of those who excuse this woman from
mortal sin, though she go abroad without necessity, and know the evil which she
must cause by her coming abroad. Aliis tamen placet hanc non peccare
mortaliter, quod ea occasio potius ex propria adamantis turpiter malitia sit
accepta, quam a muliere data, quae jure suo ac liberate sibi concessa utitur.
Ibid. n. 17.
There are others, says he, who hold that she sins not mortally,

Finally, after he has considered these two opinions, and the reasons on which
they found them, he concludes for this latter, in favor of this woman, whom he
declares innocent. Et ideo quamvis priorem opinionem probabilem credam,
existimo veriorem esse hanc posteriorem, ut non ob id teneatur faemina sua se
egrediendi domo, standi ad ostium domus vel fonestram, and discurrondi per
civitatem liberate privare. Ibid.
And for that, says he, though I also believe the first opinion to be
probable, but I esteem notwithstanding the latter to be more true, which is,
that this woman is not obliged to deprive her self of this liberty which she
has, of going abroad from her house, to stand at her door or window, or to
walk in the Town. He demands no other thing of her, ut nullatenus cum ad sui
amorem provocare intendat.
but that she have no intention to cause him to sin who loves her. And after
this he justifies the offense which she gives him out of a frolic and without
necessity, and which she might easily avoid if she pleased.

So that although this woman knows that she is about to destroy a man by an
action which is altogether free, and which she may easily eschew, she shall not
be at all guilty for his death, according to the Jesuits, if she had not a
formal design to kill him. If any should talk after this rate of the death of
the body, and pretend that he who had voluntarily and without necessity done an
action which he foresaw would be followed by the death of a man, should
nevertheless not cease to be innocent, provided that he had not an actual and
express intention to kill him, such a man would be judged worthy to be hated by
all men. And these Divines nevertheless fear not to talk thus of the death of
the soul, and to testify that they fear less the justice of God then of men.

The principle of all this Doctrine concerning scandal, may be seen in Bauny,
Whether he who does some thing from which his action he foresees that others
will take matter of offense and sin, ought to accuse himself thereof; and what
is this sin to be termed? He says frankly, that Navarre, and others whom he
cites, say that it is scandal: But he adds in his following discourse: This is
not my judgment. See upon what I build. Taking scandal properly and for one
special kind of sin, such an one is not guilty thereof, save only when by a
formal design he says or does some thing for the ghostly destruction of his
Neighbors. This is the general principle upon which his Fraternity build, as
well as he, the foundation of all this matter.

He must be utterly forsaken of God, and in the extremity of black and affected
malice who falls into this excess, and into this sort of hatred of his
Neighbor, which is proper only unto Devils; and to reduce the sin of scandal
to this disposition is to declare that it is committed no where but in Hell,
and to take it quite out of the world; or rather it is to entertain and protect
it in the world, by disguising it in such sort as that we may not know when we
commit it; and by consequence to give all men license to commit it freely, and
without scruple,

Bauny also makes use of the pretense of a good intention, to justify Usury.
For after he had furnished us with an invention, to palliate and cover it
before the eyes of men, by means of three contracts, of which he himself
prescribes us the form, he endeavors to hide it from God himself if he could,
and also to justify it by a good intention. For greater surety, (says he, in
the 14. chap. of his Sum, p. 219.) it is good that the creditour say to him
that is his debtor, that his intention in this contract is not usurarious,
though he let out his money to him for profit, with protestation on his part
that he would do nothing therein against God and his conscience. For hereby he
declares that he is determined only to that which is good and far off from
sin. Thus he mocks God and Man, intending to surprise them by such gross
contrivances; as if he could change the nature of things by innevating the
turms and manner of expressing them.

It is easy to see the contradiction which is in these words; but it will
appear yet more clearly, if we compare that which he says here with what he
tells us elsewhere, in his practique, l. 3. chap. 6. page 362. where treating
of benefices, he says, when any one causes a benefice with cure incompatible
with a dignity to be provided for him, he is reputed to renounce it without any
expression thereof in words, c. 1. de consult. in 6. although he make
protestation that he will not part with it; because this protestation is
contrary to his action. A man that is in a dignity and who causes a cure also
to be provided for him, cannot hold them both, although he would, and
protests that it is his intention; because this protestation is contrary to
his action. And an Usurer who gives his money to interest to make profit
thereof, may deliver himself from usury and restitution, by protesting that it
is not his intention to make an usurarious contract, though in very deed he do
make one, and his protestation be contrary to his action.

One of the greatest abuses that these Doctors make of the intention, although
it may be presumed for the most part that such resolutions proceed only fro
the lips, as Bauny confesses in his Sum, chap. 46 page 717. of which he
brings a good proof, and as it were a certain mark, in these follwing words: As
it will come to pass, if notwithstanding all this which these people have said
and promised for the time past to the said Confessor, they do not cease to
behave themselves with greater excess and liberty in those crimes then before.
And though also we see by experience of what is past, that they will not amend,
and that their present disposition makes it also sufficiently appear that they
have no true will, he forbears not to maintain that we must believe what they
say, cum ipsi sint sui accusatores, defensore, and testes; being they are their
own accusors, defenders and witnesses; though many times it may be presumed
that such resolutions come not from beyond their lips. Such are the most part
of the resolutions, promises, good intentions of the greatest sinners, upon
which notwithstanding these directors ground themselves to confer on hem the
Sacraments,

In which they are so ingenious, that when they cannot find this sort of good
intentions in him who has done amiss, they go to seek it without him in some
other accessory to the action. As if that would suffice to clear it of malice
and crime. Thus Bauny exempts from mortal sin, children who rob their parents;
In as much, says he, as the Parents cannot be supposed to be willing to oblige
their children not to meddle with what is theirs upon this penalty; there being
good reason to believe that they had rather see all their goods wasted by their
hands, then their said children out of grace and favor with God. As if the
commandments of God and the sin of those who violate them, depended on the
disposition or will of man; and as if those who were offended together with God
in the same action which was committed against him and against his Law, by
releasing their interest; and remitting the fault which is committed against
them, could also as speedily take away and blot out that which is against God
and against his Law, principally when he that has committed it does not take
the pains to ask him pardon,

If it be true, as says Bauny, that children sin not mortally in taking the
goods of their Fathers and Mothers; why say they not also that they should not
sin mortally in attempting their lives also? For the reason they bring for the
one proves it as well of the other. His reason is that parents cannot be
thought to oblige their children, not to attempt upon what is theirs under this
pain of mortal sin, and eternal damnation; and we may as well believe that they
are not to be thought to desire to oblige them not to enterprise upon their
lives on the same pain, it being apparent that if Fathers were true Christians,
as they suppose them to be, they would rather like to see not only all their
goods wasted by their childrens hands, but their own lives lost also, rather
then see their children in disgrace with God, or in eternal pains.

By this same reason, by which they go about to excuse the theft of children,
it will follow that the wicked persecuting honest men; Tyrants spilling the
blood of Martyrs, the Jews in putting to death Jesus Christ, sinned not
mortally; because it is certain that neither Jesus Christ, nor the Martyrs, nor
honest men ever had an intention that those who invaded their goods, their
honor, or their lives, should fall into displeasure with God, or into eternal
damnation. On the contrary there is nothing that they would not do and suffer
to hinder them there from, as may be seen clearly in that the Saints and
Martyrs prayed unto God to pardon them that persecuted them, following herein
the example of Jesus Christ, who prayed upon the Cross for those who put him
to death, and demanded of his Father that he would not impute unto them the sin
of his death.

CHAP. V. Of the matter of Sin.
ARTICLE I. That the Jesuits enhanse and debase as they please the goods of
this world, which are the usual object or matter of sin; and so nourish vice,
and dispense with the Law of God.
THe object and the matter of sin are temporal things, which God having made
for man that he might employ them for his service, he turns them into a
stumbling block, by taking occasion of offending and destroying himself
thereby, by suffering himself to be surprised by the pleasure which he finds
therein, or making use of them otherwise then God has ordained.

The Jesuits are wont to judge of sin by its object, and to measure its
greatness by the quantity of the matter, and by the value of the things which
induce men to commit it. I will not examine this principle, the defect whereof
is easy to be perceived. But I am confident, that there is none that will not
find it very strange, that they having established this rule, which ought by
consequence be always inviolable amongst them, they yet do not follow it
themselves, but do like those who have two different weights and measures;
setting what price they please upon temporal goods, making them sometimes much
and sometimes little worth,

It is upon these principles, and with this spirit, that Bauny in his Sum,
chap. 7. page 80. after he had described envy as a monstrous vice, which sits,
says he, like the Cantharides only on the fairest flowers, after he had said
with Saint Cyprian, that it is as it were the worm of the soul, which makes its
own hurt of another good; and after he had declared universally, that the
envious man engaged not a little his conscience and honor, since against all
sorts of prudence, by a Metamorphosis altogether vicious, he attempts to change
good into evil, and good and wholesome actions into poison; nevertheless he
concludes in this sort: this sin, though Saint Augustine testifies that it is
contrary unto charity, nevertheless seems not to me to be mortal.

Although envy be so pernicious and deformed as he represents it; though it be
like the worm that consumes the soul and ruins the conscience; like venim
which corrupts good actions and turns good into ill; though it be contrary unto
charity, as Saine Cyprian and Saint Augustine say, and as he himself avows with
them, yet it seems not to him that it is a mortal sin; and if we will believe
him, it ought not be put into the number of the seven mortal sins. His reason
is, because the good which is found in temporal things is so slender, and of so
little consequence in respect of Heaven, that it is of no consideration with
God and his Saints.

By the same reason we may say that theft, slander, and even homicide it self
are no mortal sins; because that the goods which are withheld from our
Neighbor by theft, the honor we violate by slander, and his very life which
we cause him lose by homicide, are all temporals, in which the good that is
found is so small and of so little consequence in respect to Heaven, that it is
of no consideration with God and his Saints: and by consequence could not be
matter of mortal sin according to the Divinity of this Father, nor a sufficient
subject to put man out of favor with God. See here how this Author debases the
price and estimation of temporal goods to excuse sin, But when he has in hand
to dispense with men for their duty, and the Law of God; then he enhanseth
their price, to cause that lust may prevail with us above the Law of God on
those occasions, wherein to obey and keep it we must suffer some loss in these
goods.

In the 46. Chap. of his Sum, page 711, after he had established the
conditions necessary to a penitent to be in an estate to receive absolution, he
proposes many questions, whereof see here the first: From these principles,
says he, it will be easy to answer the questions which follow: The first,
those who in their commerce, their traffic, their discourse, their resort, are
obliged to see, to speak, to treat with maidens and women,

He saw well enough that this pass was dangerous, and that the answer he was
about to make to this question was of it self odious and scandalous: For this
reason he causes to march in his front a good number of Authors, as it were to
sound the ford, and to be his guarde. The first he produces is de Baia, whom he
makes mouth to them all, and to answer absolutely, yea. He alleges Navarre
after, making him to confirm this opinion, and to assure us that we may not
constrain this penitent to abandon that traffic which is so perilous unto
him. He puts Emanuel Sa last, saying that he declares that upon the penitents
refusal to quit his traffic, we may not refuse him absolution; provided that
he and those others with whom he is accustomed to sin found their refusal upon
some good and lawful cause; as not to be able to dispense therewith without
giving the world subject to talk of, or that they themselve should thence
receive some inconvenience. For otherwise, say they, (he speaks of others whom
he cited) we cannot refuse them absolution, dummodo firmiter proponant, so that
they strongly insist on it.

After these Authors he is more confident, and speaks with more assurance, p.
712. saying, that though the occasion of sin be as it were certain,
nevertheless because it is not affected nor sought out in a frolic, and
without necessity, because we cannot avoid the dangers that are joined
thereunto, without scandal, without concerning therein our honors and our
goods, it follows that to persevere therein is no fault, by the fourth rule of
right, quod non est licitum in lege, necessitas facit licitum, what is not
lawful by law, is made lawful by necessity.

The same man, what is to be done with menservants and maidservants, Cousins
of both sexes, Masters and Maids, who mutually engage and aid one another in
sin, or such as take occasion from the house where they are, or occasions they
have therein? To answer this question, he makes use of the same artifice he
made use of in answering the former, which is, to make others to speak and to
cover himself under their shadow. When the relapses, says he, are frequent and
as it were daily, Navarre, in 3. chap. number 31. Graff. l. 1. c. 30. number. 23.
Suarez, part 3. t. 4. d. 32. s. 2. holds that they must be sent back. And a
little after: If notwithstanding, add they, they offend only rarely together,
as once or twice a month, they may be absolved, concurrentibus quatuor
praedictis, quorum quatuor scilicei causa notabilis est, quod non possint sine
magno incommodo and detrimento separari. Those four things concurring, of which
four the remarkable cause is, that they cannot be separated without great
inconvenience and damage.

See here the Law of God put in balance with temporal goods: on one side, the
Law of God forbids sin, and to avoid it commands to fly from the occasions of
it; on the other side, commodity, interest, and pretense of honor, engage in
perpetual danger, and in, as it were, certain occasion of sin. In these
occasions the good which is found in these temporal things is no longer slender
and of no consequence, as Bauny spoke before, to remove envy out of the number
of mortal sin; he declares here, on the behalf of Emanuel Sa, that it is a good
and lawful cause; and on the part of Navarre, that it is a very considerable
occasion; and finally, he does not only make use of it as of a good excuse,
but he forms thereout a kind of necessity which dispenses with the Law of God,
Q^od non est licitum in lege, necessitas faci^ licitum.
That necessity makes that lawful which is not lawful by the Law; which is to
be understood only of things which are indifferent in themselves, and not of
things which are in themselves, and essentially, naught and dishonest, as these
of which I speak are.

In consequence of this principle and this rule, the Jesuits judging also of
sin by the object and matter, when this object is spiritual and the matter
invisible, or little exteriourly, the sins can be only slight ones according
to their judgment. Whence it comes to pass that they acknowledge hardly any
mortal sins of curiosity, idleness, pride, vanity, and other spiritual vices of
like kind, and these vices must pass unto some sensible matter, and different
from their own, and in some notable outward excess, to make them mortal
according to them, as we have already remarked speaking of coveteousness,
concerning which Escobar relating the opinions of the principal Divines of the
Society, acknowledges no crime if it be not accompanied with some circumstance
contrary to Justice: and when he treats of pride, and ambition, and of
boasting, he finds also nothing which approaches so much as near to mortal
sin, if this vice do not proceed unto some great excess against the honor of
God or our Neighbor, if by a perversion altogether extraordinary, it do not
blind a man so far as to make him say, with the King of Tire; I am God.

See here the passage entire which deserves to be represented also here, Tunc
ad mortale accederet, quando aut graviter D^i revereatia laederetur, aut
proximi fama. Fit equidem cum gravi Dei irreverentia, cum in morem Regis Tyri
dixerit satuus; Ego sum Deus. proximue outem gravi injuria afficitur quando
quis cum Pharisaeo jactat; Non sum sicut iste Publicanus. Escobar, tr. 2. exam.
2. number 9. page 291.
If boasting do not ably offend against the honor of God, or the reputation of
our Neighbor, it proceeds unto mortal sin, now the honor of God is remarkably
burt by pride and boasting, when a man is such a fool, as to say, with the King
of Tire, I am God: and when he boasts himself like the Pharisee in saying, I
am not like this Publican, he offends grievously his Neighbor, namely him whom
he so speaks of.

These two cases excepted, and some other such like which he observes, he holds
that ambition, vanity, and boasting, cannot proceed unto mortal sin, and that
so long as these vices continue that they are of their own peculiar nature, so
long as vanity continues simple vanity, pride is simple pride, and they exceed
not their own proper matter, they are ordinarily but venial sins.

By consequence of this same principle, sins which are committed against
virtues purely spiritual, and against the most Divine and elevated things which
we enjoy, such as are the Word of God and his Truth, Religion and the most Holy
Functions of Religion, provided they be not extraordinary, are only venial,
and it is the excess only that renders them mortal, and this excess also
must not be common.

This made Emanuel Sa to affirm, Fabellam recitare, ut auditores excitentur ad
pie audiendum, non est peccatum. Sa verh. Praedicare. number. 5. p. 378.
that it was no sin to make fabulous relations in Sermons to stir up the
auditors attention and devotion. He speaks also more clearly in another place
where he says, Mentiri in concione in pertinentibus ad doctrinam, quidam aiunt
esse mortale, alii non semper: quod intellige si sit materia levis. Sa verb.
Mendacium. number. 2. page 494.
that there are some who hold that it is always mortal sin to tell a lie in
Preaching on any Doctrinal point; but others deny it. And he relates the
opinion of these latter, adding only that it must be understood only when the
matter is slight. If to lie in the chair in points of Doctrine, according to
this Jesuit, be but a venial sin, he without doubt would make no great matter
of lies which a Preacher should speak in other matters; and it may be he might
give them in this the same liberty that he gives them to tell tales generally,
and without exception.

He condemns them not more rigorously who tell lies in confession: Mentiri in
consessions de peccatis venialibus, out de aliis confessis mortalibus veniale
solum peccatum est; etiamsi illa antea apud se proposuisset vere confiteri. Sa,
verb. Confessio. n. 12. p. 88.
It is but a venial sin, says he, to lie unto a Confessor in confessing venial
or mortal sins formerly confessed, though after resolution to confess them
truly. Escobar says the same, and adds some thing. Mendacium de pecca^o
veniali, veniale est, nisi illud veniale esset totalis confessionis materia;
quia tunc daretur absolutio fine materia, and Sacramentum nullum esset. Suarez
tom. 4. n. 3. par. disp. 22. sect. 10. n. 6. Alii negant, quia omne mendacium
de veniali est res levis. Escob. tr. 7. ex 4. n. 107. p. 816.
Suarez holds, says he, that to lie in confessing a venial sin, is but a
venial sin, provided that this venial sin be not all the matter of the
confession, for in this case the absolution will have no subject, and the
Sacrament will be null. Others hold the contrary, for that a lie which consists
in a slight and venial matter is always slight. this Jesuit and of those
whose judgment he reports, seems to him a very slight thing to furnish matter
for a mortal sin, though it destroy a Sacrament, and turn it into an action
profane and sacrilegious.

It is easy to see if this be to honor the Truth and the Sacrament of
penance, which by a particular reason may be called the Sacrament of Truth,
because there a man acknowledges that which he is truly, confessing himself a
sinner before God, and confessing his sins before a Priest who holds the place
of God: nevertheless this Divinity teaches that it is no great matter to lie in
this Sacrament; and that fault committed herein ought to be considered
according to the matter of the sin rather then by the holiness of the
Sacrament; in such manner, that if the matter about which the lie is told be
not an important thing in it self, the sin is but slight, though thereby the
Sacrament be profaned, made null and sacrilegious.

This Jesuit commits yet a greater extravagance against the truth, when he
says that it may be opposed, with a resolution altogether formal, that is to
say by pure malice, though it be acknowledged in the heart, without becoming
guilty of any great fault. Impugnae^e perspicuam veritatem, animo impugnandt
and contradicendi, est peccatum grave aut leve juxta materiae gravitatem aut
levitatem. Escobar, tract, 2. exam. 2. cap. 1. number. 14. page 292,
To conflict with the truth, says he, which is evident with a formal design to
oppose and contradict it, is great or little according as the truth in hand is
of great or little consequence. animo impugnandi and contradicendi perspicuam
veritatem.

If when the King speaks, any of his Officers should rise up and contradict him
publicly in a thing which he knew himself to be just and true, being induced
to this excess only by insolence; and to oppose himself against the King, and
to contradict him without cause, it is certain he would be treated as in guilty
of high treason, and his action would pass in the judgment of all the world
for an unsufferable outrage and contempt of Royal Majesty, though the subject
upon which he thus opposed the King were not of great importance. And yet
Escobar would that it should be accounted but a slight fault to deal thus with
God and his Truth.

One passage alone of Sanchez, which I will rehearse here, may suffice to prove
that which I have said, that in things purely spiritual, the Jesuits find
scarcely any sufficent matter for mortal sin. Res quantumvis sacras principal
ter ob vanam gloriam officere, ut Sacramenta omnia ministrare vel recipere,
sacram celebrare, non excedit culpam venialem. Sanchez, op. mor. l. 1. c. 3. n.
1. p. 9. Et si debitus ordo pervertatur, ea tamen perversio non tanti est, ut
adea gravis injuria rebus spiritualibus inseratur, ut poena aeterna digna sit.
Ibid.
To perform of vanity, says he, the most sacred actions, as to administer the
Sacraments, or to receive them, or to celebrate the most Holy Mass for vain
glory, can be but a venial sin, though vain glory be proposed, as the principal
end.

It is not an easy thing to judge what reason he may have thus to diminish
this sin, if he acknowledge that there may possibly be great ones in Spiritual
matters. For indeed it will be a hard thing to find greater then this,
considered by the light of Faith, then to say Mass for vanity, as the
principal end thereof, this is properly to sacrifice to vanity, or to the Devil
who is the god of vanity, the body of Jesus Christ, which is horrible only to
think. And if the sacrifice of the Mass may be referred unto vanity without
any great sin, so as this Jesuit pretends: then may it also be related to all
other vices: that is to say that we may sacrifice and offer up the body of
Jesus Christ to all vices, which is a kind of Idolatry unheard of, more
criminal in every sort, and more impious then that of all the Pagans, who
putting the creatures in the place of God, offer to them other creatures: but
he who says Mass for vanity as his principal end, makes vanity a false God,
and offers unto it the true God, in sacrificing unto it the body of Jesus
Christ. And yet this sin according to Sanchez is but a slight one,

ARTICLE II. The consequence and explication of the same subject by two
examples, and two sequels which the Jesuits draw from their principles
concerning the matter of sin.
1. That God cannot no more than men command or forbid a matter that is in it
self slight, under the penalty of mortal sin. 2. That he that has a design
and will to commit all venial sins if he were able, sins only venially.
FRom this maxim which the Jesuits presuppose as a principle of their
Divinity, that the object and matter of sin ought to serve for a rule, whereby
to judge of its greatness; in such sort that when the matter is final, the sin
cannot but be small, they draw this consequence: That no Law, civil or
ecclesiastic, humane or Divine can render men guilty of mortal sin, when the
thing commanded or for bidden them is not great.

Emanuel Sa says generally, Praeceptum de re levissima non obligat ad mortale,
etiamsi qui praecipit id velit. Sa, verb. Praeceptum. number. 1. page 575.
When a slight thing is commanded,

Amicus says the same thing with larger extent: Ad obligationem sub culpa
mortali necessaria est gravit as materiae proeceptae vel prohibitae, sine qua
nulla lex humana obligat sub mortali.
To cause that disobedience may become a mortal sin, the matter which is
commanded or forbidden must be great: without this the violation of any humane
law is not a mortal sin. Whence he draws this consequence: Unde etiamsi
superior velit subditum ad mortale obligare, de facto illum non obligabit, nisi
materio legis aut praecepti sit gravis. Amicus, tom. 5. A. 5. de lege humana.
sect. 8. n. 194. p. 64.
Though the intention of a Superior be to oblige in such manner him who is
under his charge, so as he should not disobey him without mortal sin, it does
not indeed oblige him in this sort, if the matter of the Law and of the
commandment be not great.

He passes farther, assuring us that God himself cannot make a man criminal by
his command, if that he commands or forbids is not of it self great and
considerable. Nulla lex neque humana neque divinae just obligare potest sub
culpa mortali, in materia levi. Ibid. n. 198. p. 63.
No Law, says he, neither humane nor Divine, can make the sin committed in a
slight matter, to be mortal.

It would be hard to prove, by this rule, that Adam sinned mortally in eating
the fruit which God had forbidden him; since it follows from this principle
that God himself could not forbid him to eat it under pain of mortal sin, the
matter if this command and sin being too slight a thing.

If the Pelagians had known this maxim, it had been very easy to maintain
their error, touching original sin and the punishment it deserves: them, then
in Adam, because they have not committed it by their own proper will; it cannot
be also but very small in it self, if it be considered in its matter which was
but an Apple.

It seems that Amicus was not far off from this opinion, when he drew this
consequence from his principle: Unde etiamsi possit Deus ut supremus poenam
aeternam insligere protransgressione materiae levis; non tamen potest ut Judex,
quoniam ut Judex debet illas inflage e cum proportione ad culpam, quae tanta
est, quanta transgressio ipsa materioe. Amicus, Ibid.
That though God as a Sovereign and absolute Lord might make him suffer an
eternal pain, who did disobey him in a slight matter, yet he could not do it as
a Judge, because in this quality he is obliged to proportion the punishment to
the fault which is not greater then the matter of the disobedience. That is to
say in more clear terms, that God may make use of his absolute power to do
unjustly; it being clear that he who makes use of his power without regard of
Justice, commits unjustice; and if men cannot do in this manner, God can do it
less; because his power is much more strongly and inseperably united to his
Justice then that of men. For it is founded upon Justice, and Justice is the
foundation of his Throne, as the Scripture says. And so to remove Justice from
the power of God, and to make this to subsist without that, is to take away its
foundation and to overturn it. So that instead of concluding that it might be
separate from his Justice, because it is great and Sovereign, the contrary
should rather be concluded, it being manifest that it would not be so great,

Also to say as Amicus says here, that God can punish the faults of his
creatures, otherwise then in the quality of a Judge, is to testify that he may
act without judgment, and not only without cognizance of the cause; but
against the cognizance and light of the truth: and by consequence to despise or
neglect truth and Justice, since it is no other then to despise it, not to
consider it when it is known.

This is finally to make God like those wicked ones, who say in the Scripture:
Our power shall be the Law of our Justice: Sap. 7. v. 7. Sit autem fortitudo
nostra lex Justitiae. Which is proper only to violence and Tyranny, it
belonging to none but Tyrants to measure their Justice by their power, and not
to be willing that their power should be regulated by Justice. This is then to
overturn the power of God, and to ruin it utterly to conceive of it in this
manner, as these new Divines represent it, this is to deprive him of his
Soveraignity and infinite greatness, and to render it defective and like that
of the Creatures. Also these people regard not the interest of God, whilst
they advance his authority in a manner so unworthy of him; but the upholding of
their maxims, and the false reputation of their Schools. Whence it comes that
when the same interest of their Schools and of their Doctrine requires it,

For on one side they take from God the true power, which he has to command
all things great and little, so absolutely that we cannot disobey them without
sinning mortally, and without encurring an obligation to an eternal punishment:
because this is not accommodable to the principle which they have established,
whereby to judge of sin, by measuring its greatness by its matter; and on ^he
other hand they attribute unto God the power which he has not, and which he
cannot have, to torment without sin, and without any cause an innocent person,
and to make him even suffer eternal pains for his pleasure alone, and by his
absolute authority, because it is the sequel of the same principle, and for to
defend it and answer the difficulties and inconveniences it draws after it, it
is necessary that they establish this second maxim: that is to say, that to
defend an error and impiety, they are forced to advance another greater then
the former.

For this is the property of error, to grow always as it advances, and the
extravagancy and the excesses thereof are commonly greater and more visible in
its consequences and conclusions, then in its beginnings and principles, whence
they are drawn. Without doubt the Jesuits would abhor these impieties, and
many other which they promote, if they looked on them alone and in themselves;
but when they see them to be the necessary consequences of their Doctrine, and
correct their opinions. Such is the carriage of Amicus, when he repeats this
the second time, and answers with assurance that Respondeo Deum ut supremum
Dominum punire posse peccatum veniale poena aeterna. Amic. tom. 3. disp. 23.
sect. 1. number. 18. p. 237.
God as Sovereign Lord may punish a venial sin with eternal pain. And to
discover the bottom of this horrible opinion, he proves it by an excess yet
greater, saying that he may even eternally damn an innocent. Nam sieut ratioue
supremi dominii quod habet in creaturas, eas etiamsi nullum commiserint
peccatum torquere potest aeternis poen is: it a iisdem poenis torquere posset
omnes propter veniale tantum peccatum. Ibid.
For as in the quality of a Sovereign Lord, he may cause his creatures to
suffer eternal pains, though they have committed no sin; he may also inflict
the same pain upon one sole venial sin. The more then barbarous in justice and
cruelty which this opinion attributes falsely unto God, is so visible that this
Jesuit himself is forced to confess and acknowledge it. For after he had said
the third time, number. 18. that Concedo Deum just quantum est ex part sua,
quemlibet torquere posse poena aeterna propter veniale tantum, ratione supremi
dominii. Nego tamen id sieri posse quantum est ex part culpae. Cnlpa enim ut
just puniatur, exigit proportionatam poenam. Ibid. n. 18.
God might absolutely torment in eternal pains any person whomsoever for venial
sins, and on his part it might be justly done, because of the Sovereign
dominion which he has over all creatures, And his reason is, because the
punishment of a fault cannot be just, if the penalty be not proportionable
thereunto.

So that to cover in some manner an injustice so manifest, he makes use of a
marvelous subtilty, saying that damnation and eternal punishment, which God
causes an innocent person to suffer, or him who is guilty of venial sins only,
shall not be a penalty but an affliction and a torment. Talis poena quatenue
excederet talem culpam, non esset illi debita; ac proinde nonhaberet rationem
poenae quae ordinem dicit ad culpam, tanquam proprietas illi commensurata; sed
potius haberet rationem tormenti quod Deus tanquam supremus dominus potest
cuilibes creaturoe etiam innocentissimae infligere. Ibid.
This pain, says he, so far as it exceeds his fault, shall not be due unto
him. Whence he draws this conclusion: And therefore shall not hold the place of
a punishment, because punishment is related to a fault as a propriety
proportionable thereto. And that which he adjoyns: That it will be rather a
torment, which God as Sovereign Lord may cause every creature to suffer though
most innocent; serves only to make more appear the injustice he attributes
unto God. For the word torment is more harsh, and more odious then that of
punishment; because pain cannot be called torment, but when it is extreme and
unsupportable. So that if it be unjust to punish an innocent, it is also more
to torment him.

And if God by his will alone may torment an innocent, it shall be no more true
which the holy Scriptures teach us, that God takes from himself only the
motive to do us good, and from our selves only the subject to do us ill;
because both the one and the other shall come of his own will alone; and even
herein he shall be the proper Author of evil, and the greatest evil which a
reasonable creature can suffer, which are the torments and eternal pains of
Hell, if he make him suffer them without having offended him, or for having
committed only some small fault; which is against the universal consent of the
holy Fathers, against the Faith of the Church, and against natural right and
equity.

So the subtilty of this Author instead of mollifying his opinion and
justifying it,

The second conclusion which we said the Jesuits draw from this principle: That
the greatness of a sin ought to be taken from its matter and object, is this,
that he who has a will and a design to commit if he could all venial sins,
sins only venially, Escobar makes thereof a problem; proposing it in this
manner. Habens voluntatem peccata omnia venialia perpetrandi, peccat and non
peccat mortaliter. Escobar, Theol. Mor. l. 3. page 83.
It may be held that he who has a will to commit all venial sins, sins
mortally; and it may also be said that he does not sin mortally. The reason for
this second part (of this problem) is the very principle that we now speak of:
Non peccat, quia malitia interni actus voluntat is desumitur ab objecto, prout
propenitur a ratione. Sed objectum hujus internae voluntat is sunt omnia
venialia, and nulla major malitia proponitur a ratione praeter venialem. Ergo
interna volunt as perpetrandi omnia peccata venialia, non potest esse culpa
lethalis.
Because that, says he, the malice of an inward action of the will is taken
from the object toward which it warps, according as it is represented to it by
the understanding. But the object of this will are all venial sin, and the
malice which the understanding represents unto it is but venial; and for that
cause a will to commit all venial sins can be but a venial sin.

So that a man may have a will to commit all the venial sins which he can
commit in the matter of theft; Escobar in the abridgement which he made of
moral Divinity in one sole Book, proposes the same question, but not any
longer as a problem; but as a resolution and an opinion constantly assented to
by the Society. For he professes to relate no others, and to advance nothing of
himself, no more then from strange Authors. Rogo, auex numero venialium exurgat
mo^ta'e. Unde v. g. per impossible quie omnia peccata venialia committeret,
culpam levem non excederet. Escobar, tract. 2. exam. 1. c. 12. n. 57. p. 385.
It is demanded, says he, whether of many venial sins one mortal may be made;
and by consequent if one committed all venial sins, which is impossible, if the
fault were more then a slight one? He confesses himself that this case is so
extravagant, that it is impossible. Yet he forbears not to propose and resolve
it in this sort. Negative respondeo, cum Granado 1.2. cont. 6. tract. 2. d. 2.
sect. 7. docente volentem uno actu omnia peccata venialia perpetrare, solum
venialiter delinquere.
Then with Granades, who holds that he who has a will to commit all at once;
and by one sole act all venial sins, sins only venially. There is some cause
to doubt whether the question be more strange,

Who can persuade himself that a person can be in favor with God, who is
resolved to offend him as much as he can, so that he may not be damned, and
doing all the evil that he is able against him, with resolution to do yet also
more if he could do it without destroying himself.

If a child should deal thus with his Father, or a friend with his friend, or a
servant with his Master, he would make himself an object of public hate, and
an abomination to the whole world; and there would be no person who would not
judge them entirely unworthy of the quality and name of a Son, friend or
servant. And nevertheless these Jesuits pretend that he who demeans himself
thus toward God, ceases not to be in truth his servant, his friend, and his
son, and that he does nothing which deserves displeasure,

Sanchez proposes a case which is not far from that of Escobar: He speaks of a
man who entering into a Religious Order, had made a resolution not to observe
any rule or constitution of that Order, nor of all the counsels or commands of
his Superiors, but those things only which he could not neglect without
mortal sin; and for all the rest whereto he thought not himself obliged under
the pain of mortal sin as vigils, silence, abstinence, Justes of the Order, and
other such like Religious observations, and mortifications of the spirit of the
body, he would not trouble himself at all, and would dispense with himself as
much as he could. He asks what judgment ought to be made of a Friar who should
be in such an estate? whether his resolution and will which he has absolutely
to violate all the points of his rule, and all the duties of his profession
wherein he believed he should not sin at all, or but venially, should be a
mortal sin? whether this would hinder him from being a good Monk, and whether
this would be a great fault against the obligation which he had to move toward
perfection?

The answer of this Doctor is, that such a man ceased not for all that to be in
a good estate before God; and that he should be a good Friar though not
perfect, and that he sinned not, at least not mortally, against the obligation
he had in the quality of a Religious person to pursue after perfection. One of
his reasons is, that because he sins but venially (as he supposes) in violating
severally every one of the points of his rule, and the regular observations
which he is resolved not to observe, the will which he has to transgress them
all, is but a will to sin venially, and which has for its object venial sins
only;

We shall consider more particularly this case of Sauchez and his answer, in
handling the duties of Friars, and perhaps elsewhere, speaking of mortal and
venial sin, I was willing only to mark this here by the by, as a dependence
and conclusion of the principle, which is the subject of this Chapter, that the
greatness of the sin ought to estimated from, and according to its matter and
subject.

That the Jesuits nourish them that they may gratify the passions of men, and
by consequence excite them to Sin.
HItherto we have shown that the Jesuits nourish sin, by nourishing men in
passions, in evil habits and in vices, in Ignorance, and in a false pretense of
good intentions, wherewith they commonly shelter themselves, which are as it
were the Fountains and the internal principles of Sin. I must now make it
appear that they favor no less the outward principles of the same sin, which
are 1. Human reason and authority, which furnish arms and expedients to
defend them. 2. With customs, which produce examples to support them. 3. The
next occasions, which draw men to them, cause them to fall into them, and
retain them in them. We will treat of every one of these outward principles of
sin, apart, as we have done of the inward.

CHAP. I. Of the maxims of reason and humane authority.
FAith is not less elevated above reason, then reason is above sense; and it is
no less disorder to regulate the lives of Christians, who ought to live by
Faith, by the maxims of humane reason, and much less of reason corrupted, as
it now is by sin, then to desire to judge spiritual things by sense. This were
to transform men into Beasts, and to subject them to follow their senses in the
regulation of their life, and to treat Christians like Heathens, to give them
no other rule for their conversations and actions, then the maxims of
Philosophy and humane reason.

Yet this is it which the Jesuits have done; and all those who read their
Divinity, and principally that which treats of manners, will find therein no
other principles in a manner but those of the lowest Philosophy and humane
reason, and that corrupted. They hardly know what it is to cite Scripture or
Councils, and if they rehearse any passages of the Holy Fathers, it is for the
most part for form only or to resute them, rather then to use them for
foundations or solid proofs of their opinions, in relying on the authority of
these great men who have advanced nothing of themselves in points of
consequence, which belong to Faith or manners, which they had not taken from
those who went before them in the Church, and which came not originally from
the Apostles, and from Jesus Christ,

But the Jesuits, far enough from this conduct, make profession to invent and
to speak things of themselves, to follow novelty, to make every thing probable,
to leave to the ingenious to choose in all opinions. Whence it comes, that
making use sometimes of one, sometimes of another, they accommodate themselves
easily to the humors of all the world, and have wherewith to content all; how
contrary soever they can be. But this also makes them fall many times into
contradictions which are inevitable for them who have no other rule but their
own proper sense.

These are the things which I shall handle in this Chapter, to show what a
wound they have given unto Divinity, and by consequence thereof to good
manners, in substituting reason into the place of faith, and particular and
novel opinions to that of antiquity, and the tradition of the Fathers, I shall
make apparent.

1. That their Divinity is novel, and that they make profession to follow
novelty.

2. That every thing in it is probable, and that they will have the liberty to
follow all sorts of opinions.

3, That their School is venal and wholly complaisant to the world, and that
they will have wherewith to content all sorts of persons, in answering every
one according to his desire.

4. That it is full of contradictions.

I will treat every one of these points severally, dividing this Chapter into
so many Articles.

ARTICLE I. The Jesuits make profession to follow novel maxims, and to contemn
tradition and antiquity.
NOvelty has always been odious in the Church; if at any time it were objected
unto the Saints, they did always defend themselves from it as from a calumny,
and have had an extreme care to advance nothing in the Church which they had
not learned in the Church it self; so far that they have believed that it was
no less crime to introduce or receive new Doctrines then to make or adore
Idols. This is the judgment of Saint Augustine, upon these words of the 80.
Psalm. Non erit tibi Deus recens, where he says that Deus recens aut lapis aut
phantasma est S. August. in Ps. 80.
this new God is an Image of stone, or a false imagination. And a little after,
he unfoldeth his thoughts more at large in these words: Non dixit, a te, quasi
simulachrum forinsecus adhibitum; sed in te, in cord tuo, in imagine
phantasmatis tui, in deceptione ^rroris tui; tecum portabis Deum tuum recentem,
manens vetustus. Ibid.
it is not said, thou shall have no new God without thee: as if he would only
mark the outward and visible forms: but he says, you shall not have a new God
within your selves. That is to say, you shall not bear within your hearts, in
your imaginations in the illusion of your error, a new God, contining your
selves old and corrupt.

All novel opinions contrary to the Tradition and ancient belief of our
Fathers, are, to speak properly, nothing but phantasmes, imaginations and
errors: these are as it were so many Idols which some would introduce into the
Church,

And as those who make Idols, those who sell, and those who buy them to adore
them, are all equally Idolaters: so in the same manner those who invent novel
opinions, those who teach them, and those who follow them, are all accomplices of
the same fault: and though these last may be less guilty, and are more to be
lamented then the others, because they do sin with more ignorance, and wilder
themselves by following blind guides; yet they all find themselves involved in
the same misery, and subject to the same condemnation, pronounced by the
Fathers, and by the Scripture, who condemn this sin, and forbid it as a sort of
Idolatry.

According to these principles of the Scripture, and the language of the
Prophet and of God himself, we may say there are so many Idolaters as there are
writers at this day amongst the Jesuits, there being none of them in a manner
who are not jealous of their own proper thoughts, and who have not introduced
into Divinity some novel opinion; or who do not make profession to maintain and
teach some which have been introduced by their Fraternity, to the prejudice of
the ancients who have been always received and followed in the Church until
these last times.

Poza has composed a great volumn which he has entitled Elucidarium Deiparae,
in which there will be found very little, if all that be thrown out which he
has invented himself.

He maintains confidently that Saint Anne and Saint Joachim were sanctified
from the wombs of their Mothers, and that there is more reason to attribute to
them this privilege, then to Jeremy and Saint John Baptist. He confesses,
Nullus est pro^me in asse^tione hac, sed neque contra me, cum non sit hacterus
disputata. Peza in E^ucidario^. 2. tr. 8. c. 3. p. 547.
that there are no persons that are for him or against him in this proposition,
because none have spoken of it before himself. If there be no Author for him,
they are all against him, and the silence of the Saints and all the Doctors
that were before him, is a manifest condemnation of his presumption, and of his
rashness in so declaring himself an innovator, in an unheard of novelty in the
Church in a matter of Religion.

Molina has done the same thing, where he has gloried to have invented the
middle knowledge in the matter of Grace and of Predestination, with such
insolence, that he is not afraid to say, that if it had been known in the
first ages of the Church, the heresy of the Pelagians possibly had never risen.

Maldonat, (...) habere Antorem qui na s^ntret..... ^ames qur quot ligisse me
memini ^o^s, sic explic^nt; ego autem al^er sentio. Malden.
I would find some Author who was of this opinion, or: all Authors whom I
remember to have read, expound this text in this manner, but I expound it
otherwise. Which is a manifest contempt of the Council of Trent, which forbids
to expound Scripture against the consent of the Fathers; and an imitation of
the language of Calvin and other Heretics, renouncing the tradition of the
Holy Fathers, and all the antiquity of the Church.

If Escobar could have condemned this confidence of his Fraternity, he would
have condemned them only of venial sin. Novas opinio. nes, novas vestes
exponere, v^nialis tantum culp^ est. Escob. ^r. 2. exam. 2. n. 10. p. 291.

Qaia ejusmodi inventione quis gestit aliorum laudem captare. Ibid.


To introduce, says he, rovel opinions, and new sorts of habits into the
Church, is only a venial sin. He has cause to talk of new opinions, as of new
fashions of Garments, for in the new Divinity of the Jesuits who hold all
things probable, there needs no more reason to quit an ancient opinion, then to
change the fashion of apparel; and if there be any ill in it, it is very small,
and that too must come from some peculiar circumstance, as from vanity or
ambition.

Though this censure of Escobar be very gentle, Molina and Maldonat as more
ancient and more considerable in the Society then he, will not submit
thereunto, and Poza is so far from acknowledging, that there is any ill in
inventing new opinions, that he had a design in his Book not to produce therein
any other then the inventions and imaginations of his own mind;

He rehearses many passages out of Seneca, saying Patet omaibus veritas, noadum
est occupata; qui ^n^e nos fueruut, non domini sed duces fuerunt; multum ex
illa futuris relictum est. Seneca, Ep. 33. Dum unusquisque mavult credere quam
judicare, numquam de vita judicatur, semper creditur.
that truth is open exposed to all the World, that none have yet taken
possession thereof; that they who were before us were our guides, but we are
not therefore their slaves; that there remains yet enough for those who come
after us; that every one liking better to believe, then judge, they are always
content to believe, and never judge at all how they ought to live. And a little
after. Non alligo me ad aliquem ex Stoicis proceribus; est mihi censendi jus.
Itaque aliquem jubebo sententiam dividere de beata vita.
I addict not my self to any one in particular of these great Stoical
Philosophers; I have a right to judge them, and to give my advice upon them.
This is the cause why some times I follow the opinion of one, and sometimes I
change something in the judgment of another.

It is clear that these passages go to establish a right for reason above
authority: which had been tolerable in an Heathen, who had no other guide but
Reason, and who speaks of questions and things which cannot be regulated but by
Reason. But a Christian, a Monk, a man who interposes himself to write in the
Church in matters of Faith, for the instruction and edification of the
faithful, to make use of the maxims and terms of a Pagan to ruin the
obedience of Faith, and the tradition which is one of its principal
foundations, staving off the Faithful from the submission which they owe to the
Word of God, and the authority of the Holy Fathers,

He alleges also some passages of Catholic Authors, as that same of
Tertullian. Dominus noster Christus veritatem se, non consuetudinem nominavit.
Tertull.
Our Lord Jesus Christ said that he was the truth, and not the custom. And this
other of Lactantius: Sapicntiam sibi adimuut qui sine ullo judicio invent a
majorum probant, and ab aliis pecudum more ducuntur. Sed hoc cos fallit, quod
majorum nomine posite, non putant fieri posse ut ipsi plus sapiant, quia
minores vocantur. Lactant. lib. 2 divin. instit. c. 8.
These deprive themselves of wisdom, who suffer themselves to be led by others
like Beasts, receiving without discerning all that which the ancients have
invented. That Which deceives them is the name of Ancestors. Imagining that
they cannot be Wiser then they, because they come after them, and because these
are called neoteriques. And in the same place. Deus dedit omnibus pro virili
portionem sapientiae: nec quia nos illi temporibus, sapientia quoque
antecesserunt. Quia si omnibus aequaliter datur, occupari ab antecedentibus non
potest. Ibid.
God has given wisdom to every man, according to his capacity, and those who
precede us in time do not therefore exceed us in wisdom. For being it is given
indifferently to all men, they who came first cannot by their possession eject
others from it.

He considered not when he alleged these passages, that what these Authors
say, is for reproof of those who suffer themselves to be carried with humane
customs and traditions, to the prejudice of manifest truth, or who are too
credulous and timorous in the inquiry after natural things, which depend on
reason;

He alleges also these words which he attributes to the Council of
Constantinople: Beatus qui prosert verbum inauditum, id est novum. Syn. Constable.
art. 1.
Happy is that man who produces an unheard word, that is a now one. Finally, he
cites those words of the holy Scripture: Omnis scriba doctus similis est
patrifamilias qui profert de thesauro suo nova and vettra. Matthew. 13. ver. 53.
every learned Doctor is like unto a Father of a Family who brings out of his
treasure things new and old.

I pass by this last passage of the Gospel of Saint Matthew, which he abuses
manifestly against the sense of the Son of God, and that of all interpreters.
But I cannot pass over the remarkable falsity, and visible corruption of the
pretended words of the Council of Constantinople. For the true words of the
Council are: Beatus qui profert verbum in auditum obedientium. Blessed is he
who utters a word into obedient ears. From which he first cuts off the word
obedientium, obedient. Afterward he joins two words into one, and instead of
in auditum, in to the hearing, which were the Councils words, he makes it say
inauditum, unheard. In the third place adding corruption of sense unto
falsification of words, he says that this word inauditum signifies new. But
there is no cause to marvel that the desire of novelty leads to falsity, and
consequently to errors and heresies.

Azor, and after him Filliutius who does nothing in effect but follow him,
speak also very advantagiously for novelty, saying generally that the
Apostolical Traditions are of humane right, Ex quo officitur ut traditiones
divinae ad ^us divinum specteat, ac proinde sunt immutabiles. Apostolicae vero
ad jus humanum, and propterea Ecclesiae authoritate mut abiles. Azor, Instit.
mor. l. 8. c. 4. q. 4. page 743. Filliutius, tom. 2. tr. 22. c. 1. n. 11. p. 65.
Divine Traditions, says Azor, appertain to Divine right, and by consequence
they are immutable: but the Traditions of the Apostles are humane Laws, and for
that cause the Churoh may change them. He expounds a little above what he means
by Divine and Apostolical Traditions in these terms: Divinae traditiones sunt
qua^ ab ipsius Christi ore Apostoli acceperunt, vel quas Spiritu Sancto
dictante vel gubernante, vel Christo Domino imperante promulgarunt. Apostolicae
sunt qu as ipsi Apostoli tanquam Ecclesiae Praelati, Doctores, magistri and
recto es instituerunt. Azor. Ibid.
Divine Traditions are those which the Apostles have learned from the mouth of
Jesus Christ, or which the Holy Ghost has dictated, and they have written by
his Command, or by that of Jesus Christ. The Traditions of the Apostles are
those which the Apostles have instituted in the quality of Prelates, Doctors,
Tutors, and Governors of the Church. In such manner that according to them,
the Traditions of the Apostles are no other then the Inventions of the
Apostles, which they ordained of themselves, and of their own proper motion,
without having learned them of Jesus Christ, or the Holy Spirit. This is no
more then his words clearly signify, and the division he makes suffers not any
other sense to be given them, since he opposes those Traditions which the
Apostles have instituted of themselves; quas ipsi Apostoli instituerunt, to
those which they have received from the mouth of Jesus Christ, and from those
which the Holy Ghost taught them, and which he established by their Ministry;
quas ab ipsius Christi ore Apostoli receperunt, vel quas Spiritu Sancto
dictante and jubente, vel Christo Domino imperante, promulgarunt.

He makes then of these two sorts of Traditions, as it were, two opposite
members, dividing Traditions into Divine and Humane or Apostolical. He calls
the first Divine, ad jus humanum spectant, because according to him they
proceed from an humane spirit, and not from Gods, and that the Apostles who
were men, instituted them, and are become their Fathers and Authors.

If it be true, as he faith, that the Apostles have made these rules in the
Church, whether concerning faith or manners, and that they have not received
them from Jesus Christ nor the Holy Ghost, he has reason to say that the
constitutions and traditions, which he terms Apostolical, are only of humane
right, because they take their original and their authority from the spirit of
man, and which by consequence may be changed by men; and it may follow also
from the same principle, that they are subject unto error; the spirit of a
man, how holy soever it be, may always deceive him, when he is the Author and
original of his thoughts and actions.

It will follow thence also that the Apostles have governed the Church as
Princes, and Politicians govern their estates and their common wealths, by
their wit and reason. It would follow likewise that the Church is not governed
by the Spirit of Jesus Christ,

The Jesuits perhaps will not be much troubled to agree to all those thing;
which are common enough in their Society, and maintained by their most famous
Writers, who teach that the Laws of the Church are no other then humane; that
its power and conduct extends only to the outward man, and that the Church it
self is only a politic body, as shall be proved elsewhere, when we come to
make known how pernicious these maxims are to all Religion, and overturn the
power and authority of the Church.

After Azor had spoken so basely and so unworthily of the Apostles and
Apostolical constitutions, we need not think that strange which he says
against the Ancients and Fathers of the Church, and would have the opinions of
the new writers of these times to have as much weight and credit as they, so
that if the Fathers sometimes prevail with them against the new Authors, the
new Authors do as often and more frequently prevail over the Fathers. It is in
the second Book of his Moral Institutions, where after he had demanded Prime
quaeritur an opinio probabilior existimetur, ita ut morito praeserri debeat, co
quod sit antiquorum sententia, and altera sit recentiorum?
whether we ought to hold an opinion more probable, because it is from the
ancient Fathers; or Whether for this reason it ought to be preferred before
that of the moderns? He answers in these terms: Respond^o quond^ revera
opiniones sunt pares, saepe antiquorum opinio juniorum sententiae praefeatur:
non tamen lege aut ratione efficaci compellimur ad came semper anteferendam.
Inst. Moral. l. 2. c. 17. q. 1. p. 127.
when the opinions are equal themselves, those of the ancients are commonly
preferred before new writers: but there is neither law nor reason sufficient to
oblige us to prefer them always. This is no great honor to the Fathers, to
say that we may prefer their opinions before those of modern Authors, when
the reasons appear equal on both sides,

But the contempt is more manifest in that which he adds, that even in this
case there is no obligation to subject our judgments to the opinions of the
Holy Doctors of the Church, who in important affairs say nothing but what they
learned of it, and that every one has liberty to follow them, or not to follow
them; so it shall be lawful to follow the moderns always, and never to follow
the Fathers, when the reasons of the moderns are as likely as those of the
Fathers, which will easily appear so to those who judge by humane sense, and
natural reason, rather then by the light of Faith, as the Casuists of these
times, and the people of the world commonly do.

It will also be lawful to prefer the moderns before the Ancients, even when
the ancients are grounded on more strong and solid reasons, according to that
maxim of the Jesuits, who say that we may prefer an opinion, which is less,
before another which is more probable. For this is an infallible consequence of
this maxim, joined to that other, which will have the Fathers, and their
opinions, considered no otherwise then by reason and conformity to humane
sense, as the Parliament of Paris considers the Laws and opinions of the
ancient Roman Lawyers; or rather as the heretics consider the holy Fathers,

Reginaldus handling the same question, whether the ancients or the moderns are
rather to be believed, when they are found in contrary opinions. He
distinguishes upon the Point, saying that Quae cirta sidem emergunt
difficultates, eae funt a veteribus bauriendae: quoe vere circa mores homine
Christiano dign^s, a novitiis scriptoribus. Reginald. praefat. ad Lect.
in resolving difficulties that arise about faith the right thereof is to be
drawn from the ancients: but those which regard manners, and the life of
Christians are to be taken from the modern writers.

It is ordinary with those who have no right to a thing, for which they contest
unjustly, to endeavor to have it divided, to the end that they may have at
least one half, when they cannot carry all for themselves. It was by this rule
that Solomon knew that of the two women who disputed in his presence, in the
case of the Infant, either pretending that it belonged to her; that she who
would have had it cut asunder in the middle ought to have none of it, and was
not the true Mother. So the Jesuits cannot better testify that they are
deprived of truth,

But if it belong to the ancients to determine on questions which arise about
matters of Faith, it must needs be that they also decide difficult matters of
conscience and manners, since the faithful ought to live by Faith; and if we
ought to take from the moderns the rules of manners, and not of faith, we must
have another rule of life given us then faith, if faith be not the source and
measure of good works, nor the principle of Christian life.

Celot undertaking to defend the Casuists of his company, testifies that
Reginaldus has done as he said, and having taught moral Divinity twenty years,
he always made profession to follow the opinions of the newest Authors; and
quidem recentiorum. Which he approves and confirms, relating that very passage
of the Author which we have just now cited in the same terms as we have
produced them: Celot, l. 8. c. 16. p. 714. Quia quae circa fidem emergunt
difficultates, sunt a veteribus hauriendae, quae vero circa mores homine
Christiano dignos, a novitiis Scriptoribus. Which shows that this wicked
DOctrine is not peculiar to one or two, but comes from the genius of the
Society. In whose name this Author wrote, who seems desirous to separate us
from the ancients, and to hinder us from acknowledging them for our Fathers,
that he might set them in their place.

If it be true then that we ought to take the ancients for the rule of faith
only, Augustine speaks according to Scripture. And to speak truth, the children
of the Church receive not their life of the Fathers of the Church, and are not
their children, but of the Fathers of this World, and Divines of the last times.

Celot is not contented to follow Reginaldus in this point, but he speaks of
himself for novelty against antiquity, with a sleightness and contempt
unsufferable. Quid agas? Sic se habent humana omnia, vixerunt moribus suis
antiqui, nos nostris. Utri melius? C^lot in praef. l. 5. p. 240.
What shall we do, says he, all humane affairs are thus; the ancients lived
after their rules, and we after ours. And who shall tell us which are the
better? He acknowledges that which is too true, we now live in a manner quite
different from that of the ancients, and of the Holy Fathers; and this is that
which should oblige us to address our selves rather unto them, then unto the
moderns, to learn to regulate our manners,

There is none but Celot who seems not willing to confess that the ancients are
better then the moderns, in saying, that we know not whether their conduct and
rules be better then that of the moderns. But he should at least have
considered, that we may well sometimes give the moderns the name of Fathers,
but not of Saints, and that by the Holy Fathers, we understand always the
ancients, so that as well the public voice of the Church as that of the
Society it self suffices to convince the blindness of his Pride.

But he is not content to equal himself and his to the Holy Fathers, and
ancient Religious who lived in the primitive times of the Church in a holiness
and purity altogether extraordinary, he has also the confidence to prefer
himself, in these strange terms. Inique de nostro saeculo judicarunt qui
nostratum Religiosorum mores ex antiquorum factis expendunt; ut quod illi
faciendum sibi committendumve censuerunt, hoc nos confestim pro vo luntate
amplexemur aut fugiamus. Plane ut si qu is maturi ae ^i hominem ad puerit^m
redire compellat, quoniam in illo aetatulae slore vinulum and clegantulum
nounihil habebat quod matri arrideret. Celot, Ibid.
They do wrong, says he, to our age who would judge of the life of the
Religious of our times, by that of the ancients: in such sort that what the
ancients have believed themselves to be obliged to do or to avoid, we ought
also to command or forbid, He could not have discovered himself more, nor
testified more contempt of these great Saints and first Religious, then to
compare the moderns to men grown ripe and perfect, and the ancients to infants,
who have nothing at all of solid, but only a prettiness proper to content the
easiness and foolish affection of women. Whence it follows, we are no more to
consider the ancient Fathers, then as children, in regard of the moderns, who
must be the venerable Fathers of the Fathers themselves; and by consequence
they can be no longer their disciples, since it belongs to perfect men to
instruct children, and not children to instruct men.

It seems that it is in this same sense, that Celot speaking of Saint Paul, the
first Eremite, of Saint Anthony, and many other Saints, who imitated them in
flying the corruption of the world, and retiring into the Desert to serve God
there, he says that the Church has rather tolerated then approved those great
personages, and their manner of life altogether Holy and Evangelical. Alios
tulit potius quam express probavit Ecclesia homines seculi fastidio and amore
Dei incitatos, statim cursu in solitudinem se abdentes, ut sanctum Paulum, ut
in primis annis sanctum Antonium and alios ab Augustino memoratos. Celor, l. 5.
c. 4. p. 257.
The Church, says he, rather tolerated then approved formally, those who being
pressed on by the love of God, and contempt of the World, retired as it were in
haste, and went to hide themselves in the wilderness, as Saint Paul and Saint
Anthony, in the first ages, Augustine speaks. We tolerate only that which is
evil or disorderly, which comes always from evil or weakness. This Jesuit
therefore must accuse these great Saints of the one or the other, and that
their actions which were all holy pass in bis mind for disorders or defects,
if it be true that the Church did tolerate them only, as he says, and not
approve them. But she could not give them a greater approbation then by
Canonizing them, and declaring them Saints for that Angelical and admirable
life which they led in the Wilderness, as also the Church testifies at this day
publicly in its office, and its mysteries, and all the great personages of the
Church, the Holy Bishops, the Popes and the Doctors have published their
praises, out-vying as it were one another through all ages of Christianity: and
Celot perhaps is the first amongst Catholics, that has had the boldness to
debase and dispraise them.

But this contempt and insolence will appear yet more unworthy and
unsufferable, when he compares them to those who lived in the first ages of the
world, of whom the Poets speak as of savages and beasts, living without Laws,
without polity, and without conduct; in such manner that those who came after,
being formed and regulated by the reason and industry of the more prudent,
there appeared betwixt them so notable a difference, that it seemed that it
might be said that the former were not men in comparison of the latter. So
Celot speaks and pretends in the sequel of his discourse, that Quemadmodum in
priscorum seculorum hominibus adeo fuit obrutus divinus igni^ meant is and
rationis, ut cum posteriorum aetaetum politis and legantibus ingeniis
comparati, vix homines appareant. Celot, l. 5. c. 10. p. 314.
as the Heavenly fire of reason had so little vigor amongst the men of the
first ages of the world, that comparing it with the beauty and politeness of
the spirits of latter ages, it was hard to believe that they were men; In like
manner Saint Anthony, Saint Paul, and the other Hermits who lived in the first
ages of the Church, compared with the Religious of this present, cannot without
difficulty pass for true Religious;

In the mean time he is so firm and resolute in his opinion, that he cannot so
much as only suffer that the examples of these ancient Fathers, of the Monks,
should be alleged, being not willing they should be otherwise considered then
as children. For see how he bespeaks his adversary: Nae ^u durus and
importunus, qui ad exempla nascentis monachismi perpetuo provocas. Ibid. p. 241.
You are troublesome and importunate, alleging unto us continually the examples
of those who lived when the institution of Monks was but yet in its infancy.
Which he bears so aloft that he fears not to say in express terms; Meminerit
interim hujusmodi interrogationibus antiquitatem sine periculo respectari n^n
posse, Ibid.
That antiquity cannot be attended to without danger. As if the opinions and
the examples of the Holy Fathers, and of the first Religious were not only
unprofitable but also dangerous, and that it were more safe to raze them out of
the memories of men, then to regard and consider them.

But if there be danger to attend unto antiquity,

We must also condemn the whole Church, who publicly celebrates and honors
their memory, and demands of God for her children grace to imitate them, as she
declares often in her office. So that it cannot be dangerous to observe these
ancient Fathers and first Religious, and to follow their examples, but only
for those who have introduced so many novelties, both into their Doctrine and
into their conduct, that the sole view of antiquity, from which they are so
prodigiously departed suffices to convince and to confound them.

ARTICLE II. Of the Doctrine of Probability.
A Whole Book may be made of this Article, which is the principal of this
Extract, as also the subject which is here handled, is the most general and
important of the Jesuits Divinity, in which in a manner all things are
probable, as may be seen by Escobars six Volumes of Problematique Divinity:
which comes to pass not only by necessity,

I. POINT. The principal maxims of the Jesuits concerning probability.
THe Doctrine of probability taken out of the Jesuits Books consists
particularly in these following points.

1. That the Jesuits Divinity makes all things probable.

2. That they pretend that an opinion is probable, though it be held only by
one single Divine.

3. That of two probable opinions we may choose that which is less probable
and safe.

4. Layman and Azor, who are the most famous of the Society.

SECT. I. The opinion of Layman, and of Azor, concerning probability.
LAyman establishes fairly, at first, for a fundamental maxim, Ex duabus
probabilibus partibus quaestionis, licitum est eam sequi quae minus tuta est.
that when there are two probable opinions about one question, it is lawful to
follow that Which is less sure. Of which he renders this reason. Quia in
moralibus operationibus necesse non est sequi quod optimum and tutissimum, sed
sufficit sequi bonum ac tutum. Layman, lib. 1. tract. 1. cap. 5. sact. 2. p. 4.
Because in moral actions it is not necessary to follow the rule Which is
absolutely the best and most safe; and it suffices that it be absolutely good
and sure. Now he pretends Quod autem probabilis opinio tradit, id bonum ac
licitum est. Ibid.
that what is supported by a probable opinion is simply good and lawful, taking
lawful and safe, for the same thing.

But if they demand what will make an opinion probable, Probabilis sententia,
uti communiter accipitur, ita definiri potest: Quae certitudinem non habens,
tamen vel gravi autoritate, vel non modici momenti ratione nititur. Ibid. p. 5.
we may call that a probable opinion, as it is commonly understood, which being
not certain and undubitable, is notwithstanding supported by some considerable
authority, or some reason which is not slight. He afterward expounds the
definition himself in this manner: Autoritas gravis hoc loco censeri debet,
quae est saltem unius viri docti and probi, qui tamen talem doctrinam no^
inconsiderate ac temere, sed post perspecta ra^ionum pondera quae in oppositum
afferri possunt, amplexils est. Ibid.
that authority which may be judged considerable in this matter, is at least of
one learned and honest man, provided that he have not embraced it
inconsiderately and rashly, but after he has weighed and exanimed the reasons
of those who hold the contrary.

In the least temporal affairs we require at least two witnesses, to give a
Judge a competent knowledge of what is necessary for him, whereon to form a
reasonable judgment; and this Jesuit would have a man to repose himself for
eternal salvation upon the word of one man alone, or on an apparent reason. He
confesses himself in this place, page 8. Po^ro probabilior sententia censeri
deb^t, cui lex eo loco recepta assistit. Nam Judex in mandatis habet ut
secundum leges judicet. Ibid. page, 7.
that an opinion ought not to be received as probable in Justice, nor serve for
a rule unto a Judge, unless it be authorized by the Laws which are received in
every place, and that the Judge is obliged to Judge according to those Laws. So
that, according to Layman, it is not lawful for a secular Judge to follow his
own sense, nor that of one or more Consellors in temporal Laws, but he is
obliged to attend to the Laws and Ordinances as the true rule of his
judgments; and yet according to the same Jesuit,

After this we need not wonder, if the Jesuits believe that the conduct of the
Church is altogether humane and politic. For if it be such as Layman here
describes it, it follows evidently that it is even below the conduct of polity,
and is not so much as humane or reasonable.

Emanuel Sa and Escobar, who have made an extract, as it were, and choice of
the principal Authors of the Society, and the opinions which it approves, also
accord in this point with Layman: Aliquando unus ^an um Doctor gravis admodum
opinionem probabilem potest facere. Escobar in pr^oemip, Exam. 3. n. 8. p. 24.
Sometimes one single Doctor, says Escobar, who is of great estimation may
make an opinion probable. And demanding a little after; Number liceat opinionem
probabilem sequi relicta probabiliort? Licet, immo and tutiori. Ibid. n 9. p.
25.
Whether an opinion more probable may be left to follow one that is less
probable? He answers yes, though that also which is left be likewise more safe.

Emanuel Sa expounds himself farther, saying that it is lawful to do that which
we hear affirmed by a learned man, or what we see done by honest men, although
we have cause to fear they are deceived, and believe our selves that the
contrary is more safe for conscience. Potest quis facere quod probabili ratione
vel autoritate putat licere, attamsi oppositum tutius sit. Sufficit autem
opinio alicujus gravis Doctoris, auc honorum exemplum. Sa verb. Dubium. number. 3.
page 183.
A man, says he, may do that which he believes by some authority or some
probable reason to be lawful for him, all be it the contrary be more safe; and
it is sufficient for him to have on his side the opinion of some one Doctor of
reputation, or the example of honest men.

But Escobar raises the price yet higher above him; and sets the last hand as
he pretends unto the Doctrine of probability, and that he might extend the
license which he gives men to do whatsoever they would, to the uttermost point
to which it may be drawn, he says in the Preface of his problematick Divinity
'that Demum non solum tunc judico opinionem habere probabilitatem, quando ille
qui eam suscitavit probabilem esse affirmat, and probabili ratione suffulcit.
Verum etsi doctrina adducta a Doctore, nec a se, nec ab alio vera esse
affirmetur, sed gratia solummodo argumenti fuit inducta. Et sane Doctrina quae
nulli Doctori placuit negative, hoc est quom nullus usque modo probavit, alteri
legenti docto placere poterit. n. 27. Addiderim si caeteri Doctores illam
reprobaverint positive, si tamen eam non esse sufficienter reprobatam alteri
Doctori videatur, nec argumentum pro illa doctrina adductum satis esse solutum,
probabilem posse reputari. Escobar in praefat. Theologiae problematicae.
an opinion is probable not only when he that invented it, says that it is,
and when it is supported by some probable reason: but it ceases not to be
probable, though neither the Doctor who advances it, nor any other say that it
is true: for a Doctrine, which no man ever approved or rejected, may please
some who shall read it. I will add that allbeit even all Authors do positively
reject it, nevertheless if any Doctor find that the reason he make use of to
prove it is not sufficiently destroyed, the opinion may be held for probable.
So that there is place to hope, according to this Author, that the most
universally condemned crimes may one day become lawful, since it depends upon
any one Doctor that shall find that the principles by which worldly men defend
themselves are not sufficiently destroyed.

Tambourin seems yet to add something more to this opinion, or at least to
expound pound it in a more plausible, short, and easy way. Absolute puto cum
Salat, Vasquez, Sanchez, Merolla apud Bardi. de consc. d. 1. c. 6. quibus add
Pasq d. 18. sat is esse in omnibus casibus constare prob. bi^iter opinionem
esse probabilem: ego hic and nunc prudenter operor, quia dum probabiliter puto
hoc esse probabile, satis prudeater illud judicium in praxi sequor. Tambur. l.
1. Decal. cap. 3. sect. 3. number. 126.
He supposes that you are in some trouble, how you are to behave your self,
when you have a strong desire to do something, and can find no opinion whereon
to rely, and to assure you that it is probable: and to set your conscience in
quiet, he answers you, that it is enough that you are probably assured, that
the opinion is probable. So that not only probability is sufficient to excuse
sin, but probability of a probability.

There is no appearance that the Jesuits would make use of this doctrine in
their temporal affairs. And in effect it is not good save only to give them
power to dispose of men's consciences, according to their fancies, and so sport
themselves with the Salvation of Souls, by submitting them to the inventions of
their spirits and their judgments, as a safe rule for the guidance of
conscience, which is a thing never heard of in the Church before them.

Azor handling che fame point, says Quando opiniones sunt aeque probabiles
jure possumus minus tutam in agondo praeferro: immo etiamsi quae minus tuta
est, minus probabil is habeatur. Azor. l. 2. c. 16. p. 126.
that when two opinions are probable the one as well as the other, we may
justly prefer in the practice that which is less sure, though we believe it
also to be less probable. He is not content only to say, Haec authors non
tradiderunt, he forbears not to propose this opinion, whereof he is the
Inventor by his own confession, as a probable opinion and sure in conscience:
because allbeit he want authority, he believes he has a good and sufficient
reason for it: Ratione tamen efficaci concluditur, says he, following the
maxim of his Fraternity, that to make an opinion probable, it is sufficient to
have one authority or reason which we believe to be good.

This good reason is, that Quia id been agitur quod prudenter agitur: sed qui
aliorum consilio ducitur prudenter agit: ergo qui in agendo opinionem Doctorum
probabilem sequitur, prudenter rem gerit.
what is prudently done is well done; and We do that prudently which we do by
the counsel of others: by consequence he that does follow the opinion of
learned men acts prudently. I leave it to those who make profession of logic,
to examine this Syllogism according to their rules, whether it be in good form
or not. I will content my self to say, without digging deeper into this matter,
for the clearing up and making it to be better understood, that if to act in
the manner this Jesuit speaks of be to act prudently, it must needs be that
this prudence comes not from the Father of lights, since it carries us to
prefer something before God and our own Salvation, and not to have so much
love for him nor for the truth, which we see more clear and certain, as for our
own sense, and some secret passion which causes us to embrace and follow that
which is less true and sure.

Dicaftillus extends this prudence so far as to prefer a probable opinion
before that which is certain and safe, even in the matter of the Sacraments.
For that it is, says he, to act prudently: For example, Assero si quis
probabiliter credat se jam confessum de illo mortali, vel ic non commisisse
tale peccatum, vel consessionem prius foctam de ^llo, probabiliter putet esse
validam, vel probabiliter putet tales aut tales cir cumstantias non esse
necessario confitendas; non teneri ad confessionem; etiamsi forte probabilius
sit consenfisse vel peccasse mortaliter. Ratio est quia licitum est cuique
seqai opinionem probabilem, etiamsi contratia sit probabilior; quod principium
satis receptum est in re morali. Suarez de p. d. 22. lib. 9. n. 6. Henriq. l.
5. c. 4. Sanchez, f. l. 1. c. 10. n. 76. Dicastillus de Confessione tract. 4.
d. 9. d. 8. n. 134.
If any one believes probably that he has already confessed such or such a
mortal sin, or that he has not committed it, or that the confession he has
made thereof is valid, or that he is not necessarily obliged to confess such
and such circumstances, he will not be obliged to confess it, though possible
it may be more probable that he has consented unto mortal sin, or that he has
committed it. The reason is, that it is lawful for every one to follow a
probable opinion, though the contrary be more probable, this principle being
sufficiently received in morality, as Suarez says.

If this principle be sufficiently received in the Morals of Suarez and his
companions, it is not received by the Saints which governed the Church, or
rather by whom the Holy Spirit did govern it; wherefore not to speak of others,
Saint Augustine says expressly that Graviter peccat in rebus ad salutem animae
pertinentibus vel eo solo quod cert is incerta praeponeret. S. Aug. l. 1. de
Baptilm. contra Donat. c. 3.
in things which have reference to the Salvation of the soul, a man shall sin
grievousty in this, only that be preferres that which is uncertain before that
which is certain. And by the same rule that which is less certain, and assured,
Nulla satis magna securitas ubi periclitatur aeternit as. No security can be
enough where eternity is in question.

Finally, this prudence is not so much as humane and reasonable; and we should
not approve of it in the conduct of temporal affairs. For if a Physician give
unto his patient of two remedies which he has, the more uncertain and
ineffectual: or if a Consellor in his instructions about a suite, or in a Plea
of great concernment should make use of evidences and arguments which were more
doubtful, and suppress the more certain for any private interest: if an
Overseer or a Tutor who has money to put out, should not lend it him whom he
knew to be the most sure and solvent: If all these persons, I say, acted on
this manner, would they be esteemed wise, or could we say they acted prudently;
or should we have cause to approve or be content with their conduct? It is
probable the Jesuits would not make use of such people, nor employ them in
their affairs of importance; they are only the things of God and of Salvation,
wherein they find it good for us to act on this manner, and wherein they
believe that it is not to act against true prudence.

In pursuance of all these maxims which are as it were the foundations of all
that they say upon this matter, Layman and Azor draw diverse consequences to
decide many particular questions and difficulties.

Layman assures us Doctor alters consulents consilium dare poteft non solum ex
propria, sed etiam ex opposita probabili aliorum sententia, si forte illi
favorabilior seu exoptatior sit. Lavman supra page 6. Immo arbitror nihil a
ratione alienum sore si Doctor consultus significet consulen i opinionem a
quibusdam vir is doctis tanquam probabilem defendi, quam proinde sequi ipsi
liceat, quam vis idem Docto ejusmodi seatentiam speculative falsam sibi certo
persuadeat, ut promde ipsemet in praxi e^m sequi non possit. Ibid.
that a Doctor may give counsel to him that advises with him, not only
following his own opinion, but following also the contrary which other Doctors
hold probable, if it be more favorable or more acceptable. He adds, that he
believes that this Doctor should do nothing unreasonable in saying to him who
consulteth him, that the opinion according to which he has answered his case,
is held by some learned persons, and that by consequence he may follow it;
though he himself believes assuredly that it is false in the theory, and that
therefore he may not follow it in the practice.

And that we might better see his extravagance, he says himself, in the same
p. 7. Etsi probabilis opinio sit medicamentum infirmo profuturum, uon inde
sequitur probabile esse quod liceat medico tale medicamentum dubium adhibere;
quin potius cum agatur de periculo corporis, securior via eligenda est. Quare
Medici and Chirurg^ sequi debent sententias certas and securas, rejectis
incertis and dubi is. Ibid. page 7.
That though it were probable that a Medicine might help a sick person, it
would not follow thereupon that it were therefore probable that a Physician
might give him a dubious remedy: but on the contrary, because that the life of
the body, and the danger of losing it was in question, he is obliged to choose
the meaus which is more safe. Whence he concludes that the Physicians and
Chirurgions are obliged to follow certain and assured opinions, And to take
away from Physicians and Chirurgions all pretense and occasion of failing in a
case so important, he declares that Quod si certa curatio non arcurrat, ^enctur
secta^i ea quae probabilior a sudicat. Ibid page 7.
if they find not a remedy that is certain, they are obliged to make use of
those they judge most probable. He says shortly after the same thing of the
secular Judges: Judex jadicare tenctur secundum sentent^am quae inspectis
allegat onibus probabilior, jurique conformior est. Ibid. p. 7.
That a Judge is obliged to judge according to the opinion, which, after he
has considered all which is alleged and proved on one or other side, seems to
him more probable and more conformable to right.

In tempord things we cannot use too much precaution, nor take too much
security, according to the Jesuits; but in those which concern Heaven and
Salvation, it is not necessary to be so exact, and to employ so much care,
according to the same Jesuits. When the health or life of the body is
concerned, or where there is danger of losing that. they declare that we are
obliged to choose the means that are more safe: but when we deal about the
Salvation, or life of the soul, and the danger of losing it, they pretend that
we may choose the means and follow the opinion which is less secure. To hold
this discourse, and to propose these maxims to the faithful, as the rules of
their conduct, is it not to teach them openly to take less care of their souls
then of their bodies, of their Salvation than of their health, and to prefer
the World before God, and life temporal before eternal?

Layman concludes also, following these principles, that a learned man may give
to diverse persons counsels quite esntrary, according to contrary probable
opinions. Which is very conformable to the prudence of the Jesuits, though this
carriage appear very abominable to the Divine Os bilingue detestor. Prove. 8. v
13. Pondus and pou dus, me^sura and mensura, utrum que abominabile est apud
Deum. Prove. c. 20. v 10.
wisdom, S^poenitens in praxi bona fide s^qu^tur senteatiam quae a quibusdam
Doctoribus tanquam probabilis and tuta defenditur; Confessarius vero, s^u
ordinarius sen delegatus, eandem speculative improbabilem censeat; nihil
obstante sua persuasione tenetur absolutionem confer. lb dap. 5.
If a penitent, says he, follow in simplicity in his conduct an opinion which
some Dostors have maintained as probable and sure, and on the contrary the
Confessor, whether he be ordinary or substitute, thinks it improbable in the
theory, he is obliged to give him absolution, notwithstanding his persuasion.
So the penitent shall be the arbiter and guide of the Confessor, and not the
Confessor of the penitent: and whereas the penitent ought to submit to the
opinion of the Confessor, and thereunto is obliged by all sorts of reason and
justice, the Confessor shall be obliged to follow the opinion of the penitent,
though he judge that which is false and improbable.

Quaeritur 4. an discipulus jure possit sui magistri and praeceptoris
sententiam sequi, ita ut eam secutus probabi^ sentire videatur. Resp^ndeo
posse. Et idem dicendum est de co qui operam navat legendis authoribus ut
doctrinam sibi comparet; qui si quam legerit apud probatum quempiam Authorem
sententiam sequatur, probabiliter opinari merito c^editur: and proinde tunc
hic, tum discipulus suum magistrum seentus a temeritatis crimine liber est.
Azor, l. 2, c. 17. p 131. q 4.
Azor draws almost the same consequences from the same principles, and demands
whether a Scholar may rely upon an opinion which he has learned of his Tutor
or Professor, without troubling himself with others, and whether he may follow
and teach it in security of conscience. He answers that he may; and he says
the same thing of him that meets with any favorable opinion in an approved
Author, he maintains that both of them are exempt from rashness, Si vero
rudis and imperitus, ejus non est opinionum fandamenta discutere. Qaare ut
prudenter factitet, sat is est si boni ac docts viri opinionem sequatur. Si vir
peritus and doctus, debet opinionum ration^s and poadera examinare and excutere
ut prudenter agat. Ibid. q. 5.
On the contrary he pretends that ignorants and gross witted persons are not
obliged to examine the reasons, and the foundations of the opinions they would
embrace, and that to act prudently, it is sufficient unto them to follow the
opinion of a man whom they esteem virtuous and knowing. But those who make
profession of learning are obliged to examine, and to weigh the reasons of the
Authors whom they would follow, to act prudently.

But if in this he give the advantage to the ignorant above the knowing, he
makes them a recompense a little after, in giving to these second all sorts of
liberty above the former, saying that a knowing man may form himself an
opinion, teach it, practice it, and cause others to follow it, though it be
contrary to all that have taught before him, and that no other Author but
himself alone has maintained or does maintain it, provided he believe he have
sufficient reason to maintain it.

Quaeritur quid dicendum quande vir bonus and doctus contra communem opinionem
nullum classicum and probatum Authorem babet; nahilominus tamen habet rationem
manisestam and firmam, an probabiliter sentire diceretur, si contra communem
opinionem senserit urgenti and firma ratioee permotus?
We demand, says he, if an honest and learned man having some strong and
manifest reason against the common opinion; but yet having no received or
approved Author, may by this forceable and evident reason form a probable
opinion, though it be contrary to the common opinion? He answers, Kespoadeo, in
foro conscientiae non est cur temere and imprudenter agere videatur; siquidem
probabilem and justam rationem and causam sequitur. Ibid q. 6.
that before God and in conscience he is not guilty of any rashness nor
imprudence, because he is grounded upon just and probable reason.

See here the prudence and the rare and extraordinary humility of the Jesuits
all at once, and the security they give to their penitents and devouts, making
them depend for their Salvation upon the imagination of one single man, though
contrary to the judgment of all others, without knowing that in all this they
do any thing against that prudence or charity which they ought to have toward
their Neighbors or themselves.

Nevertheless they are not content to give unto men this strange liberty, to
invent new opinions and to follow them against the judgment of all others,
they will also have it lawful for them to quit their own opinion to make use of
that of another, when it is more profitable and more favorable unto them.
Septimo quaeritur, an cuique liceat in foro conscientiae probabilem aliorum
sequi sententiam contra propriam opinionem? Ibid.
It is demanded, says Azor, if it be lawful in conscience to follow others
men's probable against our own proper opinion? He relates two contrary opinions
upon this question, and he concludes with those who hold the affirmative, Haec
opinio est probabilior and verior. Ibid. p. 132.
this opinion is more probable and true. Escobar is of the same opinion, and he
proposes this difficulty himself. Possum probabili aliorum sententiae aptare
meam, probabiliore ac tutiore relicta? Ita plane, nec sic operans contra
conscientiam agam, modo existimem alienam opinionem quam sequor esse
probabilem. Escobar in prooemio exam. 3. c. 3. n. 10 p. 25.
But it is lawful to accommodate my self with the opinion of another which is
probable, quitting my own which is more probable and more sure? He answers in
these terms: Yes without difficulty, and acting thus, I act nothing against my
conscience, provided I judge that the opinion of others which I follow be
probable.

Pilat acted in this manner when he put Jesus Christ to death, quitting his
proper judgment by which he believed him to be innocent, to follow the opinion
of the Jews who maintained that he was worthy of death. And I see not how
according to these rules of probability he can be condemned for pronouncing
sentence of death upon our Savior: but I see that we may rather justify him,
by saying that his judgment was founded upon a probable opinion and more then
probable, because it was not of one single Doctors, but of all the Doctors, and
all the Priests, and all the best learned, and best esteemed persons amongst
the Jews, who by one common consent affirmed it both by their own, and by the
public voice of all the people, that he whom he believed innocent, was indeed
a malefactor who deserved death; Matthew. 25. v. 66. reus est mortis. For
although he have not herein given unto the Judges the same liberty as to others
to follow probable opinions; nevertheless there are others who have granted it
unto them, as Escobar and Castro-Palao, May a Judge in his judgment follow a
probable opinion, leaving that which is more probable? He answers in two words,
that Castro-Palao holds that he may. And passing farther on, he gives him the
power to judge even against his own opinion, as did Pilate who condemned our
Lord, after he had declared publicly that he believed him innocent.

We may also according to these principles of the Jesuits excuse this Pagan
Judge by reason of his ignorance; because not knowing the customs nor the Laws
of the Jews, it seems that he could not do better in this juncture of affairs,
then refer himself to the Priests and Doctors of the Law, who assured him
that according to their Law our Lord ought to dye. Nos legem habemus, and
secundum legem debet mori. Joh. 19. v. 7.

From this general maxim, That it is lawful to forsake our own proper opinion,
and to apply our selves to that of another, and to follow it, though it seem
not so probable, Azor draws his answer which he gives to this question: Decimo
quaeritur, an Sacerdos qui poenitentium confessiones audit, possit contra
propriam s^n^entiam probabili poenitent is sententiae adhoerere? Azor, Ibid. p.
123.
Whether a Priest who hears Confessions, may reasonably come over to the
opinion of his penitent, when it is contrary to his own? He proposes the
opinion of diverse Authors, who took in hand to unfold this difficulty by many
distinctions: but he relyes on that of those who maintain that in every case,
without exception and distinction, every Confessor may and ought to submit to
the opinion of his penitent. Q^arta opinio est in universum asserentium
integrum esse Pres^ytero contra propriam poenitentis opinionem tenere. Et bac
est verior opinio: quia cum poenitentis sententia ^it p^obabilis, ^mprudenter
ac temere Presbyter non agrt si eam contra propriam sequatur. Ibid.
The fourth opinion is of them, says he, that hold absolutely and generally,
that it is lawful for a Confessor to follow the opinion of his penitent against
that of his own; and this opinion is more true; because the advice of the
penitent being probable, the Confessor acts neither rashly nor imprudently in
following his against his own proper sense.

To act in this manner is indeed to deny ones self; but it is not to follow
Jesus Christ as the Gospel has ordained, but rather to forsake him, because
Jesus Christ is truth and rightousness, which he renounceth that renounceth his
own light and his own conscience, to follow the opinion and take the law of a
man to whom he ought to give law according to the order of God and the Church.

From this opinion Azor infers that being a Confessor may always follow the
judgment of his penitent against his own, that he is obliged thereto when he
has heard his confession, and finds not in it any other private indisposition.
Ex qu^ efficitur ut tunc temporis Presbyter debeat paenitentem absolvere, cum
ejus confessionem audivit.
It follows, says he, that a Confessor having heard the confession of his
penitent, is obliged to absolve him. And although the Confessor believes
absolutely that the penitent is obliged unto restitution, and that for this
reason he scruples to absolve him; he pretends notwithstanding that if the
penitent will not be brought to accord thereto, the Confessor is obliged to
believe him, and that when even he cannot believe him, he ceases not to be
obliged to absolve him. His reason is, Quia is qui poenitentium confessiones
audit, little saluti prospicere debet: and sicut poenitens probabilem sen entiam
secutus potest tuta conscientia rem alienam sibi retinere, nec ad restituendum
ulla lege compellitur: sic etiam confessionis auditor Presbyter sure non
cogitur poenitenti praecipere ut rem alteri restituat quam boua side possidet.
Ibid.
because he who hears the confessions of penitents is obliged to provide for
their Salvation:

So that when all the Doctors and all the Saints condemn a man to restitution,
Azor believes that if he can but find one single Casuist that exempts him, he
may uphold himself by his advice, and follow it with a safe conscience as a
probable opinion, without troubling himself about all the rest, and
consequently oblige his own judgment. For he imagines that though a penitent
declares that he has another goods, and that his Confessor with all the
Doctors believe that he ought to make restitution thereof; yet having one
Casuist for him, he is in a probable opinion upon which he may ground his
conscience; and so possessing in simplicity another goods, he cannot be
obliged to quit them. This resolution is without doubt very Christian and very
considerable; but the reason he brings for it is no less. Quia is qui
poen^tentium conserssiones au di^ little saluti p^a^pic^re debet.
Because, says he, he who hears the confession of penitents, is obliged to
provide for their Salvation. As if to incite a man to restore another man's
goods, were not to procure his Salvation, or as if the actions of Justice and
charity were not for Heaven, but for Hell and damnation.

But the contradiction is yet more observable in the conceits of this Casuist.
For after he had opined in this manner in the affairs of conscience and eternal
Salvation, see how he speaks of Physic, and of corporal health and life,
Q^ituritur modo an medicus co^a prop^tam opinionem tuta conscientra possit,
aliorum probabilem opinionem seoutu^, medicinam graviter aegrotanti praebere,
cum tamen ipse existimet eam esse (...)? Respondeo, manifestum esse sure non
posse medicum remedium aegroto adhibere, quando dubitat an sit profuturum aut
nociturum. Ibid. p. 134.
It is demanded, says he, whether a Physician may with a safe conscience
following the probable opinion of other Physicians against his own proper
judgment, give to a man who is very sick a medicine which he believes may kill
him? He answers presently, that it is a manifest thing, that it is not lawful
for a Physician to give to his patient a remedy whereof he doubts, whether it
will save or kill him. He believes then that it is not to be careful enough of
the health and life of the body, to ground it upon uncertain though probable
opinions; and on the contrary, that it is not to have care enough of the
eternal Salvation of the soul, not to be willing to establish it upon like
opinions. Who sees not hence clearly, that the health of the body is to him
more considerable, and more precious then the salvation of the soul, and that
he understands well enough that it is a crime to jeopard temporal life contrary
to a man's own conscience; but it seems to him to be nothing to hazard eternal
life in that manner. We have seen, above, Layman to maintain this rare Doctrine.

He avows also that Deinde perspicunm ctiam est quando sunt opiniones probables
sibi contrariae, estque aliud remedium certum, tunc nefas esse medico certo
posthabito aegrotaitibus secundum opiniones probabiles mederi. Ibid.
it is evident when there happen two contrary opinions, and there be also some
other assared remedy, it is not lawful for the Physician to quit the assured
remedy, and to use the patient according to these probable opinions. Which he
proves by the rule of right, which says Est enim regula juris, certum
tenendum, and dimittendum incertum.
that what is uncertain is to be quitted, and what is certain retained. Quia in
dabiis tutior and certior pars est eligenda. Ibid.
that in doubtful cases that is to be chosen which is more safe and certain.
He then admits this rule in temporal affairs, and acknowledges it for
indubitable and visible by the light of nature alone; and they are only Divine
things, and such as concern eternal Salvation in which he will not acknowledge
them, and in which he believes that it is lawful to act against common sense,
quitting the certain for the uncertain, and dismissing that at pleasure which
ought to be preserred before all the world at once, and all the lives of the
world; as if he would testify that he is of the number of the children of this
world, who are wiser in their Filii hujus seculi prudentiores filiis lueis in
generatione sua suut. Luc. c. 16. v. 8.
affairs, then the children of light in theirs, as says the Gospel; he
pretends even that these latter ought not be so wise in their conduct as the
first, and that Heaven deserves not that we should take so much pain for it as
the earth.

So that this Doctrine is not only pernicious and corrupt, but also entirely
unreasonable, contrary to the light of nature and it self, and proper to
deprive men of virtue, piety, and common sense all at once, and to conduct them
at length to blindness and atheism, which may be clearly seen, only by
passing over what we have already reported hitherto, and representing in an
abridgement some capital points of this new Doctrine, respecting what we have
expressly proved, and especially handling therein the pernicious effects it
produces in the Church and in the World.

Potest quis facere quod probabili ratione authoritate putat licere. Sa, verb.
dubium, n. 3. d. 183.
The Doctors of probability teach us that we may found an advice of conscience,

Probabilis sententia, uti communiter accipitur, ita definiri potest: Quae
certitudinem non habens, tamen vel gravi authoritane, vel non medici momenti
ratione titur. Layman, l. 1. c. 5. p. 5.
That it is a probable opinion which has only one single Author, or one
reason which we esteem good, to maintain it.

and
That of two probable opinions, it is lawful to follow that which we like best.

Quande opinioner sunt aeque probabiles, possumus minus tutam in agende
praeserre; immo etiamsi quoe minus tuta est, minus probabilis habeatur. Azor,
lib. 2. cap. 16. page 126.
That we may even follow that which is less probable and less safe, if it be
more profitable or more favorable.

Doctor alteri consulenti consilium dare potest non solum ex propria, sed etiam
ex opposita aliorum sententia, si haec illi favorabilior seu exoptabilior fit.
Layman, Ibid. p. 6.
That we may follow them both in different affairs, and even in the same affair
also, acting and giving contrary counsels, now after the one, and then after
the other.

Immo arbitror a ratione nihil alienum fore si Doctor consultus sign ficet
consulenti opinionem a quibusdam viris ^octis tanquam probabitem desendi, quam
proinde sequi ipsi liceat, quam vis idem Doctor ejusmodi sementiam speculative
falsam ceito sibi persuadear; ut proinde ipsemet in praxi eam sequi non possit.
Ibid. page 7.
That even when one believes assuredly that an opinion is false, and that we
cannot follow it directly in the conduct of some person, we may send this
person to those who hold with it, and counsel him to follow their advice.

Satis est in omnibus c^sibus constare probabiliter opinionem probabilem.
Tambar. 1 page l. 1. cap. 3. sect. 3. number. 8.
That we are not obliged,

Q^il si Consessarto falsa videatur opinio poenitent is? Debet se accommodare,
si a pro^atis autoribus probabilis reputetue. Escobar, p. 28.

Idem diceadum, etc. quam vis Confessartus falsam esse opinionem poenitentis
existimet. Sanch. op. mor. l. 1. c 9. n. 30. p. 29.


Finally, that even a Confessor is obliged to absolve a penitent who refuses to
submit to his opinion, because he holds some other which is probable, unto
which the Confessor ought to submit himself, though he believe it to be false,
and to quit his own.

It is visible that he who can believe these maxims; may do, say, and counsel
all things which he will, and all things that may please them who consult with
him, and that there can be no affair of conscience so troublesome and so
desperate, for which expedients may not be found, nor crimes so black which may
not be easily excused or justified.

SETC. II. The opinions of other Jesuits conformable to the proceeding for
making all things probable, and to give liberty to follow all sorts of opinions.
I Have in a manner taken only out of Layman and Azor what I have reported in
the precedent Article; and though that might suffice to know the spirit and the
maxims of the Jesuits upon this subject; yet because it is very important, I
will not omit to represent also the thoughts of some other Jesuits to make
appear yet more clearly the conformity of their Doctrine, and to show exactly
that these; maxims are not peculiar to some few amongst them,

Filliutius inquires, Quo pacto quisque gerere se d^beat inter opinioner
contrarias de rebus ageudis in foro conscientiae? Filliut. mor. qq. t. 2. tr.
21. c. 4. n. 125. p. 126.
how are we to behave our selves in the guidance of consciences, when we meet
with two contrary opinions? He answers, out of hand, that it is lawful to
follow that which is more probable though it be less safe; and he adds Dico 2
licitum esse sequi opinionem minus probabilem, etsi^minus tuta sit. Ibid. p.
128.
that it is lawful to follow that which is less probable, though it be also
less safe. A little after he expounds what he means by a probable opinion,
concluding in this manner. Ex his infertur primo, opinionem probabi^emdici
eam^quae in aitur rationibus alicuyus momenti; ita tamen ut pro opposita nulla
sit ratio convincens, quam vel ipse selvere non possit, vel ab alio solvi non
posse sibi persuadeat. Ibid. n. 133.
It follows 1. that we call that opinion probable; that is fupported by reasons
sufficiently considerable, provided notwithstanding there be no convincing
reason for the contrary opinion, of such sort as we cannot, nor believe any
other can answer.

He requires then two conditions to make an opinion probable. That it be
founded on reasons in some sort considerable. Which will be easy enough to
meet with, there being no person who having formed an opinion, does not believe
but that the reason he brings to sustain it, is good and often better then that
of those who maintain the contrary.

The second condition is, Ut pro opposito nulla fit ratio convincens.
that there be no convincing reason for the contrary. This condition is no
less easy then the former. For a reason may be convincing in respect of one
man, which is not so unto another, and he who favors an opinion may find it
good, Tambourin affirms, upon the Decalogue.

So that by these two conditions all sorts of opinions are easily made
probable. For on one side those which of themselves have neither probability
nor truth, nay become probable, if we can find any plausible reason to sustain
them; and on the other side, a proposition most assured and best established by
Tradition, by demonstration, and faith it self, will become only probable
considered by humane reason, which is this Jesuits rule to discern of probable
opinions. For what reason so ever you can bring to prove it, they who know the
evasions of the Schools may elude it by some distinction, or imagine that it
may be eluded by some other, and so it shall not be convincing; and by
consequence the proposition shall be only probable by the definition of the
Jesuits.

He pretends also that the Infertur 2. unius Doctoris probi and docti
auctoritatem opinionem reddere probabilem: quia non leve fundamentum est ejus
auctoritas. Ibid. n. 134.
authority of one honest and knowing man makes an opinion probable, because
this authority is a foundation which is not of little consideration. And though
his Author be alone in his opinion, they hold that his opinion ceases not to be
probable, provided that he believes that he has reason to sustain it against
all others; A communi opinione non facile recedendum; viro tamen docto qui
utriusque partis fundamenta perpenderit, licet, si suam, etsi singularem,
probabiliorem judicet. Ibid. n. 135.
Because although we ought not easily divide from the common opinion, yet it is
lawful for a learned man, if after he has poised the grounds of the two
opinions, he judge that his own though singular is the more probable. And by
consequence others may follow his advice and repose themselves on him for their
Salvation, especially if they have not been Students and made profession of
learning. For this Jesuit assures us, that Unus etiam indoctus potest sequi
alterius docti singularem sententiam. Confidit enim prudenter doctrinae ejus.
Ibid.
a man who is not learned may follow the opinion of him that is, though it be a
singular one. For prudence wills that he confide in his Doctrine. He only
would have us to take heed that this Doctor so singular in his opinion be none
of the ancients. So that if a man knows for certain that one or more of the
ancient Doctors have heretofore held and taught publicly a proposition, it
must not prevail so far with us for all that as to believe therefore that it is
probable, if it be not approved by the Casuists and Divines of our times. Parum
versato in mo alibus non lice^ quodcunque in uno bell altero Doctore ex
antiquioribus invenerit sequi, non sciat etiam a recentioribus illam sententiam
teueri. Ibid. number. 136.
It is not lawful, says he, for one that is not well verst in moral Divinity,
to follow all that he shall find in one or two ancient Doctors, if he do not
know that it is also the judgment of the moderns. He pretends then that a new
Divine may make his opinion probable against the judgment of all others by his
own sole authority: Reginaldus, and Celot after him, say in the name of all the
Society, Quae circa fidem emergunt difficultates, eae sunt a veteribus
hauriendae: quae vero circa mores homine Christiono dignos, a novitis
scriptoribus.
the resolution of difficulties which concern faith must be taken from the
ancients, but that which concerns the life and manners of Christians ought to
be taken out of the modern authors.

This seems to be the extremest debasement and contempt of that can be done to
them whom all antiquity and the whole Church have honored as their Fathers and
Masters, not only to defeat them of this quality, but to set them below the
meanest Authors, and the last Divines of these times, to whom is given the
power and authority to make an opinion probable, by their single approbation
and by their single opinion, secluding that of all others, and this right is
refused to the Fathers of the Church, though they be many consenting together
in the same judgment, submitting them to the new Divines as their Masters and
Judges; in such manner as it is not lawful to hear them, if they be not
approved by the moderns. I know not that the heretics have said any thing more
outrageous and insolent against the Fathers of the Church.

Escobar knows not to be more reasonable in the point of probability then his
Fraternity, since he makes profession to report nothing but their opinions. He
proposes this question: Varietas opinionum inter superiorem and subditum adest;
teneturne subditus obedire? Escobar in preoem. exam. 3. n. 31. p 30.
when a Superior and those that are under his charge are of different
apprehensions, is the inferior bound to obey him? The first opinion he relates
is that of Asserit Salas teneri subditum obedire qurties potest absque peccato.
Salas, who holds that the inferior is bound to obey always whilst he may do
it without sin. The other opinion, which he sets latter as the more probable,
is that of At Castro Pelao; Quando subditus, inquit, nititur opinione probabili
quod praeceptum sit illicitum, vel extra superior is jurisdictionem, potest non
obedire: quia ^nicuique fas est sequi probabilem opinionem.
Castro-Palao,

According to this maxim there will be no more Superiors in the Church nor in
the World, nor obedience unto them, it being manifest that there is no subject
nor inferior who cannot easily think in himself, that the command of his
Superior is unjust, and find reasons too to persuade himself of it, and others
also, or at the least meet some Casuist, who will tell him that it is probable
that his Superior has gone beyond his power, or has no reason to command
this; and therefore he is not obliged to obey him: So the authority of all
forts of Superiors will depend on the will and the fancy of their inferiors.

He holds not only that the privilege of probability may dispense with an
inferior for the obedience which he owes to his Superior; but also to elevate
him above his Superior, and to oblige the Superior to obey his subject. He
demands Tenetur poenitentis opiuionem probabilem confessarius sequi, relicta
sua probabiliori? Tenetur, quia poenitens habet jus ad absolutionem, opinioni
probabili nitens. In prooem. exam. 3. cap. 6. number. 27. dag. 25.
whether a Confessor is obliged to follow the probable opinion of his penitent,
and to quit his own which is more probable? His answer is, that he is obliged
thereto; because the penitent grounding himself upon a probable opinion, has a
right unto absolution. So absolution and pardon of sins is no longer a grace
and favor unto the sinner, according to Escobar, but a right;

But as a probable opinion gives right unto a penitent to demand absolution, so
it might seem that a probable opinion should give a right to a Consessor to
refuse it, if he judged it neither to be his duty, nor to be in his power to
give it him: But Escobar maintains that he is obliged to give it him,
renouncing his own right as well as his opinion, to submit it to that of his
penitent: Quod si Confessario falsa videatur opinio p^nitent is, debet se
accommodare si a probat is autoribus probabilis reputetur. Ibid. n. 27. p. 29.
and if it happen that the opinion of the penitent appear not only not
probable to the Confessor, but that he also believes it assuredly false,
Escobar wills not to refuse to comply with the will of his penitent, and that
if the penitent will not submit nor abate any thing of his pretended right, the
Confessor must accord to what he demands. For if he pretend to use rigor, and
to pass sentence upon this difference, these new Doctors who have established
themselves judges in the Church, and of the Church it self; and of the Holy
Fathers, will almost all with one voice condemn him to give him absolution; and
in case he fail therein, Vasquez 1.2. tom. 1. disp. 92. a. 7. n. 4. addit
Confessarium non proprium negantem absolutionem secundum opinionem probabilem,
solum venialiter delinquere. At credidero mortaliter pecoare si de mortalibus
facta confessio. Ibid. n. 27.
Vasquez will declare he sins mortally, if he be an ordinary Confessor as
are the Parish Priests; or venially, if he be a delegate, as are the Monks. And
Escobar with others having no regard at all to this distinction, will condemn
absolutely them both of mortal sins

SECT. III. The opinion of Sanchez concerning the probability of opinions.
WE might produce upon this subject almost as many Authors as there are of the
Society, because they have in a manner all written of it, and they are all
agreed in the principal questions; so important is this point in their
Diviuity, of which we may say that it is as it were the foundation, and that
there upon their Doctrine and their conduct is built. But there is none that
has more enlarged and cleared this matter, nor by consequence who has more
discovered the spirit of the Society, then Sanchez: For this purpose I thought
meet to give him a title apart.

Amongst many maxims which he establishes as fundamentals in this matter,
this is a principal one. Opinio probabilis est, quae rationi alicujus momenti
inni^tur; ita tamen ut pro opposita part nihil convincens sit. Sanch. op. mor.
l. 1. c. 9. n. 6. p. 28.
An opinion is probable when it is founded on some considerable reason;
provided there be nothing to convince the contrary opinion. From whence he
draws this consequence with Val. Tunc manner apud aliquem intra opinionis
certitudinem quidpiam, quando sibi persuadet rationem illius solvi posse aut ab
ipsomet, aut ab aliis.
A man may hold an opinion probable, when he is persuaded that he himself or
some other can answer the reasons used for ground thereof. And when he is
persuaded that neither he, nor any other can answer the reasons he has against
an opinion, Licet quis rationem peculiarem habeat contra oppositam sententiam
quam ipse solvere nequit, and sibi solvi non posse videctur; non ideo censere
debet opposiram aliorum opinionem improbabilem esse, ut eam sequi nequeat.
He ought not to believe for all that, if it be held by others, that it is not
probable, so that he may not follow it himself. Of which he renders this
reason, which breathes nothing but modesty and humility, Quiae solo suo jubicio
non debet aliorum sententiam improbabilem judicare. Ibid.
Because he ought not judge of himself alone, that the opinion of others is not
probable.

And to make all men resolve to pass by all sorts of difficulties and reasons,
how strong and insoluble soever they appear, he says that it Vel eo maxim
quod sibi persuadere debeat quotidie contingere subito inveniri solutionem
rationum quas quis insolubiles putabat, aut ab aliu facile solvi. Ibid.
happens daily that new answers are found to reasons which were believed to be
invincible. And so although one single person or many cannot answer the
convincing reasons which are given for an opinion, yet they ought persuade
themselves that others may do it; and that so the contrary opinion ceases not
to be probable, and by consequence may be followed in conscience.

So that according to this Author it is lawful to put in practice an opinion
which we believe false and pernicious, thinking that this own judgment made
thereon may possibly be false; so there will be nothing which can be capable to
retain these libertine spirits, nor to hinder them from despising all sorts of
reasons and lights, how clear and strong indeed soever they be, and that by
their own judgment, and after that from doing what they please.

They may extend this liberty much more easily to the most certain truths of
Religion, which have not always convincing reasons for them, because they
subsist only by authority and faith; Sibi persuadeat rationem illius solvi
posse ab ipsomet aut ab aliis. Supra.
might easily persuade himswade himself that either he or some other might
answer them. And if he should not happen on any person who were able to do it,
he might always imagine that it was not impossible to meet some one hereafter;
since that, as Sanchez says, Quotidie contingere subito inveniri solutionum
quas quis insolubiles putabat, aut ab aliis facile solvi.
It happens daily that we meet with answers unto reasons which we believed
invincible. So these principles and these inventions are very proper to
overturn all the truths of piety or Religion.

This same Author demands also, An autoritas unius Doctoris docti and probi
reddat opiaio tem probabil m? Respondeo, reddere; posse quempiam amplecti
opinionem quam a magistro audivit in iis quae ad mo es pertinent. Sanch. Ibid.
n. 7.
whether the authority of one single Doctor who is learned and honest do make
an opinion probable. And he answers; yea, adding that in what concerns manners,
a man may hold to an opinion which he has learned of his Schoolmaster and
follow it. His reason is the same with what Azor and Layman have alleged: Quia
opinio probabilis est quae non levi innititur fundamento: ita autoritas viri
docti and pii non est leve fundamentum.
Because an opinion established upon some foundation that is not slight, is
probable. But the authority of a learned and pious man is no slight
foundation. Whence it is easy to conclude that there is no Jesuit, especially
who are regent, amongst them, whose opinion may not be followed and practiced,
how new and peculiar soever it appear, and be indeed: because there are none of
them who are not believed to have these two qualities of learned and pious, and
to whom the Society do not attribute them.

So that when P. Hereau taught in the College of Clermont, that it is lawful
to kill a man secretly who slanders us, or who persecutes us unjustly,

For they hold that though a Doctor or Regent should be deceived by publishing
errors for truths, we may always in conscience follow his opinion, even when
he erreth against Divine right. This is that which Sanchez maintains resolutely
against them who would restrain this liberty to errors against humane right or
Law. Nec limitatio Adriani and Cordubae, ut hoc intelligatur, si sit error
juris humani; secus si sit divini: Ducunturque quia in rebus humani juris
indagandis non tanta diligentia ac in rebus juris divini exigitur: sed non
placet. Ibid. number. 7.
I cannot approve, says he, their restriction who would extend this to errors
against humane but not Divine Law, they build upon this that we are not obliged
to inquire with so much care the things which are of humane, as those which are
of Divine Law. But I cannot approve this reason. And he is not content to say
it once, but he repeats it often, to show how much this limitation displeases
him. And his reason is, Quippe in utrisque est magni ponderis and momenti
virigravis and pii autoritas. Ibid.
Because in these sorts of things the authority of a grave and pious person is
of great weight. That is to say, that the authority of a Regent Jesuit is great
and strong enough to prevail above Divine and humane right, and to carry us
against the Law of God. And that so we may follow in conscience the erroneous
opinion of a Casuist, though that which he permits atd approves be forbidden
and condemned by God in the Scripture.

He also enquires An ab opinione communi recedere liceat?
whether it be lawful to dissent from common opinions? Vasquez and Azor At
melius Vasquez and Azor dicunt licere viro docto qui non parum literis vacarit,
and recte utriusque partis fundamenta expenderit, suam singularem opinionem
probabiliorem judicare and illam sequi. Ibid. n. 9. p. 29.
that it is lawful for a learned man and well studied, and who has examined
the reasons of both sides, to maintain that his private opinion is more
probable, and to follow it, though he be single and alone in his opinion, being
otherwise it should not be particular: Quod in to eventu non videatur prudenter
operari.
Becaufe he seems not herein to act against prudence, since he has found some
reason that pleases him, and seems good unto him: which will easily happen to
a proud spirit, who can have no greater pleasure then to imagine that he
surpasses others by his subtilty and his wit.

But this Jesuit so learned in this matter, and this wisdom of probability,
discovers one of the principal foundations upon which it is established, and
from which many conclusions may be drawn, saying Nihil repugnat ut duas
opiniones e diametro sibicontradicentes idem intellectus probabiles judicet,
aut aeque, aut alteram probabiliorem. Ibid. number. 12. page 29.
there is nothing which hinders that one and the fame person may judge two
opinions, directly opposite to be equally probable, or that the one is more
then the other. Whence he concludes in this manner: His it a praemissis prima
difficultas est an cuique lice at in fore conscientiae operari juxta aliorum
opinionem minus tutam quam probabilem reputat contra propriam tutiorem, and
quam sibi probabiliorem esse persuadet. Ibid. n. 13. p. 29.
These things being thus presupposed, the first difficulty is to know whether
it is lawful in conscience, to regulate our actions by the opinion of another,
when it is not sufficiently safe, and which we believe only probable, quitting
our own which is more safe, and which we believe assuredly to be probable.

He at first rejects many Authors who say that this is not lawful, and At multo
probabilius est licere. n. 14.
declares that it is much more likely that it is lawful. His reason is that
which he has already alleged many times, Existimans opinionem esse
probabilem, juxta illam operans nec imprudentiae nec temeritatis notam
incurret. Ibid.
That he who believes an opinion probable, acting according to that opinion,
ought not be condemned as rash or imprudent. And seeing it might be said that
this man acting against his own proper light, and quitting an assured opinion
to follow one less safe, puts himself in danger to violate the Law of God, and
indeed to offend him; which is not to act prudently: He answers Nec sic se
exponit periculo peccandi formaliter; id est ita ut illud peccatum ei imputetur.
that he exposes not himself to danger of sinning formally; that is in such
manner that the sin which he commits should be imputed unto him: believing that
he need not care if the Law of God be violated, and if God be dishonored,
provided that we our selves be not blamed, and receive no hurt thereby.

The second conclusion which he draws from his principles, is, Secundo
deducitur contra aliquos neotericos, eum qui in ea esset opinione, ut
probabilius reputaret non licere opinionem minus probabilem sequi, adb^e posse
illam sequi, si probabile quoque reputet licere opinionem minus probabilem
sequi. Ibid. n. 17. p. 30.
that he who believes that it is more probable that we cannot in conscience
follow that of the two opinions which is less probable, may yet follow it
himself, if he believe that it is also probable that he may follow it. So that
a man believing that he ought always follow the more probable opinion, and that
it is not lawful to follow the less probable, may notwithstanding this
persuasion do the contrary without sin; and follow in effect the less probable,
if he believe that the opinion of those who hold that this may be done, is also
probable, which will not be hard for him, or rather he cannot choose but
believe it, if the Authors who are of contrary judgment be not evidently
wicked and ignorant, since one honest and learned man alone is sufficient to
make an opinion probable.

This Doctrine is very convenient for us that we may do all that we please,

Sanchez declares likewise Quarto deducitur, licite quoque viros doctos posse
contra propriam opinionem aliis consulere, sequendo alienam quam probabilem
putant. Ibid. n. 19.
that it is lawful for learned persons to give connsels against their own
proper opinions, following those of others which they believe to be probable.
Whence he by consequence draws great advantage and great privilege for those
who profess learning; that is without doubt for the Doctors of the Society,
which is Quare poterunt hi modo juxta unam, modo juxta contrariam opinionem
consulere. n. 20.
that they may give counsels one while following one opinion, and another while
following the contrary. Yet he advises them Quamvis melins sit semper juxta
eandem, maxim in scriptis; Ne varii deprebendantur.
That it were better to follow always the same opinion; above all when the
answer is in writing. And the reason of this charitable advice is, lest they
should be found out and be convinced of inconstancy and double dealing. of
being found out and discovered in their doublings; ne varii deprehendantur.

But they have an excellent remedy to secure themselves from this reproach
which men may cast upon them, which is, not to give their advice easily in
writing; and this is also the advice which Sanchez gives his associates in this
matter, in which he may well pass for a Master.

Hereunto we may also in this matter join another, which is to answer one who
demands counsel according to the opinion which we hold and which we teach, and
if he comply not therewith, and that the contrary opinion be more agreeable unto
him, to address him to others of the Society, who hold it and teach it. But if
nevertheless they will make use of the right which they have to follow now one
opinion and then another though contrary, and give counfel according to that
which is less probable, to oblige those who consult them, the same Sanchez will
advise them at least to use this precaution, Haec varietas facile vitari
potest, si consuleus sive verbo sive scripto asserat; quamvis contcaria opinio
probabilior sit, hanc quoque tanquam probabilem posse amplecti. Ibid.
that giving their advice, whether it be by word, or in writing, they declare
that though the contrary opinion be more probable, yet nevertheless that which
they have chosen may be followed in surety being also probable.

There are some that affirm at least that when restitution is in debate, or
some case which respects Justice, it is not lawful to follow the more large,
Sanchez pretends that At jure optimo omnes alii Doctores n. 14. allegati
allique praedicta limitatione indistincte tradunt licere opinionem minus
probabilem amplecti, ac eam consulere, ut express Vasquez 1. 2. q. 19. a. 6.
d. 63 c. 1. initio dicit in omni materia id procedere. Ibid. n. 22.
without standing upon this exception it is generally lawful, and without
distinction to follow the less probable opinion, and to counsel others to
follow it, citing Vasquez, who says expressly that this is true in all sorts
of matters.

One of the reasons of them that hold the contrary, is, that Sicut Judex fori
externi tenetur sententiam juxta probabiliorem opinionem far, it a hi con
sulere. Ibid.
as a judge who exercises outward justice, is obliged to judge according to
the more probable opinion; so the Doctors are obliged to do the same in giving
counsel. To which Sanchez answers, Estque latum discrimen inter Judicem fori
externi and interni; quod ille sit Judex inter parts, and it a constitutus a
Republica, ut secundum id quod magis aequum reputat, sententiam ferat. At hic
est in soro poenitentiae Judex, quod judicium est medicinale, nec inter parts,
sed inter Deum and howinem. Ibid.
that there is great difference betwixt him that exercises outward justice, and
he who exercises the inward: because the first is judge between the parties,
and is established by the commonwealth to judge that which he believes to be
most reasonable; but the second is a Judge at the tribunal of penance, to
judge, as a Physician, not betwixt parties, but betwixt Man and God. All this
is more proper to destroy his opinion then to confirm it. For if a Judge who
renders Justice before men, be obliged to follow that which he believes to be
more equitable, how much more is a Confesser and judge of consciences, who
ought to follow justice and verity with so much more care and exactness,
Sanchez, this quality it self obliges us by his proper principles to follow the
opinions that are more safe and more united unto truth, since he avows that
Physicians are obliged always to embrace this sort of opinions, and to forsake
the less probable and more uncertain.

Finally, if humane Judges be obliged to search out and follow that which is
most just, and most safe, because they are Judges betwixt party and party; who
sees not that the Confessors and Pastors of souls are obliged to the same
thing by the same reason, since being Judges betwixt God and Man, they are also
Judges betwixt party and party? For to imagine that God and Man are not true
parties in this interior judgment, were no other then to pretend that the
judgment of penance is no true nor proper judgment; nor act of jurisdiction,
against the definition of the Council of Trent, it being clear that a judgment
cannot be but betwixt two parties. they rather are inseparable, since he always
in all sorts of sins is the first offended and the first Judge; unless happily it
be so that the Jesuits think that God is no party at all, because they see him
not appear before their Tribunals, and because they find no body present
himself to speak for him, and maintain his rights and interests against those
who confess themselves unto them, and who consult them. And thence it comes to
pass that they are so complacent and so easy to grant upon their simple
petition all that they demand, as if there were no parties, and their affairs
were all matters of favor, and absolutely depending on their good grace and
pleasure whom they take for their Judges.

Sanchez says in his following discourse, which we have now examined. Sat est
Confessario and Doctori consulto efficere ut in ordine ad Deum consulens recte
componatur. Ibid.
That it is sufficient for a Confessor, and for a Doctor who is consulted, to
reconcile the penitent and restore him to good terms with God. But this stands
in no stead, because he cannot make this reconcilation, but by observing the
Laws of Justice, and condemning the sinner by an equitable judgment, which
according to himself ought always to follow that which is most conformable to
reason and equity in humane and temporal affairs,

Sanchez fifth conclusion is, Quinto deducitur quid in ea quaestione dic^ndum
sit; an in conscientia tutus sit hubens usum and propositum varios Doctores
consulendi, donec aliquem sibi ad libitum suum respondentem inventat? Quando
recta investigandi ratione, an ea opinio sibi favens sit probabilis. Ibid. n.
24.
that a man who is accustomed to consult diverse Doctors until he meets some one
who answers him according to his desire, and who is resolved to continue this
practice, has his conscience secured so long as he does this with a good
intention; that is to say, to know if the opinion which favors him be
probable. He would say, that if this man had no other intention then simply to
content his last, he should do ill; but because he has a design to do it by
way of probability, in finding out some one who might tell him, not what he
ought, but what he would do, is probable; donec aliquem sibi ad libitum
respondentem inveniat: he is innocent and without reproach; Quia unicuique jus
est jus suum protegendi, and ad id rations quaerendi. Ibid.
because every one, says he, has a right to maintain his right, and to look
out reasons for it.

He pretends then that every one has a right to desire that what flatters his
lust should be probable, and to find out some one who may tell him that it is
probable, or who may make it probable: according to this it shall be lawful for
all men to seek out approvers of their most unreasonable thoughts and motions;
and provided they find but one alone, as there are always complaisant persons
to be found, and especially for the great and rich, it shall be lawful for them
to do what they will, when they are yet condemned by all others, because
according to the Jesuits one alone is sufficient to make an opinion probable.

Sanchez seventh conclusion is the answer which he gives to this question,
Septimo deducitur quid de Confessario dicendum: an contra propriam opinionem
possit poenicentem absolvere? Ibid. n. 27.
Whether a Confessor may absolve a penitent against his own opinion? To make
this question more clear, he proposes it in this example: Ut si Confessarius
contractum esse usurarium judicat: si poenitens probabiliter esse licitum, and
vult illum inire.
As if a Confessor judge a contract to be usurarious; and the penitent on the
contrary believe probably that it is lawful, and will proceed in it. He says
at first that there are some who hold that an ordinary Confessor, as a Parish
Priest, may against his own proper opinion absolve this man, and that it is not
lawful for an extraordinary Confessor. But he answers after that Dicendum est
utrumque Confessarium posse. Ibid. n. 28.
both the one and the other may do it.

It is farther demanded whether they be both obliged so to do? To which he
answers with the same boldness, maintaining Dicendum est, utrumque teneri
absolvere postquam confessionem audivit. Ibid. n. 24.
that both the one and the other of these Confessors is obliged to absolve his
penitent after he has heard his confession. His reason is: Recta enim judicii
ratio petit, ut sicut poenitens confessori recte praecipienti obedire tenetur:
ita confessartus recte dispositum tenetur absolvere, qualis est sequens
opinionem probabilem. Ibid.
Because the order of Justice requires that as the penitent is obliged to obey
the Confessor, when he commands just and reasonable things; so the Confessor is
obliged to absolve the penitent, when he is well disposed, as he is when he
follows a probable opinion.

And he believes that the Confessor is in such manner obliged to absolve this
penitent, that if he fail therein, he sins sometimes mortally; and when that
happens not, his fault is always great and dangerous, the thing being of great
consequence, according to the opinion of Vasquez and Suarez, Et ita credo esse,
quia ratio proposita ita suadet, ac graviter conqueri jure optimo poenitens
potest, quod sibi been disposito, anditaque ejus confessione, absolutio
denegetur. Nec levis videtur culpainstitutionis Sacramenti ac confessaris
muneri contraria. Ibid. n. 24.
which he approves,

Upon this account the holy Fathers and the first Pastors of the Church had
committed many mortal sins, in refusing absolution to many penitents who could
not want probable reasons to maintain against them, that they were well
disposed; unless perhaps the Doctrine of probability being not yet started in
those times, the penitents were not so well instructed then as they may be now,
to maintain and defend their rights and Privileges which this Doctrine gives
them against their Confessors, and to oblige them to renounce their own
judgment supported by the authority of all the Doctors ancient and modern, to
submit to the private opinion of the penitent, provided that it be probable,
and to do for them, and let them do themselves what they please.

Escobar is yet more resolute upon this point then Sanchez. For saying that
Vasquez holds that if the Confessor be a Monk or some other delegate, and not
ordinary, he sins in this case but venially; he is not of his opinion; and he
maintains, with others, that absolutely and without any exception at all, At
crediderim mortaliter peccare, si de mortalibus facta confessio. Escob. in
prooem. exam. 3. c. 6. n. 27. p. 29.
he sins mortally, if the penitent in his confession have mentioned any mortal
sins.

If any dared to say that a Physician is obliged to follow the opinion of his
patient, though he believe his own to be better and more proper to cure his
disease, he would be condemned of folly by all the world.

Sanchez proceeds yet farther, and says, that the Confessor sins mortally or
dangerously if he absolve not his penitent in submitting to his opinion. Imo
dicendum est contra Manuelem n. 28. allegatum, quamvis Confessarius falsam esse
opinionem poenitentis existimet.
Though he is persuaded that it is false, Tandem huc usque dicta locum habent
quando poenitens est doctus, vel ab altis instructus de probabilitate opinionis
quam sequitur. Sanch. l. 1. c. 9. n. 30. p. 31.
when the penitent is learned or instructed in the probability of the opinion
which be maintains against him.

But if the penitent be ignorant, and know not that his opinion is probable,
some believe that the Confessor ought not give him absolution in that estate,
unless he be upon the point of death, in which case they think that he ought to
instruct him, Tunc enim ait Salas esse informandum de opinionis probabilitate,
ne in malo statu decedat. Ibid. n. 31.
declaring to him that his opinion is probable, for fear that he not knowing it
should dye impenitent.

But Sanchez believes that this is also too severe and unjust, and he repeats
it, saying: Verum ego existimo etiam extra hunc statum eum informandum. Ibid.
n. 31.
As for me I am persuaded that even when he is not in this extremity, he ought
to instruct him, and make him know that his opinion is probable. He builds upon
this that he ought to consider the Salvation and good of his penitent, who
otherwise may despise his Confessor, and do contrary to that which he has
ordained, loving rather to follow his own proper sense and passion, then to
subject himself unto the advice of his Confessor: or at least take counsel of
some other for the savegard of his conscience: which he pretends the Quod
Confessor vitabit si poenitentem admoneat.
Confessor may redress by teaching him, that the opinion which he maintains so
obstinately and without any reason, since he knows it not to be probable, is
yet held by some Divines.

He believes also that the Tunc quia Confessor tenetar ex officio bonum
poeaitentis procurare, ill que consulere illum admonendo: tum quia lex
charitatis obligat ad peccatum proximi vitandum. Ibid. n. 31.
Confessor is obliged by his office, and by the Law of Charity which he owes
his neighbor and penitent, to give him this charitable advice, this making one
part of the obligation which he has to procure his weal and Salvation; and
that he is not to stay until his penitent himself demand it, but that he is
obliged to prevent him, when he sees him in danger to fall into sin; as it
would happen in this case, where he sees his penitent wholly resolved to
despise his advice by mere obstinacy, and being bent to follow his own
judgment, and to do what he list in despite of him; Cum in ejusmodi peccati
perpetrandi periculo videt Confessor eum constitutum, cum pertinacem eum
videat. Ibid.
As if seeing the sinner addicted to his own sense, disobedient, and too
obstinate in his disobedience, the Confessor ought or could judge that he is in
a good estate and well disposed to be reconciled unto God; or as if he could
hope to put him out of this wicked disposition and obstinacy by acknowledging
and declaring unto him,

Sanchez proposes also another question in the matter of the Sacraments, which
he resolves according to the same principles. The question is, Octavo
deducitur quid in ea quaestione dicendum sit: An licitum sit in Sacramentorum
administratione uti opinione minus probabili and minus tuta, quando de
Sacramenti valor agitur? Ibid. n. 32 p. 32.
if in the matter of the Sacraments it be lawful to rule ones self by the
opinion which is less probable and less safe, when the validity of the
Sacrament is in question. He answers in reporting the opinion and reasons of
them who maintain that this is not lawful; but he pretends Quamvis tamen hoc
probabile sit, existimo tamen probabilius esse licere in Sacramentorum adm
mstratioae uti opinioue minus probabili, relicta probabilio i^ac tuta, non
obstante irritandi Sacramenti pe^iculo. Ibid. n. 33
that though what they say is probable, yet it is more probable that in the
administration of the Sacraments it is lawful to rely upon an opinion which is
less probable, leaving that which is safe and more probable,

He requires only two conditions. The first is, that here in nothing be done
outwardly against the custom and ordinary manner of administering the
Sacraments. The second is, that it be not prejudicial to the salvation of our
Neighbor. For in these cases that more safe opinion ought to be followed: out
of these two cases he declares that it is lawful to put the Sacrament in
hazard, and administer it in an uncertain manner, only to have the
satisfaction of putting in practice a probable opinion, making less account of
the validity of a Sacrament, and of the respect which is due unto the Sacred
Mysteries and the blood of Jesus Christ, then of the goods and advantages of
private men, and of the customs and outward forms which they observe in the
administration of the Sacraments, as if it were more evil to offend the eyes of
men, then those of Angels and God himself, who sees the Sacrament made void by
the sleightness and rashness of the Minister.

But he makes one exception worth the noting. Excipitur tamen ab hac regula
quando opiniones circa jurisdictionem Sacerdotis ad audiendas confessiones
versantur: atque opinio probabilis docet illum habere: probabilior autem negat.
Talis enim Sacerdos nullo modo peccabit audiendo confessiones. Ibid. n. 35.
We must except, says he, from this rule the case in which the opinions differ
about the jurisdiction of a Priest, for hearing of confessions; when one
probable opinion holds he has this jurisdiction, and the other which is more
probable, denies it. For in this case the Priest sins not at all in hearing
confessions. It may here be questioned whether the same charity toward his
neighbor, which made him before establish the rule which he proposed, Quia
communis error ex prebabili opinione ortus, satis est ad gestorum per eum
Sacerdotem valo em. Ibid.
that an error which has taken its original from a probable opinion, and
which in consequence thereof is become common, is sufficient to authorize and
make valid all that which the Priest does. That is to say, that a false opinion
and an error in the fact and practice, may serve for a rule and foundation to
the conduct of Christians when it is by use, or rather by abuse, past into a
custom. The Son of God says that it is truth that delivers men, and this
Jesuit will have that error and falsehood may deliver them from their sins and
save them.

He ad joins also this other reason: Tum etiam quoniam in confessionibus semper
quispiam fatetur aliqua venialia cum mortalibus. At quilibet Sacerdos certam in
venialia jurisdictionem habet: and ideo cum poenitens non ponat obicem, and sit
certa jurisdictio in aliquam materiae partem, erit certus confessionis valor.
Et quamvis careat ille jurisdictione in mortalia, ca indirecte and per accidens
un tute illius absolutionis remittuntur, atque excutabitur poenitens ab eis
iterum confitendis ratione justae ignorantiae, eo quod juxta probabilem
opinionem credatur vera Sacerdotis illius jurisdictio. Ibid.
that in confessions he that accuses himself of mortal sins accuses himself
also of venial. Now it is certain that every ^riest has jurisdiction of venial
sins; and by consequent the penitent for his part putting no bar, and the
Priest on his part having an assured jurisdiction of one part of the matter, he
is assured that the confession will bevalid; albeit the Priest have no
jurisdiction over mortal sins, they shall be nevertheless remitted indirectly
and by accident, in virtue of the absolution which he shall give for venials,
and the penitent shall be dispensed from a new confession, his ignorance
sufficing for his excuse, because it is just and reasonable,

The Priest is in an error, as he now said, and the penitent ignorant, and yet
he believes that the Priest gives absolution, and the penitent receives truly
the remission of his sins, mavelous force of error and ignorance, or rather
of probability, and of an opinion probable in appearance only, which gives
such virtue to error and ignorance.

Nothing can be spoken more to purpose to conclude that there needs no
approbation nor jurisdiction of Bishops and ordinaries to confess; and this is
that which Sanchez regards and pretends in his exception rather then the good
and salvation of souls. For if this be truth, which he says, the Monks without
having recourse to Bishop or Pope, may of themselves take liberty to confess
in all things and all sorts of persons. They need only command their regents
to teach that without this their absolution may be valid. For so this opinion
becoming probable, it will become lawful. So that putting themselves afterward
into possession, they will acquire some right, and the opinion whereupon this
right shall be founded, though false, continuing to be taught by others shall
become common as well as the possession, Quia communis error ex probabili
opinione ortus, satis est ad gestorum per Sacerdotem valorem. Sanchez, op. mor.
l. 1. c. 9. n. 35. p. 32.
That an error which has taken its original from a probable opinion, and so
is become common, suffices to authorize and make valid that which a Priest
does.

After all this, though their opinion were the falsest in the world, and they
were assured of it themselves, though they have neither jurisdiction nor
approbation, nor privileges, they would not for all that cease to believe that
they have liberty to confess all sorts of persons; because that in the most
depraved consciences, and the greatest sins that can be confessed unto them,
they may always find with ease some one which is venial, for which there will
be no need of approbation, every Priest having power to absolve them, and the
absolution which he shall give for them will extend it self also to the others
how great and enormous soever they may be. All this is the argumentation of
Sanchez, which I do only rehearse and deduce, to make it the more clear.

After this we must acknowledge that the Jesuits are very sober and temperate
in their learning; that they use not all the power which their Divinity gives
them, and that they give great testimony of their religious modesty, and of the
esteem they have for the Pope and the Bishops when they present themselves
before them to demand their privileges; or their approbations to take
confessions, it being in their power to attempt and do it themselves, without
speaking to them thereof at all.

And this license belongs not only unto them but unto all Priests, whether
they be Monks or not. For all Priests as well as they having power to give
absolution for venial sins,

Which is wholly to overturn the order of the Church, and of the Sacrament of
Penance, to expose it to the most profane and sacrilegious hands of the most
wicked Ministers, and to abolish absolutely all the authority of the Bishops,
and of the Pope himself, in what concerns the administration of this Sacrament.

From matters of Divinity Sanchez passes to those of Physic and Law, applying
to Judges and Physicians that which we have now said of the probability of
opinions. He puts this question about Physic. Quando nullum remedium est
certum, sed variae inter medicos opiniones versantur circa medicamenta illo
morbo applicando; an liceat medicamento uti juxta opinionem quam medicus minus
probabilem credit? Ibid. n. 40. p. 33.
When the opinions of Physicians are divided concerning the remedies which are
to be applied to a sick patient, so that there be no certain one; it is
inquired whether a Physician may make use of a Medicine according to a less
probable opinion? He proposes first the opinion of some that say that a
Physician may in this case follow the less probable opinion. But after he had
reported the contrary opinion which holds that this is not lawful, he says,
Existimo hanc sententiam veriorem esse, non quad sit contra obilgationem
justitiae ex medici officio debitam, uti opinione illa probabili, sed contra
charitatem debitam proximo indigenti exhibendam, quae p^tit ut certio^i
medicam, (...) quo possumus, el subveniamus. Ibid. n. 41.
that he esteems this last opinion more true; not that the Physician does any
injury, or any thing contrary to the obligation of his duty, Which confirms
what we said above, that it must needs be, according to his opinion, that the
health of the body should be a thing more precious then the Salvation of the
soul, and that he esteems the Physicians to be obliged to be more charitable
and more circumspect then Priests and Pastors of Souls, since he believes that
Physicians ought to follow the more probable opinion, and to give to the sick
the most assured remedies they can, by the Law of charity to our neighbor who
demands it; qui petit ut certiori medicamento quo possumus ei subveniamus.
Whereas he pretends that Confessors and Pastors of souls are not obliged at all
thereto, and that they may conduct men by an opinion which they believe less
probable and less safe, as has been clearly proved by his own words.

As for Judges when the right of the parties is not clear and certain, and when
it happens that the Doctors are of different advice about the interpretation
and sense of the Law, the opinion of Sanchez is, Quando utraque opinio est
aeque probabilis, verius est integrum esse judici quam maluerit opinionem
eligere, and secundum came judicare. Ibid. n. 45.
that when the one opinion is as probable as the other, it is more apparent
that it is in the power of the Judge to choose which he pleases, So that,
according to this Divinity, the Judges shall have great power to oblige their
friends, since all affairs almost may easily be made probable in the manner
they order and handlethem now a days; and he adds that which follows upon his
principle, Imo cessante scandalo nunc secundum unam, nunc secundum aliam.
That he may, if it give no scandal, judge one while according to one opinion,
and an other while according to another opinion. For if he may choose of two
probable opinions that which he pleases, it follows thence that he may follow
sometimes the one and sometimes the other, according as it shall please him.
Which is evidently to make Justice altogether arbitrary, and to expose it to
the avarice and passion of wicked Judges, the advice which he gives to avoid
scandal, is only to counsel them that they take heed that men do not perceive
this unjust license, because they would thereby be scandalized, fearing more
that men should be offended then Justice and Truth.

He is more troubled to resolve what the Judge is to do when one of the two
opinions is more probable then the other. He cites some Authors who in this
very case give to the Judge power to pronounce according to what he likes best,
and even to follow that which he believes to be less probable; and to prove
their opinion he lends them a reason of which he oftentimes made use before in
like cases about other matters; Quia nec temere nec imprudenter agit, utpote
qui ratione probabili ducitur. Ibid. n. 46.
Because a Judge does not herein behave himself rashly or imprudently, guiding
himself as he does by a probable opinion. Which obliges him to approve the
opinion of these Authors, though he dares not follow it: Quamvis autem hoc sit
probabile; and probabilius judico eum teneri sententiam serre juxta opinionem
probabiliorem. Ibid. n. 47.
Because though it be probable, yet he believes it to be more probable, that a
Judge is obliged to Judge according to the more probable opinion.

There are none therefore but Casuists and directors of consciences alone that
are absolutely exempt from this obligation. It is of them alone that we are to
understand that which Filliutius said above: Licitum est sequi opinionem minus
probabilem, etiamsi minus tuta sit.
It is lawful to follow the less probable opinion though it be also less safe.
And it is to them only that we are to refer all those maxims and
conclusions which we have seen him and his fraternity draw from this principle.
And though in this they favor indeed those of other professions, in fixing
them more unto truth and Justice, and leaving them less liberty to depart from
it, yet it is not this they regard particularly; their principal design is to
favor themselves, in giving to themselves a power to dispose of the power of
Jesus Christ, of his ministry, of the consciences and Salvation of men
according to their fancy, and do in the Church whatsoever they please, without
considering that there is no greater misery then to love license, and to be
able to do what one will against justice and truth.

II. POINT. The pernicious consequences and effects of the Jesuits Doctrine of
probability.
IF the Tree may be known by its fruit, and if a good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit, as Jesus Christ says in the Gospel, we may confidently affirm that
the Doctrine of probability is the most dangerous that ever appeared in the
Church and in the world,

There is no Chapter in this book that proves not this truth; but because it is
important, and that there are, it may be, many persons that will hardly
believeit, and will not easily observe it, through the whole extent of this
treatise; I will represent here some of the principal proofs of the pernicious
consequences and unhappy effects of this Doctrine.

1. It favors and nurses up weak and disorderly persons in their mistakes and
disorders, sinners and libertines in their bad courses, heretics in their
heresies, and Pagans in their infidelity.

2. It teaches to elude the Commandments of God and the Church, and it
overturns Laws Civil, Ecclesiastic, and Divine.

3. It destroys the authority of Princes over their Subjects, of Pastors of the
Church over the Faithful, of Fathers over their children, Masters over their
Servants, of Superiors in Religious Orders over their Inferiors, and
generally of all Superiors over their Inferiors.

4. It introduces independence, and leads to irreligion.

5. It cannot be destroyed nor hindered from having course in the world, if it
be once therein received and taught.

Every one of these points are handled largely enough in diverse places of this
Book, where may beseen the passages of the Jesuits Authors which I have cited
for their verification. Wherefore, to avoid repetitions, I shall often only
give a short touch here, as I pass, of what they say upon the most part of
these points, relating upon the rest some other new passages of their Authors.
I will also recite some out of one of their principal and most faithful
disciples and partakers, Caramuel by name. This is the only exception to be
found in all this work, of my design which I have to rehearse only the Authors
of the Society; if yet in this it can be said that I depart from my design,
since it is still only the Jesuits that speak by the mouth of one of their
disciples, who does nothing but deduce and explicate their opinions. But if
sometimes he seem to be transported, and to expatiate too far in the license of
their Doctrine, he draws always his conclusions from their Doctrines, and he
often supports them by their very reasons; and in all the liberty of his style
and spirit, he advances nothing but what is comprised and contained in the
maxims of the Society, which I have represented in the preceding Articles.

It had not been hard for me to have drawn the very same consequences with him.
But besides that I make some scruple to aggravate or publish the mischief
before it appears and breaks forth of its own accord, it goes sometimes to
such an excess that it seems incredible, if they themselves who are the
Authors thereof did not both own and publish it.

SECT. I. That the Jesuits Doctrine of probability favors disorderly persons,
libertins, and infideles.
1. IT favors weak and disorderly persons, and nuzzles them in their
looseness, because, according to the rules of this probability, there is no
person of any condition who may not easily be excused of the most part of his
duties general and particular, continue to live in his disorder and in the
abuse which the corruption of the age has introduced, and exempt himself from
alms, from fasting, and from other good works which he may and ought to do,
according to the order of God and the Church, that he might come out of his
weaknesses and disorders, since these holy exercises are the strength and
nourishment of the faithful soul.

But all these proofs and others also which might be produced upon this point,
are contained in one sole maxim of the Jesuits Divinity, reported by one of
their chiefest disciples and defendours: Omnes opiniones probabiles sunt
peraeque tutae ac securae; benigniores etsi aliquando siut minus probabiles,
per accidens sunt semper utiliores and securiores. Caramuel, Comment. in Reg.
S. Bened. l. 1. d. 6. n. 58. Item Theol. fundam p. 134.
That all probable opinions are of themselves as safe the one as the other; but
the more pleasant although they be less probable are always more profitable and
more safe by accident. That is to say, because of their sweetness which renders
them more easy, more proportionable to the inclinations of men, and more
favorable to their interest and softness. And it is pretended that they are
more safe because they never fail to be received by the men of the world, as
more profitable to their lusts and temporal interests, though they ruin their
conscience and salvation.

After this there remains nothing to be added to favor those persons who love
their disorders but one, which is, Licet and non licet fovere propositum varios
adeundi Doctores, donec inveniam mihi qui ad libitum respondeat. Escobat,
Theol. Mor. l. 2. sect. 2. c. 6. Probl. 7.
that they may be in a resolution to consult many Doctors, until they can find
some one who answers them according to their desire. Escobar, after he had left
his Readers at liberty, to follow either the affirmative or the negative,
says, Idem babeo compertum.
that he holds for certain that it is lawful.

2. This same Doctrine favors and nourishes sinners and libertines in their
wicked estate, securing them that they are not obliged to leave it, and turn
unto God but at the point of death; and that at that time it suffices to
demand pardon of God; and that to obtain it there needs no more then to say
that we are sorry for offending him, in endeavoring to stir up himself to a
regret for his sins; but if he cannot have the sorrow which he desires, and
which is necessary, it is enough to desire it, that absolution supplies this
default; and that if he have not the convenience even to confess himself,
provided he does what he can,

Cum Confessarius audit confessionem hominis in extremis positi, vel ob
aegritudinem, vel quia mox fit puniendus a Judice, non curet de proposito non
peccandi in posterum, sed solum doleat de contractis peccatis. Difficile est
enim ab hujusmodi hominibus in peccat is emeritis verum de caetero non peccandi
propositum capere. Cum enim non restet vivendum de futuro, ad quod tempus
propositum ordinatur? Nulla est necessitas quae conscientiam premat ad talem
affectum promendum. Id docet Suarez, tom. 4. disp. 4. sect. 3. 2. 5.
As for a resolution to amend and sin no more hereafter, they say it is not
necessary, nor needs the Confessor himself be troubled thereabout, nor torment
him whom he assists at the point of death; since having no longer to live, he
should but speak in vain of this resolution, which referres only to the time
to come; Sicut enim periculosum est hominibus de rebus humanis affectis and
honori deditis, petere propositum non vindicandi ipsis illatam injuriam* ita
propostium non peccandi, si vita duraret, haud petendum est ab his qui ad
peccandum proclives fuerunt. R^stat enim in his qui si scirent duraturam vitam,
nec confiterentur, nec mores mutarent. Petrus Michael de Sanroman Soc. Jesu
expeditionum spititualium Soc. Jesu, l. 5. c. 7. p. 78.
That it were even dangerous to demand it of a man habituate and fixed in his
sin, as of an ambitious person not to revenge himself; knowing that as the
affection which this man has to the world and to his honor will not permit
him easily to pardon and forget injuries which are done him, so the custom and
inclination which that man has unto sin holds his will so bound and captive,
that he cannot so much as say seriously and truly that he is resolved to
forsake it, being also still so disposed, that if he hoped to live longer, he
would neither think of confession nor of changing his life.

3. That which conduces very much to nourish wicked men in their
licentiousness, and weak ones in their softness, is, that neither of them will
take any pains nor labor to part from evil,

The Jesuits divert men very far from this way, when they represent it very
large and so easy to find and hold, that it can hardly be mist; because
according to them whatsoever a man believes or does following some probable
opinion, he always goes on safely toward Heaven, and that the most pleasing
and large opinions lead men thither more safely then others. Which is not only
proper to nourish the wicked in their naughtiness, and the weak in their
looseness; but to weaken the strongest, and make them indifferent and careless,
who proceed with the greatest courage and fidelity in the service of God.

Escobar considering the commodiousness which this Doctrine of probability
gives to men to save themselves without labor, and in doing what they will,
transported with astonishment and joy, speaks in these terms: Profecto dum
video tot diversas sententias in rebus moralibus circumferri, divinam reor
providentiam fulgurare: quia ex opinionum varietate, jugum Christi suaviter
sustinetur. An non melius viatori plures vias a Vallisseleto in Madritum
exponi, quam si unica reperiretur? Certe vel eam nimis latam esse opportet, out
per came transeuntes impediri, ac cum molestia peragrare opus esset. Ergo divina
providentia cautum plures moralium operationum vias exponi, rectamque posse
inveniri actionem, sive juxta unam, sive juxta alteram opinionem homines
operentur. Sautius in select. disp. 44. n. 40. Caramuel tract. supra reg. S.
Bened. 60. Escobar, Theol. mor. tom. 1. l. 2. sect. 1. c. 1. n. 23. p. 54.
When I see such store of different opinions in Christian morality, it seems to
me that the Divine providence does herein lighten with brightness: because that
by means of this variety of opinions we may bear the yoke of Christ more
sweetly. Valladolid to Madrid, that he may learn many ways, then if he had had
but one only. For it must be either very large, or those who travel therein
would hinder one another, and would all have much trouble to hold in it. It is
then a manifest conduct of the providence of God, which presents men many ways
to regulate their actions, and their manners, so that they may always do well
whether they follow the one or the other of the two contrary opinions. Or as he
says in another place; Ut quamcunque duarum primo diversarum (opinionum)
iniecint, recta tendant ad superos. In prologo tom. 1. c. 3. n. 13.
whether they enter into the one or the other of these two entirely opposite
opinions, they will go on directly to Heaven.

It would be very hard to reconcile these maxims with those of the Gospel,
wherein Jesus Christ speaks but of one way to Heaven, saying Quam arcta porta
and angasta via est quae ducit ad vitam, and pauci sunt qui inveniunt eam.
Matthew. 7. v. 13. Ego sum via, veritas and vita. Joan. 14. v. 6.
that it is very strait; and that there are few persons that find it, and fewer
that enter it, walk in it as they ought, and persevere therein: that this way
is the truth, which can be but one, and that it is himself that is this truth,
and way.

And the Jesuits say that God has discovered of late times by a peculiar
providence many ways to Heaven, that he would have them made the most
convenient and easy that they can be possibly, and that the most large and
most easy should be the best and most safe: Profecto dum video tot diversas
sententias in rebus moralibus circumferri, divinam reor providentiam fulgurare.
Benigniores etsi aliquando sunt prababiles per accidens, sunt semper utiliores
and securiores.
that the world might march in crowds by these new ways unto Heaven; crowded,
or lest they should stifle and hinder one another in walking together in the
same way, especially if it were so strait as our Lord represents it; that to
prevent and avoid also yet more this inconvenience, it was fit that these new
ways to Heaven should be not only different and distant from one another, but
that they should be also sometimes opposite. For by this means they which
follow it will be in no danger of pressing or inconveniencing one another in
any kind, since they can never meet one another in the same way. Finally they
teach that for fear of pestering one another in walking continually in the same
way, or for some other reason which you please, you may change the way and
enter some other, and returning by the same path march quite contrary to what
you did, and turn your back on that part you pursued before, and yet never
wander or part from the way to Heaven and Salvation. Thus they declare that any
way is good to walk to Heaven, whether we march on the right hand or on the
left: Melius viatori plures vias exponi, quam si una tantum reperiretur.

Certe came nimis latam esse oporteret, aut per eam trauseuntes impediri, ac cum
molestia peragrare opus esset.

Ergo superna providentia eautum plures moralium operationum vias exponi.

Rectamque posse inveniri act o^em, sive juxta unam sive juxt aliam opinionem
homines operentur, Vir doctus diversis se^undium diversas sententias opposita
consilia dare po^est, Layman, sup. Poterunt hi modo juxta unam, modo j^xta
contrartam op^nion in conjutere. Sanchez. lu^. Qui ex duabus opimonibus
probabilibus non sequitur alteram, potest sequenti momeatu licite tenere
^lteram. Caramuel Theol. fund. page 143.




Molina in Concord. qu. 23. a 4. and. 5. Disp. 1. memb. ult.
As Molina vaunts himself for having invented that knowledge which he calls the
middle knowledge, and affirms that it was unknown to the holy Fathers and to
all antiquity, and that none ever mentioned it before him, so far that he has
not scrupled to say that if Saint Augustine had discovered it, and the Church in
his time had known it, they had not had so great trouble to defend themselves
from the Pelagians, and to refute their error and heresy. In like manner
Escobar rejoices himself, and attributes it to a particular favor of Gods
Providence, that he and his Fraternity have discovered in these last days many
new ways unto Heaven, which have been unknown to all the Saints of the ages
past, to the Church, and to Jesus Christ himself, who has not spoken thereof
in his Gospel, or if he have, it has been only to condemn them, and to
advertise men to fly from them as the broad ways which lead unto damnation.

This same Jesuit may also say in the transport of his joy, and in the
consequence of his principles, that if his ways to Heaven so sweet and so easy
had been sooner discovered, the Church would not have been so severe in its
disciplice,

4. The Doctrine of probability is also very proper to nourish the infidels in
their infidelity. For if it be true that of two opinions we may follow that
which is less probable with a safe conscience, whatsoever we represent to a
Pagan to convert him, he may still abide in his Idolatry: because although we
make the Christian Religion very probable unto him, and he see clearly that it
is more probable then his; yet it is very hard, and as it were impossible to
convince him in such sort that there should remain no doubt of our faith in his
spirit, and no reason which may render his Religion probable; and by
consequence he may persist always in his paganism, without being almost at all
obliged on pain of damnation to quit it,

This argumentation is certain and evident after the principles of the Jesuits
probability: but it will be less suspected, when we shall know that it is taken
out of Sanchez and others cited by Escobar. Sanchez demands when an Heathen is
obliged under the guilt of sin to receive the Gospel which is preached unto
him? And he answers 1. that according to some it is not enough to make him see
that the Gospel is credible, but that it must be made also more credible unto
him than his own Sect, though it do not cease to appear unto him also credible.
But he answers in the second place that this opinion pleases him not at all,
and pretends that in this very case a Pagan is not bound at all to embrace the
Faith: Caeterum hoc non placet it a generaliter dictum; quippe dum Infidelis
sibi persuasum habet suam sectam esse probabitem, quamvis contraria sit
probabilior: tenetur utique in articulo mortis constitutus veram fidem, quam
probabiliorem judicat, amplecti, utpote in coarticulo constitutus, in quo de
extrema salute agitur: ac proinde partem quam tutiorem and probabiliorem
judicat, amplectitenetur. At extra eum articulum non tenetur, quod adhuc
prudenter existimet se posse in sua secta perseverare. Sanch. op. mor. l. 2. c.
1. n. 6. p. 86.
Because that when an Infidel is persuaded that his Sect is probable, though
the contrary, which is the Christian Religion, appear unto him more probable;
it is true that at the point of death when his Salvation is reduced to
extremity, and when by consequence he is obliged to follow that part which he
judges to be more sure and more probable, he is bound to embrace the true Faith
which he believes to be more probable. But out of this extremity he is not
obliged, because he judges prudently that he may persist in his idolatry. In
pursuance of this rule of probability; that he acts prudently who follows a
probable opinion, I believe this Jesuit would not answer for the Salvation of a
man who dies in this estate, since he must then believe that he may be saved
without Faith, and in Idolatry,

SECT. II. That this Doctrine of Probability favors the Heretics, and
nourishes them in Heresy.
THe Doctrine of Probability is no less favorable to Heretics then
Infidels, in that the ordinary arms whereof the Church makes use to defend it
self against Heretics, and to assail them, being Scripture, Counsels,
Fathers, and all that which we have received from the Ancients by Tradition,
the Jesuits and those who with them defend this Doctrine of Probability, find
not these evidences for their advantages, and are so far from making use of
them, that they fear and fly from them all they can.

They cite in their Schools in their writings in a manner as often the Books of
the Pagans, as of the Scriptures; they profess openly to prefer the new
Authors above the Ancient; they acknowledge not properly for Masters and
Fathers, any but those of their Society, to the judgment and the censure of
whom they submit frequently enough the judgments of the Saints which the
Church has always acknowledged for Masters and Fathers.

Divine or Ecclesiastic authority, Suarez, to Vasquez, Molina, Lessius, and to
others such like, without making almost any mention of Jesus Christ, the
Apostles, or the Ancient Fathers, unless for form, and without producing the
definitions of the Councils or Traditions of the Church to determine the
questions, because they find them, not conformable to their Spirit nor their
designs; some can make no use of them because they understand them not, and
even will not give themselves the trouble to study them; and the others,
because they find not in them what is for their purpose.

Besides they wish they could content the whole World, and answer all persons
that consult them according to their humor and disposition. Which obliges
them to look out for a Doctrine that is flexible and manageable, and which may
be accommodated to all occasions. The maxims of Faith seem to them too fixed,
and the rules of the Church and the Gospel too firm, and the opinions of the
Holy Fathers too exact and too unmovable. For this cause they being not able
to make use of them to establish the maxims of which they have need,

In this they imitate and favor the heretics of whom they have learned to
reject the Holy Fathers, especially in the difficulties which regard manners,
and the conduct of life; and to despise Antiquity and Tradition through a blind
love of their own novelties and proper imaginations: and they are even in some
sort more blameable then the Heretics; because they renounce the Father and
the Tradition upon a pretense of holding to Scripture; and these to follow
their new Authors, from whom they declare openly that we ought to take Law and
rules for Christians Morals, rather then from the Fathers of the Church. Quae
circa fidem emergunt dissicultates, eae sunt ex veteribus hauriendae: quae vero
circa mores homini Christiano dignos, a novitiis scriptcribus. Colot, l. 8 c.
16. p. 714.


And indeed there has never been any heresy which has not had at the least
some sort of probability; because there has yet never been any which has not
had some appearance of truth, without which it could have found no followers,
the spirit of man not being capable to follow any thing but truth, nor to be
deceived but by the shadow of it. And it often happens that the greatest
Heresies took for their foundation the greatest truths, and have built on the
strongest reasons. Which shows clearly that if to follow a probable opinion be
to act prudently, and if an opinion be probable when it is grounded on the
authority of some learned man, or some likely reason, as the Jesuits and those
who hold their Doctrine of Probability tell us,

It is true that the Heretics have misconceived the truths of which they would
make use, and especially those of the Scripture which they have corrupted in
their sense and in their words, that they might fit them to their thoughts and
errors. Communis error ex probabili opinione ortus, satu est ad gestorum per
Sacerdotem va^em. Sanch. op. mor. l. 1. c. 9. n. 35. p. 32.
But as according to these new Doctors a probable opinion which has taken its
original for an error, becoming common in process of time become also safe,
and may be followed in conscience. So although the Heretics were convinced to
have had their rise from error, they might according to this maxim pretend
that time and custom have purged away this defect, and have put them in
possession by a good title, which is sufficient to quiet their consciences and
justify them before God. And to fortify them yet more in this their
imagination, and to defend it against those that would trouble them, they may
say that though it were true that the Catholic Religion were more probable
then the Lutherans or the Calvinists, they would yet cease to be probable,
though they were not so much, and that of two probable Religions as well as
Dico 2. licitum esse sequi opinionem minus probabilem, ^tramsi minus tuta sit.
Filliutin^, mor. qq. romans 2. tr. 21. c. 4. n. 128. page 12.
two probable opinions we may follow that which is less probable, according to
the Jesuits Doctrine, though it were also less safe:

For considering this other rule of the Doctrine of probabilty; Omnes opiniones
probabiles sunt per se aeque tulae; benigniores etsi ^iquando sint minus
probabiles, per accidens sunt semper utiliores ac securiores. Caramuel, sup.
that of two probable opinions the more pleasant is always the more safe though
it be less probable, a Calvinist or a Lutheran may say that he has more
reason to continue in repose and security of conscience in his Religion then
the Catholic in his, since it is manifest that the Doctrine of Calvin and
Luther is more pleasing and favorable to nature and the inclinations of men
then that of the Catholic Church, and by consequence it is more safe.

I should have refrained from reasoning in this sort, and drawing these
consequences from the Jesuits Doctrine, though they be clear and evident,
knowing how far it is from the Spirit of the Church to raise new difficulties
in the matters of Faith, and to meet with the objections of the adversaries,
then especially when they notably dishonor the truth, and when they are
capable of hurting the weak spirited, if the Jesuits themselves and their
disciples had not raised these doubts, and proposed these instances, and if
they had not put these reasons in the mouths of the heretics, to teach them to
answer those who would press them to return to the union of the Church.

They go so far as to confess that these instances and these reasons, of which
they acknowledge, that the Heretics may make use to nourish themselves in
their obstinacy, are taken from their Authors, and are no other then the
principles and consequences of their Doctrine of probability, Calvin and Luther.

It cannot be but from this imagination and observations, that one of their
principal disciples, from whom I have extracted all these reasons, and all
these consequences favorable unto herefie, which we now above observed to be
their product, protests, Ad solamen coram qui in Germania habitant; and
multos viros, oliter probos, infectos dolens haeresi aliquas periodos scribe,
and verius ex selectissimis authoribus exscribo. Caramuel Theol. fund. p. 472.
that he has taken these discourses from good Authors, as are all those of the
Society, for the comfort of the Germans and many others, otherwise honest men,
whom he is troubled to behold infected with heresy. For in matter of Religion
we can give no consolation nor repose of conscience to any man, but by giving
him hope that he may be saved in that whereof he makes profession.

After this protestation, he represents first of all a Man born in heresy
amongst the Lutherans and well instructed in Lutheranisme. He supposes in the
second place that this Lutheran is entered into conference with many Catholics,
and, amongst others, with a Capouchin, one of the chief of their Order, who, to
press him to conversion, represents unto him that it is necessary for him
either to renounce Jesus Christ, Roman Church. And in the process of his
discourse, he teaches him to answer this Capouchin, according to the rules of
probability which we have represented above, and he furnishes him with all the
reasons and all the instances which I now deduced, being draw from the same
principles. See how he makes him speak:

Christianismus probabilissima Religio est, and sub ipso dantur sectae
antiquiores, juniores, severiores, benigniores, universaliores, minus
universales, and praecipue Romana: Lutherana, and Calviniana, quae si vere
probabiles: Ergo mihi Lutherano non est necessario redeundum ad Romanam
Ecclesiam, aut secedendum a Christo. Nam praeter Romanam Ecclesiam, cui
probabilitatem non nego, etiam Lutherana est Christiana and probabilis, and
multo Romana benignior. Caram. Theol. fund. p. 472.
Christianity is the most probable of all Religions, and it contains in it many
Sects, of which some are more ancient, and some others are more novel; some
more safe, and some more pleasant; some more diffused, and other more narrow,
amongst which the Roman, the Lutheran, and the Calvinist are truly probable.
And by consequence being a Lutheran, as I am, it is not true that there is a
necessity for me to return to the Roman Church, or to renounce Jesus Christ.
For besides the Roman Church, which I acknowledge to be probable, the Lutheran
is also Christian and probable, and it is besides more pleasant then the Roman;
And by consequence more safe in conscience, according to the rules of
probability.

After that this Author had made this heretic to speak thus, he interrupts his
discourse, that he might himself expound that which he said, or rather that
which he made him say. And to give more weight unto him: Vim rationis jam
penetras. Jam vides quo respicit haereticus. Tenet primo probabile quod Deus
mentiri nequeat. Secundo esse probabile quod revelarit sacram paginam, and si
velis, ut sic loquar, dicta^crit. Tertio esse probabile quod eandem Romana
Ecclesia been exponat. Ibid.
You see, says he; the force of his reason, and what it is he pretends. First
of all, he holds that it is probable that God cannot lie. In the second place,
that he has revealed the Holy Scripture, Rome expounds the Scripture well.

This is no Lutheran that says this, it is a disciple of the Jesuits that
talks thus for him, that expounds and builds his opinions on the principles of
the probability. 1. It is probable, says he, that God cannot lie? It is
probable that he has revealed the Scripture, and that the Church interprets it
well. That is to say, that these Articles are no more points of Faith, or that
Divine Faith as well as humane is a simple probability, and that these points
and these propositions are in such manner probable, that the contrary ceases
not to be also probable.

He dares not say this himself, though it follow evidently from his reasoning
and his principles; but he makes it to be said by this Lutheran: Et tamen
addit: iis non obstantibus haru^s antitheses esse probabiles. Ibid.
He adds, says he, that notwithstanding all these reasons, the contrary ceases
not to be also probable. That is to say, that as it is probable that the Church
interprets Well the Scriptures, it is also probable that it does not
interpret them well; that as it is probable that God has indicted the
Scriptures, it is also probable that he has not indicted them: that as it is
probable that God cannot lie, so it is also probable that he may lie and
deceive men. It is true that this Author is not so bold as to maintain openly
that these Antitheses are probable on the one side as on the other: Harum
Antitheses esse probabiles. This is not the language of a Lutheran neither.
Luther, but because it is a consequence of the Doctrine of probability, which
the Jesuits teach, which he lends this Lutheran to maintain his heresy; and he
makes him say it, without any testimony that he condemns the impiety of these
words. On the contrary he furnishes him with reasons to support it, making him
speak in these words: Resolutionem hanc sic ille confirmat and dilucidat:
Doctrina Aristotelis, inquit, prout nunc traditur in Academi is Italicis,
Haspanicis, Gallicis, probabilissima est: nec contra hanc ipsam prohabilitatem
militat mundi aeternitas, and anima rationalis mortalitas. Nam ifti and similes
errores sunt expuncti, nec jam traduntur a Christianis Philosophis. Haec ipsa
doctrina and schola Aristotelis in tres sectas dividitur, Thomisticam,
Scotislicam and Nominalem; omnes probabiles, omnes celebres, omnes plausibiles.
Dicant Dominicani: Nostra Schola Aristotelica est antiquior Nominali and
Scotistica; ergo redeundum ad ipsam, vel secedendum ab Aristotele. Quid inde?
Nam a Franciscanis ridebuntur qui aeque jure reponent vel admittendam esse
Scotischolam, vel relinquendum Peripateticum. Ibid.
The Doctrine of Aristotle, which as it is now taught in the Universities of
Italy, Spain, France, is very probable, and it cannot be objected that
Aristotle held that the world was eternal, and that the reasonable soul is
mortal, because these errors and others such like are at this day bannished
out of this Philosophy, since it has been taught by Christians. This same
Doctrine and the School of Aristotle is divided into three Sects, which are
that of the Thomists, that of the Scotists, and that of the Nominals: These are
all three probable, all three famous, all three maintainable. If the Dominicans
would say that the School of Aristotle, which is in their Order is more ancient
then that of the Scotists and Nominals; and therefore that we must follow them
or forsake Aristotle, what should they gain thereby. For the Franciscans would
deride them, and believe hey, Scotus, or separate themselves from the
Peripateticks. And making application of these examples to the matter he has
in hand, comparing the Dominicans in the pretension they have against the
Scotists and the Nominals, to teach the true Doctrine of Aristotle with the
Catholics, who maintain against the Lutherans and Calvinists, that they alone
follow the true Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and are in the Church which he has
instituted, he prosecutes it in these terms: Tunc argumentatio urgeret, cum una
sub Christo Religio, vel una sub Aristotele schola demonstrationes produceret.
Nam si una secta demonstraretur esse vera, reliquae demonstrarentur esse
falsae, and in nostro casu ait Barsanomeus; omnes has religiones, Romanam,
Lutherianam, and Calvinianam esse Christianas and probabiles judico, and omnes
hac scholas, Thomisticam, Scotisticam and Nominalem esse Aristotelicas and
probabiles censeo: and hanc ob rem ratiocinio illo disjunctivo; vel redeundum
est ad Romanam Ecclesiam, vel secedendum a Christo, convinei aut urgeri non
possunt. Ibid.
This form of arguing were very strong and cogent, if there were but one
Religion under the name of Jesus Christ, or one School under the name of
Aristotle, which could prove it self clearly to be the true one; For if it were
demonstrated that one Sect were that true one, it would appear by the same
means that the other were false. But in our case the Lutheran says that he
holds that the Roman, Lutheran, and Calvinian Religion are all Christian and
probable, even as he believes that the Schools of the Thomists, Scotists and
Nominals are all Aristotelian, and probable, and that therefore he cannot be
convinced or pressed by this dilemma; that he ought either to come back to the
Roman Church, or depart from Jesus Christ.

And because this defender of Lutheranisme by the rules of probability, knew
that antiquity is a strong foundation of Religion, and a puissant proof to show
that it is true, Nec antiquitatem ipse and Concilia generalia morabitur. Haec
enim, ut ait, probabilia argumenta and non evidentia ministrant. Queniam schola
Aristotelica Christi religione multo antiquior, and scholae Peripateticae multo
numerosiores magistros habent quam generalia Concilia. Ibid.
that he troubles not himself about antiquity, nor the general Councils,
because evident arguments cannot be drawn from them, but only probable ones,
since the School of Aristotle is more ancient then the Religion of Jesus
Christ, and the Academies of the Peripateticks had a greater number of Masters
and Doctors, then general Councils. And he makes all this to be spoken by a
Lutheran; but in the progress of his discourse he becomes his advocate
himself, and speaks thus openly in favor of him: Et si licet Patri Magno
doctrinam Peripateticorum de errore and tyrannide arguere, cur non licebit
Barsanomeo esse cautiori?
It is lawful for Father Valerian de Magnis the Capouchin, to accuse the
Doctrine of the Peripateticks of error and Tyranny, why is it not lawful for a
Lutheran to take care of himself, for fear of being deceived by retiring to the
Roman Church, and least instead of truth, he find there error as well as in
other Sects. Cur non licebit dicere Romanam quidem Ecclesiam probabilissimam,
at que adeo in foro interno esse securissimam. Et tamen hoc ipso non obstante
Lutheranam quam ipse profitetur esse etiam probabilem atque aeque Christianam
and securam. Imo securiorem omnino, quoniam minus probabilis sententia si
b^niguior, etiam securior est. Cur non licebit addere se esse in quieta
conscientia apud Lutherum adeoque nec teneri redire ad Romanam Ecclesiam, nec a
Christi religione secedere. Ibid.
Wherefore may he not say the Church of Rome is as to truth very probable, and
for conscience very safe? But this hinders not, but that the Lutheran Doctrine
which he professes may be also probable, Christian and safe, and even more
safe, since an opinion less probable is more safe, when it is more pleasant.
Wherefore may he not also say that he is in repose of conscience amongst the
Lutherans; and by consequence he is not obliged to return to the Roman Church,
or to forsake the Religion of Jesus Christ.

It is not the Lutheran that talks thus,

And as if this Author kept intelligence with this Lutheran, or as if he were
convinced by the strength of his reasons, and could not make answer unto him,
he concludes in this manner: Sic discurrit etiam nunc Barsanomeus, and debet a
te, lector erudite, compesci. Patrem Valerianum Magnum audivit, and alios
audire desideras. Ibid.
It is thus that this Lutheran also argues at this day; and it were well that
some one of them that read this, would undertake to refute him. He has already
heard Father Valerian the Capouchin, and he desires to hear others.

It is his duty who has done the hurt to apply the remedy; it is their duty
who have put arms into the hands of the enemies of the Church to fight with
her, deberet a te lector erudite compesci.

He does not condemn even that which he makes the Lutheran himself say; he
complains not that he makes evil use of his Doctrine, and of the Jesuits about
probable opinions, or that he interprets or applies it ill. He does not only
not answer his reasons, but he makes them avail as much as he can. He enlarges
them, he expounds them, he adds his own to them, if they be not all his: and
though he dare not approve them directly and possitively, declaring that all he
says is true, he does it yet indirectly inquiring why he may not so speak? And
leaving the question so without answer, he testifies that he has no true one,
and that he agrees that a Lutheran may in this manner defend himself against
them that press him to leave his Lutheranisme, and return to the Church of
Rome.

Also before he entered into this discourse, he said plainly that he did it
only to this purpose to comfort the Germans and other honest people infected
with heresy. He pretends then to comfort them by the discourse of this
Lutheran, and he avouches, that in the matter of Religion and Salvation, there
can be no consolation but in repose of conscience, and in the persuasion of
being united to the true Church, and in an estate of Salvation; se esse in
quieta conscientia apud Lutherum, and that a Lutheran Church is a probable,
Christian and safe Church: Lutheranam Ecclesiam esse probabilem, Christianam,
securam. And so he testifies openly, that one may be saved out of the Roman
Church amongst Lutherans and Calvinists. These are the consequences, and fruits
of the Doctrine which makes all things probable.

SECT. III. That the Jesuits Doctrine of Probability destroys the Commands of
God and the Church, and teaches to clude all Laws Divine and Humane, even that
which forbids to do unto others that which we would not have done unto our
selves.
IT is easy to prove this by reason, and to make it apparent by evident and
necessary consequences, that it is a sequel of this Doctrine. But it seems more
to my purpose to show it by the proper words and examples of the Masters and
defenders of this very Doctrine.

Caramuel proposes this case: Proponi alterum casum. Petrus die Sabbati sub
mediam noctem, ut primum audivit duodecimam, comedit carnes; and postquam satur
excessit e mensa, audivit aliud horologium significans duodecimam. Die sequenti
communicare vult, and sic discurrit: Horologia habent opinionum probabilium
virtutem: at ego comederam antequam tale horologium sonuerit: ergo probabile
est quod sum jejunus. At opinioni probabili conformare conscientiam possum:
Ergo potere communicare. Caram. Theol. ^und. p. 139.
A man hears the clock strike twelve on Saturday at midnight, and presently
thereupon he eats flesh. Rising from table after he has filled himself with
meat, he hears another clock strike twelve also. that is to say flesh on
Saturday; and therefore by consequence it is probable that I am fasting. For I
may regulate my conscience by a probable opinion; and therefore I may
communicate.

He finds no difficulty herein. Wherefore concluding for this man, and for the
devotion he has to communicate after he had well broken his fast on the Lords
day, whether it were past midnight when he did eat, or after he had filled
himself with victuals on Saturday, if he did eat before midnight; he concludes
thus: Et volo scire cur communicare no^ possit; nam stando Doctrinae
praecedenti potest. Et ego in hoc toto petii discursu quod possem negare aut
reprehendere, nihil invenio. Ibid.
I would know wherefore he may not communicate; for he may according to the
preceding Doctrine, which renders all thing probable: and as for me I find
nothing in this reasoning which I can deny or refute.

See another case of Escobar which is no less strange. Non legis libeum
haereticum, scu de Religione tractantem, sed audis alium qui te incitante aut
petente illum legit. Incidis and non incid is in excommunicationem; and
consequenter eges and non eges Bullae indulto ut possis absolvi. Escobar,
Theol. mor. lib. 7. sect. 2. c. 33. probab. 59. p. 289.
You road not, says he, an heretical Book, or which treats of matters of
Religion, but you hear another who reads it upon your request, and upon your
motion, we may say, according to the Doctrine of probability, that you incur
the danger of excommunication, and that you incur it not; You may then follow
whether of these two opinions you please: but if you be a man of conscience,
you will not fail to follow the more safe, which is according to the principles
of this learning, that which is more sweet and more large.

Therefore to assure you yet farther, yet Escobar repeats it again, Non
incurris excommanicationem, nec eges Bullae indulto, ut absolvaris: quia audire
non est legere. Ibid.
that you do not incur the danger of excommunication, and that you have no
need of the favor of a Bull to be absolved. And his reason is manifest:
because to hear read is not to read. So you are exempt from all censure,
according to Escobar, though you have made this heretical Book to be read by
another; and so you have read it by his eyes, and have been the cause of his
sin and your own. This very same thing he expresses in these following words.
Hoc verum censeo etiamsi is qui audit legere, legentem induxerit ad legendum.
Inducere enim alium ut legate, non est legere. Ibid.
I hold that this is true, though he who heard another read have induced him to
read it. For to induce another to read, is not to read.

And if you would know the principle of this opinion, this is it: Et censura
contra facientem lata no illigat consulentem, nisi in Bulla exprimatur. Ibid.
the censure which is ordained against him who does a thing, is not against him
who counsels it only, if it be not expressed in the Bull. Here the question is
not of him that counsels only to read, but of one who causes it to be read
before him that he may hear it; and for this cause he in effect is the Reader,
more then he who lends him his eyes, because he is the Author of the reading,
and the other is only the Instrument.

Incurret vero censuram famulus legens, nisi ignorantia excusetur. Ibid.
As for the servant that reads unto his Master, he runs the peril of being
excommunicated, says Escobar, if he be not excused by ignorance. So that a
servant that reads to his Master an heretical Book in Latin, or it may be in
the vulgar tongue, without understanding more of it then if it were Latin,

The Council of Trent pronounces an excommunication against those who steal
Women. Respondeo hoc decretum non habere lecum in quocumque raptu, sed in
aliquo dantaxat. Quare si quis rapiat mulierem, cousa libidinis, and non ad
contrabendum cum illa matrimonium, non incurrit praedictas coasilis poenas. Ita
Lessius, lib. 4. number. 70. Sanchez, lib. 7. m. 85. d. 13. number. 4. Tamb. lib. 7
c. 6. n. 11.
Tambourin exempts from the curse, and from all other punishment intended by
the Decree of the Council, those who steal or carry them away by foam to abuse
them and not to marry them.

Escobar proposes also this question about indulgences. Scio debere apponi
opera, jejunium scilicet, ele^mosynam, confessionem, etc. Rogo si ejusmodi
opera moraliter hoas ex circumstantiis fiant mala out venialitor ant
mortaliter, sufficianene ad Indulgentiae lucrationem?
I know, says he, that unto indulgences there ought to be joined certain
works, as fasting, alms, confession, etc. But I inquire whether when these
works which are good of themselves, become by some circumstances venial or
mortal sins, they be sufficient also to gain the indulgences? He answers with
Granado: Granadus disp. 4. number 10. sufficere docet opus esse banum ex suo
genere, licet ex circumstantiis and individuo malum sit. Escobar, mor. Theol.
tract. 7. exam. 5. c. 8. n. 59. p. 850.
that it suffices that the work be good in its kind, though in particular it be
naught, by reason of its circumstances. This is a thing unheard of and entirely
incredible, that an indulgence may be obtained by a mortal sin. That is to say,
Granado and Escobar have held it, and it is lawful to follow their Counsel in
rejecting the contrary.

Dispensations as well as indulgences, are the graces and favors of the holy
Chair; and as the Pope does not commonly grant indulgences, but with a
condition of doing certain actions, which he prescribes for the gaining them,
so neither does he grant any dispensations but for certain causes, which are
alleged to obtain them. But, as Escobar holds, that indulgences may be gained
by criminal actions, so he says, also that a dispensation may be gained and
used lawfully, though the cause upon which it is demanded be false, and that it
be grounded on no reason at all. He demands Number sit peccatum mortale
dispensationem concedere, seu impetrare, eaque uti fine justa causa? Granadus
affirmat. At Sanchez de matrimonio, c. 3. disp. 18. n. 10. probabile putat nec
esse veniale peccatum uti dispensatione obtenta sine causa. Escobar. Theol.
mor. tract. 1. exam. 16. c. 4. n. 32. p. 236.
whether it be a mortal sin to demand a dispensation without just cause, and to
make use of it in the same manner. He answers that Granado holds that it is;
but Sanchez believes that it is probable, that it is not so much as a venial
sin, to make use of a dispensation obtained without cause. His reason is, Quia
jam lex relaxata est: unde nec ad veniale remanet obligatio.
because the Law having once lost its force, it obliges no more, and it may be
rejected without venial sin.

He adds Concedere autem ant impetrare sine causa veniale alii solummodo putant
in gravi dispensatione. Ibid.
that some believe that it is but a venial sin, to demand or to grant a
dispensation without cause, and then only when the dispensation is of
consequence. It appears therefore, that according to these people that it will
be no sin, even venial, when the dispensation is not important. And so all the
Laws of the Church shall be exposed to contempt and men's malice, who may
procure themselves to be dispensed with therein by lies and falsities, and
after serve themselves with those dispensations, without committing more then
venial sin, which passes for nothing with the Jesuits.

After this it will be found less strange which the same Escobar says, that
when a dispensation is procured upon any just cause, the cause ceasing, yet the
very same dispensation may be made use of. Cessat dispensationis causa number
dispensatio cesset? Negative respondet Salas, Sanchez affirmat. Ibid. n. 36.
Does the dispensation cease, says he, when the cause upon which it was
obtains cease? He answers, that Salas holds the negative, but Sanchez holds
the contrary. Both these Doctors are capable to make that opinion probable. And
therefore we may follow whether we please, according to the Jesuits.

From this principle Granado and Diana draw many conclusions remarkable in the
practick. Cum quo dispensatum est propter morbum in esu carnium, potest vesci
his licet omnino convaluerit.
That a person who has obtained a dispensation to eat flesh on prohibited
days, because he is sick, may continue to eat though he be well recovered. Cum
quo propter infirmitatem disp^nsatum est in voto Religionis, postquam couvaluit
non tenetur.
That one who has procured a dispensation from a Religious vow, because of
some infirmity, is not obliged to his vow, no not after he is healed of his
infirmity. Cum quo propter infirmitatem oculorum dispensatum est in onere
recitandi horas etsi convaluerit non tenetur legere.
That an Ecclesiastic who has obtained a dispensation from reading his
Breviary, because of some infirmity in his eyes, is not obliged to read after
he is healed.

All these things are very probable, if that be true, which Escobar has told
us above, that a dispensation may be demanded without any reasonable cause, and
afterward be made use of without sin: they are also even certain and evident,
if as he has said with Salas, a dispensation determines not though the cause
upon which it was obtained cease. But this is to prove a less disorder by a
greater, and practices which are bad, by a principle corrupt and erroneous:
this is to open a door to all looseness and libertinsme, and to despise all the
Laws of the Church.

He proposes also a like case: Tempore praesationis quis venit ad Sacrum
audiendum quod unice ^bbratur. Teneturne ill^m singularis illius Sacrificii
partem audire? Sanch. and Suar. tene^i asserunt. Quod illa sit praecipua sacri
pars: ego autem probabi^iter assero non t^i; qu^a per illum partem Missae non
potest implere praeceptum. De Escob. mor. Theoi. tract. 1. exam. 11. v. 4. n.
108.
There being but one Mass said in a Church, a man comes there when they are
rehearsing the Preface: it is demanded whether he be obliged to hear the
remainder of that single Mass? Sanchez and Suarez say that he is, because this
is the principal part of the Mass: but I hold, that it is probable that he is
not obliged, We may conclude by this, that he who cannot pay all his Debt, is
not obliged to pay what he can, and that weakness discharges him of what he
can, as well as what he cannot.

Caramouel reports many like cases, whereupon the resolutions are sometimes so
extravagant, that he is obliged to disown them, or at least to dissemble that
he approves them; though he affirms that they are conformable to the principles
of the Doctrine of Probability, and that they follow necessarily from the
Doctrine of Diana, whom he professes to follow throughout, as they both follow
the Jesuits, Sequemur agnum, hoc est Dianam, quocumque ierit. These extravagant
cases are these: Juxta mores and rubricas Monasticas in Officio solenni habemus
12 lectiones and totidem responsoria quae non recitat Communitas, sed audit
tantum. Ergo si siat 24 in Choro, and singuli dicant simul lectionem and
responsorium, satisfacient praecepto legendi 12 lectiones and totidem
responsoria. Caram. Theol. sund. p. 225. and seq.
In Monasteries where according to the custom and rules of the Office, on
solemn Feast days, twelve Lessons and as many Responsals are said, which the
whole Community rehearses not, but hears only, there are found 24 Monks in the
Quire, by distributing the 12 Lessons to 12 Monks, and the 12 Responsals to 12
others, and causing them read all together, and at the same time, every one his
Lesson or his Responsal whereof he has charge, they will satisfy their
obligation, to read 12 Lessons and 12 Responsals. The second is; Quando duo
legunt simul, non erit opus ut alter alterum expe^et, sed poterit alter
incipere versum sequentem antequam alter praecedentem absolvat; quoniam potest
simul se and socium audire, nec est cur ad attentionem and auscultationem
recurras, quia attentionem internam non esse necessariam putamus. Ibid.
When two persons say their Breviary together, it is not needful that they
hear one another; but one may begin one verse, before another has ended that
which goes before,

If then instead of two persons who say the Breviary together, we take so many
as there are verses in the Office, every one saying his verse in the same time,
they will complete the Office in as little time as was needful to rehearse one
single verse: they need only to speak louder, and cry out if need be, that they
may all hear one another at least confusedly; as the 24 Monks of whom he spoke
in the precedent case, who repeated the Lessons and Responsals of their Matines
together. For as to the inward attention and understanding of the words, he
said but now, that it is not necessary.

3. The third case is, Si semel in una hora dicitur Pater, Ave, and ea quae in
boxis diversis repetuntur, non debent in aliis boris recitari.
When we say the Pater noster, and Ave Mary, in the beginning of the Office, it
is not needful to repeat it in all the other Hours of the same, no more than
all that which is repeated diverse times in the Office: The reason is, Unico
actu potest homo diversis praeceptis satisfacere.
because we may by one sole action, satisfy diverse precepts. When he
concludes yet further,

4. That a person who has been ordered to recite the Rosary, which consists of
150 Aves, and 50 Paters, satisfies this command by saying only once the Pater
and Ave.

Though Caramouel be very passionately affected to the Doctrine of Probability,
and addicted wholly to Diana, as well as the Jesuits, to follow them in all
things, and through all; Amicus, that he defends him blindfold, and against
his own light, in that which he first of all taught, that we may kill a
Calumniator, saying with another Divine whom he consulted on that subject,
Potuisset Amicus hanc resolutionem omisisse; at semel impressam debet illam
tueri, and nos eandem defendere.
That Amicus might very well have spared to advance that Proposition; but he
having once caused it to be printed, he is obliged to maintain it, and he also
to defend it: Therefore, say I, though Caramouel be all for Diana, and all for
the Jesuits, yet he dares not declare himself entirely for one part of this
case, which I have now reported, and particularly this last. They are so
ridiculous, and that I may make use of his Metaphor, of so hard digestion for
any of but a reasonable wit, that he believes not that Diana himself would
affirm it, though he declares, An haec omnia Diana admittet? Non puto. Quid
ergo? Vel haec omuia debebit deglutire, vel a principali opinione recedere.
That he must of necessity swallow all these things, or renounce the principles
of the Doctrine from which all these conclusions infallibly follow.

5. Sanchez holds, Petrus ingressus navim majoris commoditatis causa contulit
secum Diurnale, subscribens Thomae Sanchez in Sum. tom. 1.19. n. 8. affirmanti
legentem ea quae continentur in Diurnal, Officio divino satisfacere. Postquam
autem solverunt a portu, mutavit dictamen, and secutus sententiam Johannis
Sancii in select. disp. 11. n. 2. asserentis in Diurnali non contineri integrum
officium divinum, ac proinde carentem Breviario, licet Diurnale habeat, non
teneri legere Officium divinum, illud non l^git. Sed quomodo hanc dissicultatem
proponet? Ut exact respondeam, opus est omnes circumstantias expendere, etc.
Caram. Theol. fund. p. 138. Paulus primo Sanch^zii sententiam sequebatur, and
been faciebat, quia est gravis author. Ex vi bujus dictaminis potuit sine
gravis culpa scrupulo relinquere Breviarium in terra, and solum confer
Diurnale. Secundo asseritur Paulus mutasse dictamen, and hoc humanum est, and
rationale: homo non est suarum opinionum mancipium. Cum probabile dictamen
mutat, utitur coelitus sibi concessa liberate, and been facit, fidei
orthodoxae dogmatibus demonstrationibusque ac principiis per se notis subest
ingenium, probabilibus sententiis superest. Ideoque quam libere sententiam
Sanchezii approbavit, tam libere potuit eam dimittere. Potuit igitui Paulus
sine conscientiae scrupulo mutare dictamen, and valedicens opinioni unius,
sequi alterius opinionem. Tertio dicitur Paulus noluisse uti Diurnali, and
defectu Breviarii multis diebus quibus in navi fuit horas non recitasse, nec
tamen peccavit mortaliter. Operabatur enim juxta conscientiae dictamen, quod
erat probabile and prudens subnixum Sancii authoritate. Dices quando Paulus
ingressus est navim veluit mutare dictamen; ergo voluit non legere. Patet, quia
ex mututi^ne dictaminis inferebatur lectionis omissio: ergo graviter peccavit,
quia mortifere peccat qui vult non legere cum potest; and Paulus antequam e
portu solveret, poterat confer Breviarium and legere. Respondeo concedendo
Paulum cum ingrederetur navim, voluisse mutare dictamen, distingu^ consequens,
voluit ergo non legere, hoc est omittere hordrum lectionem quam nunc
judicaturus erat obligatoriam. Nego; illam quam tunc judicaturus erat
obligatoriam, Concedo. Ergo peccavit graviter, nego subsumptam consequentiam.
Ibid. p. 144.
that he has satisfied the Divine Service, who recites only what is the daily
Office. And Sancius on the contrary holds, that the whole Service which ought
to be said, being not in the daily Office, he that has only the daily Office,
is not obliged to say any thing at all, because he cannot say all that he
ought. These two Opinions are sufficiently commodious considered apart: but
they will be much more joined together, as Caramouel makes appear in this
example. Sanchez, that he may have less Service to say; a little after, being
at Sea, and now out of possibility of procuring a Breviary, he quits the
opinion of the Jesuit Sanchez, to follow that of Sancius, a Jesuit also, and
lays aside his Diurnal, that he may discharge himself wholly of the Service,
and say none at all. Caramouel approves this conduct, and as a faithful
Disciple of the Jesuits, maintains both the opinion of Sanchez and of Sancius
at once. He says, Sanchez, because it is probable; and that he has also power
to quit it, to follow that of Sancius, because that is also probable; and that
he is free to change in this manner, because it is very natural and very
reasonable, a man not being in slavery to his own opinions, no more than to
those of others. Homo non est suarum opinionum mancipium; but he is rather
their Master, and may and ought hold his spirit elevated above them, how
probable soever they be, and make himself Judge thereof, or rather serve
himself with them as he pleases, or reject them without troubling himself so
much as to judge of them, or examine them. Whence he concludes, that this
Ecclesiastic has done well and prudently in all his carriage.

He says also, that though this Ecclesiastic even then when he took his
Diurnal, that he might say what was contained therein, according to the opinion
of Sanchez, had an intention to quit this opinion of Sanchez, as soon as he was
got onward at Sea, and to take up and hold that of Sancius, that he might
discharge himself of the obligation of saying what was in his Diurnal, as well
as that which was in his Breviary, yet he did no evil, testifying that it is no
evil for an Ecclesiastic to sport himself with the Church, and its Commands,
to elude them, and to persuade himself that he is not obliged at all to say any
thing of the whole Breviary: and though this have not been lawful heretofore,
because this opinion was not then invented, it shall be lawful in time to
come, according to the maxim of these Divines, because Caramouel a considerable
and learned man maintains it. Sanchez and Sancius, whom he cites, and whom he
follows, will give it him by a Rule of this Science, which holds, That a
Scholar may hold and teach an opinion which he has learned of his Master, and
after that, it is probable and safe in conscience; and that the same will be
also so much safer, as it is pleasanter, by this other Rule, that Benigniores
etsi aliquando sint minus probabiles, per accidens sunt semper utiliores and
securiores.
the more sweet are always the more profitable and more safe, though they are
less probable.

6. But if you make scruple of not saying all the Service, and that you desire
only to be discharged of some part of it, because it seems to you to be too
tedious, these obliging Divines will bestow on you two Expedients for your
contentment.

The first is, Sacerdos quidam quoti^te recitare consuevit Officium Romanum
fello Resurrectionis Dominicae proprium, and modo quaerit an peccaverit; and si
sic, qualiter? Respondetur 1. Illum Sacerdotem si quotidie citra ullam
rationabilem causam Officium Resurrectionis recitet, peccare solummodo
vemaliter. Respondetur 2. Sacerdotem illum si id quod in casu proponitur faciat
quotidie ex mediocri and ration ibili causa, nunquam ullo modo, ne venialiter
quidem peccare. Caram. Theol. fund. p. 520.
that you may choose the shortest Office of all the year, as is that of Easter,
and say it every day without changing, if you have any the least pretense,
which may appear a little reasonable. It will be, say they, no sin at all; and
if you have no pretense, they hold, that it will be only a venial sin.

So it will be lawful for an Ecclesiastic to overturn the whole Order of the
Church, and Divine Service, singing Allelujah in the days of Lent, and on
Good Friday, Jesus Christ is risen, whilst yet he is suffering, and nailed to
the Cross; and all this shall be lawful for him for his pleasure only, and for
his convenience, or upon the least pretense in the world.

7. The other is, to say Matines and Lauds in the Evening, following the
practice that is of late common enough, with intention to satisfy at once the
obligation of this day, and the following. See here how Caramouel propounds
this case Peto utrum ille qui Vespere Matutinas and Lauds recitat, duorum
dierum satisfaciat obligationi? Opinio p^ima affirmat simplicem Matutinarum and
Laudum lect onem si fiat sub Vesperum duorum dierum, oblig^tioni fatisfacere,
and probat, quia una and eadem action potest Philip^us satisfacere duobus
praeceptis numero distinctis eodem tempore concurrentibus; huic e diametro
opponitur sententia altera osserens non posse eadem ratione satisfiers utrique
obligationi. Ibid. p. 217.
I ask, whether he that says the Matines and Lauds in the Evening, satisfies
the obligation of two days? The first opinion holds, that bare rehearsing the
Matines and Lauds in the Evening, satisfies the obligation of two days; and it
is proved, because that a man may by one sole action, satisfy two different
commands, which are directed for the same purpose, and which fall out at one
and the same time. There is another opinion quite opposite hereunto, which
holds, that in saying the Service once only, two obligations cannot be
satisfied. See there is the case, and here is the answer.

Proposui hanc doctrinam eximio cuidam Doctori Jesuita Theologiae Moralis a
multis annis Professori, and bic Pragae docenti: and respondit sibi videri
sententiam benigniorem probabil^m. Ejus nomen non exprimo. Scio enim illum
malle in pace vivere, quam ab ingenii perspica^itate coll^udari Ergo pro illa
sit iste, primus author, sit s^cundus Caramouel: sort alii accedent, and quae
probabilis est ab intr^seco, ab extrinseco erit etiam aliquando probabilis:
forte etiam nunc est probabilis ab extrinseco benigna opinio. Est enim nova and
solum a nobis tractata: habet pro se duos authors, and contra se nullum; and
quia hoc verum, cur non erit probabilis? Ibid. p. 222.
I have proposed this question to an excellent Doctor, a Jesuit, as a Scholar
to his Master, who has a long time taught Moral Divinity, and who taught it
also here at Prague, who told me, that the more pleasant opinion seemed to him
probable. I name him not, because I know he had rather live in peace, without
being assailed by ignorant persons, than be commended for the greatness of his
wit. Let this Author then be the first for this opinion, and Caramouel the
second; as it is reasonable that the Master should go before, and the Scholar
follow after. It may be others will follow hereafter, and as it is probable of
it self, so it will be one day by the authority of men, and perhaps it is so at
present; for it is wholly new, and I am alone the proposer of it, and it has
two Authors for it, and there are none against it. And being so, why is it not
probable? This opinion discharges of one part of the Breviary, and that of
Sanchez, being well managed, with that of Sancius, may discharge of the whole
in many occurrences.

There is also another more commodious and more easy, which gives liberty to
cut off therefrom what we please, or to say or not say it at all absolutely if
we please. The foundation of this opinion is, that the Church can neither
command nor forbid. condemn nor punish that whereof it cannot take cognizance:
Upon this principle Caramonel reasons in this manner. Lectio horarum occulta,
vel etiam omissio ejusdem lectionis occulta, per accidens est incognoscibilis.
Superior enim qui externos subditorum actus vere occultos, and secretos
cognosceret, jam non esset homo sed Angelus. Ergo per accidens est
dijudicabilis. Ergo per accidens est impraeceptibilis. Ergo per accidens
accidit Superiori quod non possit interdicere actiones aut omissiones secretas
and occultas per accidens. Ibid. p. 205.
Albeit that the action of him who says his Breviary in secret, or who fails
thereof in secret, may be known by himself, yet it cannot be known by any other
man; a Superior must be an Angel, and not a man, to know all the secret
actions or omissions of this subject. Then this action in the same manner is
incapable of being judged, and if so, of being punished, and then also of being
commanded. And by consequence it is thus true, that Superiors cannot forbid
secret actions or omissions. There is nothing required, but to be secret and
crafty enough to hide himself from men, so that they know not whether he say
his Breviary or no, without thinking of God who sees all; nor of the command of
the Church, who appoints the Office to be said every day; nor by consequence of
the penalties ordained against them that neglect it.

See how these Doctors teach to obey the Church, and to keep its commands; and
they believe yet after all this, to have done it great service, and given it
cause of being well contented with them: Cum Ecclesia ferat suas leges ita a
gravibus Doctoribus explicari, hoc ipso quod eorum explicationes permittit
public imprimi and doceri, censetur suum praeceptum secundum eas confiderare.
Mascarenhas tract. 5. n. 491.
The Church knowing well, says Mascarenhas, that considerable Doctors do
expound the Laws in this manner, and permit these Explications to be taught
publicly, and printed, it seems that she approves them, and fits her Laws to
them. This is without doubt to explicate the Laws of the Church clearly, and to
leave no difficulty therein; but it is to destroy the spirit of it, and to
preserve only an appearance thereof: so that they neither say or demand any
thing, but what the particular persons would have. By which it may be judged,
what esteem Jesuits have for Civil Laws, and Laws of Princes, there being no
appearance that they will give more honor to them, than to those of God,

1. Peccant and non peceant subditi sine causa non recipientes legem a Principe
legitime promulgatam. Escobar Theol. Moral. tom. 1. l. 5. sect. 2. c. 14.
probl. 13. p. 160.
It may be said, according to Escobar, that the Subjects of a Prince, who
refuse to receive without just cause the just Laws which he has caused to be
legally published, do sin; and it may be said also, that they sin not at all.
He speaks of a lawful Prince, and he supposes that the Law which he causes
to be published, is just, and that his Subjects have no cause to complain
thereof: and yet he pretends that they have liberty to obey, or not. In
pursuance hereof, he alleadges Authors and Reasons which they produce on each
side, to make both the opinions probable, and to give liberty to follow whether
we please. And it is apparent, that if any demanded his advice, he would
counsel them to follow the more easy, and more profitable, after the rules of
his Divinity; that is to say, that he would incite Subjects to disobey their
Prince.

2. This permission to despise the Laws of Princes, is general for all sorts of
persons; but it gives also a particular license to Ecclesiastics, saying,
Clerici non solum vi directiva, sed and vi coactiva subjiciuntur and non
subjiciuntur Principum secutarium legibus quae spectant ad Reipublicae
gubernationem, nec cum Clericorum pugnant statu. Ibid. c. 15. probl. 19. p. 162.
It may be said that Ecclesiastics are Subjects, The question is then
problematical, there being Reasons and Authors on both sides; and though there
were none, it is enough that Escobar holds each of these opinions, to render
them both probable. But as the principles and resolves of this Science are
almost all favorable to looseness and disorder, he concludes with some
discourses, that, Infero Clericos secluso scandalo non peccare mortaliter
Principum secularium leges vi^lando, quia legibus hisce direct non tenentur.
Ibid.
excepting in the case of scandal, the Ecclesiastics sin not mortally in
violating the Laws of secular Princes, because they are not directly Subjects.
He excepts no kind of Laws, since he speaks of those which are just, and
derogate not from the Rights of the Church, not allowing the Ecclesiastics to
be therein Subjects, no more than the Princes themselves that make them.

This is without doubt to make themselves conformable to the example of Jesus
Christ, and the words which he spoke unto Pilate: Joan. 19. v. 11.
Non haberes potestatem adversum me ullam, nisi tibi datum esset desuper, etc.
Thou would have no power against me, if it were not given thee from above;
and to the conduct of the Saints, who believed they should have disobeyed God
himself, if they had disobeyed Princes, who commanded them nothing against the
honor of God, and the Church.

It were easy to relate an infinite of like resolutions, which the Jesuits
give in all sorts of questions which respect Manners and Religion, to make it
appear by sensible examples, that by their Rules of Probability they confound
all things in the World; in Divinity, and almost generally in the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church. Tambourin will dispense with me for this labor,
having publicly acknowledged that which I say, in a Collection which he has
made of the principal decisions which are drawn from the principles of the
Doctrine of Probability, where, after he had reported a great quantity,
according to the order of the Alphabet, he declares, that there are an infinite
of others which he has not, nor can report, because that would be very
difficult and tedious, and the maxims and use of the Rules of Probability,
extending themselves in a manner unto all sorts of matters, there would need an
entire Volume wherein to collect and report them simply: Operosum id ita est
and prolixum, quippe per omnes fere materias est percurrendum, ut integrum
merito volnmen exposcat; yet I cannot abstain from reporting here also, three
taken out of this Author, which show an extraordinary and palpable corruption,
and a very peculiar deprivation of reason in those who are capable to approve
or follow them.

1. Probabile est v. c. hoc vectigal injuste esse impositum, probabile item
esse impositum just; possumne ego body quia sum exocto Regius vectigalium
exigere ejusmodi vectigal, sequendo opinionem asserentem illud just esse
impositum; atque adeo licere mihi sine injusti^ia illud exigere; and cras, imo
etiam h^die, quia sum Mercator, illud occulte defraudare sequendo opinionem
asserentem illud a justitia deficere.
It is probable, says he, for example, that an Excise is justly established;
it is probable on the other side, that it is unjust: may I, being at present
established by the King to raise this Impost,

2. Secundo probabile rursus est ablationem famae pecunia compensari, probabile
non compensari. Possumne ego body infamatus velle ab infamante compensationem
in pecunia; and cras, imo body, ego ipse alium insamans, nolle famam proximi a
me ablatam compensare pecunia?
It is probable that the loss of reputation may, and may not be compensated
with money. May I to day, being defamed, desire satisfaction in money; and to
morrow, or this very day, having defamed another, not be willing to allow him
the same compensation?

3. In the third place; Tertio probabile item reo licere aequivocare in
judicio, probabile non licere. Possumne ego reus body aequivocare: cras vero
creatus Judex urgere reum ut non aequivocet? Haec and innumerabilia ejusdem
generis hic in controversiam narrantur. In casibus relatis number. 1. 2. 3. atque
in similibus licitam esse ejusmodi mutationem concedimus. Tamb. l. 1. Theol. c.
3. sect. 5. number. 1. 2. 3. 21.
It is probable that a Defendant may use equivocations in Justice. May I being
this day Defendant use equivocations, and to morrow being chosen Judge,
constrain the Defendants not to make use of them? In the process he answers; In
this case, and other such like, I grant that it is lawful to change opinion.

He believes therefore that these persons may do that justly unto others, which
they would not have done unto themselves, and which they would free themselves
from as much as possible: and he sees not that this is to overturn the prime
Law of Nature, and the Gospel, which ordains, That we should do unto others
that which we would they should do unto us, and not to do unto others that
which we would not they should do unto us; and that this is at once to violate
all the Commandments of God, which are founded on this principle of Nature, and
all the Law and Prophets, which according to Jesus Christ's saying, depend upon
this rule, and all the Holy Scripture, which are nothing else but an extension
and explication of this same principle.

SECT. IV. That the Jesuits Doctrine of Probability, ruins entirely the
Authority of the Church, of Pastors, and Superiors of all sorts.
TO make this truth appear, we must observe, that there are four sorts of
Principles for ruining the Authority of Superiors. 1. By corrupting or
destroying the principle of it. 2. By bounding it, and encroaching upon it. 3.
By rejecting or weakening its commands. 4. By hindering Subjects from obeying.

The Jesuits by the Doctrine of Probability, corrupt the Authority of the
Church in the original of it, in attributing to it no other than a mere humane
power. They retrench and destroy it, in not consenting that it may prescribe
the inward actions of virtue; they bound it, and encroach upon it, by the
irregularity of their Privileges, which they abuse, to the contempt of the
commands and Ordinances of Bishops, and invading their Jurisdiction; they
utterly abolish some of their Laws, and they weaken others of them, and there
are hardly any unto which they have not given some assault, by the multitude of
inventions they have found out to defeat and elude them.

These points are entirely verified in the whole process of this Book, and some
of them in entire Chapters. But that which is remarkable,

The Authority of the Church is of it self assured and uncontrollable, being
supported by the firm rock of Gods Word: For this cause there cannot be found a
means more ready, or more infallible to ruin or weaken it, than to undermine
its foundation, and to make it depend on humane reason and authority,
submitting its Jurisdiction and its power, to the disputes and contests of the
Schools, and rendering in that manner every thing probable that respects its
power, that they may afterward become the Arbitrators and Masters thereof.

It is not needful here to repeat all that is found in the body of this Book,
to prove this truth; it is sufficient only to report some passages of their
Authors, and their Disciples, in which they avow themselves, that the Doctrine
of Probability does absolutely ruin the Authority of the Church, and of all
sorts of Superiors; and they make it so clear in the examples that they
produce, that after they are read, it seems not that any person can doubt
thereof.

Hereof see one manifest proof in the case which Caramouel propounds in these
terms: Petrus secutus opinionem benignam probabilem non satissacit mandato sui
Abbatis in casu in quo probabiliter non tenetur obedire, and probabilius
tenebatur. Praelatus supscribens sententiae severiori judicat illum debuisse
obedire, and proinde peccasse. Petitur an possit contra illum procedere and
punire tanquam inobedientem? Caram. in com. in reg. S. Bened. l. 1. n. 65.
A man relying on an opinion sweet and indulgent, but probable, judges that he
ought to obey, and therefore that he has sinned. It is enquired, whether he
may act against him, and punish him as disobedient? See here the question
proposed according to the rules of Probability. The Superior has reason to
command it; the Inferior has reason not to obey, both founded on Probability.
The person of the Superior is more considerable, and his pretension more just,
besides it is more probable. Let us see notwithstanding what will be the
judgment of the Doctors of this Science. Respondeo Petrum non peccasse. Addo
posse Praelatum subscribere alterutri opinioni, ac propterea censere Petrum
habuisse obligat^onem obediendi. Sed illam invincibiliter ignorasse ductum
opinione probabili, nihilominus temere judicat Praelatus eum peccasse, quia
improbabile est eum peccarc qui sequitur opinionem probabilem, ut number. 59
ostendi. Cum ergo improbabile sit Petrum peccasse, injustus erit Antistes si
contra illum procedat, quia ubi non est culpa nec medicina est opus, nec poena.
Ibid.
I answer, says Caramouel, that the Inferior sins not; and I say further, that
the Superior may follow which of the two probable opinions he pleases, and by
consequence judge that the other is obliged to obey him; but he having followed
a probable opinion, is innocently ignorant of this obligation. But the Superior
shall be rash if he judges that he sins, because it is not probable that he
sins who follows a probable opinion; and so it being probable that this private
man has not sinned, the Superior shall be unjust if he treat him as guilty;
for where there is no fault, there is no need of remedy, nor punishment.

There is no person who sees not that this answer overturneth in a manner all
the Authority of Superiors, of what condition or order soever they be, since
the reasoning of this Author is general,

If this Superior be condemned of rashness and injustice, in following the more
probable opinion, he shall be by much stronger reason if he follows the less
probable.

So that whatsoever he does, and on what side soever he turns, in any
difference which he shall have with his Subjects, he cannot avoid condemnation,
if he be judged at the Tribunal, and according to the Laws of Probability; and
it seems that as this Doctrine was not invented but to favor looseness, and
disorder, and vice in all sorts of professions, it has also for its principal
scope, to fight against and to destroy as much as is possible, the persons that
are established by God to hold the Word in duty, and all things in order.

This is evident, that the Doctors themselves of this new Science are
constrained to confess, that if the principles of their Probability be held to,
we must speak no more of Scripture,

Caramouel considering this principle of the Jesuits Divinity, of which we
shall speak hereafter, to wit, that the Church has not power to condemn inward
actions, affirms, that it follows thence not only that the Ecclesiastic does
not ill, who says not his Breviary at all, provided he conceal this; but also
that there is no more Authority in the Church: which appears so horrible to
himself, that he cries out with astonishment, Bone Deus, si haec opinio semet
admitteretur actum esset de tota aut fere Superiorum authoritate: subditi
obedirent ad oc^los, and privatim omnia mandata Ecclesiastica aut Secularia
t^merarent. Nemo peccaret si secreto comederet carnes die Veneris; nemo qui
diebus jejunii tertio vel quarto: nemo qui secreto omitteret Officium divinum.
Caram. Theol. fund. p. 205.
Good God, if this opinion have success, there will be an end of almost all
authority of Superiors; the Inferiors will only obey them when they look on
them, and in secret they will violate all sorts of Commandments, Secular or
Ecclesiastic; none shall sin in eating Flesh on Fridays, nor in eating three
or four times a day on Fasting-dayes, nor in dispensing with themselves
secretly for Divine Service. He acknowledges all these things, he confesses
that they are unsupportable excesses, but he confesses that they are true
consequences of the Jesuits Probability. Nimia omnia and improbabilia, and
tamen legitime illata ex doctrina probabili.
These excesses are very great and incredible, but yet they are the legitimate
consequences of the Doctrine of Probability.

He himself makes no difficulty to testify openly, that he sees well that this
Doctrine tends to the withdrawing of all sorts of Subjects and Inferiors, Ut
video ex hac doctrina oriri in nostris scholis possit Independentium illa
haeresis quae ab annis pauculis inficit Angliam. Ibid.
to introduce every where the heresy of the Independents, which of late years
has infected England.

To all this he answers but one word, and as it were on the by, at the end of
his discourse: Quaerenda igitur est ratio probabiliore certier, quae hanc
doctrinam perniciosam debellet. Ergo Theologe Lector me adjuva: ergo vel mihi
oslende cur antecedens non sit probabile aut cur consequens sit probabile, aut
tandem ostende errorem in argumentation is nostrae forma, quoniam doctior esse
desidero, nec ^p^os Magistros lavenio. Ibid.
We must therefore search out some reason which is more certain than the more
probable, to convict and overturn this pernicious Doctrine. Assist me, says
he, Reader, if thou be'st a Divine, and show me why the antecedent is not
probable, or how the conclusion can be so, or at least show me some fault in
this reasoning; for I desire to be instructed, and I find no Master capable to
instruct me.

He avows the mischief of this Doctrine which he himself terms pernicious, and
also that he knows no remedy for it at all; That is, that it is wholly
inevitable. Whence it is easy to conclude, that by the very rules of Logic,
unto which he addicts himself, as the principal rule of Truth, the Doctrine
from whence issues by infallible consequence so great errors, is truly
pernicious, and entirely false; because it is indubitable in Logic, that from
a true conclusion, nothing but truth can follow; and likewise that that from
whence false and pernicious conclusions may be drawn, must needs be false and
pernicious it self; without troubling ones self to seek other reasons to prove
it, this same being evident and certain by the light of Nature only, and by the
acknowledgement of them who are the Authors and Defenders of this Doctrine.

We need no other proofs to make appear,

But the Jesuits Doctrine of Probability, gives the spirit of man a Sovereign
liberty, which submits it self to nothing, and reserves always to it self a
power, not only to condemn and approve what it pleases, but also to condemn
that which it approves, and to approve what it condemns, passing from one to
another, and even from the more probable to the less probable, without fearing
to engage it self at all in the least sin; and pretending always to walk in an
assured way, and more then probable in the midst of Probabilities, which
environ us on every side, since they have made probable almost all the rules of
life and humane converse, and have even elevated men's spirits above all these
Probabilities, to a Sovereign Independance.

Caramouel expresses this in this manner: Fidei Orthodoxae dogmatibus,
demonstrationibus ac principiis per se noti^ subest ingenium, probabilibus
sententiis superest. Caram. Theol. fund. p. 138.
The wit of man is subject to the Doctrines of Orthodox Faith, and the evident
principles of natural reason, So that to reduce the substance of this Article
into a few words, the Doctrine of the Jesuits Probability withdraws the Spirit
from all sorts of obedience; from that which is due to Superiors, by giving it
power to resist them upon the least appearance of reason; from that which is
due unto God himself, by permitting to dispense with a great part of his
Commandments; and from that which is due to the Church, teaching to deride its
Laws, and clude its Ordinances; from that which is due to reason, by giving
liberty to follow that which is less probable, if it please better, and be more
conformable to our interests: and also attributing unto it an Empire greater
than that of God himself, who can never depart from that which is most just and
most reasonable; and giving it an incomparable power and Independance in the
Kingdom of Probabilities.

SECT. V. That an opinion probable being once received, all the Prelates of the
Church, and all the men in the World, cannot hinder that it should be probable,
and safe in conscience, according to the Jesuits.
THere is nothing more easy, than to introduce into the Schools a new opinion,
and to make it probable according to the Jesuits,

There is also nothing more easy than to cause it to be received in the World,
because they believe that the most pleasant, which are those that all enquire
after, are the best and most safe.

Finally, there is nothing more easy, than to uphold and bring it in credit,
its own pleasantness, and the approbation that some give it, being sufficient
to acquire unto it new Partisans, and new Defenders, who will publish it, and
induce it unto practice: and so it will have for it the approbation of Divines,
the example of private persons, and plausible reasons, which are all
foundations of Probability. And being once established in this manner, it will
as it were be impossible to destroy and discredit it; and consequently there
will be no means to hinder the World from following it, or the Authors who have
undertaken its defense, to teach and publish it.

For 1. It is well known what trouble it is to undo things that are passed into
custom, and evil things rather than good; and amongst evil things, those which
are most pleasing and favorable to the corrupt inclinations of nature, give
most trouble in rooting them out, and we hardly ever obtain our design therein.

2. When a custom, which has taken birth from an evil maxim, is also propped
up by apparent reasons, and the authority of those that have reputation of
being virtuous and learned,

3. The Authors of these opinions make use of no other arms commonly to defend
them, nor admit of others to oppose them, than reason; they submit all to
dispute, they examine all by the rules of Logic, by Syllogismes and
Subtilties: So that he who is most proper to catch at niceties, and contest
about them, carries it commonly, though his cause be the weaker and less
reasonable.

4. It is clear, that there is scarcely any that will give way to another in
wit and reason, especially in the heat of a dispute; but the opinions which
carry men on to looseness and vice, have yet more advantage in this kind of
combat, which is made by reason and disputation, that they are there as it were
invincible, because of the force which the natural corruption of our spirits
give them. It were easy to produce many proofs hereof, if one of the newest,
and withal of the most eager defenders of Probability, did not testify it
openly by his words: Qui rem dicit esse illicitam, ad multa tenetur. Primo enim
debet ostendere rations quae malitiam probant, esse demonstrativas, nempe
tales quibus dari responsio probabilis no^ possit. 2. Debet etiam ostendere
rations quae bonitatem probant, ne quidem probabilem esse ostendet si omnibus
ad unam dederit solutionem quae evidenter sit vera. 3. Etiam debebit ostendere
partem illam quae bonitatem astruit, non ha^ere sufficientes authoritates ut
dic^tur probabilis. Haec omnia tria simul ostendere debet, casurus causa etsi
du^ ex illis ost^ndat, modo unum non ostendat. Caram. Theol. fund. p. 138.
He that says that an action is evil and unlawful, 1. To make appear, that
the reasons which prove the malice of the action be demonstrative; that is,
that they be such as whereto no probable answer can be given. 2. And in the
second place, he ought also show, that the reasons which prove this same action
to be good and lawful, be not so much as probable: which cannot be done, but
by giving to every one in particular a solution which is indubitable and
evident. 3. In the third place, he is also obliged to make appear, that the
opinion which maintains that this action is good, has not sufficient authority
to be held probable. He is obliged to prove these three things together; and if
he fails but in one, though he prove the other two, he will lose his cause.

There needs nothing more to make invincible all sorts of wicked opinions, and
which lead men unto looseness and vice, it being certain, that it is impossible
to convince them by the rules and conditions which this Disciple of the ^efuits
prescribes. For there being no reasons so evident, which the wit of man can not
obscure and entangle by his passion and artifices, it is clear that if evil
mexion^ must be judged by reason and dispute, none will ever be convict,
because the animosity of men may always maintain them by contrary reasons.

And if we cannot be assured of any truth, unless we can entirely salve all the
difficulties which occur therein, as this same Author pretends, it will
follow that there shall never be any thing assured in Morality, nor in
Doctrine, nor in Faith, nor in Nature; since it is manifest, that the greatest
and most indubitable Truths,

The evil Doctrine shall have even all sorts of advantage above the good,
because according to this Casuist, he that maintains it needs prove nothing of
that he says, nor answer to any thing that can be said against him, but by
Probabilities. And on the contrary, he that speaks for truth, and who condemns
error, looseness, and vice, is obliged to prove all that he says by
demonstrations, and to answer and refute all that which his adversary can say,
with reasons so clear and cogent, that he cannot reply any thing that has so
much as an appearance of truth.

And when he has entirely disarmed him, and destroyed all his reasons, making
him see clearly that they are of no value, and that they are not so much as
probable only, he has yet gained nothing at all. For if you believe this
Casuist, he must besides this, take from him all his Authority of every sort,
and reduce him to that pass, that he may be able to find none sufficient to
support his opinion, and render it probable, which is in a manner impossible;
because it suffices as to this, to have one single Casuist that teaches it; and
though none have yet ever taught it, he that invents and first maintains it,
may make it probable, if he be accounted a man of learning and piety, and there
are none but such amongst the Masters of this Science.

5. This is one rule of these great Doctors, that Benigniores eisi aliquando
sint minus probabilts, per accidens sunt semp^r utiliores and securior^s.
Caram. Theol. fued. p. 134.
the opinion more sweet, is always better and more safe, though it be less
probable. By this rule the opinions which favor looseness and corrupt
inclinations, will be more safe, and their probability always invincible. For
if the reasons which are applied against them, be more forcible and pressing,
they will thereby become indeed less probable, but they will not thereby become
less pleasing; and consequently they will become always better and more sure,
according to the maxims of this mavelous Science.

6. But if you oppose against them the authority of the Saints, and Ancient
Fathers, they will say, that their opinions are very probable, but those of the
Casuists of these times are no less probable; that the Moderns carry it even
above the Ancients, Quod ownia quae pulcbie cogitarunt, j^m sunt a junioribus
summo sludio and ingenio elimata. Ibid. p. 22.

Quae circa sidem emergunt difficultates, eae sunt a veteribus hauriendae: quae
vero circa mores homine Christiano dignos, a novitiis scriptoribus. Celor. l.
8. c. 16. p. 714.


because their best thoughts are cleared up, and perfected by those that
followed them. But though the opinion of the Ancients be more probable, that of
the Moderns being more pleasant, they conclude by their principles, that it is
better and more safe. They maintain also, that when the question is about
Faith, we may well have recourse unto the Ancients, and hold that which they
have believed and taught in their Writings; but in matter of manners, and the
conduct of life,

7. One of the most certain ways to know that an opinion is bad, are the bad
consequences, and pernicious effects which naturally follow thereupon: but this
is not capable to stay the defenders of the Jesuits probability. They
acknowledge the dangerous consequences and pernicious effects which issue
infallibly from many. Novel opinions which they teach, and they for bear not to
maintain them at all, and protest that they will maintain them always, because
they seem probable, and no person can condemn them. Multa inoonvenientia
suboriuntur ex restrictionibus mentalibus, multae ^x occultis compensationibus;
multa ex licentia occidendi injustum Judicem aut teslem, quam nonnulli
concedunt; multa ex illa opinione quae docer de occultis non judicare
Reelesiam, multa ex aliis. Quibus tamen non obstantibus inconvenientibus, illae
sentensiae in terminis quibus body traduntur in Scholis sunt ut minimum
probabilissimae, and a nemine damnari pessunt. Caram. Theol. fund. p. 549.
Hereupon follow many inconveniences, says Caramouel, which arise from these
mental restrictions, secret compensations, the liberty which some give to kill
an unjust Judge or Witness, the opinion which holds that the Church cannot,
judge of secret things, and other like opinions: and yet all these
inconveniences hinder not but that these opinions, so as they are taught at
this day in the Schools, are at the least very probable, and cannot be
condemned by any.

8. If it be represented unto them, that a good part of these Novel opinions
are contrary to the Laws of the Church, and some of them to the Civil Laws
also, they pretend that because they be Novel, they are exempt from the censure
of the Laws more ancient than they, and they could not be condemned or
defended, when they as yet were not at all. Caramouel talks of the opinion of
Amicus, who holds, that it is lawful to kill a Defamer: For enquiring, Anne
eadem doctrina admiui poterit stando juri Civili and Canonico? Respondeo Amici
doctrinam esse novam, and legibu^ vulgat is juniorem; atque adco nihil de illa
a Pontificibus, Caesaribus aut Regibus fuisse dispositum. Caram. p. 549.
Whether this Doctrine may be received without offending against the Laws Civil
and Ecclesiastic? He answers, That the Doctrine of Amicus is Novel, and later
than the Common Laws; and consequently the l'opes, Emperors and Kings, have not
spoken for it nor against it. By this rule all new opinions which introduce
errors and abuses, shall be under shelter from the Laws of the Church which
went before them, though they be condemned therein: They may be taught without
punishment, and followed with a good conscience.

9. Quidam Episcopus in Belgio interdixit Antonii Dianae resolutiones,
jussieque ut nemo venderet, emeret, legeret aut haberet: and Bibliopolae
solliciti interrogabant posserne liber ille interdici? Respondi ill is quod si
illos condemnant, hic jam haberent docti aliquid quod p^tenter tolerare non
possent. Non enim libri damnari passants qui a doctu leguntur, approbantur,
laudantur. Caram. p. 89. In hunc scopulum impegit quidam praecipue Antistes.
Sed quid faciemus aut dicamus homini incapaci doctrinae, p. 393. Invidiae
ignordanti condona^, p. 89.
And if a Bishop seeing the evil consequences which they cause in this Diocese,
would censure and forbid the Books which teach them, this Disciple of the
Jesuits will make no difficulty to say, that it belongs not unto him, that if
he attempt it he exceeds his power, he will give occasion to persons who
profess this Science to complain of him, as doing a thing they cannot suffer;
because it is not lawful for him to condemn Books which are read, approved and
commended by learned men.

But if after this the Bishop yield not to their remonstrances and complaints,
he shall not escape their reproaches and injuries, and they will make him pass
in their Schools and Books for an ignorant, for an envious and stupid person,
and incapable of being instructed, and who by consequence deserves not to be
spoken to, nor to have pains taken with him to teach him what he understands
not: and so that without regarding his censures and his prohibitions, they need
not cease teaching and publishing the same opinions which he condemns.

10. The Pope can have no more power over them in this, than the Bishops, as
the Jesuits have testified many times, causing the Books of F. Bauny, and F.
Rabardeau, and others, to be reprinted with approbation of their Superiors, and
of the principal Divines of the Society, after they had been censured at Rome.

And indeed the reason wherefore they pretend, that their Books and their Novel
opinions cannot be condemned, after they have had approbation by their
Superiors, and other able men of their Society, is general, and includes the
Pope as well as the Bishops: For they say, Non enim damnari possune libri qui a
dectis leguntur, approbantur, landantur.
that it is not at all lawful to condemn the Books which are read, approved,
and praised by learned men.

11. And since the Authority of the Churches Laws do not extend to new
opinious, which are come after them, since neither the Bishops nor the Pope
himself may for bid them, Nulla ex praedict is synthesibus aliter potest sua
probabilitate privari, quam si contraria transeat in arti culum fidei, Ibid. p.
89.

Finge quemcunque casum possibilem praeter desinitionem Eeclesia.


That none of their Propositions can cease to be probable, if the contrary
become not an article of Faith: whereupon they defy any man whomsoever, to
find another means to condemn a probable opinion, than by an express definition
of the Church. For they hold, that a single Casuist may introduce and authorize
in the Church a probable opinion, and that the Pope and all the Bishops cannot
exclude it, when it is once received and tolerated: That the whole Church must
speak to silence one single Regent of a Classis, must make an Article of Faith
to condemn a Probability.

12. And yet after all this it is not known, whether the Authors of this
Science would submit to the definition of a Council. For according to their
maxims, they are not obliged to it, since the whole Church together, no more
than the Bishops and Pope apart, can do that which in it self is impossible.
Now this is one of the maxims of these Doctors; Non enim damnari possunt libri
aut opiniones quae a doctis approbantur and laudantur.
That it is not lawful to condemn opinions, any more than Books, which are
approved and commended by learned persons; or to speak yet more clearly, Cum
impossible sit probabilem condemnare senteniam, and impossible eam non esse
probabilem cui multi Doctores subscribunt. Caram. p. 393.
As it is impossible that an opinion which has the approbation of many
Doctors, should not be probable, so it is impossible to reject it. And this
impossibility is universally acknowledged in all Philosophy, and this is the
first and the greatest of all impossibilities, because it arises from the thing
it self, and from the proper definition of a probable opinion: For Opinion
probabilis est quae a magnis and multis defenditur. Ibid. p. 89.
a probable opinion is, that which many persons renowned for their learning do
maintain; so that if it have the approbation of many Doctors, it is also
impossible to hinder it from being probable, and by consequence lawful and
safe in conscience; as it is impossible to cause, that they who have approved
it, should not have approved it, or that they who were Doctors, and many in
number, should not be many Doctors: Corgregentur universi Europaei, docti,
indocti, magui, parvi, non tamen poterunt facere aut vere definire viginti non
esse viginti, aut viros eximios and summarum A^demiarum lumina, non esse
magnos. Ibid.
Assemble if you will, says Caramouel, all the men of Europe, learned and
unlearned, great and small, they cannot make nor truly judge that 20 is not 20,
or that excellent persons, and the chief of the most famous Universities,
should not be excellent men; which all the powers of the World cannot do, nor
the whole Church together, to wit, that 20 should not be 20, or Doctors be no
Doctors.

He explicates the same thing in another manner, by a comparison, which serves
at once both to prove and clear his thoughts; Qui ^aim propositioni a multis
viris doctis assertae ueget probabilitate^, hi^ negat lineae longitudinem,
supersicici latitudinem, and corport profund r^tem: hic negat desinitionem
desinito competere. Caram. p. 393.
For to deny, says he, that an opinion which is maintained by many learned men
is probable, is to deny that a line has length, a superficies breadth, and a
body thickness: or this is indeed to deny a proposition, wherein the proper
definition is attributed to its subject. This is as much as to say, that none
whoever, not excepting God himself, Respendi si Dianae librns Episcopus ille
interdixit ut merces, viderint ^onsules and Reipub. Patres ad quem pertineat
interdicere merces; si eofdem interdixit ut nocivos per accidens, nullam injure
im Dian it in^nlie, and sue full upus jure. Neme enemin sus dome ten tur
telerare librum etiam bondm, quia suis sit pernicios^ per accidens. Caram. p.
89.
But yet if the Church do censure any one of these opinions approved by these
Doctors, they will take this censure for a rule of policy, or prudence, by
which sometimes good things are forbidden, because they may be hurtful by
accident. This is Caramouel's answer to one who advised with him concerning
Books prohibited by a Bishop.

But if the Church pretend to condemn them as wicked, they will oppose
themselves thereto, as to an unjust and unsufferable enterprise, or rather
wholly impossible, (...) condemnav^e, hic jam habent docti aliquid qu^d
pa^umter tolerare non possent, non enim damnari possunt lib i (aut opinion s)
qui a doctas leguator, pp. (...), laudant^. Ibid.
That it is not in the power of any one, whosoever it be, to condemn opinions,
no more then books which are approved and commended by learned men.

And after all, when a Council assembled does expressly condemn them, they will
not perhaps submit themselves to their judgment, since they cannot condemn
them more expressly than the Council of Trent has condemned the Lutheran
errors; and yet notwithstanding this condemnation, a Doctor of these
Probabilities abstains not from making a Lutheran to say, that his Sect and his
Religion is probable, without opposing him therein. Cur non licebit ^arsanomeno
dicere Roman^m quid^m Eccleuam esse prababilissimam, atque adeo in soro intreno
^sse seemissimam. Et tamen hoe ipso nonobstante Lutheronam quam ipse prefitus
esse etiam probabilem atque aeque Christianam and securam. Imo securio^em
omnin^, quoniam minus probabilis sententia si beniquior, etiam securi^r est.
Sic discurret etiamum Barsanomenns, and deberet a, lector erudi^e, compesci.
Caram. p. 472.
On the contrary he testifies, that he is not far from his opinion, and that it
is a consequence of the rules and principles of this Probability, sending the
Lutheran to those who hold the contrary, to receive from them an answer unto
his reasons, as not finding therein any thing to answer, and believing them to
be solid and invincible because probable. For this is the secret and scope of
this Science, to make all things probable, that we may do and say what we will,
joining unto Probability a certainty and kind of infallibility, for ensuring
this Science, and the consciences of those who follow it; in such manner, that
they are secure from the fear of Gods Judgments, the Authority of the Church,
and the censure of all the men in the World.

ARTICLE III. That the Divinity of the Jesuits is obsequious and mercenary.
IT will appear sufficiently that the Divinity of the Jesuits is wholly
complacent of it self, in that it is proper to give content to the whole World;
and they can, following their principles, quiet all sorts of consciences, in
satisfying the desires of all sorts of persons. And in this it is servile and
mercenary, because there is no servitude more base, than to flatter the
passions of others; and so much the more, because this is not done but because
such are slaves to their own proper lusts.

This is clear by what I have produced out of their Books in the former
Chapter, and it is a consequence so evident and necessary from their
principles, that I might forbear to prove it more particularly. Notwithstanding
it will not be unprofitable herein yet to produce some more examples, which may
serve to give greater light, and greater clearness to the most simple and
incredulous.

Escobar enquires, Petit consulens aut poenitens sibi exprimi quae sit
sententia probabilior? Escob. in precemio exam. 3. cap. 6. number. 24. p. 28.
What must be said to a penitent, or other man, who demands which of two
opinions is more probable? He answers, that he to whom this person addresses
himself, Quod si solum ex practica obligatioue sciscitatur; potest consu^ere
quod minus probabil^ judicat. Imo m^iorem se geret consiliarium saepe id
consulens quod facilius and cum minori periculo ^u incommodo praestart p^tes^.
Ibid.
But if he desires only to know what he ought to do in the practice, we may
advise him to do that which is less probable, and we shall oftentimes do him
better service, by advising him to that which is more easy, and which he may
do with less danger and inconvenience.

Greater obsequiousness cannot be desired, since this goes beyond the thought
of the man who demanded the best advice. For instead of counselling him that
which is absolutely best, according to his demand, this Author would have us
counsel him that which is less probable, provided it be more easy and
agreeable to his humor. And to remove from his Director the scruple that he
might have concerning a conduct so indulgent and soft, he adds, that this
counsel will be better than if he should give him the other: Meliorem se geret
consiliarium.

A little after, having said that the Confessor is obliged to follow, even
against his own sense, the opinion of his penitent, he enquires, Quod si
Confessario falsa videatur opinio poenitent is, debet se accommodare si a
probat is authoribus probabilis reputetur. Ibid. number. 27.
What shall the Confessor do, if he believes that the opinion of his penitent
is false? He answers, that for all this he ought to comply with him, if he have
any approved Authors who hold that his opinion is probable.

He says in the former case, that the Confessor ought to show himself
indulgent toward him who comes to enquire of him what is just and reasonable,
in granting him more than he demands; and here he obliges him to comply with
another, in giving way to him against his own opinion, and granting him that
which will carry him against reason and justice. This is to please all men in
all things; Paul, but to satisfy their desires and their interests, against
the rule of St. Paul, and the Gospel, who teaches us, that this condescension
saves none, and is proper to deceive and destroy as well those who offer it, as
those who accept it.

The same Author speaking of a man who would not accept of the penance which
his Confessor had appointed him, asks Quid si affirmet se velle Purgaterii
poenas subire? Levem poenitentiam adbuc imponat ad Sacramenti integritatem.
what must be done if he say that he will stay to do it in Purgatory? He
answers, that the Confessor is not to forbear to impose upon him some slight
penance, for the integrity of the Sacrament, and not for the necessity of the
penitent. His reason is, Praecipue cum agnoscat gravem non acceptaturum. Escob.
tr. 7. exam. 4. c. 7. n. 188. p. 829.
because he well perceives that if he impose on him any greater, he will not
receive it. So that whereas the wicked disposition of this penitent, deserves
to be treated more rigorously, he requires that he be treated with more
indulgence, as if that would reduce him into a better estate, and remove from
him his pride and obstinacy.

Filliutius proposes a like instance in the Sacrament of Penance, saying, Quid
agendum Confessori cum defectum aliquem commisit in confessione contra ejus
substantiam? Filliutius mor. qq. tom. 1. tract. 7. c. 12. n. 369. p. 211.
What must a Confessor do when some fault is committed in confessing, against
the very essence of the Sacrament? He distinguishes first of three sorts of
sins against the substance of Confession, (these are his words) of which this
is the third: Tertio quia poenitens non sit rue dispositus qu^ad dolorem aut
integritatem, and id a Confessario agnoscitur, sed ob verecundiam aut timorem
non est ausus negare absolutionem.
When the penitent for want of sorrow necessary to his sins, or of having made
a full confession, is not will disposed, and the Confessor knows it well, In
this case he answers, that the Confessor who has made this fault, ought to
endeavor to make this penitent return to Confession; and after he has accused
himself of the sins which he has committed since his last Confession,
Generaliter interreget an de omnibus praecedentibus doleat, and quantum potest
si necessarium esset denuo paratus sit ad ea confitenda. Ibid.
to demand of him in general, if he be sorry for all his sins past, and if he
were not ready to confess them a new if there were need, in the best manner he
could, without troubling himself that he makes him commit another new
Sacrilege in confessing himself, as at first, without discovering all his
sins, and in wilful concealing of a part; and yet when he has drawn these
words from his mouth, he wills that he be content therewith, and that he give
him absolution: Quo habito, absolvat. n. 372.

He pretends that he is not bound to give himself so much trouble neither, nor
his penitent, Si sequatur grave incommodum aut scandalum, non tenctur.
if he fears not that some scandal will arise thereupon, or some other
inconvenience. For in that case he gives him an expedient yet much more dasie,
that is, that he may be content that he has regret for his sin, in saying in
his mind, or with his mouth, that he is sorry, and so be shall leave his
penitent in his good persuasion. Satis est Corfessori dolor de peccato
commisso, and relinquere poenitentem in bona side. Ibid. a. 373.
He pre-supposeth in expounding this difficulty, that this penitent is in a
naughty disposition, quia poenitens non sit recte dispositus quoad dolorem ant
inregeitatem; and that the Confessor knows it, and id a Confessario agnoscitur;
and yet though no new thing have since happened, besides the absolution which
he received in this bad estate, which is made still worse by this Sacrilege,
he thinks that he is become well disposed, quia per subsequentes Confessiones
justificabitur, ^. 373. though he continue to make them always in the same
manner, retaining those sins which he concealed wilfully the first time. He had
need to have an extraordinary strong Faith, that can believe that such a man is
in a good estate, and that it is lawful thus to play with Sacraments,
Consciences, and Religion.

Amicus proposes a case almost alike; Dubitapur an Conf^ssarius qui evidentiam
haber quod poenitens peccatum commiscrit, illudque non fit confessus, debeat
illum de tali pecc^to monere? Amicus tom 8. disp. 13. sect. 23. n. 331. p. 233.
It is questioned, says he, if a Confessor, who knows evidently that a
penitent has committed a sin, and has not confessed himself thereof, ought to
admonish him of it? He adds, to make himself to be better understood, Solum
difficultas est quando Confessario non solum evidens est poenitentem commisisse
peccatum; sed etiam illud non fuisse confessum. Ibid.
that the difficulty is only when the Confessor knows evidently, not only that
the penitent has committed this sin, but also that he has not confessed it.
He acknowledges frankly as a certain principle, that a Confessor cannot absolve
a penitent when he believes that he is in mortal sin: And after he answers in
these terms; Caeterum in casu proposito potest Confessarius judicare quod
peniteus commissum peccatum tacuerit justa aliquit^ex causa; oc proinde tuta
conscientia poterit illum absolvere. Ibid.
In this occurrent the Confessor may judge, that the penitent has concealed
his sin for some good or just reason; and for that he may absolve him with a
safe conscience. The reason he makes use of for a foundation to build this
answer on, is, Probabiliter prudens Consessarius judicare poterit tale peccatum
esse quod vel reipsa, vel juxta probabilem opinionem poenitentis ipse putat non
esse in confessione explicandum. Ibid.
that a prndent Confessor may judge probably, that the sin in question is of it
self, and indeed, or according to some probable opinion of the penitent,

This is not only simply to oblige a Confessor to yield an entire submission to
a sinner, contrary to the nature of his charge, which requires that he should
receive it from him; but also to yield unto him a blind submission and
obedience, without knowing even what he thinks: which is not only shameful and
extravagant for a Director and a Guide, who ought to conduct, and not suffer
himself to be conducted, and follow those who are under his charge, without
knowing whither they go, nor what way they take; but it is also unjust in a
Confessor, who being a Judge, and a Divine Judge, holding the place of Jesus
Christ, cannot judge in that manner without cognizance of the Cause, but by
Sacrilegious rashness and unjustice, concluding that an opinion which he knows
not, is probable, and that an action which he has all the reason in the world
to mistrust, is innocent.

Filliutius declares openly, that he desires to oblige men, and comply with
their humors, when he says, that the I oclesiasticks are not obliged under
mortal sin, to have any manner of attention in rehearsing their Office: For
reporting the opinion of those who hold, Neminem teneri sub mortali ed
attenti^nem internam. Respondes and ^ico prime hane primam opinionem probabilem
esse. Fillutius tom. 1. qq. mor. tr. 23. c. 8. n. 253. p. 126.
that no man is obliged under mortal sin, to have any inward attention: I
answer, says he, this opinion is probable. He confesses indeed that the
contrary is more probable, but according to his principles it is sufficient
that this same is probable, to follow it with a safe conscience, in quitting
the more probable. And the reason which induces him to approve this opinion
is, Quia satis accommodata est hominum fragisitati and difficultati quam
humanus intellectus experitur in attendendo diu uni ret. Ibid.
because it is very accommodant and conformable to man's frailty, He is not
content at all that this opinion is indulgent to the softness and fickleness of
men; but he cannot forbear to declare, that it is even for this cause that he
approves it, and to testify that the Jesuits Divinity has for its scope to
flatter and nourish vices, instead of fighting with, and destroying them.

Celot having undertaken to defend the Casuists of his Society, says, that one
of the conveniences which may be received thereby is, that it delivers men from
scruples which trouble them, that it discharges them of restitutions which
they believe themselves obliged to make, and gives them expedients to break
marriages after they have been lawfully contracted. Accedit ad te perplexo vir
animo, lancinantibus conscientiae vulneribus cruentatus: videt faciendum quod
morte gravius timet: vult quae ut faciat nunquam. inducetur: se and suae omnia
salva cupit; sed-fieri non potest. Hinc urget animae salus; hinc honoris,
bonorum, fa miliae. Quid tot liberi? Quid plena, ut inter cives, dignitatdomus?
Celot l. 8. c. 16. p. 717.
A man, says he, agitated by the remorses of his conscience, and all torn with
the wounds it has given him, addresses himself to you: He acknowledges that he
must do that which he fears more than death; he desires it also, but can never
obtain force to resolve upon it. He would save himself and his wealth both at
once, but this is impossible: The desire to save his Soul presses him on one
side; and that of preserving his Estate, his Honor, his Family, presses him on
the other side. What shall become of his Wife, of his Children, of his whole
Family great and honorable, for a private one? See here without doubt a man in
a strange estate, Omnia ut doctus es versanti tibi radius consilii non
incommedi affulget. But you shall never meet with day, nor entire clearness,
until you seek it amongst the Jesuits, the principal of whom are as the
shining Stars and Sun of Divinity, who by their influences will in a moment
recover this desperate spirit. Hunc tibi scrupulum eximant Suarez, aut Lessius,
aut Molina; aut omnes tres consulti casum tuum explicent, rationibus
stabiliant, securam faciant conscientiam tuam. After this there is no means,
according to Celot, to hinder them from kissing their Books, and lifting up
their cries of Joy unto Heaven: Non erumpes in coelum? non triumphabis gaudio?
Abstinebit cliens ille tun^ ab osculo libris salutaribus imprimendo?

But he confirms this goodly discourse by an History worthy to be rehearsed:
Scimus repertum aliquando qui summam ingentem pecuniae Confessarii judicio
restituendam deferret, atque ex itinere in amici Bibliopolae officina
confliterit. In qua roganti number aliquid novi? oblatus est recens Theologiae
Moralis scriptor, quem ille neglectim and omnia alia cogitans cum evolvit, in
casum forte suum incidit, and restituendi obligationem solutam didicit. Tum
enim vero dojecta scrupuli sarcina, retento auri pondere, leviorem domum
repetiisse. Ibid.
I knew, says he, a certain man who carried a great sum of money by the order
of his Confessor; but passing by the Shop of a Bookseller his Friend, he staid
there, This man was condemned by his Confessor to make restitution: He is
resolved thereon: He is upon the point of doing it. He had already taken the
money which was necessary thereto, and was in his way to carry it back to him
to whom it appertained: A novel Casuist of the Society hindered him. See the
fruit of this obliging Divinity.

And Celot pretends that this fruit was so great, and the happiness so rare for
this sinner to have met this Book, which hindered him from making restitution,
that he fears not to take it for a principal effect of his eternal
Predestination, saying, Casu quidem, sed qui in Deo providentia, in Angelo
custodia, in viro Praedestinationis effectus est.
It is true that this happened to him by accident, but this accident was no
other than the providence of God, the protection of his Guardian Angel, and the
effect of the eternal Predestination of this man. Auream saluti^ catonam jam
indo ab aeterno, non ex illis centum and mill, sed ex boc uno pendere voluit
Deus. Nisi soriberet hic, non salvaretur ille. Ibid.
God would, says he, that the golden chain of his salvation should be formed
not of those eleven hundred links of Gold of which the Poets speak, but of this
single occurrent which he happened on in this Book: If this Author had not
written, this Reader had not been saved. And addressing himself to his
adversary by a jollity worthy of this Divinity, Amabo te, Petre Aureli, tu qui
dives es and nullius eges, ne per Christi viscera pauperibus invide librum
noum, quem ipsis aeterna Dei electio, sanguis Christi comparavit. Ibid.
I pray you, says he, and conjure you by the bowels of Jesus Christ, being
rich as you are, and needing nothing, envy not unto the poor a Book which was
prepared for them from all eternity, by the love which God had to them, and
which was purchased for them with the blood of Jesus Christ.

He testifies that this person who went to make restitution by the order of his
Confessor, went to damn himself eternally, if he had not been diverted by this
new Casuist of the Society; that this was a trace altogether extraordinary, of
the providence of God, a particular protection of his good Angel, and an effect
of his Predestination, that he fell upon this Casuist who recovered him into
the way of heaven, by withdrawing him from the obedience of his Confessor, and
the resolution he had taken by his advice to make restitution: that he had been
a lost man, if the Jesuit had not written, and caused his Book to be imprinted;
nisi scriberet hic, non salvaretur ille. That he had no less obligation unto
God, for having caused him to meet this Book, than for having loved him from
all eternity, and for giving him his Son Jesus Christ; because indeed this Book
is one mark of the eternal love of God toward him, and a particular gift
thereof; and finally, that Jesus Christ had bought this Book for him at the
price of his blood, as a necessary means unto his salvation; Quem aeterna Dei
dilectio, sanguis Christi comparavit.

These whimsies and extravagancies would seem incredible, if they had not been
printed and represented in the Authors own proper words; and it is certain,
that if this discourse were reported,

Father Causin in a Book which he entitled, An Apology for the Religious of
the Society of Jesus, having undertaken to excuse the unhappy Doctrine which F.
Hereau taught in their College of Clermont at Paris; He did not consider,
says he, that there are Doctrines like unto those trees which do no hurt in
one Country, and spoil all when they are transplanted into another; and there
are Disputations which it may be would be found good in Italy, and in Spain,
which when they come into this Realm, look with clear another face; as also
certain Maxims that are very good in France, which cannot be relished in Spain.
This proves very sufficiently that which we said, that the Doctrine and Spirit
of the Jesuits addicts it self entirely to the humors of men, and depends on
the difference of times and places. For he disowns not the pernicious maxims of
F. Hereau, but only his carriage of them: he blames him not for having written
contrary to the opinions of the Society, when he taught, that we might attempt
against the lives of all men generally, without excepting Princes, and cause
Children yet unborn, to dye in the wombs of their Mothers, as we shall make
appear in its place; but only to have wanted discretion, and to have offended
against that rule of the Society which F. Celot relates: Quae opinienes
cujuscunque Autoris sint, in aliqua Provincia aut Academia Catholica graviter
offendere scientur, eas ibi non doceant neque defendant. Ubi enim nec fidei
doctrina, nec morum integritas in discrimen addneitur, prudens charitas exigit
ut nostri se ill us accommodent cum quibus versantur. Reg. Prof. Scholast;
sect. 6.
When there are opinions of any Author whatsoever, that wre not well received
in Women Province or University, and which offend the Spirits of the Catholics,
that they be careful not to teach them nor maintain them in those places. For
when the Doctrine of Faith is not in question, nor the integrity of manners,
sage and prudent charity wills that ours comply with the humors of those
amongst whom they live.

The same F. Causin answering to that which was objected against the Society,
that the sum of F. Bauny censured at Rome, and many other like Books of his
Fraternity, teaching pernicious maxims, were again after the censure of the
Holy Chair, imprinted with permission of their Superiors, and approbation of
the principal of the Society, he says, That the Books of their Writers fall
sometimes into the hands of some easy Fathers, who out of the high
fore-stalled opinion they have of the capacity of their Authors, suffer their
Works to pass with great facility.

Indeed it were not reasonable to expect that they who are so gentle and
complacent toward Strangers, should be less toward their Brethren. For as for
justice, fidelity, and truth toward our Neighbor, or the Public, they are
not accustomed to put themselves to much trouble in what concerns them, and to
cover their interests and lusts with the name of charity and sweetness, and a
complacency which is in the bottom altogether humane and interested.

But he gives also more power unto Princes, Others, says he, to whom
opposition is made, write either at Rome by the commandment of the Pope, or in
other Countries at the instance of Foreign severe Princes, who carry things at
their pleasure, with a high hand; so that it comes to pass oftentimes, that
they have no more power over their Books, than over the Winds or Stars. So the
Books of the Jesuits fall sometimes into the hands of certain of their easy
Fathers, who let them pass easily, and their Authors, whatsoever they advance:
otherwhiles they fall into the violent hands of Foreign Princes, who do what
they please with the same Books and Authors; so that the Superiors have no more
power over them, than over the Winds or Stars. It must needs be that the Spirit
and Divinity of the Jesuits is very manageable, very pliant, and very
obsequious, that they may make of it whatsoever they will, or rather whatsoever
the Princes and Grandees of the World would have. After this confession they
have made themselves, we may say, that they are very near the estate which the
Jews were in, when the Prophet objected unto them; Princeps postulat, and Judex
in reddendo est, and magnus locutus est desiderium animae suae, and
conturbaverunt came. Micheae 7. v. 3.
The Priuce demands what he pleases, and the Judge speedily grants it him; and
the mighty man does only declare his desire, and they trouble and entangle his
conscience, heartning him in wicked designs by false reasons, instead of
opposing, or redressing and regulating them by the Law of God, and maxims of
the Gospel.

This is to acknowledge and declare himself a slave in an abject manner, to
violent powers and strangers, as this Jesuit talks, to say as he does, speaking
for the whole Society, that they carry things with a high hand, as they list,
no more power over their Books, which they compose, and which they cause to be
printed, than over the Winds and Stars, who receive their motions not from
Celestial intelligences, but from Terrestrial and Temporal powers. It is easy
to judge by this what their fidelity may be, and what reason there is to
confide in their Discourse and Divinity so fickle and voluntary, not only for
private persons, but also for Princes, since being thus for all, they are for
none, and abandoning truth so easily, they will yet more easily for sake men,
according as their interests shall require them.

ARTICLE IV. That the Jesuits Divinity is subject to contradictione, and change
in opinions.
THey that are not at all informed of the maxims of the Jesuits, wonder when
they hear say that they are so little constant and faithful in their words,
and in their actions: others who have some knowledge of their opinions, report,
that ordinarily the cause of this proceeds from the Doctrine of equivocations,
of which they make profession. But those who know them better, give thereof a
reason more clear and more easy, drawn from the principles of their Divinity:
For there is no need to have recourse to equivocations to deceive, if we
believe we may lie with a good conscience; and it seems foolish to rack ones
wits to find a word with double sense, to cover and disguise his thought, if he
be persuaded that it is lawful to speak and do quite contrary to what he
thinks, and to quit his own opinion to follow that of another, when he finds it
more favorable for him; keeping still the liberty to resume his own, and to
follow it when he shall have occasion for it, and so to pass from the one to
the other, giving unto the same difficulties contrary advices and resolves,
following his own humor, or complying with theirs who demand his counsel.

These are the certain maxims of the Jesuits Divinity, as I have made appear
above; after which it ought not be thought strange, that they are so inconstant
in all their ways,

One of their most ordinary contradictions, is to acknowledge Truths in their
general Propositions, and to destroy them in the particulars and practice.

This may be seen clearly in F. Bauny in many places of his Books, as in his
Sum c. 3. p. 49. where speaking of Penance, he agrees, that if we look for
heaven and eternal life, without first doing penance for our sins, it is mortal
sin. And in the 43. chapter and 69. p. he declares, that pardon of sin, and
correction, are two things inseparable; and that the one is not given, but
after the other: Non datur venia nisi correcto. And in the 38. chapter p. 589.
speaking of a Consessor, and of the cognizance he ought to have of the
disposition of a penitent: In truth, says he, as he holds the place of a Judge
in the Sacrament, as says the Council in the 14. session and 9. chapter he cannot,
nor ought pass sentence, but on what he has a full and perfect cognizance of.
And in the following page he cites the C. Omnis utriusque sexus, where the
Confessor is spoken of in these terms: Debet diligenter inquirere and
peccatoris circumstantias and peccati, quibus prudenter intelligat quale debeat
ei praebere consilium, and cujusmodi remedium adhibere, diversis experimentis
utendo ad sanandum aegrotum.
He ought carefully inform himself of the circumstances which respect the
sinner, as well as which respect his sin, that he may judge prudently what
counsel he ought to give him, and what remedy he ought to prescribe him; making
use of sundry experiments to cure his disease.

And in his Practique, Remes, under Charlemain, and Leo 3. in the 16. chapter That
they should observe, Quinto quomodo confitentium peccata dijudicant, and tempus
poenitentiae constistuunt.
how the Confessors judged of the sins of the penitents, and what time of
penance they prescribed them.

The other Jesuits acknowledge with him the same maxims, as the fundamental
rules of Penance: but after they have acknowledged them in general, they
overturn and violate them in their conduct: they even condemn those that would
observe them, and establish others quite contrary, without fear of falling not
only into manifest contradictions, but also into a visible contempt of those
Truths which they have acknowledged, and of rendering themselves by this
carringe unexcusable before God and men.

So F. Bauny says in the 46. chapter of his Sum, p. 717. That notwithstanding
great and frequent relapses, a sinner who resorts to the feet of a Priest to
put an end to his sins past, dignus est absolutione toties quoties, deserves to
have his pardon, quandocunque nulla notetur emendatio, when he is not observed
to have amended his life at all. Never troubling himself to agree this with the
rule which he established before, Non datur venia nisi correcto, No pardon
without amendment. For he consents not only that a man deserves pardon for his
sin, and that absolution is to be given him though he be not amended,
quandocunque nulla notetur emendatio; but he pretends also that it ought to be
given him as often as he demands it in this estate, toties quoties, Because, as
he says, such resolutions are presumed to come no farther than from the teeth
outward.

And in the 40. chapter 650. p. he says, That if any one of ignorance and
simplicity have accused himself of his faults only in gross, without
determining any one in particular, it will not be needful to draw out of his
mouth the repetition of such faults. As if he had a design to recant what he
had said above, That a Confessor who holds the place of a Judge in this
Sacrament, as the Council speaks in the 14. sess. and 19. chap. cannot pass
sentence but of what he has an entire and full cognizance.

In the 5. chapter 68. p. It suffices not, says he, to discharge our duty, to say
to a Confessor that we have stolen in notable quanity sufficient to offend
mortally, if we do not rate and specify the sum: because he ought to know the
condition of his penitent, which cannot easily be done, unless he unfold unto
him the value of his theft. And yet in the 39. chapter 616. p. he is not afraid to
maintain the contrary in these terms: It is not necessary in Confession to
relate the said circumstance, the quantity of the theft, as whether one stole
five, or fifty Crowns. It will suffice in rigor to say to his Confessor, that
in matter of stealth he has sinned mortally, taking from another the sum
which makes and constituteth that sin.

In the 3. chapter 46. p. he says, That he who receives the Supper, or hears a
Sermon without applying his heart thereto, ought not to be esteemed an Hugenot.
But in the 20. chapter 336. p. he says, That he who without intention of idolizing
it, does bend his knee before an Idol, shall yet be held for an Idolater. As if
to receive the Supper amongst Hugenots, were not as well an action of an
Hugenot, as to kneel before an Idol is an action of an Idolater.

In the same 20. chapter p. 332. he speaks thus: Since true devotion is inward,

And on the contrary he says, That the Church seems to him, in the precept
of reciting the Hours, to exact of the Priests and those who are obliged
thereto, only to honor and praise God: chaunting Psalms and singing, though
with voluntary distraction, wherein they continue, provided that they sing
tunably and with reverence. Of which he renders this reason in the same place:
For the outward action by which we attend on God, is of the kind and appertains
unto the virtue of Religion: Therefore as they who without intention of
Idolatry bow their knee before an Idol, are notwithstanding guilty of Idolatry;
so we must believe that they pray, who recite the Office though without
intention,

And a few lines after he reasons thus, and draws this practique conclusion: It
follows that the Confessor cannot blame the penitent of a mortal fault, for
applying his mind to frivolous things, whilst that his tongue sounded in the
Church with others the praises of God, if outwardly he did nothing that was
incompatible with this attention. 2. He shall not oblige him to repetition of
any thing he had said, because pronouncing it in such manner, he has
accomplished the precept; neither is he for all that obliged to make
restitution of the fruits received from his Benefice, if it be so that he have
any.

And yet he has not only said the contrary before, but he returns again to it
in the 13. chapter 163. p. The said Beneficiaries shall be obliged to make
restitution of the fruits they have received of their Benefices, when they say
their Hours but imperfectly, with voluntary distr^tions which endure the whole
Office, or the greater part thereof. Of which he render^ this reason: Because
not to rehearse his Hours at all, and to do it indecently, without respect,
attention and reverence, is all one before God, because he is equally contemned
and dishonored in both.

It would be hard to find in two Authors, who had different designs to
contradict and refute one another, opinions so opposite, and contradictions so
visible For these oppose one another in their principles, in their conclusions,
and in their reasons,

And that which is yet more astonishing, is that they make these so strange
changes almost in a moment; and they may be met with sometimes in the same
page, and sometimes within two or three lines, as may appear in some of the
places which I have cited. But I cannot pass by one important and manifest
contradiction of the same Author, which is found in his Practique in the 3.
book, 44. chapter 727. p. For after he had said in the precedent page, that the
Ordinary may and ought admonish the Rectors to execute their charges
themselves; whereunto if they were not obedient, they might be deprived. He
adds in approbation of this carriage: And indeed the contrary custom seems to
me only an inveterate error, which through length of time becomes greater and
more abusive; quia diuturnitas temporis non minuit, sed auget peccatum.

And yet in the same Book, 43. chapter 715, and 716. pages, after that he had said,
that the Rectors are obliged to reside on their Cures, he enquires whether
custom may dispense with their Residence? In this affair, says he, one
difficulty is moved, to wit, whether custom not to reside on Cures, can sh^lter
as well from the sin, as the punishment appointed by the Council against those
who fail, which is, that they should have no benefit by such Cures? He answers,
that Layman and Navarre hold the affirmative, and he confirms it by this
reason: Because according to the common axiom, that which the Pope may grant by
dispensation or special privilege to any person, custom gives to all a
discharge thereof, and that without fear, especially when it is for a long time
observed in the Church. Constable. in 6. c. 1. Consuetudo vim habet legis; Custom
has the force of a Law.

It appears clearly that in one place he says, that the use of not residing
upon Cures, is no other thing than an inveterate error; and in the other
place, that custom of not residing gives a discharge to all.

In one place he says, that length of time renders the error of Non-residence
greater and more abusive; in the other, that a custom of Non-residence, frees
all from the forfeiture of their Revenue, especially if this custom be of long
continuance in the Church.

It seems that this liberty of maintaining and publishing contrarieties, is
granted the Jesuits by their Superiors, with permission to print these Books
wherein such contrarieties are found. Therefore it is less strange, that their
Superiors pretend to have this right as well as private persons, and make use
of it without scruple in occurrents wherein they judge it advantageous to the
good of their affairs, as it did appear by the answer of F. Cotton to the
Gentlemen of the Parliament of Paris, upon the matter of Santarel's Book, which
is well enough known in Paris, and in France. For those Gentlemen objecting to
him, that Viteleschi General of the Society had approved the Book, he answered
together with three other Jesuits that accompanied him as their Provincial:
That the General could not do otherwise, because they at Rome would have him do
so. The Gentlemen of the Parliament demanded of him, if he were of the same
judgment, and approved such proceedings? He confessed that as for Santarel's
Book, he did not approve it at all; Rome he would have done as he did. Which
gave one of the Commissioners occasion to say to them; You have then one
conscience for Rome, and another for Paris: and to the Gentlemen his Colleagues
to say, God defend us from such Confessors.

Two or three months after, the Gentlemen of the Parliament having proposed
unto them certain Articles, extracted out of the Book of Santarel, that they
might condemn them, and others contrary to them, that they might a ^rove them;
they did both without much trouble. And yet they have since put this Book of
Santarel, with those of the English Jesuits, against the safety of Kings, and
authority of Bishops, and against the Discipline of the Church, into the
Catalogue of the Books of their Society, though they had declared and protested
publicly, that these Books did not proceed from their Society, and that they
were falsely attributed unto them. And lately also F. le Moine in his Apology
speaks thus of these very Books: We have declared a long time since, that we
know not these Authors, which we believe not to be of our Society; and also at
this day we may protest in sincerity, that they are as unknown to us as they
were before.

He is not afraid to give the lie to his General Viteleschi, and other Divines
of his Society, who have approved the Book of the Jesuit Alagambe, le Moine,
who knew them not at Paris, would have known them at Rome it may be, if he had
been there: and this same sincerity which made him protest that he knew them
not in France, would have made him in Flanders or in Italy have declared quite
contrary, by the rule of the Society, which wills that they comply with the
times, places and humors of all the World.

This manner of acting and speaking is ordinary enough amongst the Jesuits, and
they are already so accustomed to contradictions, that they fear no more the
reproach which is cast upon them continually for defending vice and error; but
they are rather rendy to glory therein, and shortly to make public profession
thereof; since Dicastillus pretends, instead of blaming Diana for contradicting
himself frequently in his answers, he does rather praise and thank him, as for
some signal service which he would do the public, in obliging the World, and
complying with the necessities and desires of those who consult with him.
Eccehic Author (Diana) sibi contrarius est; id tamen, quod illi non semel
comigit, non reprchensione, sed gratiarum action dignum est. Nempe vir pro
communi bono laborans, and communi utilitati serviens, plurima lectione dives
and copiosus pro occurrenti consultationum and quaerentium necessitate aut
etiam desiderio, jam huic, jam illi parti adhaeret, quando pars utraque
probabili ratione, and doctorum virorum auctoritate nititur, and in praxi
utriusvis operari tutum est. Voluit a^tem nobis in medium proserre ad hunc
ipsum sinem quid in una, quid in alia occasion responderit quaerentibus. Quid
quaeso utilius pro praxi. Haec obiter dixerim, ut facessere iubeam nescio quos
invidos, qui haec and si quae sint similia crudito viro non verentur objicere.
Dicastillus de Sacr. Euch. tr. 4. dis. 10. dub. 5. n. 110.
You see, says he, that this Author is contrary to himself, which happens unto
him not once only; and he deserves not to be reproved for it, but rather to be
thanked. This man who labors for the public good, having completed himself
with great reading, complying to the necessity, and even unto the desire of
those who consult with him;

He observes very well, that Diana falls into many contradictions, by following
and teaching diverse probable opinions which were contrary; and that he was
induced hereunto by a Spirit of Complacency, and the desire which he had to
comply with the necessity, profit, and even the desire of the persons who
consulted with him. So that by his own confession there is great alliance, and
necessary consequence betwixt Probability, Contradiction, and a Spirit of
Compliance and Complacency, which to satisfy the desires and interests of men,
has invented the Science of Probability; and that they may make use of it more
freely, and more agreeably unto the will of the people of the World, thus
trouble not themselves though they fall into contradictions, whilst they follow
all sorts of opinions.

In another place speaking again of Diana, he says, Nec sine admiratione legi
in Diana, in quo eruditio cum benignitate de primatu certat, dum casus resolvit
erudite juxta and benign, and plures at varias, imo etiam opposita^ sententias
ut probabiles sequitur and admiteit. Dicast. de poenit, tract. 8. disp. 9. dub.
8. number. 351.
That he cannot read without admiration, because his learning and his
obsequiousness contend for the prize, in his resolves which he gives in Cases
of Conscience, with as great benignity and accommodation,

Tambourin seems to design to lay the first foundations of this Science, and to
dispose men's minds to receive it, when speaking of himself, and confessing that
he happens often to fall into contradictions, yet he will not have Neque me hic
contrarium esse suspicetur is qui forte animadvertit me interdum aliquam
sententiam approbare quam alias non sum amplexus. Id enim tun^ solum facio
quando utraque sententia probabilit a me judicatur, quod non est mihi
adversari, sed docere potius sententias illas posse ad libitum tuto excipi.
Tambor. l. 1. Decal. cap. 3. sect. 7.
us say, nor so much as suspect that he is contrary to himself, when we see him
approve an opinion which in another place he has not received; because he has
not done it, but in that either of them seemed probable unto him.

To authorize Usury, and give it a free course in the World, the Jesuits have
found no means more short and easy, than to take from it that name which is so
odious, and to say to them who exercise it, that they should not call it Usury
any more. Tambourin here makes use of the same expedient to establish the
Science of Contradictions; he will not have us to call them Contradictions, nor
that we should say that he contradicts himself, when he affirms contrary
things, and which destroy one another.

CHAP. II. Of Evil Customs. That the Jesuits allow those which corruption has
introduced into all sorts of conditions, and make use of them to excuse sins
and vices.
THE mischiefs and disorders which come from evil Examples and Customs cannot
be expressed; and we may say, that these are the most ordinary means, and the
most forcible and puissant arms which are employed at this day to destroy
Christian Truth and Piety, and to authorize Corruption and Looseness, which
abounds so much amongst all sorts of conditions.

We made it appear just now in the former Chapter, that F. Bauny excuses by
custom, and delivers from all fear and scruple the Parish Priests who are
Nonresident. The custom, says he, in his Practique 43. chapter 716. p. 3. book,
gives a discharge from all, and this without fear; especially when it has been
long observed in the Church.

Tambourin takes this rule from Castro-Palao, That in ten years Custom
prescribes against Law, or against another custom legally introduced: so that
if they have not been observed during that time, they oblige no more: After
this we need not wonder if the Jesuits trouble themselves but little about the
Laws of the Church, since there are none happily against which they have not
prescribed on a good or bad account.

Dicastillus by the same principle says, that the Judges sin in administering
Justice on Festival days, unless the custom have prescribed to the contrary.

Escobar upon this question, Quanto tempore potest anteverti Matutinum? Escobar
tract. 5. exam. 6. c. 9. n. 55. p. 661. and 662.
How much sooner may we begin than the hour ordained for saying Matines? says
frankly according to his opinion, and of the principal Doctors of the Society
whom he had read and examined, that we may without scruple begin Matines at
three or four of the clock after noon, for the day following, because it is the
custom of many at this day. Usus Romanus, communisque Ecclesiae mos suffragatur.
The usage of Rome, says he, and the ordinary custom of the Church is
favorable unto them. But he ought to have considered, that there are customs
which are abuses, and not usages, and that the Church approves not all that it
tollerates, and that it is to wrong it to attribute a custom unto it which it
has so oftentimes condemned, and which it does yet daily condemn by the same
mouth of those who follow it, in the most part of (...) Hymns which they say
at Matines and Lauds, wherein the times to say these two parts of the Office is
expressly marked and determined.

He goes yet further, Qui autem hora prima aut secunda ante meridiem recitaret,
mortali crimine foedaretur. Ibid.
he who says Matines an hour or two before noon, sins mortally; because this
is not the custom. For according to his maxim, if it were once introduced into
practice, it were no more sin, no not venial, no more than to say them after
noon. See here his words: Si autem consuotudo tulerit, hora tertia aut secunda
cum dimidia post meridiem poterit Matutinum recitari sine veniali peccato. Ibid.
But if the custom allow it, Matines may be said at half three, or at three of
the clock after noon, without venial sin.

Matines may be said without scruple, according to this Casuist, at four of the
clock, because such is the custom; and might also be said at half hour after
two, if such were the custom. After the rate then that this custom goes on
advancing and gaining time, we may follow it without fear or scruple of sin,
and say Matines for the next day before dinner, as well as after dinner: we
should thence have this commodity, to have our minds more free to say them, and
all the rest of the day for whatever we pleased to do, without speaking of many
other reasons which may serve for inducement to so laudable a devotion.

The Jesuits also make use of custom to authorize Duels, and pretend that it is
not only lawful to accept, but also to offer them. And one of the Casuists of
the Society, who taught publicly at Caen of late years, after he had
endeavored to justify this brutal madness by many reasons, which we shall
represent in their place, concludes in this manner: Qui haec responsa non
proba^t, ignari sunt communis consuctudinis and vitae. Licet enim homini hac
ratione honorem suum tutari.
These who approve not these answers, know not the manner of living,

There is no custom more wicked, nor more general amongst people of base
condition, than to swear, blaspheme, and to break out into curses and
imprecations against cattle, men, and every thing that gives them trouble.
Bauny considering this cursed custom, says according to his ordinary lenity;
Bauny Sum. c. 6. p. 73.
For my part I believe that it may be said with truth, that it is their choler
by which such people suffer themselves to be transported; it is no fault,
neither mortal nor venial, to curse Dogs, Hawks, and other such things as are
without reason.

The abuse which Merchants ought most to fear and avoid in their Traffic, and
which yet is very common at this day, is falsehood and deceit, whether it be in
falsifying and altering Merchandises, or in selling them dearer than they are
worth, or selling them by false weights and false measures. But Layman
following this custom says, Mercatores statim injustitiae damnari non possunt,
si merci substantiam alienam, puta tricico secale, vino aquam, picem cerae
admisceant, modo inde emptoribus nullum damnum inferatur, and merces
proportione pretii quo venditur satis idonea sit ad consuetum usum. Layman l.
3. tr. 4. c. 17. n. 15.
That we must not always condemn the injustice of the Merchants, when they
mingle in their Merchandises things of different kinds, as Rye amongst Wheat,
Water with Wine, and Pitch amongst Wax; provided that this do not damnifie them
that buy it, and that the Merchandise be good enough of the price it costs, and
proper enough for common usage.

And he confirms his opinion by that of Lessius and Lopez, Addit Lessius n. 83.
cum Lopez loco citato, si additio materiae secundum se deterioris eo artificio
and industria fiat ut merces non sit minus bona and idonea ad usum, quam sine
tali admixtione, posse tunc consueto pretio divendi, and luerum majus
repo^tari; quippe quod industriae esse censetur, and sine damno emptorum
percipitur. Ibid.
that Lessius and Lopez assure us, that if the mixture of the matter, which of
it self is of less value, be done with such artifice and industry, that the
Merchandise is not less good nor proper for man's use, than it would be without
this mixture, it may be sold at the ordinary price, and take more than it is
worth; because this gain belongs to the address and industry of the Merchant,
and is no wrong to those that buy it.

The ordinary vice of women, and principally of those of Quality, is luxury and
vanity. They cannot have a fairer pretense for to nourish, nor a better excuse
to justify themselves in the excess they commit therein, and the scandals
which fall out thereupon, than to say that it is the custom, and that they do
nothing but what is commonly done in the World by women of their condition.
Bauny approves this reason, and makes use of it in his Sum, chapter 46. p. 717,
and 718. where he proposes this question: If maids and women, who exceed
modesty and duty, and as we may say necessity of decency in their habits,
because they seek out therein curiosities not suitable to their estates, may be
thought capable of absolution, when they know that some take thence occasion of
sinning?

He acknowledges that many condemn this insupportable vanity, and maintain
that maids and women who are so disposed, and will so continue, are incapable
of absolution; but he declares against their judgment, and concludes in these
terms: Nevertheless we must say, 1. that the woman who trims and adorns her
self to please her Husband, though she does it as he says through vanity and
curiosity, and against modesty, knowing well that some draw from thence
occasion of sin.

He says moreover, that neither is she more to be blamed, if she trim her self
in this sort with scandal, when she does it to satisfy the custom of the
Country, and not to be singular, unlike and inferior to those of their own
sex. He would then that the pretense of pleasing her Husband, and a disorderly
and shameful custom, should give liberty to a woman to break out into all
sorts of luxury and vanity, without being blameable; and that custom has power
to change the nature of things, to cause that it shall be lawful to transgress
the bounds of modesty, that vanity shall be no longer vanity, that luxury shall
not be longer luxury, and that scandal shall be no longer scandal.

He continues speaking in this manner: 2. I say, though this said woman had
knowledge of the bad effects which her diligence in trimming her self would
cause in the body and soul of those who behold her adorned with rich and
precious clothes, nevertheless she sins not in making use thereof. The reason
is, Because to prevent the offense of another, this woman is not bound to
deprive her self of what the Law of the Country, and nature it self permits.
That is to say, that as custom makes luxury and vanity lawful for her, so it
makes scandal also lawful for her; and that the abuses which happens very
frequently in this point, by the corruption of the World, are just and true
Laws, and proper to regulate all things in a Country.

I might speak here of Usury and Symony, which are two vices so common at this
day, that the Jesuits cover them much easier than others,

CHAP. III. Of the Occasions of Sin. That the Jesuits retain men in them, and
that according to their maxims there can be no next occasions of Sin.
ONE of the most important, and most necessary counsels which can be given to a
person who would avoid sin, is that he fly the occasions; and if we observe it,
we shall find that the most ordinary cause why the most part of those who have
some good desire and care for their salvation, attain not to a true and solid
conversion, or fall back after a while, is because they have not received this
advice, or have not been faithful in the observation of it.

This is such, that the Jesuits acknowledge well indeed the importance and
necessity thereof, but they abolish it in their practice. They acknowledge in
general with all Divines, that they who would receive the Grace of God, or
preserve it when they have received it, are obliged to depart from the next
occasions of sin, which would indubitably destroy them. But when question is
made about proceeding to particulars, they grant and accommodate things in such
manner, that according to their advice and guidance there are not any next
occasions of sin,

It is by this conduct that Sancius, handling this point, speaks in these
terms: Dictum est supra quod nullus teneatur occ^sionem proximam vitare cum
magno suo detrimento; nec tunc dicetur velle occasionem, vel permittere, came
non abigere occasionem non oriatur quia velit penitus in ea permanere, sed quia
velit non incurrere damnum quod abjecta occasion obveniret. Sancius in Select.
^i^p. 10. n. 20.
I have said formerly, that no person is obliged to avoid the next occasions of
sin, when thereby some great loss will befall him: in this case it cannot be
said, that he wills this occasion, but permits it only; because that he
withdraws not from this occasion, is not that he would absolutely abide in it,
but because he would decline the damage which this withdrawing would bring on
him.

These words are general, none is obliged, nullus tenetur; and they comprehend
all sorts of persons, even Ecclesiastics and Religious, with whom this Jesuit
dispenses in the Law of the Gospel, which obliges them not only to lose all
the things in the World, rather than suffer the loss of their souls; but also
to cut off their arms and feet, and to pluck out their eyes if they offend
them, that is to say, if they be occasions o^ sin.

The loss for which this Jesuit pretends, none is obliged to eschew the next
occasion of sin, how great soever it be, cannot be of things so dear as eyes,
nor so necessary as hands and feet: For this cause if our Lord will have eyes
pulled out, and feet and hands out off, by stronger reason does he oblige to
suffer all other loss to avoid offense, and to withdraw from the occasions and
danger of being lost by offending God.

Tambourin says almost the same thing, and attempts to justify it by the same
reason, maintaining that if any one cannot quit the occasion of sin without
causing of scandal, or without suffering some damage spiritual or temporal, he
is not obliged thereto, because then it may be judged morally, that this is not
to seek an occasion voluntarily, but to suffer it. He determines not at all
this damage spiritual or remporal, testifying that of what sort soever it be,
small or great, it is sufficient to retain a man in the next occasions of sin
with a good conscience.

If the reason of these Authors had been good, to wit, that he who to avoid
loss, continues in the next occasion of sin, neither wills nor loves this
occasion of sin, but suffers it, because he loves it not for it self alone, but
for the benefit that comes to him therein, or for the evil which he would
avoid, we must say that we cannot be guilty in any occasion of sin, and that we
shall never be obliged to avoid it, but when it is affected and sought out for
its own sake: which hardly ever happens, men not breaking out unto evil,

We cannot find a more proper example to clear up this, than that which Sancius
himself presents us with in these following words: Inde nec tenebitur domo
ejicere concubinam, si concubinatio sit nimis utilis ad lucrandum bona
temporalia, media negotiatione. Ibid.
Hence it comes, says he, that a man is not obliged to cause his Concubine to
depart out of his house, if her company be very advantageous unto him, in
regard of his gain by Traffic. Which he confirms, saying the second time,
Concubinam ejicere non erit obnoxious, si ex ejectione magnum emolumentum non
esset accepturus. Sussiceret enim proponere deinceps non peccare. Ibid.
That he is not obliged to put her away, if in putting her away he lose any
great benefit, and that it suffices him to resolve not to sin any more.

This is to justify one vice by another, and to make use of covetousness and
interest to nousle a man up in fornication. But besides this reason he
produces yet another, which is, Imo si Concubina nimis utilis esset ad ob
lectamentum concubinarii dum deficiente illa nimis aegre ageret vitam and aliae
epulae taedio magno afficerent concubinarium, and alia sam^la ad id nimis
difficile inveniretur, ejicere illam non erit concubinarius obligandu^: quia
oblectamentum, dictis circumstantus consideratum, est majoris aestimationis
quam quod^unque bonum temporale.
If the Concubine be very useful to the fornicator, to cherish him, and to
keep him in good humor, so that without her he lives in melancholy, and has
great distaste of the food which is prepared for him, and cannot easily find
another Maidservant who may be proper for him, he cannot be obliged in this
case to put away his Concubine, because his satisfaction in these circumstances
are more worth than any temporal good.

We then may say boldly, that if temporal good and profit, pleasure and
divertisement suffice to dispense with an Whoremaster to keep his Concubine,
there will never be any obliged thereunto, Ob quod fas erit cuique de novo
admittere soeminam ad sui famulatum, quantumcunque metuat labend periculum, si
aliam non i^veniat paris qualitatis illis in rebus quae sibi sunt maxim
utiles. Si namque ob hanc causam jam receptam expellere non constringitur,
codem jure de novo admittere illam erit concessum. Ibid.
for these same reasons if the Concubine die, or withdraw her self, it will be
lawful for him to take another Maidservant, what fear soever he have of
falling into sin with her, if he cannot find some other who is as capable to
assist him in his affairs and conveniences. For if this reason dispense with
him for not putting her away whom he has already taken, it will also give him
a right to take her whom he has not as yet.

There remains nothing more now to this sort of Divines, but to pretend that it
is lawful for them to find out and direct themselves some Concubine to some
distressed Whoremaster, who cannot live without one, or to exhort him that has
one not to forsake her, for fear least he should be killed with melancholy.

Bauny is not more severe in this point than Sancius, maintaining, Sequitur ex
dictis absolvi posse soeminam quae domi suae virum excipit cum quo saepe
peccat, si cum non potest honest inde ejicere, cum causam aliquam habet cum
retinendi, dummodo firmiter proponat se cum eo amp^ius non peccaturam. Bauny
Theol. mor. part. 1. tract. 4. de poenit. q. 14. p. 94.
That absolution may be given a woman who entertains at her house a man with
whom she offends frequently, if she cannot handsomely send him away, or if she
have any reason to retain him, provided she resolve firmly to sin no more with
him.

The principle of this conclusion is, Quia cum est justa causa expo nendi se
peccati periculo, poenitens nee occasionem vult express and actu, nec peccatum
ex ea consequens, sed commodum suum, nempe privati^nem damni in fama, honor,
pecuniis; quo bono non frueretur si occasionem perditam omitteret aut vitaret.
Ibid.
in exposing her self for so just a reason to the danger of sinning, she does
not directly nor expressly will the occasion of sin; but the commodity, that is
to say, the conservation of her repute, of her honor, or her wealth, wherein
she would have suffered loss if she had quitted or avoided the occasion of sin.
This is doubtless to have great care of her salvation, and to love God very
well above all things, to expose her self voluntarily to evident danger of
offending him for any the least temporal interest. This reason of Bauny is the
same which Sancius expresses in other terms; which testifies, that these are
not the opinions of some particular persons, but that have overspread the
Society it self, and that they are fixed to its spirit and conduct.

But Bauny discovers another principle of this Doctrine, which is, that
Occasiones proximae sunt id solum quod ex se est peccatum mortale, vel quod ex
genere suo and natura est tale, ut frequenter homines similis condition is ad
mo^tale ind^cat, and experimento constat talem effectum in illis habere ut
plurimum, Unde Confessarius contendere prudenter po^est nunquam aut raro tali
occasion poenitentem usurum sine mortali culpa, habita ratione tam loci, quam
temporis and aliarum circumstantiarum quae ad peccatum inducunt. Ibid.
it is not a next occasion, nor which ought to be avoided, but only when it is
mortal sin, or when it is of such nature as causes men fall commonly into sin;
so that the Confessor may judge prudently by his experience past,

And a little after he says, that Deinde cum occasio peccandi non ex se, nec
omnibus si^ mala, sed buic tantum, non potest in classem little operum redigi
quae ex natura sua, and a quocunque fiant, semper sunt mala and nunquam
admittenda. Ibid.
if the occasion of sin be not evil in it self, nor unto all sorts of persons,
but only for some one particular person, it ought not be put into the number of
actions that are evil in their own nature, and forbidden unto all, so that they
should never be permitted to do them.

He will have it then that there is no next occasion of sin, and that it is not
to be avoided, if it be not a mortal sin it self, or at least if it be not evil
in it self, and for all sorts of persons, and if it do not induce men naturally
unto sin, so that it makes them fall therein always, or almost always when
they meet therewith. So that the places, the treatments, the company, the
converse which induce men to lewdness and debauchery, cannot be next occasions
to sin according to this Divinity: and those who are in wicked places, without
giving themselves over unto evil, shall not be engaged in the next occasions to
sin, and shall have done nothing which is forbidden them by the rules of
purity, and the Laws of God. So that when he says in the same place, Quo
supposito, dico primo regulariter absolvendum non esse qui est in occasion
peccandi proxima.
that ordinarily they are not to be absolved who are in the next occasion of
sin; he would say nothing else, but that he is not to be absolved who is
actually in sin, or in some practice which is commonly inseparable from it, and
from which he never parts without sin.

But he will not have this rule to be so general, Dixi regulariter, quia ex
multorum sententia cuique licet se exponere periculo peccandi, cum de aliena
salute, eaque promovenda agitur. Ibid. Aiunt licere singulis lupanar ingredi ad
odium peccati ingenerandum meretricibus, etsi metus sit, ac vero etiam
verisimilitudo non parva eos peccaturos, co quod male suo saepe sunt experti
blandis muliercularum sermonibus ac illecebris flecti solitos ad libidinem.
Ibid.
I say ordinarily, because there are that hold, that it is lawful for all
those who will endeavor after the salvation of souls, to expose themselves
unto the danger of sin. And he alleadges for example those who would go into
naughty places to treat debauched women, that they might there possess them
with some horror of their sin; pretending that this is lawful unto all
indifferently, cuique licere, licere singulis. Albeit they expose themselves to
evident danger, and that there is all the probability in the world, that they
will sin themselves with those women, having already many times proved by
experience, that they cannot defend themselves from the force of their
temptations, and that they suffer themselves to be drawn unto sin.

We find not in the Gospel this mavelous charity, which causes us to expose
our salvation for that of another, and which induces us to be damned with
them. The Apostles and Martyrs were ignorant thereof, having given the life of
their bodies to save men, but not that (...) their souls; because they had
learned of Jesus Christ, that it was to no purpose to gain the whole World to
loose a man's soul, and that it is a ridiculous way to go about to withdraw
debauched persons from sin, by committing sin with them.

Bauny speaks of the same point in French, as in Latin, and he is firm in the
same opinions, because they could not be more enlarged. For in his Sum, c.
46. p. 711. after he had demanded, If they who in their Traffic, Commerce,
discourse, resorts, were obliged to see, to speak, and treat with Maids and
Women, He answers with Baia, they may, so that the cause which draws and
induces them at such times into evil, be not of it self a mortal sin, non est
de se peccatum mortiferum; and therefore cannot be held to be of the quality of
a next occasion disposing unto evil, such as the penitent ought then
necessarily avoid, to possess and receive grace in the Sacrament.

It must be considered, that it is presupposed that the danger is perpetual,
that it causes often to fall into sin, that this sin is of that sort which is
committed by men with maids and women; and yet Bauny, who himself asserts and
advances these things, maintains at the same time, that we are not to hold a
danger of this nature to be in the quality of a next occasion disposing unto
evil.

This same F. in the 717. page, demands, What must be done with Men and
Maidservants, Cousins of both sexes, Masters and their Maidservants, who
mutually draw and assist one another in sin, or take from the house wherein
they are motives thereunto, from the opportunities they have therein? To which
he answers, that if they offend but rarely together, as once or twice in a
month, they may be absolved.

It were easy to relate many like cases which the Jesuits resolve in the same
manner; but I omit them for fear of being too long, to come to a point more
important, which discovers the principles whereupon they found their answers,
and the conditions they require unto a next occasion of sin. See here the
Principles which Bauny relates in this manner.

1. The occasion is the next, when it is of it self of a vicious nature, In his
Sum, 46. chapter 709. p. It is not such, says Baia, whom Bauny alleges for his
warrant, quando non est de se peccatum mortiferum, when it is not of it self a
mortal sin; p. 711.

2. In the second place, though a thing be evil and vicious in it self, and
serve for a next, and as it were certain occasion of sin; yet according to
Bauny, it is not such in effect, that is to say, it is not the next occasion to
sin, when it is not sought, and the will is not bent thereupon: 710. p. Which
he expounds more clearly, when he says a little after, that albeit the precept
of flying the occasions of sin is negative, and that by consequence it obliges
always, this is only with this condition, not to affect and seek humerously,
and without necessity that which induces unto sin; 712. p.

3. In the third place, he maintains, that a thing is no next occasion to sin
unto a man, if it be not so forcible that it ravisheth him in some sort, and
causes him almost every time it presents it self, to fall into sin; si non
adsit assiduit as pecoandi. Which Bauny translates and explicates in this
manner: If the said occasion do not force, as I may say, the sinner to fall at
every season, always, and at all times; 711. p.

4. In the fourth place, although a person be engaged in some place, company,
exercise, which causes him often to offend God, they say he is not for that
obliged to leave it, if he be retained by any temporal consideration, as that
of wealth, of honor, and even of pleasure it self; si adsit aliqua notabilis
causa non se separandi, says Baia, and which Bauny translates better than he
thought for, when he rendered it in these terms: Provided he have some specious
cause which obliges him to continue in the said occasion; 710. p. It matters
not, whether this cause be just or not before God, so it be specious before
men. For speaking of this specious cause which may oblige men to continue in
the nearest, and as it were certain occasions of offending God, he expounds it
thus: As when they cannot dispense therewith without giving the world matter to
talk of, ^or that is would be an inconvenience to them; 712. p.

5. In the fifth place, they assure us that a man may with a safe conscience
abide in the most certain, most ordinary, and most violent occasions of sin,
when any temporal interest or commodity engages him therein, provided he form
within himself a resolution not to offend God in that estate. Dummodo firmiter
proponat non peccare; p. 712. provided that he is displeased with what is past,
and purposes not to fall thereinto again for the future; 715. p. though he have
often made the like resolutions and protestations which have been vain and
without effect; quandocunque nulla notetur emendatio, as Sancius speaks in
Bauny, p. 717. and though even in deed there be no appearance, that he who made
these promises and these resolutions, will do what he promises, and hold to
what he resolves, as Bauny says after Diana, p. 716. and though many times it
may be presumed that such resolutions come no farther than from the lip
outward, as says the same Bauny, 717. p.

Sancius agrees very well with Bauny in all these points, Bauny with Sancius,
from whom he seems to have taken the greatest part of what he has said about
these next occasions of sin, as having found none more large upon this matter,
as appears clear enough in what we have related of this matter from him.

Layman also establishes the same principles, and requires the same conditions
in the occasions of sin. And after he has declared, that by the command of God
we are obliged to fly the next occasions, he adjoyns these restrictions and
exceptions: Excipe nisi proximum periculum, seu occasio mortaliter peccandi
sine gravi incommodo corporis, famae, aut fortunarum, tolli non possit, tune
consilium quidem est minorem illam jacturam majori bono securitatu animae
posthabere, sed nec praeceptum. Layman l. 5. tract. 6. cap. 4. number. 9.
Unless, says he, the evident danger, and next occasion of sinning mortally,
cannot be removed without some notable damage to body, goods, or reputation.
For in this case God counsels indeed to suffer this loss, to secure the
salvation of our souls, but he commands it not.

Whence he draws this conclusion for the resolving of this very case, which F.
Bauny had already propounded as above: Quare absolvendi sunt qui officio,
negoliatione, dome in qua peccandi periculum propinque imminet, discedere
nolunt, quia sine maxima dissicultate non possunt; quia occasio peccandi in se
peccatum non est, neque necessitatem infert, aut anim? libertatem aufert. Ibid.
That they are to be absolved who will not quit a charge, an employment, a
traffic, or an house wherein they are in the next and imminent ddnger of
sinning, because they cannot do it without difficulty. His reason is, because
the next occasion of sin being not sin, neither does it impose any necessity of
sinning, and takes not away liberty. That is to say, that if a man be not in
danger to lose his wits and liberty,

Escobar who boasts to be the mouth unto 24. of the most ancient and prudent of
the Society, speaking of the next occasions of sin, says, Proximam illam
occasionem appello, qua circumstantiis spectatis, raro quis a peccato assolet
abstinere. Escob. tract. 7. ex. 4. cap. 8. number. 226. p. 836.
That he calls that the next occasion of sin, whereupon it arrives rarely that
a man abstains from sin, the circumstances considered. And as if he apprehended
that he should be accounted too scrupulous and too severe, if he would hereby
withdraw persons from venial sin, he gives this advertisement: Certe peccatum
ex hujusmodi occasion exurgens debet esse mortale.
But yet the sin which arises herefrom must be a mortal one. For a venial sin
is accounted as nothing by this Jesuit, and by the most part of the rest of
them.

Praeterea talic debet esse occasio, qua nunquam aut raro non delinquatur.
Furthermore, says he, the occasion ought to be such, that it happen never or
seldom that he sins not when it presents it self. So that to put or hold ones
self into such an occasion, is not so much to be exposed to the danger of
sinning, as to cast himself into sin it self, since he is engaged into a
necessity of falling thereinto, which he hardly ever avoids. Which agrees very
well with what Bauny says, that that is the next occasion of sin, which is of
it self and of its own nature vicious, as all mortal sin is; and with that
which Layman says also on the same subject, that we are not obliged to quit a
Society, or Occupation, which is the cause that we do frequently offend God,
Quando occasio peccandi in se peccatum non est, neque necessitatem infert, aut
animi libertatem aufert.
when the occasion of sin is not sin of it self, or when it imposes no
necessity, nor takes away liberty.

An ABRIDGEMENT of the Doctrine of the JESVITS, about the next occasions of Sin.
1. Quando occasio peccandi ex se peccatum non est. Layman. Quand elle n'est
pas de soy and de sa nature vicieuse, comme seroit tout peche mortel. Bauny.
ACcording to the Divinity of these Jesuits, a thing is not the next occasion
to sin, unless it be vicious, and a sin of it self.

2. Si le precepte de fuir les occasions du peche oblige, dit Bauny, ce n'est
que sous condition de n'affecter and rechtrcher de gayete de coeur and sans
necessite ce qui portc, au peche. Intelligendum est praeceptuns ac quis ultro
ac voluntary se in petcandi periculum conjiciat, aut in eo persistat. Layman.
Though it be such, none are obliged to forsake or fly it; it is sufficient
that it be not sought of humor, and with a formed design to offend God.

3. Pourveu qu'i y ait quel que cause specieuse, comme sereit de ne pouvoir
s'en dispenser sans bailler Jujet au monde de parler, ou qu'eux memes en
receussent quelque incommodite. Bauny. Nullui tenetur occasionem proximam
vitare cum magno detrimeuto. Unde nec tenebitur domo ejicere Concubinam, si
concubinatio sit nimis utilis ad lucrandum bona temporalia media negotiatione.
Sancius. Imo si Concubina nimis utilis esset ad oblectamentum concubinarii,
ejicere illam non erit concubinarius obligandus. Sancius.


4. Concubinam ejicere non erit obnoxious, si ex ejectione magnum emolumentum
non esset acquisiturus. Sufficeret enim proponere deinceps non peccare.
Sancius. Dummede firmiter proponat non peccare; quandocumque nulla no etur
emendatio. Sancius cite par Bauny.
Resolving to continue and to engage therein upon so good motives, it is
sufficient so say with ones self, that he will not offend God, and that he form
this resolution, though he knows by his own experience that he cannot contain
himself.

5. Quia occasio peccandi ex se peccatum non est neque necessitatem infert, aut
animi libertatem aufert. Layman. Si elle violente, pour ainsi dire, le pecheur
a tomber a toutes beures, tous les jours and en tout temps. Bauny. Talis debet
esse occasio qua nunquam vel rare non delinquatur. Escobar.
How strange an impression soever the places, company, and persons who give
occasions of sin, do bring upon the Spirit of a man, holding him continually,
and causing him almost always to fall into sin, provided this occasion force
not, nor bring to the point of necessity; so it do not absolutely deprive of
wit and liberty, there is no obligation to fly it, or withdraw from it, though
we have often fallen under it in time past, and believe not we shall be able to
defend our selves in time to come.

He that would or can hold to these principles, and guide himself by these
maxims,

THE LAST CHAPTER. Of the Accessaries of Sin.
IT cannot be doubted, but that the help which sinners have one of another in
the execution of their wicked designs, is one of the outward principles of sin.

There are few crimes which are committed without the assistance of others, and
which can proceed without a Servant, a Friend, a Merchant, or some person who
favors and furnishes with money for their execution. Though the Holy
Scriptures, and all the most common rules of Morality, do condemn all these
voluntary instruments of sin, the Divinity of the Jesuits nevertheless forbears
not to excuse them. I will only rehearse some of the principal decisions of
Tambourin, because he is the last Author that I know of, who has written on
this, and who has taken care to collect almost all that is corrupt in their
Morality.

1. For Servants, he excuses those of Usurers, Dishonest, and Duellists, Si
jussu heri ulurarti pecuniam numeret, deferat, recipiat, reserat in libros; si
ejusdem jussu quem scit ire ad adulterandum sternat ^quum, ipsum mere
comitetur, mereque expectet ante sores, sternat lictum, cibos condiat,
ministretque contubinae, candemque mere ossociet ducendo ad locum ubi dominus
peccaturus est, januamque aperiat eidem ingressarae: si honoret suam beram
meret^icem, si deserat scripta and intern^ntia solius urbanitatis plena; si
deferat munuscula and esculenta, praestetque alia officia quae alius famulus
aeque praestaret. number. 18. Non ex sola famulatus ratione, sed metu detrimenti.
V. G. torvis aspiciatur oculis, demo expellatur, excusatur: si referat
adulterae vel inimico tali hora ad domum beri vel ad dictum locum accedat; si
jussu heri insequatur puellam visurus vel requisiturus ubi ea habitet; si jussu
ejusdem non aperiat modo januam, sed doceat ubi herus sit: si dominum adjuvet
ad ascendendum per fenestram quo ingrediatur in locum ubi peccaturus sit. number.
19.
If a Servant, says he, by the command of his Master, who is an Usurer, tells
the money, carries it, receives it, Books it; if by command of his Master, whom
he knows to be going to commit adultery, he saddles his horse, attends at the
gate, makes the bed, makes ready meat, serves at the table of his Whore,
accompanies her and conducts her to the place where his Master is, to commit
this sin, if he opens her the door, if he reverence this prostitute, if he
carry Lettors and Messages which contain Civilities only, if he barry Presents
to her with a Collation, and perform all other services which a Servant
commonly does for his Master, -- he is not only to be excused, because of his
servile condition, but also because of the fear of loss; if for example he fear
that his Master will be angry, or turn him out of his house. He is to be
excused, if he go to tell the woman with whom his Master goes to commit
adultery, that he will be found at home at sush an hour: or to his Masters
enemy, that at such an hour he shall find him at such a place: If by the
command of his Master, he follows a Damsel to see or enquire where she lives;
if by his command, he not only open the door, Wherefore takes he such pains to
particularize such infamous actions, if it be not for fear least a Servant
should make any scruple upon any one of these circumstances, and that the
Master not being well served, should fall short of executing his design, or for
fear this poor Servant should put himself by his scruple in danger of being
frowned upon by his Master, for having hindered him from committing this crime.

But if you be not satisfied with the excuse of this Servant, this Father will
furnish him with another, founded on the direction of his intention, which may
serve him as he says himself, Ratiod. scendendi multos a peccato saltem
mortisero, modo, ut in casu proponitur, non placeat eis peccatum, and faciant
obsequia praedicta oo aliquem bonum suem, puta co quod exhibeant illa officii
sui causa. Tambur. l. 5. Decal, cap. 1. sect. 4. n. 30.
to discharge many persons of sin, at least of mortal sin; which is that in the
cases propounded, the servant pleases not himself in the sin of his Master,
and that he do him the services whereof we have spoken, for some good end, as
for the just reward which he expects. It is not very necessary to advertise
fervants to have this good intention; and if it be capable to excuse them, it
is true that they need fear nothing on this part, if this answer will serve
them: that their Masters sins please them not, but so far as they receive some
profit and benefit thereby.

But what this Father makes use of to excuse a servant, he also allows as
lawful to a friend. Si amicus meuo vetit ut ego seram munuscula and simlia
tarpis sci^icet amoris incit m^nta, quae ipse mittit ad suam concubinam, possum
sine peccato defer.....si tibi magni sit ejusmodi amicitia, ac vere timeas
amittere, quiatuno notabilis momenti justus metus accedit. Ibid. n. 18, 19, 20.
If my friend, says he, will have me carry presents, to be given on the
account of dishonest Love, unto his Concubine, to whom he sends them, I may
carry them without sin, if I have an esteem for the love of this man, and that
I would not lose it, because in this case I have a just cause of fearing a
confiderable loss.

The friendship of an Adulterer is very considerable in the judgment of this
Divine and this Jesuit, and preferrable to that of God himself, being he wills
that against the command of God a friend may contribute to his crime, for fear
only of putting himself in danger of losing his favors, he may by the same
motive carry on the behalf of this friend presents to a Murderer, or to an
Impostor, to stir them up by false witnesses to dishonor or kill whom he
pleases; and it will not be easy, according to this detestable Doctrine to
condemn him, that gives his friend a Sword to kill himself, if he entreat him;
if it be not that perhaps the life of the Body is more precious, and more
considerable than that of the Soul, and that it is more lawful to cooperate to
this then to that, or to contribute to an adultery then to an homicide.

As for the Merchants, they may according to this Author cooperate as much as
their vocation, or rather their Lust and Interest will permit them, to the sins
of Idolatry, Whoredom, unlawful gains, and of all sorts of debaucherie. Popest
quis vendere agnun; insideli, quem scit usui fore ad sacrisicium ideli, fucos
mulieri, quos seit emi ut ad turpem amorem ill is peruncta juvenes alliciat:
aleas and taxillos eis qui in ludo illicito sune ill is abusuri: caupones
possunt ministrare cibos in die jejunii, tum quando dubitant an ad se
divertentes a jejunio excusentur, tum quando putant eos non excusari. n. 34.
Potest quis vendere, vel etiam locare domum meretricibus vel usurario publico:
immo id potest fieri ex Sanchez l. 1. in d.c. 8. n. 20. ctiam nulla excusante
causa, u. 35. Qui vendunt esculenta soluturis jejunium excusantur si timent
diminutionem emptorum, cum raro ex tua denegatione jejunto sint vacaturi. n.
36. Ad vendendum vinum scienter se inebriantl, causam majorem aliquam praeter
ipsum vini merum pretium expostulant Castropal. Sa, Sanchez, timorem ne multum
sic diminuantur emptores. Tambur. l 5. Decal. c. 1. sect. 4. n. 33, 34, 35, 36.
We may, sell an Infidel a Lamb which we know he will use in Sacrifice to an
Idol; we may sell a woman Paint, which we know she will use to draw young men
to unchaste Love; we may sell Dice and Cards to them we know will abuse them to
unlawful gaeming; Cooks may provide meat to be eaten on Fast days, whether they
believe that they who demand it, are lawfully exempt from fasting, or not: we
may sell or hire a House to women of bad lives, and to public Usurers, and
even according to Sanchez, without any cause that may excuse this action. They
that sell victuals to those that would break their fast, if they fear upon
their refusal to lose their custom, are excused; because it is seldom that
these persons are induced to fast by your refusal, to sell Wine to those who
drink drunk with deliberate parpose. There are that require a more considerable
cause than that of having the price of their Wins; to wit that their Customers
will be diminished very much by this refusal. Sivendas iis quos scis per
frauder^, miscendo aquam vino, vel demendo de mensura, aliis esse revendituros,
tunc licite poter is quando tum nisi iis venderes difficulter, vel cum tuo
damno aliis vendere cogereris, aut si aliis sine tuo damn aeque posses, cur ex
charitate non debeas. Sanch. Castrop. Diana, Meroll. number. 37.
If you sell to those whom you know will sell again fraudulently, by mingling
Water with the Wine, or diminishing the measure, you may do it lawfully when it
would be trouble to sell it to others, or when you should suffer damage
thereby.

After the Merchants, we must not forget the artificers, who may serve very
much the sins of other men. Urgentissima existente causa, ut esset magna
paupertas arti ficis, peccatum vitaretur fabricando, venden, do idolum,
templum. Castrop. Tann. number. 38.
In a great and pressing necessity, says Tambourin, such as is the great
poverty of an Artificer, he sins not in building the Temple of an Idol, or in
selling an Idol it self. Join hereunto, that he sins not in providing also a
sacrifice, and selling a Lamb to be sacrificed to an Idol, as he said before:
That is to say, that he may provide for an Idolater, every thing that is
necessary for him to sacrifice unto the Devil; so that there remains nothing,
but to cut the throat of the sacrifice, and to burn it; farther, he may reach
him the knife to cut its throat, and help him, and hold the Torch whilst he
puts fire to it; by the same reason, that a servant may according to this
Jesuit, hold the Ladder and Foot of his Master, when he gets up at a Window to
commit Adultery, for the only gain which he gets in helping him, and which he
loses if he fail him.

After this it may be judged what these Artifans may do to serve other sins, if
it be lawful for them, to furnish with the object it self of the greatest sin,
which is the Idol and Temple where it is adored, without fearing the curse,
that they shall become like unto their works: similes illis fiant qui faciunt
ea.

It is not to be wondered at any more, if they say as this very Author in favor
of other sins; Pingentes turpia, histriones eademrepraesentantes, ex quibus
moraliter scitur multos peccaturos, si eolucro indigeant ad victum, non
recusarem licere. Tambur. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 4. n. 28.
that those who Paint filthy things, and those Comedians who represent them,
though they be morally assured that many will take occasion from thence to sin,
yet if they have need of the gain which this exercise brings them, they may
continue it with a good conscience.

It is always gain and interest that rules in the School of the Jesuits, which
presides in all their decisions, which concern manners, and makes them
favorable to all the most corrupt and infamous professions.

Finally for fear lest Sinners should want persons to lend them money, to
furnish them in their debauches, they permit them to borrow of the Usurers.
Potere ab usurario pecuniam mutuam, si mutuo non indigeat, sed tam pecuniam
postulet ut illicite expendat, licere probabile dicimus. Ibid. number. 44.
If you require to borrow money of an Usurer, though you have no occasion for
it, but to expend on your vice, it is probable that this is lawful for you.

He said before that we may without any reason, let out our House to an Usurer,
to exercise Usury therein; and here he says, that the crime for which we would
employ the money we borrow of him, is a good reason for him to exercise his
Usury. Who can after this ever want a reason to do whatsoever he would, and for
committing the greatest extesses, since after this Divinity one crime may serve
for reason to commit an other.

The end of the First Book.

THE FIRST PART. Of the Inward Remedies of Sin.
WE have hitherto observed how the obsequious Divinity of the Jesuits
favors, and nourishes all the Causes of Sin; whether they be inward, as
Lust, Ignorance, and ill Habits; or outward, as ill Customs, the Occasions of
committing it, and the Maxims of the World, and of corrupted Reason, which
authorize and justify it. We come now to behold how they oppose, and (as far
as may be) overthrow all the Remedies thereof; whether they be inward, which
destroy it in the Soul when it has committed it, and which hinder from
committing it; as the Grace of Jesus Christ, Penitence, the Sacraments, and
good Works; or outward, which of themselves make only a Discovery thereof, as
the holy Scripture, and the Commandments of God, and the Church,

CHAPTER I. Of the Grace of Jesus Christ.
ARTICLE I. That the Jesuits destroy the Grace of Jesus Christ by their
Divinity.
I Shall be so much the shorter in this Chapter, as the Subject thereof is more
large and boundless, it being most true, that the Doctrine of Christian Manners
depends on the Grace of Jesus Christ, and refers unto it as its Principle, as
S. Austin says, that the whole Scripture is nothing but Charity, and relates
thereto as its end.

I will not enter upon the Disputes which they have raised above these sixty
years upon this Subject, troubling the Church with their Intrigues, and by
their passion in maintaining the Novelties which they acknowledge and boast
they have invented. My mind and my design too do equally estrange me from it. I
shall only, as I pass by them,

The Grace of God is given us, either to do good, or to defend us from sin, and
withdraw us from it when we are fallen thereinto.

1. To fight against the Love of God, is to fight against the Grace of God,
which causes us to do good; for that good is not done but voluntarily and by
love, not by the love of the world, nor of our selves, which is always vicious;
but by that of God, which is the spring of all the good which we receive and do.

Father Ant. Sirmond, Molina, and other Jesuits maintain; some, That we
satisfy the love we owe unto God, by loving him three or four times in our
life: and others, That we may pass over our whole life without any thought of
loving him, and be saved after all this; as I shall make appear in handling the
command of loving God.

2. This is to fight with the Grace of God that withdraws us from sin, to teach
that he who is fallen into sin, is not obliged to ask grace of God, or to seek
out means to rise again from it with speed, nor even to accept them when
presented and offered. Yet this is afferted by Amicus, Escobar, and Celot: and
Qui animae confessionis praeceptopostquam satisfecit, in peccatum letale
praecipitatus est, si conscientiae stimulos ad Sacramentum poenitentiae extra
ordinem urgentis (quod confilium est) neglectu retundit and hebetat; eoque in
statu decedit e vita: ignis sempiterni praeda fiet, non quod omissa confessione
peccatum contraxerit, sed quod alterius peccati reum mere invenerit. In
refundendis communibus illis consiliorum moribus, id tantum Christiano perit
meriti, quod opere consulto acquisivisset, and solo minor apud Deum, quod major
esse noluit. Fateer sane in hujusmodi acceptatione usuque confilii salutis
cardinem non raro versari quo tempore dicas oportet gravissimo se obstringere
peccato, ego nullum praecise agnosco. Celot. t. 9. c. 7. Sect. 7. p. 816.
this last expounding himself more clearly then the rest, proceeds so far as to
say,

3. This is also to fight against or destroy that very Grace which withdraws us
from sin, to pretend that a sinner may re-enter into a state of Grace, and
dispose himself to receive it by the Sacrament of Penance (which is
particularly instituted to that end) by means of dispositions and actions
altogether natural, which come not from Grace, which only can prepare her self
a seat and subject, and dispose the heart of man to receive it. And for all
that the principal Divines of the Society are of this opinion, as Escobar
teaches us, who pretends to be but the Interpreter, as we shall see in the
Chapter of Penitence.

4. This is finally all at once to combat both these sorts of Graces, whereof
one causes us to do good, and the other withdraws us from evil; Ante legem
gratiae and antequam magna Dei misericordia in ea instituerentur Sa. cramenta
quae attritos justificarent, illisque vi Sacramentorum conferretur charitas
supernaturalis, sicut sine Sacramentis confertur contritis; sane long
frequentius sub letali culpa tenebantur homines Deum ex charitate naturali
diligere. quam Christiani in nova lege, dum ex charitate supernaturali diligere
teneantur. Molina tom. 6. de just. and jure tr. 5. disp. 59. p. 3166.
Molina and Hoc autem praeceptum contritionis lege Evangelica commutatum est in
praeceptum confessionis. Amicus tom. 8. dis. 9. sect. 3. n. 68. p. 96.
Amicus teach: as though we owed less unto God then the Jews, since we receive
more from him, and that we were dispensed with for loving him as much as they,
because he loves us more than them: or that the excess of his mercies toward
us, and the excellent means which he has given us to convert us, ought to make
us less sensible of the sins we commit against him, and to cause in us less
displeasure against them.

I note only these four points as I pass, to make it appear how the Jesuits
Divinity overthrows the foundations of the Grace of Jesus Christ, because I
shall speak thereof more largely afterward when I come to handle these points
in particular; and I will insist at present only upon some passages which are
more formal and proper for this matter.

Amicus compriseth in one sole passage all that can be said against the Grace
of Jesus Christ, in not acknowledging the wounds and weaknesses which original
sin has brought on us, without which this Grace is unprofitable and
superfluous. Vires naturae sunt nunc quae fuissent tunc, quia per peccatum
originale quod natura lapsa supra puram naturam addit, nihil virium naturalium
sublatum est in homine, sed tantum sublatae sunt vires supernaturales gratiae,
quibus natura facilius exerculsset suos actus honestos naturales, quos tamen
non facilius exercuisset tuno fine peccato originali, quam illos exerceat nunc
cum codem peccato originali: quia peccatum originale nec diminuit vires
naturales, ut dictum est, cum illae integrae manserint etiam post peccatum, nec
ponat in natura positivam aliquam inclinationem ad malum, quam homo non
habuisset in pura natura. Amicus tom. 6. disp. 5. sect. 6. n. 253. p. 33.
The powers of Nature are now the same that they would have been then, because
that original sin, which is now in fallen Nature, and had not been in pure and
simple Nature, has not at all diminished the natural powers of man, but has
only taken from them the supernatural powers of grace, by means whereof nature
might more easily have exercised those honest actions which would have been
natural unto them, though in that estate (where he supposes that it had been
pure, that is to say, without grace and without sin) it had not had greater
facility to exercise these same natural actions, which it has at present with
original sin; because original sin has not diminished the powers of Nature, as
has been said already; but they remain sound and entire from sin, and it has
not introduced into Nature any inclination unto ill, which man should not have
had in the estate of pure Nature.

It is clear, that if nature be not hurt by sin, as this Jesuit says, it has
no need of the Grace of Jesus Christ, since as Jesus Christ himself says, they
that are not sick have no need of the Physician, nor of his Grace; and the
prayers of the Saints and of the whole Church, which demand of God incessantly
by Jesus Christ to deliver them from their evils and infirmities,

Amicus does not absolutely deny that we have inclinations unto evil, and in
this he testifies himself to be a man; but in denying that this inclination
comes from original sin, he neither speaks as a Monk nor a Christian. If it
come not from original sin, but from the foundation of nature, as he pretends,
in as much as he says, that it had been in the estate of nature, if it had
been created without sin: Peccatum originale non posuit in natura aliquam
positivam inclinationem ad malum, quam homo non habuisset in pura natura; it
must come from God who is the Author of Nature; and by consequence God should
be the Author of evil and of sin, and this inclination unto evil should have
been in Jesus Christ, because he took our nature with all its natural
properties: for whatsoever is not contrary to God as Creator, neither is it
contrary to him as Redeemer; and nothing of that which comes immediately from
the hand of God alone is unworthy of Jesus Christ.

So this Jesuit destroys with one dash of his Pen Original sin, the Incarnation
and Grace of Jesus Christ. But he does it no less openly when he says a little
before, that Potuisset homo in pura natura conditus condign pro suis
venialibus satis facere. Amicus ibid. n. 249. p. 52.
man created in the estate of pure nature, that is to say, simply without sin,
had been able to satisfy simply and in rigor of Justice for venial sins, by
one act of natural love, Et quidem perfectius quam nunc.
and that he had done it more perfectly then now.

He dishonours it also when he says, that Potuisset Deus confer gratiam and
gloriam hominibus dependenter ab actionibus honestis virtutum naturalium, qui
nullam ex se connexionem habent cum gratia and gloria ordinis supernaturalis.
Amicus de Incar. disp. 13. n. 16. p. 201.
God might give grace and glory unto men, because of the honest actions of
natural virtues, though they had not of themselves any relation to grace or
glory, which are of a supernatural order. That is to say, that God could save
men by actions purely natural: and so that man could deliver himself from sin
and misery, without having need of Jesus Christ, and that by consequence his
labors and death were superfluous and exacted from him without any necessity.
And as S. Paul says, that if Justification might have been by the Law, Jesus
Christ had dyed in vain; we may also say, that if man might be justified and
made happy without Jesus Christ, and have grace and glory by his own powers,
and by natural actions and virtues, Jesus Christ has dyed in vain.

He declares yet more openly his thoughts upon this Point in the Treatise which
he made of Merit, where speaking of the Pagans morally honest actions, Nam est
difficultas de hujusmodi operibus factis a gentili sine ulla fide tamactuali
quam habituali, nihilominus juxta ea quae supra diximus dicendum est ejusmodi
opera a gentili facta placere Deo tanquam dispositiones remotas ad fidem.
Amicus tom. 3. disp. 35. sect. 4. n. 107.
The difficulty is greater, says he, when these actions are done by a Pagan,
who has neither actual nor habitual faith; yet we must answer, according to
what I have said already, that these actions done by a Gentile are pleasing
unto God, in that they are remote dispositions unto faith. He is not content to
say that these natural actions of Heathens are remote dispositions unto faith,
but he affirms that they may also be the next dispositions unto Justification.
Non enim solum Deo placent opera bona quae ex fide sive actuali, sive habituali
procedunt; sed etiam quae proxime vel remote ad eandem fidem disponunt, eaque
mediante, ad justificationem. Ibid.
Not only good actions which proceed from actual or habitual faith are pleasing
unto God; but those also which dispose, and serve for near or remote
dispositions for receiving the same faith, and consequently of justifying
grace, as the actions of Pagans of which he speaks.

He expounds himself yet more clearly on that passage of S. Paul: Sine fide
impossible est placere Deo. Hebr. 11. v. 6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. For seeing that he evidently
condemns his opinion, he eludes it by expounding it in this manner: Caeterum
Paulus vel intelligitur de complacentiae affectu qui fundatur in merito de
condigno: vel cum negat sine fide aliquid placere Deo, intelligit de fide, non
tantum per modum principii, sed etiam per modum termini. Ibid.
We must extend these words of S. Paul unto that complacency which is founded
on perfect merit, which we call commonly of condignity: or else when he says,
that no action can please God without faith, he understands not only that
faith which is the principle of this action, but also of that which is its term
or effect.

And because these expressions, per modum principii, and per modum termini are
not common, he expounds them in the sequel, applying them unto his subject:
Bona autem opera fidem praecedentia, licet nequeant placere Deo tanquam
procedentia ex fide, quam nondum in subjecto supponunt; placent tamen ei ut
dispositiones proximae, vel saltem remotae ad fidem consequendam. Ibid.
Though good works which go before faith cannot please God, as arising from
faith which as yet is not in him that does them, yet they please him as the
next dispositions, or the remote at least for obtaining faith. He then openly
declares that the moral and natural actions of Heathens and of Infidels may be
the next dispositions unto Faith and Justification; that is to say, that a
sinner may be justified or disposed unto Justification by actions purely
natural. Escobar says it also openly when he puts that amongst probable
opinions which holds, Sufficit ut naturalis sit, seu viribus naturae concepta,
Escobar. tom. 1. lib. 11. Problem. 80.
That it is sufficient for Baptism that attrition be natural and conceived by
the powers of nature; that is to say, that we may be saved without actual
grace, and that contrary to the formal words of the Gospel, we may come unto
Jesus Christ without the Fathers drawing us. According to these Authors such
actions are pleasing unto God, though they proceed not from faith as their
principle, because they end in faith as their effect, and it suffices that
good works be joined unto faith in one of these two sorts, to make good this
passage of S. Paul, Sine fide impossible est placere Deo. Hebr. 11. v. 6.
That it is impossible to please God without faith.

The Pelagians and Semipelagians have never said more, and they have not
declared it so openly, being content that the natural motions of the Will
should be only remote dispositions,

Though the Jesuits dishonor Jesus Christ sufficiently in fighting in this
manner against his Grace by which he saves men, they dishonor him yet
incomparably more in himself and in his person, in taking from him all the
qualities which constitute him a Savior, and attributing unto him others quite
contrary, so as to make him capable of sin, as we shall see presently.

ARTICLE II. That Jesus Christ might have sinned, might have been subject unto
vices, might have fallen into error and folly, according to the Jesuits
Divinity.
JEsus Christ being God and Man both together by an ineffable Union of the
Divine Nature with the humane in the person of the Word; as man he is
reasonable; as God he is Reason it self, and by his personal propriety he is
uncreated and eternal Wisdom; Amicus forbears not to say, that the Son of God
might have taken the nature of man in an estate of folly, or have suffered it
to fall into folly after he had assumed it.

He propounds the question: An Verbum potuer^ naturam humanam dementem
assumere, vel in e^ assumpta amentiam permittere? Ami cus tom. 6. disp 24.
sect. 4. n. 128. p. 361.
Whether the Son of God could have taken on him the nature of man without wit,
or have suffered it after he had taken it to fall into folly? He at first
reports some reasons to prove the opinion which holds, that this cannot be
done; but afterward he declares his own judgment, which is, Affirmans tamen
pars non modo probabilior, sed omnino vera est mihi. Ibid. n. 129.
That the opinion which holds it possible is not only probable, but altogether
true according unto him. And he builds upon this Reason, Quia Verbum posset
assumere naturam humanam spoliatam omni sensu externo. Ibid. n. 130.
That the Word might take humane nature destitute of all outward sense. In
which case it would also be deprived of all use of reason, which as he proves
by Aristotle depends on Plantasie, and on outward and inward senses.

This Reason is not very worthy of a Jesuit who should be concerned in the
Grandeurs of Jesus Christ, as in those of his own Society who have taken their
name from his. more reason than was necessary to make him not to be a beast.

And, building upon this Principle, he concludes in the process of his
Discourse, Ergo non est cur ex hoc capite repugnet Verbum amentem naturam
assumere, aut amentiam in natura jam assumpta admittere: sicut non solum potest
assumere naturam omni sensu externo privatam, sed etiam talem sensuum
privationem in assumpta jam natura admittere. Ibid. n. 130.
That there is nothing this way that can hinder the Word from taking the nature
of a fool, or after he has taken our nature to suffer it to fall into folly,
as he cannot only take a nature deprived of all outward senses: but also suffer
it to fall into this privation after he has assumed it. He is not content only
to say, that the eternal Word might suffer under folly; but he says also, that
he might have assumed it voluntarily, as he assumed humane nature. That is,
that this proposition, the impiety and blasphemy whereof is horrible only to be
thought, might have been true: God is a fool, and that with a voluntary folly,
which is accounted the worst of all.

He ought to have considered, that folly is a disorder of the body and the
Soul, and of the highest part of the Soul, which is Reason, and that all
disorder is inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, as well as sin is inconsistent
with it, because it is a voluntary disorder and a true folly according to
Scripture: and if the reason of Jesus Christ had been disorderly, it is
manifest that his Will might have been so too; and that as his Will could not
be so by sin, which is the folly of the Will, neither could his reason be so by
folly, which is, as we may say, the sin of the Understanding, as some
Philosophers esteem.

Error is yet a greater evil than folly, because folly takes away reason,
Amicus forbears not to maintain with others, that Jesus Christ was capable of
erring, and that he might err in deed.

For the explication of this opinion, he distinguishes two sorts of errors,
whereof one respects the things we are obliged to know, and which he calls
Error pravae dispositionis, because it includes a wicked disposition, from
whence it proceeds as from its cause: the other respects such things as we are
not obliged to know, which consists in a simple privation of knowledge; error
simplicis negationis. He says De secunda non est dubium quin potuerit esse in
Christo. Nam sicut potuit Verbum assumere naturam irrationalem incapacem omnis
scientiae; ita and rationalem omni scientia spoliatam, tam actuali quam
habituali. Amicus tom 6. disp. 24. sect. 4 n. 114. p. 359.
of this second sort of error, that there is no doubt but it might be in Jesus
Christ. For as the Word might have taken the nature of a beast incapable of all
sort of rational wisdom and knowledge, so it might in like manner have taken a
reasonable nature destitute of all wisdom and knowledge, as well actual as
habitual.

He is not content only to maintain a proposition so strange and impious; but
he would also have it pass as undubitable, as if it were not lawful only to
doubt of it, non est dubium. But behold his blindness! we need only consider
what he says of the other species of error, which consists in being ignorant
of that which is our duty, or to have an apprehension of it contrary unto
truth. He dares not absolutely affirm, Vasquez and some others Tantum de prima
est controversia. Prima sententia affirmans potuisse de potentia absoluta talem
errorem esse in Christo -- est Vasquez disput. 60. etc. Ibid.
Who hold, says he, that this sort of error might have been absolutely in
Jesus Christ; and this opinion is that of Vasquez.

Certainly he does great wrong to doubt of this sort of error, after he had
said, that we may not doubt of the other. For if it be certain, as he pretends,
that the eternal Word might have taken a reasonable nature destitute of all
kind of knowledge and wisdom actual and habitual, it follows manifestly that he
might have taken it destitute of all that knowledge of things which every
reasonable nature is obliged to know, as of the knowledge of God and of the
first principles of Reason; since this sort of error is necessarily contained
in the other.

Which follows also clearly from the other opinion of the same Jesuit, that
Jesus Christ might have taken on him the nature of a fool. For folly is not
only an ignorance of principal duties, but of all truths also, according to the
very definition of the Philosophers who say, that it is a general blindness of
mind in all things, mentis ad omnia caecitas. So that if Jesus Christ might
have been a fool in humane nature, he might have been generally ignorant of all
the duties of humane and reasonable Nature, and of all the principles of
Reason. And Amicus shows himself as weak a Logician as Christian, in doubting
of this last Article, after he had said, that we might not doubt of that
general Maxim, whereunto it is inseparably and visibly annexed.

One of the Reasons of the Jesuits who teach that Jesus Christ was capable of
that error which has respect unto his duty, error pravae dispositionis, and
which is not only a simple ignorance and simple privation of light, but an
opposition to the truth, and an apprehension contrary to its Rules and Laws;
is, That Jesus Christ might according to them have taken the nature of an Ass,
as they express it in these very words: Foruit Verbum assumere stoliditatem
naturae asininae: ergo and errorem naturae humanae. Amicus ib. n. 116.
The Word might have taken upon him the sottish and blackish disposition of the
nature of an Ass; and by consequent he might have taken the error of humane
nature. Which can serve for no other thing then to make this opinion more
incredible, whether we regard the impiety of these strange words: Potuit Verbum
assumere stoliditatem naturae asininae; or we regard the consequence which is
ridiculous: Ergo and errorem naturae humanae. For the blockish disposition of
an Ass is not an ignorance of his duty, because it hinders not an Ass to know
and perceive all that which he ought to know and perceive according to his
nature, and much less is it an apprehension opposed unto truth, which the
nature of an Ass is incapable to know. And so though it were true that Jesus
Christ might have been united to the nature of an Ass, it would not have
followed, that he might have been united to a reasonable nature engaged in
error, and in error contrary to his duty.

The second Reason of Vasquez related by Amicus, Non mag^s repugnat Verbo per
naturam assumpram errare and falsum materialiter dicere, quam in eadem assumpta
natura cruciari and mori. Igitur si poruit in natura ass^mpta cruciari and
mori, posset per eandem errare and falsum materialiter dicere. Ibid. n. 116.
That it is no more repugnant to the divine Word to err or to speak a thing
false in it self by the nature which he has assumed, then to be tormented and
dye in the same nature. I will not stay to examine this Reasoning, nor to tell
what the difference is betwixt dying and erring or speaking falsehood, to make
appear that the one is unworthy and impossible in regard of Jesus Christ, and
not the other. I shall do no other thing but briefly represent, according to my
design, what these Jesuits say.

Vasquez says, that as Jesus Christ might suffer and dye, so he might likewise
err and speak false, even in the things he was obliged to know, and which
appertained, as Amicus expounds himself, to his condition and duty. This is to
say plainly enough, that Jesus Christ might sin, not only in his humane nature,
but in his Godhead it self. For though a man may sometimes err and speak
false through ignorance, this ignorance excuses him not in things which he is
obliged to know, since it is of these that the Gospel says, that the servant
who knows not his Masters will shall not go without punishment, though he shall
not be so rigorously punished as he who has known and neglected to do it. Now
these Jesuits say, that Jesus Christ might have erred and spoke falsely in the
things which appertained to his duty, and which he was obliged to know, and by
consequence according to them he might have sinned and deserved chastisement
according to the Scripture.

But though it were so,

For in effect they maintain that Jesus Christ is capable of sin, as well as
error, as also that he might have been subject unto vice. Amicus says well,
that the Word could not have assumed an humane nature that was in an estate of
actual or habitual sin; but he adds Major est difficultas de habitibus vitiosis
a tali natura antea contractis; an illi perseverare potuissent in natura
assumpta? Ibid. sect. 2. n. 42.
That there is more difficulty in what concerns the vicious habitudes which
this nature might have contracted before it was united to the Word; to wit, to
know whether they might yet continue in it after its union with the Word. And
to clear up this difficulty, he says that, Affirmat Vasquez disp. 61. cap. 6.
qui, quamvis nobiscum sentiat quoad peccatum habituale antea contractum, quoad
habitus vero vitiosos, putat eos assumi potuisse cum natura humana. Ibid. sect.
2. n. 42.
Vasquez affirms that also, and that though he be of the same opinion with
himself concerning the habitual sin which the humanity might have contracted
before that it was united unto the Word; yet he believes, that the Word in
assuming this humane nature, might also have assumed the vicious habits which
had been found therein.

But I see not that it would be less dishonor to Jesus Christ, to hold him
capable of vicious habits, then of actual or habitual sins. For vicious habits
are the springs of sin, and consequently contain in them a greater corruption
then the sins themselves, and the sins are comprised in them, as in their
spring and principle; so that he who is capable of the one, is necessarily and
infallibly capable of the other.

Thus the Jesuits do formally attribute sin unto Jesus Christ: also they
declare him capable thereof, when they demand, whether the humanity of Jesus
Christ, being become a sinner, Jesus Christ could have satisfied for that sin,
either in the same humanity, or by laying that down, and assuming some other.
The propounding only of these questions is so strange and injurious to Jesus
Christ, that it offends the faith and ears of the faithful. Amicus fails not to
answer them as seriously as if they were very important, and of great
edification. Dico 1. potuisset Verbum in alia humanitate assumpta condign
satisfacere pro peccato prioris humanitatis a Verbo dimissae? Amicus tom. 6.
disp. 6. sect. 5. n. 137.

In tali casu potuisset Christus condign pro peccato suae humanitatis
satisfacere.


I hold, says he, that the Word taking another humane nature, might in rigor
of justice satisfy for the sin of the humanity he first took, and after laid
down. And a little lower, he says that, In this case Jesus Christ could have
satisfied in rigor of justice for the sin of his humanity.

And as if these questions were much for the advantage and glory of Jesus
Christ, before he speaks his apprehension upon them, he protests In utroque
sensu proposita hypothesis disputanda est, ut vis and efficacia Christi
satisfactionis eluceat. Ibid. n. 133.
That he proceeds to handle the question in both the senses which he supposed;
but that he does it, that the virtue and efficacy of the satisfaction of Jesus
Christ may appear with more splendor. He believes then, that to make the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ more apparent, he ought to make him a sinner; and
that to give more splendor to his virtue, he ought to engage him in crimes of
his own, as if it had not been sufficiently great and illustrious by his
infinite innocence and purity.

I will not speak at all of the blasphemous and impious suppositions which they
make on this subject, when they say, Occisio Christi ab ipso Christo sibi per
impossible illata, fuisset ejusdem ordinis cum satisfactione Christi. Ibid. n.
17.
That if by way of an impossible supposition it were granted, that Jesus Christ
might have slain himself, this murder and this crime would have been of the
same order with the satisfaction of Jesus Christ. There is no need that I
insist on these so abominable imaginations and expressions, since that which
they affirm of him absolutely is no less.

To prove that Jesus Christ might have sinned effectually, they say, that he
might have had of himself and in himself an obligation to undergo the
punishment of sin. Respondent docti aliqui recentiores non repugnare in natura
assumpta remanere reatum poenae, non solum temporalis, sed etiam aeternae.
Ibid. disp. 24. sect. 2. n. 56.
Some new Doctors, says Amicus, answer that the obligation to punishment, not
only temporal but eternal, is not inconsistent with the nature assumed by the
Word.

Obligation unto punishment is a propriety and necessary consequent of sin, and
the obligation to eternal pain, the propriety and necessary consequent of
mortal sin. For it is impossible, that he who sins mortally, should not be
obliged to eternal punishment; and it is also impossible, that he should be
obliged to eternal punishment, who has not sinned mortally: both the one and
the other being equally contrary to Justice, and by stronger reason to the
Justice of God. Whence it comes, that they who say, that an obligation to
eternal punishment might befall the humanity of Jesus Christ, suppose of
necessity that this humanity has sinned mortally, and that it may even be
actually engaged in mortal sin whilst united to the Word in Jesus Christ, it
being impossible, that he to whom sin is remitted, should be liable to eternal
punishment, and that God can punish him eternally to whom he is reconciled, and
to whom he owes eternal life, as he owes it to all the just, and much more to
the Man-God who is his eternal Son.

This opinion is maintained by some Casuists, as says Amicus, but it seems to
him very rude, and especially to Suarez, taking it generally, and in its whole
extent. For this cause, that he might sweeten and moderate it, he makes a
distinction betwixt pain temporal and eternal, saying, that Jesus Christ might
well be liable to temporal punishment, Respondet Suarez dis. 33. sect. ult
versus finem, concedendo de reatu poenae temporalis, negando de reatu poenae
aeternae, quoniam poena aeterna necessario tollitur. cum ipsa culpa. Ibid. n.
57.
Because, says he, eternal punishment is necessarily remitted with the sin and
the guilt. Whence it follows, that if Jesus Christ were obliged to eternal
punishment, he should be actually in mortal sin by the assertion of Suarez
himself, who for this reason durst not say, that the Humanity of Jesus Christ
could be obliged unto eternal punishment.

But he is at least constrained even by this same reason to affirm, that Jesus
Christ might sin venially, since they hold, that he might be liable on his own
account unto temporal punishment, and that the obligation to temporal
punishment cannot come but from venial sin, as the obligation unto eternal
punishment cannot come but from mortal sin.

Which agrees well with that which Amicus says, that Jesus Christ might
absolutely sin Dico 4. potentia physica proxima peccandi, si non repugnaret
defectu divini decreti, non repugnaret ratione unionis and sanctitatis Verbo
participatae in humanitate Christi. Amicus ibid. n. 43.
by a physical and next power of sinning, which would not be incompatible with
the union which the humanity of Jesus Christ had with the Word whereof he was
partaker, if the repugnance came not from the decree of God. And if you would
know what he means by a physical power of sinning, potentia physica peccandi,
he expounds it himself, saying, that it is Quae constituitur ex principiis
intrinsecis ad operandum simpliciter necessariis. Ibid.
that which proceeds from the internal principles which are simply necessary
unto action; that is to say, unto sinning. So that according to his opinion,
Jesus Christ had in himself a power of sinning, and the internal principles
necessary to sin, and if these principles had not their effect in him; that is
to say, if Jesus Christ did not actually sin, it was not because there was any
thing in him that was repugnant thereunto; non repugnaret ratione unionis and
sanctitatis a Verbo participatae in humanitate. But this came to pass purely
and simply from the will and protection of God, si non repugnaret defectu
divini decreti.

In this manner Molina, Suarez, and some others expound the Impeccability of
Jesus Christ, as Amicus says, Qui docent impeccabilitatem humanitatis Christi
fuisse eandem cum impeccabilitate quam habent confirmati in gratia, quae non
est physica, sed moralis. Ibid. n. 70. p. 352.
maintaining that the Impeccability of the humanity of Jesus Christ is the same
with that of those who are confirmed in grace, which is not physical, but
moral. That is to say, that Jesus Christ was not properly impeccable, but by
the grace and mercy of God, as the Saints might have been in this world as well
as he, and are also now in Heaven by the same mercy. And by consequence that
Jesus Christ was of himself capable to sin even as they, and that he had sinned
effectually without the extraordinary succors and graces he received from God.

It is from this same Principle that Amicus says with Vasquez and many others
whom he names not, that it were no inconvenience to affirm, that this
proposition is true: The Word was capable of sin. For making himself this
objection: Objicies 4. implicat Verbum etiam per communicationem idiomatum
denominari physice peccabile. Denominaretur autem per communicationem idiomatum
physice peccabile ab ipsa potentia physica peccandi, si ea posset cum
humanitate unita Verbo manner. Ergo, etc. Ibid. n. 102.
It cannot be said without contradiction, that the Word by the very
communication of the properties of the two natures which are in Jesus Christ,
should be naturally capable to sin. Now this may be said, if a physical and
natural power to sin may subsist in the humanity which the Word has assumed.
He answers to this objection, Respondeo 1. negando majorem. Multi enim, inter
quos Vasquez disp. 61. cap. ult. non reputant absurdum Verbum per
communicationem idiomatum denominari peccabile. Ibid. n. 103.
by denying the major, because there are many, and amongst them Vasquez, who
hold, that it is no absurdity to say, that the Word by the mutual communication
of the two natures, is capable of sinning.

And by consequence we might say according to this Divinity, what is horrible
and dreadful only to think, that the Word had or might have been mischievous
and wicked, and that the Devil might have had him under his power as his
Captive and Slave, because the Devil is the Prince and Master of sinners
according to Scripture.

There have been Heretics that have maintained that Jesus Christ was not God;
and others, that he was a man of the same nature as we; but there was never any
that acknowledging that he was God and Man both at once, imagined that he was
capable of sinning, and falling under the power of the Devil, as the Jesuits
affirm and testify, by attributing to him a next and natural power of sinning,
of being in error, and even of that which proceeds from a wicked disposition
and deordination, error pravae dispositionis: to retain and keep wicked habits;
of being subject unto vices, of being obliged to temporal punishments, and even
of eternal for his own sins, as we have now seen in their own proper words.

1. If Jesus Christ might have sinned,

2. If sin might have been in Jesus Christ, then sin is no more sin; because
sin being no otherwise sin then as it is against the will of God, if Jesus
Christ, who is the Son of God, and God as well as his Father, could sin, sin
would be voluntary unto him, not only according to his humanity which did or
should commit it; but also in regard of his Divinity and divine person who
should permit it, or take it unto him voluntarily in the Humanity which should
be personally united unto him, as well as the other qualities and actions of
this humanity which are proper to him, and appertain unto him in some sort more
than unto the humanity it self.

3. But if God could will sin, or be partaker thereof by assuming it, or
permitting it voluntarily in a nature which should be united unto him; God
should be no more God, because he should be no longer the supreme Truth, which
is more inconsistent with sin, which is nothing else but error, injustice, and
malice, then light is with darkness.

4. This is not the way to withdraw men from sin, to attribute it unto Jesus
Christ. But to move them unto horror and detestation of so strange an opinion,
it is sufficient to consider, that it tends to destroy both the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ, and even his Divinity it self.

CHAPTER II. Of Repentance.
REpentance is a remorse and sorrow for offending God; and herein is it the
proper and natural Remedy of Sin; since as it is committed by pleasure, so it
must be blotted out by sorrow. This sorrow is a virtue which appertains to
Religion; and it is also one part of the Sacrament of Penance so necessary and
so considerable, that it has given even its name thereunto. We separate not
here these two considerations; and that we may treat more largely of Penance,
we will consider it as a Sacrament: and because that in this quality, besides
grief for sin, it contains also Confession, Absolution, and Satisfaction, we
will treat here of every one of these by way of preocupation of what should
have been said in the Chapter of the Sacraments, distributing them into so many
Articles.

ARTICLE I. That according to the Jesuits we may be justified by the Sacrament
of Penance by a natural sorrow, and even without any true sorrow for sin.
THe first step of a Soul that returns unto God, is the knowledge and remorse
it has for offending God: Surgam and ibo ad patrem meum, and dicam ei: Pater,
peccavi in coelum and coram te. Luc. 5.18.
I will arise and go unto my father, and say unto him; Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and before thy face, says this child after he had departed from
the obedience and guidance of his father, when he began to resolve himself to
return unto him. The Jesuits consent well unto this Catholic Truth; they do
truly affirm; that we cannot absolutely obtain pardon of sins without
acknowledging with sorrow that we have committed them; but when they would
expound what sorrow this ought to be, they speak of it in such manner as
destroys it in effect. For they are not content to say, that the least degree
of sorrow is sufficient to blot out all the sins in the world; but they do also
maintain, that this sorrow ought not of necessity to be supernatural; and some
proceed so far as to say, that without any true sorrow for offending God, we
may be reconciled unto him, by being only grieved that we have not the sorrow
which we ought to have.

Filliutius demands, Quaero^n requiratur certa intentio ad contritionem? Tom.
1. tract. 6. cap. 9. n. 231.
If there be any particular degree of sorrow necessary unto contrition? Dico 3.
non requiri certum gradum intentionis. Ibid. 234.
That there is no certain particular degree which is necessary. His reason is:
Tum quia Scripturae and Sancti Patres conversioni in Deum promittunt
remissionem peccati absque limitatione intentionis: ergo neque nos limitare
debemus. Filliut. mor. qq. to. 1. tr. 6. c. 9. n 234.
Because that the Scriptures and holy Fathers allow remission of sins to him
that is truly converted unto God, without limiting the degree. Whence it
follows, that we ought not to limit it.

God wills and demands often in Scripture, that for obtaining pardon of sins, we
should be converted unto him with all our hearts. Whence the holy Fathers have
taken occasion to say, that we ought not to limit or bound the grief of a
sinner who is converted, since it ought to be with all the affection of his
heart, and that it cannot be too great nor equal the demerit and indignity of
sin. And this Jesuit on the contrary says, it must not be limited, because it
cannot be too little, and that it is always great enough to blot out sin. See
the conformity of his spirit with that of the holy Fathers and Scripture.

It seems that he would correct his error in the answer which he makes a
little after to this question: An contritio debeat esse intentior?
Whether the sorrow of contrition ought in degree to surpass all other sorrow?
For he answers, Respondeo and dico 1. debere esse intentiorem, saltem quoad
appretiationem. Ibid. n. 237.
Yes, as to appretiation at least. But he does only hide his error under the
obscurity of his words, as will appear by the explication he gives himself to
this word Appretiation. For he says that, Dico 2. ejusmodi appretiatio five
existimatio non sumitur. ex intention graduali charitatis vel dilectionis.
Ibid.
This appretiation or estimation proceeds not from any high degree of charity
or love. propter excellentiam motivi, or in more clear terms; because God who
is the Object and Motive thereof is great, though it be in it self very weak
and small, as is also the Charity from whence it proceeds.

And when he says, that the sorrow for offending God ought to be
appretiatively greater than all other grief which we can have for any temporal
loss, he intends to say no other thing then that it ought to be greater in the
thought and esteem of the sinner, in such manner that he judge and acknowledge
that God is greater than all other things, and that by consequence the loss of
God is more considerable than all other losses; though indeed this sorrow be
much less and more feeble in his heart than that which he has for other losses
and evils. Whence he draws this consequence which clears up his thoughts yet
more.

Quare poterit dolere magis de mor te parentis aut filii. Ib. n 238.
This is the reason why he may have more trouble and grief of mind for the loss
of his father or of his son, then for having offended God. For this hinders not
but that he may believe, that God deserves to be more loved than a father or a
son; and by consequence to be more resented when he is lost by sin, though in
effect he have more affection for his father or for his son, and he be more
moved by the loss of them than by offending God: and yet in this disposition,
according to this Jesuit, he ceases not to be in a good estate, Quia minima
gratia est sufficiens ad remissionem omnium peccatorum; and ad minimam gratiam
sufficiens minima contritio tanquam dispositio.
Because, says he, the least grace is sufficient for the remission of all
sins, and the least contrition is a sufficient disposition for the least grace.

He demands also concerning the sorrow which is necessary to obtain pardon of
sin in the Sacrament of Penance; Quaero an hic dolor debeat esse verus and
realis? Respondeo probabile esse dolorem existimatum sufficere. Tr. 7. de
Confess. cap. 6. n. 150.
Whether this sorrow ought to be true and real; or it be sufficient we are
persuaded that it is, though it be not at all? His Answer is, That it is
probable that it is sufficient that we believe it to be such. That is to say,
that to obtain pardon of God in Penance, it is not necessary to have a true
sorrow for offending him, so that we believe we have this sorrow.

Escobar also demands in the same matter, Number necessarius sit dolor
supernaturalis? Sufficit naturalis, qui tamen supernaturalis existimetur.
Escobar tr. 7. exam. 4. n. 39. p. 805.
If it be needful that sorrow be supernatural? And he answers, That it suffices
to be natural, so we believe it to be supernatural. As if a Creditor were
obliged to discharge his Debtor, when he had given him Brass money for Gold,
provided he imagined that he gave him good Gold.

He speaks yet more clearly upon this Point a little after, saying, Si quis
doleat de peccato propterea quod Deus in poenam illius malum temporale immisit,
sufficit; si autem doleat sine ullo respectu ad Deum, non sufficit. Ibid. c. 7.
n. 91. p. 813.
That if a man be touched with remorse for his sin, because God, to punish him
for it, has brou^ht on him some temporal evil, this remorse is sufficient; but
if it have no respect unto God, it is not sufficient. It is clear that this
grief is altogether natural, Job and many others. So that this grief comes
properly from the love of the world, and the adherence we have to the goods of
this world: and yet according to the opinion of Hurtado the Jesuit reported by
Escobar, it is sufficient to blot out sins, though it be it self a disorder and
a sin.

But if any object unto him what Amicus does to himself; Qui peccatum
detestatur propter poenam, plus actu detestatur poenam quam culpam, cum poena
sit ratio detestandi culpam. Amicus tom. 8. disp. 3. sect. 1. n. 5.
That he who detesteth sin because of punishment, does indeed detest the
punishment more than the sin, the punishment being the motive and reason that
incites him to detest the sin: which is to love himself more than God, and to
prefer his own interest before the honor of God, since he is touched more by
the loss which he makes, or the temporal punishment that he suffers, than the
sin which displeases and dishonoreth God; He will answer without doubt as the
same Amicus, Nego hujusmodi actum non esse honestum, quia non te nemur semper
actu plus detestari culpam quam poenam. Ibid.
That he cannot agree that this act is not good and honest; and he will serve
himself of this reason: That we are not always obliged to detest actually the
fault more than the punishment. From whence he will conclude, as he has done
already, Si quis doleat de peccato propterea quod Deus in poenam illius malum
temporale immisit, sufficit.
That if a man be touched with remorse for his sin, because God, to punish him
for it, has brought on him some temporal evil, this remorse suffices to blot
out his sin, if it be true, as the same Amicus pretends, that we are not always
obliged to do otherwise; and this sorrow be good, honest, and regular.

This being so, we must say, that the world is at this day filled with persons
of great virtue and true Penitents; since amongst so frequent and common
miseries, there are hardly any that are not afflicted with loss of their goods,
their happiness and their repose, and who will not easily confess, that their
sins are the cause. So that according to the Rule of these Jesuits, the most
covetous, most ambitious, and most voluptuous will be the greatest Penitents,
because they are more touched with regret than others for the loss of their
goods, and for having deserved it by their sins.

Escobar might well have seen these consequences from his and his Master
Hurtado's opinion, since they are so evident, but they have not startled him,
for without standing upon them at all, he insists only upon one Rule of Suarez,
whom he affirms to be of the contrary opinion, and to reject his; Quia alias
sequeretur peccatotem posse se disponere ad Sacramentum and illum affectum, ex
solis naturae viribus. Ibid.
Because it would follow thence that the sinner might dispose himself to
receive the Sacrament and the benefit of the Sacrament by the powers of nature
only. But he confesses he makes no great account of this reason. For he answers
only in saying with Hurtado, Si autem doleat sine ullo respectu ad Deum, non
sufficit. Ibid.
That if the sinner grieve for his sin without any regard of God, it is not
sufficient. That is to say,

But if this be true, not only persons that are most addicted to the world; but
also Devils and damned Spirits will always be in a disposition to be converted
For in their greatest pains, as they are troubled to endure them, so are they
also for having offended God; not because their sin is displeasing unto God,
but because it is the cause of their torments. So that knowing that it is God
who torments them, but that it is sin only that makes way for him to torment
them; they hate not sin otherwise then as they hate God, and they have the same
aversion for them both, as being the entire and total cause of their
punishment, which is the principal motive of their grief. Such is the
displeasure of those of whom Escobar speaks, who are troubled that they have
offended God because of the punishments he sends them for their sins; and yet
he pretends that this displeasure is sufficient to justify a sinner in the
Sacrament of Penance.

Filliutius also demands particularly, Quaero an dolor hic verus debeat esse
supernaturalis; an vero sufficiat naturalis ad valorem Sacramenti. Filliut.
mor. qq. t. 1. tr. 7. c. 6. n. 153. p. 185.
If this true sorrow ought also to be supernatural, or whether indeed it be
enough that it be natural, that the Sacrament may be effectual? He relates
after his use two contrary opinions, of which the one says, that this sorrow
ought of necessity to be supernatural; and the other maintains, Dico 2.
probabiliorem videri secundam sententiam. Ibid. n. 154. p. 185.

Quia mihi non constat de obligatione evidenter, non sunt homines obligandi ad
iterandas confessiones. Ibid.


That it appears to him more probable. One of his reasons is, that if it were
necessary to have supernatural sorrow for the obtaining pardon of sin, it would
so fall out, that many confessions at this day would be void, for want of this
sorrow, and which for that cause ought to be repeated: which would be
troublesome to Confessors, and the Penitents are not to be obliged hereunto, if
the obligation be not indubitable and evident.

But though a person were assured that his grief is purely natural, yet he
holds that the Sacrament would not cease to be valid, though it were useless
and ineffectual to him: Non enim pertingit ad eum gradum quem Christus
instituit ut necessariam dispositionem ad fructum, ex Tridentino. Est tamen
sufficiens ad valorem Sacramenti, quia Christus noluit obligare ut tam rigide
teneremur ad iterationem, quando adsunt necessaria essentialia judicio: adsunt
autem omnia cum est integer and verus dolor. Ibid. n. 154. p. 186.
For this grief, says he, is not that which Jesus Christ has instituted as a
necessary disposition to receive the fruit of the Sacrament, according to the
Council of Trent, though it be sufficient for the essence of the Sacrament:
Because Jesus Christ would not so rigorously oblige us to reiterate the
Confession, when that which is essential unto the judgment which the Priest is
obliged to exercise may be found therein, as it is found in effect when the
Confession is entire and the sorrow true, though it be only natural.

So the Sacrament of Penance shall not be only altogether humane, being
composed of parts all natural, as are confession and sorrow: but we may also
fulfill the Command which Jesus Christ has given us to receive the Sacrament of
Penance by actions merely humane, may be accomplished by Sacriledges according
to the Jesuits, which they boldly affirm, as we shall see more at large in its
place; but it is not for all that less horrible and incredible.

After he has reduced sorrow for sin to an imaginary or mere natural being, he
demands, An requiritur ut dolor sit de omnibus peccatis confessis? Ibid. n. 156.

Respondeo 1. requiri ut sit de omnibus.


Whether it be necessary that this sorrow be extended to all the sins that are
confessed? He answers presently, according to the common opinion, that grief as
well as confession, ought to be extended to all sins. But he adds to temper
this Answer, that if the Penitent be sorrowful only for some part of his sins,
and do this purposely, or by an ignorance that is criminal and entirely
unexcusable, and that knowing his own indisposition, he forbears not to persist
therein voluntarily, the confession will be null. Si vero ignorantia vel
inadvertentia sit inculpabilis, vel culpabilis venialiter tantum, aut etiam
mortaliter, sed communi modo, erit valida. Ibid. n. 157.
But if he be not guilty of this ignorance or inadvertence, or that he be not
fallen into it but by some venial fault, or even mortal, but common and
ordinary, the confession shall be valid.

If we consider Baunys discourses, he will seem at first to reject this
Doctrine. For in his Treatise of Confession in his Sum, Chap. 42. page 674.
After he had said in the entrance, (3) That by the word Contrition, we
understand one of the essential parts of the Sacrament, which in the propriety
of its signification contains two things, remorse for sin, and a purpose to
amend, he declares in the following page, That to the end this remorse may be
such as it ought to be to make it an act of contrition; and by consequence an
essential part of the Sacrament, as he said at first, It should incline him to
the hatred of sin, not for any shame he has for committing it, (as the
Philosophers did heretofore) for this motive is temporal, and unprofitable to
eternal life, as may be seen in Antiochus, 2 Maccab chap. 9. nor yet for having
lost his goods. For to be thus touched with resentments of what is past, is one
sort of avarice, and very shameful avarice; not for having deserved by sinning
the flames of Hell, this sorrow is servile, and though it be good, though it be
religious and holy, it takes its original from self-love which edifies the City
of Babylon, and not of God, as S. Augustine in 4. of the City of God, chap. 28.
and therefore not compatible with this action whereof we now speak. Which he
confirms in his Chap. 45. page 193. saying, that attrition respects properly
his own interest, and the particular good of him that acts it.

It may seem that he could not speak more strongly,

For he declares, That the grief we have for deserving by sin the pains of
Hell, is not only servile, but does also take its original from self-love which
edifies the City of Babylon, so that it comes not from God; as also it regards
him not at all, because it regards properly private interest, and that of him
who acts it. Whence it follows evidently, that God has not instituted it as an
essential part of the Sacrament of Penance, it being impossible that that which
comes not from God at all, and which respects not God at all, should be
instituted by God to serve to compose a Sacrament: that what edifies the City
of the Devil, should be proper to edify the City of God, as the Sacraments do;
and that what takes its rise from self-love, should give and produce the love
of God and his grace, as the Sacraments produce it, according to all
Catholics. Which is so clear, that this Jesuit himself has concluded, That
this sorrow is not compatible with this action whereof we speak; that is to
say, with contrition or sorrow, which is an essential part of the Sacrament,
according to his own words.

But all this hinders not but that he says at the same time in the same place,
that this sort of grief which he so much debases and rejects as an instrument
of the City of the Devil, is good, religious, and holy, without coming from God
who is the Spring of all Holiness, all Goodness, and of all Religion; good,
holy, and religious, taking its rise from self-love, which is the spring of all
sin and vices; and finally that it can be good, holy, and religious, edifying
not the City of God, but Babylon, which is the City of the Devil, in which
there is nothing but confusion, corruption, and impiety. But this is not yet
enough for this good Jesuit, he will make a more ample reparation to the fear
of the pains of Hell, after he has so much dishonored it. He declares in the
same Chapter page 687. That the grief which has for its object the deserved
pains of Hell is sufficient with the Sacrament for a man's Justification. He is
not content to make it holy: but he makes it sanctifying and justifying, and
even in the Sacrament; which appertains not to many the most excellent and most
perfect works. So that according to his Divinity, the fear of Hell, and the
sorrow which proceeds from it, is one of the most mavelous and most
prodigious things in Christianity, containing in it so many contrary qualities,
whereof some debase it to the City of the Devil and to Hell, and the other
elevate it unto Heaven, and give it one of the first ranks in the City of God,
which is the Church; some make it profane, and others make it religious; some
make it impure and contagious, and the others divine and sanctifying.

He proceeds yet farther on in favor of this sorrow which he has represented
in so monstrous a manner, saying, that even those who have it not, may receive
grace in the Sacrament of Penance, provided only that they desire it, and that
they are grieved that they have it not. Fourthly, says he in the same Chapter,
To settle a Soul in peace, who apprehends that he has not the contrition which
is necessary to the expiation of his sins, he must be told that he may supply
that by his will to have it, or by the remorse he has for not possessing such
as he desires to have, and such as he should have, perfectly to satisfy God.

He has taken this Maxim from Emanuel Sa, who says, Dolor sufficiens est cum
Sacramento dolere quod non satis doleas: itemque displicentia de peccato, cum
proposito; cavendi, et amfi displiceat ob timorem poenae. Sa verbo contritio.
n. 5.
That the sorrow which we have for not having sorrow enough, is sufficient with
the Sacrament; as also dislike of sin with a resolution to avoid it for time to
come, though this dislike come from the fear of punishment.

Escobar follows him also in this Point, as he affirms, he asks, Number sufficiens
cum Sacramento dolor est, dolere quod non satis doleas?
Whether sorrow for not having sorrow enough be sufficient with the Sacrament?
He answers, Sa ex Navarro asserit sufficientem esse. Escobar tr. 7. exam. 4. n.
122. p. 819.
Sa following Navarre, assures us that it is sufficient.

Whence it follows, that the fear of the pains of Hell, and the grief which it
produces, is so privileged and so powerful amongst the Jesuits, that though
it arise from a corrupt fountain of self-love and the confusion of the Devils
City, yet it cannot only purify the greatest sinners, and conduct them to the
City of God and to Heaven; but that the wishing only and desire to have it,
though indeed it be not had, has the same efficacy, and produces the same
effect; not in a feeble and uncertain manner, but in the Sacrament of Penance,
wherein the virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ operates with an advantage
which is not to be found in the most holy exercises and best works.

He who grieves for his sins for fear of damnation,

Bauny in the same place relates another opinion of some Casuists in these
terms: Quod si quis in articulo mortis conatur facere quod in se est, and nihil
aliud occurrat quam actus attritionis quo dicit: Domine miserere mei, cum animo
placandi Deum, hic justificabitur supplente Deo absolutionis necessitatem,
If a man being at the point of death, endeavors to do what he can; and having
in his mind only an act of attrition present, he says unto God these words:
Lord, have mercy on me, with design to pacify him, he shall be justified, God
himself supplying the want of absolution.

This is the true thought of Libertines and debauched persons, who are
accustomed to say when they are pressed to be converted, and to think on death,
that they need only one good Peccavi to obtain pardon for all their sins. It is
true that Bauny says, that he approves not this opinion, Because it is founded
only on the mercy of God, and not on any good or solid reason. But it is enough
to vent it into the world, that he proposes it as being maintained by some
Casuists; since that he thereby testifies that it is probable, and may
therefore be followed with a safe conscience, according to the Principles of
the Divinity of his Society.

Father Anthony Sirmond has been yet more bold. For he makes no bones to say,
be it at the point of death, or when the Sacrament is to be received or
administered. There are, says he, who refer this to the extremity of life; He
speaks of the obligation to exercise the love of God; Whereunto is opposed the
small appearance that so great a Commandment should be given us not to obey but
so late. Neither am I of opinion to be persuaded, that upon every reception or
administration of the Sacrament, that we ought of necessity excite in our
selves that holy flame of love, to consume therein the sins of which we are
guilty; attrition is thereto sufficient with some strong endeavor after
contrition, or with confession when there is c^nvenience for it.

We must not dispute after this, whether attrition be sufficient to receive the
Grace of the Sacrament of Penance. This Jesuit gives no place for this
difficulty, pretending that attrition alone is sufficient to restore a man unto
grace, provided only, That he endeavor after contrition, or that he confess
himself when he has convenience. So that for him who has not this convenience
being in mortal sin, he maintains that attrition is sufficient, and that he may
himself all alone blot out his sins, be it at the point of death, or when he
comes to receive some Sacrament. And that he may leave no cause to doubt of his
opinion, nor of the virtue he ascribes to attrition, he says, That it alone is
sufficient to take away sin. For he establishes, as it were, two ways to
return from sin to grace; attrition alone with endeavor for contrition, and
attrition with confession; giving, as it were, the choice unto the sinner of
which he please. that has convenience for it. He affirms also, that a strong
endeavor after contrition is commendable; but he is not of opinion to believe
that we ought of necessity excite in our selves this holy flame of love, to
consume therein the sin whereof we are guilty. He confesses that this is the
best expedient, the most safe and perfect; but he pretends that we may dispense
with it, and that attrition is sufficient thereto.

It is remarkable that he speaks of attrition in the self same sense as Father
Bauny, though it be not entirely in the self same terms. For he speaks of
attrition which arises from self-love, and which is without any love of God,
as his words evidently testify: I am not of opinion to believe that we ought
of necessity excite in our selves this holy flame of love, to consume therein
the sin whereof we are guilty. He excludes then the obligation and necessity of
exciting in us the love of God to destroy mortal sin. So that when he says,
that attrition is sufficient, he intends that attrition which is without the
love of God: the attrition and regret for offending God, which takes it rise
from love of ones self, and not of God, as Bauny says.

Dicastillus extends also the effect of this attrition yet farther. For he
says, that this alone is sufficient to cause that one may suffer Martyrdom;
that death and torments undergone, not through a Principle of Charity and Love
of God; but only through fear, are capable to justify and make everlastingly
happy the greatest sinners. There is not then any remedy more universal than
attrition, by the opinion of these Fathers; since, as we have now made appear,
it has so many different effects, Martyrdom it self not being excepted,
majorem charitatem. We must not only say of this fear altogether earthly and
servile, what the Scripture faith indeed of the most noble: Initium sapientiae
timor: Fear is the beginning of wisdom: but we ought also to add; Consummatio
sapientiae timor: Fear is the completing of wisdom; since it causes us to
produce the most Heroic act of Christian Religion, and conducts us even into
Glory; ad conferendam gratiam and gloriam: and contrary to what the Apostle
says; When my body is in the midst of flames, if at the same time my heart be
not inflamed with this heavenly fire of divine love, all these torments are
unto me unprofitable: Si tradidero corpus meum ita ut ardeam, charitatem autem
non habeam, mihi nihil prodest: If I give my body to be burnt, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing. This Jesuit would have it that death which the
Philosophers call terribilium terribilissmum, suffices with attrition only;
that is to say, by the motive of fear alone, and without any mixture of love,
it is capable to purge away all blemishes, and to bestow glory on the most
criminal person of the whole world; ad conferendam gratiam and gloriam.

THE SUM Of the Doctrine of the Jesuits related in this Chapter,
THey hold that the least degree of sorrow is sufficient for it.

That it were better this grief were supernatural; but if it be not, it is
enough that we believe it is; when we know that it is only natural, we c^ase
not for all that to be sufficiently disposed to receive the Sacrament of
Penance, and to fulfill the command for receiving it, though we receive no fruit
thereby.

That though it be true that we have no real remorse for sins, if we only think
we have, we may obtain pardon and receive grace by confessing in this estate:
That for greater assurance we ought always put forth a strong endeavor to
excite this contrition; Babylon, is sufficient to dispose us for absolution and
justification.

That if after we have done what we can, we see we have labored in vain, and
that we cannot draw from our hearts that sincere and necessary dislike of our
sins, we must be sorry that we cannot have it, and say at least with our
mouths, if we cannot say it with our hearts; Lord, I have sinned, have mercy on
me; Peccavi Domine, miserere mei: that this suffices for a right receiving of
the Sacraments, or even for to dye well without Sacraments, if we have not
convenience to receive them, that God will do the rest, and supply the want of
Priest and of absolution.

And finally, that this very fear suffices to conduct a Soul right into Heaven
by the way of Martyrdom.

See here the Maxims of the Jesuits, according to which there is no need
neither of the Grace of God, nor of the Spirit of God which is charity, nor of
true sorrow for offending, nor even of the Sacrament of Penance it self to have
remission of sins. Non requiritur certus gradus intentior is. Filliutius.

Minima gratia est sufficiens ad remissionem peccatorum; and ad minimam gratiam
sufficit minima attritio tanquam dispositio. Filliutius.

Sufficit dolor naturalis, qui tamen supernaturalis existimetur. Filliut. and
Escob.

An hic dolor debeat esse verus and realis, an vero sufficiat existimatus.
Respondeo and dico 1. probabile esse dolorem existimatum sufficere. Filliut.

L'attrition est suffisante pour consommer le peche. Sirmond. Si quis doleat de
peccato propterea quod Deus in poenam illius malum temporale immisit, sufficit.
Escob. Estre touch de ressentiment du peche pour avoir perdu ses biens, c'est
une espece d'avarice and avarice tres honteuse. Pour avoir en pechant merit
les flammes d'enfer, c'est crainte servile qui prend son origin de l'amour
propre, qui edify la cite de Babylone and non de Dieu, comme temoigne S.
Augustine au 4. live. de la Cite de Dieu chap. 28. Bauny. Et toutefois il ne
laisse pas de dire en suitte que cette meme douleur, laquelle a pour son objet
formel la peine meritee de l'enfer, suffit au Sacrement pour la justification
de l'homme. Dolor sufficiens est cum Sacramento, dolere quod non satis doleas.
Sa and Escob. Pour loger la paix dans une ame qui apprehende de n'avoir pas la
contrition necessaire a l'expiation de ses pechez, it luy faut dire qu'elle y
peut suppleer par la volonte de l'avoir, and le regret de ne la pas posseder
tell qu'elle en a desir. Bauny. Qui in articulo mortis conatur facere quod in
se est, and nihil aliud sibi occurrit quam actus attritionis quo dicit: Domine
miserere mei, cum animo placandi Deum, hic justificabitur, Deo supplente
absolutionis necessitatem. Opinion rapportee par Bauny: il'cite Victoria and
Lessius. L'attrition avec effort pour la contrition, ou avec la confession qui
en a la commodite, est suffisante pour consommer le peche don't nous serions
coupables, soit avaunt la reception ou collation des Sacremens, soit a
l'extremite de la vie. Le P. A. Sirmond.




ARTICLE II. Of Confession and Accusation of Sins. That the Jesuits do destroy
the integrity thereof.
THe sinner in Confession is as a sick Patient, who presents himself to the
Priest as to his Physician, and discovers unto him his sickness, that he may
appoint him the remedies which he shall judge necessary for the healing and
Salvation of his Soul. For this cause he ought to be faithful, and make him see
the bottom of his heart, not contenting himself only to tell him his sins
piecemeal, and to specify as much as he can their number and their
circumstances; but also by noting out to him the passions unto which he is
subject, and the evil habits which have been the sources of these disorders.
The Divinity of the Jesuits diverts men from acquitting themselves sincerely in
this duty, and from fulfilling the integrity of confession in all points.

1. Bauny says, That if any one of ignorance and simplicity confess his faults
only in gross, without determinately expressing any one in particular, there is
no need to draw from his mouth the repetition of those faults, if it cannot
conveniently be done, because [the Confessor] is pressed with Penitents that
give him not leisure for it. In his Sum, Chap. 40. page 650.

Layman proposes the same case; and though at first he propounds that this
blockish person, who through ignorance accuses himself only of his sins in
general, is obliged to confess himself anew, if he comes to know the obligation
he has to declare them in particular; yet he maintains afterward, Interdum
tamen si appareat magna hominis ruditas, confessarius contentus esse potest
enarratione peccatorum a proxima confessione commissorum, praecedentium autem
rudi aliqua cognitione, praesertim si aliorum poenitentium copia adsit. Layman.
l. 5. t. 6. c. 9. n. 4. p. 117.
That if the Confessor see that he is a man very ignorant, he may content
himself to cause him tell those sins which he has committed since his last
confession, and to receive of him the imperfect and general knowledge of the
time past, especially if he have many other Penitents.

The Confessor then, as often as he finds himself pressed with Penitents, must
presently become a Prophet, to discover of himself the sins which are not
declared to him but in general, and to prescribe the true remedies by a light
extraordinary, and which comes immediately from God; or else he must deal with
his Penitent at adventure, as a Physician that being not at leisure to confider
his sick Patient, dispatches him in haste, and appoints him the first thing
that comes in his mind; without having taken so much pains as to inform himself
of the particularities of his sickness, because he has many other Patients to
visit, who will not suffer him to stay with this, and look to him more nearly;
and in the mean time he would persuade him that he is cured, and that he may
return to his ordinary employments.

Bauny proposes a second case like to the former. He demands, What is fit to be
said to them who in their youth have done many actions vicious in their own
nature, which notwithstanding they believed not to be such? He answers, That
they are not obliged to say one word of them when they apprehend and know their
nature and conditions; and much less to repeat their past Confessions. He seems
to have a design to oppose himself to the word of the Prophet, who beseeches
God not to remember the sins of his youth and of his ignorance,

Dicastillus proposes one case very like this: Qui confessus fuit peccatum quod
nec ipse nec Confessarius sciebant esse mortale, vel certe de eo dubitabant.
Postea-novit esse mortale, non tenetur iterum confiteri -- quia adsunt omnia
necessaria ad substantiam Sacramenti, ad cujus valorem non requiritur quod
Confessarius manifest noverit peccatum esse mortale. Dicastillus n. 353. and
354. d. 12. d. 10. tr. 8. de Poenit.
When a Penitent in Confession declares one of his sins being mortal as venial
through ignorance, and the Confessor by like ignorance believes it to be such;
whether after the certain knowledge of this sin, he be obliged to confess it
anew? He resolves this case without fear, and says, Ex quo fit ut post
mediocrem diligentiam non teneatur quis, licet fortasse conjiciat fore ut
tandem per prolixissimam aliquod aliud peccatum occurrat. Dicast. n. 869. d.
10. d. 9. tr. 8. de Paenit.
That he is not obliged, because it is not necessary that the Confessor know
the quality of the sin, whether it be mortal or venial. Ignorance amongst
Jesuits is a most advantageous thing. If you know not that an action is not a
sin, though in process of time you do learn to know it, you are not at all
obliged to confess your self of it; and knowing that it is a sin, you know not
of what nature it is, mortal or venial, you are in no wise obliged to declare
it to a Priest.

It is in favor of this ignorance so advantageous and so profitable, Quod
a^tem non teneatur quis scribere, etiamsi lubricam habeat memoriam, jam alibi
diximus, praesertim d. 7. number. 244. Ibid.
That he frees Penitents from examining their consciences, at the least so
exactly, although it may well fall out, says he, that by examining your self
more exactly, you may discover some new sins, It were even to be wished for
Penitents, that they had bad memories, that they might before God be discharged
of their sins without the Sacrament of Confession. If you say to this Jesuit,
that the Penitent may relieve his memory by setting down his sins in writing,
he will answer you, that he is not obliged thereunto. If you add, that having
of en cause to distrust his memory, he may go frequently to Confession, he will
give you the same answer: and so it may oftentimes come to pass, that a
Penitent of this sort covered with sins, may cast himself at the feet of a
Priest as an innocent, without accusing himself of any crime, though he have
indeed a Soul altogether polluted there with, because he has been so happy as
to have a wretched memory.

Filliutius takes the thing yet higher, and proposes the question more
generally. He asks, An vero qui lubricam habet memoriam teneatur peccata
scribere, verius puto non teneri..... Non obligatur quis ad utendum medlis quae
non sunt ordinaria and communia, unde inferunt quod etiamsi sit mortale
periculum oblivionis, sicut non tenetur statim confiteri ne memoria excidant
peccata, ita nec illa scribere. Idem n. 244. d. 14. d. 6. tr. 8. de Paenit.
Whether when ignorance is not absolutely voluntary, though it be criminal, the
Confession continue to be valid, though it be out of form? H^s answer is, That
it is probable. And he adds, that if the omission come only from this, that we
are not prepared nor examined before we present our selves to Confession, it is
not necessary to repeat what we have omitted; and the Confession is valid
notwithstanding.

It is true that he says after, that the contrary opinion i^ the safer; but he
forbears not for all that to prop up this as much as he can by authorities and
reasons, that he may make it more probable, and to give more liberty and more
repose to the consciences of those that will follow him. He makes use of two
considerable reasons.

The first is, That otherwise many Confessions must be refused. That is to say,
that we are not to trouble our selves to remedy a mischief, because it is too
great, and that if it were not so universal, it were good to oppose it, by
obliging those who had forgot their sins to confess them the first time; but
that this is not now necessary; though the forgetfulness or ignorance which is
the cause of this omission of sins, and which causes them to commit this sin,
be malicious and criminal: licet ignorantia sit culpabilis mortaliter. In
regard that this abuse is become so common, that the greater part of those who
confess themselves, doing it without great resentment and without much
preparation forget frequently one part of their sins; and so there would be too
much trouble to the Confessors and Penitents to repeat their Confessions so ill
made. This is that which he says clearly in his second reason, with which he
concludes in these terms. Wherefore if we were to follow the contrary opinion
in practice, which obliges to repeat an imperfect Confession, this would make
the burden of Confession too heavy.

2. They teach, that it is not always necessary to declare the circumstances
which change the kind of the sin. Dieastillus brings for Example of this
Doctrine a calumny. Utrum qui laesit alterum in fama graviter injuste dicendo
falsum aliquid quod illius famam denigraret, teneatur circumstantiam mendacii
explicare, vel sufficiat dicere, se injuste infamasse alterum? Videri potest
hoc ultimum sufficere. Dicast. n. 172. d. 3. d. 9. tract. 8. de Panit.
It seems to me, says he, that he who has hurt his neighbor notoriously in
his reputation by publishing falfities, and against all manner of justice, is
not obliged to accuse himself to have published lies; but it is sufficient to
accuse himself to have unjustly taken away his reputation.

3. Quamvis non explicatis circumstantiis aggravantibus, non possit
Confessarius judicare de ea gravitate aut levitate. Et quamvis concedamus
aliquando peccata mortalia ob circumstantias notabiliter aggravantes....gravius
sauciare animum and periculosiora sieri. Dicastill. number. 213. d. 3. d. 9.
tract. 8. de Poenitent.
They hold also, Bauny speaks thus in his Sum, Chap. 39. page 616. It is not
necessary in Confession to relate the said circumstance: it is sufficient in
rigor to say unto the Confessor, that in the matter of theft he has sinned
mortally; taking such a sum as makes and constitutes this sin. Escobar is also
of the same opinion, he declares that it is also the opinion of the most famous
Casuists of the Society, of whom he pretends to be only the Transcriber. Certum
plane circumstantias mutantes speciem necessario exprimendas, cum addant novam
malitiam moralem. Rogo an idem afferendum sit de circumstantiis notabiliter
aggravantibus? Affirmat Suarez 3 part. tom. 4. d. 22. sect. 3. Negativae tamen
sententiae cum Vasquez 3 part. tom. 4. q. 91. d. 3. number. 3. Escobar in preoemio
examine. 2. number. 39. page 12. and 13.
It is altogether certain, says he, that in confession those circumstances are
necessarily to be expressed which change the kind of the sin; because they join
there to a new moral wickedness. Heasks, If the same thing must be affirmed of
them which aggravate and augment it notably? He answers, That such is the
opinion of Suarez. But he holds the contrary with Vasquez. His reason is,
because we are not obliged by the Precept of Confession but only to declare all
mortal sins; Commisi furtum mortale toties, non exprimendo furti quantitatem.
Ibid.
I have sinned so often in the matter of theft, without expressing the quantity
of the theft. I might here insist a little upon this, to represent how this
Maxim destroys the integrity and sincerity of confession, and at the same time
cherishes theft, not obliging him who has stolen ten thousand Crowns to accuse
himself otherwise than he who has stolen ten. But he that propounds this
destroys it himself, teaching the quite contrary, and proving it by a solid
reason in Chap. 5. of his Sum, page 68. where he says, That it suffices not
the Penitent to acquit himself of his duty, to say to his Confessor, that he
has stolen in a notable quantity to offend mortally, if he do not rate and
specify unto him the sum, because he ought to know the estate of his Penitent;
which he cannot easily do, if he unfold not to him the quantity of the theft.

But if any would object unto this good Father this so manifest contradiction,
he will believe that he is discharged thereof by saying that both the opinions
are probable, because there are Authors for the one and for the other; and as
we may follow both, so we may teach both.

4. They hold also, That it is not necessary to the validity of the Sacrament,
that the Penitent in his confession count the number of vicious desires,
thoughts, and dishonest affections which he has had and reiterated since the
time that he was addicted thereunto, Chap. 40. page 667. Sufficit dicere, toto
mense, v. c. amavi Mariam; etiamsi possit numerus exprimi. It suffices to say,
for a whole month, for example, I loved Mary; though the number might be
expressed. Which is so strange, that he dares not absolutely answer for this
opinion, confessing that the practice hereof is dangerous. But he refers
himself to Lessius and Salas who approve it, says he, as probable; and by
consequence he declares that it may be followed in practice, seeing he believes
that we may follow every probable opinion in our practice; and so we may do
that in conscience which he dare neither warrant, nor so much as express in
French, for fear of offending chaste minds and ears.

Tambourin is of the same opinion. Quamvis probabilissimum sit.....
circumstantias notabiliter aggravantes, quia mutant notabiliter judicium
Confessarii, esse in confessione aperiendas; tamen probabile etiam est.....
fidelibus hanc nec essitatem minime imponendam. Tambur. n. 111. sect. 18. cap.
1. lib. 2. meth. confess.
Though it be very probable, says he, that the aggravating circumstances,
because they change notably the judgment of a Confessor, ought to be unfolded,
it ceases not for all that to be probable that we ought not impose this
necessity upon the faithful. And it is by means of this liberty of following
the less probable opinions, that he says, Negans vel deliberate dubitans de
articulis Fidei sufficienter confitetur, si dicat se prolapsum in haeresim, nec
necesse explicare articulos in quibus contra fidem sensit. Idem n. 2. sect. 1.
cap. 2.
That he who denies the Articles of the Faith, or doubts of them voluntarily,
is not obliged to specify the Article which he denies or doubts of; but that
it is sufficient to accuse himself Incidens in haeresim, non tenetur declarare
an sit ante vel post baptismum; quare satis est fateri se in haeresim fuisse
prolapsum. Ibid. n. 6.
of being fallen into Heresy: that neither is be obliged to discover whether
it was before or since his Baptism; Satis est si in confessione aperiatur
numerus blasphemiarum, nec explicare opus est fuisse contra Deum, vel beatam
Virginem, vel Sanctos. Idem n. 17. sect. 1. cap. 3. lib. 2. meth. confessionis.
3 Qui ex inveterata consuetudine jurat, excusatur communiter a consuetudine
confitenda. Ibid. number. 23. sect. 3. lib. 2.
A Blasphemer, so the same Father goes on, is not obliged to unfold the nature
of his blasphemy, it is sufficient that he make known the number; and it is not
needful to express whether it be against God, the Virgin, or the Saints.
Neither is he obliged to unfold the customariness of it, how inveterate soever
it be.

He who takes pleasure in the sins which he has committed, and Sa verbo
Confessio, number. 16, qui declaratus est de peccatis praeteritis alias confessis,
id solum oportet confiteatur, non autem exprimere quaenam fuerint illa peccata.
Verum id fuit in editione Romana deletum. Idem number. 8. cap. 3. lib. 10. partis
decalogi.
whereof he is confessed, says Emanuel Sa, is not obliged to specify these
sins, it is enough for him to accuse himself to have had complacence in his
ancient crimes. And this decision was found so wicked, that by the report of
Tambourin, in the Edition published at Rome of this Jesuits Works, this passage
was cut off. Injuriae contra insignem tuum benefactorem, cum solum sint contra
gratitudinem...... non apparet unde haec sola afferre debeat diversitatem
specificam quae sit ex obligatione gravi subdenda confessariis. Idem n. 13.
sect. 2. cap. 6. lib. 2. meth. confess.
You have wronged your singular benefactor; I see nothing that can oblige you
to declare this circumstance which offends only against gratitude directly; so
I believe, says Tambourin. Qui delectatur simplici actu de copula cum ea quam
videt aut scit esse conjugatam, etiamsi positiva quadam repulsa non regeret
rationem conjugatae, sed circa illam abstractive se habeat..... solam tunc
malitiam contra castitatem contrahit, non vero malitiam adulterii. Dicast. n.
630. d. 8. d. 9. tract. 8. de Poenit.
He that sins mortally by desiring to abuse a woman whom he kn^ws to be
married, or to have made a vow of Virginity; who entertains himself with filthy
thoughts, and takes pleasure in these dishonest entertainments, is not obliged
to declare that this woman who has been the object of his sin, was married or
a Nun; it suffices that he accuse himself to have sinned against Chastity.
These are Dicastillus words: Tambourin is of the same judgment: nec explicandum
an cum nupta vel Moniali. Conjugatus si morose delectetur, non obstringi in
confessione explicare se esse conjugatum affirmat Hurtado...... haec Hurtado
satis probabiliter. Tamb. n. 4. sect. 1. cap. 7. lib. 2. meth. confess.
The same is to be said if this man be married. Hurtado assures us probably
enough, that he is not obliged to discover this circumstance.

If from simple complaisance, and thought only you pass on to execution, and
you do commit Incest; An cum matre vel cum consobrina non est speciatim ex
necessitate patefaciendum. Idem 48. sect. 7. c. 7. l. 2. meth. confess.
you are not bound to declare in what degree, whether it be with a Mother or a
Cousin German.

The same is to be said Foemina soluta peccans cum Sacerdote, Diacono,
Subdiacono, vel Professo, vel habente vota biennii Societ. Jesu, sufficit si
dicat se cum eo qui voto obnoxious erat, peccasse. Idem n. 31. sect. 5. c. 7. l.
2. meth. confess.
of a Whore; when she has had commerce with a Priest, Professed, or Novice
Jesuit.

Dicast. n. 19. d. 1. d. 6. tr. 8. de Poenit.
He that has prepared poison to rid him of his enemy, or who has drawn upon
him with a design to kill him, is not obliged to say: I have killed or poisoned
my enemy; but it is sufficient that he say, I have prepared poison for him, I
have drawn upon him to kill him. Secunda sententia probabilior negat esse
necessarium explicare effectum secutum. Hinc est ut etiam quando tam gravis est
materia, ut peccet erga patrem peccato surti, non teneatur id explicare in
confessione, sed satis est si se accuset de furto gravi. Idem n. 564. d. 8. d.
9. tr. 8. de Paenit.
A son who robs his father, and has taken from him a confiderable sum, is not
obliged to declare whom he robbed; it is sufficient in general to accuse himself
to have taken the goods of another. As if this Wretch had offended against
Justice only, and had not sinned against the respect which all Laws oblige him
to render unto him from whom after God he holds all. Absolute asserendum est
non debere eam circumstantiam explicati. Id. n. 378. d. 8. d. 9. tr. 8. de
poenit.
It is not necessary at all, amongst the Jesuits, to know the quality or the
greatness of the sinner, though it be even necessary to understand the quality
or the greatness of the sin whereof he accuses himself. If a Prelate, if a
Superior of a Monastery, sin against Chastity, they are not obliged to make
known their dignities. If a Governor of a Province, or a Magistrate
established for hindering robberies, favor them, take part with them, or is the
chief himself that pillages and robs the people; If a man who has the charge
to preserve public goods, commit the crimes which he himself ought to repress;
none of these persons ought to declare the obligation which is on them to
hinder and punish these crimes, it is sufficient that they accuse themselves
when they find themselves guilty of committing them in their own persons.
Dicastilius reason is pleasant. Licet Gubernator constituatur ad hoc ut
impediat furta, non tamen ut impediat sua, sicut fiscalis debet ex munere suo
denuntiare delicta contra bonum publicum, non tamen sua, sed aliorum, and
custos vineae debet manifestare fures, non tamen seipsum; quia hi homines
constituuntur in ordine ad alios in officio continendos, non in ordine ad
ipsorummet delicta impedienda. Quae doctrina mihi placet. Ibid. n. 381.
A Magistrate, says he, or any other person entrusted for the public safety,
is indeed obliged by virtue of his Charge to hinder the evil which others might
commit; but not that which he may do himself; quae doctrina mihi placet. That
is to say, that he who is established to see the Laws of the Church or of a
Prince observed, and to punish those who violate them, may himself without
being wanting to his Commission, or rather by virtue of his Commission, violate
the very same Laws. Utrum Sacerdos vel sacris initiatus percutiens aliquem
Laicum, debeat explicare came circumstantiam, quando saltem est percussio cum
effusione sanguinis. Negat Diana p. 2. t. 7. r. 8. etiamsi ad morrem sit
percussio...... Dianae adhaerco. Idem n. 382. ibid.
Diana assures us that a Priest who has smitten some Laick, so as to shed his
blood, or kill him, is not obliged to declare his quality of a Priest.

But see here an Example which surpasses all the rest, and which tends to hide
from a Confessor the most enormous Sacriledges, without sparing the respect
which all the faithful, and especially Priests, ought to have to the body and
blood of Jesus Christ. Si Sacerdos portans sanctam Eucharistiam, infamaret,
furaretur, tam gravem irreverentiam non video. Tambur. n. 42 sect. 5. c. 7. l.
2. meth. confess.
If a Priest whilst he carries the holy Sacrament, calumniate and defame his
neighbor, or rob him, and take from him his goods, it is not necessary that he
declare this circumstance in Confession. And see here his reason: I fee not
herein, says he, any great irreverence; and in the mean time it had been great
and criminal, if he had done the same thing in the Chamber of a King, or in his
Presence, the King looking on, and certainly knowing his crimes.

Dicastillus is not more respective to this divine Sacrament, Observant Vasquez
and communiter Doctores co gravius esse peccatum suscipiendi indigne, quo quis
pluribus and majoribus peccatis est irretitus. Non tamen putat Vasquez esse
necessary explicandum in confessione an cum multis vel cum paucioribus quis
accesserit. Quae doctrina mihi placet. Sufficit enim si explicet se in statu
peccati mortalis accessisse. Dicast. n 37. d. 2. d. 9. tract. 4. de Euch.
The irreverence and the sin of him who approaches unworthily to the
Eucharist, are so much greater, says Vasquez, as his soul is charged with more
enormous and greater number of mortal sins; and nevertheless the same Vasquez
teaches, that he is not obliged to declare in Confession the number of these
crimes. And this Doctrine pleases me, adds Dicastillus; For it is enough to
accuse himself that he did participate of the Eucharist, being in the estate of
mortal sin.

For what concerns evil habits and relapses into the same fins, Bauny
inquireth, Whether frequent and ordinary relapses be circumstances whereof the
Confessor ought to be instructed by the Penitent in his Confession? in such
case it is expedient to defer the absolution; he answers, that nevertheless
according to his apprehension, the contrary opinion, as being more conformable
to reason, and favorable to the Penitent, ought to be held and followed in the
practice, Chap. 59 page 621, 622 The reasons upon which he foundeth his
resolution are considerable. The first is, that this is more agreeable to
reason: as if humane reason, especially in an estate wherein it is corrupted by
fin, were the Rule of a Christian who ought to live by faith. The second; that
it is more favorable to the Penitent also: That is, that it is more favorable
for entertaining his pride and his vanity, as he expounds it himself
sufficiently. Afterward he brings for his third reason; That a Penitent cannot
inform his Confessor concerning his lapses proceeding from an inveterate habit,
without manifesting unto him his past offenses with shame for his weakness, and
pronounces definitively, concluding in these terms: Therefore he is not bound.

But one part of Repentance consisting in the confusion which a Penitent
resenteth for having offended God; this is not to be too favorable to him who
has a true design to do Penance, and to be converted, but to dispense as much
as is possible with repentance, by delivering him from the pain and confusion
which he might have had in discovering his weaknesses to his Confessor.

He says the same thing in his Moral Divinity, save that writing in Latin, he
talks also more freely and boldly. Dubitatur 12. an circumstantia recidiva sit
confitenda? Teneri poenitentem consu etudinem peccati confiteri si a
confessario interrogatur. Tamen Vasquez, Henriquez, etc. maxim si haec oritur
ex proxima peccandi occasion quam poenitens tenetur reserare. Contrarium docet
Saucius in select is disputat. 9. number. 6. Et haec opinio priore videtur esse
probabilior and sequenda in praxi, quia Confessarius jus non habet interrogandi
poenitentem de consuetudine peccandi, nisi ejus rei gravem causam habeat, raro
accidit. Deinde non est in ejus jure afficere poenitentem dedecore cognita ejus
peccandi consuetudine; sed debet eum statim absolvere, si dolorem de peccatis
concipit cum proposito futurae emendationis. Bauny Theol. mor. p. 1. tract. 4.
de poenit. q. 15. page 137.
That a Confessor bath not so much as a right to interrogate the Penitent
touching the custom of sinning, if he be not obliged thereto by some important
reason, which happens seldom; that he has not a right neither to put the
Penitent to confusion, when he knows he is accustomed to commit some sin; but
that he ought forthwith to absolve him if he put forth some act of sorrow for
his sins past, with a resolution to amend.

So that if a Confessor demand of some person who accuses himself of some
great sin, if he have formerly committed it; whether he have fallen therinto
often and whether his relapses come from the next occasions, or from the habit
he has of this sin; the Penitent according to Bauny may elude all these
interrogations if he had not rather lie according to some others, or say openly
that he is not obliged to answer to these Articles, and if his Confessor press
him very sore thereto, he may say that he is grounded on a probable opinion;
debet eum statim absolvere. How horrible is this Divinity!

And which is altogether admirable in the Doctrine of these Fathers, in the
very same time that they say that the Penitent is not obliged to answer unto
these Articles; Dicastillus n. 194. d. 3. d. 9. tr. 8. de poenit.
Non tenetur ei dicere illam circumstantiam, and that the Confessor cannot
constrain him thereto; and tunc non potest cogere illum Confessarius; he
assures us that the Confessor who is of contrary judgment to that of his
Penitent, may examine him on these very Articles. Respondetur posse
Confessarium interrogare de iis circumstantiis. The one then may interrogate,
and the other may refuse to answer; the one has a right to take cognizance of
these Articles, and the other has a right to refuse it him; the one in asking
performs his office, and the other in being unwilling to answer, does nothing
against his duty: In a word, they are both in equal safety of conscience; the
Penitent in disobeying his Confessor, who holds the place of a Father unto him
and of God himself; and the Confessor in neglecting his Charge, and betraying
his own conscience to follow that of a sinner whom he sees to be both in error
and obstinacy.

The end and principal care of these Fathers, as it appears by their discourse,
is to excuse the Penitent as much as they can from punishment and shame; that
is, to hinder him from repenting truly, which consists particularly in the
punishment and confusion which he receive from his sin, for repairing the
pleasure which he has had, and the dishonor which he has done to God in
committing it.

It is also for this end, Dicastillus furnishes his Penitents with this new
Method, to make Confession by dividing one and the same sin into many parts,
and to accuse himself thereof at several times. Qui fecit votum v.g. servandi
sextum decalogi praeceptum, potest separatim in eadem confessione dicere se
fornicatum fuisse, and subinde in decursu fateri se fregisse votum in re gravi.
Dicast. n. 171. d. 2. d. 9. tract. 8. de poenit.
He that has made a vow to observe the Commandments of the Decalogue; may in
the same Confession say apart, that he has fallen into fornication; and a
while after, not to have observed a vow which he made in a matter of
consequence. By this way the very great confusion which the Penitent might have
by the enormity of his crime, is diminished.

5. There is another case in which, according to these people, a Penitent may
also retain and conceal his sins, to wit, If he can reasonably apprehend that
telling all to his Confessor without concealing any thing, his friends, or
himself may at any time be concerned in their goods, their bodies, or their
honor, I believe that in this case, says Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 4. page 655.
It would be lawful for him to suppress and conceal the offense, which being
known of his Confessor, might cause unto the Penitent such effect as he
imagines ought to follow the confession thereof. And a little after he gives
the same liberty to him who fears that by declaring his sins, his Confessor
will be made to use him hardly, to hate him therefore, to be offended at him,
cause him to remove from the place where he dwells, or deprive him of some
convenience he receives by him.

This man shows himself here also very favorable to the Penitent; he is not
contented to excuse him from the shame which he might have had in discovering
all his faults and his weaknesses; he would not that for this he or any of his
friends might one day, that is, at all be concerned in their goods, bodies, or
honor. have but some reason to fear that this may fall out, or that his
Confessor after the knowledge that he has given him of his conscience and of
his sins, will use him ill, and hate him, or be offended with him, that is to
say, will use him with more severity, or ordain him to do something that may be
displeasing to him, though it be for the Salvation of his Soul, or will remove
him from the place where he dwells, because perhaps it is the next occasion
of sin unto him, or will deprive him of some commodity that he may receive from
him; in all these cases, and for all these reasons, it shall be lawful for him,
according to the opinion of Bauny, to suppress and conceal the offense which
known to the Confessor, might cause unto the Penitent the effects which he
imagines ought to follow from his confession thereof, if he choose not rather to
satisfy the duty of his confession, and at the same time avoid all the
inconveniences which may arrive upon the knowledge of his sin which he gives
unto the Priest, by making use of Dicastillus's expedient, Si dicat in genere
aut specie non completa tacendo illam circumstantiam, sic ergo possit dicere se
fecisse peccatum mortale, and fortasse dicere in tali genere, sed non recordari
cujus speciei, quod verum est intelligendo de notitia quae possit tunc
deservire ad confitendum in ea occasion. Dicast. n. 180. d. 11. d. o tract. 8.
de poenit.
And tell his sins in general without particularizing their kind, adding that
he remembers not of what kind his sins were. And all this he may say without
any lie, making use of the Doctrine of mental Reservation. For it is true that
he knows not the kind of his sin to declare it unto him upon, this present
occasion, and he will not declare it, and he believes that he has a right not
to do it, because he would not that the Confessor should know his estate and
his bad disposition, to avoid correction,

It is easy to perceive that it suffrceth to imagine that some one of these
effects may arise from confession, to have liberty to conceal sins from a
Confessor, or not to discover them but very generally, the greatest sinners,
and persons most addicted to the world, will always find some one of these
reasons and pretenses, to speak noething but what they please in confession,
and to suppress their most notable crimes.

My design obliges me only to represent these excesses; but if I had undertaken
to refute them, and to make these good Fathers see their extravagancies, I
should not desire to make use of other reason or authority against them, and
especially against Bauny than his own. For speaking of the Confessor, and of
the Cognizance which he ought to have of his Charge, and of the conscience of
his Penitents, in Chap. 38. page 589. Of a truth, says he, as he holds the
place of a Judge in this Sacrament, as says the Council in the 14. Session and
9. Canon, he neither can nor ought pass sentence but upon that whereof he has
a full and entire cognizance. And a little after making use also of the
Authority of the Council, he adds: In the Canon omnis utriusque sexus, he is
called a Physician of Souls: if he know not their wounds, how can he heal them,
and after the manner of a Physician, pour oil into the wounds of the wounded?
more medicorum superinfundere vulneribus sauciati. He ought therefore, says
the Council cited in the Chapter we last mentioned, omnis utriusque sexus,
diligently enquire after the circumstances of every sin and sinner, whereby he
may understand what counsel to give, and what remedy to use, proving diverse
experiments to heal the sick; diligenter inquirere, and peccatoris
circumstantias and peccaei, quibus intelligat quale debeat ei praebere
consitium, and cujusmodi remedium adhibere diversis experimentis utendo ad
sanandum aegrotum. And in the sequel from the express Authority and Reasoning
of the Council, he concludes his discourse by way of an Interrogation. In the
ignorance of so many infirmities of the Soul, and remedies to be applied for
healing it, who can reasonably promise himself the happiness to be able to
relieve the sick?

If according to Bauny, the Confessor in quality of a Judge, whose place he
holds in the Sacrament of Penance, neither can nor ought pass sentence but on
what he has full and entire cognizance of. If in the quality of a Physician of
Souls, he cannot reasonably promise himself to relieve his Patient, that is his
Penitent, nor to heal his wounds, if he know them not, if he know not his
disposition, his infirmities, and the circumstances of his sins and of the
estate wherein he is. It must needs be that when the same Bauny has said, That
it is sufficient to confess sins in gross, without determining any one in
particular, that it suffices in rigor to make the Confessor understand that
one has sinned mortally in the matter of theft, without declaring how much
has been stolen: That it is not needful to tell the number of vicious thoughts
and dishonest affections, though he could do it if he list: That a Penitent may
in Confession conceal his sens and his relapses which proceed from an
inveterate habit, for fear of manifesting his past offenses, with shame for his
weaknesses: That he may suppress and silence the offense, which known by the
Confessor, would cause the effects which he imagines might follow the
confession thereof. Bauny has said all these things, it must needs be that
according to the Principles which he has established, or rather according to
those of the Council which he has alleged, he cannot pretend that the sinner
confessing himself in this sort, can hope from the Confessor a remedy or relief
for his wounds, or remission for his sins; and by consequence we must say, that
he plays with confession and consciences, and that he teaches sinners and
worldlings to commit Sacriledges instead of Confessions, and to deride the
Confessor and God himself, whose place he holds.

Escobar is not content to say, as Bauny, that sins may be concealed in
confession, he maintains also that it is no great sin to lie unto a Confessor
when he examines the Penitent; see how he speaks: Mentiri in confessione est
peccatum mortale? Mendacium de peccato veniali veniale est. Escobar tr. 7. ex.
4. n. 107. page 816.
Is it a mortal sin to lie in confession? He answers; If the sin in question be
only a venial sin, the lie is but venial. He does indeed say, that there are
some who make a distinction, believing that if the sinner accuse himself but of
one only venial sin which he has not committed, he sins mortally. Quia tunc
daretur absolutio sine materia, and Sacramentum nullum esset.
Because for that time there being no matter for absolution, it would be given
in vain, and the Sacrament would be null. But he adds, that there are who
receive not this distinction: and the reason he brings for it, is: Quia omne
mendacium de veniali est res levis, and parum laedit Confessoris judicium. Ibid.
Because every lie which is made in the matter of a venial sin is a slight
thing, and hurts little or not at all the judgment of the Confessor.

He testifies that it would be more difficult to exempt him from mortal sin, An
Confessio generalis integritatem requirat? Quoad peccata alias confessa non
requirit. Dicit quis Confessario se velle cum ipso confessionem generalem
gerere; non ideo tenetur omnis mortalia exprimere. Quia quamvis mentiatur parum
tamen refert ad Confessarii judicium, cum ad ejus forum non pertineat. Ibid. p.
818. n. 118.
If it be necessary that a general confession be entire? He answers in these
terms; It is not necessary so to be in regard of the sins which have been
confessed before. A person, for example, says unto a Confessor, that he has a
design to make a general confession; it is not needful for this purpose to tell
all his mortal sins; for though he lie, this concerns not at all the Judgment
the Confessor is to make thereof, because it is not of his Jurisdiction.

Dicastillus seems more nimble and subtle on this occasion than Escobar. For
allowing the same liberty to Penitents, not to declare other than venial sins,
or some part of the mortal sins they have committed, he maintains that
confession ought always of necessity to be entire: see here how he intends it:
Confession at that time, though imperfect and maimed, cease not to have all
requisite integrity, which exacts nothing but a declaration of the sins which
may be discovered to the Priest who hears them, and not of those which you
conceal from him upon some ground. So that a Penitent who accusing himself of
some sins omits the rest, either because they have been confessed already, or
because he remembers them no longer, that he may tell them to the Confessor,
Objicies confessionem debere esse integram de jure divino. Respondetur
integritatem confessionis debere esse integritatem formalem, non materialem;
nempe solum debere dici omnia quae possunt explicari coram legitimo judice
absque causa quae id excuset. Di cast. n. 115. d. 7. d. 9. tr. 4. de confess.
ceases not to make an entire confession; not indeed as to an integrity which
they call material; but as to a formal integrity, which alone is necessary for
the Sacrament. That is to say, provided I persuade my self that I have some
reason to hide my sins from the Priest, it is sufficient for me to make a good
confession, to declare some unto him: and who is it that may not imagine that
he has some reason? See the Spirit of the Society, to allow God the names, and
to give men the things: it is by this means that they agree Religion and the
World, the obligations of Christianity with the lusts of men So they furnish
means to obey the orders of Jesus Christ, and at the same time to flatter the
concupiscence of sinners, and to entertain them in the greatest crimes, by
discharging them of that sincere confession which ought to be their true remedy.

Filliutius had before Escobar taught that which he says of lies made in
confession about venial sin. Mentiri circa materiam non necessariam, ut sunt
peccata venialia, negando quod factum est, sic non est mortale. Filliut. t 1.
mor. qq. tr. 7. cap. 4. number. 112. page 180.
To lie, says he, in a thing which is no necessary matter of confession, as
are venial sins, in denying that which is done, is only a venial sin. Emanuel
Sa is of the same opinion, and he maintains that the case is the same in mortal
sins which have been confessed already. Mentiri in confessione de peccatis
venialibus, aut de alias confessis mortalibus, veniale tantum peccatum est,
etiamsi ille antea proposuisset apud se vere confieri. Sa verb. Confessio. number.
12. page 88.
To lie in confession, says he, in matter of venial sins, or of mortal which
have been already confessed, is but a venial sin, though the design were at
first to confess them.

I might here relate also other expedients which the Jesuits give to surprise
and deceive a Confessor; Escobar gives to a difficulty which he propounds.
Dixisti debere repeti confessionem quando fuit invalida. An iteranda ex eo quod
facta luerit alio fine principaliter quam ob remissionem peccatorum?
Non dummodo, remissio intendatur saltem ut finis minus principalis, and in eo
non peccetur mortaliter: quia in eo casu est intentio recipiendi Sacramentum,
and omnia, ad ejus valorem requisita. Escob. 7. ex. 4. number. 119. page 818.
I have already taught you, says he, that the confession which was null and
invalid ought to be repeated; is it also to be repeated when it is made upon
some other principal design, then to obtain pardon of sins? His Answer is, No,
provided that remission of sins be propounded at the least as the less
principal, and herein is no mortal sin, because there is always an intention to
receive the Sacrament, and all that which is necessary to make it valid.

He believes then that it is but a small sin to prefer some humane and temporal
consideration to Salvation and pardon of sins; that it is not to profane the
Sacrament to refer it principally to a temporal end; that this is not to
dishonor God much, to testify the little respect which is had for his grace
and friendship, even then when it is demanded, by preferring some temporal
thing before it, which is respected as principal design, propounded and defired
to be received by means of the Sacrament of Penance much rather than his amity
and reconciliation with him. which he makes a show to desire after he had so
despised it, pretending to repair this contempt by another contempt, and to
return into favor by a motion so little sincere,

ARTICLE III. Of Absolution. That the Jesuits make it depend on the Opinion and
the Will of the Penitent, rather than the Disposition and Judgment of the
Confessor.
ABsolution is a Judgment which the Priest pronounces on Gods behalf in favor
of the Penitent, by which he forgives him his sins, after the cognizance which
he has received from himself, of the remedies which he has applied, and the
good effects and holy dispositions which they have produced in him to establish
him in the Grace of God.

The Divinity of the Jesuits ruins this part of the Sacrament of Penance, as
well as the other, taking from the Priest the authority and quality of a Judge
and Superior, and subjects him to the Penitent, in such manner, that he must
follow him in the Judgment that he ought to make of his sins and of his estate,

From these Maxims it is that Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 45. page 702. says, that
the Confessor before he absolve the Penitent, shall examine him if he have no
more to say; if he be sorry with all his heart for offending God; if he purpose
to serve him well and faithfully for the time to come, by a voiding all mortal
sin, which being said thus universally and in common, is sufficient for
receiving Sacramental absolution.

Nay, we may be excused from examining him in this manner. Dicastillus eases
the Confessor of this trouble. Poenitenti affirmanti se habere retractationem
and propositum non peccandl, credendum est, nec tamen necesse est id semper ab
illo interrogare, maxim quando personae satis alioquin instructae sunt, and
accedunt ad confessionem nullo modo coactae. Dicastill. de Poenit.
It is not always necessary, says he, to put these questions to him,
especially if they be persons well instructed, and who come freely and without
constraint to the Tribunal of Confession.

So all the disposition requisite for receiving absolution, is reduced to
words, and those also universal, and to resolutions made in general, upon which
the Confessor shall be obliged to rely and to believe all those who shall
offer him such discourse, and make him such promises, because they are their
own accusers, defenders, and witnesses; cum ipsi sint sui accusatores,
defensores, and testes; though oftentimes it be supposed that such resolutions
come but from the teeth outward; as the same Father Bauny has written a
little after, page 717.

Emanuel Sa says the same thing, Absolvi potest qui proponit abstinere a
peccato, etiamsi credat se proposito non staturum. Sa verb. Absolutio. number. 12.
page 5.
We may absolve, says he, him who resolves to abstain from sin, though he
himself believe that he shall not hold his resolution, though he be assuredly
persuaded of it; certe sibi persuadeat, Tamb number. 753. cap. 1. lib. 1. meth.
confess.
says Tambourin. How then can the Confessor believe that the Penitent is well
disposed, and that he has a true resolution to correct himself, which is solid
and capable to produce its effect, since the Penitent himself believes it not,
and is rather persuaded of the contrary, even with certainty? And this being
so, how can he be absolved in this estate?

Neither do they require any greater assurance on the part of the Confessor
than of the Dicast. n. 362. d. 21 d. 6. tr. 8 de Poenit.
Penitent, and they would have absolution given to the sinner, how inveterate
and habituate soever he be in his sin: non obstante consuetudine, though he
knows certainly that the Penitent will relapse thereinto; etiamsi certo sciret
eum lapsurum.

Emanuel Sa assures us also, Item absolvi potest qui ex rationabili and justa
causa non vult amittere peccandi occasionem, modo proponat firmiter non
peccare, etiamsi aliquoties sit relapsus. Ibid.
Qui saepius quidem in ea occasion lapsus and non deseruit occasionem, jam
vero extraordinario proposito and dolor tactus accedit ad confessionem, and
possit absolvi, licet non proponat deserere occasionem. Solet dici satis esse
tunc quod possit sperari emendatio quin cogatur deserere. Dica. n. 335. d. 19.
d. 6. tr. 8. de Poenit.
That he may be absolved who for some just and reasonable cause will not quit
the occasion of sin, provided he make a firm resolution not to sin any more;
though he have already relapsed thereinto many times.

Dicastillus goes yet farther. For without taking a pretense from any just or
reasonable cause, he says generally,

Emanuel Sa speaks of a person that is resolved to continue in the occasion of
sin, not by necessity and against his will, but voluntarily, because he has
some ground which seems just unto him, and which he will not forgo, as if he
feared to receive thereby some prejudice in his goods or honor. He believes
that in this estate he may receive absolution, provided only he take up a
resolution to sin no more; that is, that he say only simply, that he will not
sin any more, as he says himself a little after; Absolvi potest qui dicit se
dolere de peccatis and velle abstinere Ibid. n. 13. p. 6.
That he may be absolved that says, that he is sorry for his sins, and
desires to abst in from them; though notwithstanding all these resolutions he
frequently fall therein, because he continues near that occasion which he will
not forsake, and that so he cannot promise himself reasonably more from this
last protestation than from the precedent, and he sees clearly by many
experiences, that his resolutions are without foundation, and have only an
appearance, by which they have often deceived him; and yet this Jesuit pretends
that he and his Confessor also may trust therein, and establish thereon the
foundation of his Salvation, without offending against the Rules of the Wisdom
and Prudence of the Spirit of God, which ought to guide an action so important.

Bauny speaks in the same manner, also more clearly and more freely of those
who are engaged in the occasions of sin, and in the wicked habits which make
them fall and relapse many times into the same sins. He inquires in his Sum, If
notwithstanding all that they have said and promised in times past to their
Confessor, they cannot forbear to break out into excess and greater liberty in
the very same faults as before, they ought to be admitted to the Sacrament, and
may be absolved? He says first, that there are some who hold, that absolution
ought to be deferred for some time: but in the process he makes this question:
He who should do the contrary, should he sin? To which he answers clearly in
two words: That is not my opinion. And at last he concludes in this manner:
That the Penitent purposing with true affection, and resorting to the feet of
the Priest to put an end unto his sins, dignus est absolutione toties quoties,
deserves to receive pardon, quantumcunque nulla notetur emendatio, though he
amend not. He is not content to say, that absolution may be given to this man,
he pretends that it may not be refused him, since he deserves it, dignus est;
and that though he relapse every day into the same crimes, in casting himself
only at the feet of the Priest, and saying to him, that he has a desire to be
reformed, he shall deserve to receive absolution every day and, more
frequently, if he desire it, toties quoties, though he relapse immediately,
without ever being amended; quantumcunque nulla notetur emendatio.

This decision is one of the most common of the Society. Dicastillus teaches it
clearly, and says, Adhuc post ullius emendationis experimentum.....absque
voluntate tollendi occasionem.....potest absolvi. Dicast. n. 354. d. 19. d. 6.
tr. 8. de Poenit.
That after it is experimented that he amends not at all, and after it is known
that the Penitent has no will to quit the occasions, Quando justae and
rationabiles causae non tollendi praedictam occasionem subsistunt, etiamsi
saepius reincidat poenitens, non cogendus est illam tollere occasionem, nec
privandus absolutione, etiamsi saepissime recidivus; quin potius hortandus ut
saepe veniat ad confessionem. Ibid. n. 576. d. 29. d. 10.
And when there is some reasonable cause why the Penitent should not separate
himself from the occasion of sin, though the Penitent have relapsed into it
very frequently, he is not to be obliged to avoid it, nor to be deprived of
absolution; though his relapses be very frequent: he ought on the contrary be
exhorted to come frequently to Confession. Tambourin who takes up this fancy
also, renders this reason capable without doubt to convince every reasonable
Spirit. Quia si potuit prima vice absolvi, poterit and secunda. Tamb. 3.10.
sect. 4. c. 3. lib 3. meth. confess.
Absolution may be given him the first time; therefore, concludes he, it may be
given him also the second time. And so infinite times, toties quoties, say
others.

If these people be well disposed to receive absolution, or deserve it, I know
not where to find any one unworthy of it, and who may be refused it, because
all those who demand it after Confession, would, or at least say to their
Confessors, that they have a will to mend.

See here without doubt a great ease for sinners. But if they break out with so
much more liberty, giving themselves up unto sin, as they see there is facility
of remedy, what must be done? May absolution be refused them, or for some time
deferred? Dicastillus says, No, Potest absolvi, etiamsi peccaverit spe
obtinendae absolutionis. Dicast. n. 254. d. 16. d. 11. tr. 8. de poenit.
and that it may be given them, though they fall into sin through hopes of
obtaining absolution.

Another Maxim altogether common in the Jesuits Schools, is, that a Confessor
is obliged to give absolution to a Penitent who demands it of him upon some
probability that he is sufficiently prepared to receive it, though the
Confessor be persuaded of the contrary. Absolvi potest qui contrariam opinioni
Confessoris opinionem sequitur, sed probabilem. Sa verb. absolutio. n. 15. page
6.
He may be absolved, says Sa, who follows a probable opinion, though contrary
to that of his Confessor.

La m^n speaks also more clearly, more absolutely, and more universally in
these terms: Si poenitens in praxi bona fide sequatur sententiam quae a
quibusdam Doctoribus tanquam probabilis and tuta defenditur, Confessarius vero
seu ordinarius, seu delegatus, eandem speculative improbabilem censcat, non
obstante sua persuasione, tenetur absolutionem confer. Layman l. 1. tr. 1.
cap. 5. sect. 2. n. 10. page 7.
If a Penitent follow in his practice with simplicity an opinion which some
Doctors hold to be probable and safe, and his Confessor, whether ordinary or
delegate, believe that this opinion considered in it self and in the Theory
has no probability, notwithstanding this persuasion he is obliged to give him
absolution.

And because he sees the confusion that it would make to put the Malefactor
into the place of the Judge, he represents himself this inconvenience which
follows upon his Principles, and makes this objection himself Confessarius est
poenitentis superior; ergo poenitens deposita propria opinione, Confessarii
praecipientis opinionem amplecti tenetur. Ibid.
The Confessor is the Penitents Superior; and by confequence the Penitent is
obliged to quit his opinion to follow what his Confessor ordains. He answers in
this sort: Respondeo non esse superiorem simpliciter, neque jus praecipiendi
habere in omnibus, sed solum in ordine ad peccara quae ad tribunal poenitentiae
def eruntur. Ibid.
I answer that he is not absorutely his Superior, and that he has not a right
to command him in all things; but only in what has reference to the sins
wherewith he charges himself at the Tribunal of Penance To speak this in more
clear terms, the Confessor ought indeed to pronounce the Sentence of Absolution
on the Penitent; but he is to take it from the mouth of the same Penitent, like
a Crier that publishes the Decree of some Court.

I see very well that the Confessor is not absolutely nor in all things
superior to the Penitent, as this Jesuit says, but only in what respects the
sins which he has confessed. But in what consists this superiority, if the
Penitent having discovered his faults, he ought not to refer it to the light of
the Confessor to judge of the quality of his sins, the convenient remedies, and
the time necessary to heal them, and of his disposition to receive absolution?
For if in every of these points, and particularly in that which presupposes
and contains them all, which is absolution, the Confessor ought to submit to
the opinion and will of the Penitent, he is no more his Superior in what
respects even those sins of which the Penitent has accused himself. It is the
Penitent who is true Superior, and the Confessor holds the place of an Inferior
on his part, since he is bound to obey him and follow his opinion against his
own. Which comes all to one with what I have already observed, that upon this
supposition that the Confessor pronounces Sentence of Absolution, taking it
from the mouth of the Penitent, as a public Crier does from the mouth of a
Chief Justice of some Court;

The opinion of Layman were probable, if it might be said, that a Judge were
obliged to refer himself to the judgment of the Malefactor, sending him back
absolved when he pleases, though according to the Laws he deserved death; or a
Physician that of his Patient, treating him as a sound man because he desires
it, and because he is not sensible of his disease, though the Physician believe
he is in danger of death. For this is in effect that which Layman pretends,
when he says, that a Confessor who is truly a Judge and a Physician, is
obliged to give absolution to a Penitent, because he demands it, though the
Confessor be persuaded that he is not in an estate to receive it: Sanchez l. 1.
in Decal. c. 9. n. 28. apud Escobar l. 2. Theol. mor. sect 2. prob. 28.
non obstante sua persuasione tenetur absolutionem confer. Sanchez obliges
him even unto this under the pain of mortal sin.

Amicus says the same thing in other terms: Ex dictis deducitur Confessarium
semper posse and debere contra propriam opinionem poenitentem absolvere, quando
ille probabili opinione ductus putat aliquid sibi licitum esse, quod
Confessarius juxta suam opinionem putat esse illicitum. Amicus tom. 3. disp.
15. sect. 2. n. 90. p. 212.
It follows, says he, from what I have said, that a Confessor may always, and
that he is even obliged to absolve the Penitent against his own proper opinion,
when the Penitent following the Maxims of a probable opinion, believes that he
may do that which the Confessor believes he may not do according to his. He
relates for it this reason a little after: Alioquin gravissimo onere
poenitentem obstringeret ad iterum sua peccata alteri confiteri. Ibid.
For otherwise he would oblige the Penitent by too great rigor to confess his
sins also to some other. And to confirm his Answer, Deducitur 2 posse medicum
aliorum opinionem secutum dare aegroto medicinam quam ipse privata sua opinione
probabiliter putat illi nocituram. Ibid.
of a Physician who according to him may follow the opinion of others, and give
to a Patient a medicine, which he believes may hurt in his particular case.

He could not have chosen a more proper example to make the excess of this
Doctrine appear. For who will believe that it is lawful for a Physician to
cause his Patient to dye, by giving him for a remedy that which he believes to
be poison, that he may render this observance to other Physicians that are not
of his opinion, or even to content the sick who desires and demands this remedy
which the Physician believes is not proper for him, and may cause his death;
like as this Jesuit pretends that a Confessor may and ought to give absolution
to his Penitent, because he demands it, and believes he has reason to demand
it, though the Confessor be persuaded that he is not in an estate to receive
it, and that he cannot give it him but to his condemnation. But if this opinion
which this Penitent has contrary to that of his Confessor be prejudicial to a
third party, wherein for example the making restitution is in debate, may the
Confessor absolve him, permitting him to act according to this opinion? Escobar
after he had made a Problem of this Question, ranks himself on their side who
say, that the Confessor is obliged to absolve his Penitent, and judges even
that the contrary opinion is hardly at all probable.

Tambourin a faithful Scholar of the great Masters of the School of the
Society, makes use also of the Example of a Physician and a Judge; but in a
different manner, and quite opposite to Amicus, and more proper to evidence the
excess of their Doctrine. Potest, imo debet Confessarius sequi opinionem
probabilem poenitentis contra propriam sententiam sive probabilem, five
probabiliorem..... Et quamvis in rebus humanis five judex, five medicus deberet
opinionem probabiliorem sequi; tamen Confessario..... satis erit si poenitens
recte ad praedictam justificationem dispositus appareat, id quod satis habetur
sequendo opinionem probabilem. Tambour. n. 1. sect. 1. c. 9. l. 3. meth.
confess. Debet id sub mortali. n. 2. Obligatur sub mortali conformare se
opinioni probabili. Ibid.
The Confessor, says he, may and ought to follow the probable opinion of his
Penitent, against his own judgment, although it be more probable.... And though
in the world a Judge and a Physician be obliged to follow the more probable
opinion, it is not so with a Confessor; because it is sufficient for him that
his Penitent have the dispositions which are for receiving grace, which he may
have following a probable opinion; and by consequent a Confessor is obliged to
give him absolution by conforming himself to his opinion on pain of mortal sin.
After this the Confessor will take heed not to be wanting therein, and the
Penitent needs fear nothing.

But to oblige him under so great a pain, of what sort ought the Penitents
probable opinion to be? See the Rule this Jesuit prescribes him: Opinio debet
esse probabilis in se five tamen per rations in trinsecas, five per
autoritatem extrinsecam autorum-si ergo opinio poenitentis nullam ex his
probabilitatem habeat, sed solum ipsi poenitenti appareat probabilis. diligens
sit Confessarius in examine talis sententiae, an forte sit probabilis faltem
extrinsece propter autoritatem alicujus autoris, and si invenerit esse talem,
illi se conformet. number. 4.
That the Confessor may be obliged to follow it, it must be probable, either
because of the reasons on which it is built, or because of the authority of
those who follow it. If the opinion of the Penitent have none of these
probabilities, but only seem probable to the Penitent, the Confessor shall take
heed that he neither do nor resolve any thing rashly, that be examine it
diligently, to see if he can find any Author who has approved it, and if he
find any, and give him speedy absolution. He cannot herein use more precaution,
so fearful the Jesuit is, lest his Penitent should be sent back without
absolution.

Amicus proposes also a difficulty about Absolution. Si dubitas an Confessarius
qui evidentiam habet quod poenitens peccatum commiserit, illudque non sit
confessus, debeat illum de tali peccato monere. Amicus tom. 8. disp. 13. sect.
13. n. 331. p. 235.

Caterum in casu proposito posset Confessarius judicare quod poenitenscommissum
peccatum tacuerit justa aliqua ex causa, ac proinde tuta conscientia poterit
illum absolvere. Ibid.


It is doubted whether a Confessor who knows evidently that his own Penitent
has committed a sin which he has not confessed, ought to advertise him of
this sin? He answers and concludes, That in this adventure the Confessor may
judge that the Penitent h^th some just reason to conceal his sin, and for this
he may absolve him with a safe consciencs.

Filliutius proposes the same case: Si constet Confessori poenitentem oblivisci
alicujus peccati, per se loquendo, tenetur interrogare ob integritatem ipsius
judicii. Filliut. tom. 1. qq. mor. tract. 7. cap. 12. number. 360. page 210.
If the Confessor, says he, be entirely assured that his Penitent has
forgotten some sin, he is obliged speaking generally to examine him thereof to
make his judgment entire and perfect. He says not that this is for the benefit
and Salvation of the Penitent, that he might make him confess his crime, and
make him capable to receive pardon, but because of the integrity of the
judgment, that it may have all its parts; that is to say, that he may have an
examination and answer of the sinner upon which judgment may be made; because
all judgment ought to be composed of the hearing of the guilty and sentence of
the Judge, who cannot pronounce sentence before examination. He requires not
then that he should examine, but to observe the forms of judgment, what answer
soever the sinner make: Quod si interrogatus neget, regulariter tenetur illi
credere. Ibid.
so that if he deny his fault, and will damn himself he declares that the
Confessor is bound to absolve him, and make show to believe him: That if he
cannot absolutely believe him, Quod si evidens illi sit poenitentem mentiri, si
tantum id sciat via secreta, post prudentem interrogationem tenetur judicare
secundum acta and probata in illo soro. Ibid.
because he is assured that he lies; he maintains that notwithstanding this
assurance, if he knows the sin of the Penitent only by some secret way, he is
obliged, having examined him prudently, to judge according to what is said and
proved in this inward Justice of Confession. That is to say, that he is obliged
to absolve him, though he see that in absolving him, he accumulates to the
highest his fault and his lie by a Sacrilege. Strange absolution, which does
more effectually condemn! Cruel and dreadful charity, which casts a Soul into
Hell for fear of offending against carnal prudence and the interessed
complacency of wicked Confessors! The same proposes another case. He supposes
an Usurer to have many times promised his Confessor to make restitution, and
has always deceived him. He falls sick, and seeing himself in danger of death,
he makes again the same promises, but without setting upon the duty of
restitution, though he have means, and may do it at that very same hour. He
asks what ought the Confessor do in this extremity? And he answers, Si esset in
articulo mortis, etsi praestat non absolvere nisi restituat cum possit, tamen
ad id non tenetur Confessarius, modo sit illi probabile haeredes id facturos.
Filliut. t. 2. qq. mor. tr. 34. cap. 8. number. 155. page 549.
That the man being at the point of death, though it were better not to absolve
him if he do not first make restitution according to his ability: yet the
Confessor is not obliged hereunto, provided that he probably believes that his
heirs will do it. It is by this Maxim then men are absolved daily, and all
sorts of persons deceived at the point of death and during life in such manner
as astonishes and offends all honest persons. before death, when he might: so
the restitution made by them would be unprofitable for him, if he had no will
to do it himself, when he might without difficulty. And the Confessor that
relyeth on what the Heirs will do, though it be uncertain whether they will do
it or not, seeing he contents himself with a simple probability; modo sit illi
probabile haeredes id facturos, and distrusts not the will of the dying man,
though it be clear and visible, testifies evidently that he cares no more for
the conscience and the Salvation of the sinner, than for the holiness of the
Sacrament, and that he subjects and abandons both to the complacence of men,
and the interests which engaged him thereunto.

Sanchez having put the question, whether absolution ought to be given to
persons who by their negligence and fault knew not the Mysteries and things
necessary to Salvation, first relates the opinion of Azor in these terms: Quod
si semel and it erum admoniti sunt, and discere potuere, ac proinde culpa non
liberentur, ait absolutionem adhuc der egandam non esse, dummodo praeteritae
negligentiae eos poeniteat, and firmiter proponunt fore ut discant. Sanchez
oper. mor. l. 2. c. 3. n. 21. page 92.
When they have been advertised once or twice, and they have been able to learn
that which they know not, and by consequent cannot be exempt from fault, he
holds that absolution cannot be denied them nevertheless, provided they repent
of their past negligence, and take a firm resolution to cause themselves to be
therein instructed. But he after gives his advice, and concludes yet more
favorably and more generally, saying: Et quidem in praxi existimo nunquam aut
rarissime denegandam absolutionem ob doctrinae Christianae ignorantiam. Ibid.
I believe that in the practice we may seldom or never deny absolution because
of ignorance of the Doctrine of Christianity. This would also be without all
reason and against all manner of Justice, if the Confessor should be so rash as
to refuse absolution, since that, Tambourin says, after Azor and Vasquez, Vel
ex rudibus -- and supponuntur inculpabiliter non advertere ad tale onus. Tamb.
n. 3. sect. 1. cap. 5. lib. 3. meth. confess.
If the Penitent be a blockish person, not knowing that he was hereunto
obliged, his ignorance is without fault.

And to make it appear that the answer of these Fathers is universal, and that
they except no Mysteries how necessary soever they may be unto Salvation,
Instar omnium sit Sa, verbo, fides, qui sic habet necesse esse explicit
credere fidei mysteria quae public in Ecclesia celebrantur, sentiunt multi cum
S. Thoma, alii excusari multos ignorantia. number. 4.
Tambourin testifies unto us, that Sa extends it unto the Mysteries that are
publicly exercised in the Church, and which St. Thomas has assured us ought
to be believed explicitly. And Sanchez proposes unto us the case of a man who
at the point of death is entirely ignorant of the things which appertain to
Religion and Faith; and noting out to a Confessor what he ought to do, and how
he ought to carry himself toward him, he says, Satis est si ei proponantur a
Confessario ea raysteria quae tenetur explicit credere necessitate medii seu
finis, ut sunt mysteria Trinitatis and Incarnationis, ut vel sic actum ea
explicit credendi eliciat. Ibid. number. 23. page 93.
That it is enough that the Confessor propose unto him the things which he is
to believe formally, as means absolutely necessary to Salvation, such as are
the Mysteries of the Trinity, and that of the Incarnation, to the end that they
may believe them actually, at the least in this manner. That is to say, that it
is sufficient for him to make him say that he believes, In eo enim statu non
ita volet aeger, ut procurando eum addiscere, desatigandus sit. Ibid.
Because the sick is not in an estate to endure to be put to more trouble in
endeavoring to instruct him. Sanchez speaks of a man that is at the point of
death; and when he says, that it is to no end to importune and put him to
trouble in instructing him in what is necessary to his Salvation, he would not
say, that we were to fear to increase his sickness, or to shorten his life,
because that is desperate and in extremity; but only to disquiet him, and that
we ought to let him dye pleasantly, and fall more pleasantly into Hell,
preferring in such manner his convenience and ease to the Salvation of his
Soul, and choosing rather to suffer it to be exposed to eternal pains, than to
give him a slight trouble of a quarter of an hour. Such is the prudence and
charity of these Divines.

ARTICLE IV. Of Satisfaction. That the Divinity of the Jesuits destroys this
part of Penance.
IF the Jesuits be very indulgent to the pride of men, as we have already seen,
in doing all they can to spare them in the shame and confusion they have i^
discovering their sins by Confession,

Praecipitur imponenda diversa poenitentia progravitate majori aut minori intra
eandem speciem. number. 196.
Dicastillus advances this Proposition as a general Principle; that it is not
necessary that Penance should be proportioned to the crime, and that it may be
greater or less according to the qualities of the sins. If you oppose to him
the Councils and the Fathers, Recte solvit hanc objectionem Vasquez respondens
olim quidem ita fuisse in usu..... fervente charitate..... Ex quibus satis
constat non necessitate Sacramenti, sed secutos fervorem illorum temporum,
ejusmodi poenitentias assignare illorum Canonum and poenitentiarum autores.
Dicast. n. 197. d. 3. d. 9. tr. 8. de poenit.
He will affirm after Vasquez, that they would have a proportion held therein,
and that it was the use of their times; because Christian charity then ruled
the hearts of the faithful, they assigned different penalties according to the
different qualities of crimes, following the fervor and piety of those
primitive times. If you reason against him, that the Confessor having the
quality of a Judge, ought to proceed by the ways of Justice, which puts some
kind of equality betwixt the fault and the punishment; Et quidem in humanis
judiciis, quamvis nequeat esse justa and delicto proportionata sententia qua
reus damnetur ad aliquam poenam, nisi cognoscatur culpa: tamen sententia
absolutionis and remissionis rei se praesentantis and deferenti^ and petentis
veniam, esse potest remittendo quicquid illud fuerit, in quo non est servanda
proportio qualis esse debet inter culpam and poenam, ut judicium sit verum and
justum. Dicast. n. 747. d. 9. d. 9. tr. 8. de poenit.
He will agree with you that it is so in humane Tribunals; but he will pretend
that it is not the same thing in the judgment which the Priest exercises in the
Tribunal of Penance, which without this proportion cease not to be just and
true.

It is not then of ignorance that this Jesuit opposes so openly the Oracles of
the Holy Ghost, Facite ergo fructus dignos poenitentiae. Mat. 3. Luc. 3.
Bring forth then fruit worthy of repentance; and a Jesuit in these last times
which we may well call the dregs of all Ages, comes to tell us, that we need
not bring forth fruit worthy of repentance. S. Paul says, Judaeis and Gentibus
annuntiabam, ut poenitentiam agerent and converterentur ad Deum, digna
poenitentiae opera facientes. Act. 26.
That he preached to Jews and Gentiles that they should turn unto God, and
bring forth fruit worthy of repentance; and a Jesuit tells us at this day, that
this is not necessary. The Council of Trent ordain, Pro qualitate criminum
convenientes satisfactiones. Trid. c. 8. sess. 14. Condignant pro modo culpae
poenitentiam. c. 8. sess. 24.
That Confessors should impose penances agreeable and according to the quality
of their crimes; and a Jesuit assures us, that this is not the season; that
this practice had been good in the primitive times of the Church. After this
excess there is no bar can stop the spirit of a Jesuit any longer, when he
takes in hand to flatter sinners, Scripture it self and the Church assembled
have not force enough for this, and notwithstanding all their Ordinances, a
Penance, be it what it will, always suffices to obtain pardon for the greatest
crimes.

Amicus demands, An qui pro poenitentia debet duas aut tres Missas audire,
satisfaciat si omnes in diversis altaribus eodem tempore simul audiat?
Whether he on whom it has been imposed for penance, to hear two or three
Masses, may satisfy his obligation by hearing them all at once upon different
Altars. He answers with Sanchez, that this is lawful, and that this opinion is
probable; Affirmat Sanchez in Summa l. 1. c. 14. in fine. Quae sententia
probabilis est, quia praeceptum Confessoris non est nisi de duabus aut tribus
Missis audiendis. Amicus t. 8. disp. 16. dub. 14. n. 112. p. 272.
Because the Confessor has not commanded any thing but to hear two or three
Masses. He never troubles himself about the intention of the Confessor, which
in this case he cannot reasonably doubt of; he neither obliges the Penitent to
inform himself of it; perhaps out of discretion and for the honor of the
Confessor, for fear that learning it of his own mouth, and being not disposed
to obey him, since he can without that discharge himself of his Penance,
according to the probable opinion of Amicus and Sanchez, he might not offend
yet more by a manifest disobedience; he chooses rather that the Penitent should
dissemble and not acknowledge to understand the intention of his Confessor,
that he might without scandal clude his Commandment.

The same Jesuit in the same place says, that Penance given for satisfaction
of sins may be discharged, by an action which is in it self a mortal sin Dico
1. actussatisfactionis Sacramentalis ex pravo fine etiam peccati mortalis
elicitus, valet ad implendum praeceptum a Confessario injunctum de
satisfaciendo pro peccatis confessis, modo per talem actum impleatur substantia
ipsa satisfactionis. Ibid. n. 37. p. 262.
The work of Sacramental Penance, says he, when it is done with a wicked
intent and even to commit a mortal sin, ceases not to be good enough to
discharge the command of a Confessor about satisfaction for sins confessed,
provided the substance and body of it be performed. Dicastilius is of the same
judgment, being he says that Penance enjoined may not only be performed by
accomplishing it in an estate of mortal sin, Verum puto non esse peccatum
mortale -- imo absolute nullum peccatum existimo esse. Dicast. n. 150. d. 10.
d. 14. tr. 8. de poenit. Tandem concedunt communiter Doctores per poenitentiam
in peccato mortali impletam, adhuc ex fine mortali satisfieri praecepto
Confessarii. Efficitur enim opus quoad substantiam quod Confessarius praecipit,
and eo ipso est Sacramentalis pars. Ibid. n. 154.
without committing the least sin, even Venial; but also for an end which is
Criminal; which is to say, that it may be satisfied by a sin and by a
Sacrilege. It would be a strange discourse amongst men if it should be said
that satisfaction may be done to a man for injuries done him, by acting new
ones against him, and that old debts might be paid by running farther in debt
to the same person. But this which seems extravagant toward men, appears
reasonable to the Jesuits toward God; and they believe that he will take that
for good money, which passes for false and ridiculous in the world.

Bauny after he had concluded according to many Doctors, that he who refused at
the Sacrament to accept a Penance, at least a slight one, imposed on him for
his faults, was not in an estate to be absolved; after he had represented the
reasons of these Doctors, of whom there are some who hold this Doctrine so
assured, that they say, that it is a point of Faith that a person in this
estate is incapable of Absolution; he says, to sweeten this apparent rigor,
that he who is of a contrary opinion, may yet give it him; though the other
opinion were a point of Faith. In effect he obliges us not to follow it, and it
being sufficient that the other according to him is probable, and that some
Doctor holds it; yea, though no body has yet proposed it, a Learned and Pious
Confessor, as all those of the Society are, may render it probable enough by
holding and practicing it.

It is true that after all this Father Bauny declares, that nevertheless he
dares not counsel the practice of it. since all may, say they, delay to
satisfy for their sins till another life, they are not obliged to prevent that
time, as they should be if to avoid sin they ought to accept that which the
Confessor appoints them for satisfaction unto one part of their faults. But if
of complaisance and not to dispute against their Confessor, they will submit
themselves freely to that which he ordains, they may afterward do nothing at
all, according to that which Tambourin says; Poenitentia Sacramentalis si
levis sit, licet pro peccatis gravibus imposita, non obligat ex probabili
opinione. Tamb. n. 1. Sect. 5. c. 7. l. 3. 1. p. decalogi.
That it is probable that a slight Penance, for great sins, obliges not the
Penitent at all to accomplish it. That is to say, that a Penitent of the
Jesuits may either openly reject all that his Confessor says to him, and
imposes on him by way of remedy and satisfaction for his sins, or he may make
himself sport with it in private, neglecting to do it after he has promised it.

Escobar is of the same opinion, though he temper it a little. He speaks of a
Penitent that refuses the Penance which the Confessor would give him, and he
makes this question in favor of the Penitent: Quid si affirmet se velle
Purgarorii poenas subire?
What shall he do if he say he will submit to the pains of Purgatory? Levem
adhuc poenitentiam imponat ad Sacramenti integritatem. Escobar tract. 7. exam.
4 n. 188. p. 8.4.
That he should not forbear to impose some slight Penance to salve the
integrity of the Sacrament. That is to say, to keep the outward Form and
Ceremony; so that he make thereto some satisfaction though ineffectual, and
which may be rejected by the Penitent; and nevertheless he wills that care be
taken to observe this rule, above all when it is perceived that the Penitent is
not in humor to do Penance. Praecipue cum agnoscat gravem non acceptaturum; Si
Confessarius ex circumstantiis confessionis advertat poenitentem saepe alioquin
acceptatam poenitentiam gravem non implevisse, poffe aliquando vel levem satis,
vel minus gravem quam alioquin oporteret, injungere Dicastil. n. 17. d. 2. d.
14. tract. 8. de poenitent.
Or when the Confessor knows that he has not done what was appointed him and
which he has accepted of, because it seemed unto him too painful.

Tambourin is not so rigorous; he would not have any at all imposed on him, how
slight soever it may be; on the contrary he gives this advice to the Confessor:
Opinio quae docet poenitentem non teneri acceptare poenitentiam, etiam post
Tridentinum videtur probabilis; quia non videtur Tridentinum damnare voluisse
opinionem quam doctissimi viri se quebantur, citati a Patre Antonio Sanctarel.
Ex qua opinione sequitur quod si esset poenitens aliquis qui nollet acceptare,
paratus in Purgatorio solvere, non esset hoc praecise censendus indispositus,
nec propter hoc solum esset sine absolutione dimittendus, quia sequitur
opinionem quam tanti viri sequuntur. Tambour. n. 7. Sect. 1. c. 2. l. 4. meth.
confess.
That he should send away without Absolution him who refuses the Penance which
is appointed him, desiring to submit himself to the pains of Purgatory; for
being it was the opinion of so great men, it is not^credible, says he, that
the Council of Trent did intend to condemn an opinion fullewed by so great
Personages reported by St. Anthony Sanctarel. It is not probable, says this
Jesuit, that the Council of Trent would condemn so great Authors; but these
great Authors find probability enough in their Divinity to condemn the Council
of Trent,

So that the Confessor instead of removing from this hardened and insensible
man, his disobedience and presumption which he has when he should be in the
greatest Humiliation and Obedience, shall be obliged on the contrary to cherish
and confirm him in this pride and impenitence.

If this imagination of this Jesuit be reasonable, we must say that the Saints
who governed the Church heretofore, understood nothing in the Administration of
the Sacrament of Penance, since by a reason quite contrary to his, they
diminished not the Penance and satisfaction of Penitents, till they found them
extraordinarily touched with the sense of their sins, and ready to do all that
they ordained for their expiation, and even when they were already engaged and
advanced in the exercises of Penance, and resolved to go on to their uttermost
extent.

The rule of these Saints was to diminish sometimes the rigor of Penance on
them who believed that they could not be too rigorous toward them: and the
rule of these Jesuits is on the contrary, to give some slight Penance to those
who refuse to receive one that comes any thing near to what they deserve for
their crimes.

This is indeed to favor the impenitence and obstinacy of sinners, since
according to Dicastillus, because of the evil disposition wherein they are
found, the Confessor is obliged to require of them a very slight satisfaction,
Expedit quando gravitas peccatorum est magna, leviorem adhuc poenitentiam
imponere quam facultas alias poenitentium exigeret, ut ad frequentandam
confessionem alliciantur, vel ab ea frequentanda non deterreantur, id totum
cedit in utilitatem poenitentium, quibus long utilius est frequentius
confiteri, quam alia opera poenalia exercere; imo moderanda est multum
poenitentia, quando prudenter timetur fore ut ejus difficultate deterriti, vel
prorsus omittant, vel deserant inceptam. Dicast. n. 49. d. 3. d. 14. tract. 8.
de Poenit.
that it is even expedient for the more enormous crimes to impose a Penance
much below what they might do according to their estate and condition, that by
this sweetness and benignity they might more frequently attend the Sacrament of
Penance, or at the least not withdraw themselves from it, and all this for
their benefit: because it is incomparably more profitable for them to confess
frequently, than to accemplish painful and laborious satisfactions. Ego
experimento didici plernmque lenitate conciliari animos poenitentium, and
allici ad frequentiam confessionis, in qua frequentanda efficacius inveni
remedium pro poenitentibus recidivis, quam onerando illos poenitentiis quas
magna ex part non implent. At paulatim repetita Sacramenti gratia, tandem
emergunt unde alias nunquam videbantur emersuri. Ibid. n. 53.
As for me, says this Jesuit, I have found by experience that a sweet
treatment causes the Tribunals to be frequented, and this multiplication of
Confessions is more profitable for sinners, than burdensome satisfactions which
the Penitents do not execute for the most part. For by little and little by the
multiplied force of the grace of the Sacrament of Confession, they retire from
sin, wherein without this they would have always continued.

This way without doubt is very sweet, but it is also very dangerous, in
flattering sinners it easily deceives them, and by inducing them to confess
frequently, it exposes them evidently to commit as many Sacriledges as they
make Confessions, with a contempt of Penance which they therein betray, and in
the disposition and resolution which they take not to make any satisfaction
unto God, or not to accept any but very slight for the greatest crimes which
they have committed.

This shows that it is not without reason and design, that the Jesuits have
changed the name of the Sacrament of Penance into that of Confession, being
after they have destroyed inward Penitence, which is a sincere and supernatural
sorrow for sin, as I have elsewhere made apparent, they also entirely abolish
exterior penance, which is satisfaction as they declare here, and reduce all
the Sacrament so far as concerns the Penitent, to confession and declaration of
sins only.

They declare also with sufficient evidence, wherefore they labor with so
great care to sweeten and multiply Confessions, in saying, that their Tribunals
are more frequented, that is to say, that their Authority and Empire which they
assume over consciences, establishes and extends it self by this sweet way
contrary to the Laws of the Church and of Repentance, and opens them an easy
way to usurp upon the Jurisdiction of Bishops, without speaking of other
advantages and profits may thereby arise unto them.

Escobar is so little inclined to condemn the wicked disposition of an
impenitent sinner, that on the contrary he approves and justifies it, in
demanding, Si irrationabilite gravis poenitentia fuit? Non tenetur implere,
quia nec Confessarius ligare eum potuit, nec poenitens intendit sese illigari.
Ibid. n. 191.
What is to be done if the penance be too great and unreasonable? For he
answers, That the Penitent is not obliged to accomplish it, because the
Confessor could not oblige him thereto; and it was not the intent of the
Penitent neither to oblige himself in that sort.

He pretends that the sinner may set bounds to the power of a Confessor as he
pleases, and to make void his opinions,

They are not content to give unto Penitents also the liberty to do what they
will in the Sacrament of Penance, and to receive for just, or reject for
unjust, as they please, the judgment of the Confessor, and the penance which he
imposes; but they will also that even after they have accepted and have
acknowledged that it is just and necessary, it is lawful for him not to perform
it, and to transfer it on to others. For Escobar puts the question, An possit
per alium impleri poenitentia? Posse asserit Suarius, modo justa adsit causa.
Escobar tr. 7. ex. 4. n. 182. p. 828.
Whether may my penance be accomplished by another? And he answers, That this
is the opinion of Suarez, provided there be some just reason for it. Sic etiam
Missas and elcemosynas praescribere consultum suerit divitibus alioquin nimis
delicatis qui non habent animum subeundi alias corporis afflictationes. Dicast.
n 78. d. 5. d. 14 tr. 8. de poenit.
For these pers^ns are very delicate, says Dicastillus, and cannot resolve to
afflict their bodies by the austerities of a severe penance: wherefore it is to
good purpose to ordain unto them alms and Masses for a full satisfaction.

And for a yet greater discharge of the Penitent, they will that the Confessor
give Penance to him by way of counsel, without absolutely obliging the Penitent
to accomplish it. Est^e imponenda poenitentia sub obligatione? Sufficienter
esse Sacramentalem, si per modum consilii imponatur, docet Suarius. Ibid. Qui
addit opus alioqui praeceptum posse aliquando in poenitentiam injungi. Ibid.
Ought penance, says Escobar, be imposed with an obligation to accomplish it?
He answers, That Suarez holds that penance is always Sacramental, though it be
imposed by way of counsel. And that the same Author prepose also another
accommodation which is very casie, and which no man can refuse, to wit, to give
for penance something formerly commanded; so that penance for sins may be
accomplished by doing that which we should have done however, though we had not
sinned, and which the most innocent are obliged unto.

Finally, the last sweetning of penance is to advertise the Penitent only to do
some satisfaction for his sins, without determining any thing in particular,
and leaving him to his choice to do what he will. An possit Confessarius
poenitentiam omnino libere faciendam arbitrio poenitentis imponere? Ex Suarii
sententia affirmat non semper requiri ut aliquod opus in poenitentiam
imponatur, praesertim spiritualibus personis; sed sufficere si dicat: Impono
tibi pro poenitentia quicquid hodie vel hac hebdomada boni feceris, vel mali
passus fueris.
Is it lawful for a Confessor, says Escobar, to leave it wholly to the liberty
of the Penitent to do what penance he pleases? He answers with Suarez, That it
is not always necessary to impose upon him any particular work, and principally
to spiritual persons; but it is sufficient to say I impose on you for penance
all that which you shall do of good or suffer of bad this day or this week.

It is hard not to be a Penitent in this manner, and not to do penance for the
greatest sins, unless we will renounce the common life of Christians, and
resolve to trample under feet all the Commands of God and the Church, so as to
do no good in a whole day or week. And though it should happen that we could do
no good, yet could we not be exempted from receiving some displeasure and
suffering some evil. So that following this Method, it is impossible for those
very men who would do no penance, to be impenitent.

Filliutius contains in one single question all those of his Fraternity we now
related, and also those which may be made in this matter, and he resolves them
in two words in favor of impenitent sinners. His question is concerning the
precept of Satisfaction: Quaero de praecepto satisfaciendi, an tale praeceptum
detur.
Whether it be true that there is any such precept? And the better to make the
difficulty to be understood, Pro responsione notandum, quaeri obligationem ex
vi praecepti naturalis, and non ex vi positivi a Confessario imporiti in
Sacramento poenitentiae. De hoc enim cum de satisfactione. Filliut. t. 1. mor.
qq. tr. 6. cap. 9. n. 213. page 159.
It must be observed that this is a question which rises upon an obligation
that comes from a natural and not a positive precept, as that which the
Confessor imposes in the Sacrament of Penance; for of that we shall speak when
we treat of Satisfaction.

He declares that he intends not to speak of the command which a Confessor may
give his Penitent in imposing penance. For neither he nor his Brethren make any
great account of that, as we but now made appear: but he inquires only whether
there be any natural command or obligation to satisfy God; that is to say,
which arises from the duty of a reasonable creature that has offended God, and
despised his Commandments, and that respect and love which he owes him.

After this he answers clearly and without any fear, that Dico 1. non videri
datum esse tale praeceptum de satisfaciendo in hac vita pro poena temporali;
quia tale praeceptum nec colligitur ratione necessaria, nec autoritate. Ibid.
in his judgment there is no such precept which obliges to satisfy for
temporal pain in this life; his reason is, because there is neither reason nor
convincing authority from whence this precept may be collected.

But if it be objected unto him, that God remitting sin and eternal punishment,
will at the least that some temporal satisfaction be made to his justice. He
answers, that Cum Deus puniat in Purgatorio peccata quandiu in hac vita non est
satisfactum, poterit peccator sine injustitia differ satisfactionem in
alteram vitam. Ibid.
God punishing sins in Purgatory, when satisfaction is not made in this life,
the sinner may without injustice refer satisfaction unto the other life.

And if you press him farther by the obligation that is on a sinner toward
God, and by the acknowledgments he owes him for pardoning his sins, or by the
law of Charity wherein he is bound to God and to himself; Lex charitatis
propriae vel divinae non violatur; quia licet differat in alteram vitam, non
propterea perdit beatitudinem, nec divinum amorem; and licet aliquantulum
retardet, tamen est damnum reparabile. Ibid.
this law of Charity which is due to our selves or God, is not violated herein:
for though the sinner defer satisfaction until the next life, he loses not by
this, neither bliss nor the love of God; and though he retard the enjoyment
thereof, yet the loss made by this delay may be repaired.

So that none are obliged to do Penance in this world, and Jesus Christ ought
not to threaten them who do it not with a death like unto theirs, who were
overwhelmed and pressed to death by the fall of a Tower, because it is lawful
to defer it till after death; and so they who will not do it here being not
guilty, they have no cause to fear any thing because of this from God who does
not punish the innocent.

I stay not here to examine the reasons of this Jesuit, that I may not be too
tedious. I say only that the principle which he establishes that, Dico 1. non
videri datum esse tale praeceptum de satisfaciendo in hac vita pro poena
temporali.
according to his judgment there is no natural precept which obliges us in this
life to make satisfaction for temporal pains, without doubt takes away all
footing for all doubts and difficulties which might arise on this subject; but
withal it entirely abolisheth satisfaction and Penance by taking away the
obligation to do it in this life; which is that I have affirmed to be amongst
those points of the Jesuits Divinity which I have undertaken to discover.

I add that by destroying Penance, he ruins at the same time the whole Gospel
which began by Preaching Penance, and contains in effect no other thing, since
the whole life of a Christian is nothing else but a continual Penance,
according to the Council of Trent, and all the Fathers.

So we see that all the places of the Scripture and of the Fathers which speak
of Penance are addressed to the living; Emandemus in melius quae ignoranter
peccavimus, ne subito praeoccupati die mortis quaeramus spatium poenitentiae,
and invenire non possimus. Let us amend and correct those things in which we
have ignorantly offended, lest being suddenly surprised by the day of death, we
seek space for Penance and cannot find it, says the Church at the entrance of
Lent, which is the time which it proposes to all men, sinners and innocent,
perfect and unperfect, great and small to do Penance in this life; and for it
to be remittable to the other world, is to abolish it entirely, and ruin
together with it the whole Gospel and all life of Christianity.

ARTICLE V. Rules of Conduct for a Confessor according to the Jesuits.
THE principal Rules of a Confessor toward a Penitent according to them are;
1. To examine him, if it be needful. 2. To give him necessary advices. 3. To
sound as much as they can his inward disposition, and to see if he be grieved
for his sin. 4. To ordain wholesome Penance for him. 5. To give him Absolution
if he be in an estate to receive it.

From all the maxims of the Jesuits Divinity which we have but now related
concerning the Sacrament of Penance and all the parts of it, it is easy to
judge in what manner they would have a Confessor demean himself in the
Administration of this Sacrament, and what Rules they ought to observe for
discharging every of these Duties.

I. POINT. Rules to examine Penitents according to the Jesuits.
THOSE that need to be examined are, 1. Children. 2. Ignorant and Blockish
People. 3. Great Sinners.

What is meet to be said to those who in their youth have committed many
actions of a vicious nature, and which nevertheless they believe not to be
such? That they are not obliged to speak one word of them when they understand
and know their nature and conditions, and much less repeat their past
Confessions. Bauny in his sum, Chap. 4. P. 150.


2. That if any by ignorance or simplicity have not confessed himself of his
faults but only in gross without determining any one in particular, it is not
needful to draw out of his mouth the repetition of those faults, if it cannot
be done conveniently, because we are pressed by Penitents which give not
leisure for it. Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 4. page 150.

Licet ignorantia sit culpabilis mortaliter non est necessitas repetendi
confessionem, ac proinde valida est. Filliutius tom. 1. mor. qq. tract. 7. cap.
6 number. 132. page 185. Henriq. Fagund. addunt rusticos omnes, qui confitentur
aliquando sine explicatione numeri and diligentia, cogendos non esse repetere
confessiones factas antea cum indoctis Confessariis. Dicastillus tract. 8. de
poenit. d. 9. d. 2. number. 57. Poenitens qui priorem confessionem fecit informem,
non tenetur repetere...... certissimum and absque controversia est ipsum
consequi per posteriorem absolutionem gratiam. Idem tractat. 2. de bapt. d. 1.
d. 8. n. 203.


If a Peasant or a grossly Ignorant Person knowing not how to confess himself,
say that he has never accused himself but in gross without noting out any sins
in particular; the Jesuits will not that he should be made to repeat his
Confessions, and accuse himself anew by unfolding his sins by parcels,
especially when they have other persons to confess, who give them not leisure,
though the ignorance which hinders them from knowing and confessing their sins
be criminal, and renders them guilty of mortal sin, or the ignorance of the
Confessor himself be the cause. Likewise they teach generally, that when the
Penitent has made an imperfect Confession, he is not obliged to repeat it, and
he fails not for all that to receive the Grace of the Sacrament by virtue of
the following Absolution and Confession.

3. Levius and minus exact interrogandus est circa singula qui plura habet
peccata quam qui pauciora; quia cum solum requiratur diligentia and examen
humanum; hec autem sit illud quod non generat ex se faslidium and taedium hujus
Sacramenti, consequens est ut minus distincta notitia requiratur ab eo qui vel
propter peccatorum multitudinem, vel aliam ob causam difficilius posset exactam
notitiam reddere. Tambur. lib. 3. method. confess. cap. 9. sect. 5. number. 11.

Commisi furtum mortale toties, non exprimendo furti quantitatem. Escobar in
prooem. ex. 2. number. 39. page 12. etc. 15.

It is not needful in Confession to tell the said circumstance of the quantity
of the theft: it suffices in rigor to cause the Confessor to understand that
we have sinned mortally in the matter of theft, by taking from another such sum
as constitutes that sin. Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 39. page 616. It is not
needful for the validity of the Sacrament that the Penitent in his Confession
tell the number of vicious desires, dishonest thoughts and affections which he
has had or reiterated during the time he has been addicted to them. Sufficit
dicere toto mense v. c. amavi Mariam, etiamsi possit numerus exprimi. Bauny in
his Sum, Chap. 4. page 667.

Si utrique parti probabiliter adhaeret, non tenetur confiteri. Potest enim
sequi probabilem partem quam maluerit. Dicast. tr. 8. de poenit. d. 9. d. 7.
number. 277. Si quis probabiliter putet se jam confessum fuisse, non tenetur
confieri, etiamsi certo sciat se mortaliter peccasse. Ibid. number. 292. Qui habet
rationts probabiles quod non peccaverit mortaliter, and similes, imo
probabiliores rations quod peccaverit, non tenetur ad illud confitendum.
Tambur. lib. 2. method. confess. cap 1. sect. 3. number. 9. Qui probabiliter, imo
certo scit se mortaliter deliquisse, habet tamen rations probabiles, imo and
probabiliores se illud non esse confessum...... nec tenetur ad illud
confitendum. Ibid. number. 10. Asserendum non esse obligationem praedictam, sed
posse omnia peccata simul dicere non explicando, an antea suerit illa
confessus...... Si Confessarius id interroget quando nulla est obligatio ex
part poenitentis, non tenetur respondere Confessario interroganti; sed dicere,
ego hoc peccatum confiteor, quidquid sit an confessus fuerim, aliud non teneor
explicare. Dicast. tract 8. de poenit. d. 9. d. 2. number. 146.

Qui generaliter confitetur, potest sine alia explicatione admiscere nova cum
antiquis, etiamsi id de industria ad tegendum tempus quo peccatum commisit, ne
Confessarlo id innotescat, faciat, quia utitur jure suo. Tamb. lib. 2. meth.
confess. cap. 1. tract. sect. 1. number. 2. Asserendum est p^sse omittere
quaecunque velit. Dicast. tract. 8. de poenit. d. 9. d. 2. number. 162. Non
tenemur atque adeo possumus omittere aliqua peceata etiam mortalia, sed alias
rite manifestata, est communis and certa Theologorum opinio...... Quod si
poenitens dixerit se velle generaliter confiteri, and deinde non omnia
proponat, respondeo nec tunc mentiri...... Imo etiamsi mentiretur, peccaret
solum venialiter. Tambur. lib. 2. meth. confess. cap. 1. sect. 2. number. 7.


When a great sinner confesses himself, they hold that he needs not give
himself the trouble to inform of all the particularities of his life and
crimes, and that the more he is laden with sins, he is the more slightly and
less exactly to be examined. And behold the reason: The examination must be
such as may not beget a disgust of the Sacrament. Whence it follows that we
must exact a less perfect knowledge of him, who for the multitude of his sins
or some other cause can difficultly render an exact account: That if he be a
Thief, it is sufficient for him to say, I have sinned mortally in the matter of
theft, without expressing any farther the sum which he stole: If he be a
debauched and wicked person, it is not needful to press him to tell the number
of the dishonest thoughts and desires which he has had, though he might do it
easily, that it suffices that he say for example; I loved Mary a whole month,
toto mense amavi Mariam: That it belongs to the Confessor to supply and divine
the rest; and that he ought to observe this rule in other sins:

If this sinner signify that he would make a general Confession, he is not
obliged to declare the sins he has already confessed, and those which he has
committed since his last Confession; and if his Confessor pretend to oblige him
thereto, this would be very frivolously done, for he might receive his answer
from the Penitent in these words: I accuse my self of this sin, whether I have
or have not confessed it already, I am not obliged to confess more unto you.

II. POINT. Of the Advice which a Confessor ought to give his Penitent
according to the Jesuits.
1. Quendo Confellar us nullum sperat fr^ctum ex ac^ monitiore, sed p^tius
animi inquietudi^ em, rixas vel scandalum, d^ssimulare debet. Escobar tr. 7.
ex. 4. n. 155. page 825.
THey will not that he speak to him or advise him of any thing, if he thinks he
will not believe him.

2. Cum poenitens est in statu de se malo, ut invslidi matrimonii, siqui^em de
veritate hujus rei dubitet poenitens, illum d^bet Confessarius aperite: quod si
non profuturam spetret admonitionem, vel in proprium damnum verten^am, potest
and debet reticere. Escob. ib. n 74 p. 8^0.
If he knows that the sinner is in an ill estate, as for example, that he lives
in Whoredom because his Marriage is null, they say he is not to speak to him of
it, if he thinks that it will be to no purpose.

3. Confesssrius evidentiam habet quod poenitens peccatum commiserit, illudque
non sit confessus; posset judicare quod poenitens commislum peccatum tacue^it
justa ali^us ex causa: ac proinde tu^a conscientia poterit illum absolvere.
Amicus tom 8. disp. 18. sect. 13. u. 331. p. 285.
Though he be assured that his Penitent has committed a crime which he has
not at all confessed, they permit him to dissemble it, and to absolve him, in a
pious persuasion that he has some reason wherefore he does not confess it.

4. Si constet Confessori poenitentem oblivisci alicujus peccati per se
loquendo tene^ur interrogare; quod si in^errogatus negat, regulariter tenetur
illi credere: quod si evidens sit poenitentem mentiri, si id Confessarius seit
tantum via secreta, post prudentem interrogationem tenetur judicare secundum
^cta and prebata in illo foro. Fillius. tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 7 cap. 12. n. 360.
page 210.
Yet they accord that he may examine him upon this sin, provided he do it
prudently, and press him not too much, for fear of making him lie; and if i^
fall out that being examined, he lie and deny this sin which the Confessor
knows evidently, they will that he forbear not to absolve him notwithstanding
his sin and his lie.

5. Ad explorandum propositum, non pr^p^n^t Confessor d^fficulta^es multes in
peccatis vitandis, unde poenitens constituatur in periculo non h^bendi efficex
propositum in futurum. Filliut. ibid. number. 356. Idem est dicendum quando
poenitens sub peccato mortali tenetur ad aliquid adeo diffici^e ut non credatur
tunc aequo animo recepturus..... Poterit enim tunc p^udens Confessor relinquere
illum in sua bona fide quae a peccato excusat, and monitionem in tempus
opportunius differ, ne scilicet territus poe^it^ns a confessione se
abstinear, majusque detrimentum pariatur. Hoc notetur permaxime pro
Confessariis merc^torum and Principum. Tambur. lib. 5. meth confess. cap. 4.
number. 7.
That he do not make things too difficult for him, and that he do not propose
to him the pains and the difficulties which he foresees will happen to him in
correcting himself; but that it is sufficient to entertain him with a general
discourse of the filthiness of sin. HOC NOTETVR PERMAXIME, PRO CONFESSARIIS
PRINCIPVM. This is most of all to be noted for the Confessors of Princes.

6. Non est necesse ut Confessor sibi persuadeat aut probabiliter judicet
futurum ut poenitens a peccato abstinest; satis est quod existimet poenitentem
qusndo est absolv^ndus habere prop situm illud generale quod diximus. Filliut.
ibid. number 356. page 210.
Though a Penitent have only a general and ineffectual will to amend, and the
Confessor cannot judge probably that he will refrain from relapsing quickly
into his sins, he ought not to forbear to absolve him, according the Jesuits.

7. Cum Confess^rius audit conf^ssionem hominis in extremo p^s^i v^ ^b
aegritudinem, v^l quia ^t modo puniendus a Jud^ce, non curabitde proposit, non
peccandi in posterum...... Dissicile est enim ^b h^j smodi homin bus in
precatis enutritis verum de caeteto non p^ccandi propcsi^um capere.... Cum enim
non restet vivendum de future, ad quod tempus propositum ordinatur? Nulla est
nece^sitas quae conscientiam prem^t ad talem eff^ctum promendum. I a docet
Suarez tom 4 disp. 4. sect 3. a. 5. Cess^t quidem his..... qui quidem si
scirent duraturam viram, nec consiterentur, nec mores mu arent. Petrus Michael
de Sanroman Soc. Jesu expeditionum spiritualium, Soc. Jesu lib. 1. cap. 7. page
78.
If a sinner have been a bad liver of a long time, and because he has been
bred up in and accustomed unto sin, he cannot easily withdraw from it, nor even
make a true and sincere resolution to do it; but confess himself for fashion or
rather of necessity than of any true sense of his sins, seeing himself in
danger of death, and if he believed he could live any longer, to change his
life, being accustomed and addicted unto sin, but he shall content himself to
give him absolution after he has heard his Confession.

8. and 9 Confesstus commisit defectum in confessione, quia vel poenitentem ad
restitutionem non obligavit: potestne cum ipso lequi de supradicto defectu?
Minime sine expressa ipsius licentis. Escobar tr. 7. exam. 4. number. 194. page
850. Grave censetur incommodum cum meo rebore, and ostendendo me errasse monere
poenitentem. Tamburin. lib. 3. method confess. cap. 8. sect. 2. number. 2.
That he be careful never to speak to his Penitent out of Confession of what
passed betwixt them in Confession, though they were necessary to the Salvation
of the Penitent, believing that it were better to leave him in danger of
perdition.

9. and 9 Confestarius commisit defectum in confessione, quia vel poenitentem
ad restitutionem non obligavit: potestne cum ipso lequi de supradicto defectu /
Minime sine expressa ipsius licentia. Escobar tr. 7. exam. 4. number. 194. page
850. Grave censetur incommodum cum meo rebore, and ostendendo me errasse monere
poenitentem. Tamburin. lib. 3. method confess. cap. 8. sect. 2. number. 2.
That if it happen that the Confessor make any fault in confession, as if he
have not ordained restitution of another goods, whether he did it of
forgetfulness or of fear, they believe that he may not speak any more unto him
of it, when he is once retired out of his presence, without his express leave.
And certainly this would be a thing very harsh and inconvenient for a Confessor
to be obliged to advertise the Penitent to his own shame, giving him to know
that he was mistaken.

10 0 Quid agendum Confessori cum defectum aliquem commisit in confessione
contra ejus subslantiam, cum poenitens, v. c. non est recte dispositus quoad
dolorem aut integritatem, and id a Confessario cognoscitur, sed ob ve^ cundiam
aut timorem non est ausus negare absolutionem? Satis est Confessori dolere de
peccato commisso, and relinquere ^oenitentem in bona fide, quia per
subsequentes confessiones justificabitur: quod si delectus fuit exparte
poenitentis, and consequenter sit in mala fide, cogitare poterit cum per alias
confessiones qued bono faciet, justificatum iri: Item tunc poenitentem
excusatum fuisle ab integritare ob infamiam vitandam aut scandalum. Filliut.
tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 7. cap. 12. number. 369. page 211.
That if he knows that the Penitent has not told him all his sins,

11. Quod si poenitens extra confessionem a Contessario rogatus ut licentiam
sibi concedat ut ei defectum in confessione commissum aperiat, and ille nolit
licentiam concedere; an possit tune Confessorius illi defectum aperire? Nagat
Diana, tr. 4. de Sacr. resol. 87. and alii apud ipsum, and sane prob^bilius,
cum in nu^lo casu absque expressa licentia poenitentis liceat de p^ccatis in
confessione auditis extra confession^m non solum cum aliis, sed etiam cum ipso
poenitente loqui. Amicus tom. 8. disp. 14. sect. 4. number. 29. and 30. page 239.
That all which may be done in these and other like occasions, is to demand
permission of the Penitent, and to entreat him that he would be pleased to
allow him to speak one word to him concerning a certain thing which passed in
the confession he made to him; and if the Penitent declare that he is not
pleased therewith, they forbid him to proceed farther or speak any more of it.

III. POINT. Of the inward Disposition of the Penitent, and of sorrow for sin
according to the Jesuits.
AS it is necessary that the Confessor know as much as lies in him the inward
disposition of his Penitent, and the regret which he has for his sins, that he
may give him absolution, he must also learn of the Jesuits:

1. Minima gratis est sufficiens ad remissionem omnium p^cc^torum; and ad
minimam gratiam sufficit minima contritio tanquam dispositio. Ergo, etc.
Filliut. tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 6. cap. 9. number. 234.
That the least grief is a sufficient disposition to this Sacrament.

2. Quaeres 7 an hic dolor debeat esse verus and realis, an vero sufficiat
existimatus? Probabile est dolorem existimatum sufli^ere. Fillius. tract. 7. de
confess. cap 6. number. 151. page 185. Number necessarius sit dolor supernau^alis?
Sufficit na uralis, qui tamed supernaturalis existimetur. Escob. tr. 7. exam.
4. number. 39. page 805.
That it matters not whether it be natural or supernatural, true or apparent
only, and provided the Penitent persuade himself that it is as it should be, it
suffices.

3. Unde quando advertis poenittntem tuum valde alicuic^imini addictum, ne
inculces doloris actum ci^ca illud peculiare peccatum. Pericu um enim suberit
ne illud ex animo detestetur, dum ejus specialis memoria refricatur, quod in
universum and simul cum aliis detestandi difficultatem vel nullam sentiet, vel
exiguam. Tamb. lib. 1. meth. confess. cap. 1. sect. 2. number. 5.
That if any Penitent be much addicted to some crime; that he press him not to
exert some act of sorrow for this sin in particular. For it is to be feared
that he will not detest it sincerely when it is represented single and alone;
whereas he will find little or no difficulty to detest it in general and with
others.

4 Quando Confessarius non habet signs sufficientia doloris, debet intetrogare,
an ex animo detestetur; and si affirmat, potest and debet credere. Filliut.
tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 7. cap. 12. n. 353 page 210.
That if the Confessor can find in his Penitent no mark of sorrow, he may
demand of him only if he be sorry that he has offended God; and if he answer^
that he is, he ought to believe him, and give him absolution upon his word.

5. Sufficiens cum Sacramento dolor est dolere quod nonsatis d^l as. Sa verb.
contritio page 128. To repose a Soul in peace which apprehends that he has not
that contrition which is necessary to the expiation of his sins in the
Sacrament, he must be told that it may be supplied by the will he has to have
it, or the regret he has for not possessing, such as he desires, which might
perfectly satisfy God. Bauny in his Sum. Chap 42. page 685. Asstrendum omnio
est Sacramentum poenitentiae inform causare empore sequenti suum effectum si
to^latur indispositio quae causa fuit ut in principio eff^ctus non sequeretur,
Dieastill. tr. 8. de poenis. d. 6. d. 6. n. 115.
That though the Penitent himself tell him that be feels no sorrow in himself,
and that he cannot have any, he ought to encourage him, and to quiet his mind,
to tell him that it is enough that he desires to have this sorrow, and that he
is grieved that he cannot grieve: and after this give him absolution. That if
it be his fault that he sorrows not for sin, and that he has not so much as a
desire for it, he ought not be apprehensive for that neither, the Sacrament
will always have its effect, and if not presently, yet in process of time when
the Penitent shall remove this impediment, and endeavor himself to produce
sorrow for his sins.

IV. POINT. Rules for imposing Penance or Satisfaction according to the Jesuits.
1. Si irration^biliter gravis poenitentia fuit, non tenetur implere, quia nec
Confessarius ligare eum potuit, nec poenitens sese intendit illigari. Escob.
tr. 7. ex. 4. n. 191. page 289.
THey declare unto the Confessor that the Penitent may refuse the penance he
ordains for him, and therefore that he ought not be severe, but sweet and
obsequious, by imposing on him one which is sweet and slight.

2. Quod si affirmet se velle Purgatorii poenas subire, levem adhuc
poenitentiam imponat ad Sacramenti integritatem, cum praecipue agnoscat gravem
non acceptaturutum. Ibid. He that refuses at the Sacrament to receive any
penance at all, the very slightest that may be imposed upon him for his faults;
is not in an estate to be absolved: but he that is of the contrary opinion, may
give it him, because all may attend to satisfy for their fins in the other
life. They are not then obliged to prevent that time as they should be, if to
avoid sin they were obliged to accept of what their Confessor has ordained for
satisfaction for one part of their faults. Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 46. page
708. and 709.
Tho^ if he absolutely refuse penance, saying, that he will suffer the pains of
Purgatory, he may absolve him; that he omit not for all that to impose upon him
some slight thing by way of penance to preserve the integrity of the Sacrament.

3. Docet Suarius opus alioqui praeceptum posse aliquando in poenitentiam
injungi. Escob. tr. 7. exam. 4. n. 180. page 828.
That to avoid the difficulties and contestations he may have with his
Penitent, he may appoint him for penance some slight thing which he is already
obliged to do.

4. Impono tibi pro poenitentis quidquid hodie vel hac hebdomada boni feceris
vel mali passus fueris. Ibid. n. 181.
That he may also content himself to ordain for satisfaction what good or evil
he does or suffers on the week or day of his confession.

5. An possit Confessarius poenitentiam omnino libere faciendam arbitrio
poenitentis imponere? Ex Suarii sententia affirmo non semper requiri ut aliquod
opus in particulari imponatur. Sufficiunter esse Sacramentalem satisfactionem
si per modum consilii imponat, docet Suarius. Ibid. n. 180. and 181.
That it suffices to say to him in general, that he do something for
satisfaction for his sins, and leave him in liberty to do what he pleases,
without ordering him any thing by commandment, but only by counsel.

6. Decimo quaero de praecepto satisfaciendi pro poe^a temporal, an tale
praeceptum detur? Dico 1. non viderl datum esse tale praeceptum de satis
faciendo in hac vita pro poena temporal. Filliut. tom. 1. mor. qq. tract. 6.
cap. 8. number. 213. page 214.
That if he have any scruple by reason of this so great condescension,

V. POINT. Rules of the same Jesuits for giving Absolution.
1. Quando Cons^slarius non habet signa sufficientia doloris, debet interrogare
an ex animo detestetur; and si affimet, potest and debet credere. Filliut. tom.
1. qq. mor. tr. 7. cap. 12. number. 355. page 210.
WHen the Confessor sees no true marks of repentance in the Penitent, and
believes he is not disposed to receive absolution, the Jesuits assure us that
it is sufficient to stir him up to say, that he is sorry for his sins, and that
after that word he ought to be absolved.

2. Absolvi potest modo proponat firmiter non peccare, ^ti^msi aliquo^s sit
relapsus. Emanuel Sa verbo absolutio n. 11. page 5.
That though he has frequently promised amendment without any effect; yet if
he promise again to do it as formerly, he must be absolved.

3. Si nonobstant tout ce qu'ils auroient dit and promis pour le pass au
Confesseur, ils n'auroient laisse de se porter avec exces and liberie plus
grande dans les memes fautes que devant: on les doit recevoir au Sacrement?
C'est la question que Bauny propose en sa Sum, chap. 46. page 717. Et apres
avoir dit qu'il y en a qui tiennent qu'il faudroit differer l'absolution a ces
persons, il aj^ute. Qui feroit le contraire, pecheroit-il? C^ n'est pas mon
opinion.
That if he relapse again, and add also new faults to his first, breaking out
unto the greatest excess and liberty, so that he has less hopes of his
conversion than at the beginning; yet if he promise barely to amend, absolution
ought not be refused him.

4. B^uny dit encore au meme lieu que le penitent, vero proposito affectu, qui
se resout aux pieds du Prestre de mettre fin a ses pechez passez, dignu^ est
absolutione, toties quoties, merit d'en recevoir pardon, quandocunque nulla
notetur emendatio, bien qu'il ne s'amende, and bien souvent qu'il est a
presumer tells resolutions ne passer pas le bout des levres.


5. Absolvi potest qui proponit abstinere a peccato, etiamsi credat se
proposito non staturum. Sa verbo absolutio number. 11. page 5.
That if it happen that after so many faults and relapses the Penitent
acknowledging his own weakness and the small disposition he has to be truly
converted, do freely acknowledge to his Confessor that he believes that he has
not the power to refrain from relapsing, or to perform what he promises, this
ought not to hinder the Confessor from giving him absolution, if he demand it.

6. Absolvi potest qui ex justa and rationabili causa non vult omittere
peccandi occasi nem, modo proponat firmiter non peccare, etiamsi aliquoties sit
relapsus. Sa verbo absol. n. 11. p. 5.
That if he be engaged in occasions of sin, which are the causes of his
relapses, and his Confessor represent unto him the danger hereof, and induce
him to withdraw himself from them: but he will not part from them, and he has
some reason to abide in those occasions themselves, he shall not forbear to
absolve him.

7. Et quidem in p^axiexistimo nunquam aut farissime denegandam absolutionem,
ob doctrinae Christianae ignorantiam. Sanch. op. mor. lib. 2. cap. 3. number. 21.
page 92.
That he ought not to make any difficulty to absolve them that know not the
Faith nor things necessary for their Salvation.

VI. POINT. The Jesuits Advice to Penitents to make the yoke of Confession
sweet and east.
IT is easy to observe many very favorable advices for sinners amongst those
which we have but now discovered the Jesuits to have given unto Confessors. But
to take from them all the pain and apprehension which they may have of
confessing their sins, they declare in express terms:

1. None is obliged to tell that which probab'y the Confessor will reveal unto
others, or which will occasion him to use him ill, have him, be effended with
him, remove him from his haunt, or deprive him of some commodity which he
receives thereby. Bauny in his Sum. Chapter 40. page 635.
That if they have any distrust of their Confessor, or fear that after they
have discovered their conscience, he should use them ill, would look on them
with a bad eye, would deprive them of some good which he has been accustomed
to do them, they may hide from him one part of their sins.

2. It the Penitent can with reason apprehend that by telling all unto his
Confessor without concealing any thing, his friends and he may one day thereby
be concerned in their goods, bodies, or honor, and believe that in this case
it will be lawful for him to suppress and silence the offenc^, which known unto
the Confessor, would cause unto the said Penitent the eff^cts which he imagines
would follow upon the confession of it. Bauny in the same place.
That if a sinner fears that in confessing some sin, he shall draw on himself
or on some of his friends some evil at present or in time to come, they
discharge him of the obligation of confessing it.

3. An confessio generalis integritatem requirat? Quoad peccata alias confessa
non requirit. Dicit quis Confessario se velle cum illo confessionem generalem
gerere: non ideo tamen tenetur omnia mortalia exprimere. Quia quamvis
mentiatur, tamen parum refert ad Confessarii judicium, cum ad ejus forum non
pertinea. Escobar tract. 7. exam. 4. number. 107. page 8^6.

Addo facientem confessionem generalem, and nolentem manifestare se aliquod
peccatum ab ultima conf^ssione commisisse, posse illud per alia peccata prius
confessa aperire. Ibid. number. 136. page 821.


When the Penitent signifies that he will make a general Confession, if he
apprehends that the Confessor would have an evil opinion of him, if he should
represent his whole life unto him, they pretend that he may tell him only one
part of his sins, and hide from him the other, and even lie if he examine him
of those which he is not willing to discover unto him.

4. Rub^re quis afficitur de aliquo crimine, potest generalem confessionem
sacere, and illud peccatum simul confiteri, non exprimendo an alias confessum
sit: quia id parum variat Confessarii judicium. Escobar in proaem. exam. 2. n.
75. page 19.
That if he fall into any great fault which he is ashamed to accuse himself,
for fear of diminishing the good opinion which the Confessor has of him, he
may by the advice of these Doctors signify to him that he will make a general
Confession; and so mingle this last sin whereof he is in trouble with those of
his life past, as if he had committed it a long time before.

5 Confitens generaliter de peccatis alias confessis and abs^lutis, potest per
parts absolvi, scilicet nunc de part peccatorum quae dixit, postea de alia
part cum dixerit; and partem uni, partem alteri explicare, and partem
omittere. Sa verbo absolut. n. 2. p. 10.
They say also, that we may make a general Confession easily enough by saying
one part of our sins to one Priest, and another to another, and suppressing a
third part, provided they have been already confessed.

6. Duos quis adit Consessaries, quorum alteri mortalia, alteri veniali^ confit
turs ut bonam samam apud ordina^ium tue^tur, rogo number delinquat? Cum Suario
assero, non delinquere; quia est confessio integra, nec est vera hypocrisis
neque mendacium. Escobar^r 7. exam 4. n. 135. page 821. Filliut. says the same
thing, tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 7. c. 4. n. 75. p. 175. Habere ordinary duos
Confessarios, alterum cui gravia dic^s, alterum cui levia, ut probus habearis,
quidam dicunt esse pecca um mortale ob illusum Confessorem: secus vero esse, si
semel and iterum fiat ob pudorem and verecundiam. Sa verbo confessor n. 16.
page 105.
Beyond all this they have found out an expedient for spiritual persons and
Votaries, who would preserve their reputation with their ordinary Confessor,
which is to have a second Confessof or whom the first knows nothing, on whomto
discharge themselves of their gross sins which they would be ashamed to
discover to their Ordinary. Escobar says not only that we may take this
expedient, but he even praises also those who make use of it, and reproves
those Confessors who think it not good that their Penitents should sometimes go
to confess themselves to others then they. He places this amongst the opinions
which are out of controversy, and in his Problems he holds that it is no sin
to do this many times.

7. And im^edi^tely after he cites some Casuists who say: Id peccatum mortale
esse, cum hoc ^it in fi^em mortiferum; and bonum es^e si bonus sit finis uni
leviora, al eri graviora explicare ad retinendam existimationem. Qui
C^nless^rio ordi^ario levia solum peccata manifestat, prius alii Confessario
gravia exponen^, con^essionis non laedit integritatem. Ex. gr^. foemina carnis
piaculo maculata, pudore detine^ur n^ Confessarium ordinarium adeat;
laudabiliter incognito Confessario grave peccatum rederat, ne sub^icendi
criminis periculum subeat, graviter subtraxerim confeslarios qui suos
ordinarios alumnos alienam aliquando di^ionem ineuntes, imprudenter quidem
objurgant. Escobar tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 4. Nulum esse peccatum existimo vel
saepe confessarium extraneum adire. Ibid. problem. 21.
Vi^eo cum qui juravit aut vovit castitatem aut paupertatem praecepto posse
sati facere confessionis, si separatim aperiat fornicationem and surtum,
adda^que se bis juramentum in te gravi violasse. Escobar lib. 4. Theol. mor.
sect. 2. problem. 1. tom. 1.
There is yet herein another very subtle expedient to hide sins in confession,
which has some reference to the former, which is, that as you may h^de them by
parting your confessions to many Confessors, so you may also hide a sin by
parting it into two. See here the case: He that has sworn chastity or poverty,
says Escobar, may satisfy the precept of Confession, For unless the Confessor
suspects that he intends to deceive him, he will not understand by this that he
has violated the vow of Chastity.

8. Commisit quis mortale piaculum non long a confessionis hodiernae tempore a
quo absolutus non est: ac u^ minuat pudoris instantiam, dicit dum confitetur
p^ceatum illud quondam fuisse commissum etiam confessum: haec simulatio
confessionis integritati obest and non obest. Integritati confession is non
obest, etc. Primam sententiam sine sorupulo admitterem, ac prob^biliorem plane
esse judicarem, si poe ni tens solam temporis simulationem gereret, satus
multis abhinc annis haec aut haec peceata commisi, quae quidem ex oblivione
inculpabili fassus non sum.
If this be not enough, you are permitted to tell as many lies as you need to
deliver you from the shame which confession of sins might procure unto you.
Escobar avouches that it is a probable opinion that it does not offend against
the integrity of Confession, if one having committed a mortal sin immediately
after he has made his Confession, whereupon he has not yet received
absolution, he say that he has some other time committed this sin, and has
been absolved thereof. He adds at length, that this opinion about which he is
in suspense, will become more probable, if we content our selves to say the
Penitent may speak in this manner: It is many years ago that I committed this
sin, but I have not confessed it, because I forgot it innocently.

9. Mentiri in c^nfessi^ne de peccatis venialibus, aut de alias confessis
mortalibus, veniale solum peccatum esse, tamet^i aotea illa prop suit apud se
confiteri Sa verbo confessio n 12. page 88. In confessiont mentiri de peccato
venial^, ven ale est. Escobar tr. 7. ex. 4 n. 107. page 816.
For v^nial sins,

10. Si poenitens uni probsbili sen^ntiae adhaereat, Confessarius vero
contrariam p^ biliorem existimet, quid? Poenitentis sententiam probabili
probabiliori relicta se debet Confessatius conformare. Escobar tr. 7. ex. 4. n.
7. p. 810. Si poe^itens in praxi bona fide sententiam sequatur quae a juibusdam
Doctoribus tanquam probabilis ac tuts defenditur; confessarius vero seu
ordinarius, seu delegatus eandem specula^ive improbab lem censeat, non obstante
sua persuasione tenetur absolutionem confer. Layman lib. 1. tr. 1. cap. 5.
sect. 2. n 10. page 7. Ex dictis deducitur Confessarium semper posse and debere
contra propriam opinionem poenitentem absolvere, quando ille p^b^bili opinione
ductus putat aliquid sibi licitum esse quod Confesiarius ju^ta susm opinionem
putat illicitum. Amicus romans 3. disp. 15. sect. 4. number. 90. page 212.
That when different opinions arise about any thing which appertains to
Confession, as concerning restitution, the disposition necessary for receiving
absolution, the obligation to quit the occasions of sin, and other such like,
the Penitent may choose that which is most large and more favorable to his
corrupt interests, though it be less probable and less safe, and that he may
oblige the Confessor to follow this opinion which he chooses, or at least to
leave him to his liberty to follow and act according to this very opinion,
though the Confessor be of a contrary opinion, and believe that which the
sinner demands to be dangerous and unlawful.

11. 1. Imperfecti^nes, qual^s est divinis inspirationibus non correspondere,
queis excitabantur ad nimiam circa corporalia commoda solicitudinem fugiendam,
ad fugiendas dignitatum promotiones etc. non sunt Sacramenti poenitentiae
ma^ria, quia p^ccata non sunt.

Sic Tannerus l. 2. d. 4. c. 10. d. 4. n. 70. Sarct us in select. d. 1. a. n.
4. and d. 6 n. 4. and d. 7. n. 4. and 11. asserens quidem haud permittendum
esse poenitentem se accusare quod examen sufficiens non praemiserit, quod
intent non doleat de peccatis prout posset, quod Deum non dilexerit to a qua
vale^ intention; quia cum haec and similia peccata non sint, non debent in
confessione exponi. Es^obar tom. 2. lib. 140. problem. 5.


That it is not needful to confess that we have not conformed our selves to
those divine inspirations, by which we have been excited to fly the too great
care of bodily commodities, promotions unto dignities, etc. That these things
are no matter of penance, because they are not fins: That the Penitent is not
to be permitted even to accuse himself for not being sufficiently examined, nor
for not having had so strong grief for his sins as he might have had, nor for
not loving God so strongly as he might have done, because these things and such
like are no sins. This is the Doctrine of Tannerus roported by Escobar in his
Problems, and by consequence put in the rank of probable opinions, which serves
nor only to abridge Confessions, but to take away many scruples, by permitting
us to have as much care as we please of our bodies; and if God would turn us
from it by his grace, to resist it without fear of offending him.

See here one part of the Jesuits Rules about the Sacrament of Penance, and the
Duty of Penitents and Confessors, by which it is easy to judge whether sinners
by following them may become great Saints, and Confessors Martyrs, and whether
the one or the other will work any great miracles.

Certainly if these Rules so loose and soft be followed,

CHAPTER III. Of Prayer. That the Jesuits destroy Prayer, in teaching that the
Laity and the Ecclesiastics themselves may satisfy their obligation to Prayer
by praying without attention, without reverence, and even with voluntary
distraction, and diverting themselves with all sorts of wicked thoughts.
MEn fall into sin by being induced thereto by temptation, temptation cannot be
surmounted but by the aid of God, the means to obtain his help is Prayer; so
that if the life of man, according to the Scripture, be nothing but a continual
combat against temptations, it follows that it ought also be a continual prayer
to obtain necessary help and strength for the combat. Oportet semper orare and
nunquam deficere. Luc. 18.1. Catechism^ Conc. Trid. de necessitate orationis.
That we ought always to pray, and never to cease; which he says, not only by
way of counsel, but by way of precept which obliges of necessity, as is
observed by the Catechism of the Council of Trent. But Father Tambourin tells
us, Quandonam obligat natural praeceptum orandi vel adorandi? Ego hic sentio
quod supr. cap. 151. number. 8. de praecepto fidei, spei and charitatis, non dari
scilicet certum tempus and determinatum in quo direct obligat; sed else illud
in quo obligat indirecte necessitas boni acquirendi, aut mali avertend^, quae
acquirere aut avertere sine Dei auxilio nos non posse tunc animadvertimus.
Sequitur omittentem tempore tentationis orare, non peccare nisi contra
castitatem, quia solum ex periculo violandi castitatem culpabilis est talis
orationis omissio. Lessius lib. 2. Tametsi sentiremus hoc praeceptum obligare,
non est nobis in eo explicando diu immorandum, cum illud facile ab omnibus
impleatur. Quis enim tam perditus est, ut aliquando Pater and Ave non reciter?
Tamb. lib 2. decal. cap. 4. sect. 2. number. 5.
That it is in the precept of prayer as in that of faith, hope, and charity,
that there is no certain time wherein this precept obliges directly, but that
there is some wherein it obliges indirectly, to wit, when it is necessary to
acquire some good, or to remove some evil, which we observe that we cannot
acquire or avoid without the help of God: that thence it follows, that he who
prays not to God in a temptation against chastity, sins only against chastity,
because he sins not in omitting prayer, but because of the danger he is in to
violate chastity.

He thinks not that we are at any time directly obliged to pray unto God any
more then to love him, to believe on him, to hope in him; but indirectly by
adventure, and as it were by accident. That is to say, that according to him,
God has not commanded us Prayer, Faith, Hope,

So that Faith, Hope, Charity, and Prayer according to this Divinity, have no
more part in the conduct of a Christian life, than purgation and blood-letting
in the conservation of the natural life and health; and that as a Physician who
has prescribed a Purge, obliges not the Patient to love it, nor to take it
for its own sake, but simply to take it for the need he has of it; in the same
manner God commanding Prayer, Faith, Hope, and Charity, obliges not Christians
to love these virtues, and to exercise them for their own sakes, but only for
necessity sake, and as it were by force upon such occasions in which they
cannot dispense with them, without putting themselves in danger of losing life
and Salvation, by sinning against other virtues. And as a man of a strong
complexion who is not subject to be sick, though he be subject to some slight
infirmities, may pass over his whole life without purgation or phlebotomy; so a
Christian who is of a good and moderate natural disposition, and has no
violent passions, and is not subject to strong temptations, may pass his whole
life without ever being obliged to pray unto God, to love him, to believe on
him, nor hope in him;

The Pro^het says, that the just man lives by Faith: S. Paul, that we are
saved through Hope; and S. John, that he who loves not abides in death; and
that to obtain and preserve life and Salvation, we ought to pray without
ceasing. And the Jesuits maintain on the contrary, that we may live justly,
avoid death, and obtain Salvation without loving God, believing or hoping in
him, and without ever or rarely praying to him in all our life tim^

It suffices to relate these excesses barely which are unheard of in the
Church, and as it were Monsters of error and impiety, and neither Comparisons
nor Expressions can be found capable to represent them, neither can we call
them otherwise than the universal overthrow of the whole Christian Religion,
fince they destroy Prayer, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which are its foundations,
support, and perfection.

There is nothing which the simple light of Nature does better make known unto
all men, than the attention they ought to have to whatsoever they say,
especially when they treat of important affairs, and with persons eminent in
dignity and merit: but they redouble their respect and their attention when
they beg any singular grace or favor from them, and there is no prudent man
who would not condemn him of extravagance and folly, who should therein speak
in any other manner, and who would not judge that he merited not only to be
refused, but also to be punished for his rashness and insolence.

In the mean time the Jesuits hold that this carriage which appears so
unsupportable toward men, is good enough and sufficient toward God,
distracted, and wholly replenished with impure and profane thoughts, suffices
to fulfill the obligation unto prayer.

Filliutius demands, if Quaero an and quae attentio^ sit necessaria ad
praeceptum?
to accomplish the Law which commands us to pray unto God, it be necessary to
have attention, and what kind of attention this ought to be? Before he answers,
he advertises the Reader, Pro responsione notandum agere nos de hor is
canonicis, quando recitantur ex obligatione, non autem de privata devotione.
Tunc enim non est major obligatio attendendi quam in quacunque oratione vocali,
and ad summum obligat sub veniali. Filliut. mor. qq. tom. 2. tr. 23. cap. 8. n.
252. page 126.
That he intends to speak only of Canonical hours, which are recited upon
obligation, and not of prayers which are made by private devotion. For in that
case we are no more obliged to attend to what we say, than to any other sort of
vocal prayers, and this obligation goes not farther than to venial sin. Prima
neminem teneri sub mortali ad attentionem internam, modo integre recitet
externe. Ibid.
That none is obliged upon pain of mortal sin to an inward attention in saying
his office, provided he rehearse it outwardly and entirely. And though he
follows not this opinion absolutely, yet he passes it for probable, adding
thereto in the process for his first Answer, Respondeo and dico 1. primam
sententiam probabilem esse. Ibid.
That according to his judgment this first opinion is probable. But if it be
probable, then we must conclude, according to the Jesuits, that it may be
followed with a good conscience, and it will become also more probable by the
approbation which this Author bestows on it.

Escobar expounds himself yet more upon this point. Scio vagari mente ex
negligentia in officio, veniale solum peccatum esse. Rogo an si ex proposito id
fi^t, gravite^ delinquam, and ad repetendum officium tenear? Escobar tractat.
5. exam. 6. number. 157. page 679.
I know well, says he, that it is only a venial sin through negligence to
suffer ones self to fall into distractions during the office. Now it is
demanded, whether it be a greater sin to indulge ones self therein voluntarily,
and whether he be obliged to say the office over again, His Answer is, Azorium
secutus assero peccare ex contemp^u mortaliter; satisfacere tamen Ecclesiae
praecipienti, nec teneri iterum recitare, ut diximus supra.
That according to Azors opinion, which is also his own, it is a mortal sin
when it is done through contempt; but the command of the Church is nevertheless
thereby fulfilled, and we are not obliged to repeat the office, as has been
said above. So that whatever distraction there be in rehearsing the divine
office, though it be voluntary, if it come of negligence and not of contempt,
it is but a venial sin; and when it proceeds from a deliberate will and formal
contempt, though it be a mortal sin, we fail not of satisfying the Church, and
discharging our duty; that is to say, that the Church may be contented by
despising it, and God satisfied by mortally offending him.

Coninck says in a manner the same thing, speaking of the Mass and the manner
it ought to be heard. Si absit scandalum aut contempeus, distractio ex hac
part non est peccatum mortale, etiamsi exterius appareat. Coninck 3. part q.
83. art. 6. n. 247. page 286.
If there be no scandal nor contempt, says he, distraction is not of it self a
mortal sin, though it appear outwardly. And a little after he discovers the
principle of this conclusion, saying, Non est necessarium ut quis satissaciat
praecepto Ecclesiae, ut habeat internam aliquam devotionem. Ibid. n. 301.
That to satisfy the Commandment of the Church it is not necessary to have any
inward devotion. Whence he draws this other conclusion more express than the
former: Hinc sequitur eum qui etiam voluntary est toto tempore Sacri
distractus, modo sufficienter sibi prae ens sit, ut Sacro cum externa
reverentia debite assistat, satisfacere praecepto Ecclesiae. Ibid. number. 302.
Hence it follows that he who is even voluntarily distracted during the whole
time of the Mass, satisfies the Precept of the Church, provided he have such
presence of mind as suffices him to assist at the Mass with some outward
respect, as he ought.

And because he perceived that it might be replied against him, 0 Nec resert
quod actus externus sine interno non potest hebere rationem verae virtutis cum
possit fieri ob^; malum sinem; quia possumus praeceptis Ecclesiae satisfacere
per actum qui non sit vera virtus, imo qui sit peccatum. Ibid.
That though the exterior act without the interior be not a true action of
virtue, and may have reference unto some wicked end, this matters not; because
the Commandments of the Church may be satisfied by an action which is no act of
true virtue, but which is in it self a sin.

But if this Answer content not, and it augment the difficulty instead of
resolving it, he adds, not to clear up this difficulty, but to show how firm
and settled he is in this opinion, Respondeo actum externum orationis quoad
externas circumstantias debite sactum, esse vere actum externum virtutis
religionis. Ibid.
That the outward act of prayer, which is done with the outward circumstances
which it ought to have, is a true exterious action of the virtue of Religion,
though it be done with voluntary distraction, and which is it self a sin, imo
qui sit peccatum.

According to this Maxim, if Herod had secretly killed Jesus Christ whilst he
adored him, as he contrived his design when he learnt of the Wisemen that he
was born, and if he had observed all the Forms and all the outward Ceremonies
of adoration, at the same time giving only some signal unto his people to
murder this Infant, as Judas saluting and kissing the same Jesus Christ with
outward respect, and ordinary testimonies of affection which he ought him,
marked him out to the Soldiers who were come to take him; this Jesuit might
have said of this Tyrant killing Jesus Christ in the very act of adoration, and
of Judas betraying him by a kiss, Respondeo actum externum adorationis,
orationis, and salutationis quoad externas circumstantias debite factum, esse
vere actum externum virtutis religionis.
That the act of adoration and salutation, as well as that of prayer, which is
done with all the outward circumstances which ought to be had, is a true
outward action of Religion.

And because such a religious action was never heard of before, and that it is
a difficult thing even so much as to conceive this sort of adoration, he
expounds it by an example quite contrary. Sicut adoratio externa in Idolo
facta, est vere actus externus idolatriae, etsi illum exercens interius non
intendat adorare Idolum. Ibid. n. 296. 3 Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 13. page 176.
Altogether the same, says he, with the outward adoration which is rendered to
an idol, and as it is a true and outward act of adoration and of Idolatry,
though he who makes this adoration outwardly, has no intention to adore the
Idol; so he who prays unto God, or who adores him outwardly without intention
to pray or adore; but rather on the contrary with an intention to dishonor and
offend, imo qui fit cum peccato, does exercise according to this Jesuit a true
outward action of prayer and adoration appertaining to the virtue of Religion.

It might seem at first sight that this is the utmost point of disorder
whereunto it were possible to fall in this matter; but Father Bauny descends
yet lower. He demands, if the Chanons fulfill their duty, and earn their
dividends, who being assistants in the Quire during holy Service, pass their
time in scandalous discourse, and in employment altogether vicious, as in
laughing, scoffing, etc. That is, that they pass their time in an employment
altogether vicious. Though he concludes not for the affirmative, yet for all
that he testifies sufficiently that it rather shame and fear of men that
hinders him from declaring himself, and he makes it well appear that he is not
far off from this opinion, in that he contents not himself only to report and
propose it as probable, and to say, that we may follow and advise it with a
safe conscience; which is truly to approve it: but he approves it yet more
formally by supporting it with all the reasons he can. See here how he talks:
Because we are not assured of the intention of the Church, and that the Texts
of c. 1. de Cler. non res......of c. Licet 32. of the title de Prebend. make no
mention save of their assistance in the Quire, and because the custom every
where received exacts of the Chanons no other thing that they may receive their
dividends, but that they be present, I esteem them without blame and reproach,
who in favor of their Penitents hold this second opinion.

Here are four reasons to be observed, upon which he concludes that they are
not reproachable, who maintain that the Chanons satisfy their duty as far as
the Church obliges them therein, and earn their dividends by assisting in the
Quire with irreverence, and that even outward also, by laughing, scoffing, and
spending their time in employments altogether vicious. 1. Because it is enough
that they are present. 2. the custom every where received requires no other
thing of them. 3. Because this opinion is favorable to Penitents. The Jews and
Pagans themselves who have any knowledge of God, will perhaps be ashamed to
speak in this sort, and to say that we may pray to him and serve him in so
profane and unworthy a manner.

His fourth reason is, because we are not assured, says he, of the intention
of the Church. It is apparent that he has taken this reason from Filliutius,
who to confirm the opinion which he holds, that whatsoever voluntary
distractions we can have in prayer, and in the divine Office, there is therein
no more than venial sin, makes use of this very same reason. For after he had
brought for proof of this opinion, Quia satis accommodata est hominum
sragilitati and difficultati quam humanus intellectus experitur in attendendo
diu uni rei.
that it is sufficiently accommodate to men's frailty, and to the difficulty of
holding the spirit of man a long time attentive to one object; he adds,
Verisimile est autem Ecclesiam noluisse suo praecepto obligate ad rem ardusm,
ita ut major hominum pars eam servare non possit. Filliut. tom. 2. mor. qq.
tract. 23. c. 8. number. 253. page 126.
That for this cause it is likely that the Church had no intention by its
precept to oblige men to a thing so difficult, that the greatest part of men
cannot observe. He would say that when the Church commands the faithful to pray
unto God, and to the Ecclesiastics to recite the divine Office, and to both of
them to be assistant at Mass^on Festival days, we are not assured, that it
sorbids voluntary distractions and wicked thoughts wherewith they voluntarily
please themselves: we are not assured, that it would that we should at least
demean our selves with some outward reverence, or whether indeed (...) have not
left to all a liberty to laugh, s^ff, and pass their time in scandalous
discourse, and in an employment altogether vicious.

Now if these Jesuits had said as some of their Fraternity, Filliutius and
Bauny suppose. For otherwise it were in vain that they should trouble themselv
es to know its intention and will in a point which depends not at all on its
will.

But though there were some one to be found who might doubt of this, or who of
gross ignorance knew not the intention of the Church in this matter, it is not
lawful for Father Bauny to make use of this pretense to favor an opinion which
leads unto Libertinism and Irreligion, and we need not seek more clear
testimony to destroy this error than his own, since he declares in Chap. 20.
of his Sum, page 332. That being true devotion is in the heart, and not in the
carriage, or without, in the fashion and other outward gesture, and that this
pretended devotion without is but a vizor and an Idol of devotion; it is a
resolved case, that in the voluntary distraction and wandering of the mind in
praying by obligation, as do Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons, and
Beneficiaries, there is sin; and so they are obliged to repeat the Office which
they have said with so great indevotion. Pius V.

He pursues the same matter, and declares once more in the same place what is
the intention of the Church in the Command which it give Ecclesiastics and
Beneficiaries to recite the Office. The Church intends not, says he, to make
the Ecclesiastics, Possessors of the fruits of their said Benefice, if they
earn it not by their labor. The disposure thereof is conditional, if they
perform the prayers with which they are charged, doing them to the praise and
honor of God. And can we say with truth that they deserve to be his servants,
or put into the rank of those who render him the worship which his Majesty
requires of them, when they have their lips only occupied in his service, and
not their heart, because it is filled with unprofitable thoughts and very
remote from the greatness of his Majesty to whom they speak? page 333.

He had already said the same thing in Chap. 13. page 165. where he makes of it
a conclusion, promoting it not only as his opinion, but also as a manifest and
certain thing. 2. Says he, The said Beneficiaries are obliged to make
restitution of the fruits received from their Benefices when they say their
hours, And after he had cited many Authors who are of this opinion, he gives
this reason for it: Because that not to recite their hours at all, or to do it
indecently with out respect, attention and reverence, is all one before God,
since he is equally despised and dishonored in both, page 165.

Can we speak more clearly or more absolutely on this subject? It is a resolved
case, says he, that prayer which is made without attention is but a vizor and
an Idol of devetion; that the Ecclesiastics and Beneficiaries who recite the
Office with voluntary wandering and distraction of mind are obliged to begin it
anew, and in default of doing this they are bound to restore the fruits
received: that the will of the Church is, that by this action which it commands
them they should praise and pray unto their Creator: That the Church does not
intend to make the said Ecclesiastics Possessors of the fruits of their said
Benefices, but on the condition that they pray unto God, praise and honor him:
that they honor him not at all, but rather dishonor and contemn him when they
have only their lips occupied in his service, and not their hearts, because it
is filled with unprofitable thoughts.

Who would not say after this, that this Father is so persuaded of these
things, that he holds them almost for Articles of Faith, or at least for
indubitable truths, whereto the whole world ought to consent? And who would
believe that he could say at the same time, That we are not assured of the
intention of the Church upon the same things:

To which of the two opinions of this Jesuit ought we to hold; or rather how
shall we know which is his opinion, what he says, and what he thinks? He says
all, and he says nothing, because he unsays and contradicts himself. He is of
what opinion you please, and he is of none. But if men's last words be more
considerable than their first, and if we may rely on them as their last
resolution, there is cause to believe that this Father has related so clearly
the judgment and intention of the Church concerning the abuse of those who pray
and recite the Office without intention and without respect, only to overturn
it, and to testify the little account he makes of it, because he has
confidence a little after to say, that we may prudently presume that it was not
the will of the Church to oblige Priests, Beneficiaries, and others to the
divine Office with so great, severity, that they sin mortally, if they have not
an inward attention thereunto; since it seems not in its precept for reciting
the hours, to erect any other thing of the Priests and others who are bound
thereunto, but to honor and praise God; which they do in singing Psalms and
chaunting, though with voluntary distraction, and in which they continue,
provided that this be done, and they sing tunably and with reverence, page 534.

But the Argument he makes, For the outward action, says he, wherewith we
attend on God, is of the Diocese, and an appurtenance of the virtue of
Religion. Wherefore as he who without intention to commit Idolatry, bends his
knee before an Idol, is held for an Idolater nevertheless: so we must believe
that they pray who recite the Office, though without intention, yet not without
outward decency and composure, such as that action requires, page 335:

Coninck makes use of the same Reasoning and the same Example in this same
matter, as we have seen above, and there is cause to believe that Father Bauny
has only copied and translated him: but the one and the other ought to have
called to mind that it is much easier to do harm than good; and that what is
evil in it self is always evil, to what intention soever it be done. But to do
good it is not sufficient to do a thing which is good in it self, if it be not
well done, that is, with good intention, according to this Rule: Bona been
agenda.

The Reasoning which Father Bauny takes up at length upon this Point, is as
false and ridiculous as his Example. And that this is true, says he, may be
collected from this, that it imports not a little to the glory of God, that we
address our selves to him with outward respect, which edifies the people, and
obtains his favors from Heaven, whereto prayers are useful, though said
without attention.

We need not seek Reasons to make appear the extravagance of these words; it is
sufficient to make it known, That not to recite the hours at all, and not to do
it decently, is all one before God, since he is equally dishonored and
contemned in both.

After he has advanced these so strange Maxims which overturn Religion and
Prayer, which is as it were the first fruits and most common exercise thereof;
and after he has established these Maxims by such Reasons and such Examples,
he draws from thence practical Conclusions as pernicious, which he bestows on
Confessors and Directors, to serve them as a Rule in the conduct of Souls, and
in the resolution of all doubts and difficulties which may be proposed unto
them in this matter.

According hereunto, says he, the Confessor shall not reprove his Penitent as
for any mortal fault, for having applied his mind to frivelous things, so long
as his tongue resounded the praises of God with others in the Church, if in
outward appearance he did nothing that was incompatible with this action, page
335.

He shall not oblige him to the repetition of any thing said in that manner,
since in pronouncing them in that sort he has fulfilled the precept, nor yet
to make restitution of the fruits received from his Benefice, if he have any.

Which very thing he himself condemns but two pages before, saying, That
Ecclesiastics who pray with voluntary distraction and wandering minds, ought
for the performance of their duty, begin their Office anew; and in default of
so doing, if Beneficiaries, they are bound to restore unto the Church where
their Benefice is, or to the p^or the fruits received according to the rate of
their omissions, as he collects from the Bull of Pius V.

So his mind appears floating betwixt error and truth, which dazles his eyes,

Here would be a proper place to speak of the Dispensations which the Jesuits
give Ecclesiastics from reciting the Office upon Reasons so slight, and
oftentimes so ridiculous, that they themselves unto whom this obligation seems
most grievous and troublesome, durst not demand them, if they did not by
offering them unto them, prevent them, and in some sort force them to receive
them, by assuring them, that they may make use of them with a safe conscience,
though their own, altogether corrupt as it is, reproach them for it, and that
the light of Nature only suffices to discover that they ought not do it. But
because we have already produced some in the Treatise of Probability for
Example sake, I will content my self to add only one more here in this place
out of Tambourin, who says, Hinc luscus and quicunque ex oculis laborat, si
timet legendi vim ta legendo paulatim deperdere, horas canonicas non legate. 14.
Quid si hic luscus, vel ille valetudinarius legate voluntary fabulas vel
historias, omittit autem officium, peccabitne? Respondeo non peccaturum contra
obligationem recitandi officium, peccaturum non ambigo illum, quia fabulas cum
sanitatis detrimento legit: quod tamen detrimentum saltem notabile raro
eveniet, quia hisce lectionibus quantum ex hoc capite recreatur animus, non
multum opprimitur. Tambur. l. 2. decal. c. 5. sect. 8. n. 14.
That he who is purblind, or any other who has any disease in his ey^s, if he
fears to lose his sight by little and little in reading, is not obliged to read
his Breviary. But if this purblind, or otherwise of weak eyes, do voluntarily
read Fables or Histories whilst he dispenses with himself for reading his
Breviary, does he sin? I answer, that he sins not against his obligation of
saying his prayers. But I am assured he sins in reading these Fables to the
prejudice of his health; which yet will rarely happen; because that sort of
reading is recreative, and hurts not much. This Ecclesiastic who has eyes to
read Fables, and has not to read his Office, will easily be confirmed in so
good a disposition by Tambourin. This Jesuit is not troubled at all to dispense
with the obligation of rehearsing his Office, because of the weakness of his
sight: and though after that he durst not openly justify him that weakens it
yet more by reading of Fables: yet to leave him this liberty nevertheless, he
pretends that he will not weaken it by this reading, as by that of the
Breviary, or at least that this will rarely happen; quod detrimentum saltem
notabile raro evenit. And the reason is, because he recreates his spirit, and
finds pleasure in reading Fables, supposing that he cannot take any in that of
his Office. Which agrees very well with what he and his Fellows do commonly
call the Divine Service, the Charge, the Burden, the Drudgery, onus diei, the
load of the day. Whence it comes, that they teach the Ecclesiastics, to
discharge themselves thereof the most they can, as of some burthensom and
odious thing; assuring them, as we have made appear,

CHAPTER IV. Of Good Works. That the Jesuits Maxims destroy them.
GOod Works may be destroyed two ways; either by inclining men to do them ill;
or by diverting them from doing them at all. It would be easy to prove that
the Jesuits teach to do them ill, in this that they maintain, that such may be
done as are truly good without any succor of Grace, and that we may do those
which are ineritorious of eternal life without respect had unto God or eternal
life, and without once thinking thereof, provided that in doing them, we be not
under mortal sin. But because this Point is more subtle, and I have spoken
thereof already before, I will not insist on it here, contenting my self to
make appear, that they excuse and justify those who do no good Works at all,
though they be able, testifying unto them, that they are not bound thereunto;
and by this means they divert men from the practice of them, removing from them
the obligation, and abolishing the Commandment as much as in them lies.

Escobar after he had acknowledged, that there is a Commandment which obliges
us by divine and natural light to do alms, inquires, Quandonam hoc obligat
praeceptum? Respondeo quaestioni, teneri nos el^mosynam exhibere in necessitate
extrema ex rebus vitae superfluis, licet statul sint necessariae; quia proximi
vita superat mei status decentiam. Escob. tr. 5. ex. 5. n. 43. p. 632.
When this Precept obliges? He answers, That in extreme necessity we are
obliged to do alms of such things as are not necessary unto life, though they
be needful to support us in our condition. His Reason is; Because the life of
our neighbor ought to be preferred to the decency of our condition. He
presupposes, as he expounds himself before, that by extreme necessity we are
to understand that on which the life of man depends. So that if he be not
assisted, he will surely dye; and in this estate he believes that we are
obliged to give of what we have superfluous, and which may help him to live
more commodiously. This is no great excess of Charity to give for saving our
neighbors life what is not at all necessary unto us.

But he extends not this Charity much farther, demanding concerning the same
subject, Q^i vero and statui habet superflu^, teneturne communibus
necessitatibus subvenite? Probabile est teueri, probabilius non teneri. Ib^n.
47. p. 633.
If he that has more than he needs for to live according to his condition, be
obliged to help the common necessities? He answers, That it is probable that he
is obliged thereto; but it is more probable that he is not obliged. That is to
say, that a person that has abundance, and who after he has satisfied all his
own necessaries and those of his family, has yet a superfluity, is not obliged
in a public Famine to give unto the poor, nor to any one whomsoever, if he see
him not in evident danger to dye with famine: A^as enim pauci divites salutem
consequerentur. Ibid.
For otherwise, says this Jesuit, there would be very few rich men saved. As
if he had a design by this reason to oppose the judgment, and express the word
of Jesus Christ, who says by way of admiration, Quam difficile qui pecuniam
habent in R^gnum Dei intrabunt. Luc. 18. v. 24.
How hard is it for them who have wealth to enter into the Kingdom of God!
Observing how few rich men were saved, by reason of the great difficulty of
their Salvation, things so difficult are always rare: and on the contrary this
Jesuit pretends that there are many saved, and that it is not hard for them to
be saved, which they may do according to him, without making use of the
principal means which God has given them, which is the exercise of Charity,
since he dispenses with them in the obligation of doing, except in extreme
necessity, which is very rare.

Nor will he have them always bound thereunto even in extreme necessity; as
when it is needful that they retrench something of what is of use unto them for
to live commodiously, and in honor and reputation in the world. For he
demands, An dives ^eneatur preximo subvenire, etiam in extrema necessitate
constituto, cum gravi proprii^ status detrimento: Tract. 5. ex 6. n. 155. page
652.
If a rich man be obliged to assist his neighbor who is in extreme necessity
with a notable diminution of what belong unto his condition? And to answer with
more assurance in so important a Point, wherein the life of a man in extremity
is concerned, and who is in danger to give up the Ghost for want of assistance,
he makes use of the Authority of two of his Fraternity. Ex Coninck affirmavi.
Addo ex Toleto, cum Doctores non conveniant quando peccet mortaliter qui non
sacit eleemosynam, non facile condemnandes divites qui non largiuntur. Ib.
I have already answered, says he, that he is not obliged according to
Coninck, to whom he adds Tolet who gives this important advice upon this
subject, we must not easily condemn rich men who do no alms, since the Doctors
accord not when it is mortal sin not to do them. Quamvis Confessarius
absolutionem a peccatis diviti non facile negare debeat, quod communes pauperum
miserias per eleemosynam s^blevare monitus recuset; tum quia de obligatione hac
an and qualis sit, Doctores non convenient; tum quia semper dives aliquam
causam in specie profert cur recuset Tambur. lib. 5., decal. c. 1. sect. 1. n.
18.
Tambourin adds thereto a reason which secures Confessors, if it be good, and
which makes that absolution can never be refused to a rich man because of his
hard-heartedness toward the poor. So it is, says he, that rich men bring
always some apparent reason for which they refuse to do alms. An apparent
reason is sufficient to this Father to elude the Law and the Word of God, as if
God were to be contented or deceived as well as men by vain appearances.

Escobar a little above, n. 154. doubts not at all, but constantly assures us,
that rich men commit no mortal sin at all in not giving even of the superfluity
of their wealth unto the poor who are in a great and pressing necessity. Scio
in gravi pat^perum necessitate divitem non dando superflua, non peccare
mortaliter. Ibid. n. 154.
I am assured, says he, that a rich man sins not mortally in not giving alms
to the poor of what he has superfluous in their great necessity.

Tolet, whom he alleges, says, Extra extremam necessitatem si quis sine
detrimento vitae; honoris, aut re^ aut cum parvo detrimento potest alium
juvare, tenetur sub mortali: si vero absque notabili praedictorum detrimento
non potest, non tenetur. Tolet. lib. 4. Inst. Sacerd. cap 10. number. 5. page 635.
That when there is no great necessity, when we can assist our neighbor
without notable diminution of our wealth, honor, or life, we are thereunto
obliged under mortal sin; but if we cannot do it without notable diminution in
these things, we are not obliged. He would have the rich do their alms at a
small charge, and without incommodity, or at least without feeling the
inconvenience which they may receive in doing them.

He speaks yet more clearly in lib. 8. where he inquires, Anex superfluis
teneamur facere eleemosynam in communibus necessitatibus ex praecepto? Tolet.
lib. 8. cap. 85. number. 2. page 1242.
Whether in common necessities, we are obliged by the Commandment to do alms of
our superfluities?

And after he had said, Thomas and of Cajetan, he adds: Tamen communis opinio
tenet contrarium. Imo aliqui aiunt nec etiam in gravi obligari sub mortali.
For all this the common opinion holds the contrary, and there are that say
even that we are not obliged thereto under mortal sin, even in a great
necessity. Whence he takes his foundation to establish this general Conclusion.
Sit ergo alter^ conclusio. Nullus sub mortal tenetur distribuere superf^ua
extra extremas and graves necessitates. Ibid. n. 3.
That none is obliged under mortal sin to give of his superfluities, unless it
be in extreme and very great necessities. All his reason is, the Authority of
the Casuists of that time, as he says himself. I am of this opinion, because
this is the common opinion of the Doctors, and I dare not declare them guilty
of mortal sin whom so many great Doctors do excuse.

Dicastillus says, Illam teneo propter communem Doctorum sententiam, nec audeo
obligare sub mortali eos quos tanti Doctor^s excusant.
That this Author holds that we may fulfill this Precept of Alms, by lending
only without giving any thing; another may add, that it may be satisfied by
lending upon usury, and there are some who say it already in effect, though
they express it not in the same terms. For to authorize Usury, they teach them
that make profession thereof, to say to those who borrow money of them, that in
lending unto them their intent is not usurarious, but altogether designed to do
them good; that they pretend that it is only to do them a pleasure, and to
exercise Charity that obliges them to lend to them.

Emanuel Sa says the same thing, and almost in the same words. Cum inter
Dectores non conveniat quando peccet mortaliter qui non facit elecmosynam, non
facile condemnandi sunt divites qui non faclunt. Sa verb. Elcemos. n. 2. page
201.
The Doctors being not agreed when we sin mortally in not doing alms, we must
not easily condemn the rich who do them not at all. And a little after citing
Tolet in the place before alleged with some other Casuists, and reporting that
Judgment, he concludes thus: Extra extremam necessitatem eleemosynam sub
mortali peccato non esse praeceptam dicunt. Ibid.
They say, that unless in case of extreme necessity, That is to say, that
unless we see some person that has his Soul in a manner hanging on his lips,
or who is in evident danger of death, it is no great sin for him that is able
to assist him to abandon him. This is, to speak properly, to discharge men from
the obligation of giving alms, these extreme necessities never falling out in a
manner, and there being few persons who see any such in many years, or not at
all in their whole lives: and when such an one by great accident is presented,
we are not obliged any farther to provide for them, according to these Doctors,
if we have not wealth to spare, and riches that are superfluous; and there
being hardly any person who believes he has such, or who indeed has such, so
much does Covetousness, Luxury, Housekeeping rack men at this day, and makes
all men in a manner necessitous; so the obligation of giving alms shall be
abolished, and there shall hardly be any person found who shall think himself
obliged to assist his neighbor to what necessity soever he be reduced.

But the words of Tolet are considerable, and discover also with advantage the
solidity of this Doctrine. Istam teneo propter communem Doctorum sententiam,
nec audeo obligare sub mortal quos tot and tanti Doctores excusant.
I am, says he, of this opinion, because it is the common judgment of the
Doctors: and I dare not engage him in mortal sin whom so many great Doctors
excuse. He calls the Casuists of these last times great Doctors, and he dares
not depart from their opinion, though he avows after that they are themselves
departed from that of the holy Fathers, who were the Doctors and Masters of the
Church before them, which has proposed them as such to all the faithful of
latter Ages, Etsi Scholasticorum communis sententia eos excuser, tamen Doctores
Sancti eos damnant, ita ut profecto sit sententia probabilis illos obligari sub
praecepto. Tolet. l. 8. c. 35. n. 3. page 1242.
Though the common opinion of the Schoolmen excuse them, says he, yet the
holy Doctors condemn them. So that it is very probable that they are obliged
thereunto by Precept.

He is not content to say in general, that this is the Judgment of the holy
Fathers: but he cites many passages of S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S. Austin, S.
Basil, and of S. Chrysostom, who place in the rank of those who rob or detain
unjustly the goods of others, all them who give not to the poor what remains of
their wealth after they have provided for their just and true necessities. You
see, says he after he had named all these Fathers, Vides tot Sanctos damnare
superflui retentionem, multum ergo timendum est. Ibid.
so many of the Saints who condemn them that do not their alms of what they
have of superfluity. There is therefore herein much cause to fear. He might
have added to the Authority of these Fathers that are the most illustrious and
the most famous of the Church, that of all the rest, for they all agree in this
Point, so that there is not one found to say the contrary.

So that if there be one Point of Doctrine established on the ancient and
universal Tradition of the Church, this is as clearly as any other; and if that
which is established upon this Tradition, ought to pass for indubitable amongst
Catholic Divines, and amongst all the Faithful, as it has always certainly
been until this present, we cannot call this Doctrine into doubt, without
wounding the Authority of the Church and the foundations of the Faith; and to
say it is probable, Tolet says: Profecto sententia probablis est, is not of
much ^atter effect than to say that it is false, because this is to hold always
for doubtful the ancient and universal Tradition of the Church, and to give men
liberty to decide Points of Divinity, and to expound Scripture against the
consent of the Fathers; which is expressly forbidden by the Council of Trent.

Another that has not read the Fathers, might be excused by his ignorance. But
this excuse has no place in Tolet, who forsakes them after he had cited them:
and which is yet more unsupportable and more injurious to these great Saints,
he renounces their Judgment after he had acknowledged it, to follow that of the
new Divines of our times. Et nisi esset tam unanimis Scholasticorum sent^ntia
qua possunt exculari modo aliquo tales homines, absque dubio damnanda esset
talis retentio. Ibid.
If the Schoolmen, says he, did not agree so unanimousl^ as they do in this
very Judgment, by which we may in some sort excuse these persens who give not
in alms what they have of superfluity, we must without doubt have condemned
this sparingness, so as the holy Fathers condemn it, as he says himself: Vides
tot Sanctos damnare superflui retentionem. He pretends then that the holy
Fathers on one side condemn those who give not in alms what they have of
superfluous; and on the other hand the new Scholasticks excuse them, we must
hold to the Judgment of these later, if we will believe this Jesuit, and follow
his Example.

But if it be lawful in this manner to oppose the new Divines to the ancient
Tradition in this Article,

But for all that he has overreached in saying that this new Opinion which he
holds is the common and unanimous of the Schoolmen, he having himself
acknowledged at his first setting out, that S. Thomas and Cajetan were not for
it, who are not of the least consideration; and no more is it that of others,
the more ancient Schoolmen especially; which does the more heighten his
excess. For if all the Schoolmen had been of one and the same advice upon this
Point, that of the holy Fathers being contrary to theirs, it would without
doubt be a great rashness to quit the Fathers to follow the new Schoolmen. But
these being divided upon this Point, and the Saints on the contrary being all
of one and the same Judgment, so that there is not one single one who therein
contradicts the rest, the insolence and presumption appears yet more
insupportable, to prefer the opinion of one part of the new Divines to the
common and universal Judgment of the holy Fathers, and one part also even of
the most famous Schoolmen.

The Jesuits then hold, Tambourin will answer you, Aliqui contendunt
probabiliter ea quae sunt necessaria ad acquirendum meliorem statum non esse
superflua. Granad. 22. controv. 4. d. 2. l. 4. n. 18. lege Lugo, etc. Ideo taro
quis in hac sententia dicetur habere bona superflus. Tamb. l. 5. Decal. c. 1.
sect. 1. n. 14.
That there are some who maintain with probability, that the things which are
necessary to advance and exalt us unto a better condition are not superfluous.
After this opinion it will rarely happen that we can have superfluous goods. He
might have said even that this would never happen at all, observing the
corruption which reigns at this day in the world, where we see that the
ambition of men is insatiable as well as their covetousness, and that desi^ing
always to advance themselves, they labor also perpetually to enrich
themselves; so that these two passions grow always together, and have no
bounds, how great wealth soever they possess, their greediness cannot be filled
nor satisfied, but they travel continually to heap up more, persuading
themselves that they never have sufficient to furnish them or their expenses
and designs, so far are they from believing they have any superfluity to give
in alms. And so they shall not be obliged to give, alms according to this
Divinity which obliges them not even in extreme necessity, but in case they
have somewhat superfluous.

After this if you ask what shall become of the Poor, Tambourin gives them an
expedient to get out of necessity, which is to steal from the Rich. Haec etsi
probabile saciunt posse extreme indigentem surripere pretiosa, and consequenter
ex vi hujus opinionis debere ca divitem clargiti. Sed quia contraria opinio
preb bilis est, ideo poterit dives illam sequi, and illa non tradere. Nec datur
bellum justum ex uttaque part absolute, sed ex vi duarum opinionum
probabilium, quod non esse inconveniens omnes docemus. Tamb. l. 5. Decal. c. 1.
sect. 1. n. 12.
All this which I have related, says this Father, makes us see that a man
extremely poor may steal precious things, and that by consequence the Rich is
obliged to give him them. But because the contrary opinion is also probable,
the Rich may pursue him, and not give his Riches to the Poor: not that this war
can be just on both sides speaking absolutely; but it is so by virtue of two
probable opinions; which is no inconvenience, as we do all teach. He calls the
combat which is betwixt the cruelty of the Rich who refuses to give alms unto
the Poor, and the infidelity of the Poor which prompts him to steal from the
Rich, a war. I confess that he has reason for this, as well as for that he
acknowledges that this war cannot be absolutely just on both sides, since
cruelty as well as theft is a kind of injustice. And he gives also testimony to
the truth without thinking thereof, and destroys his own proper cause by adding
that this war between the Poor and the Rich, or rather betwixt cruelty and
theft, being unjust of it self, is nevertheless made just by virtue of two
probable opinions which maintain it; one, that the Rich is not bound to give
alms to the Poor, and the other, that the Poor may steal from the Rich. This is
the use and particular advantage of this mavelous Science of Probability,
according to this Jesuit, who is one of its principal Defenders, to be able to
justify crimes by abolishing the Commandments of God and the Exercise of good
Works.

After this excess we shall be less surprised with that which Lessius says,
though it be very strange; Forte inter Christianos pauci sunt qui propter
defectum operum misericordiae corporalium damnentur, cum nemo ad illa teneatur
sub peccato mortali, nisi in extrem^ and gravi necessitate proximi^ quae rarius
ita contingit, ut hunc vel illum in particulari graviter obliget. Lessi^ l. 12.
de perfect. div. v. 22. n. 242.
It seems that amongst Christians there are few who are damned for not having
exercised bodily mercy, none being obliged thereunto under mortal sin, unless
in the utmost and greatest necessity of his neighbor, which happens very
rarely, so as to impose any great obligation on any particular person.

Tolet and others say, that there is no obligation to assist a neighbor but in
some great and extreme necessity; and Lessius adds, that this great and extreme
necessity cannot happen but very rarely; in extrema and gravi necessitate quae
rarius ita contingit. Whence it follows, that we are not obliged to do alms and
other works of mercy, but in extreme necessity, that is to say in effect, that
we are seldom or never obliged; since this necessity does scarce ever happen.
Besides to say even in this case, that there is no great obligation upon us to
assist our neighbor, and to say that there is none at all, is the very same
thing; because the matter being very great, in regard that the lives of men in
great extremity are therein concerned, the obligation to assist them must needs
be great, or none at all. Also it will appear less strange to say, that we are
not at all obliged to hinder the death of a man when we can conveniently, than
to say that we are indeed obliged thereunto; but it is only a venial sin to
fail in this obligation, and to suffer him to dye.

So that these Jesuits say in effect, that we are not absolutely obliged to
succor our neighbor, even in the extremest necessity, what convenience
soever we have to do it; and being not obliged in such necessity,

But Lessius does yet farther discover this pernicious Doctrine of his Company,
adding that even then when this so extreme and rare necessity does happen, no
person is particularly obliged to provide against it: for that the obligation
to assist our neighbor in this estate of extreme necessity being general and
common to all those who have means to do it, every one may put it off from
himself unto others; in such manner that we cannot say, that this man or that
man in particular is obliged thereunto: quae rarius ita contingit ut hunc vel
illum in particulari graviter obliget. That is to say, that the Commandment to
assist our neighbor in extreme necessity is general to all those who are of
ability: but it does ordinarily oblige none in particular. And so according to
Lessius Divinity a poor man being in entremity may dye of hunger in the view of
many persons who may and ought assist him, whilst they expect and attend one
another, no one of them being particularly bound to satisfy an obligation
which is common unto them all together.

And it is from this Principle that he concludes, Forte inter Christianos pauci
sunt, qui propter defectum operum misericordiae corporalium damnentur.
That it is apparent, that amongst Christians there are few who shall be damned
for failing to exercise the works of corporal mercy; notwithstanding that the
Scripture in diverse places, and Jesus Christ in the Gospel testify expressly,
Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum qui para^us est diabolo

Angelis ejus. (...) ^ivi enim and non dedistis mihi manducare; sitivi and non
dedistis mihi bibere, etc Mat. 25. v. 41.


Depart from me ye cursed into eternal fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, because I was hungry, and you gave me not to eat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me not to drink.

Lessius observed this difficulty, and he represents and objects it to himself;
but a consideration so powerful taken from the express word of Jesus Christ,
and from the sentence of eternal death which shall be pronounced against those
who shall fail of performing the works of mercy, was not sufficient to divert
him from his opinion. For without troubling himself with what Jesus Christ
says, he replies in a way and expression which contains more of contempt than
respect due unto the Word of God. See here his terms: N^c resert quod Dominus
Matthew. 25. formam judicii describens meminerit potius operum misericordiae quam
aliorum; id enim secit ut homines praesertim plebeios qui ad majora and
spiritualia parum sunt comparati, in hac vita ad ea excitaret Haec autem ratio
cessat in extremo judicio; quia tunc komines nec erunt amplius ad opera
misericordiae excitandi. Lessi^ ibid.
It is to no purpose to allege that our Lord in the 25. Chapter of S. Matthew
representing the form of the last Judgment, He declares plainly, that the
Gospel is false, and speaks false things to deceive the people and ignorant.
For if it be lawful to have this opinion of what Jesus Christ himself says
concerning his last Judgment, and the circumstances, and the words of that
Judgment which he will pronounce concerning men's eternal life and death, it
will by stronger reason be lawful to have the same thoughts of other places of
the Gospel which are not so important, and generally of all, since one cannot
be more true than another. So we may clude the whole Word of God, when we meet
therein any thing that does not agree with our opinions, and we shall give
occasion particularly in this Subject to those, who will conceive with Origin,
that the pains of the damned shall not be eternal; to say, that Jesus Christ
has not said that they shall be so, but only to divert men from sin, and to
cause them to fear by proposing unto them infinite punishments, according as
this Jesuit says, that he neither threatens nor condemns those who fail to do
works of mercy, but only to intimidate men, and particularly those of the
Commonalty, and to stir them up to employ themselves therein, being incapable
of other more elevated actions.

Being all good works are comprised and contained in alms,

But because I have spoken expressly of Fasting in the explication of the
Commandments of the Church, of Supplication in the Chapter of Prayer; and also
in that of Ecclesiastic Duties, and the obligation which we have to say Divine
Service, I will be content to send the Reader thither, to avoid tediousness and
repetitions. In reading those places we may find that the Jesuits are no less
favorable to men's effeminacy than to their interests, and that they are as
large and indulgent in freeing them from all the pains of fasting and prayer,
as in exempting them from the obligation of giving their goods and doing alms;
testifying by this so obsequious Doctrine, and so base and loose a conduct,
that all their study and care in a manner tends to the establishment of the
Kingdom of Lust, by favoring the corrupt passions and inclinations of men, and
in consequence thereof to destroy true Christian piety, both in its fountain
which is Charity, and in its effects and fruits which are good Works.

CHAPTER V. Of the Sacraments.
AS the principal Questions which respect the Sacraments, depend on the
Institution of God and the Church,

My design is not, as I have already declared, to report generally all their
Errors, no more than to refute any one in particular fundamentally; but only
to represent some few of the more visible and more extraordinary in every
matter, that by these, Judgment may be made of others which are more in number
and many times greater than those which I report.

I will bestow the greater part of this Chapter on Confirmation, because I
shall not meet with other occasions to speak thereof as of other Sacraments, of
which for the same reason I shall here speak only some few things.

ARTICLE. I. Of Baptism and Confirmation.
I. POINT. That the Jesuits take away the necessity of Baptism; and destroy the
dispositions required thereto.
EScobar in his first Book of Theological Problems proposes these questions as
Problematical; that is to say, in which the two contrary opinions are probable
and safe in conscience. Praecep^um Baptismi obligat and non obligat adultos ad
eum recipiendum quamprimum commode possunt. Escobar lib. 11. probl. 109. Qui
hoc tempore Baptismi legem ignorant, sed tamen legis naturalis praescrip^a
observant, possunt and non possunt sine Baptismo salvari.
Whether the Precept of Baptism obliges those who are of age to demand it, to
receive it as soon as they can conveniently? He proposes this also: Gravis
metus excusat and non excusat a praecepto divino recipiendi Baptismum aut
Ioenitentiam.
Whether great terror may excuse from observing the Divine precept which
obliges to receive Baptism or Penance?

After he has concluded after his ordinary manner that it does, and does not
excuse him: that is, that herein you may follow what opinion you please; he
adds: Ego quidem aliquando putsbam instante divino praecepto reciplendi
Baptismum aut poenitentiam, and tyranno prohibente receptionem fub mortis
comminatione, adhuc esse recipienda, ut certa quoad possit salus redderetur.
As for me I sometimes thought that the divine Precept which commands us to
receive Baptism or Penance urging us, and a Tyrant forbidding us to receive it
upon pain of our lives, we cease not to be obliged to receive it, that we may
make our Salvation certain so far as in us lies. So that if God on one hand
command Baptism on the pain of losing eternal life, and a Tyrant on the other
hand forbid it on the pain of losing temporal life, the Jesuit permits us to
obey the Tyrant rather than Jesus Christ, against the very word of Jesus Christ
who says in the Gospel, that he who would save his Soul, that is, his life,
shall lose it; and contrary to that of S. Peter, which being an explication of
that of Jesus Christ, is also more express and more clear in our case; that we
ought to obey God rather than men even in peril of our lives; according as this
Apostle did indeed expose his by preaching Jesus Christ against the prohibition
of the chief Jews.

The reason for which this Jesuit says that he adheres to this opinion, Ac jam
primae haereo sententiae dum video sus^epto Sacramento omne damnationis
periculum non cessare, cum omnino certum non sit fuisse cite s^sceptum seu
ministratum. Escob. lib. 1. Theol. mor. sect. 2. cap. 7. probl. 29.
Because I see, says he, that after this Sacrament is received, all peril of
damnation cease not, since it is not altogether certain that the Sacrament
has been well received or well administered.

He grounds then the necessity and obligation to receive Baptism on the effect
it works rather than on the Command which ordains it to be received: and
because that this effect which is to be delivered from sin and damnation is not
always entirely certain, so that we may in some sort doubt thereof, even after
we have received the Sacrament, the obligation to receive it according to him
is also not entirely evident and assured, but uncertain; which suffices him to
make the obligation of the divine Precept to receive Baptism questionable when
a Tyrant forbids to receive it on pain of life; and to form two probable
opinions both safe in conscience, whence he follows and maintains that which
dispenses in these incident cases with the precept and obligation of Baptism.

He says the same thing of Penance, and by the same Principle and self same
Reason which he makes use of to abolish the obligation to these two Sacraments,
it will be easy for him to ruin also when he pleases not only the precept and
obligation to other Sacraments, as that of Confirmation and the Communion; but
also generally of all the Commands of God and the Church, or the obligation to
obey them when a Tyrant shall forbid them on pain of life, there being no
Command so important,

The dispositions necessary for worthy receiving Baptism cannot be more
destroyed, than by putting them amongst Problematick questions, as does this
Author with others whom he cites of his Company: In adul^o ad baptismum
reciplendum, requiritur and non requiritu^ contritio de peccatis praeteritis,
sufficit and non suffi^it attritio. Escobar l. 2. l. 11. problem. 78.

Attritio quam habet adultus peccator ad fructum baptismi recipiendum, debet
esse and non debet esse existimata contritic. Probl 79.

Attritio sufficiens ad recipiendem gratiam bap^ismi, debet and non d^b^t
supernaturalis esse. Probl. 80

Ad effectum baptismi sufficit and non sufficit attritio existimate. Probl. 81.
Attritio naturalis quoad substantian, and supernaturalis extrinf^ce, suffici^
and non sufficit ad baptismum cum fructu ab adulto peccatore recipiendum.
Problem. 82


Whether contrition be necessary to Baptism, or attrition suffice? Whether we
ought to believe that this attrition is true contrition? Whether this attrition
ought to be supernatural, or natural be sufficient? If it be enough that we
believe that we have attrition; and that it be only supernatural outwardly?
That is to say, that it be supernatural only in that it comes from God who
excites it, though it be natural in it self. If these questions be
Problematick,

After so gross an error against Faith, that which the same Author says
concerning Witnesses will seem little considerable: but yet I cannot omit it,
because it shows that the Jesuits accommodations go so far as to give Heretics
a part in the Ceremonies of the Church. He proposes this Question: Quando
Gatholicus reperiri non p^test, qui soiceptoris in baptismo munus ^beat,
haereticus potest and non porest adn^tri.
When we cannot find a Catholic to be a witness, may we take an Heretic? He
answers, Fateor primam sententiam satis esse probabilem, qula esto regulariter
in quantum est haereticus, non tamen est simpliciter docendi alumnum incapex,
tum qula potest ad fidem converti, cum opus sit alumnum instruere; tum quia
licet in haeresi perseveret, fidem Ca^nolicam docere poterit, sicuti potest
peccator concionator persuadere virtu^em, licet ipse sit a virtute alienus;
ergo potest Patrinus haereticus levando de facro font bap^ismatum legitimam
promittere instructionem: quod maxim verum baber, si Sacerdos ut debet,
parences ac patrinum de obligatione i^ struendi baptizatum in fide Catholica
per baptismum suscepta moneat. Escobar tom. 2. lib. 11. Probl. 130.
That the opinion which permits this, for which he cites Layman, appears unto
him probable enough; for, says he, this Heretic may be converted unto the
Faith: and though be be not converted at all, he may teach the Catholic
Religion to his God^son, as a vicious Preacher may persuade unto virtue. So an
Heretical Godfather receiving a Child from the Font may promise to instruct
him as he ought. by Baptism. We must have very much faith, or rather none at
all, and as little reason, to believe and imagine that the Faithful may be made
believe that an Heretic who has lost the faith may be received and be proper
to communicate it to an infant in Baptism: so that the Church may or ought
receive him as a surety of the promises which the infant is to make by his
mouth, who has satisfified his own; and that this is not to treat unworthily
the most holy things and to profane them, to commit them to an excommunicated
person.

Tambourin may pretend himself exempt from one part of this reproach, because
he maintains, Probabilius est ex Sanch. l. 4. m. d. c. 1. n. ult. in baptismo
nullum fi^i votum aut promissionem de obedientia fidei. Tamb. meth. confess.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
That it is more probable that in Baptism there is no vow nor promise made to
obey the Faith. But I know not whether he pretend that those who receive
Baptism or those who answer for them to whom it is administered, do therein make
use of the Art of Aequivocations. For there is no other means not to oblige
ones self to obey the Faith when one protests solemnly to believe in God, and
for ever renounce the Devil his Works, and Pomps.

II. POINT. That the Jesuits divert the Faithful from Confirmation, by
discharging them from the Obligation to receive it.
AS for what concerns Confirmation, Filliutius treating of the Obligation to
receive it, says, Olim ^b frequentes persecutiones videtur fuisse praeceptum
divinum obligans vel semel in vita, vel in nee^sitate confessionis fidei habita
opportunitate.
That it seems that heretofore because of the Persecutions which then were
frequent, there was a Commandment from God which obliged to receive this
Sacrament once in the time of life, or at least when there happened any
necessity of confessing the Faith, if convenience were had for it. He forbears
not to say a little after that according to his advice; Cessante necessitate,
videtur expirasse praeceptum and abrogatum consuetudine. Filliut. tom. 1. mor.
qq. ir. 3. c. 2. n. 40. and 41. p 55.
The necessity being past, the Commandment has been abrogated and extinguished
by custom.

He believes then that custom, that is to say, the will and negligence of men
is capable to abolish the Commands of God, without regard to the protestation
which the Son of God himself makes in the Gospel, that Heaven and Earth may
change sooner than his Word, and that one sole letter or single point of the
Law shall never be defaced. The Jesuits may well despise this Word, and craze
this Law out of their Writings and out of their Books, but it shall abide
eternally in the Book of God which is the Gospel, who shall condemn them at the
day of Judgment who have taught as well as those who have done contrary to what
he says.

The Error of this Jesuit is a Principle for the destruction of the Gospel and
all Religion. For if customs of men and length of time may destroy one
Commandment of God, it may also destroy all the rest, and Christian Religion
shall depend upon the times and the fancies of men; it shall be altogether
voluntary and temporal, and not eternal, and founded on the unmovable Rock of
Gods Will, but on the moveable sand of man's.

But as these people play with the Word and Commandments of God, making them
depend on the Creatures, Filliutius who acknowledges that there was at the
beginning in the Church a divine Command to receive the Sacrament of
Confirmation, testifies a little after that there was never any such. So there
is nothing certain according to these Doctors, neither in the divine Law and
Word, nor in their own imaginations. Dico 3. prob^bile esse per se loquendo non
fuisse da^um p^aeceptum hujus Sacramenti. Ibid. n. 42.
I say in the third place, says he, that speaking absolutely it is probable
that there never was any Precept to receive this Sacrament.

He speaks generally of any Commandment whatsoever, acknowledging none neither
from God nor the Church for the Sacrament of Confirmation, making us see also
that the Doctrine of the English Jesuits who took away all fort of obligation
to receive this Sacrament, came not from themselves only; but from the Spirit
and School of their Society, as well as the other errors of their Books
condemned by the Faculty of Paris, and by the Authority of the Clergy of France.

Escobar discovers yet more clearly this Doctrine of his Company in his
Problems, amongst which he places these, Datur and non datur recipiendae
Consi^mationis praeceptum divinum.
Whether there be a Divine Precept to receive Confirmation? where having
reported the two contrary Opinions, he tells his own in these terms: Existimo
nullum dari nec divinum, nec Ecclesiasticum praeceptum Confirmationis
recipiendae. Escob. tom. 2. lib. 12. Pr 31.
I believe there is no Precept neither Divine nor Ecclesiastic to receive
Confirmation. And as if it had not been sufficient to have said it once, he
repeats it the second time also, confirming his error. After which he proposes
this other Problem: Datur and non datur ullum recipiendae confi mationis
praeceptum. Probl. 32.
Whether it be a Venial sin to fail of receiving Confirmation? He concludes
that Omittere Confirmationem peccatum vaniale est, neque peccatum est veniale.
Probl. 33.
Except in the case of scandal or contempt it is not of it self any scandal to
omit it. He contents not himself with this neither; but that he might have
occasion to repeat this scandalous Proposition, he makes this other question:
Sub venial fideles tenentur and nec sub veniali tenentur ante Sacramenti
Eucharistiae and matrimonil susceptionem Confirmationem recipere. Probl. 34.
Whether the faithful are obliged under the pain of Venial sin, to receive the
Sacrament of Confirmation before that of the Eucharist or of Marriage? And he
answers that they are not at all obliged. In his other work wherein he has
collected the Opinions of the 24 Elders who represent the Society, he demands,
Quaenam suscipiendi obligatio? Non est necessarium necessitate medil, neque
necessitate praecepti. Escob. tr. 7. ex. 3. n. 3. n. 11. p. 794.
What Obligation have we to receive Confirmation? and he answers, that there is
none that comes either from any Commandment, or from any necessity of this
Sacrament it self. He generally takes away all sort of obligation and necessity
from this Sacrament, reducing it into the rank of things free and indifferent.
And to testify this yet more, he adds that one may without sin, at least
without any great one, have a formal will not to receive it at all, sponte
omittere, provided it be without scandal and contempt.

As if it were not enough to despise so great a gift of God as that of this
Sacrament to refuse it voluntarily without cause. There is no King nor Man of
quality who would not hold it for a contempt to refuse in this manner any gift
though much smaller,

Mascarenhas who wrote after the rest, follows in this point the opinion of his
Brethren, and speaks also more clearly and resolutely then they, supposing
himself to be fortified by their Examples and supported by their Authority.
Omittere hoc Sacramentum absolute loquendo, nec etiam p^ccatum veniale est; Et
ratio est, quia nullum de hodatur praecepc tum de jure commun^, and nullum
datur peccatum nec veniale, nisi si^ contra aliquod praeceptum. Mascarenhas tr.
1. de Sacram. in genere, disp. 4. c. 5. p. 47.
There is not absolutely, says he, any sin, no not a Venial one, in neglecting
to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation: because amongst the common Laws of
Christian Religion there is none that commands it; and it cannot be any sin, no
not a Venial one, which is not against some Commandment. He acknowledges
neither obligation, nor precept, nor any sort of necessity for receiving
Confirmation, which is hard to reconcile with the Faith we ought to have in
this Divine Sacrament, which contains so great an abundance of Grace and
fullness of the Holy Ghost. For if one should say that he might withdraw himself
from it through honor and respect, not esteeming himself worthy of so great a
gift and bounty of God, he would therein testify at the least some esteem for
this Sacrament of the Holy Ghost. But to maintain that one may withdraw from it
of his own will only, and without any reason, and without troubling himself
about the Graces and Blessings which he might receive therefrom, is to testify
manifestly that we make no great account of it, and that we would reduce it to
the rank of things indifferent. And how can men be diverted from it more openly
then by making them believe that they may overlook it, and neglect even the
occasions that are convenient for receiving it, without making themselves
guilty before God of the least sin?

But because this wicked Doctrine is entirely opposite to the consent of the
Holy Fathers and Councils who acknowledge the necessity of Confirmation, the
Jesuits have found out a new invention to defeat their Authority herein.
Pontifices and Concilin in contrarium adducta loquuntur de necessitate non
praeceptl, sed utilitatis. Escobar supra n. 22. p. 796.
Popes and Councils which are alleged against their Opinion, speak not of a
necessity of command, but of a necessity of benefit. There is no Commandment so
express, nor so clearly expressed neither in the Scripture, nor in the Books of
the Church which may not be cluded by this new unheard of and ridiculous
Distinction. For hitherto none ever spoke of a necessity of benefit, it being
clear that what is only beneficial (as is Confirmation with the Jesuits) is not
necessary: and that to join in this manner a necessity to utility or an utility
to necessity, is to form a kind of Monster composed of two contrary parts,
whereof the one destroys the other. According to this distinction we may say
that whatsoever is in the Church and in the Scripture, is necessary, because
there is nothing there which is not profitable; and all the most free Counsels
themselves being profitable may be said to be necessary.

But to show yet more clearly that this necessity of utility is but a vain word
which they have invented to obscure the light of the Ancient Doctrine of the
Church, it is manifest that according to them it is impossible there should be
any true necessity of any kind for the Sacrament of Confirmation, since they
hold that it is not commanded by any law of God or the Church, and that the
Grace which it confers may be obtained not only by other Sacraments, but also
by every sort of good works and exercises of Religion, as appears by the Books
of English Jesuits condemned by the Clergy of France, and since publicly owned
by the Jesuits in the Book of Alegambe approved by their General.

Esc^bar also expounds his thought more openly, demanding; Qui data copis
recipiendi hec Sacramentum quam postea non facile est habiturus, nen recipit,
deliquitne ut contemptor? Minime. Ib. n. 23.
If he who has convenience to receive this Sacrament, which he cannot easily
another time obtain, being not willing to receive it sin by contempt? And he
answers in one word, No. Which is so much more considerable, because a little
after he says of this Sacrament, after the opinion of one of his Brethren,
that where Asserit praepesitus caeteris paribus majo^em gratia^n per illam
conferri quam per Baptismum and quodvis allud Sa^ a nentum, excepto Ordine. Ib.
n. 24.
the disposition is equal it confers more Grace then Baptism or any other
Sacrament, except that of Orders. So that according to the principles of the
Jesuits we may without any considerable neglect, indifferency, or contempt,
resuse all the Graces that are contained in all the Sacraments of the faithful,
when God offers them by his extraordinary mercy, and we may receive them
without any inconvenience, fince they will that we may refuse in that manner
the Grace of Confirmation which they hold to be greater then that of all the
Sacraments.

There are two occasions upon which the Sacrament of Confirmation seems to be
most necessary, that of persecution and peril of death, and that of receiving
holy Orders. Escobar speaking of the first, says: Puto esse allquando per
accidens peccatum veniale temeritatis sine confirma^ione facile suscipienda
periculis mortis tradi. Ibid. n. 23. p. 796.
I think that it may happen sometimes by accident that a man may sin Venially
through rashness, in exposing himself unto mortal danger without receiving
Confirmation, when it may easily be had. He will not that we are obliged to
receive Confirmation even then when we are exposed to danger of death during
persecution and being in danger to lose the Faith through Torments,

But he cannot hinder truth from speaking by his mouth against himself. For
being constrained to avow that there is at least Venial sin in refusing or
neglecting to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation in this extremity, he is
obliged by the same means to confess that this sin is greater, since it is a
constant maxim with him and his Fraternity, that we ought to judge of the
greatness of an obligation and sin by that of their matter. And so Confirmation
and the Grace of Confirmation being so great that according to him it
surpasses that of all the Sacraments of the Faithful, and the necessity of
receiving it in the case he proposes being so great that therein salvation and
peril of renouncing the Faith are concerned, if we be not fortified with the
Grace of this Sacrament, it must follow of necessity that the sin which we
commit in voluntarily neglecting and rejecting it will be great, or none at
all. And Mascarenhas makes use of this very reason to prove that there is
neither any necessity nor precept which obliges us to receive Confirmation.
Confirmatur, qu a cum haec res in se fir gravis, si de illa d^retur aliquod
praeceptum obligans sub mortal: sed non obligas its, sicut dictum est supra;
ergo signum est de hoc nullum dari praeceptum. Mascarenhas tract. 1. de ^acram.
in genere, disp. 4. cap. 5. page 47.
This matter, says he, being of great importance, if there were any
Commandment for it, it would oblige under mortal sin; and there being no such
obligation, as we have said before, there is then no precept in this point: And
consequently it is no sin at all not to receive this Sacrament.

It must be observed here,

It is by this way and by these degrees that they have introduced many
Novelties, Errors, and loose Principles, both into the manners and doctrine of
the Church, which they maintain publicly at this day as Truths and Rules of
Christian Piety.

As for the other case in which it seems that we are yet more obliged to
receive Confirmation, to wit, before we present our selves to take Orders;
Escobar demands, Number Ordinibus necessario praemittenda Confirmatio? Escobar
Ibid. n. 25 p. 796.
If it be necessary to take Confirmation before Orders? He says at first that
there are some who hold it a crime to fail herein, but he afterward expresses
his own opinion in these terms: Asserue rim receptionem prius Tonsurae absque
praevia Confirmatione, non excedere culpam venislem levem, Ordinum vero minorum
veniale commissum gravius. Ibid.
I am not afraid to say that to receive the rasure without having beforehand
received Confirmation, is but a Venial sin, a very slight one; and that it is a
greater, but yet still a simple Venial one, thus to receive the lesser Orders.

He puts the same question again a little after in a Chapter which has for its
Title: Praxis circa materiam de Sacrameneo Ordinis ex Societatis Jesus
Doctoribus. Ibid. p. 888.
The practice in the matter of the Sacrament of Orders, drawn out of the
Doctors of the Society of Jesus: in which he demands, An Ordinandus debeat
prius Sacramentum Confirmationis accipere? Ibid. n. 32.
whether he who is to be ordained, ought first to receive the Sacrament of
Confirmation? He acknowledges that Tolet judges that they who do otherwise sin
mortally, and are irregular because of the express command of the Council of
Trent, which is conceived in these terms: Prima Tonsura non initientur, qui
Sacramentum Confirmationis non susceperunt. Council. Trident. sess. 22. cap. 4.
That those who have not received the Sacrament of Confirmation be not received
unto the rasure: which hinders not Escobar from declaring that Alii negant adeo
strictis verbis uti Concilium Tridentinum, sed solum consulere Episcopis ut non
confirmatos non promoveant.
others say that the words of the Council are not to be taken rigorously; but
that it only counsels Bishops not to promote unto Orders those who have not
been Confirmed. Whence he concludes with them who hold this opinion,
Probabiliter ergo tam suscipiens quam conferens Ordinem ante ordinandi Confi
mationem, venialiter deliquit. Ibid.
that it is then probable that both he who confers and he who receives Orders
before Confirmation sin only Venially.

This is sufficiently to despise the Sacrament of Confirmation, to take the
pains to receive it for preparation to holy Orders, then when it may so easily
be given by the same Bishop who confers the Orders. But this it also a greater
contempt of the order of the Church, of the Authority of an Oecumenick Council,
and of all Ecclesiastic Tradition and Discipline, not to fear at least to
violate it by a voluntary withdrawing from, and neglect of these so formal
words of the Council of Trent; Prima Tonsura non initientur, qui Sacramentum
Confirmationis non susceperint. As if these words did not contain an Ordinance,
but only a counsel and simple proposition. Which is a very easy way to
overthrow all the Decrees of Councils and the Church, and to render them
entirely unprofitable.

Here we must take notice of the spirit of these Divines, and the license which
they take to play with Sacraments and Consciences. They debase Confirmation as
much as they can, and carry themselves with visible passion to the diminishing
of the virtue of this Sacrament, which is the accomplishment of Baptism,
without which the grace of Baptism continues imperfect, and Christians are not
such but only imperfectly, according to the Fathers; and on the other hand we
see them carry indifferently all the world to confession and the Communion with
so much ardour and importunity, that they make it the head point of their
direction, as the greater part of those who follow their conduct make it the
principal part of their devotion.

Which thing is so much the more considerable, for that if we pre-suppose even
with them that there is no command which obliges us to receive Confirmation,

But if any will say, that the custom of confessing and communicating
frequently is received in the Church, and those who make a special Profession
of Piety ought to follow it, and cannot neglect it without testifying that they
contemn it with pride; we must confess by this reason that we are much more
obliged to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, and we cannot neglect the
opportunities thereof without discovering greater pride and contempt against
this Sacrament, since it is manifest that the order, custom, and use of
receiving it, is much more ancient, more authorized,

But it is easy to see by the Spirit and ordinary Carriage of the Jesuits,
that that which carries them on to aggravate with so great care the obligation
and necessity of Confession and of the Communion, and on the contrary to
diminish that of Confirmation; to push on Christians indifferently to these two
first Sacraments, and to keep them at distance from the last, is thi^, that
they are not Bishops to confirm men, as well as they are Priests to confess and
communicate, and that in recommending with so much importunity Confession and
the Communion, they make themselves necessary; and in diverting the Faithful
from Confirmation, they advance the design which they have to make Bishops
unuseful, and to withdraw the people from their guidance, that they may be
their Masters therein, and reign in the Church without any hindrance.

ARTICLE II. What sort of Dispositions the Jesuits demand for these two
Sacraments, and that they teach men to profane them by Sacrilege.
AS the Jesuits incline all sorts of persons indifferently to confess and
communicate, it behooves them that they may bring them on thereunto to make the
practice and use of these two Sacraments very easy. We have already seen in
the Chapter of Penance that they have so sweetened the yoke of Confession, that
to confess well there needs in a manner nothing but to know how to speak and
declare ones sins, though in many cases they give liberty also to conceal one
part, and though one do accuse himself in general, without specifying any in
particular, they oblige him not absolutely to repeat his Confession.

And as for their Penitents who confess frequently, they permit them almost any
thing, even to deceive them and lie in Confession, without believing they
commit any great fault, provided it be only in a matter of venial sin: that if
they have committed mortal sins which they are ashamed to discover, they may by
the advice of these directors confess them to other Priests to preserve their
reputation with their ordinary Confessor. They will also make their Penance as
easy as their Confession if they please. For if they be not in a humor to
perform it, that they may give them neither trouble nor scruple, they will
impose it on them only by way of counsel, or without prescribing them any thing
in particular, Impono tibi pro poenitentia quiequid hodie vel hac hebdomada
boni feceris, vel mali passus fueris. I impose upon you for Penance whatsoever
good you shall do, or evil you shall suffer this day or this week.

If a person overrun with crimes address himself to them, and be troubled to
make known the bottom of his Conscience and to discover the corruption of his
Heart, by declaring his wicked inclinations and habits, they will not press on
him in this point, no more then to tell them in particular the number of his
wicked desires, impurities, and secret crimes which move in his spirit and in
his heart, though it were easy for him to do it if he would; they content
themselves if he say, Amavi Mariam toto mense, toto anno. I have loved Mary a
whole month, a whole year. But if he also startle at Penance, they will give
him so slight an one that he cannot refuse it; they will even leave him to his
choice, if it be needful, and they will remit him to do his Penance in the
other world.

After this they must wholly renounce all devotion, who will not go to confess
themselves to the Jesuits; and it seems that he who refuses can have no other
pretense then to say that he has no devotion; and he may add that he cannot
have any for Confession as the Jesuits represent it, and that he cannot believe
that he confesses himself as he ought, if he confess as they say he may.

But after all this, though one will not be devout, if he be a Catholic he
must at least confess himself at Easter, which ordains that we should at least
confess our selves once a year by any manner of Confession whatsoever it be,
provided that we can say that it is a Confession, though it be a Sacrilege.

They say the same thing of the Communion, and hold that we may satisfy the
Command of the Church in communicating unworthily and receiving the Body of
Jesus Christ after we have confessed in the manner now related, or without any
Confession at all, though we believe we are in mortal sin, and overrun with
crimes. But because I shall handle these two Points in their proper place,
expounding the Commandments of the Church according to the Maxims of the
Jesuits, I will not speak thereof here at all, and I will rest satisfied only
in representing some of the dispositions with which they hold, that we may
communicate worthily and receive the fruit of the Communion. They grant indeed
that our conscience must not be charged with any crime, but they hardly require
any thing farther.

It is from this Principle that Filliutius speaking of dispositions for this
Sacrament, says at first, that we ought to be in a state of Grace, Non
requititur autem necessa^io: pein o actualis devo^io.
First, says he, it is not necessary to have actual devotion. Whence he draws
this consequence: Ex quo etiam colligitur voluntary distrctum secluso co
temptu, quia culpa non est mortalis, non ponere oblcem. Filliut. tom. 1. mor.
qq. tr. 4. c. 6. n. 163.164. page 87.
That he who is voluntarily distracted in the Sacrament, provided be contemns
it not, puts no obstacle to the effect of the Communion, because he sins not
mortally. Supposing there is nothing but mortal sin alone which makes a man
indisposed for the Communion, and to receive the effect of the Eucharist. He
adds a little after, Non requititur carentia peccati venialis. Ibid.
That it is not also necessary to be without venial sin, whatsoever it may be,
even voluntary, wherewith one actually and deliberately imploys himself at the
holy Table; and when even after he has received the Body of Jesus Christ, and
holds it yet in his mouth, instead of adoring it, he dishonours and offends him
expressly by some venial sin whereunto he casts himself at that very season,
this shall not be incompatible with the Communion, and shall not give any stop
to its effect, according to this Jesuit. D^actusli p^ccato ve nali quod
comi^tur ipsam communionem, etiam probatur non ponere ob cem; quia tale
peccatum non facit indig^un. Ibid. n. 165.
As to actual sin, says he, which is committed in the very Communion it self,
it hinders not at all from receiving the Grace of the Communion, because this
sin makes not the person unworthy of the participation of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, because, according to him, there is nothing but mortal sin that
is capable of causing this unworthiness.

He may say by the same reason, Alioquin talis peccaret mortalite^: quia qui
indigne suscipit, judicium sibi manducat and b.bit. Ibid.
That otherwise he who communicates in this disposition sins mortally, because
he who receives unworthily the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, eats and drinks
his own damnation. As if we could not communicate unworthily without sinning
mortally. This is on one side too rigorous to think that all indispositions in
the Communion should be mortal; and on the other side too large to believe that
all sorts of venial sins, even voluntary and affected, should not be
indispositions to this Sacrament.

But foreseeing that it might be justly objected unto him, that his opinion is
universally condemned by the Holy Fathers and Councils, there where they
represent the great purity wherewith the Body of Jesus Christ ought to be
received in the Communion; he says to prevent this objection: Qued si Sancti
Patres vineaistur plus exigere, incelligendi sunt vel in ordine ad utiliorem
and magis fructuosam sumptionem, vel quoad c nsilium. Ibid. number. 165.
That if the Holy Fathers seem to demand more, we must take that which they say
as a counsel, or as an exhortation to communicate with more fruit and benefit.
There is nothing more easy than in this manner to defeat all Authorities and
all the Ordinances of the Fathers and Councils. There is nothing so formal in
the Scripture it self which may not be cluded by this distinction, making every
thing pass for counsel which appears contrary to our sense, and too rigorous to
the flesh, that so we may dispense therewith without scruple.

He relates amongst others the Council of Trent, daring even to pretend that it
is for him in this Point: Quia ex Scriptura and Consiliis tantum colligitur
debere eum qui communicate se probare. Tridenti^um autem sess. 13. docet hanc
probationem in co consistere, ut nullus sibi conscius peccati mortalis absque
confessione ad Eucharistiam accedat. Ibid. number. 164.
Because, says he, we can collect no other thing from Scripture and from
Councils than that he who communicates ought to try himself. Now the Council of
Trent, sess. 13. teaches us that this proof consists in this, that no person
who believes himself guilty of mortal sin, ought to approach unto the Eucharist
without being confessed first of all. Ne absque magna reverentia and sanctitate
ad percipiendum accedat. Conc. Trid. sess. 13. cap. 7.
not to approach unto it to receive it without profound reverence and great
holiness.

This is not to be in great holiness, but simply without great evil, to be
exempt only from mortal sin; and none can say that this is to have a profound
reverence for Jesus Christ, to offend him voluntarily in receiving. And yet
though the Council forbids to communicate without very great holiness and
profound reverence, Filliutius ceases not to pretend that we may communicate
worthily in committing venial sins whilst we do communicate, and persisting in
them voluntarily.

And to remove all scruple from them who are fallen into crimes, and yet have a
defire to communicate, he puts this question: Quaero quanto temporis spatio
tenetur communicnem differ qui peccavit mortaliter? Ibid. tract. 4. cap. 8.
n. 214. page 94.
For how long time ought he to forbear to communicate who has sinned mortally?
His answer is, Respondco eum qui contritus est and confessus posse per se
communicare, etiamsi praecedente necte vel aliquo spatio ante mortaliter
peccaverit. Ibid.
That he who has remorse for his sins, and who has confessed them, may
absolutely communicate, though the very night before, or even a little before
the Communion he have sinned mortally.

He must be both a bad Divine that holds Maxims so opposite to the judgment and
perpetual discipline of the Church, and a bad Philosopher who imagines that the
spirit of a man can so easily pass in an instant from the most violent
deordination of passions, to the peace and purity of contrary virtues; and he
must also be a far worse Christian to be so little touched with respect and
love to Jesus Christ and his neighbor, as to expose the one so rashly to so
great contempt and so unworthy usage, and the other to so visible a ruin and
damnation. And if he be not absolutely impious and a Libertine who holds an
opinion so horrible, he must be at the least more bold and impudent than the
impious and Libertines themselves, who without doubt, dare not maintain
publicly what this Jesuit maintains, and have not the confidence at any time
to talk thus before considerable persons who have any sense of piety, but that
they know these discourses are found amongst the Books of the Jesuits.

Mascarenhas proposes the same case with Filliutius, but with much greater
extent, and confidence, and clearing of all the difficulties which may arise
from his resolution. Qui habuit voluntariam and mortaliter p^ccaminosam
pollutionem, sive cum complice, five sine illo, si habeat debitum illum
dolorem, praemissa confessione poterit in eadem die communicare. Mascarenhas
tr. 4. de Sacr. Euchar. disp. 5 cap. 7. page 239.
He, says he, who is fallen into voluntary and mortal pollution, That is to
say, with a sorrow natural or supernatural, true or held for true, though it be
not, the one or the other being sufficient with the Sacrament, according to
this Divine, as we have made appear when we spoke of Penance and Confession;
and he holds himself so well assured in his answer, that he doubts not but that
a man may with this disposition alone communicate worthily. Torn difficultas
est utrum Confessatius debeat consulere his sic voluntary and mortaliter
pollutis, util o deac mmunione se abstineant, non ex praecepto, quod ut dictum
est nullum datur, sed ex consilio propter reverentiam debitam tanto Sacramento?
Ibid.
All the difficulty in this case, says he, is to know if the Confessor ought
to counsel these persons that are thus fallen into mortal and voluntary
pollution, to abstain from communicating the same day, not because of the
Precept, because there is none that forbids it, as we have now shown; but by
way of advice, because of that reverence which is due unto so great a
Sacrament. He acknowledges, Ordinary respondent authors affirmative;
nihilominus tamen mihi magis placet opinio Joannis Sancil in suis selectis,
disp. 23. n. 30. afferentis hoc non esse consulendum, imo potius consulendum
quod communicent, dummodo sint per confessionem rite dispositi.
That the common opinion of the Doctors is that the Confessor ought to give
this counsel. But he declares at the same time that it is not his, and that the
opinion of Sancius pleases him better, to wit, that this counsel ought not to
be given these persons; but rather to incline them to communicate, provided
they be well disposed thereunto by Confession.

And he would not only that a Confessor should not divert them from the
Communion; but he pretends also, Deinde etiam consulendum ne poenitentes
defraudentur gratia hujus Sacramenti and aliis plurimis effectibus, Ideo reus
erit qui dignum poenitentem communione defraudar, and ille talis dignus est.
That he is obliged to incline them to it, And this obligation, according to
him, is so strict, that the Confessor makes himself guilty, reus erit, if he
deprive a Penitent of the Communion who is worthy of it, as he is of whom the
question proceeds.

If a Confessor is guilty for not inclining unto the Communion those who are
fallen the same day into voluntary and mortal pollution, S. Paul will be much
more so in the judgment of this Divine when he counsels married persons to
abstain from the use of Marriage, which though lawful, renders married persons
indisposed unto prayer; which will be false: And by consequence the counsel
which he gives them upon this Principle, to live in continence that they may
pray, will be ill founded and rash, if the crimes of Luxury hinder not those
who have committed them, from going the same day to the Communion, and gives
not power unto a Confessor to counsel them to abstain from it, it being
manifest that the Communion requires a greater purity and preparation than
prayer.

The Church also must have been many Ages in error, when it did not only
counsel, but also command by many express Canons, that those who were fallen
into mortal sins of impurity and others, should be deprived many years of the
Communion, what remorse soever they testified for their crimes.

The reason of this Jesuit is, Ne defraudetur gratia hujus Sacramenti and aliis
plurimis effectibus. He supposes that he is truly converted in a moment, being
one step out of his debauches, and that he is entered all at once, without doing
any thing else but confessing himself, into the dispositions necessary for
receiving the grace and effects of the Communion: which is notwithstanding at
the least very doubtful, there being cause to fear rather that the Communion
might turn to his condemnation, than to presume that he shall receive the
fruits and blessings which it communicates unto those who receive it worthily.

This consideration for all that and this fear touches not nor astonishes this
Jesuit. For though it were manifest that this sinner were not re-entred into
the Grace of God by Confession, and that he should commit Sacrilege by
communicating in an estate of mortal sin; he pretends that however, though he
received not at the present the grace and other effects of the Communion, he
yet should not for all that wholly lose them; but they should be held in
reserve and kept for him until such time as he should receive more purely. This
is that he testifies when he says: Ille qui cum obice ^ccedit, hab^t jus ad
gratiam sublato obice. Ergo ablato obic: hoc Sacramentum preducit offictum.
Mascorenhas tr. 1. de Sacr. in genesis disp. 4. cap. 5. number. 211.
That he who approach th unto the Eucharist with some hindrance contrary unto
Grace, has a right to receive it when the hindrance is removed; and by
consequence the Sacrament produces its effect so soon as the hindrance ceases.

Whence it follows that a man by Sacriledges acquires right to the Grace of the
Sacraments instead of drawing down the curse of God upon him, and that the more
Sacriledges and Profanations he commits, the more treasure of Grace he heaps
up,

But we need not mark more particularly the incredible absurdities and
impertinences of this Doctrine, since he who produced it himself avows a good
part of them, and confesses freely, Non obstat quod si aliquis qui multories
cum peccato communicaret, postea convertatur -- acquirat subito totam illam
gratiam debi^am tali Sacramento toties sumpto si been and licite communicarer.
That it follows thence that if a man after he have communicated many times in
a bad estate come to be converted, he shall receive in an instant all the Grace
that was due to so many Communions, though they were celobrated in an unworthy
manner. This is an horrible way to become a Saint in a moment by sacrilegious
Communions, and a puissant reason to incline the greatest sinners frequently to
commit and reiterate them, because they will be so many provisions of Grace,
which will produce an abundance capable to replenish the Soul in all parts as
soon as it is pleased to turn it self; so that they shall surpass in Holiness
many of those who have lived in innocence, when they were plunged in vices.

He alleges for one reason of so many impieties and impertinences, Nam in hoc
ipso magis apparet misericordia and clement a Christi Domini, and virtus and
efficacis tanti Sacramenti, quod maxim per hoc extollitur and amplificatur.
That herein will appear with more advantage the mercy and clemency of Jesus
Christ, and the virtue and efficacy of so great a Sacrament, which will in
consequence thereof become more frequent and honored. It is without doubt that
the Communions will be more frequent, if the greatest sinners be admitted and
even invited thereto, by making them believe that though they commit
Sacriledges,

He farther affirms, Dices cum P. Lug. lisp. 9. sect. 6. n. 208. in fine; Ex
hac doctrina sequeretur quod homo fieret repen te sanctissimus propter plura
^acrilegia, and co sanctior, quo plura suissent sacrilegis, and mu^to sanctior
si singulis di^bus contra leges Ecclesiae decies velcenties celebrasset; quod
ex se incredibile apparet.
That it follows from this Doctrine, that a man may become most holy in an
instant because of many Sacriledges which he has committed; and so much the
more holy as he has committed more of them; and yet more holy, if he have
communicated or said the Mass ten or an hundred times a day contrary to the
Rules of the Church, which appears in it self incredible. It is true that this
is incredible, so extravagant and impious is it. But this Jesuit attempts to
make it credible and reasonable by a Chimerical and imaginary distinction,
saying, Respondeo in tali casu non fieri hominem repentssilme sanctissimum
propter plura sacrilegia commissa, sed propter plures communiones.
That this man will not become in an instant most holy by having committed many
Sacriledges, but for having communicated many times. As if many Communions made
in mortal sin, and many Sacriledges were not the same thing. He adds that Et si
to fit sanctior quo plura fuissent sacrilegis, hoc non sequi per se, sed per
accidens. Per se enim tale augmentum gratiae and sanctitatis provenit ex
pluribus sumptionibus Eucharistiae; and per accidens est quod tales sumptiones
suerint sacrilegae. Ibid.
If he become so much more holy,

If we may not say according to him, supposing that these sacrilegious
Communious produce Grace, that they are the Sacriledges, but only the
Communions that produce it, neither according to him may we say that this man
has sinned in communicating, but only in committing Sacriledges, nor that any
Communions do hurt sinners, but only the Sacriledges which they commit in
communicating: for the Communion of it self hurts none, and is not evil of it
self; but only the abuse and the Sacrilege which they adjoyn to it by their
fault.

The reason by which he props this rare subtlety is ridiculous. He says that
it is by accident that these Communions become Sacriledges. But although it be
true that the Communion in it self and in general contains not Sacrilege
therein, and that it comes by accident which befalls it; nevertheless it is true
that these particular Communions made with these particular circumstances, and
in this estate of mortal sin, contain Sacrilege therein, in such sort, that it
is impossible to separate them; and it is the same thing in this particular
Communion, to be a Communion and to be a Sacrilege. And so it is not by
accident that it is a Sacrilege; but of it self and of its proper nature. And
by consequence as it may be said truly that this Communion makes a man guilty
and kills him,

I speak not here of E^tream-unction; for that my design being only to
represent the Maxims of the Jesuits Morals, the excess which they commit in the
matter of this Sacrament does respect the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
rather than Manners.

I might very well treat here of Orders and Marriage, and thereby make the
corruptions and abuses appear which they have introduced and cherished in
married persons and Ecclesiastics: but because this may be done more
conveniently and more to purpose, as in its proper place, when we speak of the
Duties of these two Estates, I will speak here only a few things concerning
Priests, so far as they are the Churches Deputies to administer the Sacraments
and Word of God unto the Faithful, and to offer unto him in the name of the
Faithful the public Sacrifice and Prayers. Where I shall make appear
particularly the corruption which the Jesuits introduce into these estates.

ARTICLE. III. Of the Sacrament of Marriage.
WE may consider in Marriage the dispositions that precede,

The first disposition unto Marriage is to have no impediment which may make it
null or unlawful. Concerning this Tambourin establishes these Rules. Si facts
diligentia dubites de impedimentodirimenti ad ducendam ali quam, potes illam
sine dispensatione ducere. Ita Merolla, Sanch. Si dubites an indigeas aliqua
dispensatione in impedimento dirimenti ad contrahendum matrimonium cum aliqua,
and in similibus, potes tibi persuadere ea non indigere, and consequenter posse
te matrimonium inite 5. Si vero certus es te indigere dispensatione, sed dubious
an illam obtinueris, praevalet indigentia certa contra dublam dispensationem.
At si certus es de indigentia seu impedimento, and item certus quod obtinueris
dispensationem, sed ambigis an dispensatio sit valids, quia dubitas an causa in
petitione dispensationis tacito vel falso expressa, fit finalis, hoc est ut
sine illa adhuc fuisset concessa; vel quia dubitas an Superior qui est in certa
possessione ^perioritatis in aliquem, sit Superior legitimus necne, validane
erit judicanda dispensatio? Praesumendum esse vali^am -- Utraque opinio ^ltem
prop er authoritatem extrinsecam probabilis est. Tambur. lib. 1. cap. 3. sect.
6. verbo ^spensatio number. 1, 3, 5.
If after things are well considered, you are in doubt of some dissolving
impediment which makes you incapable to marry some person, you may marry her
without dispensation. When you doubt whether you have need of a dispensation to
contract Marriage, you may persuade your self that you have no need: but if you
be assured that you have need to be dispensed with, and you doubt whether you
have obtained it, the assurance of the need which you have prevails above the
uncertainty of the dispensation. That is to say, that there are none but those
who would put themselves to fruitless trouble, who will take any care to see
whether they obey the Church, and to demand of it permission to do that which
it forbids; since in the most important commands, and most assured obligations,
the least suspicion and the least doubt we can have of being acquitted thereof,
whether it be of having had a dispensation, or of having had a just and
reasonable one, suffices to put the conscience in repose, without taking care
of any other thing.

According to these Maxims and this reasoning of our Jesuit, a man who doubts
whether he owe a sum of money or a rent, or who being assured that he owes it,
doubts whether he have paid it, or who knows certainly that he does owe it and
has not paid it, and doubts only whether he to whom he owes it has gotten it
well, or whether there were not some defect in the contract, in all these cases
and in all these doubts, shall not be obliged to pay.

I know not whether the Jesuits observe these Rules or this Conduct toward
their Creditors:

A Rape is one impediment of Marriage, according to the Council of Trent, which
excommunicates and condemns unto a perpetual infamy those who have committed
this crime, or who have been accessories thereto. Sanchez referens Basil. and
Rebel, putat illud decretum Trid. non se extendere ad soeminam raplentem
virum, quia Tridentinum tantum loquitur de raptore, non de raptrice, and
odiosum and poenale non est ad raptricem extendendum. Dicastil. dc matrimonio
tract. 10. disp 7. d. 58. number. 660.
Dicastillus following the opinion of Sanchez, believes that the Canon and all
the Penalties it ordains, respect the men only and not the women who are guilty
of this crime of Rape; because in the Council it is Raptor, and not Raptrix,
and this odious Decree ought not to be enlarged. For it is an odious thing in
the Divinity of the Jesuits to condemn crimes. Tambourin has taken the same
care to restrain this Decree. Quare si quis rapiat mulierem causa libidinis,
and non ad contrahendum cum illa matrimonium, non incurrit praedictas Goncilii
poenas -- Ratio est quia Goncilium nil intendit praeterea nisi libertati
matrimonii providere. Tambur. lib. 7. decal. 6. sect. 2. number. 11.
If any one, says he, steal a woman to abuse her, and not to marry her, he
incurs not the penalty of the Council. says this Father, is because the
Council pretends only hereby to provide for the freedom of Marriages. He must
be therefore less punishable who is more criminal, since to commit a Rape to
abuse a woman is an action more lewd and more criminal than to steal her to
marry her, it being impossible to expose her to greater extremity than to
abandon her after she has been abused. As if he who steals a woman and abuses
her, did not hinder a woman from being married, as she might have been before,
and did not reduce her to a necessity of being married to him that will accept
of her.

This Author sinds also another means to exempt from the condemnation of the
Council of Trent those who steal women. Ignorante Caesare adolescente abducta
est ab ejus amico quaedam invita puella, ut eidem Caesari illa puella in
mattimonium traderetur -- Si neque perse, neque per alium Caesar puellam
rapuit, ipse taptor non est, atque adco poenas non incurrit ex Sanchez: amicus
etiam nec incurrit, quia non est raptor pro suo matrimonio, de quo loquitur
Tridentiai decretum; quod cum sit odiosum, non est extendendum ultra verba.
Unde vides in hoc casu, tum amicum hunc, tum adolescentem illum pro quo rapta
est mulier, valide posse matrimonium inire cum eadem mullere etiam non
separata. Tambur. lib. 7. cap. 6. sect. 2. number. 16.
He says that if any carry away a woman whether she will or no to cause her to
be married unto his friend, his friend knowing nothing thereof, neither the
Ravisher, nor he for whom the woman was stolen, incurs the pains ordained by the
Decree of the Council, which being edious, ought not be extended beyond its
words. And thereby you see, says he, in this case as well the friend who has
committed the Rape, as the young man for whom the woman was stolen, may lawfully
contract Marriage with her, without having need to be separated from her
afterward. So that he who has a friend of some competent understanding may
marry by force what woman he pleases; and if he for whom she was stolen make
some scruple because of the Rape,

Children have an obligation upon them by the Law of Nature not to marry at
least without demanding the consent of their Fathers and Mothers. Dicastillus
says, Quod sit obligatio monendi parents and petendi confilium sub mortal,
non facile admiserim, nec satis assequor fundsmentum hujus tam gravis
obligationis and peccatl in non petendo consilio ab eis quorum petitum and
datum omnino liberum est rejicere. Dicast. de matr. tr. 1. disp. 4. d. 17. n.
176.
That he finds it hard to admit that children are obliged under the pain of
mortal sin to advertise their fathers and mothers of their Marriages; and to
demand their advice: he sees not the foundation of so strict an obligation.

For what respects Marriage considered in it self, though the Council of Trent
ordain that for the future clandestine Marriages should be null, and assures us
that the Church has always detested them, Dicastillus ceases not to be
favorable unto them. Oppositum satis constat, nullum scilicat esse peccatum.
Prohibitionem vero matrimonil clandestini non extendendam esse ad spousalis.
Ibid. tr. 10. did. 1. dub. 24. number. 351.
He says, That it is no sin to make clandestine Contracts of Marriage, and
that they are not comprised in the prohibition made by the Council against
clandestine Marriages.

The Church declares sufficiently its intent and the thoughts of the Council of
Trent upon this Point in the Ceremonies which it prescribes and would have
observed in the Betrothing for the Publication of the Bains, he says,
Praeceptum de denuntiationibus non obligat quando ex illius observatlone
notabile damnum sequitur. Quaprepter in talibus occasionibus nulla requiritur
dispensatio, etiamsi ordinatius poffet commode adiri, sitque paratus
dispensationem concedere - non solum quando est certum, sed etiam quando est
probabilis suspicio. Ibid. disp. 3. dub. 27. number. 212.
That we are not obliged to observe them, when any notable damage would follow
thereupon; that we are not obliged to demand a dispensation, The Order of the
Church for the Bains is express, as for the Betrothing; this Jesuit would
abolish the one and the other, which are as it were the Preparatives unto
lawful Marriage, and the Precautions against the clandestine, that he might
better favor and authorize them against the prohibition of the Council which
condemns them. In which he does like them who seize on the Suburbs and Avenues
of a City which they would carry by force. For after what he lately spoke thus
for abolishing the Bains and authorizing clandestine Contracts of Marriage, he
maintains, Addendum verum esse valide, etsi matrimonium ab incolis loci in quo
Tridentinum viger, in loco, in quo non viget, etiamsi eo transierit eum ob
finem clandestine contrahendi -- and non solum valide, sed licite posse fieri,
servando in aliis jus antiquum, quamvis eum ob finem transierit, ut non
obligaretur Tridentini decreto, quo obligabatur in proprio loco cujus erat
incols. Ibid. dub. 6. number. 42.
That not only clandestine Marriage is valid even amongst the Inhabitants of a
Country where the Council of Trent is received, when they go into another
Country where it is not observed, that they may marry in secret; but that this
Marriage is lawful, provided that in other things they observe the ancient
Laws, though they have purposely changed place, that they might be discharged
from the Law of the Council of Trent by which they were obliged in their own
Country. We must say then according to this Casuist, that it is lawful to make
Marriages which the Church does nullify, and which it never approved in those
very times in which it suffered them. For these sorts of Marriages have been
heretofore indeed valid, but they were never lawful, on the contrary they have
been always censured in the Church.

But if the Jesuits make Marriages good which are null, Dico effe probabile
matrimonium metu levi injuste ad hoc incusso celebratum nullum esse in foro
conscientiae. Tamb. lib. 1. decal. cap. 2. sect. 6. n. 12.

Ex metu quoque just incusso hujusmodi matrimonium nullum esse non puto
improbabile. sect. 7. n. 3.


I say, says Tambourin, that it is probable that a Marriage contracted by some
slight fear unjustly induced, is null in conscience; and even some fear justly
raised probably may nullify the Marriage. It must then be affirmed, that
Marriages to which persons are condemned by the Judges; which Fathers cause
their Children to make; which Masters make of their Servants, and Princes of
their Subjects, are null, because commonly these Marriages are made with some
sort of fear. And the same thing must be said of the Professions made by Monks
and Nuns, and consequently of all sorts of Engagements and Contracts.
Nevertheless it is apparent that the Jesuits make use of fear as well as hope
sometimes for a motive to engage young persons in their Society, and they would
not refuse a donation or foundation which should be made to them with some
fear, without doubting whether it might be null.

For what concerns the use of Marriage, albeit the bodies of married persons
are not in their own power, according to the words of Scripture, Non solum
publica mere rix, sed etiam occulta and matitata potest retinere pretium
sornicationis and adult^ii. Dicastill, lib. 2. tr. (...) disp. 6. dub. 1. (...)
^8.
Dicastillus forbears not to permit a married woman to retain to her self the
price of her Adultery. The reason Tambourin brings for it is considerable.
Ratiomihi vi^ esse quia vir non^st ita dominus corpori^ uxoris, ut in illud
perfectissimum dominium habeat: sed solum ita ut illo uti queat in debito
conjugali omnibus aliis exclusis; quod certe non tollit uxori facultatem
acquirendi, licet cum peccato, ex turpi sui corporis concessione. Tambur. lib
7. decal. cap. 3. sect. 3. number. (...).
The Husband, says he, is not so master of the body of his Wife that he has a
perfect dominion over it, but he has only the power to use it according to the
Law of Marriage with exclusion of all others: which certainly takes not from
the woman power to gain something, though not without sin, by prostituting her
body. This reason is worthy the Proposition which it is brought to prove. For
it is a manifest contradiction to say that a husband has a right to use the
body of his wife with exclusion of every other, and that nevertheless the woman
may sell the use of the same body unto another, if in selling this use she sell
not that which belongs unto her husband, she does no injustice, and she does
not properly commit adultery, and her sin will not be more than a simple
fornication.

This Author makes no difficulty to say, Express excludere finem
multiplicandae prolis, imo etiam cupere filios non procreare, veniale est.
Tambur. lib. 7. cap. 3. sect. 5. number. 7.
That it is no more than a venial sin expressly to exclude from the use of
Marriage the end of having children, and to desire even to have none at all;
without considering that the begetting of children being the end of Marriage,
to use it without this end, and even against this end, excluding it positively
by a contrary desire; is to abuse Marriage voluntarily, is to profane a
Sacrament, is to reject and contemn the blessing which is especially given to
obtain children: it is finally to live with a woman in Marriage as out of
Marriage, abusing her to satisfy a brutal passion, and for sensual pleasure
alone, as debauched persons abuse women single or married who abandon
themselves unto them; and yet all these excesses are but a Peccadillo according
to this Jesuit.

When we doubt of the validity of a Marriage, Dicastillus gives an invention
unto persons whom the fear of God withholds, from the use of Marriage until
such times as they are cleared of their doubt. Si conjux putet probabile quod
sit impedimentum, propterea quod putet v. g. probabilem opinionem vitae prioris
viti, and similiter probabilem opinionem mortis, atque adeo probabilem assensum
valoris, potest reddere and petere: quia licitum est sequi opinionem probabilem
-- Imo etismsi probabilius sit matrimonium non valere. Neque enim tenetur sequi
opinionem probabiliorem, sed satis est cum probabili operari. Dicast. de
matrim. tr. 10. disp. 8 dub. 14. number. 174.
If a woman, says he, believes that it is probable that there is some
impediment to her Marriage, because it is probable for example, that her first
husband is yet alive, and it is also probable that he is dead, she may give and
require the duty of Marriage, because it is lawful for her to follow a probable
opinion..... and even though it be more probable that the Marriage is null,
because none is obliged to follow the more probable opinion, and it suffices to
follow a probable one. Therefore the Judges ought to take good heed that they
condemn not easily husbands who have two wives, or wives who have two husbands,
for they need only some probable reason to justify them, and there is nothing
so casie as to find one, especially for things which we passionately desire and
love; and when the Magistrates will not take these Maxims of Probability for
Rules in their Judgments, nor the Doctors of this new Science for their
Masters, the Confessors nevertheless will be obliged to follow them in their
direction of Consciences by the same Law that these Censors, or rather
Corrupters of Manners, impose upon them to submit themselves to the fancy and
pleasure of their Penitents when they have some probable authority or reason to
support them.

This Jesuit continues to advance and extend the mavelous virtue of
Probability, whereby to introduce disorders into Marriage-affairs, Qui hibet
probabilem opinionem nullitatis matrimonii -- si simul habeat probabilem
opinionem valoris, poterit etiam petere: imo satis probabile est posse etiam
negare; ita ut quando negat, se accommodet opinioni quae dicat nullum esse
mattimonium; quando vero petit, se accommodet opinioni quae dicat esse validum.
Ibid. number. 175.
That he who has a probable opinion of the nullity of his Marriage, and also a
probable one of the validity of it, may demand the duty of Marriage, and also
it is as probable that he may deny it; so that when he shall refuse it, he
shall follow the opinion of those who hold that his Marriage is null; and when
he demands it, he shall follow that which holds that his Marriage is good. If
the wise as well as the husband would make use of the right which Probability
gives her in this doubt concerning the nullity of their Marriage, they should
live in very good intelligence during this disorder of Marriage, whilst each of
them for their own part refuses that which the other demands, and would take
by force, grounding themselves on a probable reason. The same debate will
hereupon happen betwixt a man and his wise through the conduct of this Science,
which the same Jesuit says it may cause in another case betwixt a poor man and
a rich, whilst the rich refuses upon a probable opinion to give alms unto the
poor, and tells him that he is not obliged thereunto, and the poor steals from
the rich upon another probable opinion, which maintains that he may do it in
his necessity. These are the productions and the fruits of the Doctrine of
Probability, which confounds all things both in Religion and in the World.

It is not necessary to report here all the Casuists filthy Questions and
shameful Resolutions about the Use of Marriage, by which they teach and approve
the profanation of this Sacrament. It may be seen sufficiently by what I have
now related, how far their impudence may go.

ARTICLE IV. Of them who administer the Sacraments. That the Jesuits permit
Priests to administer the Sacraments, to say Mass, and to preach, principally
for vain glory or lucre of money, and in an estate of mortal sin.
EScobar in his Problems demands, Obligatio administrandi Sacramenta, aliasque
sacras functiones peragendi potest ac non potest vendi.
If it be lawful to sell the obligation of administering the Sacraments, and
performing other holy Functions? He says at first that it may and may not,
according to the different probable opinions of Casuists whom he cites. And
afterward he ranks himself on their side who say that it is lawful. Primsm
sententiam approbo sequorque, si suscipiatur obligatio administrandi
Sacraments, ali^rumque sacrarum functionum perficiendarum cum oneribus
corporalibus accidentaliter annexis. v. c. quando S^cerdos obligatur ad
ministrandum tali in loco distanti, tanto tempore, tali hora, ut specialem fit
molestiam passurus. Escobar Theol. mor. tom. 1. lib. 8. problem. 86.
I approve, says he, and am of the former opinion. If a man take on him to
administer the Sacraments, and to discharge other holy Functions with bodily
pain and labor which does accidentally accompany them, as to administer them
in a place far distant, for so long, at such an hour, and in such sort as gives
him a particular trouble. This is to expose to sale all spiritual Power, and
all the sacred and divine Functions of the Jurisdiction which Jesus Christ has
given his Church, being there is hardly any which can be exercised without some
action and labor of the body.

When the Jesuit-Authors speak of Priests who officiate in Parishes,
stipendiarios Sacerdotes. And as they give them this goodly name of Servants
and Mercenaries, so they inspire them with the conduct and spirit of such, in
teaching them to set price on their Masses, and to make thereof a kind of
traffic, by treating with those for whom they say them, or with those at whose
charge they are procured to say them, in such manner as a Servant treats with
his Master for his wages, or an Handicraft for his salary with him that employs
him.

Filliutius speaks of Priests in these terms, and with as much respect when he
puts this Q^stion: An Parochus qui multa slipen^ia ^c. cepit pro Mistis,
possit, si es distribuat in stipendiarios Sacerdotes, partem aliquam sibi
retinere pro sollicitudine vel alils causis?
If a Rector who has received pay for many Masses, may retain any part thereof
for himself, because of the care he has taken thereof, and for some other
reasons, distributing the rest to the hireling Priests, whom he procured to say
the Masses? In the sequel he answers, Respondeo and dico 1. non esse contra
justitlam, si ratione sollicitudinis and laboris, vel quia est pingue
stipendium, vel quia est summum intra latitudinem justi, aliquid sibi retineat.
Filliut. tom. 1. mor. qq. tr. 5. ca^. 6. number. 186. page 125.
That he shall do nothing against Justice, if he retain some part unto himself,
by reason of the care and pains he takes, or because the payment surpasses the
ordinary rate, or because it is the highest degree of the just price. That is
to say, that a Parson may receive the money from all persons who will give it
him for saying Masses, and then cause those Masses to be said by other Priests,
ratione sollicitudinis and laboris. And since it is not usual to present so
little to a Rector as they would give to an ordinary Priest, the Rector may
give to every Priest that is under him as his wages, according to the language
of this Jesuit, so much as they usually get for saying Mass, and keep the rest
for himself, without being blamable herein for committing any injustice or
unfaithfulness. In a good Town a Parson that were in reputation, and who would
exercise this pious traffic, might make himself rich.

Emanuel Sa gives and approves this same expedient saying: Cui datur summa
pecuniae pro Missis a se dicendis, potest alios pro minori pretio conducere qui
adjuvent, and reliquum sib^ retinere. Sa verbo Missa n. 45. page 516.
He to whom a sum of money is given to say Masses, may hire other Priests the
best cheap he can to help him say them, and retain the overplus to himself.
Filliutius says we may keep Priests at hire, Emanuel Sa affirms that if we
have none, we may hire others to say the Masses which we have undertaken, and
make the best bargain we can with them, and retain the rest to our selves.

This is also Amicus his opinion, when he says, Posse Sacerdotem qui pinguia
stipendia pro Missis dicendis accepit, procurare per justa stipendis minora per
alios Sacerdotes Missas efferri, retinendo sibi quod supra justa stipendia
superest. Amieus tom. 7. disp. 33. sect. 8. number. 284. page 466.
That a Priest who has received great salaries to say Masses, may cause them
to be said by other Priests, to whom he may give the just price only which is
usually given, and withhold what is over and above far himself.

Amicus gives another expedient to Priests, that they may not lose their
Masses. He puts this Question: An possit Sacerdos accipere stipendium pro Missa
quam jam celebravit. cujus tamen applicationem sibi in futurum reservavit?
Ibid. number. 285. Potest Sacerdos de praesenti applicare effectum Sacrificii illi
qui de facto ab illo Sacrificium petiturus est. Quo pacto licitum est Ibid.
If a Priest may take money for a Mass which he has said already, but reserved
the application thereof to himself? He resolves this difficulty by a
distinction. He will not allow that a Priest who has said a Mass for no body,
should have power to keep the merit of it in reserve to be applied when he
shall be desired to say one; but he holds it good, that when he says Mass, he
actually apply the fruit thereof to the first who shall present himself to
demand a Mass of him. This is a good Maxim to husband Masses so well that you
may never Iose any one at all, and to engage mercenary Priests to say Masses
every day without fear of losing their labor, by having some always laid up in
readiness for those who shall first present themselves unto them. It is thus
that the Jesuits remove Covetousness from Priests, and cherish in their Souls
the piety and reverence they ought to have toward the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ.

Emanuel Sa offers us a third expedient, of which he would not be accounted the
Author, but proposes it as coming from other Casuists, who hold, says he, Duas
eleemosynas pro una Missa accipi posse. Unica Missa posse Sacerdotem multis
quibus promisit satisfacere. Sa verbo Missa, u. 44. page 516.
That we may take two alms for one and the same Mass; or at least, that a
Priest may with one and the same Mass discharge the obligation he is under unto
many persons for whom he has promised to say one. He speaks also of others who
teach, Etiam a divite Sacerdote posse duss eleemosynas honestae sustentationi
necessarias accipi. Ibid.
That a Priest, though he be rich, may take two alms for one Mass, if they be
necessary to him for maintaining his honor. And though he does not positively
approve all these opinions, yet neither does he condemn them, and he leaves men
at liberty to follow them, by proposing them as probable and maintained by some
Doctors.

Filliutius speaks also of this expedient, but he condemns it. Ratione unius
Misiae non posse sumi nisi unum adaequatum ^ipendium. Filliut. romans 1. qq. mor.
tr. 5. c. 6. n. 181. p. 124.
We cannot, says he, receive more than one entire payment for one Mass.
Nevertheless he teaches us another in this case more subtle and ingenious,
which is, Sacrificantem posse partem Sacrificil sibi debitam applicare iis pro
quibus tenetur. Ibid.
That the Priest may apply that part of the Mass which belongs to himself, to
those for whom he is obliged to say the Mass. Which thing Tambourin confirms by
this excellent Reasoning: Fructum mediae Missae qui dari solet aliis sibi
potest applicare Sacerdos: ergo etiam fructum specialissimum quem sibi
applicare solet, poterit applicarealiis. Tambur. l. 3. meth. Missae cap. 1.
sect. 3. n. 6^.
The Priest may appropriate that part of the Sacrifice which by custom is
applied to the Faithful. He may therefore apply to the Faithful the fruit of
the Mass which is reserved for himself. Filliutius in the process of his
discourse examining with another Casuist what is the value of that part of
Sacrifice which belongs to him who says the Mass, that the Priest may not take
for it more than it is worth, says: Quia nescitur quanta sir, addit arbitrari
partem trium Missarum posse supplere uni. Ibid.
That he ought to give his part in three for one entire Mass. Whence he draws
this practick Rule which he bestows on those he calls hireling Priests: Quod
servare poterunt, qui cum receperint multa stipendia, non possunt pro omnibus
satisfacere. Ibid.
That those who are hired to say more Masses than they can discharge, See here
a pretty way for merc^ry Priests to get money, by selling their part in the
Sacrifice and participation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which they
receive in saying Mass, for lucre of getting more, choosing rather not to
participate of the virtue of the Sacrament, and to have a little more silver.

As the Jesuits do thus teach Priests to say Mass out of covetousness; so they
do not much condemn those who say it of vain glory. Emanuel Sa tells us, Vanae
gloriae causa praecipue praedicare, aut Missam celebrare peccatum esse mortale
quidam aiunt, alii negant. Sa verbo vana gloria, number 2. page 693.
That there are some who hold that it is mortal sin to preach or say Mass
principally for vain glory, and that there are others who deny it. He repeats
almost the same thing in another place, where he says only, Non esse autem
peccatum mortale, si quis ob gloriam aut pecuniam principaliter praedicet,
aiunt nonnulli. Sa verbo praedicare, number. 4. page 578.
That there are some who hold that it is no mortal sin to preach principally
for vain glory or for money, never mentioning them who hold the contrary
opinion, that he might render that which he propounds more probable, and give
more liberty to follow it.

Sanchez and Tambourin speak more generally yet, and withal more precisely
where they say, 0 Res quantumvis sacras principaliter ob vanam gloriam
efficere, ut Sacramenta omnia ministrare vel recipere, Sacrum celebrare, non
excedit culpam venialem. Sanch. op. mor. lib. 1. cap. 3. number. 1. page 9. Vel
lucrum. Tambur. lib. 2. meth. Missae cap. 1. sect. 1. number. 6.
That it can be no more than venial sin to perform the sacred actions, as to
administer or receive all the Sacraments and to celebrate the Mass, for vain
glory as the principal end, or for some sordid and dishonest gain. It seems
that as there are in the world some sorts of commerce which persons of honor
may exercise without derogation to their quality,

But whether we refer the Sacraments to money or honor, it is always a true
traffic; and if those who set a price of money on them seem to vilify and
debase them much, those who make them serve their vain glory, do use them more
unworthily, and profane them much more; because it is certain that vain glory
is a vice and a sin greater and more odious in the sight of God than Avarice,
and this crime is yet more inexcusable when it is pursued voluntarily, and when
the glory of the world and esteem of men is propounded as our principal end;
and yet Sanchez pretends, and Tambourin also, that herein no other than venial
sin can be committed. Res quantumvis sacras principaliter ob vanam gloriam
efficere, ut Sacramenta omnia ministrare vel recipere, Sacrum celebrare, non
excedit culpam venialem, says Sanchez, si propter finent venialiter
peccaminosum quis principaliter celebraret, v. g. ob vanam gloriam, vel lucrum
venialiter malum, solum venialiter peccaret. These are Tambourins own words,
who rehearses this passage out of Sanchez. Tambur. meth. Miss. lib. 2. cap. 1.
sect. 1. number. 6.


Escobar who cites the same Sanchez and follows him, V. g. si quis propter
vanam gloriam jejunet, oret, Sacraments recipiat vel ministret, Sacrum faciat:
quia quamvis aut similia principaliter gerat propter vanam gloriam, dummodo
tamen in hac vana gloria non instituat finem, ejusmodi sacris rebus levem
irrogat injuriam. Escob. l. 4. Theol. mor. cap. 3.
If any one for example, says he, fast, pray, administer or receive the
Sacrament by a motive of vain glory, though he do these things or other their
like principally for vain glory, he does only slightly injure holy things. It
is but a slight wrong unto Jesus Christ to make him serve vain glory, thence it
follows that Sacriledges are no more crimes, but small offenses; it being clear
that to refer the most sacred actions of Religion, even the Sacrifice of the
Mass it self unto vain glory as its principal end, is, it may be, the greatest
profanation that can be committed, and the greatest Sacrilege, and not only a
Sacrilege, but an horrible Idolatry, since this is not only to establish a
creature, but a vice for ones supreme end. It is properly to sacrifice unto
vanity, and to refer the Sacrifice of the Mass to the Devil as to his chief
end. For we sacrifice not unto God but by offering and relating the same
Sacrifice unto him in the same manner. A strange kind of Sacrifice and unheard
of amongst the Heathens! For this is not to sacrifice one creature unto
another, as they did: but it is to sacrifice unto a creature and even to a vice
God himself and the Son of God, by offering and referring thereto Jesus Christ
as to the principal end. Where we must observe what Escobar adds: Provided,
says he, that he place not his end in this vain glory, this is an exception
wholly absurd and which destroys it self.

If it be not enough to permit them who administer the Sacrament to celebrate
it with an evil intention, Escobar will also give them leave to cooperate with
the sins of those who receive it unworthily. Potest Sicramentum peccatori
publico exhiberi, dummodo non ex con emptu Sacramenti vel Religionis, sed ob
alium finem velit etiam public Sacramentum recipert, and mortem vel infamism,
vel grave fortunarum detrimentum minitetur.
We may, says he, administer the Sacrament to one that sins publicly,
provided he do not receive it publicly through contempt of the Sacrament or of
Religion, but for some other end, and that he threaten us with death or loss of
reputation, or to do some great wrong to us in our goods. He adds to confirm
this opinion, Item assero. Eo enim in casu permittit potius alterius peccatum
ex justa causs. Escobar tom. 1. lib. 7 probl. 93.
That this is rather to permit sin in another for some just cause, than to
cooperate therewith.

I know not whether Pilate followed this probable opinion when the fear of
falling into disgrace with Caesar, wherewith he was threatened, obliged him to
deliver Jesus Christ unto his enemies: but I know very well that we cannot say
that he cooperated not to the sin of them to whom he abandoned him.

Dicastillus faith that this is the opinion of Suarez, and that it pleases him
entirely, tota praedicta doctrina mihi placet. But because he saw well that the
whole world would not follow Suarez his advice herein, he surnisheth those who
find themselves engaged to administer the Sacraments to such as sin publicly,
and yet have some respect for holy things, so as not willingly to prostitute
them with other ways that are no better than the former. Sanchez: Licere
ministrare hostiam non consecratam pro consecrats. Dicast. tr. 4. de Sacr.
Euch. d. 9. d. 21. number. 491.
To give an Host not consecroted for a true one. Sacrilege is very common
amongst the Jesuits who permit these cheats and tricks in all the Sacraments,
no one excepted, and whereof they relate many examples, to which they give
their approbation.

Finally the Jesuits teach very commonly, that we may administer and receive
our selves the Sacraments, and perform the most sacred Functions being in an
estate of mortal sin, without committing any new crime. Convenient communiter
(Doctores) opus non esse ut minister conscius peccati mortalis praemittat
confessi onem Sacramentalem ante admitistrationem Sacramenti. Dicastill. tr. 2.
de Sacr. d. 3. d. 10. n. 200.
It is not necessary, says Dicastillus, that he who finds himself guilty of
mortal sin, should confess himself before he administer the Sacraments. He is
not content to lay now this Proposition thus in general, he establishes it by
many particulars which he proposes. Nec Episcopum consecrando Chrisma,
Ecclesiam, aut calices, aut concionande -- in peccato mortali, secluso scandalo
peccare mortaliter, imo nec venialiter. Ibid. n. 207.
A Bishop in performing the functions of his ministry, which are all holy,
being in an estate of mortal sin, sins not save venially. Sacerdos aut alius
quivis ministrans Sacramentum in urgenti necessitate, non peccat mortaliter,
imo nec venialiter. Ibid. n. 214.
He that administers the Sacrament of Baptism, be he Priest or Laick, sins not
mortally. His reason is: Tune ergo qui sic baptizat, probabile est non peccare
mortaliter, etiamsi sit in peccato mortali, quia a viris prudentibus non
censetur gravis irreverentia. Ibid. n. 220.
Because in the judgment of the prudent there is not herein any great
irreverence. De audiente confessionem in peccato mortal cum animo se
conterendi antequam absolutionem impendar, docet Dian. p. 1. tr. de circ. R.
47. cum Henriq. l. 6. c. 18. n. 6. and ex utroque Lugo n. 18. non esse mortale.
Idem tr. 1. de Sacr. d. 3. d. 10. r. 243.
A Confessor may also hear Confessions in an estate of mortal sin, without
crime and without offense, provided he produce some act of contrition before
that he give Absolution. This Jesuit yet may in some sort be excused on this
occasion. Ratio vero est quis tunc Sacerdos non administrat Sacramentum, sed
quando absolvit. Ibid.
The Priest does not properly administer the Sacrament of Penance, save when he
gives Absolution, and not when he barely hears what the Penitent says.

I know not whether this distinction be allowable or not, and I would willingly
demand of him whether a Judge be only then a Judge when he passes Sentence,
and whether he execute not his Office when he receives, for Example, the
depositions of Witnesses? Also Tambourin without having regard to this
Chimerical distinction, decides the case clearly, Peccaret tunc Sacerdos tum
absolvendo, quia absolveret in mortali, tum non absolvendo, quia negaret jus
poenitentis, id quod esset pati perplexitatem, quam omnes Doctores nunquam
concedendam esse fatentur. Tambur. lib. 3. meth. confess. cap. 5. sect. 3. number.
15.
That he sins not in administering the Sacraments; because that otherwise a
Confessor should be in a strange perplexity in this case; he sins if he gives
Absolution; if he refuse to give it he sins also against justice, because he
wrongs his Penitent who has a right to Absolution. Now all the Doctors are of
judgment that no such perplexity is to be acknowledged. Ut in die festo alii
Miffam audiant, sive Parochus sive non Parochus...... Nam quamvis opinio
contraria sit probabilior, quia non apparet in relinquente tunc Missam notabile
damnum, and aliunde praeceptum de audienda Missa non obligat nisi debito modo,
haec tamen saltem propter auctoritatem extrinsecam Doctorum came
approbantium...... probabilis est: non obligatur autem in tali casu Sacerdos
celebrare, quia potest tenere praedictam opinionem quod non possit. idem.
Tambourin also permits a Priest to say Mass in this estate on an Holy Day,
that others may participate therein. And after he had induced Priests to
approach unto the Altar so unworthily to celebrate the Sacrifice, Dicastillus
will not yet oblige him thereupon to betake himself to some Confessor so soon
as he can. And for that he perceived well that the Council of Trent might be
objected against him, which in the 7. C. of the 15. Sess. ordains that he who
has said Mass without confessing himself, should confess himself shortly
after; he expounds the Council to save his Doctrine by saying, Qui ex mera
malitia celebrat sine consessione, an non comprehendatur illo praecepto, and
teneatur statim confiteri? Respondetur negative. Ita Lugo number. 150. and est
communis sententia, quia Concllium solum loquitur de co qui ob urgentem
necessitatem sine consessione celebrat. Dicastill. tract. 4. de Euch. d. 9. d.
9. number. 155.
That it obliges only Priests who have said Mass in some great and urgent
necessity. If then he say Mass being in mortal sin without necessity, he shall
not be obliged; yea, though he also did it maliciously, he should not be
obliged; ex mera malitia.

And they find so little irreverence and so little evil in administering the
Sacraments, and offering Sacrifice in this manner, that they even permit the
Faithful to exact of them these Functions without any necessity, although they
also know that they are in an estate of sin. Licet cuicunque petere and
recipere Sacramentum Sicerdote existente in mortali, etiam non Paroche, nec
parato allas ipsum conserre, si perenti ea receprio futura sit commodior vel
utillor, quam si ab alio peteretur. Idem tract. 1. de Sacram. d. 3. d. 13. number.
296.
It is lawful for every one, says Dicastillus, to demand and receive the
Sacraments of a Priest who is in the estate of mortal sin, though he be not his
Parish Priest, nor be designed for it, nor so much as disposed to administer
them unto him, if he find it more for his convenience and benefit than to
demand it of others.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND BOOK. That the Divinity of the Jesuits abolishes
or corrupts them.
THE Physician labors for his Patient when he prescribes what he ought to do,
as well as when he presents unto him what he ought to take for his Cure. Whence
it comes that they say commonly that he has given him a good Remedy, when he
has given him good advice how to remove the Disease whereof he is sick. So
that not only the things which he prescribes, but the prescriptions themselves
are remedies; but with this difference, that what he prescribes, as Purges and
Medicines, are the inward remedies, because they act upon the disease it self,
and have an internal virtue proper to destroy it when they are taken
effectually: but the prescriptions are as it were external remedies, because
they act not immediately upon the disease, but only upon the mind of the
discased by the knowledge they give him of his disease, and of what he ought to
do for his cure.

We must say the same thing, holding the Rules of Proportion, of our Souls
diseases and remedies. We have already observed that Grace, Penance, good
Works, and the Sacraments are the internal remedies of sin, because they have a
divine and internal virtue which the Spirit of God has impressed upon them to
expel sin from the Soul, or to prevent its entrance thereinto.

We have seen in the former Part of this second Book, that the Jesuits destroy
the internal remedies of sin; we shall see here in this, how they abolish or
corrupt the external: and so it will appear that they favor and cherish sin as
much as they can. This second Part shall have three Chapters. The first shall
be of the Corruption of Scripture. The second of the Commandments of God. And
the third of the Commandments of the Church.

CHAPTER I. Of the Corruption of Scripture. That the Jesuits corrupt the
Scriptures diverse ways.
THere are only three things to be considered in the holy Scripture; the
Letter, the Sense, and the Authority. And accordingly we may distinguish three
different manners of corrupting holy Scripture. 1. In the Letter, by adding,

We might compose great Volumes of Passages which they have altered by false
Interpretations, yea, may be of all places wherein Canonical Writers and Jesus
Christ himself have spoken with any vehemence and vigor concerning the
Holiness of our Mysteries, the Duties of a Christian, and the narrow way to
Salvation, we should be troubled to find one whereunto they have not given some
blow, haling them from their natural sense by Expositions false and contrary to
the general Consent of the Fathers and Tradition of the Church, that they might
accommodate them to the relish and lusts of worldly men. I will relate only
some few to serve for Example.

S. Paul says, writing to the Corinthians: Si habutro omnem fidem, Ita ut
montes transferam, charitatem autem non habuero, nihil sum. Et si distribuero
in cibos pauperum omnes facultates meas; and si tradidero corpus meum ita ut
ardesm, charitatem autem non habuero, nihil mihi prodest. 1 Cor. cap. 15.
Though I had faith to remove mountains, and had not charity, I were nothing.
And though I should distribute all my goods to the relief of the poor, and
though I should give my body to be burnt, if I had not charity, it would avail
me nothing. But Father Celot being resolved to maintain the contrary, saying
that we may suffer Martyrdom profitably, and do those other works whereof the
Apostle speaks like a Christian, without any motion from Charity: to defend
himself from this passage so strong and so manifest, he corrupts and subverts
it in this manner.

He says that this must be extended to the habit, Paul speaks, may be
meritorious, holy, and perfect, though they be done without love to God, and
though we never think of him, provided we be in an estate of Grace. So that he
maintains that a man who is in the estate of Grace, cannot act otherwise than
by this Charity whereof the Apostle speaks. See his words: Eo loco habitum
charitatis postulari ab Apostolo aio ego 3 negat Petrus Aurelius, and actum
vult intelligi.
I say that the Apostle in this place demands only the habit of Charity, Petrus
Aurelius on the contrary holds that it ought to be extended unto the act. And a
little after: Actum profecto laudant, suadent, and omnibus praeserunt
Scripturae; at habitum charitatis tanquam rem semper necessariam expetunt.
Celot. lib. 3. cap. 3. page 125.
It is true that the Scripture commends the act of Charity, that it directs and
advises us to it, and prefers it before all other things; but it commands the
habit as being continually necessary.

If S. Paul speak in this place only of the habit of Charity, he requires it in
vain of the Corinthians, seeing they had it, as he himself supposes, calling
them just and holy; it is in vain that he exhorts, that he advertises them,
that when they suffer any persecution, when they give alms, when they perform
any other good work, they should do it of Charity, since they, having the habit
of Charity, could not act otherwise than by Charity, this habit having
necessary influence upon all their actions, as Celot pretends.

Coninck speaks also more clearly to this Point. For he says that to be a
Martyr, one by these Examples: Qualis est in eo primo qui fugiens tyrannum a
quo compellitur ad impia, in fuga subito occiditur. Secundo in eo qui
sollicitatur ad defectionem fidei, quia banc recusavit, dormiens occiditur.
Coninck 3. p. q. 66. de baptis. a. 12. n. 136. p. 80.
Such an one as that of a person flying from a Tyrant who would force him to
some impiety, is slain unexpectedly in his flight: or at least of him who being
solicited to renounce the faith, is killed in his sleep, because he refused to
do it.

And because it may be said that these persons had a will to maintain the
faith, and to dye for it, since the one fled for fear to lose it, and the other
refused to renounce it, and so they are faithful in their will to dye for the
faith; he declares that neither is this at all necessary, and that Imo videtur
sufficere ut in odium fidei occidatur, e^si de confessione fidei nihil prius
cogitaveri^ v.c. si subito hostium incursu deprehendatur dormiens, and in odium
fidei occidatur. Ibid.
it suffices that they be killed out of hatred to the faith, though they had
not formerly so much as a thought of confessing it, as it happens when in
sudden Eruptions of Barbarians one is killed in his sleep through hatred of
faith.

So that he believes that one may be a Martyr, and merit the reward of
Martyrdom, not only without any act of Charity, but also without any act of
Faith, and without so much as any natural and reasonable act, dying without any
apprehension and without any thought had beforehand of dying for the Faith.

Perhaps it may be imagined that he grounds himself on the preparation of the
heart of this man, believing that God regards the good disposition which he had
unto Martyrdom. But neither does he demand so much as that. And he presupposes
on the contrary, Nic refert quod talis forte fi ei mors proponeretur prae
timore negaret Deum; quia haec conditionolis propositio nihil ponit in re,
atque ita nihil obest. Idem page 139.
It matters not, says he, though if death had been proposed unto this man, the
fear it would have brought on him would possibly have forced him to forget God,
because this conditional supposition produces no real thing in this man; and so
it cannot hurt him.

He believes then, that to be a Martyr it is not at all necessary to have so
much as a conditional will to dye for God, if occasions were presented, that
the contrary disposition rather to forsake God than to lose his life on this
occasion cannot hurt him; and by consequence that it is not bad, nor hinders a
man from being in an estate to receive the Crown of Martyrdom if he dye without
ever thinking of it in this disposition by the hand of a Tyrant.

But he discovers the ground of this Doctrine when he says, Potest quis magis
eligere mori quam negare Christum impulius solo metu gehennae. Idem d. 1. number.
118. page 77.
That a man may resolve with himself in this case to dye rather than forsake
Jesus Christ by fear of Hell only. That is to say, that without charity or love
of God, the fear of the pains of Hell only, may make a true Martyr, contrary to
S. Paul, and contrary to the consent of all the Saints, Scripture, and Church,
who declare publicly when the Feasts of the Martyrs are celebrated, E^ quia
pro ejus amore sanguinem suum fuderune, ideo cum Christo exultant sine fine.
That it is because they shed their blood for the love of God and Jesus Christ,
that they rejoice eternally with him. And by consequence that he who sheds not
his blood for the love of God, shall have no part in the joy of Jesus Christ,
and loses his labor, as S. Paul says: Si tradidero corpus meum ita ut
ardeam, charitatem autem non habutro, nihil mihi prodest. 1 Cor. cap. 15.

Father Anthony Sirmond in a Treatise of the defense of Virtue, part 3. page 54.


Though I give my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it profits me nothing.

The Father Anthony Sirmond eludes also these very words of the Apostle, by
maintaining that he means only to say that if a man be in mortal sin, all these
things, that is to say, Faith, Alms, and Martyrdom, are of no benefit. Whence
he concludes, That S. Paul requires not nor could require any thing but
habitual charity, only exempt from all mortal sin. 3 part. p. 51. of the
Treatise of the Defense of Virtue.

He is not content to say that S. Paul requires no other disposition to
Martyrdom, than to be exempt from mortal sin, though there be no motion of
charity, nor any will to dye for God; but he adds also, that the Apostle could
not require any other thing. And as if to require any other thing were rigor
or unreasonable injustice, he concludes with this exclamation: What! would you
oblige the Martyrs going unto Martyrdom unto some act of Charity? That is to
say, that according unto him it is a thing not only far off from justice and
reason, but also without all appearance thereof, to imagine that the will to
dye for God should be necessary unto true Martyrdom.

This same Jesuit has corrupted another passage of the 3. Chap. of S. John,
whereof the Council of Trent makes use to explicate the Nature of meritorious
good Works, saying they are such, because they are wrought in God; quia in Deo
sunt facta. By which words the Holy Fathers and the best Interpreters of the
Holy Scripture and of the Council of Trent, have understood works done by the
motion of Gods Spirit, which is that of Charity. But he will not endure it, and
is so far transported as to tax them as weak men, As to that which some
represent, says he, tr. 3. page 45. that the Council does include herein the
motive of Charity, because that it demands that they be wrought in God, it is a
mere imagination. It may be he never read the Council, or it is likely he took
no notice that it expounded it self, in saying that good works ought to be
wrought by a virtue and grace which Jesus Christ inspires continually into his
Members; in such manner as the Vine continues life and vigor to its branches.
Cum enim ipse Jesus Christus tanquam caput in membra, and tanquam vitis in
palmites, in ipsos justificatos jugiter virtutem influat, quae virtus eorum
bona opera semper antecedit and concomitatur, and sequitur, etc. Sine qua nullo
pacto grata and meritoria esse possent, nihil ipsis justificatis amplius deesse
credendum est, quoniam minus plene illis quidem operibus quae in Deo facta
sunt, divinae legi pro hujus vitae statu satisfecisse, and vitam aeternam suo
etiam tempore, si tamen in gratia decefferint, consequendam, vere promeruisse
censeantur. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 16.
For Jesus Christ, says the Council, communicating vigor continually to those
who are justified, as the head communicates unto its members, and the Vine unto
its branches, and this vigor preceding, accompanying, and following always
their good works, which without it could not in any sort whatsoever be pleasing
unto God and meritorious, we must believe that there is now nothing more
wanting unto persons justified which might hinder us from judging reasonably
that the works which are thus wrought in God, have satisfied his Law so far as
the condition of this present life may permit, and that they have merited
eternal life, which they shall in due time receive, provided they dye in this
estate of Grace.

Paul, the one saying that our good works should be done in Charity; and the
other, that they ought to be wrought in God, that is to say, in the Spirit and
by the Spirit of God, who is no other than the Spirit of Love and Charity, and
the words of the one expound the words of the other. But I see no means to
reconcile them to this Jesuit, for he can no longer pretend that the Council
and S. Paul require only habitual Charity with an exemption only from all
mortal sin. The terms of the Council by which it expounds it self, may also
serve for exposition unto S. Paul, being so clear, that it is impossible to
obscure them.

He corrupts also a third passage, Corinthians, whereof the Apostle speaks in
these words: Id enim quod in praesenti est momentaneum and leve tribulationis
nostrae, supro modum in sublimitate aeternum gloriae pondus operatur in nobis.
2 Cor. 4.17.
For the tribulations which we endure in this life being momentary and light,
produce in us a far more incomparable, full, solid, and eternal glory. And
Father Sirmond pretends that he calls the tribulations and afflictions of this
life light, because they have not in them the weight of the love of God to
command them. That is, that they are light then when they are undergone without
love: by consequent weighty and burthensom when they are born for love to God.
These words of S. Paul were never thus expounded in the Church; and it is to
fight with common sense to say, that love is a weight and load which makes
things heavy and burthensom which are done upon the motion thereof.

All the Saints and Interpreters who have spoken of this passage, have
conceived that S. Paul calls these present afflictions light; because that the
grief they cause is light in comparison of the Joys which they merit, as he
says that they endure but a moment in comparison of the Eternity of Glory
which is the recompense thereof. But that they should be called light, when
they are born without love, as if love did hinder them from being so, is that
which never entered into the thought of any Interpreter ancient or novel. And if
it were so, the afflictions of S. Paul could not be light, or we must say that
he suffered them without love: The afflictions of the greatest Saints also
could not be light,

It is needless to lose time in refuting these Paradoxes and Extravagancies.
There is no Divine nor prudent man that sees not even by natural reason and
experience, that on the contrary it is love and the motions of the affection
which renders things light, easy, and even sweet and pleasant, though they be
in themselves troublesome and difficult. Which is yet more true of the love of
God than of that of the Creatures, that being infinitely exalted above this in
virtue and force, as well as in dignity.

This Jesuit contents not himself to abuse the words of S. Paul in this manner;
but he aspires unto the fountain, and attempts to corrupt it also as well as
the streams. The first of the Commandments which God gave in the old Law, and
which he has repeated in the new, is: Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex to to cord
tuo.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. And Father Sirmond is not
afraid to maintain that we are not obliged by this Commandment to love God. For
God, says he, tr. 2. p. 16. commanding us to love him, is satisfied in the
main that we obey him in his other Commandments. And as he says also, page 28.
A God so loving and lovely, commanding us to love him, is satisfied that we
obey him without loving him.

It is easy to destroy all the Commandments by this Method; Thou shall love me
with all thy heart, if it be lawful to say that he intends something else than
what he says, and that he would not oblige us to love him, though he says it
with an expression so clear and strong, there can be nothing certain in the
whole Word of God, and we may in this manner clude all the Commandments,
pretending that he desires not that of us which he demands, or that he would
not oblige us in good earnest to that which he testifies to be his desire.

But the reason of this Father, why God would not have us to love him, is
excellent, because he is loving and lovely, as if love desired any thing so
much as reciprocal love, or could be otherwise acknowledged and satisfied than
by this love. He ought also at least to consider that God is not only amiable
and loving, but also a great lover of truth and sincerity: and that so there
can be no apparent ground to make him a liar or dissembler, in commanding men
to love him without desiring to oblige them thereunto.

This Jesuit corrupts also this same passage and Commandment in another manner,
saying: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. signifies no
other thing, than; thou shall love him if thou will without being obliged
thereto: because the Commandment to love God is a Command of pleasure in
respect of affective love; but a Command of rigor in respect of effective love
and the execution, p. 21. He would say that God by this Commandment demands the
outward actions, and not the affection; that he commands us to produce the
effects of love without obliging us to have this love, and that he is content,

He has also invented a third gloss, which is no other than a consequence of
the former, saying: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
signifies, thou shall love him freely and without any obligation. For God,
says he, the God of love will be loved freely and without any obligation; and
if he threaten, it is that he may be obeyed. But if we love not them freely
whom we love of duty and upon obligation, we must say that a Son loves not his
Father freely, because he is obliged to love him by the Law of God and Nature:
and if that which is done of duty be not freely done, it follows that the
Religious Orders keep not their vows freely, nor the Faithful any of the
Commandments of God, because they are thereunto obliged.

But if he threatens, says he, it is that he may be obeyed, and not that he
may be beloved. We must believe then that there are no penalties nor threats
against them that never love God. Which neither agrees with what S. Paui says:
He that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 16. nor
with that which S. John says: Qui non diligit manet in morte, 1 John 3. He
that loves not abides in death. The one threatening them with death, and the
other with a curse who love not Jesus Christ.

There remains yet his last corruption of this very word of God of Jesus
Christ: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. That is to say,
thou shall not hate him at all. For albeit his sacred love be not kindled in
our hearts, says he: Page 19.
though we love him not at all, and the motive of Charity do not incline us to
do that which he commands us, yet we cease not for all that to obey the
Commandment of Love, in as much as we do the works of Love. So that herein we
may see the goodness of God; he has not so much commanded us to love him, as
not to hate him; either formally by an actual hate, which were indeed
devilish; or materially by the transgression of his Law.

This excess is visible enough of it self, and needs not be represented more
particularly, and it might easily be apprehended to be the extremest that can
be committed on this subject, if there were not found another yet greater in
this little Book, which is as it were the foundation of all the rest. For he
talks of the love of God as a thing odious and servile; and he represents the
Commandment of loving God, as a yoke and servitude unsupportable, attributing
it to the particular favor and grace of Jesus Christ that he has delivered
us, as he pretends, from the obligation of serving God in love, that our
services might be pleasing to him, and meritorious unto eternal life. And to
justify this his imagination, which scents strong of impiety, Si vos Filius
liberaverit, vere liberi critis. Joh. 8. v 36.
If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed: which speak manifestly of
freedom from sin, as appears by what goes before. See here how he expounds this
passage. If the Son make you free, says he himself in S. John, you shall be
free indeed. Yea, I hope, we shall by his own proper testimony, yea even from
that very strait obligation wherewith some would charge us, which is to love
God in every point which has any reference unto merit. Tr. 3. p. 60.
He pretends then that Jesus Christ has not only delivered us from sin, as is
formerly affirmed in this place; but also from the obligation even of loving
God himself, and of serving him in love, which appears unto him too rigorous.
Which has reference to what he says, tr. 2. p. 24. that God neither could nor
ought command us to love him, but only to serve him. See here, says he, how
God has right and might command us his sacred love, he has right to command
us so far as concerns the effect, but not in what concerns the inward
affection. It must needs be therefore that according to the opinion of this man
the love of God, or the Commandment to love God is some evil or unreasonable
thing, if he could not command us it, since it is certain that God may command
every thing that is not evil, unjust, and unreasonable.

To so many remarkable corruptions of diverse passages of Scripture, he adds
also one to justify the rest. For amongst many objections which he propounds,
and makes to himself, drawn for the most part out of the Scripture which in
joins us to do all things for the love of God, if we expect any recompense from
him for them; Matthew. cap. 10. verse. 41. He that receives a Prophet in the
quality of a Prophet, and a righteous man in the quality of a righteous man,
shall receive therefore the reward due unto a Prophet and to a righteous man.
Also he that gives a glass of cold water to the meanest Disciple of Jesus
Christ, shall not lose his reward, provided he give it to him as a Disciple of
Jesus Christ. That is to say, for respect unto Jesus Christ, and for his love,
as these words do signify sufficiently of themselves, and as the Holy Fathers
and Interpreters dounderstand it.

See here his objection which he resolves magisterially, and by an
interrogation, as it were for instruction rather than answer. I agree it, says
he, tr. 3. page 71. and 72. But what is it, think you, to treat a Prophet, a
righteous man, and a Disciple of the Son of God, as a Prophet, a righteous man,
and a Disciple of the Son of God? It is to honor him, invite him, do him good,
and give him entertainment, whether it be to receive some instruction from him,
or to imitate his good example, or to learn his Oracles, or for other good
considerations, of which yet not one is so heightened as to reach the purity of
the love of God.

He afterward makes this his opinion and answer more clear by an example and by
a comparison. I would gladly know of these Interpreters, (says he, he speaks
of those who say that to receive a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, is to
receive him for love of Jesus Christ) whether a man who is prosecuted by his
Creditor, and who seeing one of his Agents coming to demand payment of the
debt, goes to meet him, invites him, makes much of him, that he might win him
over to him, and obtain some forbearance; I would gladly know whether this
Debtor receive this Solicitor as coming to him on the behalf of his Creditor,
and whether the good entertainment he makes for him comes from a good heart and
pure love which he has for him who sent him, page 73.

goes readily out to meet him, and receives him as coming on the behalf of his
Creditor, for otherwise he would not have regarded him at all; he has also
reason to say, that if he invite him, use him kindly, and make any
entertainment for him, this proceeds not from any good will; but rather as from
force and constraint, and that he does not this for the love of the Solicitor,
nor for his sake who employed him; but for love of himself and respect to his
own interest, to try to gain the Solicitor and win him by his means. He could
not have expressed his opinion better, and I should have been troubled to find a
more apposite comparison and clearer words to express the excess thereof, than
those whereof he himself makes use. He would have us say then that when Jesus
Christ says in S. Matthew, c. 10. Qui recipit Prophetam in nomine Prophetae,
mercedem Prophetae accipiet; and qui recipit justum in nomine justi, mercedem
justi accipiet; and quicunque potum dederit uni ex minimis istis, calicem aquae
frigidae tantum in nomine discipuli: Amen dico vobis non perdet mercedem suam.
Matthew. 10. v. 41.
That he who receives a Prophet in the quality of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the quality of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward; and whosoever shall give
only a cup of cold water unto the least Disciple in the quality of a Disciple,
verily he shall not lose his reward; he intends to say no other thing but that
we should receive Prophets, righteous men, and Disciples, and all those who
come on his behalf, in such manner as a poor man receives Sergeants,
Pursevants, and Sollicitors who come to demand money on the behalf of his
Creditors.

Finally he concludes his answer in these words: Some for want of a right
understanding have taken these words and such like from the mouth of our Lord
in the Gospel, in nomine meo, propter me, as if they could signify no other
thing in our tongue, than for the love of me, and to please me. What an
absurdity is this! how can they take them in that sense in the 16. of S. Mark,
where it is said, In nomine meo daemonia ejicient, In my Name shall they cast
out devils: and in the 5. of S. Matthew, where the words run thus: Mentientes
propter me, Lying for my sake. It is our Lord who speaks.

Since it is our Savior who speaks, he ought to have heard him with more
respect; and if he did not understand his words, he should at least not have
made him speak the quite contrary to what he says. But he wants yet more
humility than understanding. For if he had never so little submissiveness and
docility, we might send him to the Holy Fathers and Interpreters of Scripture,
to learn the sense of this passage. But there were cause to fear that seeing
they all take it in that manner which he condemns, and hold that this which our
Lord says in nomine meo and propter me, signifies that which he does for the
love of God and to please him, his zeal would transport him against so many
Saints and great Personages, and make him exclaim; What absurdity is this! or
as he does elsewhere: This is a mere vision. For these are his common answers
when he has no better. So expunging out of Gods Law all command and obligation
to love him, he reduces all Religion to this, to serve him in keeping the other
Commandments and doing good Works outwardly.

But Lessius will not have Christians obliged to external good works
themselves, Matthew brings no other reason for the sentence of life or death
eternal which he will pronounce at the end of the world upon the Elect and
Reprobates, than the accomplishment or omission of these works; he chose rather
to contradict and clude this last and dreadful sentence, than by correcting his
error to submit himself thereunto, for he is not ashamed to say that the
reason which Jesus Christ alleges, and whereupon he grounds his judgment is
not true, and takes not place in the matter wherein he alleges it, that is to
say, in the last Judgment. It is not to purpose, Nec refert quod Dominus Matthew.
25. formam judicii describens meminerit potius operum misericordiae quam
aliorum. Id enim fecit ut homines, praesertim plebeios, qui ad majora and
spiritualia parum sunt comparati, in hec vita ad ea excitaret: haec autem ratio
cessat in extremo judicio: quia tunc homines non erunt amplius ad optra
misericordiae exci^tandi. Lessim de perfect. divin. lib. 13. tract. 22. page
142.
says he, to allege that our Lord in the 25. of S. Matthew, representing unto
us the form of the last Judgment, speaks of the works of mercy rather than
others. For he does it only to stir up men, and especially the common people
who are not capable of comprehending spiritual things, to exercise these works
in this life. Now this reason cannot take place at the last Judgment; because
then there will be no need to excite men unto works of mercy.

I will not stay here to examine this excess,

They who can have the patience to behold a multitude of Expositions of
Scripture, Councils, and Holy Fathers, false, extravagant, unheard of, and many
times impious, need only read Poza's Book which he entitled, Elucidarium
Deiparae. A Volume as big as his would be needful to represent all his
excesses. I have related some of them in the Chapter of Novelty and elsewhere,
which I repeat not here, to avoid tediousness.

Father Adam has surpassed all his Brethren in the same excess. For he
destroys not only the letter and the sense of Scripture, he fights with the
Authors themselves whom God has made use of to impart them to us. He decrys
them and deprives them of all that authority and credit which is due unto
sacred Writers, and who were no other than the hand and tongue of the Holy
Ghost, by attributing unto them weaknesses and extravagancies; and affirming by
an horrible impiety, that following their own imaginations and passions, they
are sometimes transported beyond truth, and have written things otherwise than
they were, and that they did neither conceive nor believe them themselves in
their consciences.

Calvin defeated by himself. In the third Part of this Book, Chap. 7. he says,
That it is not only in criminal matters that zeal and hate inflame a Soul and
transport it unto excest and violence; but that the Saints themselves
acknowledge that they are not exempt from this infirmity: And flagrant passions
sometimes push them on to actions so strange, and ways of expressing themselves
so far removed from truth, that those who have written their lives have called
them holy extravagancies, innocent errors, and Hyperboles more elevated than
their apprehensions, and which expressed more than they intended to say.

He adds also in the same Chapter, and in the progress of the same discourse,
That this infirmity is not so criminal, but that God did tolerate it in the
person of those Authors whom he inspired, and whom we call Canonical, whom he
left to the sway of their own judgments, and the temper of their own spirits.

He compares the Saints and Fathers of the Church to persons full of passions
and violence, he excepts not the Canonical Authors themselves, and he makes
them all subject to the same infirmities, and the Canonical Authors also to the
greater and more inexcusable. For if they be vicious in others, they are yet
more in these, in whom the least faults and the least removes from the truth,
which in ordinary persons were but marks of infirmity,

It is therefore manifest, that what this Jesuit says tends directly to
destroy all Holy Scripture, Faith, and Religion. For if the Canonical Writers
could exceed and depart a little from the truth in one single point, they were
subject to do it in all the rest. So their discourse is not of divine
Authority, neither are their Books the Books or Word of God, because God is
always equally infallible, and can never go beyond or depart from the truth in
the least, whether he speaks himself or by the mouth of his Prophets.

CHAPTER II. Of the Commandments of God.
ARTICLE I. Of the first Commandment, which is that of Love and Charity.
THis first Commandment of Love contains in it, and requires of us three
things; to wit, that we love God above all Creatures; our selves for God; and
our neighbor as our selves.

I. POINT. Of the Command to love God.
I will relate nothing here save only from Father Anthony Sirmond, because he
seems particularly to have undertaken to destroy this Precept, and because he
has said upon this Subject alone all that may be found in the worst Books of
his Fraternity. 1. That he abolishes the Command of loving God, and reduces it
to a simple counsel. 2. That according to him the Scripture hardly speaks at
all of divine Love and Charity, and that our Lord has very little recommended
it. 3. That he declares that the love of God may very well consist and agree
with the love of our selves. 4. And that it is nothing else but self-love.

SECTION I. That there is no Command to love God, according to the Maxims of
the Jesuits Divinity.
OUr Lord speaking of the double Commandment of Love says, That all the Law
and the Prophets do depend thereon: In his duobus mandatis universa lex pendet
and Prophetae, Matthew. 22. He says not that the command to love God does depend
on,

The Jesuits on the contrary teach that the Command to love God depends on, is
comprised in, and confounded with the rest. They say that to love God, so much
as we are or can be obliged by God himself, is only to obey him in his other
Commands, though it be done without love: That it is sufficient love of God to
do nothing against him: That to discharge our duty and what the Holy Scripture
ordains in this point, it suffices not to hate him: As to what remains, it is
left to every ones liberty in particular to love him if he list, and when he
pleases, so that no person in the whole course of his life can ever be obliged
by the Precept of loving God above all things: so that he should not sin at all
against this Commandment, who never put forth any inward act of love, as Father
Sirmond affirms in his Book of the Defense of Virtue, tr. 2. page 15. So that
though indeed it would be a happiness to love God actually more than all
things, yet provided we offend him not, he will not damn us, page 16. And
finally that it is in this manner that God might and ought command us his holy
love, page 24.



The first Discourse of Father Anthony Sirmond is this: If there be a Command
to love, it obliges to the observation thereof, by its own Authority, I mean,
it obliges us to love God.

Now during the whole life of man there is neither time nor occasion wherein we
are obliged to love God; because as he says, page 16. God commanding us to
love him contents himself, as to the main, that we should obey him in his other
Commands: and that because God has not obliged us absolutely to testify our
affection to him otherwise than by yielding obedience unto him, page 18. And
because though we have no love for him effectually, page 19. And because a God
so loving and lovely commanding us to love him, is finally content that we obey
him, page 28. And by consequent, according to this Jesuit, there is no absolute
Commandment to love God, since we are not bound to the observation of it by any
Authority of its own, as he pretends.

Another Argument taken also out of Father Sirmond is this: Every Command
carries some threatening with it, to keep them in their duty to whom it is made,
and then some penalty or punishment against those who violate it. Now the
Commandment which God gave us to love him, contains neither threat nor
punishment, at least no grievous one. And by consequence we cannot say that
this is a Commandment truly so called.

The first Proposition of this Syllogism is certain and evident of it self. But
beyond this you shall find also in Father Sirmond, tr. 2. page 20. and 21.
where he distinguishes of two sorts of commands; the one of indulgence, which
requires something without strict obligation thereto; the other of rigor,
which absolutely obliges to what it has ordained. And to express himself more
fully, he adds afterward, that he commands as much as is possible, but without
threats, without adding any penalty, at least any grievous one to him who
disobeys. His command is all honey and sweetness: or to speak more properly,
this is only an advice, when he adds a penalty or commination of death, then it
is given in rigor.

The second Proposition is his also, If there be any command to love God, it
must oblige by its own Authority to its observation. He puts this Question: And
some one may demand: And to what is he obliged by his transgression? Sins he
mortally against this Precept, who never exercises this inward act of love? And
he answers thereupon in these terms: I dare neither affirm nor deny it of my
self. Indeed the answer he was about to give to this question was too impious
to proceed from the Mouth or Pen of a Jesuit. He had need to use or rather to
abuse the Authority of some great Saint to cover it, and to make him say by
force and against his judgment, what he durst not propound of himself. S.
Thomas, says he, 22. q. 44. a. 6. seems to answer no: and to be content for
avoiding damnation, that we do nothing otherwise against sacred love, though we
never in this life produce any formal act thereof.

S. Thomas speaks not of this in the place he quotes, but speaks rather the
contrary. And how could S. Thomas say that no man is ever obliged to love God
at all in his whole life, since the whole world knows that he held, That all
men are obliged to turn unto God and to love him as soon as they begin to have
the use of reason.

Notwithstanding this he forbears not to repeat the same thing and to confirm
it also in these terms, speaking of Charity and the Love of God: He commands us
not, as we have said, if S. Thomas may warrant us, to love God under pain of
damnation. page 77. and in the 24. page God would be loved freely; if he
threats, it is that he may be obeyed. And also, page 16. To love God actually
more than all, O the felicity! If not (that is to say, though we never have the
felicity to love him actually) provided we do not otherwise offend him, he will
not damn us.

Whence we must conclude according to these Principles and Reasonings, that
there is not absolutely any true Command which obliges us to love God, since
that which he has given us himself contains neither threat nor penalty, at the
least no grievous one against them who fail therein, if you will believe in him
rather than S. John, S. Paul, and the Son of God himself, who say the contrary
in so many places of Scripture.

SECTION II. That according to Father Sirmond the Gospel speaks hardly any
thing at all of Divine Love and Charity, and that Jesus Christ has not much
recommended it.
AFter Father Sirmond had reduced this great and first Command of God to a
simple advice and no more; this advice is also of so little consequence in his
Judgment and according to the mind of Jesus Christ himself, if you will believe
this Jesuit, that he has scarcely mentioned it in the whole Gospel. You will
be troubled to find, says he, page 162. tr. 2. that he has spoken manifestly
of this divine practice, if it be not at the conversion of Magdalen, and in his
Sermon at his last Supper, where he exhorts us to love him.

In these two places, of the practice of the love of God, he will not have him
therein to recommend it as necessary, but only that he commends it and exhorts
us to it, as a good thing; that is to say, that he advises, but commands it not.

And in this he testifies that he has read the whole Gospel very exactly, and
that he has very well dived into the sense of the words of Jesus Christ,
saying to his Apostles at the last Supper: Hoc est praeceptum meum ut diligatis
invicem. Joan. 15. v. 12.
The commandment which I give you, is that you love one another. He discovers
also by his discourse, that he understands perfectly well what the Gospel and
new Law is, which according to the Divines after S. Thomas is no other thing
than the Law of love and love it self* So that when he says that love is
scarcely spoken of through the whole Gospel, it is as if he should say that the
new Law is not spoken of in the new Law, nor the Gospel in the Gospel.

But to show that he speaks not hereof without having considered it well, he
observes that of 32 Parables, which is the most frequent manner of Christ's
discourse, he applies but one for the recommendation of the love of our
neighbor, in the person of that distressed poor man abused by thieves betwixt
Jericho and Jerusalem, page 121.

After he has read the Gospel so exactly as to number the Parables contained
therein: Paul had no reason to say, writing to the Romans, Plenitudo legis est
dilectio; qui diligit proximum, legem implevit. Romans 13. v. 10.
That love is the fulfilling of the law, and that he who loves his neighbor
has fulfilled the law. For if love be the accomplishment and fulfilling of the
Law, it will follow that love is extended through the whole Law, otherwise it
could not fulfill nor comprehend it all. And so it would neither be the
fulfilling nor accomplishment of it: and if the love of our neighbor fulfill
and accomplish the Law, the love of our neighbor must contain and be contained
in all the Law, as the Soul fills and contains and is filled and contained by
the body; which caused S. Austin to say, Non praecipit Scriptura nisi
charitatem, nec culpat nist cupiditatem, and to modo informat mores dominus.
That the whole Scripture old and new is, and commends nothing but charity.

If we will not submit to the Authority of S. Austin and S. Paul, we should at
least give way to that of Jesus Christ, and acknowledge his error, or raze out
of the Gospel so many passages wherein he recommends so expressly and clearly
the love of God above all things, and that of our neighbor, by making thereof
an express Commandment which he calls his, and the Commandment proper to the
new Law, as when he says in the 13. of S. John: Mandatum novum do vobis, ut
diligatis invicem sicut dilexi vos. Joan. 13. v 34.
A new commandment give I unto you, And in Chap. 15. Hoc est praeceptum meum ut
diligatis invicem. Joan. 15. v. 12.
This is my commandment that you love one another. And a little after: Hoc
mando vobis ut diligatis invicem. Ibid. v. 17.
I command you to love one another; and many other places there are wherein he
speaks of charity and of the command to love God and our neighbor as a
Commandment which is not only proper to the new Law, but which contains also
the whole Law new and old; as he expressly declares in S. Matthew, where
speaking of the double Commandment to love God above all things and our
neighbor as our selves, he says, In his duobus mandatis universa lex pendet
and Prophetae. Matt. 22. v. 40.
That all the Law and Prophets depend on these two Commandments.

SECTION III. The mixture and agreement of Self-love with the Charity invented
by Father Sirmond the Jesuit.
IT soffices not Father Sirmond to have taken away and dashed Charity as much as
he could out of the Law of God, the sacred Scriptures, and the heart of man; he
sets upon it in its own nature, and he seems to desire to drive it from it
self, first in mingling it with, and secondly in changing it into self-love.

He mixes it with self-love when he says tr. 2. page 47. The more that charity
possesses it, the less does the Soul think of any other thing than to love;
and the more it takes to heart the interests of God, the less it cares for its
own peculiar: but all this is accidental unto charity, whereof the highest
perfection may subsist in a heart altogether inclined to and concerned to the
utmost for it self,

If it be true that to lay to heart the interests of God, and to care for them
more than our own be accidental unto charity, as this Jesuit pretends; S. Paul
understood not what charity was, and he has spoken very improperly of it in 1
Cor. 13. where making the most express and exact description of this divine
virtue that we have in the Scripture, he places this amongst its qualities and
properties as the Center and Principle of all the rest, and as the heart of
this divine virtue, that it seeks not its own interests, non quaerit quae sua
sunt. And this Jesuit pretends on the contrary that, the highest perfection of
charity may subsist in a heart attentive to all its own affairs: that is to
say, in a heart whose affections are fastened to the things of this world; as he
expounds himself sufficiently by the words following; and concerned to the
utmost for himself, by referring to himself and his private interest whatsoever
he loves in the world, and even in Religion it self, in the exercises of piety
and good works which he may do.

Our Lord says, Qui amat animam suam, perdet eam. Joan. 12. v. 25.
That he who loves himself shall lose himself. S. John forbids us on Gods
behalf Nolite diligere mundum, neque ea quae in mundo sunt. 1 Joan. 2. v. 15.
to love the world or any thing that is in the world, and he declares openly,
Qui diligit mundum, non est charitas Patris in co. Ibid.
That the love of God is not in him who loves the world. And Father Sirmond
maintains on the contrary, that all this agrees well together, and that charity
in its bighest perfection may subsist in a heart and person who is chiefly
concerned for himself; and that this person may have his heart inclined to all
his own concerns; that is to say, affectionately addicted to all worldly
affairs, without failing in what he owes to the principal object of his
affection.

He expounds this conceit by the example of the Blessed: As it comes to pass,
says he, to the Blessed who declining every sort of evil, provide for all
their own concerns, and yet are not the less appertaining to God: That is to
say, that the Blessed have great care of their interests, taking heed that no
evil betide them, and that the good they enjoy escape not from them, and all
this without diminishing their love to God.

Our Lord would not have us careful of any thing in this life but to serve God,
leaving unto him the care of our selves, all that concerns us, and even that
which is most necessary for us. Nolite solliciti esse dicentes: Quid
manduc^bimus? Quid b bemus? Aut quo operiemut? Haec enim omnia gentes
inquirunt. Scit ^nim Pater vester qula his omnibus indigetis. Quaerite ergo
primum regnum Dei and justitiam ejus, and haec omnia adjiclentur vobis. Matthew.
6. v. 31.
Be not sollicitous, says he in S. Matthew, saying, What shall we eat, what
shall we drink, wherewith shall we be cleathed? For the Heathen inquire after
all these things; and your Father knows that they are necessary for you. Seek
first the Kingdom of Heaven, and its Righteousness, and all this shall be given
unto you as an advantage. And Father Sirmond on the contrary will have the
Blessed themselves in Heaven to be careful of their interests, And yet he
pretends that they serve God never the worse: because they may be all at once
for God and themselves; so that according to him Charity at the highest point
of perfection, such as it is in the Blessed, may subsist in a heart which is
most deeply concerned for it self.

SECTION IV. The changing and transforming of Charity into Self-love by Father
Sirmond.
WE have now made appear that Father Sirmond mingles and confounds Self-love
with Charity in the hearts of the Blessed themselves; we must now see how he
changes and transforms also love of God into self-love, and acknowledges no
other Charity but that of Self-love.

He makes as it were a Party upon this Point, for which he does not at first
declare himself; but propounds its reasons and foundations.

1. He makes a person who desires to love God, but fears to mistake by loving
himself instead of God, to speak in this manner; I fear that having made me for
his own sake, I only love him for my self, tr. 2. page 83. In his following
Discourse he encoun^ this fear, saying, that when we desire God, we desire not
God for Gods sake; but we desire God to and for our selves. From whence he
takes occasion to say unto this person as it were in drollery: But say you do
desire him for his own sake, do you not desire him for your self? Truly if you
reject this consideration, I by your leave shall not do the same, page 84. And
this person replying that he does not reject it neither; that he desires God
indeed, but that he does desire him that he may be his, and refer all to him;
because he is his Creature and a participation of his Being; that he would be
his, that he might be more obedient and entirely dependent on him: he answers
him as it were to disabuse him: Consider that to be of God and to depend on
him, seems not a motive proper to incline you to desire the enjoyment of him,
page 85.

That is to say, that they who love God with an hope to enjoy him one day, as
all good people in this world do lovehim, or those who already do enjoy him by
loving him, as the Blessed in Heaven, love him not nor desire him, that they
may depend on him and be his; but to the end that he may be theirs, and after a
sort refer himself unto them.

He confirms and establishes this Principle by another like it, which is, that
none can love any thing besides his own proper good, and that whosoever loves
has necessarily a regard to himself, page 86. And a little after he grounds
his Principle on another Argument which he puts into the mouth of those who are
of the Faction of Self-love against Charity, making them to say, that as good
is the object of love, even so the private good of every one, is that which the
love of every one regards. Whence he infers without interrupting his discourse,
that if I can desire nothing but under the appearance of good, so no more can I
do it without appearance of my own good, I of mine, and you of yours, page 87.

And for fear we should stop him in his Career, Paul says in express terms,
Non quaerit quae sua sunt. 2 Cor. 13.
That it seeks not its own; he prevents this objection, and cuts up by the
root this difficulty, by saying or making them of the Faction of Self-love
which he maintains to say; that it is Nature that does this, and that Charity
which elevates and perfects it without destroying it, ought to keep close to
it, page 88. That (...) to say, that Charity ought to follow the motions of
Nature corrupted as it is at this day, and stay there. For it is Nature that
inclines us always to love our selves and for our selves: and that so Charity
gives the same inclination, and works the same motion in the heart it fills;
so that in charitable love as in natural, the private good of every one is that
which every ones love regards, so that no person in any sort whatsoever can
desire any thing which is without appearance of some private good to himself in
particular; that it is Nature which does cause this, which being immutable in
its Laws which are confirmed and not destroyed by Grace, Charity is to be kept
within those bounds.

It is true that Father Sirmond has propounded these things in the name of
another; but this is only to conceal himself, I am content, says he, page 90.
that all they maintain take place even in Charity, that it cannot be inclined
toward any object without observing and seeking therein the proper good of him
whose heart is inflamed therewith.

He that would undertake to change and transform Charity into Self-love, could
not do it more clearly, than by attributing Nature and its motions and the
definition of Self-love unto Charity: and Self-love cannot be more naturally
set forth, than by saying with this Jesuit, that it is a weight or motion of
the Soul which cannot be inclined to any object without observing and seeking
therein the private good of him whose heart is therewith inflamed. So that when
he says that he is content that this should take place in Charity, he avows
that Charity and Self-love are one and the same thing.

After this we have less cause to be aftonished that he has said, as we have
seen above, that God neither ought nor could command the love of Charity; and
that Jesus Christ is come from Heaven to Earth to set us free, and deliver us
from it as a slavery and yoke unsupportable. For indeed God could not command
Selflove; and Jesus Christ is come into the world only to fight with and
destroy it.

In this the consequence and connection of the Principles of the Jesuits
Divinity is very observable,

II. POINT. That the Jesuits by destroying the Charity which man owes unto
God, destroy also that which he owes himself.
AS to love any one is to desire his good; so to love ones self is to desire
good to ones self. Whence it follows, that God being the only true good of man
which can render him content and happy in this and the other life, no man does
truly love himself but after the proportion of his love to God, the force and
motion of the love which he has to God inclines him to desire, seek him, and
do all he can to find and unite himself to him as his end wherein at length he
finds his repose and happiness.

So that to make appear that the Jesuits destroy the true love that a man owes
to himself, I need only to continue to show that they destroy that which he
owes to God, adding unto what I have already reported from Father Sirmond upon
this Point, some opinions of other Authors of the Society. If it seems to the
Jesuits that Father Sirmond may find his justification in the conformity of his
opinions with those of his Fraternity; we shall also find therein what we
pretend, that is, to make appear that his opinions upon this subject are not
peculiar unto himself, and that all that he has said against Charity is taken
from the grounds of the Societies Divinity.

Dicastillus the Jesuit speaks in the same manner of the love which God obliges
us to bear toward him. Dilectio quam Deus exigit a nobis, proprie voluntas est
implendi ejus mandat^, quatenus hoc bonum illi and gratum est. Dicastill. de
paenit. tr. 8. disp. 2. dub. 5. number. 135.
The love which God exacts of us, is, says he, properly a will to accomplish
his Commandments.

And Tambourin relying upon the same foundations, reasons thus about the love
we owe unto our neighbor: Sicut autem certum est: no^ obligari ad proximum
diligendum, juxia illud Marth. 22. Dillges proximum tuum sicut reipsum; ita lbi
certum videtur non adesse obliga^ionem diligendi per aliquem actum internum
express tendentem in ipsum pr^ximum. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 26. a. 8. in c. Suar.
c. 5. d. 1. s. 4. n. 4. Coninck d. 24. d. 4. Sa is enim superque est si ames
Deum, ejusque voluntatem velis exequi. etc.
As it is certain that we ought to love our neighbor according to the
Commandment of the Gospel in S. Marth. chap. 22. You shall love your neighbors
as your selves; so it seems to me also assured that there is no obligation to
love him by an internal act of the will which is expressly terminated on him --
For it is enough that you love God, and that you desire to accomplish his will,
wherein the love of our neighbor is comprised. Whence it is, that if you hate
him not, and observe for his sake the outward works of good will, you love him
sufficiently. See here the very consequences of Father Sirmond drawn from the
same Principles.

Filliutius expounding in what manner we are obliged to love God, that we may
love him above all things, says that this ought not to be extended in such
manner as that we ought to have in our hearts a greater and more strong love
for God than for the Creatures. His reason is; because if this were so, we
should be greatly troubled, and scruple oftentimes to know whether we loved God
as we ought. Rectius consulitur conscientiis piorum hominum, qui semper alicqui
dubitarent de sua dilectione, si deberet esse intentior amore cujusvis
creaturae. Fillius. tom. 2. mor. qq. tr. 22. cap. 9. number. 283. page 92.
we may better provide for the repose of the consciences of pious persons, who
without this would be always in doubt of their love they bear unto God, if it
ought to be in a higher degree than the love of any creature whatsoever. He had
spoken truer, if he had said that this opinion is favorable to the laziness
and lusts of men, and not to their conscience, which it destroys by procuring
to it a false repose, which causes it to sleep securely in misery and death.
Finally he pretends that we are not obliged to love God in any higher degree
than the Creatures.

Amicus says the same thing, and brings the same reason for it; Quod nimirum
semper homo debeat esse onx us an intensiori actu amaverit Deum quam ullam
creaturam. Amicus tom. 4 disp. 29. scot. 2. number. 15. page 388.
That a man would be always in trouble to know whether he bore love toward God
in a higher degree than toward any creature. It seems these people have taken
for their task, not to teach men their duty, and to carry them on to the
performance of what they ought, but rather to dispense with them therein when
they find any trouble or difficulty to perform it. Which thing they do in the
greatest part of the most important Precepts of Christianity. For men believing
them to be too perfect and difficult for them, look for nothing but to be
dispensed with in their obligation unto them; instead of representing unto God
their inability, and to pray him to give them force and grace to bear
themselves therein as they ought.

Amicus enlarges himself yet farther on this reason. For speaking of two ways
of loving God above all things; to wit, by loving him as much as we can by his
common assistance, or by loving him indeed at the least more than any creature:
Uterque modus reddit praeceprum servatum moraliter impossible, and semper
dubium relinquit operantem de ejus impletione. Ibid.
The one and the other manner, make the Precept of loving God morally
impossible, and leaves him who labors to fulfill it always in doubt whether he
have accomplished it or not.

If it be impossible to love God as much as we can, or more than any creature,
as this Jesuit pretends, it is impossible to love him with all our heart and
all our might, and to love him as much as can be above all things, and to love
him more than any creature, is but the same thing. He would say then that it is
impossible to keep the first Commandment of God, in the manner God himself has
enjoined us to observe it. Which is not only simply to destroy it, but to
reduce it, as we may say, below nothing, by maintaining that it is not so much
as possible; since God cannot command that which is impossible, as he himself
cannot do it.

We are not to wonder, if presupposing that it is impossible to love God as he
has commanded as, he conclude that we are not at all obliged thereunto. But he
draws also from this same Principle many other Conclusions, whereof he makes so
many Maxims and Rules of Christian life.

1. Secunda sententia docec Deum diligendum esse super omnia tantum
appretiative seu praelative, non autem intensive, quae ver^ est and sequenda.
Ibid. n. 15. Talis dilectio appretistiva seu praelativa effentialiter
comparativa est^ quia praesert Drum in amor^ omnibus aliis amabilibus. Ibid.
number. 16.
He says that it is sufficient to love God appretiatively, (by way of
Valuatien) more than all other things, that is to say, as he expounds himself,
to prefer God and his love before every Creature and its love.

2. Quoniam possumus ralem aestimationem de Deo habere, ut propter increatam
suam bonitatem praeserendus sit in amore rebus omnibus creatis; and tamen
nonnisi remiss in talem actum tendere.

Quod tolis dilectio esse possit, etiamsi in gradu remississima sit, constat ex
jactis principlis. Ibid. number. 20.


That unto this it is not only not needful to have more love for God than for
the Creatures;

3. and 4. Quod autem vi hujus praecepti ad nullam certam dilectionis
intensionem teneamur, constat ex dictis, cum nec uspiam sit, nec ex aliquo
revelatoideducatur. Ibid. n. 21. Unde negandum est certam intensionem in actu
dilectionis esse sub praecepto, sed tantum sub consilio. Ibid. n. 22. 1
Intensio dilectionis non est sub praecepto, sed tantum sub consilio. 2 Sola
dilectio appretiativa super omnia sufficit ad implendum praeceptum charitatis
erga Deum, etiamsi remississima sti. number. 19. Etiamsi nonnisi remiss in talem
actum tendat.
That God commands us no more when he commands us to love him above all things.

4. and 4. Quod autem vi hujus praecepti ad nullam certam dilectionis
intensionem teneamur, constat ex dictis, cum nec uspiam sit, nec ex aliquo
revelatoideducatur. Ibid. n. 21. Unde negandum est certam intensionem in actu
dilectionis esse sub praecepto, sed tantum sub consilio. Ibid.n. 22. 1 Intensio
dilectionis non est sub praecepto, sed tantum sub consilio. 2 Sola dilectio
appretiativa super omnia sufficit ad implendum praeceptum charitatis erga Deum,
etiamsi remississima sti. number. 19. Etiamsi nonnisi remiss in talem actum
tendat.
That This is sufficient in effect to enable us to say that we love God above
all things, and that we are ready to quit and lose all things rather than
offend him, and therefore to accomplish the first and great Command of Divine
love: And that to love God more, is an advice and not a command; and by
consequence no man is obliged thereto.

I undertake not to examine here these Maxims and Arguments, because I have
already said something of them in another place. I represent them here, only to
discover according to the design of this Chapter, that the Jesuits have taken
in hand to blot out of the Gospel the principal and greatest Commandment which
obliges us to love God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all
our might; and they say on the contrary, that we cannot love God so little as
not to satisfy this Commandment.

God declares that he will be loved with all our heart, that is, with all our
might, that is to say, as much as we are able. Amicus on the contrary pretends
that he ought to be content that we love him as little as we please: because to
love him more, (1) and to a certain degree is only an advice: It suffices that
we love him much under what we could, if we would; (2) because the least degree
of love is enough for him, and for to satisfy this Commandment.

If this Jesuit had resolved to make a Party against God, and to contradict and
contend with him openly, he could not speak with more violence and evidence:
and unless he would quite abolish and destroy the Command which God has given
us to love him with all our heart and all our strength, he could not diminish
and debase it more than to reduce it to the last extremity, saying: Ad
implendum praeceptum charitatis erga Deum, sufficit dilectio, etiamsi in gradu
remississima sit.

But he stays not there, and as if he had feared, that he had granted too much
unto God in allowing him the least part of our heart and affection, he expounds
his thoughts more clearly, and to pacific the consciences of pious persons, who
might fear they had not the love they ought to have unto God, if they should be
obliged to love him in that very manner the Jesuit speaks of above all things;
he adds, that when God commands that we should love him above all things, we
must not extend this word all things, to the rigor in its utmost extent and
aecording to its natural sense, so that it should comprehend under it all
Creatures; but that we must understand by all things, only those which are
evil, Cum dicitur dilectio Dei ap pre^iativa super omnia, non necessario
intelligitur super omnia quae amicitlae Dei adver^ontur, cujusmodi sunt omnia
peccata mortalia. Ibid. number. 16.


So that according to this Maxim no person is obliged to love God more than
any Creature, since there is no Creature evil, nor contrary to friendship with
God; but rather appointed by the Ordinance of God himself to help us to know
and love him. And so according to the Jesuits we may love all Creatures more
than God; and which is more strange, without violating the Commandment which
appoints us to love God above all things.

If we believe Amicus then and his Brethren, there will be nothing but sin, and
that mortal sin also, above which God ought to prevail in our esteem and
affection; because that only destroys the friendship we have with him. And if
God command us any thing in this matter, and a kinsman, a friend, or any
whosoever desire the contrary, we may according to this new Philosophy refuse
God what he desired of us, to content a kinsman, a friend, or other person,
without offending the friendship we ought to exercise toward God, provided
that this refusal be not in something expressly commanded, and of such
consequence that we cannot fail thereof without sinning mortally.

It is easy to judge whether this be to love God above all things,

After he has brought the love we owe unto God to this point, Filliutius adds
that we are not obliged to love him in this manner above three or four moments
in our life, whereof the first is, when we begin to have the use of reason; the
second at the point of death, and the third to love him actually from five
years to five years during life. The rest of the time he allows us to love God
or the World, as we please, confidering the love of God (except at these
instants which he has set down) as a work of Supererogation for which God is
beholding to his Creatures. P^imum est initium moralis discursus; secundu^r
articulus mortis, tertium est tempus intermedium vitae, saltem quinto quoque
anno. Villint. tom. 2. mor. qq. tr. 22. cap. 9. number. 286. and 290. page 93.


This obligation also would be too severe and too hard, it would not be
sufficiently proportionable to the weakness of our natures. Whence Dicastillus
concludes, that God would have repentance separated from the love of God, to
make it more casie. So that whereas, according to S. Paul, fear did render the
yoke of the old Law unsupportable, quam non potuerunt portare patres nostri,
and love makes the new Law sweet; jugum meum suave est, and onus leve; we must
say, according to the Divinity of these Fathers, that the old Law was
incomparably more sweet than the Christian, because fear reigned in that, and
love the most difficult of all, in this. Or to speak conformably to their
Principles, they are both equally sweet and easy to practice, since under the
one and the other we are equally dispensed with for the love of God, and fear
bears sway in both. Videtur accommodata fragilitati humanae, cum poenitentia
etiam ante adventum Christi eslet alligata illi actui qui omnium meximus and
prae cae^eris arduus. Dicastill. de poenit. tr. 8. disp. 2. dub. 4. number. 106.


Molina quite overthrows the Divinity of the Apostle. For after he has
established fear in the place of love in the new Law, he substitutes in the old
Law love in the place of fear, pretending that it is in this that we may truly
say thereof, quam non potuerunt portare patres nostri; and that this is the
special privilege of ours above the old. For this cause this obligation to
love God only three or four times in our life, seems to him also too severe.
This had been well under the old Law; but at present that we are under the Law
of Grace, we have Sacraments which may supply the want of charity and love to
God. Ante legem gratiae, and antequam ex magua Dei misericordis in ca
instituerentur Sacramenta quae attritos justificarent, il^isque vi
Sacramentorum conferretur charitas supe^naturalis, sicut sine Sacramentis
confertur contritis, sane long srequentlus sub lethali culpa tentbantur
homines Deum ex charitate supernaturali diligere, quam Christiani in nova lege
eum ex charitate supernaturali diligere tentantur. Molina de just. and jure,
tr. 5. disp. 59. number. 5. page 3166.
Before the Law of Grace, says this Jesuit, and before God by a singular mercy
had yet instituted Sacraments capable to justify those who approach unto them
with attrition, so that they might receive by the virtue of these Sacraments
supernatural charity, as they do who being contrite do receive the Sacraments,
men were much more frequently obliged under the pain of mortal sin to love God
by the motion of supernatural love, than Christians are under the new Law.

And confessing that under the old Law they were obliged to love God by a love
of supernatural charity, Non ita frequenter sub reatu lethalis culpae tenemur
Deum ex charitate supernaturali diligere ad effectum comparandae
aeternaefelicitatis, interitumque evadendi sempiternum, quoniam satis est nos
atteri susciplendo simul Sacramentum novae legis. Ibid.
That Christians who live under the Law of Grace, are not obliged under the
pain of mortal sin to love God so often with a love of supernatural charity to
obtain life, and avoid death eternal, because it is sufficient for them to have
attrition, receiving at the same time some Sacrament of the new Law.

Amicus says the same thing of the Commandment of Contrition, for our
conversion unto God after sin. But I will not stand here to allege or make
reflection on what Molina says, because it is spoken of elsewhere. I will only
add, to clear up the conformity of the Jesuits upon this Point, that which
Filliutius says. He demands, Pro quo tempore urgeat ejus obligatio? An statim
post p^ccatum commissum? Secunda sententia negat, etiamsi occurrat
opportunitas, and facile fieri possit. Respondeo and dico 1. tenendum cum
secunda sententia. Filliut. tom. 1. qq. mor. tr. 6. cap. 8. number. 198. and 199.
page 157.
In what time we are obliged unto contrition, and whether it be so soon as we
have sinned? And after he has reported two opinions, of which the second,
says he, denies that we are so soon obliged, though we have conven ience, and
that we may easily do it, he concludes in these terms: I answer and say in the
first place that we must follow the second opinion, which holds that we are not
obliged.

He descends also yet farther in particular, and demands Quibus temporibus per
se obliget contritio ex jure naturali? Ibid. number. 205.

Respondeo and dico 1, si respiciatur lex justitiae qua homo tenetur
satisfacere Deo pro injuria peccati, sic non videtur obligari, nisi quando
adest periculum mortis. Ibid.


on what occasion the Precept of Contrition obliges by the Law of Nature? if we
regard the Law of Justice by which a man is obliged to satisfy God for the
injury which he has done unto him by sin, in this manner he seems not to be
obliged to contrision and sorrow for his sin, but only when he finds himself in
danger of death.

His other Answer is, Si respiclatur lex charitatis erga Deum, jute naturali
obligat ante mortem. Ibid. number. 206.
That if we respect the love which is due unto God, we are obliged unto it by
that Law of Nature before death. That is to say, that though in rigor and
without any injustice a sinner may remain in his sin and aversion from God
until his death; notwithstanding he ought of charity to prevent that time, and
to love God sometimes without attending for this extremity, if he will not ask
him forgiveness as soon as he has offended him, nor even for many years after;
it is reasonable that at least he pass not above five or seven years before he
do it. This is the charitable advice which Filliutius gives him in these terms.
In universum intra annum non videtur obligare: quolibet septennio vel
quinquennio, est prob^bile, (...) alibi dicam de charitate. Ibid. n. 208.
Speaking generally it seems that a man is not obliged thereto within one years
time; that he should be obliged thereto within five, or from seven years to
seven, is very probable, as we shall see elsewhere, where I shall speak the
same thing of Charity. He holds that a sinner after he has passed five or
seven years in his sin, and in a voluntary aversion from God, and all others in
like manner who have passed over so long a time without once thinking of loving
God, will be obliged, the one to ask God pardon, and the other to love him at
least after so long a time. If this be probable, as he says, the contrary is
also: and by consequence of two probable opinions we may follow which we will
with a safe conscience, according to the Jesuits Divinity,

The third Answer of Filliutius is, Si resp^ciatur lex charitatis propriae,
probabile est obligare etiam extra articulum. Ibid. number. 206.
That if we regard the Law of Charity which every one owes unto himself, it is
very probable that he is obliged to have contrition and sorrow for sin before
the article of death. And as if he feared lest this should also torment some
consciences, and give them too much trouble and scruple, he adds: Ob
authoritatem autem Doctorum quos citavimus in praecedenti quaesito, non est
improbabile quod non obliget. Ibid.
For all that, because of the Authority of the Doctors whom we have quoted in
the former question, it is probable that he is not obliged thereto. That is to
say, that a man who is in mortal sin, may with a safe conscience, according to
this probable opinion, persist voluntarily all his life in a state of enmity
against God, and delay his conversion until the point of death, demanding only
forgiveness of God when he is ready to dye, and can offend him no longer,
without doing herein any thing against the charity he owes to himself, any more
than against that which he owes unto God.

I can hardly believe that a Jesuit would approve a Child who should deal with
his Father in this manner as he says we may carry our selves toward God; and
I know not whether he would counsel any of his Brethren who had a mortal
disease to suffer it five or seven years, or even until he should see himself
nigh unto death, without calling for the Physician, and without applying any
remedy thereto,

I know well at the least, that if herein he pretend not to offend against the
Laws of Justice and Christian Charity, he shall transgress those of the
Society, who have so well provided for the health of all their Brethren, that
inftead of delaying to the extremity, they have ordained to cause the Physician
to visit them from time to time, though there be none of them sick. What kind
of prudence must this be which has so great care of the health and life of the
body, and so little of the Souls?

Father Celot is not content to say as Filliutius and others, that a sinner is
not obliged to seek God after he has offended him; but even that God himself
preventing and seeking, as we may say, his friendship by the inspirations and
good motions he bestows on him, he may refuse and reject them effectually,
without herein making himself guilty of any fault. He says also the same thing
of them who make profession of living well, and of all those who of deliberate
purpose reject the inspirations and graces by which God inclines them to do any
good work, though both the one and the other knew that their Salvation would
depend upon these inspirations, and that through neglect of receiving them, and
complying with them, they might be lost eternally. Fateor certe in hujus
acceptatione usuque consilii salutis cardinem non raro versari: Quo tempore
dicss oportet gravissimo se obstringere peccato qui omittar. Ego nullum
praecise agnosco. Celot lib. 9. cap. sect. 7. page 816.
I acknowledge, says he, that Salvation depends many times of this counsel,
and the use that is made of it, you must say (he speaks to his Adversary) that
in this case he that will not follow it, commits a great sin. But as for me I
hold that he commits none at all. A man that suffers himself to dye of hunger,
without being willing to take bread or any other nourishment that is presented
unto him, when he might easily do it, would pass in the judgment of all the
world for a self-murderer: and he that suffers his Soul to dye, or rather who
kills it, by refusing knowingly and even resolvedly, the graces and
inspirations sent him by God, on which he knows that his eternal life and
Salvation depend, shall be innocent in the judgment of these Jesuits, Quo
tempore dicas oportet gravissimo se obstringere peccato; ego nullum praecise
agnosco.

THE SUM Of the Doctrine of the Jesuits concerning the Love of Charity which a
man owes unto God and to himself.
THey say that when God commands us to love him, he intends only that w^ should
serve him, though it be without love; that he desires no other thing but that
we obey him by doing outwardly that which he injoyns us; that he would have us
also to keep the other Commandments, though in keeping them we love him not;
that it is sufficient not to hate him, to fulfill the Commandment of loving him,
and by consequence to be saved.

God has commanded us to love him with all our heart and all our might;

As God loves us always, and does us good without intermission, so he would
also that our love and acknowledgments should be continual and without bounds.
But the Jesuits maintain that we may pass over whole years without loving him;
and that by bethinking our selves thereof once in five or seven years, we are
quit: yea, that though we have never actually loved him at all through our
whole life, it suffices to discharge us from this obligation we have to love
him, to think thereof at the point of death; nay, there be some who do hardly
acknowledge even this obligation.

God is not content to be loved in a slight way, he will be loved as God, and
as he deserves, above all things. The Jesuits say on the contrary, that we may
love all things more than God, because according to their Divinity the least
degree of love suffices to acquit us of what we owe him.

And when God says that he will be loved above all things, they hold that he
would say only above all things that are evil and contrary to his friendship,
that is to say, above all sorts of mortal sins, which only can overturn and
destroy the friendship which men have with God.

As man cannot find his bliss but in God, so he loves not himself truly, but so
far as he loves God, seeks, adheres, and is united to him by love: but the
Jesuits dispense with him for this genuine love which he owes himself,

They say moreover, that being departed from God, he may continue in that
estate without troubling himself about returning to God and himself; and that
when God seeks him first by his inspirations, he may refuse and reject them,
and abide in this estate of enmity and voluntary aversion from God until the
point of death; and so expose himself to the danger of perishing eternally,
without making himself by this guilty of any fault, and without being deficient
in the love he owes himself, any more than in that he owes God.

III. POINT. Of the Command to love our Neighbor, that the Jesuits utterly
destroy it.
FAther Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 7. page 81. expounds the Command to love our
Neighbor in these terms: By Charity we are obliged to testify unto him who
may have offended us, that we retain no animosity against him, and according to
the convenience of times and persons give him proofs of the love we bear him.
He quotes some Divines from whom he has taken what he says; and he adds
reason grounded on the Example and Authority of the holy Fathers. For love,
says he, which we bear toward our brethren, ought to resemble that which the
members have one toward another, as writes S. Austin in the 15. of his 50
Homilies. Si enim sic nos amare voluerimus, quomodo se invicem amant membr.
nostri corporis, And making application of this Example taken out of S. Austin,
and which S. Austin took out of S. Paul, Let us see then, says he, what it is
the members of the body do naturally one for another. They love and agree
mutually, and sympathize with one another in misery Quando sanum est caput,
congaudent omnia membra, and placent sibi de singulis caetera membra, etc.

See here the duties of Charity toward our Neighbor, which he acknowledges
with the Divines and holy Fathers, and then he establishes the command and
obligation: It is even hereunto that God and Nature obliges us, says S.
Ambrose in the first Book of his Offices, Chap. 28. And therefore, Secundum Dei
voluntatem and naturae copulam invicem nobis auxilio esse^debemus, certare
officiis, velut in medio omnes utilitates ponere, and adjumentum far alter
alteri, vel studio, vel officio, vel pecunia, vel alio quolibet modo, ut inter
nos societatis augeatur gratia.

Perhaps it will be wondered at, at first, that I having undertaken to represent
only the Errors of the Jesuits, have rehearsed these places of Father Bauny,
as if I had something to reply against them. But I do not pretend to reprove
him for producing the opinion of the holy Fathers with those of the
School-Divines, that he might establish one of the principal points of
Christian Morality. I have no other design than to make him see clearly the
excess wherewith he is transported by voluntarily despising the Doctrine of the
holy Fathers after he has acknowledged it, since he has confidence to say
afterward: I believe nevertheless that to fail in these things is no mortal
sin, unless in case of scandal, page 81. that it is no morsal sin to be
deficient in that which God and Nature obliges us unto, as he said but now:
that it is no mortal sin, as he says also in the same place, to have such an
^atred against our neighbor, as not to be willing to keep company with him, to
have such and so violent an aversion from him, as upon no terms or occasion, to
be willing to speak with him nor help him in his business, nor at all to
forgive him when he acknowledges his fault, and offers satisfaction. For he
declares roundly, that to be deficient in all these things which he has
related according to the opinion of the Fathers and new Divines: themselves, is
no mortal sin unless in case of scandal: that is to say, in the language of
this good man, that provided men be not offended at these things, the violation
of Charity and the Law of God is of little consideration.

He speaks also of Envy with the same spirit, citing also S. Austin and S.
Cyprian, but only to despise their Authority also, by openly preferring his own
opinion before that of these great Saints. For after he has related the words
of S. Cyprian, who wondering at the nature of Envy, cries out: Qualis est animi
tinea zelare in altero felicitatem, in malum proprium bona aliena convertere,
illustrium prosperitate torqueri? He adds speedily after, as thinking strange
at S. Cyprians wondering, and correcting the opinion of S. Austin whom he quotes
likewise: This sin, though by the testimony of S. Austin it be contrary to
Charity, yet seems not to be mortal, Because the good which is found in these
temporal things, is so slender and of so little consequence for Heaven, that it
is of no consideration with God and the Saints.

I let pass this reason of which I have spoken in another place, to relate that
which he adds also concerning the sin of Envy. It is no more mortal, says he,
when a man gives way to such desires upon some good motive, ex bono motivo. He
expresses a little before some of these desires which he does not only
discharge of mortal sin, but which he justifies absolutely, and would have to
pass for innocent, saying that we may wish evil to our neighbor without sin,
when we are urged to it by some good motive, page 77. And to expound and
support his opinion, he makes use of the Authority of Bonacina writing in these
terms: So Bonacina upon the first Commandment, disp. 3. q. 4. n. 7. exempts
from all fault the mother who desires the death of her daughters, quod ob
deformitatem aut inopiam nequeat juxta animi desiderium eas nuptui tradere; or
indeed because for their sakes she is ill used by their father: quia occasion
illarum male secum agitur a marito, aut injuriis afficitur. Non enim proprie
filias detestatur ex displicentia ipsarum, sed in detestationem proprii mali,
page 77.

He brings also another Example on the same subject: also one may without fault
desire some evil to befall a wicked man, as death; non quidem optando quatenus
malum ipsius est, sed quatenus boni rationem habet. This good or this
appearance of good which serves for motive to desile the death of a man without
offending God, is expounded by Emanuel Sa in this sort. Potes optare hosti tibi
alioqui valde nocituro mortem, non odio, sed ad vitandum damnum tuum. Item de
morte ejus gaudere ob bonum inde secutum. Sa verbo charitatis, number. 8. page 65.
You may desire the death of an enemy who might do you much hurt, Jesus Christ
was far off from this Doctrine, when in the Gospel he forbids us to render evil
for evil, and commands us on the contrary to do good for evil: But this Maxim
justifies the greatest part of the enmities and mortal feuds that are in the
world. For commonly we desire not the hurt, and especially not the death of
another, but to deliver our selves from some evil, or to reap thereby some
good, and he must have lost all regard of God and Nature, who should desire any
evil or death it self to befall a man out of a mere frolic, without occasion,
reason, or hope of any good.

I might here also represent that the Jesuits dispense with the obligation of
assisting our neighbor, except only in extreme necessity, and that they
cherish the license of committing, without fear of punishments, thests,
murders, impostures, cheats, and breaches of trust in all sorts of condition.
For all these abuses and all these sins are against the Command which God has
given us to love our neighbor as our selves, and never to do unto him what we
would not have done unto us. But because all these things have been largely
proved in other places, I will speak no more of them at present.

I will add only for conclusion unto this Chapter, that which Amicus says upon
a question which he proposes concerning the command to love our neighbor; An
vi hujus praecepti teneamur ad aliquem actum charitatis erga proximum? An vero
huic praecepto satisfacere possimus per solos actus externos misericordiae and
beneficentiae, quando necessitas and ratio postulat? Amicus tom. 4. disp. 28.
sect. 1. n. 3. page 377.
Whether by virtue of this Precept we be obliged to some act of Charity toward
our neighbor? Or whether we may satisfy it by acts of mercy and bounty
exercised toward him when necessity and occasion require?

After he has quoted the Divines who hold the affirmative, and related their
reasons to the number of five which are very considerable, he cites Suarez,
Coninck, and some others who are of the contrary opinion, with whom he
concludes in these terms. Haec sententia probabilis est, quam express tradit
Bernardus, Sermon. 50 in Cantica. Ibid. number. 14.

Baque non obscure colligitur ex illis verbis, Matthew. 7. and Lucae 6.
Quaecunque vultis ut faciant vobis homines, and vos facite illis. Ibid.


This opinion is probable. He attributes it also to S. Bernard, saying, That S.
Bernard teaches it expressly in his 50. Sermon upon the Canticles. Which we
should have more reason to wonder at, if he had not also the confidence to say
that he learnt it of Jesus Christ, and that it was drawn and did evidently
follow from these words of Jesus Christ in the 7. of S. Matthew, and 6. of S.
Luke. Do unto men whatsoever ye would they should do unto you. As if Jesus
Christ commanding us to do good unto our neighbor, did dispense with us from
loving him from the bottom of our hearts, or as if he had not commanded the one
as well as the other; and yet more expressly to love him than to do him good, as
it may appear in many places of the Gospel, as in the 13. of S. John. Mandatum
novum do vobis ut diligatis invicem sicut dilexi ves. Joan. 13. v. 34.
I give you a new Commandment that you love one another as I have loved you.
And in the following verse: In hoc cognoscent omnes quia discipuli mei estis,
si dilectionem habueritis ad invicem. Ibid. v. 35.
All the world shall know that you are my Disciples, if you love one another.
And without alleging other passages of Scripture upon this point, that alone
which this Jesuit abuses to show that God commands us only to serve and not to
love our neighbor, does absolutely prove our obligation unto both. For as
there is none who desires not to be relieved in his necessities, so there is
none who desires not to be beloved and to be served with affection, and there
are many who had rather not be served at all, than without affection and with
regret, or with indifference. When God then commands men and says: Quaecunque
vultis ut faciant vobis homines, and vos facite illis.
Do ye unto men whatsoever ye would they should do unto you, he commands as
well to love as to serve, because there is none that desires not you should do
to him the one as well as the other.

He proves his opinion also by this reason: Probatur autem haec sententia
primo, vi hujus praecepti non tenemur diligere proximum aliter vel plus quam
nos ipsos. Atqui nos ipsos non tenemur diligere actu interno charitatis. Ergo
nec proximum. Ibid. number. 15.
We are not obliged by this Precept to love our neighbor otherwise or more
than our selves. Now so it is we are not obliged to love our selves with a love
and internal act of Charity. And by consequence we are not obliged neither unto
our neighbor in that manner.

He alleges another Reason and Argument in this manner: A fortiori candem
sententiam docent qui actum internum charitatis negant esse necessarium in
implendo praecepto de diligendo D^o super omnia. number. 14.
Those who deny that to accomplish the Command to love God above all things, it
is needful to exercise any act of love and charity toward him, by stronger
reason may hold this other opinion.

Finally, his last reason is, Multi damnarentur ex eo quod hujusmodi actum
internum charitatis erga omnes homines non elicuerint, quod est argumentum ab
absurdo and improbabili. Ibid. number. 18.
That if we were obliged to love our neighbor, It suffices that a point
appears difficult for it to be rejected of them who profess a complacent
Divinity, and an easy devotion, how clear and evident soever it be in the
Gospel: and the same reason serves them to hold it for a thing indifferent or
an advice only, whatsoever is contrary to the senses, and which gives them any
trouble, though it be expressly commanded.

I stand not any longer upon this last reason no more than upon the two former,
because I have spoken sufficiently thereof before. It suffices to observe that
this Jesuit establishes here one error upon two others, and that he pretends
with his Brethren, that we are not obliged to love our neighbor, because we
are not obliged to love our selves, any more than to love God by any Command:
and by consequence that he and his Companions by their own confession destroy
and abolish entirely the two Commandments of Charity, and the love of God in
the second degree, which regards our neighbor, as well as in the first,
which respects God himself.

IV. POINT. That the Jesuits allow of Magic and Witcheraft.
IT would never be believed, if we did not read it in their Books. Tambourin
says, Homo audita conventione, cum daemone utitur sigho opposicolicit^, quia
non fule, nisi contrarlum signum arpon^re, quo posito demon promisit non
amplus thesaurum enstedire. Tambur. number. 12. sect. 2, cap 6. lib. 2. primae
partis Decalogi.
That he who knows another has made a Covenant with the Devil to hide a
treasure, may make a sign opposite to that which has been made to commit this
treasure to the Devils custody, that the Devil may keep it no longer. As if the
Devil had not still what he demands, whether the treasure be committed to him
to keep, or he be hindered from keeping it, whilst the marks and superstitious
Ceremonies whereof he is the Author are observed. It is not the treasure put
into his custody that he demands; but the heart and soul of him who believes in
him, and who makes use of his superstitions to oblige him, or prohibit him to
keep a treasure.

The same Father puts a question, whether it be lawful to undo one Charm by
another? He answers, Quod si absolute peram ut dissolvat, sciens ipsum posse
dissolvere cum miltsicio, and possei fine malchcio, ^utans tamen, imo certo
sciens ipsum cum nevo malcficio diffeluturum, dico esse saltem probabde and
tutum licite posse petere, Ibid. n. 7.
That if I demand absolutely that he who has set the Spell should take it off,
knowing that he can, either with or without a new Charm, yet believing or
knowing certainly that he will do it with one. I answer, says he, that it is
at least probable and safe in conscience that it may be lawfully demanded. This
is as it were to send a Messenger or a Deputy to the Devil, and to cause him to
be requested for what we dare not demand our selves,

He says after Sanchez, Colligit Sanchez non esss superstitiosos qui per qua
dam scriptures, five ex psalmis, five ex aliis orationibus confectas curant
infirmos qui suo tactu ves orationibus etiam incurabiles motbos pati modo
sanant, hos salvatores vocant. Ibid. number. 30. sect. 1.
That they are not superstitious who heal the sick by Charms composed of Psalms
and other Prayers, and who by stroking and prayers heal them of incurable
diseases. They call these persons Saviors, says he. These diseases being
incurable, it is clear that they who heal them, as he says, by stroking and
prayers, must needs act by an extraordinary virtue and more than humane: and as
they are not Saints, that so we might believe that they have the power of God
in their hands, it is visible that they employ that of the Devil.

It is also lawful, according to this Father, Verba sacra pro latratu canum,
proque effluente sanguine, and pro morberum expulsione, amota certa
expectatione, and vanis, si forte adsint, ceremoniis, sunt licita. Ibid. number
80. sect. 1.
to make use of sacred words to keep dogs from barking, to stanch bleeding, and
to heal diseases, provided we attend on the event without firm confidence
therein, and cut off all vain Ceremonies, if there be any. This without doubt
is a worthy use of the Word of God, to employ it only to keep Curs from
barking; and this is without doubt to sanctify the profession of Thieves, to
teach them to pray unto God when they are about to enter into a house to rob,
that by their prayers they may hinder the dogs from bawling and wakening the
people.

To avoid Witchcraft in these prayers, Tambourin requires two conditions. The
first that the event be not attended with certain confidence nor the effect of
these prayers, allowing it to be lawful to desire it, and to attend on the
power of the Devil as probable, that the vain Ceremonies be cut off, if there
be any. But the Devil regards not to employ vain and Pagan Ceremonies in
Magic, when it is more advantageous for him to use those of the Church. 1.
Because thereby he profanes the sacred signs of our Religion. 2. Because
thereby he hides his malice better, and more easily surprises the simple by
marks and appearances of piety.

But that none may scruple to consult Astrologers about what shall befall them,
Tambourin assures us, Video viros pletate and dectrina non mediocres ab
Astrologis sui natalis figuram, suosque particulares futuros eventus non cum
scrupulo exposcentes. Ibid. n. 19. sect. 1.
That he has seen men of extraordinary piety and learning make no scruple to
demand from Astrologers the figures of their birth, and productions of things
which should happen unto them. This alone suffices to render their virtue
suspected, and entirely to ruin it, since this was to approve and authorize a
profession condemned by the Scripture and Church, and to cherish worldly men in
a profane curiosity which leads them to consult Diviners and judiciary
Astrologers, about things to come, which depend on God alone, and not on the
vain observations of these Impostors.

Tambourin adds, Certe cum cui praedicitur modo dicto Praelatura, non
condemnarem, saltem de mortali, fi adire Romam velit ad aliquam sub aliqua spe,
non vero certitudine exspectandam. Ibid. number. 20.
That he would not condemn him at least of mortal sin, to whom an Astrologer
having predicted that he should be advanced to some Prelacy, if he resolved
thereupon to go to Rome with some hope, Without doubt this is a very
Ecclesiastic mission, and altogether divine, to go to Rome to obtain a
Prelacy, being induced thereunto by a Diviner or an Astrologer, that is to say,
by the illusion of a Spirit humane or diabolick which governs these
Foretellers, who having first deceived them, does by them deceive and blind
others by their own ambition and folly.

There can be nothing more proper to authorize this pernicious Science, and to
give it free passage through the world, than to say that it is capable of
conducting Churchmen in the greatest and holiest Charges of Religion. But this
is clearly enough to justify and declare it innocent and lawful, and to
confirm those who profess it in their error, to maintain that the gain they
get thereby is just and lawful, as Saucius does when he says: Li nullam operam
apposuit ut art diaboli id sciret Astrologus quod nullo alio pacto sciri
potuit, sive affectus evenerit, sive non, tenetur pretium restituere danti: Si
vero Astrologus ille vel divinator operam suam apposuit, and art diaboli res
ita evenit, non tenetur pretium restituere, quia ipse suam operam, etsi turpem,
apposult -- quia illa diligentia a mago illo apposita est pretio aestimabilis,
nee in hoc casu tenetur damna and expensas consulenti restituere, sed tantum
quando nullans operam impendit, aut ejus diabolicae artis ignerus est. Saucim
in Summa, lib. 2. cap. 38. number. 96.
That if an Astrologer have not done what he could to know by the help of the
Devil what he could not know otherwise, whether the thing happened, or happened
not, he is bound to restore the money be received: but if he have done what he
could to know of the Devil what would happen, he is not bound to restore what
he received; because he has taken pains for this money..... For the pains,
care, and industry of this Sorcerer has its valuation, and may be estimated by
money; and in this case he is not responsible for damages,

He condemns him not then unto restitution, but only for not being sufficiently
employed in the study of this impious and horrible Science, and for not having
intelligence enough with the Devil. This extravagance appears incredible, but
it is a just punishment on him, for that he could imagine that it was just that
those goods which the Lord has made for them who adore him, should serve for
recompense to the Worshippers of the Devil, and that they could get them justly
by doing of all injuries the greatest unto him who is thereof the Sovereign
Master.

ARTICLE II. THOU SHALL NOT SWEAR BY GOD IN VAIN. That the Jesuits destroy this
Commandment by diminishing, excusing, weakening the sins of Swearing and
Blaspheming.
BAuny treating of Blasphemy in Chap. 6. of his Sum, page 69. acknowledges that
we see but too many people who by utmost infidelity renounce God; but he adds
also shortly after, that the rashness of the tongue or mind in fits and sallies
of choler, which are the cause a man is not master of himself, excuse from
mortal sin, this extreme infidelity of those who renounce God:

He has written also in the same Page, That by a most pernicious abuse it is
become a custom in the world to affirm doubtful things by these words; As true
as there is but one God, which cannot be considerately uttered without the sin
of blasphemy. He acknowledges the Commandment neither to swear nor blaspheme,
and the sin committed in the violation thereof; but he abolisheth it as
speedily, adding that this sin is mortal when there is an intention therein
aequandi humanam veritatem divinae, to equalize the truth of humane things to
Gods.

This Clause is remarkable; When we have an intention. For it presupposes that
when we have not this intention, there is no mortal sin. And to expound and
establish this Doctrine yet farther, he brings this reason: Because this is
against his sacred honor, and the reverence which we owe him, to compare
uncertain and mutable things to the constancy and eternal duration of his
immutable and divine Essence: (Sanchez in the 1. Part of his Sum in the Book of
an Oath) and by necessary consequence to attribute unto him that instability
which is contrary to his perfection and holy Nature, and so to blaspheme, page
70.

He always measures blasphemy by the intention of him that commits it; so that,
according to him to conclude that any person offends mortally in uttering these
words: As true as there is but one God, or other such like, it is necessary
that he have an express intention to attribute instability unto God, and that
he believe that God is as mutable and inconstant as the Creatures. Which they
do not for all that, says he, who by this form of speech, would not compare
any thing unto God, but only show indeed that the thing is true in a certain
manner, as it is true that God is. And by consequence they blaspheme not by the
Principles of this Father; As if the sin of Blasphemy could not be committed,
but when by an error of the understanding, or a false opinion of God, or by
affected malice, or a formed design to destroy and dishonor him, he is
blasphemed. If this be so, then to be Blasphemers we must become Heretics, or
rather Atheists, or Devils.

He expounds himself yet more clearly upon this very matter in the 66, 67, and
68 pages of the same Chapter, where giving out Rules of Practice for a
Confessor, he says, That he ought to inform himself of the Penitent who
accuses himself of blasphemy, whether he have done it with a formal intention
to dishonor God; and whether he were maliciously affected toward God; and
whether he blasphemed him out of hatred; whether he were touched with any
despite against God. And he adds in the sequel, That if the Penitent answer
that he has not been touched with any despite against God, etc. the said
Confessor is not to repute him for a Blasphemer, nor deprived of Grace, because
he has used blasphemous words.

And in the 66. page, after he has said, That it is a sort of blasphemy, when
we name with contempt, shame, and dishonor the holy and most sacred Members of
the Son of God, he adds in favor of these Blasphemers: Which they seem not to
do, who make use of them in their common discourse as ornaments of speech,
saying, Death, Head, He confirms his opinion by the Authority of some who hold
after Bonacina, that to name these parts in choler, and not through any
indignation against God, is no blasphemy. His reason is, because in these
words; By the Head, by the Belly, nothing is uttered concerning God which is
false, since it is true that God being become man has these members; though,
as he said in the beginning, these members be named with contempt, reproach,
shame, and dishonor to the Son of God.

If he could excuse this crime of all sin, as well as of Blasphemies, and make
it wholly innocent, it may be he would do it. But not dating to undertake that,
he does at least what he can to diminish it, making use of Laymans Authority,
who by his relation, says, That this is a sin of irreverence against God,
which is but venial when it is without perjury, scandal, or danger of swearing
false.

At the end of the same p. 66. continuing to give his advice and Rules of
Practice to the Confessor, he says, That be ought to examine his Penitent
whether he have an ill will and despite against his Creator. And in the
beginning of the following Page he declares that his advice is, that if the
Penitent declare that his choler has transported him to these scandalous
words, we may be persuaded that in uttering them he has sinned only venially.
He says also a little after, That we must make the like judgment of those who
without consideration do use them; that is to say, that they sin only venially.

Finally, he acknowledges none for Blasphemers properly but those who
voluntarily, of set purpose, and knowingly name these sacred members of the
humanity of the Son of God, if they do it out of formal contempt, wittingly
against the truth, in which case it is a mortal sin of blasphemy or perjury.

I let pass all these passages without making any reflection thereon; of the
Intention, where they may be seen. I have here only touched them in my passage,
that I might make appear what is the opinion of Father Bauny concerning
Blasphemy, and that to find it such as he sets it forth, and with the
conditions he requires in it, we must go into Hell. For we may speak and judge
of things by his Principles and Arguments, that he has taken blasphemy from
the face of the Earth, by multiplying Blasphemers, and giving them liberty to
blaspheme freely, and means to excuse themselves from all the blasphemies they
can commit, if they know how to make use of the Rules which he has taught them.

One will say that he uses no blasphemous words but as ornaments of his
language. Another may say that he did it through choler and despite against
some one whom he will, and not out of any evil affection or indignation he had
against God. The most part may say that when they let fly blaspheming, cursing
and despitefully railing against their Creator, passion and choler transported
them unto these scandalous words. And if they be all examined, as Father Bauny
counsels a Confessor to examine them who address themselves unto him, saying,
That it is very pertinent to the purpose that he may learn of them, and know
their intention from their own mouth, and what has moved them to blaspheme, he
will, it may be, find none who will not answer that he did it not through any
formal intention to dishonor God, or through any hatred which he had against
him, to reproach, contemn, and dishonor God, or Jesus Christ, or his most holy
and sacred members. And thus there shall no more Blasphemers be found in the
world, and we must no more have recourse to the Ordinances of the Church, nor
of Princes to punish Blasphemers, nor count that amongst the Commandments of
God which forbids blasphemy; since according to the Divinity of this Father,
there will be none in effect, they will be only sins of irreverence and venial.

The other Jesuits seem more moderate on this subject: but if they appear in
this less to blame, they are, it may be, more indeed, and they are much more
dangerous than Bauny. For the vice that proceeds to extremity, and is visible
in its excess, is only for them that have no conscience; but it surprises and
insensibly engages those who have yet some fear of God, when it is propounded
with some temperament, and when it is covered with some pretense which serves
as a reason to commit it without scruple.

Escobar, by Example, in his Moral Divinity, places amongst Problematick
Questions, whether all blasphemy be mortal sin. And though he rank himself
indeed amongst them that hold the affirmative, yet he forbears not to say that
it is no blasphemy when Amans amasism Deam suam, suum vocitat idolum.
a Lover calls his Mistress his Goddess and his Idol. For after he had related
diverse opinions about this question, according to his custom, he joins himself
to those who excuse it from blasphemy, Si coram medioctiter prudentibus
obloquatur, nullatenus blasphemiae nota afficiendus est hujusmodi utens
locutionibus: quia amanti a peria est adulatio: at coram ru^icis, haud, cum
omnino a gravi materialis blasphemiae piaculo liberarim. Escob. tom. 1. Theol
Mor. lib. 4. probl. 21.
If this Lover speak before persons of indifferent discretion, be ought not in
any sort be esteemed a Blasphemer, because it is clear that it is only
flattery; but if he speak before gross witted persons, he would not altogether
exempt him from a grand material blasphemy. If this reason take place, there
will be no blasphemy at all, unless he who hears it, believe that he who utters
it, speaks according to his judgment, so this shall be only a material
blasphemy; that is, the matter of blasphemy only. So that there will be no true
blasphemies but what are uttered by Infidels and impious persons who believe
they speak truth when they blaspheme. And according to this Rule the Tyrians
and Sidonians blasphemed not when they said unto King Herod to flatter him,
that he spoke as a God and not as a man: And this proud King ought not to have
been eaten of worms, as he was by the just Judgment of God, for suffering these
blasphemous words, since the flattery was altogether manifest.

This reason may be made use of for a foundation of the Proposition of
Tambourin and Azor who hold, that to say, This is as true as the Gospel, or
this is as true as God, is no blasphemy: And their reason is, because it is
visible that this is an excess against the divine Truth. That is to speak
properly, that this is no blasphemy, because it is visible that it is one.

Sanchez says that he who swears lightly and unconcernedly, without thinking
on what he says, Juramentum cui desuit tertius comes, nempe judicium quod
attinet ad necessariam jurandi causam and debitam reverentiam, est sola
venialis culpa 3 siquidem sollus vanitatis and superffuitatis peccatum est.
Sanch. op. mor, lib. 3. cap. 4. number. 35. p. 17.
The oath, says he, whereunto the third condition is wanting, to wit,
judgment, when men swear without necessity, or without the respect and
reverence that is requisite, is but a venial sin; because the irreverence
herein committed is not great, being only a sin of vanity, or of superfluity.

Filliutius says the same thing, and almost in the same words: Si desit
juramento tantum judicium, hoc est, si fiat absque necessitate aut utilitate,
peccatum aliquod committitur. Tale juramentum non est mortale, si desit
contamptus. Filliut. tom. 2. qq. mor. tr. 25. cap. 11. number. 332. and 333. page
205.
If judgment only be wanting to an oath; that is to say, if it be uttered
without necessity or utility, there is in it some fault. And a little after: An
oath is not a mortal sin, if it be without contempt. We must not then say any
longer in the Commandment that forbids Swearing; Thou shall not swear by God in
vain; but only thou shall not swear falsely; since that, according to these new
Divines, we may without great sin swear in vain and out of vanity, without
necessity, profit, occasion, or reverence, which in swearing is due to God whom
we take for Judge and Witness.

Filliutius's reason is, Licet aliquo modo sit contra Dei authoritatem, tamen
quia non fit contra illam in se, sicut destruitur veritas ejus per mendacium,
sed tantum fit contra illam, non tractando illam cum debita reverentie 3 ideo
tantum committitur culpa venialis. Ibid. number. 333.
Because though this oath, thus made without necessity or reverence, be in some
sort against the Authority of God; nevertheless because it destroys it not in
it self, as a lie destroys his truth, and is not contrary unto him otherwise
than as it renders him not all the respect that is due unto him, it is but a
venial sin. As if it were a small matter to fail of our respect toward God,
and to demean our selves irreverently toward him,

This Author considers not that to destroy truth in our selves, is no less a
mortal sin, than to destroy it in it self, which is impossible. For we are
obliged to have it in us as our life, by loving and honoring it: and to chase
it from us by contempt or negligence, or by preferring other things before it
which please us more, can be no other than a mortal sin, since this is truly to
kill our selves, and it in us.

And for the Authority of God, it is certain that we cannot indeed deprive him
of it, any more than of his Power; and to deny it, were to become a Fool or an
Atheist. Since then it cannot be destroyed in it self, nor in the opinion and
judgment of men that have their reason found, there remains but one way to
destroy it so much as may be, which is by contempt, and irreverence which is
committed against it by using it indifferently without respect to confirm what
we say, swearing without necessity or occasion, and even of mere vanity. So
that if in this case and these circumstances the sin committed against the
Authority of God, and the reverence which is due unto him be a slight one, as
these Jesuits say it is, it seems that there can never be any great one,
according to them in this matter.

Filliutius proceeds farther, and maintains, that to swear, not only without
occasion and reverence; but also upon some bad occasion, as to affirm by oath
that one has committed murder or adultery, is but a venial sin. Qula licet
juramentum hoc adjungatur narrationi peccati mortalis; ut juro me commisisse
tale homicidium, vel fornicationem; tamen non fit cum complacentia in illo ex
necessitate, sed tantum fic sine causa and leviter, quare non excedet culpam
venialem. Ibid. n. 336. page 205.
For though we make use of this oath in the relation we make of a mortal sin,
as when we say: I swear that I have committed this murder, or this fornication;
yet this may be done without any complacency in this crime, and only out of
levity and without cause. Wherefore it is but a venial sin.

He adds that though a man who swears thus, should take pleasure in the crime
he relates, and should scandalize and defame another person in his relation,
this oath according to Suarez would not be mortal; which he also believes as
probable with him. For after he has said that the more rational Casuists hold,
that Si quis narret peccatum mortale, infamando proximum, ut adulterium cum
muliere honesta, vel complacendo in illo, tunc juramentum additum videtur
mortale. Ibid. number. 337.
if any one reporting a mortal sin wrong the honor and reputation of his
neighbor, as by saying, that he has committed adultery with an honest woman,
or if he take pleasure therein, if he swear to affirm that which he says, it
is a mortal sin; he opposes unto theirs the opinion of Suarez, as probable.
Attamen Suarez loco citato, n. 8. defendit a mortali, si tantum habeatur ratio
juramenti: quia non cadit supra illam materiam quatenus mala, sed tantum
quatenus vera. Quare nec erit peccatum, saltem mortale, quod est satis
probabile. Ibid.
For all that Suarez, says he, in the place now quoted, n. 8. maintains that
it is no mortal sin, if it be considered only as an oath; because this oath
regards not the matter of this discourse, as bad, but only as true: And by
consequence there is none, at the least no mortal sin therein; which is
probable enough.

And because this reason of Suarez is metaphysical enough, Filliutius relates
another, or rather expounds the same in another manner, Quia ejusmodi defectus
nec est contra finem juramenti. Potest enim confirmari per illud veritas, nec
facit Deum testem mendacii, sed ad summum rei malae and indecentis, ut diximus.
At id per se non est injuria gravis. Ibid. number. 336.
Because this defect, says he, speaking of the injury done unto God by the man
who takes him for a witness of the adultery he has committed, is not contrary
to the end of an oath. For it may serve to confirm the truth; and he takes not
God for a witness of a false, but at the most of a wicked and dishonest thing,
as we have said; and this in it self is no great injury: against God. By this
reckoning we may say that a child should do his father no great wrong, nor a
servant his Master, nor wife her husband, to produce and take him for witness
of her debauches, provided they were true; unless we will say, that the honor
of God is less considerable than that of men, or that God ought to be
insensible of all injuries and indignities committed against him.

Sanchez discharges of sin, at least mortal, all those who swear of custom,
Qualiscunque illa fit, and nondum sit re^ractata. Atque ita ut sint peccata
lethalia, requirit talem advertentiam, qualis est necessaria in homine non sic
ad jurandum assueto. Sanch. op. moral. lib. 3. cap. 5. number. 28. page 21.
of what sort soever it be, says he, though they have not yet recanted it. If
they in swearing have not so much presence of mind as to perceive what they say
and do, and what evil they cause, as the most prudent have, who have not this
evil habit; so their vice and wicked custom of swearing shall not hurt them;
but on the contrary upon this occasion it shall be favorable unto them. For if
they had it not, they would perceive what they did in swearing, and would make
themselves Criminals. But because the evil custom of swearing which they have
contracted, and wherein they persist still voluntarily, blinds,

By this reason if a man being in a dangerous way, should pull out his own
eyes, and then fall into a precipice, he might be excused by this, that he
could not see when he fell.

By all this which has been said unto this present, it is clear that the
Jesuits excuse them who swear and forswear through an evil habit; who swear
rashly and without reason, vainly and without necessity, in wicked and
scandalous matters, which tend to the dishonor of our neighbor by defaming
him, and of God by taking him for witness of crimes and debauches, of which in
swearing they boast themselves. So that there remains nothing in this matter
but swearing and forswearing with full knowledge and black malice, to be a
crime, and which properly retains the name of an oath and perjury in the
Schools of these Fathers.

Escabar puts this Question: Lictu^e inducere aliquem ad jurandum falsum; quod
tamen ipse juraturus ex ignorantia verum putat? Escobar tr. 1. exam. 3. cap. 7.
number. 31. p. 74.
Is it lawful to suborn any person to swear a false thing, which he
notwithstanding ignorantly believes to be true? And after he had said that Azor
is not of this opinion, because it is not lawful to cause that evil to be done
by another which we cannot do our selves, he adds: Affi^n ac autem Petrus
Hartado.
But this is the opinion of P. Hurtado. He might also have joined Sanchez to
him, who holds the same opinion; Si absque inductione aliqua mea ille se eff^at
ad jurandum quod bona fide putat esse verum, etian si ego falsum norim, and
conducat ad probandum quod scio verum esse, and ne jure meo defrauder, licebit
utique acceptare. Sanch. op. moral. lib. 3. cap. 8. number. 10. page 35.
If some one present himself to me, says he, without my solicitation to swear
that which he in simplicity believes to be true, though I know well that it is
false: if notwithstanding it serve to prove some other thing which I know to be
true, and conduces to hinder that I be not deprived of my right, it is lawful
for me to take his offer.

The reason of Escobar is, Quia proximus tunc non inducitus ad eff^ctum
formaliter malum, cum jurando non delinquat. Ibid. Escobar.
Because in this case we engage not our neighbor in a thing which is formally
evil, since he sins not in swearing. We may say by the same reason, that it is
lawful to cause a Fool to kill another man, because he sins not in killing him.

He demands also, Licetne petere juramentum (...) co, quem timto la sum
juraturum?

Licet, dummodo ^on petatur ut (...) sulsum. Ibid. number 33.


Whether it be lawful to cause him to swear whom we fear will swear false. In
the disposition wherein this man is supposed to be, it is one and the same
thing to require him to swear and forswear; since we know that the one is
inseparable from the other; and because we dare not require both together, we
need only, according to these Doctors, make an abstraction in our minds, and
separate the one from the other in our thoughts, and only require him to swear,
without considering the perjury he is about to commit.

Filliutius has put the same Question, and answered it in the same manner.
Dico 4. posse quemcunque intercedente legitima cause, petere juramentum ab co
quem probabiliter timet esse pejuraturum. Filliuti^ com. 2. moral. qq. tract.
21. cap. 11. number. 447. page 206.
I hold, says he, that any one may upon a lawful cause request a man to swear,
though he probably fear that he will be forsworn. And this answer is but a
conclusion drawn from a Principle he had minted before, saying, Non esse
intrinsece malum, petere juramentum ab ^o quem scimus pejuraturum, dummodo
serventur aliquae conditiones. Ibid. number. 346.
That this thing is not evil in it self, Amongst these conditions, one of the
principal is, Ut sit alique justs causa id petendi, necessitas videlicet, vel
utilitas, alioqui esset contra charitatem proximum constituere in tali
occasion.
That somewhat of value be in question, and that there be some just cause to
require this oath, as the necessity of our affairs or benefit we hope
therefrom; otherwise it would be against Charity to expose and engage our
neighbor in such an occasion.

He believes not that it would be against the Charity we owe our Neighbor, to
cause him to kill his own Soul by perjury when we pretend some temporal
interest in it; but then only when we pretend nothing, nor receive any profit
from it.

Filliutius saw this difficulty very well, but he forbears not for all that to
persist in the maintenance of his opinion, saying, Ne propterea est contra
charitatem; quia haec non obligat ad vitandum peccatum alterius cum proprio
damno.
That yet this is not against Charity, because it obliges us not to avoid the
sin of another man by our own loss. This Maxim agrees well with the Word of
Jesus Christ who says, that it were better to be cast headlong into the
bottom of the Sea with a Millstone about our neck, than to offend our
neighbor, and to induce him to sin. They consider neither truth which is
prejudiced, nor God who is offended by perjury, nor the Soul of our neighbor
who kills himself by his perjury; but only the private interest of him who
causes him to swear, which they are not ashamed to prefer before all these
things.

Who dares excuse him who should induce his brother to do an action which he
knew was capable to procure his fathers death and his also, because he might
from thence draw to himself some profit or advantage thereby? Non est
intrinsece malum petere juramentum ab eo quem scimus pejeraturum.
That it is not a thing evil in it self to entreat a person to swear, who, we
know very well, will forswear himself.

This opinion is Sanchez's also, who after he had said that there are some who
hold, Ut non liceat juramentum a pejeraturo petere, quamvis ille ad pejerandum
paratus sit, seque sponte offerat.
That it is not lawful to induce him to swear, who will forswear himself,
though he be very forward, and offer himself voluntarily thereto; he adds,
speaking after his own opinion, and correcting that of those Divines, At
concurtenti justa causa, nulla est culpa. Sanch. op. moral. lib. 3. cap. 8.
number. 6. page 34.
That when some just occasion to do it occurs, it is no sin. And a little
after, to clear up this Question, he adds: Sed major est difficultas quando
ille pejeraturus non erat actu paratus, at necessitas est in petente. Ibid.
number. 7.
But the difficulty is greater when he who is to forswear himself is not
disposed thereunto, and he who entreats it of him has some necessity obliging
him thereto.

He acknowledges that according to the Principles of S. Austin, S. Thomas, and
other Divines, whom he had quoted before, this is not lawful; but he forbears
not to maintain on the contrary, Dicendum est licere concurrenti justa causa
necessitatis ejus juramenti, quamvis alter sit pejeraturus, nec esset paratus
ad pejerandum. Ibid.
That it is lawful when any just occasion happens which renders this oath
needful, though he who takes it, must forswear himself, and was not disposed to
forswear himself, if he had not been entreated. His grounds are the same with
those of Filliutius, Ratio est quia non petitur ab eo perjurium, sed
juramentum. Nec lex charitatis obligat cum proprio notabili detrimento ad
vitandum id proximi peccatum. Ibid.
The reason is, says he, because he is notrequired to forswear himself, but to
swear; and the Law of Charity obliges not to eschew this sin of our Neighbor
with notable damage to our selves thereby to be incurred.

The first Example is, Quia potest quisplam causam alterius agere, and ratio
administnedonis petit exigi id juramentum; and nisi petatur, arguetur
praevaricationis existimatae, aut negligentis administrationis. Ibid.
That it may happen that a man has taken on him the care of another man's
affairs, and that to acquit himself well therein, he shall be obliged to exact
this oath; so that if he fail therein, he will give occasion of suspecting his
fidelity, or his affection and vigilance. So you have the first Example, which
is of a man who being charged with some affairs, knows not well how to perform
or dispatch them so readily as he desires, without making use of a Perjurer;
this is to give great liberty, or rather a great and dangerous temptation to
all Agents, Proctors, and Sollicitors of Affairs.

The other Example is of a man who has need of a Knight of the Post to reform
a Contract and make it valid, Insuper potest deservire hoc juramentum
confirmando contractui qui alias infirmus erit. Ibid.
Moreover, says Sanchez, this oath may be made use of to fortify and make
valid a Contract, which without it would be null. This is to make good
penny-worths of conscience and our neighbors Souls, to abandon it in this
manner, and to help him even to cast himself into perdition and the power of
the Devil, to secure a debt, or to avoid the reproach or suspicion of being
negligent in the conduct of an affair.

Escobar puts also this Question about an Oath: Number liceat per faisos Deos ad
jurandum inducere? Determinate inducere, mortale crimen est; petere vero
juramentum ab eo qui per falsos Deos est juraurus, per se malum non est. Escob.
tr. 1. exam. 3. number. 57. page 79.
Whether it be lawful to induce one to swear by false gods? The Answer is, That
to engage him expressly thereto, is a mortal sin: but to demand an oath of him
who will swear by false gods, is no evil thing in it self. He holds then that
it is no evil in it self to take such an oath of an Infidel; but it would be to
demand it; that it may be demanded, but not expressly; that we may solicit an
Infidel and engage him to swear, provided we tell him not in express terms,
that he shall swear by his false gods, though we be assured that he will not
swear otherwise, not acknowledging the true God. Who sees not that this is to
deride God and men, to treat of matters of Religion and Salvation in a manner
so unhandsom and gross, that common sense only is sufficient to perceive the
excess and baseness of it?

Escobar cites Filliutius upon this Point, and he says in effect the same
thing with him, and in the same terms: Petere juramentum ab co quem constat
esse juraturum per falses Deos, non est per se malum. Filliutius tom. 2. mor.
qq. tr. 21. cap. 11. number. 339. page 265.
To demand, says he, an oath of him who, w^are assured, will swear by his
false god, is not a thing evil in it self. This is also the Judgment of
Sanchez, who with his Brethren acknowledging, that it is to contribute to an
action of Idolatry, or at the least to give occasion of it also with them, that
it may not be done without some reason for it. But instead of what the others
say generally, that we ought to be engaged thereto by some necessity or
utility, he says more, that it cannot be so little, as not be sufficient
thereunto. Vel modica utilitas satis est ad excusandum ab hoc praecepto
vitandae hujus occasionis. Sanch. ut supra number. 23. page 37.
The least benefit or interest suffices, says he, to dispense with the
Precept which obliges us to avoid this occasion.

And it is in a manner upon this reason that he gives a solution to another
difficulty which he propounds a little after. Secunda difficultas est quale
peccatum fit exigere hoc juramentum ad Infideli parato ad jurandum per falsos
Deos, quando defuit necessitas aut utilitas excusans. Ibid. number. 22.

Quam difficultatem in terminis non enodant Authors.

Quia generale charitatis preximl ac correctionis fraternae praeceptum obligat
quemlibet sub mort^li ad vitandum lethale alterius peccatum, quando commode and
absque suo damno id potest.


What sin is it to require an oath of an Infidel who is ready to swear by false
gods, without necessity or utility which might serve for excuse? He answers, 1.
That none have declared nor explicated this Question in the terms he has
proposed it. And after he acknowledges that some condemn this action of mortal
sin; because it is entirely against the Charity which we owe to our Neighbor,
which obliges us to hinder, and much more not to tempt him to offend God
mortally, at least when we can do it conveniently and without any loss.

This so weighty a consideration startles him a little; but it is not capable
to make him to quit his opinion, and yield unto the truth. Quamvis autem hoc
probabilius esse credam, quia ratio adducta fortiter urget; at probabile est
culpam solum venialem admitti.
Though I believe, says he, that this opinion is more probable, because the
reason of these Authors which I now related is very urgent; it is very probable
that it is but a venial sin. His reason is, that since there needs so small a
matter to be able without sin to prevail against the Precept forbidding us to
demand an oath of an Infidel; this is a sign that this Command is not so
rigorous, as to oblige under mortal sin, though we should violate it expressly
and without any particular reason, Quia, ut vidimus n. 2. and seq. vel modica
utilitas satis est ad excusandum ab hoc praecepto vitandae hujus occasionis; at
a praeceptis sub mortali obligantibus, non tam levis causa excusare solet. Ibid.
Because, says he, the least consideration of benefit suffices to exempt us
from the Precept which obliges to avoid this occasion; and it is not ordinary
for so slight an occasion to dispense with Commands which oblige under mortal
sin.

This manner of arguing is very ordinary with the Jesuits, to establish one
Error by another, and to make use of one disorder which they have already
introduced, to make way for a second, by drawing consequences from the one to
the other. Because they give liberty without sin to demand an oath of an
Idolater, when we have any small pretext for it, they infer from thence, that
when we demand it without any reason, it cannot be any great evil. Thus it is
that they take from themselves authority to dispense with the Commandments of
God, and abolish them as they please; and that they make use of their own
dispensations to give them liberty to violate them freely, or at least without
any great sin.

ARTICLE III. Of the Commandment of God, HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER.
THis Commandment obliges Children to their Fathers and Mothers in four
principal things, as the Catechism of the Council of Trent observes; to love,
reverence, obedience, and assistance. These are also the four Duties in which
the Jesuits undertake to dispense with them.

1. For what concerns love, Dieastilius says, Defiderare filium v. g. parentis
mortem aut de illa gaudere ob haereditatem eldem provenientem, non ita certum
est esse licitum, quamvis de gaudio and delectatione non quidem habit^ de morte
ipsa secundum se, quatenus est malum patris, immo ad finem haereditatis
obtinendae aut similem, optare ut licita via, scilicet a Deo, non quatenus
malum patris est, sed quatenus inde filio bonum provenit, non putarem esse
mortale. Dicastill. lib. 2. tom. 2. disp. 12. a. 1. dub. 6. number. 546.
That it is not altogether certain that a child can lawfully desire the death
of his father or rejoice in it, because of inheritance which might come to him
thereby; but he believes that he sins not mortally in rejoicing, not in his
death, considered as an evil unto his father, but as a lawful means appointed
of God, for him to obtain the succession;

See here a man exceedingly confounded. He would gladly justify a child who
desires the death of his father, that he may enjoy his estate; but he dares not
do it absolutely, because this appears not to him to be altogether certain. He
contents himself to exempt him from mortal sin by the rule of directing the
intention, which teaches him to look on his fathers death, not as ill to his
father, but as good for himself, because of the inheritance that comes to him
thereby.

An possit filius mortem patris optare, vel de illa gaudere, non ut est malum
patris, (hoc enim esset odium execrandum) sed ur ipse filius patris haereditate
fruatur -- facilis est responsio. Licite enim haec optas vel amplecteris, quia
non gaudes de alterius malo, sed de proprio bono. Tambur. lib. 5. decal. cap.
1. sect. 3. number. 29.
Tambourin who wrote since Dicastillus is more hardy; he makes no difficulty of
exempting this desire from sin, on condition the intention be directed
according as Dicastillus discourses. And that he might render this more
probable and more intelligible, he distinguishes of two sorts of desires,
whereof the one is absolute, and the other conditional. Si desideres sub
condition, facilis item responsio licite posse. Si quis enim hunc actum
eliciat: Si meus pater moreretur, ego haereditate potirer, and g^uderet tunc
ille, non de patris morte, sed de haereditate. n. 30.
If you desire the death of your father upon some condition, says he, the
answer is easy, that you may lawfully. For if one say in himself: if my father
should dye, I should enjoy his estate; in this case he should not rejoice in
his fathers death, but in his inheritance.

Behold the Example of a conditional desire, in which he finds no difficulty.
Cupio mortem patris, non ut malum patr^s est, sed ut bonum meum, seu ut causa
mei boni; nimitum quia ex il ius morte ego ejus haereditatem adibo. Si, inquam,
sic defideras, major est difficultas resolvendi, etc. -- Nihilom inus
Castropalaus...... ex quibus vides opinionem Castropalai esse satis probabilem.
number. 31, 32, 33.
I desire the death of my father, not because it is an evil to him, but because
it is good for me, or because it is the cause of good unto me; and because by
this his death I enter into the possession of my paternal inheritance.

This is the same thing that he had already said in the former passage; and
this repetition makes us see more clearly the perplexity he is in through the
desire he has to justify this unnatural child in his desire of his fathers
death, that he may enjoy his estate. He finds therein some difficulty; but
after he had reported the opinion of Castropalao who approves this sort of
desires, he concludes that this opinion is probable enough; that is to say,
that a child may lawfully and without sin love his fathers inheritance better
than his father himself. For if he loved his father better than the inheritance
that he hopes from him, he could not rejoice in the death of his father as in
some good thing, since it would procure him more hurt than good by taking from
him his father whom he loves more than all the estate he should receive thereby.

I know not how without horror any can, I will not say approve, but produce
and publish such thoughts and desires so opposite to the most common notions of
reason and of Christian and natural piety; to exempt that from sin in children
which were horrible and criminal in the remotest kindred, friends, or
domestics; and finally to pretend to prove this overthrow of Nature and
Reason,

It is thus that Lions, Bears, and Tigers devour men, not simply to kill them,
and to do them hurt, but for their own proper good, that they may feed
themselves with their flesh: yet they spare beasts of their own kind, and in
this they are less cruel and inhumane than men who are so blind and unnatural
as to believe and follow a Doctrine so pernicious, and which teaches men to
kill, eat, and devour one another through a desire of any the least temporal
interest.

If this were lawful, as the Jesuits pretend, there would be no more any true
Christian or humane Society. It would be lawful for every private man to desire
public Calamities, not considering them as the destruction of Families, Towns,
and the Commonwealth, but as his particular benefit. There should be no more
Charity nor Religion, since we might without sin, according to this Divinity,
not only wish all sorts of mischief to our Neighbor; but desire also the
profanation of the most Holy things, and the out-throw of the Laws of God and
the Church, provided only we say that it is not any hurt or offense to God or
our Neighbor that we desire, but only the good and profit that thereby we
pretend unto.

Now Tambourin as he speaks more absolutely and boldly than Dicastillus,
because he wrote after him, so he adds also the resolution of many like
questions: An possi^ subditus mottem cupere sui Praelati, ut Praelaturae ipse
succeda^, vel ut ab eo Praelato sibi infenso liberetur? Si solum desideres, vel
cum gaudio exciplas ejusmodi effectus, haeredita^em, molestiae carentiam,
p^aelaturam, facilis est responsio. Lici e enim haec optas vel amplecteris,
quia non gaudes de alterius malo, sed'de proprio b^no.
May an inferior desire the death of his superior in the Church or
Commonwealth, Here is the case to which he answers precisely and without
hesitation in these words. If you desire only or receive with joy the effect of
this death, to wit, the Inheritance of a Father, the Charge of a Prelate, the
deliverance from some trouble he procured you, the answer is easy, that you
may desire all these things lawfully, and that because you rejoice not in the
evil of another, but in your own proper good.

Dicastillus durst not at first determine upon this question, because it seemed
to him uncertain; the Authority and Example of Castropalao having made him more
bold, he approves and propounds it as probable; and Tambourin makes thereof a
Maxim, in which there is no difficulty at all, facilis responsio. Thus it
comes to pass, that these Doctors who make profession of a complacent Theology,
go on still advancing, not to the better, but to the worse, as S. Paul speaks,
and labor to stretch or rather to corrupt men's consciences, by stretching and
corrupting the most holy and inviolable Rules of Faith and Morality, and making
those things probable which in themselves are incredible.

If to desire the death of ones father be of itself a crime, as none can
question it, the crime is yet greater when he is carried thereto by some wicked
motive, as that of having his estate, which comes from covetousness and
injustice, and contains in it also a notorious ingratitude:

This injustice and disorder may appear yet more visible in the other Example
brought by Tambourin of an Inferior who desires the death of his Superior: A
Monk, for Example, or a Clerk of his Abbot or Bishop, that he might enter upon
his Office. For the desire alone of a Charge of this nature, even under
pretense of a good motive, as to be serviceable unto Souls, is a kind of
ambition and presumption which renders a man unworthy of that Office which he
desires in that manner, as S. Thomas, after the Scripture and Fathers, does
expressly teach us; he who has not this good motive, and desires to enter by a
way so odious and criminal, as is the death of his Superior, is not only
unworthy of the Office which he so desires, but also deferves to be excluded
from the Clergy, and even to be chased out of the Church, as a rebellious and
unnatural child from the house of his father, who desires to see his death,
though he dares not kill him himself. How then can one of these desires
justify the other? How can we say that an Inferior may lawfully desire the
death of his Superior, if we pretend not that one may be a murderer, because he
is an Usurper, and desire the death of a man, because we would have his goods,
without having either right or capacity, but only an unjust and unreasonable
pretense unto the one or the other.

This yet suffices not this barbarous and murdering Theology, Dicastillus
says, Colligitur ulterius ^citum esse fillis, contra parents, servis contra
dominos, vassallis contra principes vi vim repellere quando actu invaduntur,
injuste, cum praedictis conditionibus, idemque de Monachis aut subditis contra
Abbates and Superiores. Dicastill. lib. 2. de just. tr. 1. d. 10. dub. 3. number.
30.

An in casibus praecedentis dubitationis liceat direct velle and intendere
mortem injusti aggressoris ad defendendam propriam vitam? Negat S. Thoma^ --
His tamen non obstantibus asserendum est tanquam verissimum, sicut honestum est
in executione repeilere aggressorem illum occidendo, pari ra^lone honestum est
direct illum velle and intendere occidere. Dub. 4. number. 4.


That a child who defends himself against his father who assaults him unjustly,
may kill him; as also Servants their Masters, Vassals their Princes; Monks
their Abbots and their Superiors. Which he understands not only in such manner
that a Son may kill his Father by accident and besides his intention, in his
own defense; but so as he may have a design to kill him voluntarily. For after
he had proposed this case which I have now related, and many others, he
concludes that in this case it is lawful to desire to kill him who assails us.

As for what concerns the respect due unto Fathers and Mothers, Tambourin
declares confidently, (1) That a Son is to be excused from mortal sin who will
not acknowledge his Father, if he do it not of contempt, but to avoid some
inconvenience, or that he might not be put to the blush in acknowledging him.
It is manifest that according to Scripture this is to renounce ones father, as
it is to renounce Jesus Christ to be ashamed to acknowledge and confess him;
and yet this is a small fault in the Jesuits Divinity.

Neither is he more religious about their obedience, Filius si recognoscere
nolit patrem, non ex contemptu, sed ad vitandum aliquod incommodum aut
crubescentiam, a mortali culpa sic puto esset excusand us. Tambur. lib. 5.
decal. cap. 2. sect 2. number. 17.
Whether children may lawfully contract Marriage with persons unworthy of their
alliance against the will of their fathers and mothers? He answers, Though some
believe they cannot without mortal sin, which is very probable, yet he avouches
that it is probable and safe in conscience that they may..... and that Sanchez
has reason to say, that a daughter is so free, as to Marriage, that though she
have not yet attained so much as twenty five years of age, she may marry her
self unto a person unworthy of her, without her fathers consent. Whence it
follows, according to this Author, that Isaac exceeded his power when he so
expressly forbad his Son Jacob to marry in the family of Chanaan, which was
unworthy of his alliance.

If the disobedience of a Daughter toward her Father in these circumstances be
not criminal, it seems it never can be so, since it cannot be in a more
important matter than this same wherein Marriage is concerned, which imports an
engagement for the whole time of life, and a Marriage with an unworthy person,
and which proves a disadvantage and dishonor, not only to the Daughter who
enters it, but also to her kindred and whole family.

But if we object to this Father, that Scripture, Fathers, Difficultas ergo
sola superest an cum indignis possint filii licite contra^cre, patre vel
genitrice diffentientibus? Et quidem l'cet aliquibus videatur non posse, idque
sub mortali, quod certe valde probabile est..... fattor tamen probabile item
esse ac tutum quod possint..... Et recte docet Sanchez filiam adeo liberam
esse, ut ante vigesimum quintum annum nubere valeat, etiam indigno, and sine
patris consensu. Tambur. decal. lib. 5. cap. 2. sect. 3. number. 5. Vocavit itaque
Jacob, Isaac, and benedixit eum, praecipitque ei dicens, Noli accipere conjugem
de genere Ghanaam. Genes. 28.
Though the Pope Evaristus, says he, have ordained that a daughter should not
be held for a married wife, if her father himself agreed not to the Marriage:
Though the Pope S. Leo and S. Ambrose say, that it is not becoming the modesty
of a Virgin to choose an Husband, but that she ought to attend on her Fathers
judgment: Though in the holy Scriptures this charge be laid upon Fathers:
Though S. Paul teach expressly, that daughters ought to be given in marriage by
their fathers: Though many Examples of the Saints show this manifestly; I
answer with Sanchez, that these things and such like prove well that it is very
commendable for them to demand their fathers advice; but not that they in not
doing so fall into the horrible disorder of mortal sin.

Si statuit Evaristus Papa, ut pronupta nequaquam habeatur puella quam pater
ipse non desponsat: si Leo Pontisex and Ambrosius aiunt non esse virginalis
pudoris maritum eligere, sed judicium parentum esse expectandum: si in sacris
S^riptutis parentibus tribuitur hoc munus: si S. Paulus express docet a
parentibus tradendas esse filias nuptui: si multa Sanctarum Scriprurarum
exemplaid manifest demonstrant: Respondeo cum codem Sanchez haec and similia
probare quod esset valde honestum ejusmodi consilium a patre exquirere, diram
peccati mortalis necessitatem non probare. Tambur. lib. 5. d^al. cap. 9. sect.
3. number. 6.
This discourse is proper for nothing but to countenance disobedience and
impudence in Children, and to favor Rapes and clandestine Marriages; and this
is very insolently and Jesuitically to clude the holy Scripture, the Authority
of the Church, a daughter should not be held for a married wife, if her father
himself agreed not to her Marriage.

See here another case wherein the liberty of Children, that is, their
licentiousness is sufficiently established. Filius in ludo illicito non est
subditus patri: atque adeo lucrum ex illo habitum absque controversia sibi
adqui^ere no^at Rebellius. Tambur. lib. 5. decal. cap. 4. sect. 1. number. 7.
A Son, says the same Author, is not subject to his Father in what concerns
unlawful games: and by consequence he may without wronging him, retain unto
himself the gain he makes thereby. He will have it that because a Son commits
two sins, one in playing at an unlawful game, and the other in gaming contrary
to his Fathers prohibition, that which he has gained, is therefore justly
acquired to his own use. If he had not been disobedient in gaming contrary to
his Fathers will, he had had nothing of that he gained; but because he was
disobedient, that which he has gained appertains to himself, though he have
contemned his Father, and played only with his money. So he receives benefit not
only of the money which is his Fathers, but of his contempt of his Father also;
and this contempt gives him a right which he could not have had if he had not
abused both his Father and his money. So mavelous and gainful too is the
Divinity of these Doctors.

Finally, Tambourin speaking of the temporal assistance which Children owe unto
their Father, shows us how far this obligation may go. He proposes the case of
a Father taken by Thieves who threaten to kill him, if a certain sum of money
be not given them; he demands whether the Son were obliged to give this money?
Quod si iste pa^ in s^mili ^ae discrimi^e ^saretur, pecuniaque a divite filio
exposceretur, difficilior est res^ur^o. Equidem hac uterer distinctione; Si ea
summa demi potest ex supe^fluis, vel solum statui convenientibus, obligarem
patrem filiumque; si debeat demi ex necessariis, ita ut vel omnino
depauperandi, vel admodum notabiliter a suo statu dimovendi effent, neu^rum
obligatem...... Et nihilomi nus priorem dicti partem non ranquam omnino certam
affirmo. Tambur. lib. 5. decal. o. 1. sect. 1. number. 11.
If a father, says he, be in peril of his life, and money be demanded to save
him of his Son who is rich, the question is more difficult. As for me, I would
make use of this distinction: If the sum demanded may be taken out of goods
superfluous or only becoming the condition of the Son, I would oblige him to
give it. But if it ought to be taken out of what is necessary unto him, in such
sort that it would wholly impoverish him, or cause him to fall notably below
his condition, I would not oblige him at all..... Notwithstanding I say not,
that it is altogether certain that this Son is obliged to give on this occasion
such goods as are superfluous or convenient for his condition. Behold a
decision very favorable to those Children of whom he spoke before, who
innocently desired the death of their Fathers.

He would be far enough from obliging a Son to expose his life to save his
Fathers, since he would not that he should be obliged so far only as to give
for it a part of his goods which he may absolutely spare. And if you represent
unto him that which our Savior recommends unto us to love one another as he
loved us, and what S. John says, that we ought to lay down our life for our
Brethren, and by stronger reason for our Fathers and Mothers, I see not what he
can answer, but what he has already said before, cluding the Authority of the
Scripture and the Saints; that these Commands, though so express, repeated, and
solemnly confirmed by the whole Church, are wholesome advices and counsels of
Decency and Civility, which oblige no farther than we please to follow them.

ARTICLE IV. Of the Command of God: That the Jesuits absolutely overthrow this
Commandment, and authorize all sorts of Murders.
THere is, it may be, nothing in all the Morals wherein the Jesuits are so
transported as in this same. The excesses they have committed therein are so
great, that as it is enough to raise an horror against them only to understand
them, so we should have found it hard to believe them, had we learnt them from
others than themselves: and if they, after they had taught them in their
Schools, had not also published them every where by their Books.

1. Cum autem hujus legis vim Dominus explicaret, in eo duo continere ostendit.
Alterum ne occidamus, quod a nobis fieri vecitum est; alterunt quod sacere
jubemur, ut concordi amicitia charitateque inimicos complectamur, pacem
habeamus cum omnibus, cuncta denique incommoda patienter feramus. Catech. ad
Par^hos.
This Precept contains in it two things according to the explication which our
Lord gives thereof, as the Catechism of the Council of Trent observes. The one
is forbidden us, to wit, Murder; and the other is commanded us, to wit, love
and charity toward our enemies, peace with all the world, and patience to
suffer all sorts of evils. The Jesuits destroy these two parts of this divine
Precept by the pernicious Maxims of their Divinity. For as to the second, they
are so far from believing that God has commanded the love of enemies, that
they believe not so much as that there is any true Command to love our
Neighbor in general, nor God himself, as we have seen whilst we spoke of the
first Commandment of the Decalogue. And for the first part, which is the
Command not to kill, they overthrow it by infinite decisions which are contrary
thereunto.

For they generally allow to kill in defense of honor, life, and goods;

The allowance they make herein is general and without exception. They grant it
to Clergymen and to Friars as well as Secular persons. And to give the greater
liberty to the use of it, they make it pass for a right of nature, of which
they pretend that any whosoever may make use against any other whomsoever, even
a Servant against his Master, a Son against his Father, a Monk against his
Superior, leaving them at their choice to employ all means whatsoever they
please, and which they judge most proper for their design, whether it be by
open force, or by surprise, and making use of secret ways, and by service of
other persons interposed, if they will not or dare not themselves attempt to
kill those who do or would do them some hurt; as we shall see by and by. The
matter is too large to be comprised under one single title, wherefore I will
divide this Article into five Points, in each of which I will represent the
Opinions of diverse Authors of the Society, beginning with Lessius.

I. POINT. Lessius his Opinion concerning Murder.
SECTION I. How far he enlarges the permission of Killing in defense of his
own life: that he holds that a Priest at the Altar may break off the Sacrifice
to kill him who assails him.
LEssius proposes this Question concerning Murder: If it be lawful to kill a
man in defense of my own life. Utrum liceat alterum occidere in vitae suae
defensionem. Lessiui de just. and jur. lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 8. number. 41. p. 83.
And then he relates many cases, in which he maintains that this is lawful.

The first case, Si reipsa me ferias armis, and de hoc nullum est dubium. Ibid.
number. 42.
says he, is if I be struck with a weapon, and in this point there is no doubt
at all.

The second is, Si accedas ad feriendum, nec possim evadere nisi vel sugiam,
vel te praeveniam. number. 44.
if you draw near unto me to strike me, and I cannot avoid it unless I fly or
prevent your blow.

The third is, Si nondum accedis, tamen instructus es ad invadendum, nec possum
evadere nisi praeveniam. Tuac enim possum praevenire. number. 45.
when you do not yet approach, but you are ready to invade me, and I cannot
avoid you but by preventing you; I may in this case prevent you.

The fourth case, Si per samulum vel sicarium me statueris occidere. number. 46.
when you have a design to cause me to be slain by a Servant or Assasin.

The fifth, Si falsis criminationibus testibusque subornatis, v. c. imponendo
sacrilegium vel crimen infandum, vitam meam impetas in judicio. number. 47.
when you fall upon me by way of justice to cause me to dye by false witnesses,
who accuse me of crimes which I have not committed; imposing upon me, for
example, some Sacrilege or other detestable crime.

It appears then, Lessius, it is not necessary that you may with a good
conscience prevent and kill a man, for you to stay till he smite you; it is
sufficient that he draws near to smite you: Si accedas ad feriendum. It is
enough that he is disposed to do it, though he be far off from you: Si nondum
accedas, sed tamen instructus es ad invadendum. It suffices that he has a will
or has given commission to another to do it: Si per famulum aut sicarium me
statueris occidere. It is sufficient that he has wrongfully accused you of
some crime for which you may lose your life: Si falsis criminationibus, etc.

If you enquire unto whom it is lawful to kill in all these cases, Molina will
answer that the permission is general, and for all sorts of persons. Dicendum
est ad dubium propositum, fas universim esse interficere eum qui nos
interficere decrevit, quando aliter non patet via evadendi mortem, aut grande
periculum mortis, quod nequitia illius ex eo decreto nobis imminet. Molina de
just and jur. tom. 4. tract. 4. disp. 13. number. 2. page 1760
To answer, says he, to the question proposed, we must say that it is
generally lawful to kill him who is resolved to kill you, when there is no
other means to avoid death or imminent danger of death, whereunto you are
reduced by the resolution he has maliciously taken to cause you to dye. That
is to say, that a prudent man, according to Molina, will not expect to use
means for assuring his life, till he see himself nigh unto death; but he will
even prevent the danger, and without attending till his enemy assail or seek
him out to kill him, will prevent and kill him, by getting the start of him as
soon as he believes he bears him ill will, Dicendum est fas esse universim
interficere eum qui nos interficere decrevit. This liberty is without any
exception and for all people: Fas est universim.

Amicus says the same thing, and he expounds it also more particularly. For
after that he has advanced this general Maxim; That every one has a right to
kill any whomsoever who would deprive him of his life, he draws from thence
some consequences which serve to establish and declare his Principle Infe^ur,
1. hoc jus tuendi proprism vitam non solum h^bere personam priva^am contra
privatam, sed etiam privatam contra publicam, subditum contra Superiorem,
filium contra patrem, Clericum aut Religiosum cont a secularem, and e contra
absque ulla irregularitatis contractione. Amic^ de just. and jure disp. 36.
sect. 5. number. 76. page 537.
It follows, says he, 1. That not only one private man has a right to defend
himself against another private man, but also against a public person; an
inferior against his superior; a Son against his father and mother; a Clerk or
a Monk against a Layman, and a Layman against a Clergie-man or Monk, without
contracting any irregularity thereby.

And to show us that this Maxim altogether barbarous and inhumane is common to
and passes for certain with the whole Society, Lessius maintains and rehearses
it almost in the self same terms with Amicus, and draws it like him from his
Principles. Quare etiam Clericis and Monachis hoc concessum sicut and Laicis;
idque contra quoscunque, etiam contra Superiores, ut Monacho contra Abbatem,
filio contra parentem, servo contra dominum, vassalo contra Principem. Lessius
supra number. 41. page 84.
Therefore, says he, it is lawful for Churchmen and Monks to kill for the
security of their lives, as well as Laics, and they may use this liberty
against any whomsoever, and against their Superiors themselves; as a Monk
against his Abbot, a Son against his Father and Mother, a Servant against his
Master, a Vassal against his Lord and Prince.

So that according to this Doctrine and what we have already seen and heard him
say,

Lessius adds, Et in quocunque officio sit quis occupatus, ut si celebret and
invadatur, potest se tu^ and occidere invasorem, si necesse sit, and postea
Sacrum continuare. Lesi^ ibid.
That this may be done in what sunction soever we be employed, as if a Priest
be assailed whilst he is at the Altar saying Mass, he may defend himself, and
even kill, if it be needful, him who assaults him, and afterward go on with
his Mass. This without doubt is perfectly to imitate Jesus Christ, who is
offered in that Sacrifice, who being nigh unto death, prayed for those who
caused it; this is, I say, well to imitate Jesus Christ, to forsake the Mass
which is a Commemoration of the Sacrifice of the Cross, and to abandon the
Altar, to smite and slay an enemy. This is a good disposition wherein to return
unto the Altar, and continue the Mass, to imbrue his hands in the blood of his
neighbor, and to come presently thereupon and lay them on the Body of Jesus
Christ, and to receive his Blood which he shed for his enemies.

This crime is not one single crime, Lessius to speak of it without necessity,
and propound it for an example, if it were not to make us see that the Jesuits
Divinity is ingenious and fruitful in forming Monsters and inventing new
Crimes, and audacious in giving liberty to commit them.

SECTION II. That according to Lessius it is lawful to kill in defense of our
Honor.
IT is not only in defense of our life, but in the preservation of our honor
that we may kill any one whomsoever, according to Lessius Principles. Fas etiam
est viro honorato occidere invasorem qui fukem vel alapam conatur impingece ut
ignominiam inferat, si aliter haec ignominia vitari nequit. Lessius ibid. dub.
12. number. 77. page 89.
It is also lawful, says he, for an honorable person to kill an Assailant who
would strike him with a cudgel, or give him a box on the ear to affront him, if
he cannot otherwise avoid the disgrace. And a little after, to facilitate the
practice of so pernicious a Doctrine, he particularly sets down several ways by
which we may attempt against another honor, which are so many occasions
whereupon he pretends it to be lawful to kill him who makes this attempt.
Notandum est variis modis honorem alterlus poss^ impeti and auferri, in quibus
videtur concessa defensio. Ibid. number. 78.
It is to be observed, says he, that the honor of another may be invaded and
violated in diverse manners, against which it is lawful for him to defend
himself by the ways he has related.

First, Si baculum vel alapam nitaris impingere, de quo jam dictum est. Ibid.
If one endeavor to strike him with a cudgel, or to give him a box on the ear,
of which we spoke but now.

In the second place, Si contumeliis afficiatur, sive per verbs, sive per
signa, hic etiam est jus defensionis. Ibid.
If he be outragiously reproached by words or gestures, he has a right to
defend himself, and by consequence to kill.

In the third place, Si illata alicui alapa cesses, vel etiam fugias. Ibid. number
79.
If he who has given him a box on the ear continue in the same place, or even
though he fly away thereupon.

In the fourth place, Si nomini meo falsis criminationibus apud Principem vel
viros honoratos detrahere nitaris, nec alia ratione possim damnum illud famae
avertere, nisi te occulte interficiam. Ibid. number. 81.
If you endeavor to deprive me of my honor before a Prince, Judge, or Persons
of great quality, by accusing me of feigned crimes; and I have no other way to
divert this loss of reputation but by killing you secretly.

And a little after he adds, alleging Bannez for it: Idem dicendum si crimen
est verum, si tamen est occultum. * P^obari potest 1. quia si baculo vel alapa
impacta velis meum honorem and famam violare, possum armis prohibere: ergo
etiam si id nitar lingua. Nam parum videtur refer quo instrumento quis
nitatur infer injuriam, si aeque efficaciter nocebit. Ibid. number. 81. 2. Quia
contumeliae possunt armis impodiri, ergo and detractiones. 3. Periculum samae
aequiparatur periculo vitae: at qui ob periculum vitae evadendum licitum est
occidere: ergo, etc. Quia honor merito apud homines pluris aestimatur quam
damnum multarum pecuniarum: ergo si potest occidere ne damnum pecuniarum
accipiat, potest etiam ne ignominiam cogatur sustinere. Ibid. number. 77.
The same is to be said where the crime is true, so it be hid and secret. And
that he may establish this so strange Doctrine, of which there is none who may
not see how dangerous and fatal the consequences are, he brings three instances
which are so many reasons whereof he makes use to prove it.

Idem dicendum si crimen est verum, si tamen est occultum. * P^obari potest 1.
quia si baculo vel alapa impacta velis meum honorem and famam violare, possum
armis prohibere: ergo etiam si id nitar lingua. Nam parum videtur refer quo
instrumento quis nitatur infer injuriam, si aeque efficaciter nocebit. Ibid.
number. 81. 2. Quia contumeliae possunt armis impodiri, ergo and detractiones. 3.
Periculum samae aequiparatur periculo vitae: at qui ob periculum vitae
evadendum licitum est occidere: ergo, etc. Quia honor merito apud homines
pluris aestimatur quam damnum multarum pecuniarum: ergo si potest occidere ne
damnum pecuniarum accipiat, potest etiam ne ignominiam cogatur sustinere. Ibid.
number. 77.
This may be proved, says he, first because if one attempt to damnifie me in
my honor and reputation, by smiting me with a cudgel, or giving me a box on
the ear, I may betake me to my arms to keep him off; and by consequence I have
the very same right if he endeavor to do me the same wrong by reproaching me:

In the second place, Recourse may be had to arms to hinder an affront; and so
likewise by consequence to silence reproaches.

In the third place, The danger of losing honor is equal to that of l^sing
life. But it is lawful to kill to avoid the peril of losing life; and by
consequence also for avoiding the danger of losing honor. Idem dicendum si
crimen est verum, si tamen est occultum. * P^obari potest 1. quia si baculo vel
alapa impacta velis meum honorem and famam violare, possum armis prohibere:
ergo etiam si id nitar lingua. Nam parum videtur refer quo instrumento quis
nitatur infer injuriam, si aeque efficaciter nocebit. Ibid. number. 81. 2. Quia
contumeliae possunt armis impodiri, ergo and detractiones. 3. Periculum samae
aequiparatur periculo vitae: at qui ob periculum vitae evadendum licitum est
occidere: ergo, etc. Quia honor merito apud homines pluris aestimatur quam
damnum multarum pecuniarum: ergo si potest occidere ne damnum pecuniarum
accipiat, potest etiam ne ignominiam cogatur sustinere. Ibid. number. 77.
Because, as he says a little before, men by good reason esteem their honor
more than wealth and money; and by consequence, as he will say hereafter, if
one may kill for fear of losing his money, he may also for fear of taking an
affront.

I have no design for the present to consider or examine this whole discourse
nor all these reasons which contain almost as many excesses as words, I shall
content my self to say in general of him and those who imitate him in this kind
of reasoning in matters of Christian Morality, that the farther they advance,
the farther they stray and are removed from the truth, and fall continually
from one error into another; and the latter are usually the greater; their
conclusions are worse than the Maxims from whence they draw them; and the
reasons which they produce to prove the one and the other, are also oftentimes
of yet more dangerous consequence than all their propositions.

The same L^ssius, after the three reasons which we have now related, gives
thereupon also a fourth, which comprehends all the rest, and which alone may
serve as a general Maxim to resolve a multitude of cases in this matter, Quia
jus defenfionis videtur se extendere ad omne id quod necessarium ut te ab omni
injuria serves immunem. Ibid. number 81.
Because the right of self-defence, says he, seems to give liberty to employ
all the means which are necessary to secure ones self fromall sorts of
injuries. He seems to have taken this Maxim, as good store of others, from
Molina who expounds it also more clearly. Fas est quacunque via and ratione,
and quibuscunque armis id totum efficere quod ad tu^m defen^onem su^rit
necessarium. Molina de just. and jure tom. 4. tract. 3. disp. 2. number. 5. page
1757.
It is lawful, says he, to employ all sorts of means, and to make use of all
sorts of ways, and of all sorts of arms to do that which is necessary for
selfdefence.

The Proposition of the one and the other is universal in all these points.
They give no boundaries to men's passions, suspicions, jealousies, and pretenses
whereof they may make use to cover and justify their interests and vainglory.
If we believe these Jesuits, all men have right to make use of all sorts of
expedients to maintain their reputation, true or false, against all sorts of
people who offend against it in any manner whatsoever, or who hurt their
interest and pretensions. He may kill his adversary himself, or employ other
persons whom he shall judge more proper to kill him, by open force or surprise.
All this is lawful for every private man, according to these Doctors. Jus
defensionis videtur se extendere ad omne id quod est necessarium, etc.

They hold also, that we may use this right, not only in important occasions,
but even in the least also, to repel or repair a petty as well as a grand
injury, to have satisfaction for an offensive word, as well as if we had
suffered the greatest reproachful outrage. And in a word, that we may make use
of this right to protect our honor by all sorts of effectual ways, ut te ab
omni injuria serves immunem.

After Lessius has established so detestable a Maxim, which is equally
prejudicial to the Church and State, and which overthrows all Laws divine and
humane, he is constrained by the horror he had toward it in himself, to
declare that he approves not the practice of it: Verum haec quoque sententia
mihi in praxi non probatur.
But there is cause to believe that this word comes rather from the secret
check of his conscience, than that it is a testimony of his true judgment, and
that it proceeds not so much from the fear of God as men, who might, as he well
perceived, reproach him justly therewith, and impute unto him all the unhappy
effects of a Doctrine so abominable and pernicious to humane Society.

For if he had had God before his eyes, and had truly condemned the practice of
this bloody and barbarous opinion, he would never have published and maintained
it with so many reasons, as true, just, and reasonable; since this is at the
same time to approve the practice thereof, there being none who does not easily
believe, that it is lawful to follow in the practice of a Rule which is just
and conformable to reason and truth.

And though he had proposed it only as probable, and not as his own opinion, he
had thereby sufficiently approved the use of it, and ought to be responsible
for all the mischiess which may arise from it, since according to him and all
his Society, it is lawful in practice to follow a probable opinion, even so as
to prefer it before that which is more probable.

SECTION III. That it is lawful to kill in defense of ones goods, according to
Lessius.
THe third concern for which Lessius holds that it is lawful to kill, is for
the preservation of our goods. His reasons are: Primo quia bona temporalia sunt
ad vitam conservandam necessaria: ergo sieut licet vitam tueri, ita etiam haec
quae sunt vitae necessaris, non solum ut praecise vivamus, sed ^tiam ut
convenienter and honest vivamus. Lessius de just. and jure lib. 2. cap. 9.
dub. 11. number. 67. page 88.
First, because temporal goods are necessary to preserve life: and by
consequence it is lawful to preserve them in the same manner as life it self,
as being necessary, not only to live absolutely, but also to live honorably
according to our rank and condition. He made use of the same reason a little
before, to prove that a man may fight a duel for the defense not only of his
life and honor, but of his goods also. Et ^adem videtur esse ratio in
invasione fortunarum. Nam fortunae sunt necessarium vitae instrumentum,
subsidium and or^mentum. Ibid. dub. 8. number. 49.
It seems to me, says he, that the same reason for killing takes place when
our goods are invaded; for our wealth is a necessary instrument, support, and
ornament of our life.

So that, according to Lessius, we may deprive our neighbor of his life, for
fear he should deprive us of our goods. It is manifest enough that this Maxim
cannot appear very Christian; but the reason on which he grounds it is much
less; because, wealth is a necessary instrument, support, and ornament of life.
That is to say, that the commodity and advantage which we reap from wealth in
that it gives means, not only to live, but to live at ease and in honor, ought
to be preferred before the life of our brother; and so we need not make any
scruple to kill him, if he attempt to disseize us of our temporal commodities,
without fear of violating the Laws of the Gospel.

The second reason is, S^cundo, quia daretur alioquia eccasio furibus and
latronibus viros probos spoliandi. Nihil enim ab illis esset tutum, si de^e^
sio necessaria non posset objici. Concessa autem defension^attiam concessa
censetur occisio, sine qua saepe non pote^t esse defensio. Ibid. number. 67.
Because otherwise occasion would be given to Thieves and Robbers to pillage
honest men. For if it were not lawful to resist them by doing what is necessary
for our defense, there would be nothing safe and secured from their
enterprises. But as it is lawful to defend our selves, so it is also lawful to
kill, because oftentimes we cannot defend our selves without killing. He proves
by the same argumentation, that we may kill to preserve our honor, and to
repel or prevent an affront: Quis alias daretur occasio improbitati optimos
quosque contumelils vexandi. Dub. 12. number. 78.
Because if this were not lawful, occasion would be given to wicked persons to
commit all sorts of outrageous abuses upon honest persons. And a little after
he repeats the same reason: Q^ia alias daretur licentia improbis quodvis genus
con^umeliae in quemvis ingerendi. Ibid.
Because otherwise liberty would be given to wicked men to outrage any person
whomsoever as they pleased.

He is very much afraid to give way to robbery, detraction, calumny; but he
fears not at all to make way for the murdering and damning of his neighbor,
which follows thereupon inevitably in such encounters; since a thief, a
calumniator,

He contents not himself to establish in this manner this inhumane and
barbarous Maxim; but to render it more easy to be practiced, he notes out
many particular cases wherein he pretends that it is lawful to kill, of which
one is, Si conjuraveris in mea damna.
When you conspire to ruin us; And another, Si impedis inique meos creditores
ne mihi satis^aciant Ibid.
When you unjustly hinder my Creditor from paying me. So that as soon as any
man shall threaten to undo us, or we shall know that he will hinder our
Creditors from paying us, whether he do it of animosity, or because the same
persons who are indebted to us are also accomptable to him, and he may lose his
debt if we be first paid, it will be lawful for us to attempt upon the life of
this man, and to kill him publicly or privately.

This Doctrine is so horrible, that Less^us himself foreseeing the extremities
and deadly accidents which are inseparable from this liberty of killing, which
he gives all sorts of people indifferently and without excepting any person,
endeavors to moderate it by two conditions, that he might make it more
tolerable, and diminish the horror which at first sight it raises in all those
who have only some resentments of humanity. For after he has said absolutely,
that it is lawful to kill him who would take away our goods; he adds by way of
exception, Dixi in responsione si res illae sin^ magni momenti; quis pro re
minima non videtur concessum jus defensionis cum tanto alteries malo. Estenim
valde iniqu^m ^t pro pomo, vel etlam uno a^reo servando, alicui vita auferatur.
n. 68.
That this is to be understood in case the things be of great importance; But
he overthrows this exception immediately after, and destroys it strangely,
adding thereupon these words: Si tamen tibi verteretur probro nisi rem furi
extorques, posses conari, and, si opus esset, occidere.
Yet if some affront would be done you for not recovering your goods out of the
hands of a thief, you may assail him, and even kill him if need be.

It must then be confessed that it were a very rigorous and unjust thing,
according to this Jesuit, to desire to deprive a man of his life, who had only
taken an Apple from us: but if this should cause any confusion or disgrace to
him from whom it was taken, and that he should be derided, if he suffered it to
be carried away from him, he might endeavor to force it out of the hands of
him who had done him this injury, and in case of resistance it would be lawful
for him to kill him. Certainly a man's life cannot be made more cheap than to
give it or rather to take it away for an Apple.

The same Author discovers another condition whereupon we may kill him who has
taken away some temporal goods, that is, that the loss cannot easily be
recovered by some other means; but he has no sooner propounded this condition,
then he ruins it by the same reason by which he seems to establish it, in
saying that to do otherwise, that is to say, to kill him who takes from us some
thing which we might recover by some other more sweet way, would be to fall
short of the charity which we owe unto our neighbor; Quia si posset alster
recuperari; v. g. per judicem, saepe etit saltem contra charitatem pro illius
defensione occidere; ut si sur re ablata fugiat.
For, says he, if we can recover it by some other way, as that of justice, it
will be oftentimes at least against charity to kill, that we may hinder him
from taking it from us; as if a Thief fly when he has taken away something.
Which he expounds yet more clearly a little after, number. 70. where he puts this
Question: Au sit contra justitiam si furem procul fugientem conficias, quando
res judicio esset recuperabilis? number. 70.
Whether it be against justice to kill a Thief that flies, when that which he
has taken may be recovered by Law? To which he answers No, according to the
opinion which seems to him most probable.

Men believe now adays that they do very well to hold themselves precisely to
that which they cannot omit without injustice; and they ordinarily trouble
themselves little about charity, provided they can persuade themselves that
they do what they ought of Justice. So that to tell them that an action is in
some sort against Charity and not against Justice, is to give them liberty to
commit it. And as for the Jesuits who abolish the Commandment of Charity, as we
have already seen, when they say that a thing is against Charity and not
against Justice, they say according to their Principles and in their ordinary
language, that it were good indeed to abstain from it, but it is no sin to do
it.

Lessius destroys also this condition in another way, saying, number. 70. that
though we may absolutely by way of Justice recover our goods out of the hands
of him who retains them unjustly, yet we are not obliged to follow this way,
and, Quando in judicio non potest nisi magnis molestils recuperari. n. 70.
That we may kill him when we cannot without great trouble and difficulty
recover them by the way of Justice.

This is an excellent invention to cut off a multitude of Suits which arise
daily for goods usurped or unjustly detained: Lessius advice, shall have no
more need to seek to Judges or Advocates, and he may do himself Justice in all
affairs of this nature; his Law shall be his own passion and interest; and
instead of sending a Sergeant to cite him who will not restore his goods, he
may send a Murderer to take away his life.

He says also the same in a manner, number. 66. assuring us, that a person who
sees a Thief carrying away his goods in the day time, may kill him, though the
Thief neither was in a condition, nor had any will to offend him, nor even to
defend himself. Behold his words: Hine qui furem diurnum non se telo
defendentem interficere^, non excusaretur ab homicidio in foro exteriori; in
foro tamen conscientiae excusartur si non ^rat probabilis spes recuperandi, vel
si recuperatio non erat certa fed dubia, number. 66.
It follows that he who should kill a Thief who steals by day, and who defends
not himself with arms, would not be ex^sed in Justice from the homicide which
he had committed; and yet in conscience he should be excused, if probably he
had no hope to recover what was stolen from him, or only doubted, and was not
wholly assured thereof. And his reason is, Quia non tenetur res suas perdere,
aut probabili periculo exponere, ut fur salvus fiat.
Because he is not obliged to lose his goods, or to expose them to the hazard
of being lost, to save a Thief.

God says by the mouth of S. John, Et nos debemus pro fratribus animas ponere.
1 Joan. 3. v. 16.
That we ought to lay down our lives for our neighbor, and Lessius says we
are not so much obliged as to part with our goods, nor a part of them to save
his life; and that on the contrary we may take it from him and kill him our
selves rather than to expose our goods to any hazard of being lost, or to spare
our selves the trouble of recovering them after they are lost. So conformable
are these Maxims to those of the Apostle and the Gospel.

The horror which he is constrained to receive hereof himself, or rather the
fear which he has to make himself odious and unsufferable in the society of
men, is the cause that he dares not absolutely counsel men to practice this;
and he himself alleges inconveniences which may render it difficult or
dangerous. For after that he had said that it is lawful to kill him who is
become an accuser of us of pretended or even of true crimes, but secret and
concealed, he adds: Sed and haec sententis, etsi fortasse speculative
probabilis videri queat, non ramen in praxi admittenda ob incommoda quae ex ea
sequi possunt. Facile enim bomines sibi persuadent se per calumniam accusari,
and non esse effugium nisi morte accusatoris: sicque multae caedes injustae
patrarentur. Denique talis in Republica ben^ constitute, ut homicida
p^ecteretur. Dub. 8. number. 47. page 85.
But this opinion also, though it may be probable in the Theory, yet for all
that is not to be admitted in the practice, because of the inconveniences
which may arise thereupon. For men easily persuade themselves that they are
scandalized when they are accused, and that they have no other way to avoid the
calumny, than by killing him who accuses them. And by this means there would
be a multitude of unjust murders committed. Finally, they who should practice
this opinion in a Commonwealth well constituted, would be punished as
Murderers.

And below, number. 55. having said that it is a wholesome advice rather to
endanger our own life than to kill him that assaults us, he supports his advice
with this reason: Quia periculum est ne ira aut odium se admisceant, neve modum
excedamus, and sic dum volumus servare vitam corporis, vitam perdamus animae.
number. 55.
Because herein there is danger lest choler or hatred mingle it self therewith,
or that we should be transported with some excess; and so thinking to preserve
the life of our body, we should lose that of our Soul.

And in Chap. 12. number. 78. after he has set down of himself a Proposition of
which he declares himself to be the first Author, saying, that he had not found
it in any that had written before him, which is, that it is lawful to kill him
who has spoken any contemptuous word unto us, or who has made only some sign
thereof, he brings in this restriction: Cavenda tame^ vindictae libido. Dub.
12. number. 78.
Yet he ought notwithstanding avoid herein the desire of revenge. And though
afterward, number. 80. having proved by three different reasons that an
honorable person who has received a box on the ear, may pursue him who gave
it him, and kill him, though he were withdrawn; speaking always of this as of
an opinion he holds for true in it self, or at least probable, because of the
reasons upon which he has grounded it, yet he seeks to sweeten a little the
rigor of it, concluding in these terms: Ob has rations haec sententia est
speculative probabilis; tamen in praxi non videtur facile permittenda.
For these reasons this opinion is probable in the Theory; yet for all that it
ought not, as it seems, be easily permitted in the practice. Primum ob
periculum odii, vindictae, and excessus. number. 80.
First because of the peril there is therein, lest hatred and revenge should
transport unto some excess.

This judicious Jesuit requires some prudent man to the practice of this so
reasonable and humane a Doctrine; he would have one kill in cold blood, after
he had well thought of it, without heat or precipitation; and that having well
weighed what he goes about, and being prepared for it as an action of
importance, he should follow this rare Doctrine with so great simplicity, that
he should thrust the sword into his brothers breast, and presently withdraw it
again without any kind of emotion; that he should shed his blood, and wash his
hands in it as soberly as if it were in water.

It is therefore clear enough that all these precautions and apparent
limitations proceed only from the apprehension he has that this Doctrine which
he believes to be good, might become odious by the imprudence and evil conduct
of those who know not rightly to make use of it. He distrusts not the truth of
this opinion, since he says that it is probable in the Theory, but doubts of
the capacity of many persons, for executing it as he desires, because of the
danger that is therein, lest hatred or revenge should transport them unto some
excess.

He produces also some other reasons to the same purpose, which are all taken
from considerations purely humane and politic. As when after he had given a
liberty to kill upon an injury or word spoken in drollery, he adds, Verum haec
sententia non est sequend^. Satis enim esse debet in Republics, ut injuriae
verbales verbis repelli, and legitima vindicta comprimi and castigari possint.
number. 78.
That for all that we ought not to follow this opinion; because in a
Commonwealth we ought to content our selves with the power of repelling
injuries by words which consist only in words, and to repress and chastise them
by a lawful and reasonable punishment.

And a little after, number. 82. to prevent the reproach which might be cast upon
him for saying we might make use of all sorts of means which we should judge
necessary to kill an accuser who charged us with false crimes, or would
discover and publish secret ones, though true, he endeavors to cover this
pernicious Maxim, by saying: Verum haec quoque sententia mihi in praxi non
probatur, quia multis caedibus occultis cum magna Relp, perturbatione praeberet
occafionem. In jure enim defensionis semper confiderandum est ne ejus usus in
perniciem Reip. vergat. Tune enim non est permittendus. number. 82. Haec sententia
est speculative probabilis.
For all that, neither do I approve this opinion in the practice. And his
reason is; because it would make way for many secret murders, not without great
trouble and disorder to the Commonwealth. For we ought always in making use of
the right we have to defend our selves, take heed we do nothing which might
tend to the prejudice of the Commonwealth. For in this case it must not be
used.

So he always maintains his opinion, which teaches to kill, to be at least
probable, he also vindicates the license he gives to kill, to be a true and
lawful right, though he dares not advise us to use it at all times, because of
the consequences thereof. Because as he now said, In jure enim desensionis
semper considerandum est ne usus ejus in perniciem Reip. vergat. Tunc enim non
est permittendus.
We must always beware that this bring no prejudice to the Commonwealth. For
then we must not be suffered to make use of this right.

He says not that it is a thing evil in it self to kill, even in such
occasions; Quia ejus usus in perniciem Reip. vergeret, cum magna Reip,
perturbatione.
Because this would produce some disorder and mischief in the Commonwealth.

And to terrify him who against his counsel, but following his Maxims, would
kill for so small an occasion as a word of contempt, he brings this reason,
Talis in Rep. been constituta ut homicid^ plecteretur.
That if he be taken in the manner, or accused before a Magistrate, he will be
handled and punished as a Murderer.

This is a consideration of a profane person rather than a Divine, and so are
all the rest which he alleges on this point. And we may say that the Pagans
would have furnished us with more forcible and solid ones, to condemn the
Doctrine as well as practice of murders, which this Jesuit authorizes by his
cruel Maxim.

And also it is easy to judge, that if he had had a true design to divert men
from the practice of this murderous Doctrine which he teaches, he would have
set himself to it after another manner, he would have pressed them with the
Authority of Gods Law, the obligation of their consciences, and the fear and
threats of eternal death, and not only with the dread of civil Laws, secular
Judges, and temporal death.

But he would not rack the consciences of others, nor speak against his own: he
believed,

In concluding this Chapter which contains particularly the opinions of Lessius
concerning Murder, I cannot omit one good advice which he gives Churchmen and
Monks in this point. After he had said generally that there was no obligation
thereunto; nevertheless it would be good counsel many times, salutare
consilium, not to prevent and kill him who assails us; but rather to expose our
own than to take away his life, he adds, Ob has rati^nes censeo hoc consilium
magnifaciendum, and omnibus Clericis, maxim Religiosis, amplectendum. number. 55.
That Churchmen, and particularly Monks, ought to make great account of this
counsel, and embrace it.

But for fear he should give them any ground of scruple by giving them this
advice, he advertises them that for all that they have a right and liberty to
kill as well as the people of the world when they are assaulted, and that if
there be herein any fault, it is only against the reputation of their
profession. Non quod absolute non liceat, sed quod non ita deceat. number. 55.
Not, says he, that it is not absolutely lawful for them to kill; but because
it does not become them so well.

And to show now far he is from diminishing the right which he gives Churchmen
and Monks, Si tamen nolunt fugere, non peccabunt contra justitiam, eisi
invasorem occidant. number. 44.
Nevertheless, says he, if they will not fly, they sin not against justice,
though they kill him who assaults them.

He says also the same thing afterward, number. 86. and gives them the same
liberty for defense of their goods as of their lives. For having put this
express Question: Utrum si Religiosus nolit fugere vel se tucri, peccet contra
justitiam, laedendo vel occidendo invasorem?
Whether a Monk who will not fly, but defends himself, sins against justice in
hurting or killing him who assaults him? He answers definitively in these
terms: Puto non peccare contra justitiam, maxim si vita vel fortunae
invadantur. n. 86.
I think he sins not against justice, especially if his life or goods be
invaded.

He pretends then that a Monk who sees a Thief take what belongs to him, may
kill him without fear of acting against Justice, though he should do better to
pardon him, and spare his life withdrawing himself or flying: Charitas ersi non
obligat, tamen ad hoc magis inclinat.
And though Charity incline, it does not oblige thereto, as he had said before,
though by withdrawing himself, Ne proximus in aeternum pereat. number. 55.
he prevents his neighbor from destroying himself for ever.

If Charity oblige not in this occasion, as Lessius pretends, I know not when
it can oblige. Here we are concerned in the saving, or rather in the not taking
away of a man's life: here we are concerned even in his eternal damnation; and
that we may not be the cause, or at least the occasion and instrument of this
double death, the question is only of the peril of losing a few goods, or of
retiring and flying. The case concerns a religious person who is assaulted, or
from whom what he has would be taken. Lessius answers that he may kill him
without fear of sinning against Justice. Puto, says he, non peccare contra
justitiam, nor even against Charity it self absolutely, because it obliges not
hereto. Charitas non obligat.

After this we may find it less strange which we have seen already, that Father
Sirmond maintains that the Law of Charity obliges us not in rigor always to
love God, nor our neighbor, upon what occasion soever; since, after Lessius's
Maxims, there are many very slender occasions upon which it is lawful to kill,
though we may easily abstain therefrom if we would, and though we see clearly
enough that from temporal death he passes on to eternal.

II. POINT. The Opinions of Amicus concerning Murder respecting the Religious.
That he permits them to kill in defense of their Honor, him who impeacheth
them of false Crimes, or only threatens to discover those they have indeed
committed.
NOt only to preserve his life and goods, as Lessius has now said, but a Friar
may also kill to preserve his worldly honor, Amicus in particular, and he
himself makes no difficulty to declare himself the first Author thereof, at
least of many points which he propounds himself, and which he says he found
neither cleared, handled, nor so much as propounded by any Author; we will
afford him the honor of being treated as the Father of a new opinion, and we
will represent apart his opinions upon this point, since they are singular, or
at least were so when he first produced them. For they have since made a
mavelous progress, as we shall see in the sequel of this Article.

He says first as Lessius, that to eschew the danger of losing life, a Monk
has the same right as a secular person, to kill him that assaults him, whoever
he be. Hoc jus tuendi propriam vitam non solum habet privat^ persona contra
privatam, sed etiam privata contra publicam, subditus contra Superiorem, filius
contra patrem, pare^s contra filium, Clericus aut Religiosus contra secularem,
and contra, absque ulla irregulatitatis contractione. Amicus tom. 5. de just.
and jure disp. 36. sect 4. number. 76. page 537.
This right, says he, of defending his life, belongs not only to one private
person against another, but also to a private against a public person, to a
Subject against his Superior, a Son against his Father, a Father against his
Son, an Ecclesiastic or Monk against a Secular, a Secular against an
Ecclesiastic or Monk, without any irregularity thereby incurred.

But he stays not there; he pretends that they may make use of this right of
killing, for the preservation of their repute in the world, as well as their
lives. Convenient suptadicti fas esse ad propulsandam ignominiam quam mihi
aliquis infer conatur, illum praeveniendo occldere: sicut fas est ad
declinandam mortem quam mihi injustus invasor molitur, illum occidere, antequam
mihi mortem vel mutilationem inserat. Ibid. sect. 7. number. 106. page 542.
The Authors of whom I speak, says he, agree in this point, that to defend our
selves from an affront which would be given us; it is lawful to prevent the
aggressor by killing him: in the same manner as when a man endeavors to
deprive us unjustly of life or member, it is lawful to kill him before he can
execute his wicked design.

It seems at first sight that this general Proposition is to be extended only
to the Laity. But besides that, he gives in all things which concern the right
of killing, the same liberty to the Monks as to the Laity, as we shall see
hereafter: he declares it also here very manifestly. For after he has demanded
whether that he now said, Sed adhuc superest difficultas, an omnibus perfonis
licitum sit in tutelam honoris invasorem occidere? Negant id concessum esse
Clericis and Religiofis, ut cum glossa in Clement. Si furiosus, de homicidio,
and glossa in caput, Suscepimus, sub eodem titulo, docent communiter Doctores.
Ibid. page 544.
That it is lawful to kill in defense of honor, ought to be extended to all
sorts of persons? And said that according to Law and the common opinion (...)
the Doctors it is forbidden the Religious, he forbears not to say afterward,
Negari tamen non potest honorem famamque illam quae ex virtute so sapientia
nascitur, quique verus honor est just defendere Clerici aut Religiosi valiant,
ac saepe debcant: cum hic sit proprius professionis little. Quem si amittant,
maximum bonum ac decus amittunt. Ibid. number. 118. page 544.
That we cannot at least deny that Clergymen and Friars may and even are
obliged to defend their honor and reputation which proceeds from virtue and
prudence; because this honor does properly appertain to their profession, and
that if they lose it, they lose a very great benefit and advantage.

The point of honor then, Ergo saltem hunc honorem poterunt Clerici^c
Religiosi cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, etiam cum morte invasoris
defendere. Ibid.
Maximum bonum ac decus. Whereupon he concludes, and says in the second place,
That the Clergy and Religious may at least defend their honor, and in doing
all which is necessary thereto, may even kill him who would deprive them of it.

And to encourage and incline them to commit this Murder with greater
confidence, he represents it to them as an action of virtue, and contents not
himself to say that they may, but declares that sometimes they ought to do it;
so that they should sin against Charity, if they failed therein: Quin interdum,
lege saltem charitatis, videntur ad illum defendendum teneri. Ibid. Yea and
sometimes, at least by the Law of Charity they seem obliged to defend it.

What kind of Religious Charity is this that obliges to commit Murders, for
fear of suffering some loss or diminution in worldly honor? If it be
Jesuitical Charity, it is not that of S. Paul which he recommends unto
Christians, when he says, Charitas non inflatur, non est ambitiosa, non
quaerit quae sua sunt. 1 Cor. 13. v. 4.
That Charity is not puffed up, is not ambitious, and that it seeks no its own
private interests.

Amic^s does not content himself to have said once or twice very clearly, that
it is lawful for a Monk to kill for the point of honor, Unde licebit Clerico
vel Religioso calumniatorem gravia crimina de se vel de sua Religione spargere
min^ntem occidere, quando alius desendendi modus non supperat. Ibid.
It follows, that it will be lawful for a Clergie-man or a Monk to kill a
slanderer who threatens to publish some great crimes against him or his Order,
if he have no other means to defend himself therefrom.

It is not needful therefore, according to him, that a Monk attend until a
slanderer speak evil of him or his Order, that he may kill him; it is
sufficient that he threats to disgrace him; and even without expecting this, if
he believes that he has a will thereto; and that he is disposed and ready to
do it. For in that case this Jesuit gives him the same right to kill him: Si
calumniator fit paratus ea vel ipsi Religioso, vel ejus Religioni public ac
coram gravissi^is viris impingere, nisi occidatur. Ibid.
If he be ready to charge th^se crimes on him or his Order publicly before
considerable persons, if he be not slain before. One of his reasons is, N^m quo
jure licitum est seculari in tali casu calumniatorem occidere, codem jure
licitum videtur Clerico and Religioso, cum in hoc Religiosus and secularis sin^
omnino pares. Ibid.
Because that in this case it seems that a Clergie-man or a Monk has the same
right as a Layman lawfully to kill a slanderer, there being no difference in
this point betwixt a Layman and a Religious. That is to say, that he would
have the Clergy in this point conform themselves to the world, and that he
would be sorry that Monks should have less liberty than Lay men to follow their
passions, and to revenge themselves beforehand of an injury they have not yet
received.

Which cannot but seem very strange to a person never so little equitable,
seeing that instead of putting a stop to the passions of the world by the
Example of the Religious, he would overthrow the virtue of the Religious by the
Example of the World,

A Disciple of the Society desirous to defend this Doctrine, that he might
clear up and make it better comprehended, propounds it in a very remarkable
Examample. Legi^i hanc doctrinam and inquitis an homo Religiosus qui
sragilitati eedens foeminam vilem cognovit, quae honori ducens se prostitutam
esse tanto viro, rem narrat, and candem infamat, possit illam occidere?
Caranuel fund. 55. sect. 7. page 551.
You have read, says he, this Doctrine of Amicus, and you demand whether a
Monk that has sinued through frailty of the flesh with a woman of base
condition, who takes it for an honor to be prostitute to so great a Personage,
boasts her self of it, and defames him, may kill this woman.

He dares not at first declare his opinion, and he acknowledges he is in great
suspense, and knows not which way to resolve, speaking thus: Quid scio? At
audivi ab eximio P. N. S. Theologiae Doctore, magni ingenii and doctrinae viro:
Potuiffet Amicus hanc resolutionem omisisse; at semel impressam debet illam
tueri, and nos candem defendere. Doctrina quidem est probabilis, sed qua posset
uti Religiosus, and pellicem occidere ne se infamaret. Ibid.
I know not what to answer. It is true I have heard an excellent Father, a
Doctor in Divinity of great wit and learning say, that Amicus might well have
forborne to propound this proposition; but it being once published in print, he
was obliged to maintain it, and we to defend him. This Doctrine indeed is
probable, and a Monk may kill a woman with whom he has sinned, for fear she
should defame him.

He says well, Amicus had never published this mischievous Doctrine, but he
says not that it is wicked; and though he saw well enough the falfity and
error thereof, as he testifies by the difficulty he makes to approve it, yet
he believes that Amicus was obliged to maintain it after he had published it,
semel impressam debet illam tueri. For that it is a kind of disgrace to a
learned man as he is, and to the Society, to seem to have been ignorant of any
thing, or to have erred; and a Jesuit knows not what it is to recant sincerely
when he has once set forth a Proposition by the order and with the approbation
of his Superiors.

This Doctrine, though altogether brutish and inhumane, cease not to be
probable in the Judgment of this Casuist: Doctrina quidem est probabilis,
because Amicus has set it out; and because he who is a Doctor as well as
Amicus, by the engagement he stands in to the party, and that he might gratify
his Master and his friend, finds himself obliged to give him his approbation:
Et nos debemus candem defendere. And upon a probability so well founded, a Monk
may kill a woman with whom he has sinned, for fear she defame him. Poterit
Religiosus pellicem occidere ne se infamet, taking from her in this manner her
life after her honor, and clearing an adultery by a murder.

A Judge cannot put to death a Malefactor, if he be not lawfully and evidently
convicted; and if he condemn him upon simple conjectures, presumptions, and
probabilities, he makes himself guilty of his death.

This is not sufficient to have made this opinion probable, he must also, that
the Religious may have entire liberty to follow it without any scruple, remove
from the contrary opinion all manner of probability; and this Caranuel does,
saying, Doctrinam Amici solam esse veram, and oppositam ^mprobabilem censemus
omnes docti. Ibid. sect. 6. p. 544.
That all able men and learned persons amongst them hold with him, not only
that the opinion of Amicus is true, but that the contrary opinion is not so
much as probable.

It must needs be that this opinion which authorizes Murder in favor of
Adultery, has in a little time made a mavelous progress, since Amicus
declares that he invented it, and Caranuel not daring at first to say that he
approved it, speaks of it a little after as certain and evident truth, the
contrary whereof seems not to him to be maintainable, because that upon his and
Amicus Authority all the learned of the Faction of Probability have embraced it.

Then he fortifies this Authority by reason, which he proposes in this manner:
Conformius rationi videtur honorem tueri gladio quam mendacio; generofius and
sanctius famam desendere occidendo aggreflorem quam ei falsum testimonium
imponendo. Ibid. fund. 55. sect. 6. page 550.
It seems more agreeable to reason to defend honor by the Sword then by lying:
That it is a thing more generous and holy to maintain reputation by killing an
Assaillant, then by hearing false witness against him. Cum mode^amine tutelae.
Id enim semper subinteligitur. Ibid.
provided only we pass not the bounds of a just and necessary defense, and that
we do no more then is precisely necessary to kill him. For it is, thus that he
declares he has always understood it, for fear we should question his prudence
and moderation.

He continues his reasoning and adds. At non esse mortale hoc ultimum p^obabile
est, ergo nec illud prinium. Ibid.
Now it is probable that there is no mortal sin in the second, to wit, in
bearing false witness against him who would take away our honor: and therefore
neither any in the first, to wit, in killing for maintenance of the same
honor. We may conclude by the same reason, that it is lawful to rob to
preserve our reputation, or to commit a second adultery to cover the first for
which we fear to be disgraced, since these crimes are not greater than slander,
false witness, and murder, which he pretends to be lawful for the same reason.

Then he undertakes to verify in order all the Propositions of this his
Discourse, beginning with the first. Majorem pr^bo, quia homicidium ex natura
sua malum non est. Multi enim interimunt just, and mendacium ita malum est, ut
nec divinitus dispensari aut cohonestari possit, in omnium Thomistarum
sententia; imoetiam in opinione Scotistarum plurium, qui putant posse Deum
dispensare in aliquibus praeceptis Decalogi. Ibid. Quod si dicantur non
sufficere, vix erit ulla opinio probabilis. Ibid.
I prove, says he, the major, because manslaughter is not absolutely evil in
it self, since many may kill justly; and on the contrary, a lie is so wicked,
that God himself cannot make it lawful and honest according to all the
Thomists,

Amicus then and his Fraternity, and other his Partisans, who maintain at this
day his opinion, must have more power than God himself; being they can justify
and sanctify lies and calumnies when they are scrviceable to them for
preserving their honor in the world, which God cannot so much as make lawful
by dispensation.

But the proof of his second Proposition is remarkable. Pr^bo minorem etiam,
esse videlicet probabile non peccare mort^liter qui imponit falsum testimonium
alicui, ut suam justitiam and honorem defendat: quia illud est probabile quod
asseritur a viris doctis; at haec doctrina habet in se viginti and plures viros
magnos and doctos. Quod si dicantur non sufficere, vix erit ulla opinio
probabilis. Ibid.
I prove also, says he, the minor, namely, that it is probable that he who
bears false witness to defend his right and his honor, sins not mortally: for
that which is maintained by persons of piety and learning is probable; and this
doctrine has for it more then twenty great and very learned Personages. Whence
he concludes, That if we imagine these not to be sufficient to make it
probable, we shall hardly find any at all that is so.

Behold a new wonder of the Doctrine of Probability, to prevail not only
against the opinions of men, but against the Law of God and Nature. For this
Casuist said a little above, that by the common consent of the Doctors, a lie
is in its nature so bad, that God himself cannot prevent it from being so at
all times,

It is impossible to advance the Doctrine of Probability any higher, then to
elevate it above the Power of God, and to subject the Laws of God unto it, by
giving it a power to approve what they condemn, and to justify that which God
himself cannot so much as tolerate.

I know not whether, as they hold that a Confessor is obliged to quit his own
opinion to follow that of his Penitent, though he believe it is false, if it be
supported by some probability, so they do not even pretend also that a man who
has killed one to preserve his honor, coming to appear before God to receive
his Judgment, may not oblige him to renounce his own light, and to pass over
his own Laws to absolve him, by representing unto him, that he could not sin,
following a probable opinion supported by the Authority of twenty Doctors.

If the Jesuits be not confident enough to say this, yet they must needs
believe it, or renounce their Doctrine of Probability, since it is a necessary
and evident consequence of the Maxims of this Science. For as they hold it for
certain, that we cannot sin in following a probable opinion; it is also very
certain, that an equitable Judge, and by stronger reason God who is Equity and
Justice it self, cannot condemn nor punish him who sins not. Amicus and these
twenty Doctors who have approved it, has slain one to preserve his honor,
having not sinned, God cannot condemn nor punish him; but he shall be obliged
to absolve him, and give him part of his glory, in yielding to the Authority of
these Doctors, and giving way to the Rules of Probability, though he judge
according to divine light, that his action is wicked, and condemned by the
eternal Laws.

After this we must not think it strange, that they will not submit this
mavelous Doctrine to the Laws of the Church, or Princes, and that they
pretend that they are of no force against it, as Caramuel declares, answering
this question: Anne cadem doctrina poterit admitti sano jure civili and
canonico?
May we entertain this Doctrine of Amicus without offending against Civil and
Ecclesiastic Laws? For he answers, Respondeo Amici doctrinam esse novam and
legibus vulgatis juniorem; utque adeo nihil de illa a Pontific^bus, Caesaribus,
aut Regibus fulsse dispositum. Ibid. page 549.
That the Doctrine of Amicus is new, and later than the common Laws; and that
by consequence the Popes, Emperors, and Kings have ordained nothing about this
point. Whence it will follow by the same reason, that if any one should begin
at this day to teach some new and heretofore unheard of error, as to say that
Blasphemy or Adultery were no sin, his opinion would not be condemned by the
Church; because it would be new and later than its Laws. When the Church
condemns an Error, it condemns all those who shall hold it for the future, as
well as those who have held it in time past: Amicus, in condemning slander and
murder which this Jesuit approves and authorizes.

But if the Error and Crime were not so evident as it is in this opinion, its
novelty alone, of which this Casuist would make use to exempt it from the
censure of the Church, suffices to make us see that it is condemned by the
Church it self. For there is no Divine who knows not that Novelty, and
particularly in matters of Doctrine, has been always suspected and odious in
the Church, and that it has always rejected and condemned it by the Laws and
Mouths of all the Saints which governed it. And by consequent this opinion of
Amicus being novel by his own confession, it has been condemned by the Church
before it proceeded from his imagination.

After Amicus had expounded this pernicious Doctrine so largely, built it up
with so great care, and supported it with all the reasons he could, he thinks
to put himself under shelter by saying, Verum quoniam haec apud alios
scriptanon legimus, nolumus a nobis ita sint dict^, ut communi sententiae
adversentur: sed solum disputandi gratia proposita, maturo judicio relicto
penes prudentem lectorem. Amicu^ supra ^om. 5. disp. 36. sect. 7. number. 118.
page 544.
That since he had not read these things in the Writings of any Author, his
design was not to oppose himself to the common opinion, but only to propose it
by way of dispute, leaving it to him who should read these things to judge
thereof according to his prudence.

But seeking to hide, he discovers himself the more, and his words render him
more guilty, since he acknowledges this Doctrine is novel,

And it is to no purpose for Amicus to say, that he does not set on foot these
Maxims so contrary to Justice, Nature, and humane Society, but only by way of
disputation, and that he submits his unto others Judgment. For this discourse
makes not an opinion good which is bad of it self; and this excuse and
submission hinders him not from being blamable for publishing of it; but it
only testifies that he did this with fear, and that he meant hereby to sound as
it were the minds of men, to see how this his first Proposal of it would be
received in the world, that he might afterward declare himself more openly,
and maintain it with an absolute confidence, if this first draught of his Essay
should prosper with him, and an opinion so strange and odious should only be
tolerated.

But besides this, it is an enterprise unsufferable and pernicious to the
Church and Commonwealth to propose so horrible Errors and Maxims which carry
on unto vice, revenge, and murder, under a pretense that it is done only for
disputation sake, and for an exercise of wit, without determining any thing at
all absolutely. There is no more certain way to teach men all sorts of
villainies, and to imprint in their minds all sorts of the most brutish and
abominable imaginations.

III. The Opinions of other Jesuits concerning Murder.
THis matter is too important to rely on the Judgment of Lessius and Amicus
alone. We must join thereto that of some others of their Fraternity, the better
to verify what we have reported of their Writings. Now if it fall out that
they say in a manner all the same thing, it will prove the truth of what I say,
that this Doctrine of Murder is not the opinion of one or two private persons
only; but of the principal Jesuits, and of the Spirit of the Society.

1. Dicastillus as well as Amicus whom we have already quoted, with others
also, gives license to any one whomsoever to kill all sorts of persons
indifferently, Father, Mother, Priest, Monk, all Superiors generally, without
excepting Princes and Kings, no more than Bishops or Popes, when they are
persuaded that they assault them unjustly. Licitum est filiis contra parents,
servis contra Dominos, vassallis contra Principes vim vi repellere quando actu
invaduntur injuste -- Idemque de Monachis aut subditis contrs Abbates and
Superiores est communis sententi^. Dicast. l. 2. tr. 1. disp. 10. dub. 3. number.
30.
It is lawful, says he, for Children to rise against their Parents, Servants
against their Masters, Vassals against their Princes, and to repel force with
force, when they are actually and unjustly assailed. And the same is lawful for
Monks against their Abbots, and Inferiors against their Superiors. So that if
we should see a Son smite his Father, we ought not lightly to condemn him, for
it may be this Father would have beaten him unjustly.

Molina speaking of an Adulterer, does not only not call it in question,
whether it be lawful for him to kill the Husband of the Woman with whom he has
sinned, when he takes him in the fact; but he takes it for granted as a certain
thing, Adulter aggressus a m^rito adulterae, in facto deprehensus, licite illum
interficere potest. Molina de just and jur. tom. 4. tr. 3. disp. 14. page 1765.
An Adulterer, says he, may lawfully kill the Husband of a Woman with whom he
has committed Adultery, if her Husband having surprised him in the fact do
assault him:

Tambourin is also of the same opinion: Adulter in adulterio deprehensus p^test
se defendere, occidendo eos qui ipsum occidere aggrediuntur; quia in foro
conscientiae non just invaditur and merito. Tambur. lib. 16. decal. cap. 1.
sect. 1. number. 7.
An Adulterer, says he, taken in the fact, may he defend himself, and kill
those that would kill him? I answer he may. Because according to the Laws of
Conscience the Husband has not right to assault him. If then in Conscience and
before God, this Husband assaults him not according to Justice. He kills him
then unjustly. And notwithstanding Tambourin forbears not to give him a
dispensation also, saying in the following Section, Potest maritus occidere
juvenem vim infarentem uxori quomodocun que consentienti, quando illum aliter
avertere non potest: sect. 2. number. 8.
That a Husband may kill a young man that forces his Wife, though she consent
to it in any sort whatsoever. This advice doubtless is very religious, to
permit a dishonored Husband to revenge himself of treachery by injustice; and
it is also an excellent manner for an Adulterer to repair his fault and expiate
his crime of profanation of Marriage by taking away the Husbands life, after
he has taken away the Wifes honor, according as these Jesuits allow him.

Molina in the process of his discourse says the same of a Thief, Juxta hanc
doctrinam dicendum est fas esse furi qui ad furandum est ingressus interficere
cum qui tali^de causa vult talem surem interficere quando aliter non potest
evadere came mortem. Ibid. page 1766. number. 2.
According to this Doctrine we must say, that a Thief being entered into a house
to steal, may in conscience kill him that would kill him for his Theft, if he
cannot otherwise escape death. We must no more be so much astonished that they
assure us that he from whom one would take life, honor, or goods, may kill in
his own defense, and prevent the Assailant; since they pretend that he who
unjustly invadeth the honor or goods of another has the same right and power.

He also maintains, that in these occurrents wherein it is lawful to kill,
according to him, it is lawful to defire it, to lay a design for it, and to do
all we can to effect it. See his words. Dicendum posse aggressum Intendere
mortem aggressoris, petendo ictu cor aut jugulum aggressoris animo cum
prosternendi ac necandi, quando videt sibl ita esse necessarium ad tute
evadendum manus ejus. Ib. disp. 11. number. 4. page 1755.
We must say that he who is assaulted may form a design to kill the Assailant,
and direct his blow at his heart or throat, that he may overthrow and killhim,
when he sees that it is necessary for him, that so he may certainly escape out
of his hands.

Tambourin permits us to have this determinate will of killing in our own
defense all sorts of persons. Ut vitam meam defendam, non vero ut vindictam
sumam, communis est doctrina posse a me occidi cum qui me injuste aggreditur,
etiam intendendo ejus mortem ut medium meae vitae, licet is sit meus pater,
filius, frater, dominus, conjux, Sacerdos, Religiosus, sine periculo
excommunicationis vel irregularitatis. Hurtado, Dicastillus and alii apud
Dianam. Tambur. lib. 6. Decal. c. 1. sect. 1. n. 1.
It is, says he, the common Doctrine, (without doubt amongst the Jesuits) that
to defend my life, but not to revenge my self, I may kill him who assaults me
unjustly, even with an intention to kill him, He might have said moreover, and
added with merit, and even with pretension to gain an Indulgence by this
manslaughter; since according to his Brethren, an action of this nature is
good and honest; and by consequence a matter capable of merit and indulgence.

Amicus says in like manner, Infertur posse invasum in defensionem suae vitae
intendere, non quidem ut sinem, sed ut medium necessarium, mortem invadentis.
Amicus de just. and jur. disp. 36. number. 78. page 538.
That he who is assaulted may endeavor to kill the Assailant, looking on his
death, not as his end, but as a means to preserve his own life.

Dicastillus adds, that this design of killing is honest. Asserendum est
tanquam verissimum, sicut honestum est in executione repellere aggressorem
illum occidendo; pari ratione honestum est ditecte illum velle and intendere
occidere ad repellendum illum and conservandam proptiam vitam. Dicastillus lib.
2. tr. 1. disp. 10. dub. 4. number. 41.
We must say and maintain it as most true (says this Father) that as it is an
honest thing to repel him who assaults us, by killing him; so likewise it is
honest directly to desire to kill him, and to intend it for repelling him, and
defending our own life. This is not simply to tolerate, excuse, or justify
murder, this is highly to praise it, and to stir up all people to commit it,
and to give themselves voluntarily to the practice of it as a good action, to
say, as this Jesuit does, that the designment as well as the execution of it is
commendable and honorable.

But if you have given occasion to this unjust Aggressor to invade you, may you
kill him? You may according to the same Dicastillus. Non peccat peccato
homicidil invalus qui occidir injustum invasorem, etiamsi invasus dederit
c^usam invasionis, Ibid. dub. 5. number. 25.
He commits not a sin of manslaughter, who kills him that invades him
unjustly, though he gave him occasion to assault him. That is to say, that he
who by any offense or injury done against a person, has given him occasion to
assault him, becomes just by taking up arms to maintain his injustice, and may
justly kill after he has unjustly offended. And herein he shall do also, if
you will believe this Doctor, an honorable and commendable action.

Filliutius assures us also, in casu quo licet occidere invasorem, etiam
licitum est intendere ejus mortem tanquam medium necessarium ad sui
defensionem. Filliutius Moral. qq. tom. 2. tr. 29. cap. 3. number. 37. page 358.
That in occurrences wherein it is lawful to kill the Invader, it is also
lawful to desire his death as a means necessary for our defense.

Molina goes yet farther, and says that though in killing him who assaults
unjustly, we see that he will dye in an estate of eternal damnation, yet
nevertheless we may kill him without offending against that Charity which we
owe unto our Neighbor: Tunc lege charitatis non est necesse praeponere viram
illiu^ spiritualem nostrae propriae corporali. Imo vero nec honoriaut bonis
externis quae ille velit injuste a nobis auferre. Molina de just. and jure tr.
3. disp. 13. page 1751.
Because in this case Charity obliges not to prefer this man's spiritual before
our own corporal life, nor before our honor it self, or our temporal goods
which he would unjustly bereave us of.

That is to say, that without violating the Laws of Charity, and much less of
Justice, we may kill the body and soul of an enemy or thief, and send him to
Hell rather than suffer any loss in goods or honor, or hazard our lives; and
if Charity should require any other thing of us in these occurrences, its yoke
would be, according to this Jesuit, unsupportable, unreasonable, and contrary
to public good and humane Society. Irrationabile autem and importabile bonoque
communi contrarium esset jugum and praeceptum quo praeciptremur pati j^cturam
injustam vitae and bonorum omnium nostrorum externorum; ne nos nostraque cum
moderamine inculpatae tutelae defendendo interficeremus injuste aggressorem qui
sua nequitia a tanta injustitia non vult desistere: aut nicelle illa sua
nequitia defistere ^olendo, interitum incurrat aeternum. Ibid.
Otherwise, says he, this would be a yoke and command unreasonable,
unsupportable, and contrary to public good; since it would oblige us to suffer
an unjust loss of our lives and goods, for fear that in defending our selves,
and doing what is necessary for our security, we should cause a man to lose his
life who invades us unjustly, and who of mere malice refuses to desist from so
great injury as he would do us, or lest he should incur eternal damnation, by
continuance in the same wicked disposition.

By this reckoning S. Paul was unreasonable, and made an unsufferable
remonstrance to the Corinthians, when he reproved them that they did not suffer
themselves to be wronged, defrauded, unjustly spoiled of their goods, rather
than, not only to offend or kill the wrong-doers, as this Jesuit allows; but
also rather than sue and contest publicly with them. Jam quidem omnino
delictum est in vobis, quod judicis habetis inter vos. Quate non magis injurism
accipitis? Quare non magis fraudem patimini? 1 Cor. 6. v. 7. Et nos debemus pro
fratribus animas ponere. 1 Joan. 3. verse. 16.
You are to blame, says this great Apostle, in this very thing, that you go to
Law together before the Judges, why do you not rather suffer wrong? Why do you
not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? And S. John must be yet more
unreasonable and inhumane, when he says that all the faithful ought to lay
down their lives for their brethren.

And yet the license which Molina gives in this point, Est autem hoc licicum,
non solum Laicis, sed etiam Clericis, cum jure naturae liceat, nullibique illis
prohibitum reperiatur; quin potius defensio bonorum externorum illis
permittatur. Ibid. page 1770.
belong not only to the Laics, but to the Ecclesiastics, as being allowed by
the Law of Nature; and not found to be forbidden them at any time; since on the
contrary it is lawful for them to defend their worldly goods.

Amicus applies also this Maxim to the Religious particularly, saying, Quod
hoc jus tuendi propriam vitam etiam cum periculo mortis invasoris, non solum
habeant seculares, sed etiam Clerici and Religiosi, constat. Amicus de just,
and jur. disp. 56. number. 128. page 546.
That it is certain that the right of defending their goods at the expense of
their lives, who would take them away, does not only belong to Secular, but
also to Ecclesiastic and Religious persons. Thence it follows, that a Monk
encountering a man who is entered into his Monastery to rob it, may take a Sword
or a Knife to kill him, if he cannot otherwise hinder him from bearing away the
goods of the Monastery.

Dicastillus, supported by the Authority of many Authors whom he quotes, speaks
more resolutely and more generally, Asserendum est omnibus, etiam Clericis,
licitum esse occidere invasorem suarum facultatum notabilis momenti, quando
alitet servari vel recuperati non p^ssunt. Dicast. lib. 2. tract. 1. disp. 10.
dub. 5. number. 46.
That it is lawful for all sorts of persons, Clergy men themselves, to kill
them who take away their goods. And if you will take his word, and keep to his
Principles, this sort of manslaughter is an action not only not wicked, but
honest and worthy the profession of a Clerk or Religious Monk. Colligitur posse
occidi furem dum sugi^ cum re quam surripuit, ut si fugiat cum equo quem mibi
surripuit, possum illum insequi telo vol bombirda consodere, quando fur
praemonitus de more recusa^rem accep^m Sdimittere^ vel etiamsi non sit
praemonitus, quando non est locus praemonendi, and perioulum nunquam
recaperandi rem (...). Ibid. number. ^.
That if a Thief fly away on horseback, he may be pursued with a weapon, or
killed by a Pistol-shot, when after he has been threatened to be killed, he
cease not to bear away what he has taken; and even though he be not threatened
nor admonished thereof, because time permits not, and there is danger never to
recover what he carries away.

But what if satisfaction might be had for it by Law, were it not then ill done
to kill him? It is not, says he, against Charity to kill a Thief who robs me
of things which I cannot recover at Law without much trouble. So it is that in
the JesuitDivinity the Law of Charity has no force against that of Interest,
and the life of a man is not worth the pain of pursuing at Law the restitution
of what he has robbed.

Molina gives the same liberty, and yet greater, for he allows killing for
preservation of worldly honor. For he fears not to say, At si homo ingenuus,
cui dedecori sit fugere quando alius eum aggreditur, tunc esto fugiendo, vitam
propriam and aggressoris posset conservare, non tenetur fugere, sed defendendo
propriam personam and proprium honorem interficere potest injustum aggressorem,
quando aliter non potest utrumque conservare. Molina supra page 1778.
That if an honorable person be assaulted, and in danger to lose his
reputation, if he fly, though by flying, he might preserve his own life, and
his who assaults him, he is not for all that obliged to fly; but it is lawful
for him to kill him who invades him unjustly, in defense of his life and
honor, when he cannot do it otherwise. So a worthy person is not obliged to
retire, nor step one pace backward, no more than abate a point of honor to
save the life of him who offends him in some matter,

Vasquez finds so little difficulty in this point, that he speaks of it as a
thing of which none ought to doubt, saying, At si homo ingenuus, cui dedecori
sit fugere quando alius eum aggreditur, tunc esto fugiendo, vitam propriam and
aggressoris posset conservare, non tenetur fugere, sed defendendo propriam
personam and proprium honorem interficere potest injustum aggressorem, quando
aliter non potest utrumque conservare. Molina supra page 1778.
That all are agreed (without doubt they of the Society) that when a man comes
upon us to assault us, and testifies that he would violate our honor, by
threatening to beat us with a Cudgel, or give us a box on the ear, it is lawful
for us to kill him, if we have no other way to defend our selves. He is not
content to say we may revenge an affront received; but he pretends that it is
lawful even to prevent the mischief, and to kill him that only threatens to do
it.

The reason is, Omnes fatentur quod licitum est invasorem qui suste aut alaps
minatur nobis m^lum contra honorem, occidere, si alius non sit sufficiens modus
defensionis. Vasquez opusc. moral. cap. 2. dub. 9. number. 34. page 43.
Because he who invades us in this sort, seeks to deprive us of our honor,
which is justly esteemed of more value than money or goods. For he who repels
not such an affront, is of no account amongst the people. And hereupon after he
has said that the Casuists are agreed, that when a man is in hazard to lose
his life and honor at once, it is lawful to kill him who assaults him; he
adds, that albeit he were not in danger to lose his life, he is not obliged to
fly, and that he may kill only to defend his honor. Quia aggreditur proprium
honorem auserre, qui jure optimo pluris pecunia aestimatur. In populo enim
parvi haberetur qui similem Injurism non propelleret. Ibid.
It seems to me also, says he, that when a man has his honor only to defend,
he is not obliged to fly; because he is to set more by his honor than money
or goods.

St^ and mihi etiam videtur quod ob tuendum honorem non renetur fugere, quia
pluris saciendus est honor quam pecunia aut res familiaris. Unde non est cur
obligemus Christianos ita pretiosa amittere ex eo quod fugiant invasorem
injustum. Ibid. Honestus vir si alapa, etc. percutiatur, etc. Tambur. lib. 6.
cap 1. sect. 3. number. 1.
Tambourin says the same, and Dicastillus extends and expounds it very
largely, exempting him that follows his opinion in this point from restitution
as well as sin. And by the same Principle upon which he establishes this
Doctrine, Poterit statim repercutere vel fugientem insequi, and tantum
infligere verberum, quantum putatur necessarium ad honorem recuperandum.
Dicastil. lib. 2. tr. 2. disp. 12. par. 4. dub. 2. number. 410.
he approves the Doctrine of Sanchez who believes that it is lawful secretly to
kill a slanderer or false witness in an affair wherein not only life, but even
outward goods also of great importance are in question. And in another place L.
2. tr. 1. disp. 10. dub. 15. number. 220.
he extends this permission of killing false witness and slanderers, Si quis
falsis criminationibus apud Princip^m, Judicem aut viros honestos te infamare
parat and nititur, and alit^r non possis damnum illud avertere nisi eum
occidende, poteris eum occid^re -- Idem dicendum si crimen sit verum, dummodo
sit occultum. Dicast. lib. 2. tr. 2. disp. 12. page 4. dub. 2. number. 414.
unto such as defame us before a Judge, Prince, or honorable persons, when we
have no other means to secure our selves against this damage. He proves that it
is even probable in the Theory, that we may prevent this slanderer, and kill
him before he have defamed us.

And that Churchmen may not in this regard be in worse condition than others,
Tambourin who quotes for himself Dicastillus, Lugo, etc. says, Si alia vis, v.
g. fugiendo, te tutari possis, fugere teneris si dedecori magno tibi suga non
vertitur, ut certe non verteretur si esset Religiosus; non ita si vit sit
nobilis, quamvis sit Clericus, cui dedecus esset se in pedes dare. Dicastillus
lib. 6. decal. cap. 1. sect. 1. number. 6.
That it is lawful for a Gentleman, though he be a Clergie-man, not to fly,
because this would be a shame to him. Tambourin had lived all his life time
amongst Armies, he could not have determined more Souldier-like of the point of
honor. He believes not that a Gentleman in turning Clerk, and renouncing the
world, has renounced the right his Divinity gives him to kill for preservation
of his worldly honor.

It is not sufficient for Vasquez to place worldly honor above other temporal
goods; it seems that he would have it current as the most precious thing among
Christians. And this honor and estimation which he would make so dear and
precious with Christians, is that which depends on the opinion and fancy of
those persons who are of bafest and most contemptible condition in the world,
which are the common Rabble. In populo enim pa^vi haberetur qui similem
injuriam non propelleret.
This honor, says he, is justly of more esteem than money and goods. For he
who repels not this affront, is of no account at all amongst the common people.

The value and love of this worldly honor, is that which we properly call
Ambition and Vainglory. So that when Vasquez says we may kill him who invades
this honor, he gives a liberty and power to sacrifice the lives of men to
ambition and vainglory, it being clear, that we cannot love the honor of the
world so far as to kill men for the preservation thereof, not only without
ambition, but without extraordinary ambition, whereof many ambitious persons
themselves are not capable, having an horror against so barbarous a cruelty.

This very Jesuit, as well as his Fraternity, granting a liberty to kill for
preservation of goods, Omnes intelligunt id quando res quas latro furatur non
sunt minimi pretii, quis pro parvo detrimento non est bonum occidere invasorem.
Ibid. number. 31. page 42.
Provided that what the Thief steals be not of very small value: for it is not
fit to kill him who would take some slight thing. And immediately after, to
mitigate what might seem too severe in this condition, he adds: Sed licetres
pravi-pretil, si tamen ex eo quod dominus illius non cripist illam de manibus
latronis, illi vertatur dedecori, and ille sit homo dignus honor in populo;
potest illum latronem occidere, cum aliud non restat remedium. Ibid.
But though the thing be of small value; yet if he to whom it belongs, be in
the estimation of the people an honorable person, and who will receive some
reproach, if he force it not out of the Thiefs hands, he may kill the Thief if
there be no other remedy.

And that he may leave no doubt at all about this point, he proposes also this
difficulty: Sed dices: Quo tempore licet latronem occidere? Ibid.
Perhaps it will be demanded, after how long time is it lawful to kill a Thief?
He first relates the opinion of those who say, Tan^um licet in ipso flagranti
delicto occidere.
That it is only lawful to kill when he is taken in the fact. And he afterward
concludes with some others who hold on the contrary, that it is lawful to
pursue and kill him. Sed oppositum videtur verius quod potest etiam sugientem
latronem in equo vel alio modo occidere, antequam rem occultet. Ibid.
It seems to me, says he, more true, that seeing a Thief fly away on
horseback or otherwise, it is lawful to kill him before he hides what he has
stolen.

Lessius, as we have seen already, propounds the same case, and resolves it in
the same manner. He speaks as Vasquez of a person that has taken away
something of no value, as an Apple, and will not restore it. He avows that he
deserves not to be killed for that; Si tamen tibi verteretur probro nisi tem
furi extorqueas, pesses conati, and si opus esset, etiam occidere. Lessius de
just. and jur. lib. 2. c. 4. c. 9. d. 114 number. 68. p. 88.
That if it would be a shame to you not to take it out of the Thiefs hands, you
may endeavor to take it from him, and even kill him if it be necessary.

The Stoics taught indeed that it was lawful to kill ones self rather than
lose his honor, and there are many Examples found in the Histories and Books
of the Pagans, of persons commended for having practiced this wicked Maxim.
But I find no moral Rule nor civil Law in all Heathen Antiquity, which ever
tolerated what the Jesuits allow, to kill a man for a thing of so small
importance as an Apple, so often as it falls out that the loss thereof brings
upon us some abatement of worldly honor.

I have not found, I say, in all Heathen Antiquity any Philosophy which has
taught, no Law which has tolerated this, no more than any Example of any
person that ever did it with the approbation of any sage persons. For this
cause the Jesuits may boast truly, that they have passed the bounds, not only
of the Fathers of the Church, as they brag openly, but even of all the Heathen
Philosophers, and to have discovered Principles, and invented Rules of
Morality, which the Pagans destitute of faith, by the light of reason only
would have abhorred and rejected as errors and extravagances.

Nevertheless Vasquez believes that he is obliged to extend this same power of
killing in defense of what belongs to them, unto the Clergy and Monks. It seems
to me, says he, that this is lawful for them as well as the Laity,

The Jesuits content not themselves to allow killing, as we have now seen; they
teach also and note out in particular the ways to do it, Lessius and Molina, as
we have already seen, give herein an entire liberty to do whatsoever we please,
and to take all ways which seem necessary, and which may be most commodious and
easy.

Sanchez descending farther unto particulars, says it is lawful to take the
way of a Duel, if we be expert therein, and think to have advantage thereby:
Quia hoc duellum rationem defensionis cum moderamine inculpatae tutelas induit.
Ea defensio contra invasorem est licits, and pro vita, and pro honor, and pro
rebus etiam tuendis. Sanch. opusc. moral. lib. 2. cap. 29. number. 7. p. 295.
Because, says he, this duelling is accounted a just defense, moderate also
and without excess, and this sort of defense is lawful for the preservation of
life, honor, and goods.

There are Casuists who on these occasions would at least that the Princes
license be had; but Sanchez says that this is not necessary: N^m defensio jure
natutali absque alicujus licentia conceditur. Ibid.
Because Nature gives a right of self-defence without need of demanding any
toleration. And this natural right gives leave to send as well as receive a
Challenge, according to this same Jesuit, who attributes, not without
commendations, this opinion to Bannes, saying, Atque optim^ Bannes ait licere
-- innocenti in his casibus acceptare and offerre duellum ob rationem traditam.
Ibid. Imo non provocando ad duellum, interficere occulte actorem illum
caiumaiosum. Ibid.
That he has very well observed, that in these occurrents the innocent party
may accept or offer combat, if he had not rather deal more securely for himself
by killing him secretly instead of fighting him. Cum haec occisio sit vera
defensio.
Because this slaughter, in what manner soever it be done, is always a true
defense.

And he declares that this right of killing an enemy in secret rather than by
fighting with him, is so strong, that it sometimes passes into an obligation.
Insomuch that he even assures us, Imo been Navarra n. 290. ait teneri
innocentem non acceptare duellum, nec indicere, si potest occulte illum
occidendo id vitae, honeris, fortunarum periculum evadere. Ibid.
That Navarra says very well, that an innocent person ought neither to offer
or accept the combat, if he can kill his enemy privily, and thereby escape that
peril of life, honor, and goods. And he holds, that this obligation proceeds
from the Charity which this innocent person, who commits this secret murder,
owes to himself and him whom he kills. Quippe qui proprium vitae periculum in
duello imminens vitabit, and peccatum actoris offerentis aut acceptantis
duellum. Ibid.
For as much, says he, as by this means he will avoid the imminent danger of
his own life whereunto he had exposed it in fighting a duel, and he will
withhold his Adversary from offending God by giving or accepting the Challenge.

It must be confessed, that this is a strange and unheard of Law of Charity
which obliges to kill our Neighbor and Brother to keep him from offending God,
and to cause him to be slain secretly, for fear that if he be openly set upon,
he should be transported with some excess through a desire to desend himself,
and commit a crime in fighting a duel; and in the mean time to make no
difficulty nor scruple of sending him to Hell by killing him in an estate which
he believes to be criminal and guilty of injustice, which ought surely to be
very great and manifest, since it is taken for the ground and pretense of
killing. It is sufficiently manifest,

Molina proceeds yet farther than Sanchez, or at least he declares himself
better upon this Point. For Sanchez seems not to oblige us to kill our enemy in
our defense no otherwise than by the Charity we owe to our selves, and imposes
not this obligation on other than the innocent, without determining what his
sin would be, if he failed herein. But Molina extends this obligation to every
sort of Superiors, public Persons, and even to many private Persons,
pretending that it is a duty of Justice: and he fears not to say and declare,
that he who fails herein sins mortally. Quando aggrestus persona esset cujus
vita multum Respublicae vel in spiritual ibus vel in temporalibus referret,
teneretur sub reatu culpae lethalis interficere aggressorem si posset, ut vitam
suam conservaret. Molina de just. commu^. tract. 3. disp. 14. page 1754.
When he who is assaulted, says he, is a person whose life is of importance,
and necessary to the Weal public, whether it be in temporals or spirituals, he
is obliged under mortal sin to kill, if be can, the Aggressor, in defense of
his life:

If this Jesuit had been found amongst the Apostles when our Lord said unto
them, that he should be delivered unto the Gentiles, outragiously dealt with,
and put to death, he would have believed without doubt, that he ought to have
opposed himself thereto more forcibly than S. Peter did, who said unto him only
by way of advice and natural affection: Absit a te, Domine, non erit tibi hoc.
Matt. 16. v. 22.
God forbid, Lord, that this should befall thee, this evil shall not be unto
thee. And he would have had no better answer than that which Jesus Christ made
unto S. Peter: Vade post me, Satana, scandalum es mihi, quia non sapis ea quae
sunt Dei, sed quae hominum. Ibid. v 23.
Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not
the things that are of God, but of men.

It must also be observed, that he would have the Commandment to kill an
Aggressor, unless we will sin mortally, not to be only for public persons,
when the public good is in question, but also for private persons, when the
interests of their families are concerned. See here his words: Idem videtur
eff: si ex ipsius morte sequeretur maximum detrime^ tum familiae, ut uxori ac
filiis quos alere tenetur. Molina ibid.
It seems that the same is to be said, if his death would bring some great
prejudice unto his family, as to his wife, his children, whom he is obliged to
sustain.

And for fear that it should be objected to him, that if this man be not
obliged in Justice to expose his life or his goods for his neighbor, that he
might recover him from death eternal and temporal at once, he might at least do
it of Charity; he prevents this objection by saying, Quamvis enim posset cedere
juri suo, permittendo se ab aggressore interfici ne aggressor damnum mortis
temporalis and aeternae incurreret, non tamen posset cedere juri suorum quibus
vit a ipsius est necessaris, and quibus alimenta and protectionem debet, quae a
vita ipsius pendent, Ibid.
That though it might be lawful for him to depart from his right by suffering
himself to be slain by him that assaults him, to prevent his falling into death
temporal and eternal; yet he cannot give away the right of those who belong
unto him, to whom his life is necessary, being obliged to maintain and defend
them. And by consequence he sins mortally in not killing the Aggressor, if he
can, for the preservation of his life.

But why may he not say also of the Head of an Ecclesiastic Body, of the
Superior of an Order, and of all those who have any Charge or Employment in the
Church, Tenetur sub reatu culp^ lethalis interficere aggresscrem, si possit, ut
vitam suam conservet.
That they are obliged under mortal sin, to kill the Aggressor, if they can,
for the preservation of their lives.

The one as well as the other is a consequence of his Principle, and his reason
is stronger for a Head of an Ecclesiastical Body, or Superior of an Order, or a
person who has some Charge in the Church, than for a Secular Magistrate, or a
Father of a Family, it being more true of every one of the former than of the
latter, Est persona cujus vita multum Reipub. in temporalibus and in
spiritualibus refert.
That be is a person whose life is very important to the Weal-publick of the
Church both in temporals and spirituals. Whence it will follow, that we may say
according to the same Jesuit, Tenetur sub reatu culpae lethalis interficere
aggressorem, si p^ssi^, ut vitam suam (...) conservet,
That he sins mortally, if he kill not him that assaults him, if he can, in the
defense of his life.

So that it shall not be in one or two cases only, but in an infinity of
occurrents almost, that this Command of Killing, which Molina would introduce
amongst Christians, shall oblige them under pain of eternal damnation. And it
would not be easy, according to the Doctrine of this Jesuit, to exempt from
mortal sin a multitude of holy Martyrs who have suffered themselves to be slain
unjustly, not only without defending themselves; but also sometimes forbidding
those who could and would to defend them; because some of them being Fathers of
Families, and others Fathers of the Church and of the Faithful, their lives
were of importance both in spirituals and temporals. from the right of those
who appertained to them, and who were under their Charges, whereunto their
lives were necessary. And by consequence if this Jesuit do not show them
favor, and grant them a dispensation from this Rule, they sin mortally in
dying for Jesus Christ, and not defending themselves, and not doing all they
could to preserve their lives, so far as to kill, if it were needful, their
Aggressors.

But if he pretend, that this Commandment is from God, as it ought to be, that
it may imply so great and strict an obligation, we must also believe that the
Law of God is less reasonable and less just than the Maxims of Philosophy, and
the Civil Laws of Pagans, who never commanded nor taught any such thing, and
who rather condemn it in many cases in which the Jesuit approves it, as an
excess and crime; he must therefore be constrained either to change the
Commandments of God, or to increase their number; we must, according to him,
make eleven Commandments of God instead of ten; or indeed instead of what has
been said to this present; Thou shall not kill, we must say for the time to
come: Thou may kill oftentimes without fear of mortal sin, and thou shall
even be obliged sometimes to kill on pain of Hell.

IV. POINT. The Opinion of Escobar concerning Murder.
I Will give all this Article to Escobar, and indeed he deserves it well, for
he is Spokesman for twenty four of the most famous and ancient Divines of the
Society. And he has also handled this subject of Murder very largely, and in
that short Piece of his Epitome he has omitted in a manner nothing of what the
rest have said. So that in his Book, as in an Abridgment, may be seen, what is
diffused through a multitude of great Volumes of his Fraternity.

He proposes many exceptions to the Law of God which forbids killing, of which
the first is this: Malesactores possunt occidi, nocturni, diurni fures, and
alii quicunque malefactores etiam certo damnandi. Escobar tr. 1. exam. 7. cap.
2. number. 2. page 115.
All that do wrong may be killed, as those who rob by night or by day, and all
such as offend us, though we be certain they will be damned, dying in that
estate. In saying all wrong doers, he gives liberty to kill all in general who
hurt us, in what manner soever it be, leaving it to the discretion of private
men to judge whether they deserve death or no.

He expounds himself after more clearly, introducing a person who speaks in
these terms: Quaesierim quanti valoris debeat esse res pro cujus conservatione
possunt furem occidere? Ibid. number. 44. page 122.
Of what price ought the thing to be, for preservation whereof a Thief may be
slain? He answers presently, Non debet esse res parva.
That it ought not to be of small value. But he adds after this exception: Nisi
toleretur cum injuria.
If this turn not to the disgrace of him from whom it is taken. This is the
opinion of Lessius, as we have seen already, and indeed he quotes him.

He relates also the opinion of Molina who holds, Regulariter autem Molina tom.
4. de just. tr. 3. dub. 16. number. 7. unum aureum assignat. Ibid.
That ordinarily if should be a Crown, or of the value of a Crown. So his
general Rule is, that ordinarily we may kill a man, whoever he be, for a Crown.
But he pretends there are extraordinary cases wherein far less does suffice,
and that sometimes it is enough to have taken an Apple, as Lessius says in
express terms, or to have spoken an offensive word, or to have given the lie,
as Escobar assures us after Badel: For proposing this Question: Number liceat
contumeliosum, seu profantem, mentiris, honorato viro, interficere?
Whether it be lawful for an honorable person to skill him who has given him
evil language, or the lie. He answers, At Ba delli lib. 3. dub. 24. number. 24.
putat licitum effe occidere contumeliosum, sed in casu in quo aliter arceri non
potest.
That Badel holds, that it is lawful to kill him who utters reproachful words,
in case he cannot otherwise be repressed.

He gives the same liberty to a Gentleman, against him that threatens him with
a blow of a Cudgel, or a box on the ear, and prepares to smite him; saying,
Aggreditur quis vitum nobilem seu alapa, seu baculo percutere, licebitne ei
pri^s occidere aggressorem? Affirmat Lessius l. ^. cap. 9. dub. 12. number. 77.
If any one attempt to give a box on the ear, or a blow with a Cudgel to a
Gentleman, it is lawful for him to prevent and kill him, according to Lessius.
And if he could not prevent him, he demands, An liceae post impactam alapam,
percutientem Insequi and interimere?
Whether it be lawful for him after he has received a blow on the ear, to
pursue him who smote him, and to kill him? To which he answers, Aliqui negant,
quia id est injuriam vindicare, non defendere.
That some say no; because this is to revenge, and not defend himself. Lessius,
At Lessius lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 12. number. 80. licere existimat speculative, sed
in praxi non consulendum, cb periculum odii, vindictae, excessuum, pugnarum and
caedium, in Republ. perniciem. Alii seclusis his periculis in praxi probabilem
ac tutam judicarunt. Ibid. number. 48. page 123.
who believes that it is lawful in the Theory, though it be not advisable to
practice it, because of the peril of malice, revenge, disorders, duels, and
murders, which may arise from it, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth.

We have already observed before, that all these reasons are humane and
politic: and though they conclude the practice of this Doctrine to be
difficult and dangerous, they are no hinderance but that it may continue always
probable, according to these Authors, and by consequence that it may be
followed with a safe conscience, care being only had to avoid the dangers and
mischiefs that may arise thereupon, as some of those cited by Escobar do
expressly say. That is to say, that according to these Casuists, we may pursue a
person from whom we have received a box on the ear, or some other affront,
without giving over, or being satisfied till we have slain him.

Praevenitine aggrestorpotest aliquando? Potest, ut etiam insidiator. number. 6.
page 115.

Teneturne aggrestus cum dedecore fugere? Minime. Ibid.

Accedit quis ad me pugionem extractutus ad me occidendum, nee possum aliter
mor^em evadere? Potes praeveniendo occidere. number. 38. page 121.


They also teach, that we may prevent the mischief by preventing him who might
do it, and killing him beforehand, without need to attend till he falls upon
you indeed; because it is enough that he seeks occasions, or lays trains
against you.

But if he present himself to fall upon you, though you may save your self by
retiring, you are not obliged thereto, if your flight would be dishonorable.
But if he come near, and lay hand on his Weapon, it is lawful to prevent and
kill him first,

Licetne occidere eum qui non invadit actu, sed decrevit invadere? Docet Molins
de just. tom. 4. tract. 3. dub. 12. number. 2. Ibid. number. 37.
They declare, that it is not needful so much as to attend till he smites us,
or till he puts himself in a posture to do it; that he assall us, or seek
occasions to do it, and that it is enough that he is minded to do it, to give
us power with a safe conscience to prevent the mischief we apprehend, and to
take away an enemies mischievous intention with his life.

Scio falsum testem vel iniquum accusatorem contra justitiam legalem expandere
intendere crimen verum, sed occultum, licerne occidere, si ex to timeam
capitalem sententism, aut notabilem bonorum amissionem? Bannez asserit, dummodo
prius admonitus nolit desistere, and non sit spes evadendi. Ibid. number. 39. page
121.
If any man have committed a crime which is not publicly known, and he knows
that another has a design to inform against him before a Magistrate, if he
fears lest this Accuser should cause him to be condemned to lose his life, or
part of his goods, Escobar gives him, by the Authority of Bannez, liberty to
kill him. He only wills him, that he may not offend against the Laws of
Prudence in doing Justice in this manner, to consider well beforehand whether
there be not some other means to quit himself of this peril, and that by all
means he admonish the Informer to give over his prosecution, that if he refuse,
he may be slain with greater satisfaction of conscience.

Coninck, by the report of Escobar, is not altogether of this opinion, not that
he condemns the opinion which is attributed to Bannez, but on the contrary he
acknowledges, Coninck de act. Supern. d. 32. dub, 2. number. 12. docult, licet
opinio Bannez spectato solo jure naturali sit probabilis; jus tamen positivum
potuisse id ptohibere, and de facto prohibuisse. Ibid.
That it is probable, if we respect the Law of Nature: but he says, that
positive Laws might, and have in effect forbidden it. N^c impunis abit qui
acculatorem and testem praetextu salfitatis, aut injustae very criminis
revelationis, necat. Ibid.
Because he who thus kills a man for being an Informant, or witness against
him, under pretense that he had revealed some crime true, but secret, or even
had accused him falsely, cannot free himself from being punished by the Judge.

So that if one can design his plot so well, and give the blow so secretly,
that he be not known, killing a man in this manner, that he may escape the
chastisement justly due unto the crime he has committed, he has nothing to
fear, according to this Doctrine, neither from the Justice of God nor man.

Escobar also maintains with his Brethren, that it is lawful to kill in defense
of our goods, and he brings their very reason for it, saying, Quia bona externa
medium sunt ad vitae, honoris and status sustentationem. Ibid. n. 43. page 122.
That worldly goods serve to the preservation of life and honor, and for the
support of our state and condition. And to add something to this invention,
which is common to him with his Brethren, he says, Et ideo bona externa vita
and sanguis hominum appellantur.
That it is for this reason that worldly goods are called the life and blood of
men.

But if they be the life of men, they are only so to them that love them, and
who are of the world, and live according to its Maxims. And this speech is
unworthy to proceed from the mouth of a Religious person, and agrees not with
the profession of despising the world and its goods to follow Jesus Christ and
his Gospel. But this Jesuit testifies also, that he speaks as he thinks,

For after he has said that Molina extends this Doctrine, which permits to
kill in preservation of goods, unto the Clergy, he demands, An possit extendi
ad Religiolos, cum proprium nihil habeant? Potest, quia unusquisque habet jus
defendendi, non solum propris, sed ea quae possidet in communi. Ibid. number. 43.
p. 122.
Whether it may be also extended unto Menks, seeing they have nothing of their
own. And he answers, Yes; because all men have a right to defend not only what
every one possesses in particular, but also what they possess in common.

That is to say, that the goods of the Monks are to Monks, as the goods of the
world are to Laymen; and that there is none but this difference advantageous
to Monks; that every private person in the world enjoys only his own propriety;
but in a Monastery every one does not only possess a part of the goods of the
Society, but the whole is common to him with the rest. Whence it follows, that
every Monk has a right to kill him that invades the goods of his house.

He demands a little after, number. 46. if Monks have the same right to kill for
maintenance of their honor, as for defense of their goods. Licitumne Religioso
occidere calumniatorem gravia crimina de sua Religione spargentem, sicut
licitum est cuilibet pro tuendo honor cum moderatione interimere? Ibid. number.
46.
Is it lawful for a Monk to kill a slanderer who publishes great crimes
against his Order, as it is lawful for all men to kill for preservation of
their honor with requisite moderation?

And he says first, P. Amicus; cujus octo de cursu Theologiae volumina nuper
ad meas venere manus, tom. 5. de just. d. 36. sect. 2. number. 118. non audet
sententiae affirmativae adhaerere, ne omnium adversari videatur.
That Amicus durst not hold to the affirmative for fear of seeming to oppose
himself against the common opinion.

He acknowledges that until the time of Amicus, Monks had not yet the liberty
of killing for the preservation of their honor. This Jesuit would gladly give
it them, but he dares not; and that which restrains him, is not consideration
of Justice, but of men and custom. He is not afraid of violating the Law of God
by granting them this dispensation, but of offending the Casuists, and opposing
himself to the common opinion. Ne communi sententiae adversari videatur. In the
mean time he forbears not to propound this opinion which he dares not yet
maintain, and he approves and supports it as much as he can.

His reason for it is, Si Laico, ait, propter honore^ and famam hoc licitum
est, multo magis videtur ^cere Clerico etc Religioso, siquidem professio,
sapientia and virtus, ex quibus hic Clerici and Religiosi honor progignitur,
majoris est quam dexteritas armorum ex qua secularibus honor nasciturs Ibid.
Because if it be lawful for a Layman to kill for the preservation of his
honor and reputation, it seems by stronger reason, that it is lawful also for
a Churchman or Monk. For as much as their profession, wisdom, and virtue, from
which the honor of a Clergie-man or Monk proceeds, is more to be esteemed than
skill in Arms, from whence Laymen draw their honor.

Amieus quoted in this same place by Escobar, adds also to confirm his reason,
that in this the condition of a Monk is altogether equal to a Lay-mans. Cum in
hoc Religiosus and Secularis fint omnino pares. But Escobar forgot these words,
or rather left them out purposely, though they seemed favorable enough to the
design he had of establishing unto Monks the right of killing for honor.
Without doubt he believed that this would debase too much the right of the
Monks in this point, to make them equal to Laymen.

For the right of the Monks being grounded, Amicus, that the right which the
Religious have to kill for honor, being better grounded, should also be
stronger and greater than the Laics. And by consequence he ought not to have
said, that the condition of the one and the other was altogether equal; but it
must be concluded by the Principle and Argumentation of these Jesuits, that in
this the Monks ought to have advantage over the Laics, and that they may kill
with more liberty, and upon less occasion those who invade their honor.

And the reason hereof is clear. Because the more precious honor is, the more
easy it is to hurt it, and the fault of him that does it, is the greater; and
as offenses which are slight, being done against private persons, are very
great, and deserve exemplary chastisement, being done against the honor of a
Prince or a King; so an injury which would not be considerable against the
person of a Laick, would be criminal, being done against a Monk, to blast his
or his Orders reputation.

By this Rule it is easy to judge how far this pretended right may be
extended;

And if it be lawful for a Layman to kill for a matter of small value, licet
sit res parvi pretii, as Vasquez says, by example, for an Apple or a Crown, ut
pro pomo, vel etiam uno aureo servando, as says Lessius, as we have seen; when
a man's honor is concerned in the taking these things from him, we must confess
that a yet lesser occasion, if a less can be had than an Apple or a Crown, will
suffice, according to this Divinity, to give the same toleration to a Monk. We
need only look surlily upon him, do or say the least thing to offend him, to
incur his displeasure, and thereupon to dye by his hand, if he please to make
use of this right which the Jesuits attribute unto him, as they also usurp it
themselves, and pretend they may use it, as we shall see in the following
Point, where we relate the Opinion of Father Petavius upon this matter.

V. POINT. The Conformity of the Jesuits, who in our days have taught in their
Colleges, with the more Ancient, in the Doctrine of Murder.
THis Doctrine having been invented and established partly by the most ancient
and most considerable Divines of the Company of Jesuits, as we have now seen in
the preceding Points, their Authority has given such credit and such a current
to it amongst their Fraternity, that passing thus from one to another, as a
Tradition of the Society, it has been ever since maintained by their Schools,
and is propagated unto our days without any interruption. On the contrary, it
has by succession of time received a notable increase, and far greater
Authority by the multitude of those who have followed it, the later always
endeavoring to add something, and to augment the inheritance of their Fathers,
by expounding and extending more and more the bloody and inhumane Maxims which
they had left them on this subject.

For some years this Doctrine has also been taught in diverse places of this
Realm, in many Colleges of the Jesuits at the same time, and many years
together in the same Colleges. Father Flachaut and Father Le Court have taught
it at Caen, and in teaching it, have been transported to all excess which
therein could be committed. I will only report here one or two passages of one
of these two Casuists, faithfully extracted out of his Writings, which have
been verified by public Authority, by the diligence of the Rector of the
University of Paris, Lessius and others have propounded upon this subject. See
here his own words. Dico 5. probabiliter licitum esse cuivis, etiam Clerico and
Religioso, per se loquendo, and semoto scandalo, occidere furem fugientem,
etiam non resistentem, ferentem res tuas pretiosas, puta equum, and praesertim
Ecclesiae, si aliter recuperare nequces.
I say that it is probably lawful for all sorts of persons, even for
Clergymen and Monks, speaking absolutely, and setting aside scandal, to kill
a Thief who flies, though he make no resistance, when he takes away some
precious thing, as a Horse; especially Churchgoods, and which he cannot
otherwise recover.

Itemque licitum esse occidere fugientem, si id necessarium sit ad defensionem
honoris tui notabiliter amittendi.
I say moreover, that it is lawful to kill a Thief who flies, if it be
necessary to the preservation of mine honor therein notably concerned.

Denique licet volentem te percutere leviter, occidere, ubi id insignis est
injuria, praesertim in Nobilibus, nimirum accepta alapa, gladio percutere
statim ad vitandam ignominiam, conservandumque honorem. Ita docti permulti.
Finally it is lawful, especially for Gentlemen, to kill him who is minded to
smite them, though slightly, if the injury and dishonor they receive thereby
be remarkable; so after they have received a box on the ear, they may presently
strike with the Sword to avoid disgrace, and preserve their honor. This is the
opinion of many learned men.

These learned men are Molina, Lessius, Sanchez, and others whom we have
produced in the foregoing Points, as the Authors and Fathers of this Doctrine,
since they have confessed themselves, that they found it not in the Books of
other Divines, at least as to certain the most important Propositions.

The same Casuist says, E duobus mediis licitis illud videtur eligendum quod
tutius est ex part ejus qui seipsum defendit, ad vitandam certam mortem,
ejusve certum periculum.
Because of two ways which are both lawful, it seems that ought to be preferred
which is most secure for the defendant, that he may avoid evident peril or
death it self. And a few lines after, he adds, Haec intelligenda sunt in foro
fori, quod dicitur forum Dei and conscientlae. Nam in foro litigioso ubi lecus
est praesumptionibus ita praeveniens actorem injustum haberetur reus homicidii,
nisi seipsum purgaret.
That all this ought to be understood in the sovereign and inward Court of God
and Conscience. For in the outward Court which proceeds according to forms of
Justice, and considers presumptions and conjectures, he who should thus prevent
his Adversary how injurious soever, would be condemned as a Murderer, if he
could not clear himself.

As if Gods Law did not forbid Murder as strongly as those of men, and it were
lawful to abuse his goodness by fearing him less than his Creatures; because
his Justice does not commonly punish with so great severity and speed as that
of the Princes of the Earth.

This Jesuit raises yet another Question, whether one may kill a person from
whom he yet never received any displeasure, Respondeo nihilominus cum quibusdam
probabiliter id licere. Propterea quod hoc praecepto, Non occides, non
prohibetur absolute omnis occisio innocentis, sed cum limitatione, ne videlicet
indebite and sine justa causa fiat. Sicut docet S. Thomas 1. 2. q. 100. a. 3.
Ista autem occisio non fit sine justissima causa and urgentissima, qualis est
conservatio propriae vitae.
That according to the opinion of some others, which is also his own, it is
probable that this is lawful; because this Commandment, Thou shall not kill,
forbids not absolutely to kill an innocent; but with this exception, not to
kill him without obligation and just cause, according as S. Thomas speaks. Now
in this case he that kills, does it not without just and very urgent reason,
such as is the preservation of his own life.

This reason may be extended yet farther. For hence it will follow, that
liberty may be taken to kill an innocent, not only to preserve life, but honor
and goods; and if he should be blamed, who had done it, he may allege for his
justification, that if he had not done this, he had been ruined in estate and
honor, whereof the one is necessary to life, and the other more dear than life
it self; and he will say as the Casuist here: Ista occisio non fit sine
justissima causa and urgentissima.

Tambourin has very lately caused the same thing to be imprinted. If any one,
says he, assault you, and make use of an innocent person to shelter him, you
may kill him, that you may hit him who invades you.

Escobar is of the same opinion, tr. 1. ex. 7. number. 52. page 121. and Lessius
whom he quotes, Si is qui invaditur non posset se tueri nisi cum periculo
innec^ntis quo invasor se protegit, utrum and liceat cum eo periculo se
defendere?
It is demanded, whether if a person assanlted cannot secure himself but by
hazarding the death of an innocent wherewith the Aggressor covers himself, he
may defend himself notwithstanding that hazard? He answers, Respondeo
probabilius esse posse. Lesstus de just. lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 9. number. 57. page
86.
That it is more probable he may. He afterward proposes the same case in
another fashion. Petes si fugiens hostem non possit evadere ulsi per angustum
iter ubi proteret infantem vel claudum; poteritne illac sugere ut se salvet?
Suppose, says he, that a man flies from his enemy, and he cannot escape but
through some strait way wherein he will crush to death some infant or lame
person, it is demanded, whether he may take that way to save himself?

He answers first, Petrus Nivarra negat, nisi sit aliqua probabilis spes non
interficiendi.
That Navarra says that he may not, unless he have probable hopes not to kill
him. But though this be always a great injustice to hazard the life of an
innocent, over whom we have no power, to secure our own; yet this satisfies not
Lessius, who outvying Navarra, adds, Sed revera videtur eadem ratio quae in
casu superiori. Ibid. number. 59.
That in truth it seems that we ought to say the very same thing of this case
as of the former. That is, that as to save my life I may kill an innocent with
my own hand; so one may ride over him, though we be assured that he will dye
thereof.

His reason is, Q^ia qui invaditur jus habet se defendendi, quo jure non
privatur ex illa innocentis interpositione.
Because he who is assaulted has right to defend himself, and that his meeting
with, or the interposure of an innocent does not take from him this right.
Which is no other than an application of the general Maxim whereon he grounds
all this Doctrine of Murder under pretense of defending life, honor, and
goods: which is, Jus defensionis videtur se extendere ad id omne quod est
necessarium ut te ab omni injuria serves immunem.
That this pretended right of self-defence is generally extended to whatsoever
is necessary to secure ones self from all injuries.

But he gives a charitable advice to temper a little these answers, if they be
found too rigorous. That is to consider, Adverte tamen primo, si potes fugere,
teneris saltem ex charitate, ne innocentem interficies. Ibid. number. 58.
That we are obliged, at least by Charity to fly, if we can, for fear of
killing an innocent. But this language, as we have already observed elsewhere,
according to the Principles of the Jesuits Divinity, is not intended to
signify any more than that if being assaulted, you can fly without any
inconvenience to you, rather than kill an innocent, in your defense, you shall
do well, though you are not obliged to it absolutely, and in doing the
contrary, you cannot be blamed of any injustice. This is that which the same
Lessius says in another case. Si tamen nolis fugere, non peccab's contra
justitiam.
If notwithstanding you will not fly, you sin not against Justice.

All this murderous Doctrine has also been taught at Paris in the College of
Clermont by Father Hereau, under the view and with the approbation of the
Superiors and Chief of the Society. For he demands: An si nomini meo falsis
criminationibus apud Principem, J^c^m, vel vi^es h^ eratos (...) nicaris, (...)
ulla ratione possim hoc damnum famae avertere nisi te occulte interficiam, id
licite possum? P. Hereau.
If when any one endeavors to defame me before a Prince, a Judge, or Persons
of Honor by false reports, and I cannot by other means prevent him from
causing me to lose my reputation than by killing him secretly, I may do it with
a good conscience? This is the same Question which Lessius has already
proposed before, and others with him. And he gives also thereto the self same
answer. Affirmat] Bannez q. 64. a. 7. d. 14. addens id dicendum, etiam si
crimen sit verum, dummodo occultum sit, its ut secundum justitiam legalem non
possit pandere.
Bannez, says he, believes it,

A crime can never be more strongly authorized than by allowing another to be
committed to conceal it, and giving liberty to kill a man who has knowledge of
it, when there is fear that he will utter it.

The reason of this Casuist is, Quia si baculo vel alapa imp^cts velis honorem
meum vel famam violare, possum armis prohibere. Ergo etiam si id coneris
lingua, nec aliter possim evadere nisi te occidam, parum id videtur refer,
cum aeque lingua atque allo instrumento mihi nociturus es.
Because if you profess that you will take away my honor or reputation by
striking me with a Cudgel, or giving me a box on the ear, I may oppose you with
Arms; and by consequence if you endeavor to do it with your tongue, I may make
use of the same means when I cannot save my self otherwise than by taking away
your life. For the difference is of small moment, whethersoever of these two
ways you assail me, since as much mischief may be done with the tongue as any
other instrument.

If this reason and this bloody Maxim be current amongst men in our days, as
this Jesuit seems desirous to make it, by giving it his stamp, and teaching it
in his public Lectures, no man can be sure of his life, or rather there will
hardly be any person left alive in this world, wherein defamations serve for
common entertainment, and a flouting humor goes for a virtue.

He alleges also this other reason which is more general. Deinde jus
defensionis extendit se ad omne quod est necessarium ut se quis ab omni injuria
servet immunem.
The right of self-defence is extended to all that is necessary to secure ones
self from all sorts of injuries. He took this reason from Lessius, which we
have already examined, Monendus tamen prius esset detractor ut desisteret, and
si noller, ratione scandali, non effet aperte occidendus, sed clam.
That it were good to admonish this Detractor before we kill him, that he
should desist from his bad intention; and if he will not do it, not to kill him
publicly, for avoiding scandal, but in secret:

The Jews had this same consideration, and said in a manner the same thing when
they were upon the demand of the death of Jesus Christ, and yet would not for
all that have him put to death on the Feast Day for fear of scandal and tumult.
Et quaereant Summi Saberdotes and Scricae quomodo eum dolo tenerent and
occidereat: Dicebant autem, Non in die festo, ne forte tumultus fieret in
populo. Marci 14. v. 12.
The chief Priests and Scribes, says S. Mark, sought means to take him by
subtilty, and put him to death; but they said, This must not be done on the
Feastday, lest it should cause a tumult amongst the people.

I will put an end to this Chapter, and close it with some remarkable places of
a Book which Father Petavius caused to be printed some years since, of Public
Penance. For writing after those whom we have already quoted, and seeing he
could add nothing to the licentiousness of their opinions about Murder, he was
minded to signalize and make himself remarkable above all others, by showing
himself more audacious than they in the practice and execution of what they had
taught.

This Doctrine is of it self so far distant from all reason and humanity, that
the greater part of themselves who would have it pass for true, or at least for
probable,

Perhaps there will be none found besides Father Petavius, who transgressing
all bounds of moderation, is not content to maintain, as others, that this
Doctrine, which teaches Murder, is probable, or to approve it in the practice;
but he requires and presses the execution of it, and pursues it with all
extremity of heat against a Doctor and Priest whom he acknowledges
unreproachable in his life, and who could not be criminal in that point upon
which he pursues him, if not in this, because he being obliged in Charity and
of necessity to reprove some defaults of the Jesuits conduct in the
administration of the Sacraments of Penance and the Eucharist; that which this
Doctor of Sorbonne said, was not pleasing to him, nor his Brethren.

He would cover his inhumane passion with a veil of imaginary good intention.
He would have his aversion against an innocent person,

He goes yet farther, and to rid his hands of his Adversary more easily, he
shows a desire, that the invention of a famous Lawgiver might be followed, who
ordained, That if any one would change and innovate any thing in the received
Laws, he should present himself with a Halter about his neck, cast into a
running knot, and having in this manner proposed his reasons in opposition to
them, if they were judged equitable, the Law should be abolished or moderated,
and the proposer come off safe; but if his overture were not consented to, he
should be strangled immediately, and so undergo the penalty due unto his
unadvisedness This course, says he, may seem too rigorous, but the intent is
commendable; nay, it is necessary for them in whose hands the Government now
is. By this discourse it is easy to conclude, according to this Fathers
Morals, that Dr. Arnauld, having proposed a Doctrine contrary to that which is
in credit amongst the Jesuits, deserved death, and that he should do no other
than a very laudable act who should draw the running knot about his neck to
strangle him; nay, that it is necessary for them who have the Government in
their hands to act thus, and to make themselves the instruments of the passions
and interests of these Fathers.

It is an incredible thing, that a Priest, a Monk, and a Christian durst speak
in this sort, and durst rise up in a manner so cruel and shameful against a
Priest and Sorbonne Doctor. But it is more incredible, that he would extend
this fury, as he makes show of against so many Bishops and Doctors who approved
his Book of frequent Communion,

It must be avowed, that those who have allowed Murders, who have given liberty
to dispatch enemies by killing them, were never transported to so great excess,
and that there are few men who have in their whole lives committed so great and
abominable homicides, as this Father, so good and gentle, has a will to do
with his own hand.

I speak not here, though this seems to be its place, of that detestable
Doctrine which teaches Subjects to kill their Kings, under pretense of their
being Tyrants; women great with child, to cause the fruit in their wombs to
perish, when they cannot be delivered thereof without endangering their lives;
young Maidens defloured, to expose their children to save their credit, which
is the Jesuits Doctrine. I shall represent all these things more conveniently,
when I shall come to speak in particular of the Duties of every person
according to his condition.

I will only observe here, that if the Murder which is committed in all these
cases, and in all others which we have formerly related, and extracted out of
the Jesuits Books, be not against the Commandment of God which forbids to kill,
as the Jesuits maintain; it will not be easy to imagine on what occasion one
may possibly break that Commandment, or make himself criminal in the violation
thereof, if he may kill an enemy, a slanderer, a thief, an invader, an informer
in false crimes, and even in true ones, but secret, and which is yet more an
innocent person, and from whom he never received any displeasure; an Infant, a
Prince,

If he may challenge into the field, assassinate publicly, kill by surprise or
upon advantage, cause to dye secretly, by poison, or otherwise for the
preservation of his life, honor, or goods, and even for the least thing in the
world, as for an Apple, when he believes himself obliged in honor not to let
him carry it away who has taken it.

I say, if one may kill, or cause to be killed in all these cases without
punishment or sin, as the Jesuits teach publicly, it will necessarily follow,
that according to their Maxims, for a man to make himself criminal against the
Commandment which forbids Murder, he must kill in a frolic, and without any
true or apparent cause. Which cannot be suitable to any but Devils, and those
that have a diabolick malice.

ARTICLE V. Of Uncleanness, which the Jesuits allow against the Command of God
and natural Reason.
THe Jesuits allow almost every thing in this matter, excepting the last act of
this sin; and it would be even hard to justify according to their Maxims and
Reasons, that they condemn it at all in good earnest, since they approve, as we
shall see presently, and discharge from all crime all the ways and means that
conduce to that end, as lewd company, impudent discourses, kisses, looks,

I know not whether we may not fear after what Father Tambourin has written,
lest the Jesuits should at length affirm, that Fornication may be lawful. See
here his words. Fornicationem esse peccatum mortale, and contrariuni afferete
esse haereticum decretum est in Clement. Ad nostram. De haereticis. Sed an sit
solum prohibita jure positivo an etiam jure natureli; atque adeo ex se sit
intrinsece mala, quaeritur a Doctoribus. Et Durandus quidem, Mardnus de
Magistris, Caramuel, aliique putant esse solum ex jure positivo. Verum communis
and omnium fere Doctorum sententia docet esse de lege naturali. Mihi vero duo
sunt certs. Primo hanc communem esse veram sententiam: Secundo data hac
veritate, dicendum a nobis esse dari rationem naturalem id certo probantem, sed
ingenue fateri nos debere eam a priori nondum clare esse compertam. Ita solemus
respondere cum de coeli quibusdam occultis, cum de quadratura circuli, aliisque
similibus etiam in Philosophia disputamus; ea nimitum certa esse, certisque
rationibus posse probari, verum eas nondum adhuc fuisse manifest ab ullo
proposi as. Dixi a priori; nam a posteriori satis manifest probatur,
praesertim ex eo quod si non esset jure naturali prohibita, in aliquo tandem
urgentissimo casu postet in ea dispensari, quod nullo modo dici potest.
Tambourin. lib. 7. decal. cap. 1. sect. 2. number. 1.
It is defined by the Clementine Ad nostram: De Haereticis. That Fornication is
a mortal sin, and that to say the contrary, is an Heresy. But whether it be
forbidden by positive or natural Law; and by consequent whether it be evil in
it self, is a question amongst the Doctors. Durand, Martinus de Magistris,
Caramuel, and some few others believe that it is forbidden by positive Law
only. But the common opinion and of almost all the Doctors is, that it is
forbidden by the Law of Nature -- As for me I hold two things for certain.
First; that the common opinion is true. Secondly, that this truth being
presupposed, we must say, For we say, that these things are certain, and that
they may be proved by demonstrative reasons, but no man has yet propounded
them. I say, the Principle whence this Conclusion is drawn. For if the
consequences of it be considered, it may be proved manifestly enough,
principally from this, that if it were not forbidden by the Law of Nature, it
might be granted by dispensation in some very pressing occasions, which cannot
be said in any wise.

It is easy to see whither this reasoning tends. Dari posse ignorantiam
invincibilem circa praeceptum non fornicandi, saltem apud Barbaros and
incultos, probabile est. Ita Azor, Fagundes, quia non admodum manifest illud
deducitur ex primis principils luminis naturalis. number. 10.
It is probable, says he, that one may be invincibly ignorant of the precept
which forbids fornication, at least amongst barbarous and gross-witted persons.
This is the opinion of Azor and Fagundez. The reason is, because this precept
is not drawn manifestly from some first principle of natural light.

He says first of all, that many Doctors, whom he cites, hold, that
Fornication is forbidden only by positive Law; and by consequent this opinion
is probable, according to him, being supported by the Authority of these
Doctors, who without doubt are not destitute of reasons to prove it.

In the second place he says, the Principle from whence we may infer, that
Fornication is evil in it self, and forbidden by the Law of Nature, is not
evident; that it cannot be found, or at least wise not clearly discovered.
Whence it follows,

In the third place, though it should continue always less probable, it is
enough that it is simply probable, since the least or last degree of
probability suffices to be followed with a safe conscience, according to these
Doctors.

4. Whence it follows evidently, that he who shall be of Tambourins opinion,
may absolutely demand and receive a dispensation for Fornication, as well as
for fasting, because it is at least probable, according to him, that neither
the one nor the other is forbidden, but only by positive Law; and where things
are not evil, save only in regard they are forbidden, one may with some reason,
and even without any reason, according to some Casuists, obtain and make use of
a dispensation for it.

5. Tambourin has foreseen this inconvenience and disorder, and confesses
openly enough, that it follows from his opinion in the manner he propounds, and
that he maintains it when he says, Si non esset jure naturali prohibits,
in^liquo tandem urgentissimo casu posset in ea dispensari. Tambur. lib. 7.
decal. cap. 1. sect. 2. number. 1.
That if for want of an evident Principle, which he confesses it has not, one
would prove it by consequences, it may be proved manifestly enough, (he speaks
of Fornication) it might be indulged by dispensation.

He produces here as a principal reason which may prove it, or rather as a
conjecture which may make it believed, that Fornication is forbidden by the Law
of Nature, because we cannot have a dispensation to commit it. And some other
time, if the world be better disposed than at present, he himself or his
Society building upon the same Principles with him, may easily prove, that it
may be dispensed with; because it is not evident that it is forbidden by the
Law of Nature, and that it is even probable, that it is only by positive Law,
as he declares it himself. And so Fornication shall be in the number of things
indifferent; and it may be lawful, when it pleases them to employ their
Authority and their reasons, to take away the prohibition which alone renders
it evil and criminal.

And it seems that he would prepare before hand, as it were at distance, men's
minds one day to receive this unhappy Doctrine, when he says in the end of the
Section, Dari posse ignorantiam invincibilem circa praeceptum non fornicandi,
salcem apud Barbaros and incultos, probabile est. Ita Azor, Fagundez -- quia
non admodum manifest illud deducitur ex primis principils luminis naturalis.
number. 10.
That it is probable that there may be invincible ignorance of the precept
which forbids Fornication, at least amongst Barbarians and gross-witted people.
This is the opinion of Azor and Fagundez. The reason whereof is, because this
precept is not manifestly drawn from the first Principles of the light of
Nature.

He also said once,

This permission which he grants to commit Fornication by ignorance, is as it
were, a presumption and proof, that Fornication may be committed, according to
him, by dispensation, since the one follows as well as the other from his
reasoning, and is grounded upon the same foundation, which he establishes or
supposes here in this place: That there is no evident Principle drawn from the
light of Nature, by which it may be demonstrated, that Fornication is evil in
it self, and forbidden by the Law of Nature.

And this same reason proves also, that he holds Fornication not to be
forbidden by the Law of God. For no man can dispense any more with the Law of
God than with the Law of Nature. So that if Fornication were not forbidden by
the Law of Nature, nevertheless it could not be dispensed with, if it were
forbidden by the Law of God; and so whilst he maintains, that if the Law of
Nature forbad it not, it might be lawful in some case by dispensation from men:
he testifies clearly, that he believes not that it is forbidden by the Law of
God.

Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 46. page 717. assures us, That they who in the places
of their Trade and Commerce are obliged to see, speak, and treat with young
Maids, and Women, whose sight and company causes them oftentimes to fall into
sin, are capable in this perpetual danger of being in a state of Grace, and of
receiving the Sacrament.

Layman affirms indeed in general, that we are obliged to fly the next
occasions of sin, but he adds thereto these exceptions: Excipe nisi proquinquum
periculum seu occasio mortaliter peccandi, sine gravi incommodo corporis,
famae, aut fortunarum tolli non possit; tunc consilium quidem est minorem illam
jacturam majori bono securitatis animae posthabere. Layman lib. 5. tract. 6.
cap. 4. number. 9.
Unless it be so that this peril and next occasion of sinning mortally, cannot
be removed without undergoing some notable incommodity in body, reputation, or
goods. For in this case there is an advice, but no command to forgo the lesser
for the greater good, and to make less account of our temporal commodity than
of the security and Salvation of our Souls.

There is no person, how engaged soever he be in the next and most dangerous
occasions of sin, who may not always take for pretense to abide therein, some
one of these reasons, and therefore none will ever believe himself obliged to
avoid them.

Lessius speaking of lewd Discourses, says, that it is only a venial sin to
hear or utter them, Si solum fiat ob voluptatem quae praecise ex ipsa
narratione capitur absque ulteriore intention, est peccarum veniale. Lessius
de just. lib. 4. cap. 3. dub. 8. number. 63. page 688.
though we take pleasure in them, provided we have some other intention besides
the pleasure we take therein. He might say as much of an idle word, or of an
inconsiderate discourse spoken at random.

And a little after,

He declares then, that in the first sort of pleasure there is no sin at all.
And his reason is, Si priore modo delectatio percipitur, non est per se
peccatum; quia delectatio sequitur conditionem operis ex quo naseltur. Talls
enim est delectatio quale est opus ex quo nascitur, juxta Aristotelem 10. Eth.
cap. 4. Est enim quiddam necessario ex operatione nobis congrua resultans.
Atqui opus ex quo nascitur non est malum sed bonum, vel quid indifferens,
nimirum notitia veritatis, vel rei rarae aut admirandae visio; quam notitiam
and visionem homines magni aestimant; etiamsi objectum circa quod versatur
maxim execren^ur. Ibid. dub. 15. number. 108. page 698.
Because the pleasure is of the same nature with the action from whence it
proceeds. For it is like unto this action, as says Aristotle in the 10. of
his Ethics, cap. 4. and it is a necessary consequent of every operation which
is agreeable unto us. Now the operation from whence this pleasure issues, is
not bad, but good, or at least indifferent, to wit, the knowledge of the truth,
or the view of any rare and admirable thing, which men esteem very much, though
they abhor the object of this knowledge and view.

Hoc modo delectantur homines lectione vel natratione praeliorum, duellorum,
and reruth admirandarum quae per artem magicam fiunt, vel little quae percinent
ad opus generationis and conceptum prolis. Ibid.
The things, the knowledge whereof men so much esteem, and which they take so
much pleasure to behold, or to entertain themselves with, are, as he says
himself, Combats, Duels, Enchantments of Magicians, the Generation of Beasts or
men, and every thing that belongs to that action. So that, according to him,
the thoughts of all these things, though a man entertain himself with them
voluntarily and with pleasure, and even for the pleasures sake which he
relishes therein, will be no sin. For he concludes all his Argumentation in
these words: Ergo talis delectario non est de se mala.
This pleasure is not evil in it self.

He might have said more, and infer from the Principle which he says is
Aristotle's, that this sensual pleasure not only is no sin, but it is also
commendable and honest, since the object he has given it, is good and honest,
namely, the knowledge of the truth: Nempe notitia veritatis.

The only condition then which he demands, that we may entertain our selves
innocently with the thoughts of these things, is that we stay not at the
pleasure alone which arises from these thoughts; and that we think not of what
may come from the thing, or the wicked and dishonest action we think on.

I will not stay to examine this imaginary condition in moral matters, any more
than the Metaphysical distinction and abstraction whereupon it is grounded. I
will only say, that to declare unto any person that he may take pleasure in any
filthy thought, provided that he respect not the filthy object that this
thought represents unto him, or that he be not touched with the pleasure which
comes from it naturally; is as if one should say, that one may stand before a
fire, provided he be not heated, and pass through the dirt, provided he be not
defiled.

Common sense only and continual experience show sufficiently,

As for Kisses, Lessius propounds a Question in this manner: Dissicultes est de
osculo quatenus ipsum per se est actus delectabilis carni, and remote disponens
ad seminationem: utrum fi quis hac ratione illo uraturs non intendende
ulteriorem voluptatem; p^cces mortaliter. Ibid. dab. 8. number. 58. page 687.
There is some difficulty about Kisses, being considered as actions in
themselves agreeable to the flesh, and disposing, though afar off, unto
pollution; to wit, whether in using them in this manner, without having an
intention to pass any farther in sensual pleasure, we sin mortally? He answers
first, according to the opinion, which is, as he says himself, the more common
in the Schools; that there is mortal sin in Kisses which are taken in this
manner, and he testifies that he does approve it. Communis sententia est in
istis esse peccatum mortiferum, quae and mihi probatur, tum quia communior, tum
quia tutius est ut omnia ista quam maxim vitentur; tum quia saepe periculum
est ulterioris consensus vel morosae delectationis, vel etiam pollutionis,
ratione temperamenti aut peculiaris dispositionis corporis. Quam ob causam
expedit in hujusmodi non esse laxum. Unde etiam inter sponsos censeo plane esse
dissuadenda, si causa voluptatis fiant.
First, because this opinion is the more common. In the second place, because
it is the safer course to remove our selves as far as we can from these things.
In the third place, says he, it is expedient not to be too loose in these
things. Whence he infers, that these kisses must be absolutely forbidden unto
persons betrothed.

But a little after he grants them as innocent and lawful things to the
betrothed themselves. For having made this Objection on the behalf of those who
are of the contrary opinion: Sponsis conceditur ea voluptas quae praecise ex
osculo and contactu manus vel faclei percipitur; ita ut ne venialiter quidem in
eo peccet. Ibid. number. 59.
It is allowed unto persons betrothed to enjoy the pleasure they take in
kissing, or touching the hands or faces of one another, so that herein they sin
not so much as venially. He answers, affirming this Proposition, Sponsis
conceditur, quia est signum copulae futurae, in quam ratione matrimonii
consentire quodammodo possunt. number. 59.
That it is allowed to betrothed persons, because this is a sign of the carnal
conjunction which is to be afterward, whereunto they have in some sort a right
to consent by reason of Marriage.

He allows them the same kisses, which he had before condemned of mortal sin,
according to the more common Doctrine and his own opinion. And which is yet
more strange and extravagant, he has allowed these unto them for the same
reason for which he had said above, that they could not be allowed them. This
is granted, says he, to persons betrothed; because it is a sign of the future
carnal conjunction, whereunto they have in some sort a right to consent by
reason of Marriage. And a little above he had said: Etiam inter sponsos suadeo
plane dissuadenda. Quia osculum ut est delectabile carni, natura sua est signum
copulae vel instantis, vel futurae, ut etiam ex usu animalium constar. Itaque
in co contineri videtur tackus quidam consensus in copulam. Ibid. number. 59.
My advice is, that we ought wholly to divert from them, even persons betrothed
themselves,

I leave it to his Brethren to undo these contradictions. I will only observe
here farther that he assures us, that betrothed persons may take pleasure, and
consent in some sort to the action of Marriage, which they shall exercise when
they are married; as if it were lawful to enjoy a right which we have not yet,
and even which we shall never have; Marriage giving us only a power to do what
is necessary for the begetting of children, and not to hunt after shameful
pleasures, and the satiating of lust.

Layman has taught the same thing. For taking the difficulty at the highest,
he puts this general Question: An sit mot tale peccatum morosae delectationis,
si conjux absente conjuge delecter se cogitatione copulae maritalis. Eademque
quaestio proponi solet de vidus oblectante se recordatione copulae praeteritae.
Idem de sponso defiderante vel oblectante se in copula futura. Layman lib. 1.
tract. 3. cap. 6. number. 12. page 41.
Whether a married person commit mortal sin by a too long continued delight
taken in dishonest pleasures of mind, when in the absence of his Bedfellow he
entertains himself with the thoughts of the pleasure which arises from the use
of the Marriage Bed? The same Question is commonly made concerning a Widow
entertaining her self with the remembrance of pleasures past, and a Spouse who
desires and fore-tastes as it were by way of advance that which he shall have.
He answers, Dico 1. conjux mortaliter non peccat si de maritali copula absente
conjuge cogitans, tem cogitaram voluntary approbet, five de ea gaudeat.
That a Husband and Wife sin not mortally, when at a distance from one another,
they think of the action of Marriage, and admit and entertain this thought with
pleasure and joy.

Sanchez to maintain that all sorts of persons indifferently may voluntarily
continue and with complacence in the thoughts of pleasure which they might have
with any woman whatsoever she be, if they were married together. Quod idem
Sanchez lib. 1. moral. cap. 2. number. 33. and Filliur. cap. 1. extendunt ad omnem
volupraris affectionem, etiam simplicis complacentiae conceptae ex cogitatione
concubitus cum mulitre, si uxor esser. Ibid.


It is easy to see, that there are no filthy and dishonest desires which may
not be justified by these distinctions and subtilties, which are of no use but
to corrupt minds, and to give them liberty to commit without ceasing an
infinite of Fornications, Adulteries, and Incests within themselves without any
scruple of conscience.

As for Pollution, Lessius maintains, that it may be desired when any good is
expected from it. His words are: Dico 3. prebabile est licitum esse illam
desiderare simplici affectu causa alicujus boni effectus cum ca conjuncti, v.
c. causa sanitatis, sedandae tentationis, obtinendaetranquillitatis animi.
Lessius de just. lib. 4. cap. 3. d. 14. n. 104. page 697.
It is probable that it may be desired with a simple affection, by reason of
some good effect which may thereby be produced; as health, deliverance from
temptation, and repose of mind.

Tolet says the same thing more clearly: Si quis desiderat pollutionem eb
bonum finem, scllicet saninatem, vel ad levandas carnls tentationes quibus
interdum affligitur, non est peccatum. Tolet lib. 5. cap. 13. number. 4. page 772.
Sa verbo Luxuria number. 11. page 449. Sanchez moral. lib. 1. cap. 2. number. 18.
page 7. Escobar tr. 1. exam. 8. number. 95. page 154.
If any one desire pollution for some good end, as for his health, or that he
may be quit of some fleshly temptations which are a trouble to him oftentimes,
it is no sin. Emanuel Sa, Sanchez, and Escobar are of the same opinion.
Inchoatam in somno pollutionem non tenetur quis evigilans reprimere.
That a person who in his sleep begins to fall into pollution, is not obliged
to repress it when he awakes. This he takes for certain in his Divinity; and
then demands, what is to be said to it, Quid si gaudeat de llia pollutione, vel
opter evenire? Si gaudear vel opter, non ob delectationem, sed propter
sanitatem, vel ad sedandas tentationes, nec peceatum quidem veniale est.
If he be well pleased with this pollution, and desire it? His answer is, Quia
quod licitum est desiderare ut fiat, licitum est etiam eo gaudere quod factum
fit, and contra, si sas gaudere de facto, etiam licitum erit desiderare ut
fiat. Haec enim sunt ejusdem moris. Nam gaudium resultat necessario ex bono
desiderato obtento, and supponit, vel implicit desiderium includit. Lessius
supra number. 105.
That if he be pleased with this pollution, and desire it, not because of the
pleasure, but because of his health, or to appease temptations, it is not so
much as a venial sin.

Lessius gives the reason why the one and the other are lawful, to wit, to
desire pollution, and rejoice in it. (6) Because, says he, when it is lawful
to desire a thing to come to pass, it is also lawful to rejoice in it when it
does come to pass. For these things are of the same nature, according to the
Rules of Morality; because delight follows necessarily from the enjoyment of
the good we desire, and it presupposes and contains in it the desire of this
good.

He seems to set pollution in the rank of good things, since he finds the
desire thereof and delight taken therein to be good, saying, Nam gaudium
resultat necessario ex bono denderato obtento.
That delight follows necessarily from the fruition of the good desired. And
indeed if pollution were not a good action, or at least indifferent, his
Argument were nothing worth. For as he says, delight follows the nature of the
thing wherein we delight. If therefore pollution be wicked and unlawful,
Lessius his opinion then is, that pollution is good and commendable, or
indifferent at least.

Upon which he expounds himself more clearly in the same place, building always
upon this same reason, and saying for corroboration thereof, Confirmatur, quia
objectum materiale hujus gaudii non est malum, and formale est bonum. Ibid.
That the material object of this joy is not wicked, and that its formal object
is good. And he had said a little above, that the reason why the desire of
pollution was lawful, is, R^io est, quia quod hic desideratur, non est
peccatum, sed per se indifferens
Because the thing desired is no sin, but in it self indifferent.

Whence he infers, not only that it is lawful to desire the good effect which
follows from pullution, as health, without desiring the pollution it self, as
some teach, who are a little more reserved than himself. But he concludes, that
we may also desire both at once, and be well pleased not of the relief only we
receive by means of the pollution it self. Non solum licitum est gaudere de
ipso effectu bono, ut quidam volunt, quamvis hic sit formalis ratio objectiva,
seu totum motivum desiderli and gaudil consideratus cum condition futuri vel
praesentis, sed etiam de ipsa causa (pollutione sc.) propter effectum.
It is not only lawful, says he, to rejoice in this good effect, according to
some, though this joy have no other object or motive than this effect it self,
and regards it only as present or to come; but it is lawful to delight in the
cause it self, which is pollution, because of the good effect it produces.

He speaks in all this discourse of pollution as he might of eating and
drinking, and all indifferent things. Non est peccatum, non est malum, est per
se indifferens; licet eam desiderate, licet de ca gaudere. Ibid.
That it is no evil, that it is no sin; that of it self it is an indifferent
thing, that it is lawful to desire it, that it is lawful to rejoice in it.

So that according to his Principles there is no more ill in pollution, than in
eating and drinking; and as eating and drinking are a remedy against hunger and
thirst, pollution is, according to him, a remedy against indisposition,
heaviness of body and mind, and against temptation which puts the Soul in
hazard of Salvation. And so as we make use of meat and drink to repair our
strength, and sustain Nature; he holds, that we may also make use of pollution
to recreate Nature, and to preserve the health and repose of the mind as well
as of the body.

Whence it follows from these very Principles of this Jesuit and his Brethren,
that as we may take and demand bread when we are hungry, we may likewise not
only desire, but also procure pollution when we feel our selves urged by
temptation, or any corporal indisposition which we hope by this means to
alleviate.

This follows necessarily from his Principle. For it is allowable to do that
which it is lawful to defire and receive with joy; Lessius himself confessed
formerly, speaking of Pollution it self. And it is not only lawful to desire
the things which are good, and to rejoice therein, but also to do them, to seek
after, and procure them: So that if it be lawful to desire pollution in it
self, and to rejoice therein, it is also lawful to stir up and incline our
selves to it as a good and blameless action.

So they are not ashamed to declare, that we are not obliged to abstain from
things which cause pollution, though we know it by experience. And this is the
formal decision which Escobar draws from the Principles of the Society. Hinc
colligo teneri neminem abstinere a calidis cibis, ab equitation^, a tali
accumbendi ration^ quibus expertus polluitur. Escobar tr^. ^. exam. ^. number. 77.
page 150.
I collect from hence, says he, that a person who knows by experience that
when he uses hot victuals, when he is to ride a journey, or lying in his bed in
a certain manner, he shall fall into pollution, is not obliged to abstain from
these things.

Layman says more clearly the same thing, to wit, that if the cause from
whence pollution proceeds, be in it self lawful and honest, we are not obliged
to avoid it, and that pollution in this case is no sin. And afterward he there
adds; Sed actio talis secundum se honesta est, and fi^is ejus honestus, v. c.
confessiones mulierum audite, vel eas secundum morem patriae amplecti, quando
sine gravi offe^sione intermitti non potest a Laicis and Secularibus, hujusmodi
actiones licitae sunt, non obstante periculo pollutionis inde naturaliter
secuturae. Vel actio ex qua pollutio secutura putatur, secundum se vel ratione
circumstantiae necessaria est, v. c. nimio cibo aut potu se ingurgitare,
inutiliter consabalari, unde pollutionem secuturam existimet; quam tamen minime
intendas; tunc veniale tantum peccatum contra casti^atem committitur, etlamsi
causa ex qua pollutio sequitur in se mortale sit, v. c. ebrietas. Layman lib.
3. sect. 4. number. 16.
That if the action whereupon we believe pollution will ensue, be unlawful of
it self, or by reason of some circumstance, or perhaps be done without benefit
or necessity, as when one eats or drinks to excess,

There is no man who will not affirm, that this is to fall voluntarily into
pol^tion, not to do what we can to avoid it; that not to fly the occasions of
it, is to seek after it; and by the common sense of all men to pursue of our
selves the things which we know by experience will produce it, when we may
freely abstain therefrom, is to procure it; which is yet more certain, when the
things are in themselves forbidden and criminal, as drunkenness, according to
Layman.

The reason he alleges to excuse him who falls thus into pollution after he
had been drunk, is because he had no intention to fall thereinto, although he
have perceived that being drunk, he should fall into it; Vnde pollutionem
secuturam existimes, says he, quam tamen minime intendas. But if this reason
excuse pollution, we must say that it excuses drunkenness also. For this man's
intention, without doubt, was not to make himself drunk, any more than to fall
into pollution, but only to take his pleasure in eating and drinking, though he
foresaw that giving way thereto, he should fall into drunkenness, and
consequently into pollution.

We may even affirm truly,

The Jesuits say then, 1. That it is lawful to desire pollution in it self. 2.
That it is lawful to rejoice in it when it is come on us. 3. That it is lawful
to do that which excites it, as to use hot meats, to be transported to excess
in eating and drinking, so far as to be drunk, though we foresee, and know by
e^perience, that the consequent thereof will be, that we shall fall into
pollution. It must needs be that they believe, that we may absolutely procure
it. For this is indeed to procure a thing, to pursue it with inclination, and
after we have done what we know is necessary to procure and produce it, to
rejoice and be well pleased when it is come.

This Doctrine is very convenient to bring to pass the designs of the Devil of
Uncleanness, who after he has tempted men by day with dishonest thoughts,
continues to torment them also in the night by illusions. Which the Church has
judged so important a thing, and so much to be feared and avoided by its
Children, that in its Public Prayers it has instituted one for demanding
peculiarly of God, that he would preserve them from these nocturnal illusions,
and especially from pollution.

Procul recedant somnia,
Et noctium phantasmata,
Hostemque nostrum comprime,
Ne polluantur corpora.
And the Jesuits on the contrary inform us, that we may desire pollution,

But if the Church teach us in this manner to avoid, and by our prayers to
prevent pollutions which might happen in the night against our wills, and
without our giving occasion unto them; with what severity would it not have
condemned them to whom they happen night and day, after they have desired and
procured them, by doing what they foresaw must needs bring them on?

Beyond the things I have formerly related concerning this subject in the
Chapter of Lust, and those which I shall relate also, treating particularly of
the Duties of married Persons, I could report here also abundance of other most
filthy and shameful opinions, if Christian modesty did not oblige me to use
great moderation in a discourse which necessity only allows me to make use of,
and honesty obliges me to cut as short as possibly I can, Sanchez has made
whole Volumes, and whereof some were so scandalous, that they have been left
out in some Editions; which has not restrained Tambourin from renewing them in
his Book.

It suffices to see by these discourses of the Jesuits which I have cited, the
great license their Divinity gives to the lust of the flesh, of abandoning our
selves to filthy and dishonest thoughts, so as to rejoice in the imaginations
of them toward all sorts of persons, provided we imagine that we have married
them, or that we desire to marry them; and that pollutions and other shameful
effects which may arise from these thoughts, are not sins, or but slight ones.
There are many vicious and immodest people who would content themselves with
this, to satisfy their infamous passions. Also from these its easy to pass to
other excesses, and wholly to let the reins loose to all sensual motions and
desires.

ARTICLE VI. Of Theft. That the Jesuits authorize it, and abolish the
Commandment of God which forbids it.
TO steal is no other thing than to wrong another in his goods, and therein to
cause him some damage, in what manner soever it be, whether we take or detain
something which is his; whether we take it by force, slight, or artifice;
whether we dispose of it, give it, or consume it; whether we make profit of it
or not. For in all these different ways of using another man's goods as our own,
his right to whom it belongs, is always equally violated, and injury is done
him by taking from him what is his. Let us see how the Jesuits Divinity excuses
These in all these different manners.

Emanuel Sa amongst his Aphorisms puts this concerning Thest: Qui damnum nullum
dedit rem aliquam accipiens, quia ca dominus non utebatur, non tenetur
restituere, si nulli est Domino usui futura. Sa verbo furtum, cap. 6. page 292.
He who in taking what is another, does him no prejudice, because he made no
use of it, and was not like to use it, is not obliged to restitution. There are
no Thefts almost which may not be cloaked with this pretense, it being casie to
be persuaded, that what we would take, is for no use to him from whom we take
it, especially if he be rich, and well to live. And indeed there are abundance
of things whereof the owners make no use, and it may be never will, which by
this Principle it will be lawful to take away without scruple,
houshold-servants of Persons of Quality and well to pass, to commit many Thefts
boldly without fear of punishment, by taking away things which they see are not
made use of, but are many times suffered to perish.

He says a little after, speaking after the common opinion, Qui per vices
pauca alicui furatur, cum ventum est ad notabilem summam, tenetur restituere.
Ibid. number. 8.
That he who steals frequently by little at a time, so as to gather together a
notable sum, is obliged unto restitution; but he adds afterward in favor of
these Thieves, Etsi quidam probabiliter negant, quando non fit ex intention
furandi totam summam. Ibid.
That there are some who hold the contrary, when it is not done with intention
to steal this great sum.

Escobar proposes the same difficulty in the same terms. An qui ultimum obolum
arripuit, and fit ideo gravis furti reus, tenetur totam illam quantitatem quae
ex minimis illis furtis coaluit, restituere? Escobar tract. 1. Ex. 4. number. 23.
page 161.
If a man after many small thests has taken the last halfpenny which makes up
a great theft, whereof he thereby becomes guilty, be obliged to restore all the
sum which was composed of these petty thefts? He answers, Non ad totam
quantitatem tenetur sub mortali, sed ad illam, qua ablata, furtum grave non
remanet.
He is not obliged under mortal sin to make restitution of all the sum, but
only part, which being taken off, the theft would be no more criminal.

Amicus before had said the same thing, almost in the same terms; Qui notabilem
quantitatem furatus est, non teneri sub mortali totam restituere, sed sat esse
si restituatur quantum sufficit ad tollendum notabile damnum illatum proximo.
Amicus tom. 5. disp. 38. number. 47. page 441.
That he who had stolen some notable sum, is not obliged under mortal sin to
restore it all; but that it is enough that he restore what suffices to make the
wrong done unto his neighbor not to be notable.

The same Author in another place draws from these Principles another
consequence very different from this, Tertio cum quis per singula furta ad
notabilem quantitatem pervenit; quoties deinde ab ecdem Domino levem materiam
usurpat, toties peccat mortaliter. Amicus tom. 3. disp. 23. sect. 7. n. 233. p.
257.

Bauny in his Sum, chap. 10. page 143.


When a man has by many petty thefts proceeded unto a notable sum, he sins
mortally every time after this that he takes any little thing from the same
person. This might seem severe after the sweetness and complacence which he had
testified in his other Answer; but such is the property of men's spirits, that
they cannot observe moderation, but are transported into excesses, passing from
one extreme unto the other, when they quit the conduct of Faith, and the
support of Authority, to follow their own private light.

Bauny handling the same Question says, that it is the common opinion amongst
Divines, that he who has at diverse times stolen many small sums, loses Gods
grace when he attains to a sum sufficient to constitute a mortal sin. And then
he adds by way of correction to these Authors; Nevertheless by their permission
I dare say, 1. That the last theft which is supposed to be a small one, even as
those which went before, is only venial. And a little after intermingling his
own discourse with Emanuel Sa's, and speaking part Latin, part French, as if
he feared to be understood of all people, he draws this Conclusion from this
Authors Argumentation: Sa verbo furtum, number. 8. says he, relying on this
foundation that he, qui per vices pauca alicui furatus est, cum ad notabilem
quantitatem pervenerit, is not obliged under pain of eternal damnation to
restore any of it.

That which above all things in the world touches men most,

And the reason is a strong one, says he. For to repair the wrong whereof we
have happened to be the cause, none is obliged under pain of eternal damnation,
when in doing it, we have only sinned venially; because such an obligation is
not the effect of other than mortal sin.

So that according to Bauny, a man may feather his own nest, and even enrich
himself with the goods of another, provided he take not too much at once, and
proceed thereto only by small Thefts, which yet all together at length make up
a notable sum, without obliging the Thief to any restitution on the pain of
undergoing eternal damnation. So restitution and damnation belong only to
Thieves that are not crafty enough, or covetous overmuch. There are Merchants,
Bankers, Confederates, and other Traders, who may heap up extraordinary riches
by this method, by taking in many parcels small sums which together produce
very great ones, and they need not cease for all that to live in repose,
without fear of damnation or restitution, which is to them many times more
severe and afflicting, if they will rely upon Bauny's word and the Divinity of
his Society.

This same Casuist speaking of things that are found, what must be done with
them, that his conscience may be set at quiet? He answers, that according to
the common and true opinion, they belong unto the poor. But he adds, Bauny in
his ^um, chap. 13. page 185. and 186.
according to the opinion of some, we may without any sin appropriate them unto
our selves with the following circumstances. The first is, that we inform our
selves of the neighborhood, or of those who by their condition may best know
news thereof, if they have no knowledge of the true and lawful possessor. The
second is, that we be in a disposition readily to restore it when the true
owner shall make appear it is his.

Though this opinion be false and very unjust, yet he seems to make it less
criminal by the qualification he gives it, being not willing that he who keeps
the things he finds, should appropriate them unto himself, and permitting him
only to become depository, and to make use of them, so only that he be disposed
to restore them to the demandant, when he makes appear they are his. But he
immediately after destroys this condition, by establishing three Principles
which he holds for certain, and whereupon he will have the decision of this
difficulty entirely to depend.

The first is, that he who has these things, may appropriate them to himself,
if he be poor. The second, that this being once done, that is to say, the thing
found being once thus appropriated, it shall so properly belong unto him, that
though the true owner appear afterward, he shall not be obliged to quit the
possession thereof. Which does wholly destroy what he had before established as
a necessary condition unto the power of retaining what is found; that he should
be disposed to restore it to him who should demand it, when it appeared that it
was his.

The third Principle, That under the name of the poor are comprised the
Monasteries, Hospitals, Churches, those that want things necessary for a
moderate maintenance, as well of their quality as of their life.

If he be a poor man that has not all that which is necessary to support
himcreditably according to his condition, there is scarce any man at this day
who may not call himself poor, and who by consequence may not appropriate to
himself all the lost things he can find, or which shall be directed to him,
without being ever obliged to restore them, though they whose they are come to
challenge them.

Layman is of the same opinion. For after he had said, that in the case of
things found, the common opinion of the Doctors is, that they ought absolutely
be restored to them whose they are, or at least if he be not found to be
distributed to the poor, and employed in good works; he supports this opinion
also on the Authority of S. Austin, bringing a passage out of this great Doctor
of the Church, which he took out of the 9. of his 50 Homilies. Si quid
invenisti and non reddidisti, rapuisti. 8. August. homil. 9. inter. 50.
If you have found any thing, and have not restored it, you have stolen it.

And on the other hand he relates also the contrary opinion which holds, that
we may appropriate and keep things found. And afterward passing sentence upon
this difference, he concludes in these terms. Inter has duas opiniones prior
magis pla and tutior est; attamen posterior quoque prohabilis. Layman lib. 3.
tract. 1. cap. 5. number. 24.
The first of these two opinions is more pious and secure; nevertheless the
last is probable also. Quod si vero post alienationem vel consumptionem bona
fide factam Daminus compareat, ^ihil ipsi restituendum est, nisi quatenus
inventor locupletior inde factus est. Ibid.
And if it happen that after he has alienated or spent it without fraud or
unjust contrivance simply and honestly, the owner come and present himself, he
is not obliged to restore any thing unto him but what he has put out to use,
and whereby he is become more wealtby.

Bauny says also the same thing, and seems to have taken it out of Layman,
translating it only out of Latin into French. For in Chap. 13. of his Sum,
page 191. he makes this Question; Whereunto are we obliged, having spent what
was another in honest simplicity, supposing it to be our own, and not
another? He answers: To restore so much as we have profited thereby, and not
more. And foreseeing himself the objection might be made against him; That
there was injustice therein, and by consequence an obligation to restitution,
in his action who contrary to justice appropriated unto himself what he neither
could nor ought, because he took it from another, he says for Answer, That in
the above alleged acis there is no injustice to be found, because they have a
specious show of honest simplicity.

This good Father speaks better than he intended, saying, That these actions
(which he intended to justify) have a color of sincerity. For indeed they
have only an appearance of fair dealing and equitable actions, and are true
Thests, as S. Austin above quoted by Layman, testifies: If you find, and
restore not, you steal.

Under the same pretense and color of simplicity he would have usurarious
bargains and contracts to pass for good; Bauny in his Sum, chap. 11. page 156.
That they who by traffic, merchandise, usurarious bargains, or contracts,
believing them to be good, have gained great wealth, being invincibly ignorant
that such manner of dealings were forbidden and unlawful, are not obliged to
make restitution of those goods so gotten, although after they have so gained
them, they be informed of the injustice of such contracts.

And a little after, page 154. after he had said, that a person after
renunciation might in conscience substract and keep one part of his goods to
maintain his family and his port; continuing his discourse, and enlarging his
opinion, he adds: Which thing I conceive also to take place in like manner when
women by the ill government of their husbands, and children by that of their
parents, are constrained to renounce their Estates unto the Creditors, who
thereof cause an Act of Renunciation to be made by the hands of the Judges.

And a few lines after he pursues it farther, and says, That a wife or
children being called unto Judgment to see themselves condemned, to confess
what they have put aside, taken out from, or usurped of the Movables,
Inheritance, or Goods of the Deceased, are not in conscience obliged to confess
it. And because they may be brought upon their Oaths, and obliged to swear
before a Judge, he gives them this expedient: Nevertheless that they may not
lie, and so doing foreswear themselves, the prudent Confessor shall teach them
that they are to frame a conception in their minds, according to which they may
form their answer and oath, which they may make by the command of the Judge, to
justify, and make him believe their innocence.

And in case they meet not with a prudent Confessor who understands well these
shifts and deceits, Because in this occurrent, says he, neither the wife nor
the children aforesaid ought, or can be forced by the Confessor to reveal the
things they so purloyn'd, though the Creditors should obtain Mandates and
Letters monitory from the Bishop.

From the same Principle he affirms in the same Chapter, page 200. That a
person, who is indebted for very great and notable sums, may, to the prejudice
of his Creditors, give away part of his goods, so that he to whom the gift is
made, shall not be obliged to restore any part thereof to his Creditors, if he
be not constrained by Law. See how he concludes after he had proposed contrary
opinions upon this point: I say then, that he who has received by Deed of Gift
any moveable or immovable of a man in great debt, is not obliged to quit it in
favor of the Creditors of such a Debtor, before the Law constrain him.

In the following Page he propounds another Case upon the same Subject; and he
resolves it after such a manner as authorizes and maintains, not only injury,
but revenge also and murder. Some one, says he, entreats a Soldier to smite
and beat his neighbor, or to burn the Farm of a man who has offended him. It
is demanded, whether the Soldier failing, Upon which he makes a Relation of
some Authors who hold the affirmative, and without quoting any one for the
contrary opinion, he broaches it as from himself, and says for refuting the
first: My opinion is not as theirs. For no man is obliged to restore, if he
have not violated Justice. Does he so who submits himself to another pleasure,
when he only entreats of him a favor?

This goodly reasoning may serve to justify from doing wrong, not only all men
who employ their friends or other persons to do mischief, making use of them as
their hands and instruments, and so doing the very same action and injury with
them, whether they commit theft or murder, or other violences: but it may also
justify all persons who induce and solicit others unto wickedness, and the
Devil himself when he tempts men, and causes them to sin; because temptation
and solicitations unto evil force not the will, and are only inducements, and
prayers as it were which depend absolutely on them who are tempted and
solicited to do evil, which many do also refuse and reject.

Behold whereunto the Maxims of this Casuist are reduced. They teach to steal
with subtilty and confidence, without being obliged unto restitution; to speak
against ones conscience, without lying; to forswear, without treachery; to make
a mock of Justice, without being deficient in the respect due thereto; to
contemn the Authority of the Church, without disobedience; and finally to
defraud Creditors, ruin Commerce, destroy public Faith, and make havoc of
our neighbors goods, without injustice.

ARTICLE VII.
BEaring false witness is a sin so odious and contrary to the Law of Nature,
that the most corrupted persons, and who boast of all other sins, cannot endure
to be accused of this, nor even of a simple lie. God has always forbidden it,
whether before a Judge, or in private; but the Jesuits favor it at any time,
and the sins which depend on it, to wit, slander and detraction.

Dicastillus demands: An teneatur quis retractare suum falsum dictum, quando ex
co inferenda est alteri mors seu mutilatio, etiamsi testi se retractant^ fidem
resultet simile damnum? Exi stimo si non peccaverit mortaliter, dicendo illam
falsitatem, non teneri cum tanto suo incommedo cognita veritate dictum
retractare. Legatur Tolet. lib. 5. cap. 59. Less. dub. 7. Reginald. sect. 2.
number. 45. Dicastill. lib. 2. tract. 2. disp. 8. dub. 7. number. 92.
Whether he be obliged to retract who has affirmed some falsity which will
cost the loss of life or member to another, when the witness by his
retractation will himself incur the same penalty? He answers, That he believes
that if the false witness have not sinned mortally by bearing this false
testimony, he is not obliged after that he understands the truth, to retract
what he has said, so exposing himself to so great evils. That is to say, it is
lawful to kill an innocent after we have slandered him, rather than put our
selves into any danger by retracting; since it is not so much the offenses or
the Hangmen, as the witnesses that put him to death who is condemned upon their
depositions.

That we may have a clearer Exposition of this Question, Ad nibil tenetur is
qui fal^um testimonium dixit ex ignorantia vel inadvertentia, etla^si ex ^llo
tes^imonio continga^ aliquem damnari. Less. cap. 3. dub. 7. Haec sententia in
praxi tuta est, sed prior magis videtur consona rationi. Dicastill. lib. 2.
tract. 2. disp. 3. dub. 2. number. 57.
That the opinion which holds that a person who has born false witness through
ignorance or inadvertence, without sinning mortally, is obliged to nothing,
though this false testimony do occasion the condemnation of a man, is safe in
practice, though the opinion seem to him more agreeable unto reason. For he
regards no more to follow the light of natural reason and equity, than the
Rules of Faith; but only his own sense and the Authority of such as he is, in
resolving difficulties which refer to Manners and Religion. And this is one of
the most goodly and commodious Principles of the Jesuits Divinity, that we are
not obliged to restitution when we have not sinned mortally in wronging our
neighbor. For if this Principle be sure, they who find a great sum of money,
or take it by ignorance and heedlesness, are not obliged to restore it, because
they have not sinned mortally in taking of it. We may see the consequence of
this in the Chapter of Restitution. But if you join hereto the conditions the
Jesuits require to make an action a mortal sin, false witnesses will thereby
receive great comfort and encouragement boldly to act and acquit themselves in
this duty.

The same Author is not less favorable to him who suffers himself to be
corrupted by money, Azors observation, who says, Notat Azor quod lic^t testis
p^cunia corruptus sese occultet nec dilcedat an tequam juridice rogetur aut ad
judicium vocetur, non peccat cont^ Justitiam, nic tenetur restituere pecuniam
sic acceptam, nisi vero similiter crederet esse furtivam. Dicost. lib. 2.
tract. 2. disp. 4. dub. 8. number. 156.
That if a witness corrupted by money, bide or retire himself before he has
been legally examined, or cited into the Court, he is not obliged to restore
the money he receives in this manner. As if Justice were no other thing than
the formalities, and outward appearance of Law. A man is in danger to lose his
life for not having witnesses of his innocence: if being able to deliver him by
your testimony, you take money not to render him your due assistance, you take
it to put him to death; since not he only who deposes against the truth, but he
also who conceals a truth whereon the life of an innocent depends, is the true
cause of his death. Which is so much more true, or at least more criminal and
unjust, when he suffers himself to be corrupted by money.

Tambourin says, Hinc sequ^tur 1. cum qui accusatur de crimine qued juridice
ab accusatore probari nequit, non lolum posse negate crimen, sed ^tiam dicere
accusatorem calumniari and mentiti. Ita Petrus Navarra lib. 2. cap. 4. number. 34.
Lege etiam S. Thomam 2.2. q. 69. artz! Qui e^im ^ccusat de crimine quod probari
non potest, calumniator est and mentiri praesumi^ur. Tambur. lib. 9. decal.
cap. 2. sect. 2. number. 2.
That he who is accused of a crime which cannot be legally proved by the
Accuser, may not only deny the crime; but say that the Accuser lies, and
slanders him. He sends us to S. Thomas in his 2.2. q. 69. art. 2. This is
without doubt that we may see his condemnation. For S. Thomas proves in that
Article, That it is not lawful for the accused to defend himself by a slander,
and that even when he is not legally examined, it is not lawful for him to
speak an untruth. Falsitatem tamen proponere in nullo casu licet alicui.
Tambourin for all that finds there is no difficulty in his opinion; as if this
were no lie, to say unto a man that he lies, when we know he speaks the truth,
and to slander an accuser as a slanderer, when he accuses us of a crime which
we have committed. Of two accusers the one speaks the truth, the other lies;
the one objects a true crime, and the other a false; and according to
Tambourins admirable Divinity, he who says the truth, is the liar; and he who
objects a true crime, is a slanderer; of which he doubts not at all.

But, Haec passim in ore sunt omnium: illud singulate and difficile: An si alio
modo t^ ab injusto test tueri nequeas, licite falsa crimina illi possis
objicere, quanta sufficient ad tuam justam defensionem? Duo assero. Unum satis
mihi probabile est; alterum satis incertum. Probabile mihi est te, si id
facias, non peccare contra justitiam; unde nec obligari ad restitutionem --
Incertum mihi est an id possit licite fieri sine ulla culpa -- Ut quid enim
(...) Sodomitam oportet probari esse illum testem? si excommunicatum, si
haereticum? -- Quid enim si sit necesse publicas Scripturas ementiri? Possetne
Notarius publicus adhuc induci? Libenter no^um hunc in aliud tempus exolvendum
reservo. number. 4, 5, 6, 7.
There is, says he, more difficulty in another case. It is demanded, if you
cannot defend your self against an unjust witness, but by slandering him, may
you do it without sin, and impose on him so many false crimes as will be
necessary for your just defense. I say two things; one is, that it seems to me
probable enough; the other is, that I find it doubtful enough. It is to me
sufficiently probable, that if you do it, you sin not against Justice; and by
consequence that you are not obliged to restitution -- but I do not know
certainly whether this may be done without any sin -- For if it be needful to
prove that this witness is a Sodomite, excommunicated,

It must be observed, that he speaks not of a false Witness who charges with
false crimes, but of an unjust Witness, ab injusto test, who accuses of true
crimes, but secret, or which he cannot prove, according to the forms of
Justice. For thus these Doctors expound themselves what they mean by an unjust
Witness, or Accuser. Hic ac^usator sibi imputer si ex hoc calumniator habeatur,
immo cum probare non possit, atque adeo injuste accusaverit, tenetur restituere
accusator Dicast. lib. 2. tract. 2. disp. 12. page 3. dub. 18. n. 285.
That this Witness, says Dicastillus, may thank himself, if in the conclusion
he be held for a slanderer, since he could not prove the crime; and by
consequence having accused unjustly, he is obliged unto restitution.

So that, according to this Divinity, to defend our selves from true but secret
crimes, and whereof there are no public prooss, we may say to the honestest
man in the world who would inform against us in a Court of Justice, that he is
a Sodomite, Heretic, Excommunicate, etc. and we may for proof of this slander,
make use of false Witnesses, counterfeit false Deeds and Writings, and corrupt
public Notaries to subscribe them, without committing any injustice in all
this; though according to Scripture, those who do evil, and those who cause it
to be done, or only consent thereto, commit the same fault.

But after he has maintained, that herein there is no injustice, Tambourin
doubts if at least there be not some sin in an action which contains so many
crimes, because that he knows it not certainly, that is to say, according to
the Principles of his Divinity, that it is also probable, that there is none
therein.

He holds then indeed, though he dare not declare it, that it is also probable,
that one may without any sin, as well as in justice, commit all sorts of crimes
to hide one he has committed, and to oppress by slanders, false Witnesses,
forged Writings, corruption of Courts, and public Persons, him who would
discover it; because he is persuaded he accuses him unjustly, that is to say,
he cannot prove what he says by the ways and formalities commonly used in
Courts of Justice, though it be true and certain.

Tambourin approves very well the manner wherein Hurtado believes that Scholars
may give testimony of the studies of their Companions. Scholasticus volens
probare cursum ad quod eget duobus testibus, adhibere potest duos amic^s qui
illum non viderint interesse lectionibus, at satis sibi persuadent illum
intersuisse; at non p^ssunt jurare se id vidiss^. Tambur. lib. 3. decal. cap.
2. secot. 1. number. 8.
A Scholar, says he, having need to prove that he has gone through his
course, and having need of two witnesses hereof, may employ therein two of his
friends, who have not seen him go to the Lectures, but are sufficiently
persuaded that he did attend them: but they may not swear for all that they
have seen him go. Neither indeeed is it the custom to cause them to swear,
whereupon it will be no hard matter to get false attestations of our studies,
which may serve for obtaining degrees and benefices.

For detraction, Tambourins Rule which he gives us to instruct us how to revile
with pleasure and delight, without mortal sin. Qui supposita detractione, sine
ullo iip^ius desiderio, laetatur non de ipsa infamia, sed de sola curiosa vel
nova cognitione factorum proximi, vel de eloquentia detracteris, vaide
probabile est ex hoc per se non pe^care mortaliter. Tambur. lib. 9. decal. cap.
3. sect. 7. number. 1.
When one reproacbes another, he who without desiring that reproach, rejoices
in it, not because of the shame that happens to his neighbor, but because of
the new and curious knowledge he obtains of his neighbors actions, or beeause
of the eloquence of the detractor, it is very probable that in this, precisely
taken, there is no mortal sin. We may then, according to him, without doing any
great evil, rejoice in the reproach of another without desiring it; but he
seems not to remember that Principle of his Divinity quite contrary hereunto,
by which his Brethren conclude familiarly, that we may desire pollution,
because we may rejoice in it. And indeed it is one and the same thing, or the
one is the consequent of the other.

He adds, that this rejoicing ought to come from the eloquence of the
detractor, and not from the shame of our neighbor who is reproached. This is
done conveniently, and without trouble, by an abstraction of the mind, or
direction of the intention; but that takes nothing from the evil of the
detraction, it augments it rather instead of redressing it. For it is true, of
reproaches as well as impurities, that the best expressed are most dangerous;
because eloquent words, and discourses studied, and agreeable to their
subjects, are as it were a bait which entices and opens the heart, to cause the
evil which is understood with pleasure to enter with more delight into it.

After you have heard this defamation, Non est peccatum certo credere de aliquo
id de quo public est infamatus per rumorem. Dicast. lib. 2. tract. 2. disp.
12. dub. 2. number. 25.
It is lawful for you, according to Dicastillus, to believe certainly the evil
that has been related unto you of any one, provided he be publicly defamed by
common report. As if common report, which may be false, and oftentimes is so,
might be made use of as a just foundation for a visible injury, and a judgment
disadvantagious to our neighbor. By this reason Dicastillus could not have
condemned of detraction or rash judgment, those who had an ill opinion of Jesus
Christ, and who accounted him a wicked and impious person; because the envy and
slanders of the Pharisees had made these reports very common during his life,
and much more at his passion and death.

But will it not be lawful to utter some reproach as well as to hear it?
Dicastillus holds, Probabilis est sementia non esse mortale (scllicet revelare
mortal^ crimen alterius, ex quo sequitur jactura famae apud virum gravem a quo
nil mali timetur) docent aliqui recentiores Lib. 2. tr. 2. disp 2. page 2. dub.
8. number. 133.
That it is probable that it is no mortal sin to destroy a man's reputation in
the mind of some considerable person, from whom no evil may be feared by
revealing unto him some mortal sin of the person defamed. He would not have
talked otherwise, had he taken upon him to maintain that detraction of it self
is not evil; and that if no other evil ensue than the infamy and loss of
reputation of him whom we reproach, it cannot be a great sin.

Revelare peccatum grave, vel etiam falso illud imponere tali personae quae de
similibus ips^ se jactat, aut nil curat, aut de iis est public infamata, nec
est mortalis detractio. Volenti enim and consentienti non fit injuria. Dicast.
lib. 2. tract. 2. disp. 12. page 2. dub..... number. 106.
Neither can it be any more a mortal sin, according to this same Author, to
reveal some great sin, or even to impose a false one on a person who boasts he
has committed such, or who makes no account of them, or who is publicly
defamed of such like, this passes with him for a small infamy: That is to say,
that we may without breach of charity speak evil of those of whom many persons
speak it, not only in repeating what we have heard spoken of them, but also by
imposing on them false crimes: or if so be a person disgraces himself by his
wicked life, you may without any great evil help to reproach him yet more, and
cause him to lose his reputation altogether, by slandering him, and augmenting
his disorders, and attributing unto him disorders he never yet thought of. I
should as soon say that one may, without much offending God or our Neighbor,
help him to destroy himself, who by a transport of passion or folly, would burn
his own house, drown or kill himself.

CHAPTER III. Of the Commandments of the Church.
IF the Jesuits afford so good penny-worths of Gods Commandments, as we have
now said, it is not to be hoped that they will use the Churches better. This
shall be seen in this Chapter, wherein we speak, 1. of the Sanctification of
Festival days, 2. of Fasting, 3. of the Communion at Easter, 4. of the yearly
Confession commanded by the Church.

ARTICLE I.
THis Commandment carries with it two obligations. One not to labor on
Festival and Lords days; the other is to keep them holy. This is the end of the
Precept, the other is but a mean to accomplish it. For that which God requires
of us principally on these Holy Days, is that we employ our selves peculiarly
to sanctify him, or rather to sanctify our selves in serving him: And that we
may be at more leisure, and attend better and with greater devotion and liberty
unto his Service, he wills, and the Church has on its behalf commanded us on
these days to quit the care of all other affairs, and abstain from all
employments which might hinder or divert us from it.

The Jesuits acknowledge these two obligations contained in this Commandment;
but they destroy them at the same time by false explications and accommodations
altogether humane, as we shall now presently see in this Article, which we
shall divide expressly into two Points, and each of them shall have two
Paragraphs, that we may more distinctly and clearly represent the Opinions of
the Jesuits upon each of these obligations.

I. POINT.
SECTION I. That the Jesuits despise the Authority of the Church, and destroy
the Commandment by which it forbids to work on Feast-days.
LAyman treating on the observation of Feasts, says that in that part of this
Commandment which forbids labor, it is commanded that we should Ut integro die
Festo opera servilia non exerceantur.
abstain the whole Feast Day from doing any servile work. And in his following
discourse expounding what he intends by servile works, he adds: Opera servilia
dicuntur quae corporis commoditatibus inservientia, ignobiliora sunt, and per
servos exercerl solita, cujusmodi sunt arare, fabricare, etc. Layman lib. 4.
tract. 7. cap. 2. number. 1. page 181.
They are called servile works which being only for the service of the body,
are in themselves base, and are not ordinarily done but by servants, as to
plow, to build, etc.

He testifies that to dance, play, go to a Stage Play, are not actions
forbidden by this Commandment, because these are not actions proper unto
servants nor slaves. And he discovers his opinion sufficiently by what he
speaks in the sequel: Dicimus igitur sola opera servilis, eaque omnia die Festo
prohibita esse, praeterquam si jure vel consuetudine permissa sint. Ibid. n. 2.
That none but servile works are forbidden on Feast-days; but they are not all
forbidden neither, if there be any particular reason or custom that allows them.

This suffices him not, to have reduced the Churches Prohibition of working on
Feast-days to those works only which are proper for slaves and servants, as if
this part of the Commandment were only for servants; he thought fit also to put
a great exception to it by saying; Praeterquam si jure vel consuetudine
permissa sint.

From this exception, as a Principle, he draws many Conclusions, which are so
many usurpations upon this Commandment,

He allows 1. To write all sorts of things, to copy, to paint. And his reason
is, Quia non minus pictores in pingendo, quam literarum studiosi in legendo
animi quadam voluptate capiuntur and detinentur; quod signum est artem pingendi
non servilem ^d liberalem esse, quippe ad recreandum hominem institutam,
liberoque homine dign^m. Ibid. number. 3.
Because Painters receive no less satisfaction in painting than those who love
books in studying: which shows that the Painters Art is not servile, but
liberal, and taken up for a divertisement unto our minds, and worthy of a
Gentleman. As if Festivals were instituted for divertisement, or none but
persons of base and servile condition were obliged to break off their ordinary
Trades and labor, to serve God on these days.

He adds a little after, that to follow these exercises, that is to say, to
write and paint on the Feast-days, not only for divertisement, or some just and
necessary cause, but also out of a mere mercenary Spirit, and for lucre only,
is no evil; and his reason is: N^m lucrum aut merces non facit opus esse
servile.
Because interest and profit do not make an action servile. There is nothing
but toil and weariness of the body that seems to him to be servile, profane,
and unworthy the Feast-days: but divertisements, pleasures, interests, and
profits appear unto him honorable and worthy of generous persons and solemn
Festivals.

And because, according to this Principle, hunting and fishing should be judged
the most servile, Venari, aucupari, piscari, ex genere suo servilia opera esse
videntur; ideoque jure communi prohibit^ ut colligitur ex cap. Licet. De
feriis. Consuetudo tamen obtinuit ut diebus Festis licita sit recreation is
causa instituta venatio, itemque piscatio in fluminibus, sint, etc. Ibid. n. 6.
To hunt, and hawk, and fish, seem to be actions of a servile nature; and
consequently forbidden by the civil Law, as may be gathered from the Chapter,
Licet. De Feriis: yet custom has obtained that it should be allowed to hunt
for divertisement on Feast-days, as also to fish in Rivers without too many
people and too much toil.

He does well to set the civil Law and the Commandment of the Church on the one
hand, which forbid hunting and fishing on Feast-days; and on the other hand the
custom contrary to this Commandment, which has introduced the abuse of hunting
and fishing on these days; and hereupon he passes sentence in favor of the
custom: Consuetudo obtinuit.

It puts also the Exercises of War into the same rank with hunting and fishing.
Bellare videtur opus fervile, cum proxime tendat ad hominum necem, quare die
Festo permissum non est. Ibid. number. 7.
It seems, says he, that the Exercises of War are servile works; because they
tend directly to kill men: for this cause they are not lawful on Festival-days.

He declares then that the Exercise of War is a servile thing. But presently
after he advances and ennobles it again in the same manner as he did hunting
and fishing before, adding, Consuetudo tamen non minus artem militarem quam
venationem Festo die honestavit.
That custom has made it honorable and worthy of the Feast-days as well as
hunting.

The same thing may be said of Dances, Balls, Stage Plays, and other shows
which the corruption of the world has authorized against the intention and
order of the Church; consuetudo illa die festo honestavit. But it is easy to
see that the Feast-days do not make these exercises honorable, but rather
these exercises dishonor and profane the Feasts, as all the Saints have at all
times believed and taught in the Church, and the most common light of Faith and
Christianity alone is sufficient for us whereby to know this.

And this Jesuit himself acknowledges it sufficiently in affirming that these
Exercises of Hunting, and War, etc. are of a servile nature, and forbidden by
the civil Law on the Feast-days. So that when he says afterward, that
notwithstanding the prohibition of the Church, and order of Nature it self,
custom has authorized these Exercises, and made them honest and lawful on
Feast-days, he must needs attribute an admirable virtue unto custom, and
altogether extraordinary, which surpasses the Power of the Church, and Nature
it self; since it can prevail without incurring any penalty against the Laws of
the one and the other.

And since the Laws of the Church are also the Holy Ghost's, who by it has
given us them, and who guides it in all it does and ordains, if custom carry it
against the Laws of the Church, as this Casuists pretends; it must needs be,
according to him, that it has more power than the Holy Ghost, and that the
Authority it has in their School, is more to be considered than that of (...)
himself, since he believes that we ought to yield to the abuses it has
introduced into the Church, to the prejudice of the primitive Orders and Laws
which the Holy Ghost has established.

But if these things seem extraordinary and incredible in themselves, the Laws
of God and the Church, it ordinarily gains the cause by their Judgment; as has
been observed in many places of these Writings.

Escobar follows the same Rules with Layman to determine what labor is lawful
or forbidden on Feast-days, that is Servile opus est, ad quod servi deputati
sunt. Nec opus servile fit, quia ^b lucrum est factum, si de se servile ante
non erat. Escobar tract. 7. exam. 5. cap. 2. number. 4. page 99.
Servile work, says he, which is for servants and slaves. And he adds, as
Layman, that if a work be not servile in it self, it does not become servile
when it is done for gain.

He afterward sets down in the number of actions which are not servile,
studying, writing, traveling, dancing. And although he affirm that hunting and
painting are servile actions, he forbears not to say afterward, Pingere ex suo
genere servile est. Venatio si fist ex officio, servile est ut pictura: ob
voluptatem and recrca^ionem, minime. Ibid. number. 8.

Mundare scopis, tapetibus vestire parietes Ecclesiarum, and hujusmodi, nisi
aliqua intercedat excusatio, saltem venislia sunt. Ibid. n. 6.

Number misericordiae opera exercenda? De se servilia non licent; ut consuere
vestem pauperi, defer ligna eidem, etc. Ibid. number. 7.


That if hunting be followed upon obligation and of duty, as when a Hunts-man,
or a servant hunts at the command of his Master, it is servile as well as
painting, but that it is not so if it be pursued of pleasure and for pastime.

That is to say, that a servant may not go on hunting in obedience to his
Master, when he sends him; but the Master may go for his pleasure, and the
servant also; and by consequence, that obedience in labor profanes a Holy day,
but pleasure in the same work profanes it not.

Speaking in the same place of those who labor in cleansing, hanging,

He would have it lawful to paint and hunt for pleasure on Feast-days; and he
will not have it lawful to sweep, hang, and adorn the Church for the Service of
God. He would have us have power to walk, dance, travel, and go whither we will
for our pastime; but he will not have it lawful to visit the poor and sick, and
to give them some assistance, pretending that works of mercy are more contrary
to the Sanctification of Feasts, than the sports and pastimes of the world. He
will not have it lawful to carry alms themselves unto the poor on Feast-days,
as he says expressly a little after.

For having put the Question, if those who by a motive of piety do actions
which are called servile, sin against this Commandment of the Church, he
answers in these terms: Excuiandine aliqui ratione pietatis? Aliqui liberant a
reatu exercentes die Festo opera servilia ad templa aedificanda, vel resicienda
gratis, ad ^l^emosynam gerendam, ad ornanda delubra, etc. At ego cum illis
sentio qui laborantes vel hoc praetextu, sint necessitate non excusant.
There are some who exempt them from sin who busy themselves in servile works
on Feast-days, to build or re-edifie Churches gratis, to carry alms to the
poor, to adorn Temples, etc. But as for me, I am of the opinion of those who
exempt them not who labor without necessity on Feast-days, though they do it
under this pretense, that is to say, by a motive of piety.

He believes then that it is lawful to play, dance, walk abroad without
necessity and for pleasure only on Feast-days; because, according to the
Jesuits Divinity, these actions are not servile. He pretends also, though
painting and hunting be servile of themselves; yet the motive of pleasure and
contentment which we look for in them, hinders them from being so, and makes
them lawful: And yet he maintains, that to sweep a Church for devotion, or to
take delight to dress an Altar, to hang a Chapel, to carry alms unto the poor,
are actions prohibited on Feast-days; and that necessity only, not pleasure,
can hinder them from being servile* As if the pleasure taken in hunting or
painting were more noble and holy ^an that which is taken in serving the poor
and God himself in the Churches.

He finds it difficult to exempt these actions of Piety and Religion from
mortal fin, so rigorous would he appear in this point. They are, says he, at
the least venial sins. Saltem venialia sunt.

Filliutius had said it before him in the same terms, and yet more clearly.
Mundate scopis templum, vestice parietes tapetibus and h^jusmedi, vidertur
servilia, and nisi aliqua excusatio intercedat, erit saltem peccatum veniale,
non motrale, seclu^o contemptu. Filliutius qq. moral. tom. 2. tract. ^ cap. 9.
n. 156. page 267.
It seems that to sweep Churches, to hang them, and other such like actions,
are servile; Strange Divinity, that we need not to fear to contemn the Command
of God, forbidding us to work on the Feast and Lords-days, by working for our
selves; because we take our pleasure in the work, as in hunting; and that we
ought to fear contempt and mortal sin in working only for the Service of God
and the Church!

So that these days which God has ordained particularly for his Service may be
employed, according to this Divinity, to serve any thing but him. We may give
one part of it to pastime, another to the world: and which is more astonishing
and horrible, we may give it all entirely, or in part, to the Service of the
Devil, passing it over in debauching and finning against God, without violating
thereby the Commandment which ordains that you should sanctify the Feasts and
Lords-days.

Filliutius teaches us this in express terms, when he says, Dico 3. opera
peccaminosa non esse specialiter prohibita in die Festo, quasi per illa dies
Festus violetur. Ibid. n. 147. p. 164.
That it is not particularly forbidden to sin and offend God on Feast-days, as
if by crimes and sins the Feast Day were violated. It will not then be a thing
done contrary to the Sanctification of Festivals, to employ them wholly in
offending God; but these Holy Days will be profaned, if they be employed in the
Service of Churches, Altars, and Poor. If the former of these excesses be more
impious, the other will appear more ridiculous, and both together do entirely
abolish the Commandment to sanctify Festivals;

If Filliutius as well as Eseobar, who in this is of his Judgment, had been in
the company of the Pharisees when our Lord intending to heal the man who had
the withered hand, to stay their envy, and prevent their malice, demanded of
them, Licet Sabbatis been facere, an male? Marci 3. v. 4.

At illi tacebant. Ibid.


Whether it were lawful to do good or evil on the Sabbath Day? Without doubt
they would not have been so surprised, nor have been so gravelled as the
Pharisees. For they answered nothing, and continued silent, says the Cospel.
But these Jesuits could not have been silent without betraying their own
consciences and the cause of their Society. Escobar would have said that it was
not lawful to do good. Non licet been facere: since he maintains that it is not
lawful to dress Churches, nor carry alms to the poor: and Filliutius might have
said that it is lawful to do evil, licet male facere, since he believes that
sins do not profane these days: Opera peccaminosa non esse specialiter
prohibita die Festo, quasi per illa dies Festus violetur.

After this Filliutius expounds what sins he means, when he says they profane
not Feast-days, alleging withal the reason of his opinion. Ratio potissima
est; quia hoc praeceptum tertium, quatenus divinum est, non obligat specialiter
ad non peccandum die Festo. Ibid. number. 147.

Tum quia opus peccati formaliter non est servile, ut detrahere, p^jerare,
fornicari, and similis. Ibid.

Nic obstat quod peccans dicitur fieri servus peccati; quia id tantum
metaphorice and symbolice verum est, non ^ut^m reipsa, ut pluribus, Suarez n.
7. Ibid. number. 148.


The principal reason, says he, is because this third Commandment, being
divine as it is, obliges not particularly not to sin on the Feast days. As if
to command us only to honor and serve him, and especially on this day, were
not particularly to forbid us to offend God thereon, there being nothing more
opposite to honoring God than sinning against him.

He alleges a second reason yet more strange; That to sin, as to slander,
forswear, commit fornication, and such like, are not servile actions. And
because S. Thomas, after the holy Fathers and the Scripture, has said that
there is no baser servitude, nor more opposite to the Sanctification of
Feast-days, than that of fin, which makes us slaves of the Devil, and causes
us to give that service unto him which we owe particularly unto God on these
days, he prevents this reason, and touches it only in his way, as not making
any great account of it. It is of no importance, says he, to say, that he who
sins becomes the slave of sin; because this is not true, but in Metaphor and
figure, and not indeed and really, as Suarez has shown at large.

He speaks this generally without excepting any person, when he says, that
this word: He who sins becomes the slave of sin, is not really true, though
he could not be ignorant that it is Jesus Christ his speech in the 8 of S.
John, where he says, That every man who sins, is the slave of sin: omnis
qui facit peccatum, servus est peccati.

This is an imagination very novel amongst Christians, that an indifferent
action, or rather good in it self and laudible, as it is to adorn the Church,
should be more base and more servile, and therefore more forbidden on
Feast-days, and more contrary to the Holiness which God demands of us on these
days, than the most enormous sins. But this is a novelty and an excess yet more
strange,

Whence it will follow, as in effect this Jesuit fears not to affirm, that
Jesus Christ spoke not properly, when he said, that he who sins, is the
slave of sin; nor S. Paul when he says, that sinners are slaves of the Devil,
and that he holds them Captives.

And he must hereupon declare that Jesus Christ has not properly delivered,
nor redeemed us, since they cannot be properly delivered who are not properly
slaves; and they are not properly redeemed who are properly in slavery and
captivity. And finally in the height of impiety, he must take away from Jesus
Christ the quality of a Redeemer and a Savior, and say that he is but a
Metaphorick and Symbolick Redeemer and Savior, and not a proper and true one,
but an improper and figurative one, contrary to the word of Jesus Christ
himself. Si vos Filius liberaverit, vere liberi eritis. Joan. 8. v. 34.
If the Son set you free, you shall be free indeed.

So that this Doctrine of the Jesuits overturns the foundations of the
Scripture and Religion, and is not only oppofite to the Wisdom of the Cross and
Christian Philosophy, but also to the Light of Reason and Heathen Philosophy.
For the Pagans themselves have acknowledged that there is nothing more servile
nor more contrary to the natural liberty of man and reason, than vice and sin,
though they knew not the Author of this servitude, and the true Master of these
slaves, which is the Devil, no more than the true Deliverer of these same
slaves, who is Jesus Christ.

SECTION II. Expedients which the Jesuits propose to elude the Commandment
which forbids working on Feast-days.
WE have seen hitherto how the Jesuits dispense with Painters, Hunters,
Fishers, etc. from the Commandment which forbids working on Feast-days, it
remains now to see what expedients they give to elude it.

Escobar furnishes us with two. The first is, if the Feasts be local and
commanded in one place only, as the Feasts of Parish-Patrons often are, to
depart from that place, and go work in another. First, he puts the thing in
question, and demands, Number e loco Festi ad locum ubi non est recedere consulto
liceat?
Whether it be lawful to depart purposely from a place where there is a Feast,
to go to another where there is no Feast? And he answers, Ita plane, and
servilibus ibi operibus vacare. Escobar tract. 1. Exam. 5. cap. 3. number. 11.
page 100.
That assuredly it is lawful to go thither, and to labor there in servile
works.

He does not say, that he ought to have some reason or some necessity for it,
but that he may do it only upon a design to work and discharge himself of the
Commandment of the Church.

Emanuel Sa is of the same opinion, and says, Audita Missa potest quis ad
locum ubi non est Festum ire causa laborandi ex loco ubi Festum est. Sa verbo
Festum, number. 8. page 275.
That after one has heard Mass in one place where there is a Feast, he may go
into another place where there is none, to labor there. He would have the Mass
heard, but only out of devotion, as Filliutius who cites and follows him, has
expounded him. An licet recedere a proprio loco in quo est Festus dies ad locum
in quo vacatur operibus servilibus?
Whether one may lawfully depart from the place of his abode where there is a
Feast, to go unto another where men labor in servile works? He answers
absolutely, Dico licere ac posse tilem vacare operibus servilibus in eo loco.
Filliutius mor. qq. tom. 2. tr. 27. cap. 7. n. 110. page 261.
That this is lawful, and that he being there may labor, as others do who live
there. And he adds, Quod ad Sac^um autem audiendum, probabilius videtur teneri
recedentem a proprio loco ubi est dies Festus, si modo commode possit habere
Sacrum summo mane, ut deind: in loco ubi non obligat dies Festus, vacare possit
operi servili. Ibid. number. 111.
That for what concerns the Mass, it seems more probable that he who departs,
should hear it in the place where the Feast is, if he can do it conveniently,
and Mass be said early; that he may afterward have spare time to go to and
labor in the place where there is no Feast.

He would have him hear Mass, but provided he can do it commodiously, otherwise
he would not have him obliged thereto. And that you may not doubt of his
thought and intention, he says once more, as it were to expound himself yet
better in these terms: Dixi, si modo commode possit, quia sic etiam limitat
Suarez, quamvis Sanchez valde probabile putet non solum ad Sacrum audiendum,
quando ante merldiem futuri sunt extra limits istius loci. Ibid.
I said, provided he can do this commodiously: because Suarez in the place I
have already quoted, expresses this same condition. Yet Sanchez believes it
very probable, that there is no obligation on him to bear Mass, since he must
before noon be out of the bounds of the place of the Feast Day.

And to clear up this difficulty yet more, Filliutius demands, An ad haec quae
diximus legitime fscienda requiratur justa causa?
Whether for doing all things lawfully, He answers, E^si aliqui requirant, quia
alioqui fieret in fraudem legis; attamen verius est non requiri, sed libere
posse ad ea loca se conserre solius operis servilis faciendi gratla, and sic
lucrum allquod colligendi. Ibid. number. 113.
That though some hold this necessary, because otherwise the Law would be
eluded, yet it is more true that it is not; but it is in every ones power to go
from the place where the Feast is, without other cause than to labor and gain
somewhat. His reason is, Quia proprie loquendo non est ulla fraus si quis jure
suo u^atur, and potius est fugere obligationem praecepti, quod cum codem
praecepto non sit prohibitum, erit res ex se indifferens. Ibid.
Because, to speak properly, it is no fraud for a man to make use of his right,
and that it is rather to avoid the obligation of the Precept, which being it is
not forbidden by the Precept it self, it follows that it is a thing in it self
indifferent.

It is a strange right, this of not observing Festivals, and to play in this
manner with the Church, by eluding its Commandment. If all the Inhabitants
would make use of this pretended right, and betake themselves every one to his
own affairs, to his work, or would only walk abroad for their divertisement out
of the Parish where the Feast is, there would be no Feast, or indeed the Rector
must celebrate it all alone, or with his Priests only, if he have any.

But this Authors reason is pleasant, that to depart expressly out of the Parish
where the Feast is, to labor in another where there is no Feast, is not to
deceive, but only to avoid the Precept of the Church. As if to avoid payment of
what we owe, were not to deceive, and a child ought not to be taken for
disobedient and rebellious who flies away, that he may not do what his father
commands him.

And that which he adds to confirm this reason, is also very considerable: That
the Church not forbidding to depart out of the Parish where the Feast is, it is
a thing indifferent and free to every one;

By the Judgment of this Jesuit the Manuals of the Church must be reformed, and
when the Rector does thenceforth recommend a Feast to his Parishioners, it will
not be sufficient to say, that they are obliged to observe it, he must also
forbid them on the Churches behalf from going out of the Parish to discharge
themselves of their obligation. The Commandment of the Church must likewise be
reformed, and not say only, as it has done hitherto, Thou shall sanctify the
Feasts, but add also; Thou shall not fly out of the Parish where they are
kept, to discharge thy self of the obligation of keeping them holy: because
without this be done, all the Parishioners may abandon the Church, according to
this new Divinity, and leave the Rector to officiate alone.

Another Expedient Escobar gives us to defeat this Command, is to keep infidel
Servants and Workmen, who may be employed and made to work on Feast-days. That
he might establish this Maxim, he demands: Prohibenturne opera servilia in
Festis tantum Christianis, an omnibus communiter?
Whether servile works are only forbidden unto Christians on Feast-days, or to
all sorts of persons indifferently? He answers, Haud damnandus Dominos qui
hujusmodi opera mancipio imponeret Infideli, quia mancipium Infidele non
p^ccat, siquidem legibus Ecclesiae non tenetur. Ib. cap. 4. number. 13. page 101.
That a Master is not to be condemned who commands an Infidel servant to employ
himself in his work on Feast-days. And his reason is, because this Infidel
slave sins not, in as much as he is not obliged to observe the Laws of the
Church.

He might have said the same thing of Atheists and Fools. Laymans opinion, Unde
putat L^yman licitum esse imponere onera servilia perpetuo amentibus, quia non
delinquunt. Ibid.
at the least in fools. But if this were so, it were advantageous to take
Atheists and Infidels for servants. This is without doubt to testify a great
love to the Laws of God and the Church, to cause them to be violated by others,
when we cannot do it our selves; as if the act and fault of a Servant did not
recoil upon the Master that commanded it.

A fool indeed sins not, no more than a Horse when he works on Feast-days; but
he that makes the one and the other work, shall bear the sin, because he is the
Author of the work, and it is he properly that works, as it is the Plowman
that turns up the land, rather than the Plow and the Oxen which he uses
thereunto: And it seems that they ought to renounce reason, who have renounced
the obedience they owe unto God and the Church, that they may imagine that they
offend not in causing that to be done in their houses, for their own interest
alone, which is forbidden, and which they dare not do themselves.

Father Bauny in the 17. Chap. of his Sum, page 266. wherein he treats expressly
of this matter, says that those who neglect to honor and sanctify the
Lords-days, do plunge themselves into a great and very enormous crime; and he
says after, that if they would avoid it, as they are obliged, they should take
the pains to hear Mass, and not to work. He reduces all the Sanctification of
Feasts to hearing Mass, and not working; whatsoever we do the rest of the day,
he pretends we are discharged.

To give authority to his imagination, that the holy Apostles have commanded us
both these things, by the testimony of S. Austin, 261 Sermon. de Tempore. See
here his words, Apostoli Dominicum diem, and Apostolici viri ideo religiosa
solennitate habendum sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor noster a mortuis
surrexit, quique ideo Dominica appellatur, ut in eo terrenis operibus vel mundi
illecebris abstinentes tantum divinis cultibus serviamus. The Apostles and
Apostolic men have therefore ordained that the Lord's Day should be celebrated
with Religious Solemnity, because thereon our Savior arose from the dead,
whence it is that it is also called the Lord's Day, that in it abstaining from
all earthly labors and worldly pleasures, we should give our selves only unto
the Service of God.

He makes great account, and lays a great stress upon this passage, and he
would have it observed as very important in this matter, believing he had
therein found all he sought for. See, says he, how he forbids us on the holy
Lords-days to employ our selves in manual operations?

I will not insist on it, that this learned Divine quotes a Sermon as S.
Austins, which notwithstanding is not his. But I cannot but admire the
simplicity of this good man, who brings for proof of his Proposition a passage
which destroys it, and which proves evidently the quite contrary to what he
pretends. For the Author of this Sermon speaking of that part of the
Commandment which forbids to work on Festival and Lords-days, requires us on
these days not only to cut off all businesses and cares about all earthly
things; but worldly pleasures and divertisements also; Vt in eo terrenis
operibus and mundi illecebris abstinentes, etc. And on the contrary this Jesuit
and his Brethren allow a multitude of persons to work, and leave an entire
liberty to the whole world, to delight themselves with what pleasures and
divertisements they please: even with those which are forbidden by Gods Laws,
provided only they take the pains to hear Mass, as says Bauny.

And for the other part of the Commandment which concerns the Sanctification of
the Feast-days, he makes his blindness to appear much more clearly in what he
relates out of the same Author and the Councils who evidently condemn his
opinion in the very places he alleges, as we shall presently see in the second
Part of this Chapter.

II. POINT.
SECTION I. That for the Sanctification of the Lord's Day it suffices, according
to the Jesuits, to hear one low Mass; that we may hear it where we will, the
whole or part, and at as many parcels as we please.
THis Author whom Father Bauny cites, after he had said that the Apostles had
ordained that we should abstain on the Lord's Day from the business and
pleasures of the world, adds that they ordained this only the better to dispose
us by this retrenchment of our pleasures and work, to keep holy this day in the
holy Service of God, without employing our selves in any other thing; ut in eo
terrenis operibus, vel mundi illecebris abstinentes, tantum divinis cultibus
serviamus. And Father Bauny says that we are quit of all obligation to
sanctify the Lords and Feast-days, If we take the pains on those Holy Days to
hear Mass.

And continuing to cite the same Author, And for the Mass, says he, which is
part of the honor which God requires of us on this day, he speaks thus: In die
vero nullus se a Missarum Saerarum celebratione separet, neque quis domi
remaneat caeteris ad Ecclesiam pergentibus, neque in venatione se occupet. On
that day let no man separate himself from the celebration of the Sacred Mass,
nor let any stay behind at home whilst others go to Church, nor spend his time
in hunting.

If he would draw any advantage from this passage, he ought at least to have
cut off these last words; neque in venatione se occupet. For citing them as out
of S. Austin who relates the Commandment of the Apostles, he acknowledges that
according to S. Austin and the Apostles, hunting is forbidden on the Lord's Day,
which nevertheless, according to the opinion of this Father and his Brethren,
is lawful on this day for those persons who employ themselves therein only for
recreation.

He ought also have taken notice, that this place makes nothing at all for him,
and in no wise proves what he pretends. For this Author whom he cites, says
indeed that no person ought to dispense with himself for hearing Mass on the
Lord-day; but he says not that this will suffice him to acquit himself as he
ought of this Precept which commands him to sanctify this day. And how was it
possible for him to say that, having said immediately before, that the intent
of God and the Church is, that we should not busy our selves in any other
thing than his Service. Vt in eo tantum divinis cultibus serviamus.

After Bauny had so well expounded this passage, and had made so happy use of
it unto his design, he joins the Authority of the Councils to that of the
Apostles and S. Austins, and he goes on with his discourse in this manner: The
Councils say as much. Mayence, cap. 17. and of Tours 3. both in the year 813.
in the time of Leo III. and of Charles the Great, and the 6. of Constantinople
in the 8. Chapter, in these terms: Diei vero Dominici tanta debet esse
observantia, ut praeter Orationes and Missarum solennia, and ea quae ad
vescendum pertinent, nihil fiat. So great ought the observance of the Lord's Day
to be, that besides prayers and the solemn celebration of Masses, nothing
should be done, but what appertains to dressing of meat.

It would not be easy to find in the Councils a passage more express than this
for condemning Father Bauny and his Brethrens opinion concerning the
Sanctification of the Lord's Day; and yet he produces it, and pretends to make
use of it as a strong proof for himself.

Bauny would have handy labor only forbidden on the Lord's Day, and the Council
which he cites, forbids us doing any thing on that day, but what is necessary
for our lives, ut praeter ea quae ad vescendum pertinent nihil fiat. Bauny
maintains, that in hearing Mass we satisfy the Precept which commands us to
sanctify the Lord's Day; and the Council declares, that we ought to employ all
the day in the actions of Piety and Religion, such as are prayers, presence at
the Mass and divine Service: forbidding all other sorts of employments and
divertisements; ut praeter orationes and Missarum solennia nihil fiat.

Layman speaking of the obligation to sanctify Festival days, expounds it in
this manner: Alterum quod in Ecclesisstico praecepto de observatione Festorum
continetur, affirmativum est, ut omnes Fideles usum rationis habentes integram
Mistam cum attentione audiant. Layman lib 4. tr. 7. cap. 3. number. 1. page 185.
The other part of the Commandment of the Church which regards the observation
of Festivals, is affirmative, and ordains that all the Faithful, who have the
use of reason, should bear the whole Mass with attention.

If you be concerned to know which Mass ye are obliged to hear, Non refert ad
praecepti hujus adimpletionem utrum Fideles Festo die intersint Missae solemni
vel privatae. Ibid. number. 3.
That for fulfilling this Precept, it is indifferent whether the Faithful hear
on Feast-days an high or low Mass. If you represent unto him the obligation
they are under to hear the high Mass in their own Parishes, he will resolve you
this doubt by telling you, that there is not an absolute obligation of hearing
Mass only in your Parish: Neither is there any Church appointed, as namely that
of your Parish, for hearing Mass, says he, but in what place soever the
Faithful hear it, they satisfy the Precept of the Church.

He will acknowledge indeed that the Bishops and Pastors of the Church ordain
that the Faithful hear Mass in their own Parish; but he acknowledges not their
voice in this point for the voice of the Church, and he makes no scruple to say
that the Faithful are not obliged to obey them, grounding himself upon the
Authority of Suarez and Tolet, Ubi admonent non obligare praeceptum Episcopi ut
subditi Missam audiant in propria Parcchia. Ibid.
who give, to that he speaks of, this advice: that the Command which the Bishop
makes unto those under his Charge, to hear Mass every one in his own Parish, is
not obliging; pretending that the Bishops themselves have not power to command
this, without doubt, because they have not received it from Suarez nor Tolet,
there being no appearance for them to say, that they have not received it from
Jesus Christ, since he has given them Authority to govern their people, and to
command them whatsoever they judged profitable to their Salvation and the good
of the Church, and has said unto them, that whosoever obeys them, obeys
him in their persons,

Tambourin troubles not himself to know whether there be any Ordinance which
forbids the hearing of private Masses in Religious houses, to the prejudice of
the Parochial. For he pretends that these Decrees are abolished by custom. Quod
si textus cap. 2. de Parcchis contrarium dicat, jam is est usu and consuetudine
abrogatus. Tambur. lib. 1. meth. celebr. Miss. cap. 4. sect. 5. number. 6.
That if the Text de Parochis, cap. 2. say the contrary, it is at this day
abolished by use and custom.

Dicastillus before him had assured us the same thing. Sed ubique and
quaecunque Missa audiatur satisfit praecepto, quidquid aliqui ex antiquis
dixerint, jam enim certissimum est apud omnes authors, antiquum jus
consuetudine abrogatum esse. Dicastill. de Sacr. Miss. tract. 5. disp. 5. dub.
4. number. 56.
Whatsoever may be said by the Ancients, it is altogether certain at present,
says he, according to these Authors, that the ancient Law is abrogated by the
custom. And which is astonishing, after he had given unto this custom, which is
a visible disorder, the power of abrogating the Right and Laws of the Church,
he denies the Bishop the power to destroy this custom by his Ordinances.
Episcopus non potest praecipere ut quisque audiat Missam in sua Parochis, eo
ipso quod secundum Ecclesiae usu^ liberum sit cuique ubique audire. number. 59.
The Bishop, says he, cannot order every one to hear Mass in his own Parish;
because, according to the usage of the Church, every one is free to hear any
where.

So if you will believe these Divines, all the Sanctification of Feasts and
Lords-days are reduced to the hearing of a Mass, and that a low Mass, and to
hear that where we please, let the Bishops and Councils say what they will.

Neque etiam certa Ecclesia, puta Parochialis, pro Missa audienda definita est;
sed ubicunque Fideles Missam audiant, praecepto Ecclesiae satisfaciunt. Ibid.
But if any one have not devotion and leisure to hear Mass, Dicastillus has
taken care to accommodate persons of Quality. Senatores ac reliqui primarii
virl qui Reipublicae negotia in aliud tempus rej^cere commode nequeunt.
Dicastillus de Sacr. Miss. tract. 5. disp. 5. dub. 10. sect. 5. n. 207.
If they cannot, says he, conveniently remit public Affairs to another time,
they are exempt from the observation of this Precept.

But that we might not accuse him for accepting of men's persons, he allows
Servants not to go to Mass. Famuli in locis ubi non est nisi una Missa,
extraordinariam adhibere diligentiam non tenentur, v.g. nimis diluculo
surgendo, and ab ordinario and moderato somno nimis demendo, vel aliquid simile
praestando. Ad hoc enim non obligat praeceptum. number. 214.
If they must rise early thereto, and sleep less than they are accustomed. If
they were urged with their own affairs, sleep and drowsiness would not keep
them in bed; and if their Master had commanded them to rise very early in the
morning to follow him on hunting, or to do some infamous service for him, this
Jesuit would have obliged him to obey him, and yet he dispenses with them for
obeying the Commandment of the Church to serve God, in hearing Mass, if to
observe this Commandment, they must rise earlier and sleep less than they were
wont.

But if you would not hear a whole Mass, these new Casuists hold, that one may
satisfy this duty by hearing part only: and it is a shameful thing to see how
they talk thereof, how they divide and cut into pieces, as we may say, the most
holy things in Religion, disputing and contesting one against another to
determine precisely what part of the Mass may be omitted, and what is
absolutely obliging to be heard to satisfy the Churches Command. They are all
agreed, that he sins against the Commandment,

Coninck says that he wants a notable part who hears the Mass only from after
the Gospel. Others reduce it to a moity or third part of the Mass, as Azor who
demands, Qualem, secundum communem sententiam, committeret qui veniret post
Evangelium. Coninck de Sacr. q. 83. a. 6. dub. unico number. 285. page 285.
What part of the Mass shall we hold to be notable? And he answers, That all
are agreed, that the half or third part is notable.

Bauny in his Sum, cap. 17. page 277. is bolder than the rest, because he
speaks after them. For he determines more particularly what part of the Mass we
are obliged to hear precisely to satisfy the Precept. This is my opinion,
says he, 1 that he who hears the Mass from the Offertory inclusively, until
the after Communion, satisfies the Precept; because he finds himself present at
all the essential and integral parts of that Mass. I know not who has given
him Authority to diminish the Mass in this sort, and to chop off from it, as I
may say, the head and the feet, by cutting away the beginning and the end of it.

There are found some others who are yet more subtle on this subject, and teach
us to cut the Mass in two in the middle, and to join the parts of two different
Masses together, thereof to make up one entire one. Azor in the place I now
alleged, gives us this Expedient, and says that he that will make use
thereof, shall acquit himself very well of his obligation to hear Mass; Quaenam
pa^s Missae notabilis habeatur? Inter omnes convenit dimidiam aut tertiam
partem esse notabilem. Azor lib. 7. cap. 8. page 630.
Because he does all that is contained in the Precept,

Coninck is also of this opinion in the place which I have now cited, where he
makes this Question: Praeslat quidquid in praecepto continetur. Nec enim
praecipit Ecclesia ut ab eodem Sacerdote totum and integrum S^crum, sed
simpliciter ut Missam totam audiamus. Azor supra.
Whether he who comes to the Mass, for example, a little before the
Consecration, and hears that which remains of that same Mass, and the beginning
of another said after, to the Consecration exclusively, satisfies the Precept
of the Church? He affirms that they who hold the negative, are grounded upon a
very strong and effectual reason, which is, that he who carries the matter so,
hears not any one whole Mass, whereunto nevertheless he is obliged by the Utrum
qui venit ad unum Sacrum paulo ante consecrationem, v. g. and audit reliquam
partem illius Sacti, and aliud sequens usque ad consecrationem exclusive,
satisfacit praecepto Ecclesiae? Coninck supra number. 287.
Commandment of the Church: Quia cum duae illae parts sint inter se omnino
independentes, non possunt integrum sacrificium constituere, and constituere,
and consequenter qui eas audit, non audit Missam integram, ad quam tamen
obligatur; and haec ratio in rigore loquendo hanc sententiam satis efficaciter
probat. Ibid.
For that, says he, these two parts of two different Masses are independent
one on another, they cannot make up an entire Mass; whereunto nevertheless he
is obliged; and this reason speaking in rigor, proves this of inion
effectually enough. But quickly after these words he adds, that notwithstanding
this, Quia tamen plurimi Doctores docent contrarium, absolute loquendo talis
est securus, and probabile est cum satisfacere. Ibid.
Because there are many Doctors who teach the contrary, he that so carries the
business is in safety, and its probable that he satisfies this Commandment.

He assures this man upon a simple probability and the word of some Casuists,
against the Authority of the Church, since he confesses that it intended a
whole entire Mass, and which is not so, if it be not said of one and the same
Priest,

He is not content to renounce reason to follow a new and corrupt practice, and
to take the liberty to overturn the Laws of the Church under pretense of
expounding them; he would also cast the fault of this licentiousness and
contempt of the Authority and Laws of the Church upon it self. For to support
his answer, he says, Ratio est quia cum Ecclesia sciat suas leges ita a
gravibus Doctoribus explicari, hoc ipso quo torum explicationes permittit
public imprimi and doceri, censetur suum praeceptum juxta eas moderati. Ibid.
That the Church knowing well that the Laws are thus expounded by grave
Doctors, and suffering their Expositions to be imprinted and taught publicly,
is thought to sweeten its Laws, and to moderate them according to these
Explications.

As if the Church approved all things it tolerates, or which comes not to its
knowledge. A new Inquisition altogether extraordinary would need to be
established to examine all the Errors which are in the new Books. And because
the Pastors of the Church dissemble them sometimes, and suffer them with sorrow
and groaning, feeing at present neither means nor disposition to correct or
repress them, it is to do them great wrong, and to abuse unjustly their
patience and forbearance to draw from thence advantage to deceive the world,
and to make the Commonalty and simple people believe that the Bishops approve
by their silence all that they condemn not openly, though they frequently
lament it before God: See here how errors and abuses slide into the Church,

Bauny in his Sum, cap. 27. page 181. proposes also this question: Whether it
be satisfactory to the Precept of hearing Mass, to hear one part of it of one
Priest, and another of a second different from the first? He quotes Emanuel Sa
and others who hold the affirmative, and approving this opinion, he adds: I
hold it for true, for that hearing it in that manner, that is done which the
Church would have. For it is true to say that he who hears of one Priest saying
the Mass after he is entered into the Church, that which follows the
Consecration unto the end, and of a second who succeeds the first, that which
goes before the Consecration, has heard all the Mass, since he has been found
present indeed at all its parts.

He stays not here. He says moreover, that we may not only hear the Mass in
this manner in parts at twice, when two Priests say it in course and
successively without interruption; but also at thrice or four times, and more
with interruption and at as great a distance of time as we will. And because he
saw that this opinion might be ill received because of its novelty, he would
make it passable under the name of Azor, that we might not believe that he
invented it himself. It is demanded, says he, if this ought to be done in an
uninterrupted succession, and without intermission of time? Azor p. 1. lib. 7.
cap. 3. q. 3. answers no, and that dividing it, we may at diverse times attend
unto so many parts of the Mass,

That is to say, that we may hear it of so many different Priests as there are
parts in the Mass, provided that what we have heard of every one apart being
joined together, contain all that is said in a Mass; and though the Priests say
these Masses at far distant times and Altars, we fail not by hearing them in
this manner, to satisfy the Commandment of the Church, and to have truly heard
an entire Mass composed of parts so different and incoherent. It were better to
oppose the Commandment of the Church openly, than to make sport with it in so
ridiculous a manner, and with so strange a liberty, which can be good for
nothing but to make the Mass and all Religion contemptible to Heretics and
Atheists.

In the mean time this goodly reason which suffices to fulfill the Precept of
the Church, by attending at all parts of the Mass in what manner soever we hear
them, whether it be in a continued succession, and at once, or by many parts,
and at diverse times, has brought things to such a pass, that some exceed so
far as to say, that entering into a Church where we find two Priests at two
Altars, whereof the one has newly begun his Mass, and the other is at the
middle of his, if we attend at once to the one from the beginning unto the
middle, and to the other from the middle unto the end, we shall thereby
discharge our duty of hearing Mass. Bauny cites for this opinion Azor and some
others, Azor speaks in these terms: If that be true which the second opinion
affirms, I see nothing to hinder but he may fulfill the Precept, who entering
into a Church hears the Mass in two parts of two several Priests who say it at
the same time. For as for attention he may lend it to them both at once. For
this cause I approve this opinion, not because it is grounded on a sufficiently
forcible reason; but because it is supported by the Authority of considerable
persons.

He acknowledges that this opinion is ridiculous in it self, and contrary to
the Commandments of the Church, and the respect which is due unto the Mass, and
is also without reason and solid foundation; and for all that he forbears not
to approve it, for fear of disobliging and reproaching those who maintain it,
to whose Authority he chooses rather to submit his Judgment, than to that of the
Church and Reason.

Coninck says the same thing, and he approves also this opinion as the more
probable, though he follows it not, being restrained by this single
consideration, Quia Doctores non ^odem modo asserunt hunc satisfacere sicut
priorem. Coninck supra.
That the Doctors do not assure us that this latter does fulfill the Precept as
well as they do for the former.

Here it is remarkable what submission and respect these Casuists have for one
another, which proceed so far as to make them renounce reason and truth, rather
than to separate from, and contradict one another opinions, if it be not
rather some combination in a faction or private interest that obliges them
thereunto. They give themselves the liberty to reject the holy Fathers, and to
prefer their proper imaginations and new opinions before the ancient Doctrine
of those Great Masters of Divinity,

Tolet treating of this subject, speaks thus: Aliqui volunt quod si quis mediam
Mis^am audire^ ab uno Sacerdote and reliquum ab alio, quod satisfactret
praecepto. Nam. Miffam integram audirer, and mihi videtur probabile. Tolet.
Instit. Saterd. lib. 6. cap. 7. number. 8. page 1030.
There are some who say, that if one hear the half of a Mass of one Priest, and
the rest of another, he does thereby satisfy the Precept, us well as if he had
heard the whole Mass entire. And this seems probable unto me.

Escobar takes it for granted as certain and general, that it is lawful to hear
the Mass in parts of diverse Priests; and afterward he makes a person that
advises with him to talk in these terms: Dixisti pesse quem partem Missae ab
uno, partem ab alio Sacerdote exaudire; Rogo an possit prius pars posterior
Missae audire and postea prior?
You have said that we may hear the one half of the Mass of one Priest, and the
other half of another: I demand of you whether we Non video, si verum est quod
secunda opinio docet, quin satisfaciat praecepto qui aedem Sacram ingressus,
duos Sacerdotes rem Sacram facientes audit simul per parts. Nam quod attinet
ad attentionem, potest ad utrumque animum intendere. Quare secunda sententia
mihi solum probatur, quia tantorum virorum est autoritate, non efficaci ratione
suffulta. Azor in^it. mor. lib. 7. cap. 3. page 631.
may first hear the latter part of the Mass, and afterward the former? To
which he answers thus: Asserit Turrianus select. p. 2. d. 16. dub. 7. quia
praeceptum quoad substantiam impletur, and solum invertitur ordo. Escobar
tract. 1. Exam. 11. number. 73. page 189.
Turrianus says you may; because so that is accomplished in substance which is
commanded by the Precept; and therein he only inverts the order. This is not
the only point wherein the Jesuits make no dainty to overturn the order which
the Holy Ghost has established in the Mysteries of Religion and the Church.

He inquires also, Potestne fimul and eodem tempore audiri quando ex duobus
Sacerdotibus unus Missam inchoaret, alter consecrationi daret operam? Affirmat
Hurtado de Sacr. tom. 2. de Missa dub. 5. diff. 4. quia ut Azorius p. 1. lib.
7. cap. 3. q. 3. alt, potest quis ad utrumque Sacerdotem animum intendere. Ibid.
Whether we may at once and the same time hear the Mass of two Priests, whereof
the one is newly begun, and the other is at the Consecration? And he answers,
That Hurtado believes it, because as Azor says, one may attend to both
Priests. So that a person who could at the same time apply his mind to five or
six Priests who said Mass together, and were in diverse parts of the Sacrifice,
might in a moment discharge the obligation of hearing Mass, taking from each a
part to compose one complete Mass in his mind.

And it is upon this Principle that Escobar relyes, when he says also, Unde
aliquis docuit probabiliter ex praecepto, ex voto, ex poenitentia injuncta
obligatum tres Missas audire, satisfacere si simul a tribus Sacerdotibus codem
tempore celebrantibus audiat. Ibid.
That he holds that probable which a certain Author, whom he names not, has
taught, that a person obliged by precept, vow, or penance imposed on him to
hear three Masses, may fulfill it by attending at once to three Priests who
celebrate at once.

There is nothing so easy as thus to accomplish Commands, Penances, and Vows.
But this accomplishment will deserve a greater penance than the former, because
it is nothing else than a playing with, and deriding Religion approaching unto
impiety, when a man is commanded to hear three Masses, or to hear them as they
are ordinarily heard in the Church, and according to the custom of Christians
fearing God, and attending at his holy Sacrifice of the Mass,

SECTION II. That according to the Jesuits the Precept of hearing Mass may be
satisfied, by hearing them without internal Devotion, Attention, Intention,
even with an express intent not to satisfy, and whilst we entertain our selves
alone or with others with other discourse and wicked and dishonest thoughts.
ALL that we have hitherto produced out of the Jesuit-Divinity concerning the
obligation and manner of hearing Mass, respects precisely the outward
Sanctification of Festivals only. We must say one word of the internal
Disposition; and see with what devotion and attention they hold it ought to be
heard that the Precept may be fulfilled.

Coninck taking the question higher, and making it general of all the Commands
of the Church, maintains, Non est necessarium ut quis praecise satisfaciat
praecepto Ecclesiae, ut habeat internam aliquam devotionem. Coninck de Sacr. q.
83. a. 6. dub. unico. number. 301. page 286.
That to satisfy it there needs no internal devotion; and that it suffices to
do that outwardly which it ordains; and he draws from this general Maxim a
particular Conclusion, which is as follows: Hinc sequitur eum qui etiam
voluntary est toto tempore Sacri distractus, modo sibi sufficienter praesens
sit ut Sacro cum externa devotione assistat, satisfacere Ecclesiae praecepto.
Ibid. number. 302. Possumus Ecclesiae praeceptis satisfacere per actum qui non sit
vera virtus; imo qui sit peccatum. Ibid. number. 296.
That he who is distracted the whole time of the Mass even voluntarily,
satisfies the Precept of the Church, provided he have attention enough to
attend at the Mass with outward devotion. He had said before, according to the
same Maxim, that the Command of the Church may be satisfied by an action not
only not good, but even really a sin.

Azor says the same thing, and he expounds it more at length. An praecepto and
legi satisfaciat qui cum peccato rem audit divinam? Azor instit. mor. lib. 7.
cap. 6. page 635.
It is demanded, says he, whether he that sins in hearing the Mass, fulfils
the Commands? He reports first of all the opinions of the Ancients, saying,
Fuere qui senscrint generatim nullum praeceptum per actum qui sit per se malus,
implerl. Ibid.
There have been some heretofore who believed generally, that no precept could
be accomplished by an action that was bad in it self. They that held this
opinion were all the holy Fathers and ancient Divines. Sed horum opinio communi
est omnium consensu resutata. Ibid.
But their opinion, if you will believe this Author, is now rejected with
common consent. Without doubt, because it is not large and obsequious enough
for those who have since invented others to sweeten or rather to disparage and
abolish the Commands of the Church. The reason of this Jesuit is, Neque enim ad
praeceptorum substantiam servandam requiritur charitas aut boni finis voluntas.
Because, according to him, charity and the desire of a good end is not
necessary to accomplish a precept in substance; that is to say, simply to
perform what is commanded.

He reduces his Maxim into Examples, Antonin, whose opinion he relates and
refutes. This Saint says, that a man who goes to Church only to look on Women,
and to entertain himself with filthy thoughts in beholding them, so that
without this he would not go to Church, nor hear Mass on a Feast Day, does not
fulfill the Precept, if he be there with such inclinations. But Azor rejects
this opinion, eluding it by a very subtle distinction. He durst not absolutely
deny but this man commits a great crime; but he says, that this crime is
against God who forbids lust, and not against the Church which obliges him to
hear Mass.

See how Azor discourses: S. Antoninus id voluit dicere ejusmodi hominem alias
ad templum nullo modo accessurum nisi soeminae videndae, aut intemperanter
appetendae causa, peccare. Id verum est, non in co quod rem divinam and
praeceptum omiserit, sed quod templum adierit libidinis and voluptatis gratia,
and quod depravato animi affectu rem divinam audierit. Quare si generatim
loquamur, omnino verum est aliorum responsum, hoc praeceptum servari etiamsi
cum peccato res divina audiatur. Ibid.
S. Antonin would say that a man that goes not to Church but only to see a
woman, and satisfy his lustful desires, who without this would not go, sins.
Which is true, not because he has violated the Command to hear Mass, but
because he went to Church for a dishonest passion and pleasure only, and
because he heard the Mass with a spirit altogether disordered. For this cause,
speaking in general, we must hold their opinion true, who say that though we
sin in hearing Mass, yet we fail not of satisfying the precept.

Tambourin says the same thing in terms capable to strike them with horror
who know what the Sacrifice of the Mass is. Si Missae quis intersit ad videndam
mulierem vel ad aucupandam vanam gloriam, satisfacit, si interim sacrificio
vacet. Tambur. l. 4. decal. c. 2 sect. 1. number. 17
If any one, says he, attend at Mass to look on a woman, or to attain some
vainglory, he satisfies the precept, provided in the mean time he attend to
the Sacrifice. According to this Author the Sacrifice of the Mass may be
attended to whilst we entertain and feed our minds with thoughts of lust and
vanity; that is to say, that we may at the same time sacrifice unto God and the
Devil: with this difference that tends also to the Devils advantage, that he is
adored and served truly with the heart by the vanity and lust which it
voluntarily entertains. Whereas the homage we owe unto God in this estate, is
only apparent and altogether outward, and consists in nothing but the presence
and posture of the body. And yet this Jesuit will have the Church hold it self
satisfied with this manner of being present at Mass, as with an entire
accomplishment of its Precept. Nothing more horrible can be spoken against God,
more disparaging against the Church, more ridiculous and contrary to common
sense, as well as Faith, and the most general resentments of all Religion.

Filliutius speaks also the same thing, and brings the same Example: Prava
intentio adjunct^ voluntati audiendi Missam, u^ aspiciendi mulierem libidinose,
etc. dummodo sit sufficiens attentio, non est contrary huic praecepto; quare
satisfacit. Filliutius qq. moral. tom. 1. tr. 5. c. 7. number. 212. page 128.
An evil intention, says he, as to look lasciviously upon a woman, joined with
a will to bear Mass, is not contrary to the precept; wherefore he who hears in
this disposition, fulfils it, provided he give that attention which is
necessary. Nisi vel consabulatio esset discontinuata, partim scilicet loquendo,
and partim attendendo, uncommuniter fieri solet. Ibid n. 216.
Unless this discourse be sometimes discontinued by talking one while, and then
attending, as it is usually done.

He has reason to say, as it is usually done; because it happens hardly at all
to be done otherwise amongst the most indevout themselves. Since though the
respect for these Mysteries could not induce them unto this interruption, yet
the diversity of the actions and Ceremonies of the Mass would constrain
thereunto all those who would not appear openly profane. Private discourses
must needs be interrupted, that we may kneel when the Priest descends to the
foot of the Altar at the beginning of the Mass, when we stand up at the reading
of the Gospel, when we kneel after the Gospel, or at least before the
Consecration; there is no person so irreligious as not to be silent, and show
respect at least outwardly when the Priest elevates the Host to adore and cause
it to be adored by the assistants; as also when he communicates, and when he
gives the Communion. So that when Filliutius says, that talking and discourse
of affairs are lawful during the Mass, and are not contrary to the Commandment
of the Church, provided they be interrupted and mingled with some attention, he
declares openly enough that they be all allowed, there scarcely ever being
other than of this sort. Bauny is of the same opinion, and he expounds it also
more clearly in his Sum, Men and women who during the Sacrifice of the Mass
interrupt your prayers by unnecessary discourses, though often repeated, fulfill
the Commandment. And he adds a little after, That to be slightly distracted in
prayer, is of it self a slight fault. Whence he infers: That albeit it be
reiterated and multiplied during the Mass, it can never proceed to be mortal.
And from this discourse he concludes absolutely. Therefore to speak a few words
to our neighbor, after returning to prayer, and from thence to talk again, is
not a thing which in rigor can hinder our attention to the Mass.

But if nevertheless any person would chat continually during the Mass, these
Doctors would not condemn him to hear another, provided these discourses were
not about serious matters, but slight, and which did not too much employ the
mind. Filliutius supra number. 216.
Non de re seria, sed levi, quae non impediat attentionem necessariam. And this
attention is altogether external, and consists in observing what the Priest
does, and the Ceremonies he practices, at least by intervals, that he may stand
up when he reads the Gospel, kneel at the Consecration, and adore our Lord at
the elevation of the consecrated Host.

According to this Doctrine, Tradesmen and women who prattle and are merry
together at their work, may in like manner chat and entertain themselves while
they are together at the Mass; because their ordinary discourses being not
seldom about serious things which busy their minds, they may apply the same
attention to the Mass as to their work; which is sufficient, according to these
Divines.

They go so far as to say, Quo pacto explicandus est Soto, disp. 13. q. 2.2.1.
sin. cum dicit; eisi colloquia sint de rebus indecentibus, tamen impleri. Ibid.
number. 216.
Filliutius says, expounding Soto whom he will have to be of this opinion; and
Bauny would come to agreement with them very easily upon this point, since he
says in his Sum, Chap. 18. page 176. That he thinks they are not blameworthy,
who hold that Prebends and Canons discharge their duty who assisting in the
Quire during holy Service, pass their time in scandalous discourses, and in an
employment altogether vicious, as in laughing, scoffing, etc.

Escobar concludes this point by reducing it to the uttermost extremity, when
he demands, Audit quis Sicrum animo non satisfaciendi praecepto, satisfacitne?
Ita plane ex Vasquez assertione. Escobar tract. 1. exam. 11. number. 107. page 193.
Whether he that hears the Mass with a design not to fulfill, do fulfill the
Precept? He answers, That he certainly fulfils it, according to Vasquez 's
opinion.

Sanchez says the same. And that it might appear less odious, he draws it by
consequence from another Principle which is yet more strange. Vere implet
audiendi Sacri praeceptum illud ex contemptu audiendo; ergo a fortiori cum
intention non satislaciendi. Sanch.oper.mor. l. 1. c. 3. n. 13. page 64.
He, says he, who hears the Mass of contempt, accomplisheth the Precept truly.
And with much stronger reason he that hears with an intention not to satisfy.
He would have us believe that we may do the will of the Church, doing it
expressly against our intention; and that we may obey it by a wilful rebellion,
and honor it by an affected contempt,

It seems impossible to advance farther in this matter, than to say that we
accomplish a Precept by an action that we do in contempt of it, and with an
intention not to satisfy it. But Tambourin goes yet farther. For he finds
means not to transgress this Precept, not only with an intention not to
accomplish it, but even in not doing outwardly that which is commanded, though
it might be done if we would. Potest quis licite in aliquem locum distantem ab
Ecclesia discedere, in quo praevidet non posse die festivo Missam audire,
tempore a die festo remoto, etiam eo fine ne audiat, seu ne ten^atur audire
Sacrum. Tam^ur. l. 4. decal. c. 2. sect 3. n. 6.
We may, says he, lawfully retire some days before a Feast unto some place
distant from the Church where we foresee that we might hear a Mass on a
Feast Day, though we do it with a design of not hearing, or of not being
obliged to hear.

This is a Paradox greater than those of the Stoics, that we may obey by
disobedience, honor by dishonouring, and discharge our duty to God and the
Church by sins and crimes contrary to the Ordinances of God and the Church. And
there remains nothing more for these Doctors to say, but that crimes and sins
are good actions, since they may serve, according to them, to the
accomplishment of the Commandments of God and the Church: since God and the
Church cannot command other than good actions.

And this is that which Celot seems to pretend, when he tmaintains, that he who
hears the Mass out of vainglory, does a good work. This is in his 9. Book and
7. Chapter, where he encounters with Peter Seguenot, and reproves him for
having said, that though we cannot accomplish as we ought the Commandments of
God and the Church, Ego contra disputo lithali peccato irretitum hominem qul
publicae metu insainiae templum and Missam ex praecepto Festa die celebrat, id
ipsum, licet imperfectum, opus praeveniente comitanteque gratia facere, neque
obedientiam Ecclesiae debitam infringere. Gelot lib. 9. cap. 7. page 813.
I maintain on the contrary, that a man who is in an estate of mortal sin,
going to Church and Mass on a Feast Day, which is the Commandment, for fear of
losing his reputation, though his work be imperfect, ceases not to act by
Grace, preventing and accompanying him, and that he offends not against the
obedience he owes to the Church.

This action is out of vainglory, and notwithstanding it must be good and holy
if it be done by the motion of preventing and accompanying Grace, as he
supposes; or indeed he must say that a sin must proceed of Grace as of its
Principle, and that Grace may cause us to sin; which were Blasphemy, or rather
a folly greater than theirs who have said that God is the Author of sin. For
they have not said that he causes us to sin in giving us Grace, but rather in
refusing to give it, and pushing us on unto sin, not by his Grace but by his
Power.

Also Celot affirms, Cui veni^ in mentem dicere nos Christi gratia ad id
impelli, quod fit cum pecca^o? Ibid. page 815.
That it never came into the thoughts of any man to imagine that the Grace of
Jesus Christ could press us on to any action which were sin. He declares then,
that he who hears the Mass in mortal sin out of vainglory, or for worldly
honor alone, does it by the motion of the Grace of Jesus Christ; and by
consequence that his action is good; and that in this quality it suffices to
accomplish the Commandment to hear Mass on Feast-days.

This Jesuit pretends that all those who observe any Commandment outwardly as
the Jews, and yet in worse manner than the Jews, doing it by a wicked motive,
cease not to have the Grace of Jesus Christ, to act by his motion, and to do
thereupon good works, though they be not perfect; that is to say, though the
good motive, which is to them as the Soul and form, and which should give them
perfection, be wanting; and on the contrary, though they be done by a wicked
and criminal motive, so that they be in themselves true sins and crimes covered
with an appearance of good external actions. And so, according to this Doctor,
sins and crimes shall be good works, proper to content God, and to satisfy his
Commandments and those of the Church.

ARTICLE II. Of Fasting, and the Commandment to Fast.
FAsting in the Church consists in abstinence from certain victuals which it
has forbidden, and to be content with one meal a day, which sometimes is not
taken till in the evening after Even-song, or at least after Noon in certain
less solemn Fast-days, as in the Vigils of Festivals; Bernard, and long after,
as the Casuists themselves agree. In our days they have anticipated the time of
repast, changing supper into dinner, and they have of late introduced the
custom of making Collations at night.

There is none who sees not that this change has brought great relaxation in
Fasting, according to what was observed and instituted by all Antiquity; and it
is not without great condescension that the Church suffers that it should be
discharged by such an observation.

The Jesuits in the mean time find it to severe; and to sweeten and accommodate
it to the world, they have reduced it to such a point, that to fast, according
to their Maxims, is in truth not to fast at all, and to make good cheer.

To make this more clearly appear, we will divide this Article into three
Points. In the first we shall see how they regulate eating and the hour of
repast on Fasting-days. In the second what they say of drinking and of the
Collation at night. And in the third their easieness to dispense with all sorts
of persons for Fasting, and upon all sorts of occasions, even the most criminal
and infamous.

I. POINT. That according to the Jesuits Divinity we may prevent the hour of
Repast, make it as long and great as we please, eat more than on another day,
and break out into all excess and intemperance, without breaking our Fast.
BAuny in his Sum, Chap. 16. page 251. declares, that at present the hour of
repast is at Noon; but he adds, that we may advance and anticipate this time
one hour without sin, and he cites for this opinion Layman, Binsfield, and
Diana, who says, that the Religious have this privilege. This is no great
advantage nor honor for the Religious, that they are the first to favor
themselves, and demand privilege to fast more at their case. But if we may
prevent and anticipate the time of refection by an hour, as he says, without
sin, there is no need of privilege for this, and the Religious do ill employ
their credits to obtain it. This Jesuit also seems not to make any great
account of it, saying afterward, that without any regard thereof they do it,
and all others also without fault; and that altogether, that is, Seculars and
Monasticks, may prevent that time by two or three hours when necessity or
convenience requires it. That is, that we may break fast on Fast-days, instead
of dining, and sit down at the table at eight or nine of the clock in the
morning.

Escobar says the same thing in a manner. He demands, Anticipa^ur sine causa
hora comedendi die jejunii, solviturne?
Whether the Fast be broken by anticipating the bour of refreshment on a Fast
day without cause? He answers, Minime, quia determinatio horae non est de
essentia jejunil. Escobar tract. 1. exam. 3. number, 72. page 213.
That it is not broken, because it is not of the essence of a Fast to eat at a
determined hour. This answer gives an absolute liberty and without bounds, and
first of all to prevent the hour of repast on Fast-days, not only two or three
hours, as Bauny says, but more also, and it gives power to eat absolutely at
what hour we will, because, as this Casuist says, to eat at one or other
determinate hour is not of the essence of a Fast.

But if any fault be committed in this disorder, it can be at the most but a
venial one, according to this Doctor himself. Delinquetur v^nisliter, nisi sit
exigua anticipatio, ut dimidiae horae. Ibid. Colligo Religiosos habentes
privilegium anticipandi prandium per horem, posse sine ulla culpa per horam and
mediam ante meridiem prandere. Ibid.
It will be but a venial sin, says he, if this anticipation be but a small
one, as of half an hour. Whence he concludes in favor of the Religious, who
have the privilege to prevent dinnertime by an hour, that they may without
sin dine at half an hour past ten.

The corrupt custom and looseness of the time gives them half an hour, and their
privileges give them an hour to anticipate their repast. So that they may dinc
without scruple at half an hour past ten on Fast-days, thereby giving a great
example of Penance and Austerity to Seculars and ordinary Christians, who
prolong their Fast an hour and a half, or two hours longer than they, and in
these times dine not till afternoon.

Tambourin flies yet higher than Escobar, Pro iis quos juvat putare meridiem
esse horam le reficiendi st^utam sub meresli, nota eos posse prandere una hora
circiter ante meridiem in hyeme. Sanch^ d. 53. number. 7. Trul. in d. n 3. cap. 2.
dub. 4. number. 2. and duabus in aestate. Ita 2305. s. 4. cap. 18. number. 100. hine
quoniam Mendicantes, and qui little privilegia participant, gaudent privilegio
anticipand^ refectionem per horam, (ita Comp privilegiorum Societatis Jesu)
ideo poterunt prandere duabus hotis hyeme, tribus aestate ante meridiem. Nam
unam aut alteram dat moralitas meridiei, reliquas Papae concessio. Et quia
multi probabiliter censent comedere semi-hora ante statutum vel concessum
tempus, etiam sine causa, non esse notabilem culpam, quia parum pro nihilo
reputatur, Dian. p. 5. tract. 5. number. 10. p. 1. tract. 9. number. 27. p. 2.19.
number. 53. idcirco hyeme poterunt hi du^bus horis cum dimidia, aestate tribus cum
dimidia ante folarem meridiem mensae accumbere. Et quidem ex cause studi^;
icineris, negotli, etc. ^iam sine veniali. Tambur. decal. lib. 4. cap. 5. sect.
4. number. 3.
As for them who imagine that midday is appointed for repast under pain of
mortal sin, it is to be observed that they may dine an hour before noon in
Winter, and two hours in Summer -- Whence it follows, that the Mendicant
Friars, and those who participate of their privileges to anticipate their
dinners one hour on Fast-days, as it is contained in the Abrigdment of the
Privileges of the Society of Jesus, may by this reason dine two hours by the
Sun before midday in Winter, and three in Summer; because the moral duration
of Noon gives them one or two, and the Papal Privilege another. And because
many do grant with probability, that to eat half an hour before the time
appointed, even without cause, is no notable fault; because a little matter is
considered as nothing; thence it comes, that in Winter they may dine two hours
and a half before midday, and in Summer there and a half. But if this be done
by reason of studying, traveling, or business, it is not so much as a venial
sin.

This privilege seemed so considerable unto Tambourin, that he would gladly
have it observed here, an Abridgment of the Privileges of the Society of
Jesus, as one of the most important for the good of the Society it self, and
for the greater Glory of God. Where it must be observed, that all this is for
them who do imagine that the hour of midday is that appointed for repast under
pain of mortal sin. Whence it follows, that they who will not entertain this
imagination, may eat in the morning, if it seems good unto them, without
breaking their Fast.

As for the quality of the repast that is made on Fast-days, Tolet says you
may fare better than you would have done, had it not been Fasting-day. Licet
tem pore jejunii a^quid plus accipere in prandio. Tolet. lib. 6. cap. 2. number.
4. page 103.
It is lawful, says he, on a Fasting-day to take something more than usual to
dinner.

Sanchez says the same thing yet more openly, and with greater contempt of the
Church and its Commands. Qui semel in die jejunii comedit, curans ita stomachum
cibis replere, ut nihil prorsus samis patiatur, vere implet praeceptum, cum
tamen legis intentionem, quae est fame aliqua carnem macerare, defcaudet.
Sanchez op. mor. lib. 1. cap. 14. number. 4. page 65.
He, says he, who taking his refection on a Fast Day, takes care to fill his
belly so with victuals, that he may not be hungry, does truly fulfill the
Precept, though he elude the end of the Law, which is to mortify the flesh by
hunger. It is lawful then, according to this great Doctor, to mock the Church
in this manner by doing the contrary to what it expects, even then when we seem
to do what it commands.

Tolet proceeds yet farther, saying, that what excess soever we commit in
eating or drinking at dinner, and how long time soever we spend therein, In
continua autem quantitate prandii non est certa servanda mensura ratione
jejunii; sed quamvis aliquis multum excedat, non ob id solvit jejunium, peccat
tamen contra sobrietatem. Tolet. supra.
So that we may be three or four hours at table after the manner of Germany,
and drink and eat as much as we will, without breaking the Fast, and without
transgressing the Order of the Church, according to these Fathers. We may
accomplish a Precept of Abstinence by an excess of gluttony; we may fast
without sobriety; do Penance by sinning, and mortify the flesh and paunch by
pampering and stuffing it.

According to this solid Divinity, they all in a manner conclude, that drink
breaks not the Fast at what time and in what excess soever it be taken. At this
time (says Bauny in his Sum, speaking of the Collation at night, Chap. 16.
page 255.) drinking concerns not the Fast, as neither on the day. Which very
well agrees with the Institution of the Fast, and as this Jesuit speaks
himself, page 258. with the end for which God and the Church do will and ordain
that we should fast, which is to bridle the flesh and subdue the appetite under
the dominion of reason. Use and excess of drinking, especially of wine, having
more force to inflame the flesh, and stir up the appetite against reason, than
the use of the most nourishing meats.

There are Drunkards that fast all the year, according to this Doctrine, though
they drink themselves drunk every day, passing them all almost without eating,
and contenting themselves with a mouthful of bread and some little matter
therewith, provided they want not wine.

The same Author says in the same place, page 256, that so often as we eat
flesh and eggs on a Fasting-day, so many sins we commit^; but he adds, That it
is not so in other victuals, as bread, fish, and butter, the use whereof
repeated so often as our appetite requires them, after the second time is no
sin. His reason is, Because seeing that what exceeds above necessary, turns
into crudities in the stomach, which increase not but weaken strength, it seems
that it cannot reasonably be said that the repast which is taken above the
second, profits the body, much less that it strengthens it.

He would say that excessive eating and drinking do the same thing that
Fasting, which is to enfeeble the body; and consequently that excesses which
are committed in Lent by eating as much and as often as their appetite requires
it, after the second time, are not sins against the Fast, because they are not
against the intention and end for which it was instituted.

This Father has not considered the difference betwixt mortifying and weakening
the body; betwixt the abating the violence of sensuality, and enervating the
forces of Nature. The intention of the Church and the end of Fasting is to
abate the violence of sensuality, and not to deprive the body of its strength.
It pretends on the contrary to cure by abstinence the weaknesses and
infirmities of the body as well as of the Soul, as it also declares frequently
in the office and in the prayers of the Lent.

This good Elder took no heed of this distinction. He confounds sensuality
which is in the body as a strange heat equal to that of a Fever, and which
gives no strength to it but to rebel against the Spirit and against the Law of
God, with the force and natural vigor of the body it self, which ought to help
him in his obedience to the Spirit, and to render it more fit and prompt to the
outward actions of piety and virtue. He pretends that no mortify sensuality,
and to weaken the body being one and the same thing, according to him, Lent, by
that means destroying his health, and weakening the natural strength of his
body, corresponds perfectly well with the intention of the Church when it
commands us to fast.

That is to say, that the true way of pursuing the intent of the Church in
Lent, is to drink and eat excessively, and that the best invention to obtain
the end of Fasting is not to fast at all, but rather to give ones self unto
debauches, because debauches do more subdue the body than Fasting, and they
weaken its force, which is the end of Fasting, according to this great Divine.

As for the Collation at night, Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 16. page 255. tells us
that we may without breaking our Fast, take any broth made with herbs, or any
Sallet with a red Herring. And to clear it up yet more largely, he demands; And
if a man should take some Confection of Almonds or Pottage with coorse-grated
bread, were it a sin? He acknowledges with some others whom he quotes, that
this cannot be done without sin; but he declares his opinion in these terms,
page 255. But I believe nevertheless that by the use of these things the Fast
is not at all concerned, when they exceed not the quantity which is allowed by
the custom of the Church, received by the consent of prudent persons. And that
there may be nothing wanting to this reformed Collation, he adds that in the
time of this Collation drinking concerns not the Fast: that is to say, that we
may take as much thereof as we will without breaking our Fast.

Azor says the same thing in these terms: Communi jam usu receptum est ut
parum panis etiam edatur vel seetsim solum, vel u a cum fru^tibus, herbis, vel
aliis cibis levioribus, enjusmodi sunt ficus, uva passa, nuces, pyra, noma, vel
alia ex saccharo and melle confecta, vel pisciculus parvulus. Nam consuetudini
in hac part standum est. Azor. lib. 7. cap. 8. q. 7.
The custom is at present to take a little bread only, or with fruit, herbs, or
other slight victuals, as Figs, Raisins, Nuts, Pears, Apples, Confections made
up with Honey or Sugar, or some small fish. For herein we must observe the
custom. If we may take for our Rule the liberty, delicacies and excess which
custom introduces every day into Collations, there will be no bounds, and
there will remain no appearance of Fasting at all, it being clear that men
every day give themselves more liberty in this matter, and many times make
Collations which are good Suppers, and which cost more than those which many
persons of every condition, who neither do nor pretend to fast, do make all the
year long.

Escobar follows Azor in this point. Scio equidem Azorium and alios, piscicu os
permittere, quod non improbarim si pauc^ sint. Escobar tract. 1. Exam. 13. cap.
1. number. 6. page 202.
I know well, says he, that Azor and others permit to eat little fishes at
Collation, and I condemn it not if they eat a few. Azor nor Bauny spoke of no
more than one small fish, and Escobar makes him say that it is lawful to eat
many. Scio Azorium and alios permittere pisciculos, because according to his
Judgment, it is indeed lawful to eat more at a Collation, provided the quantity
be not too great; quod non improbarim si sint pauci. It will quickly be lawful,
as we shall see presently, to eat a great fish at Collation, since many little
ones are as much worth as a great one, and may be equal to it.

He adds also; De jusculis ex leguminibus and amygdalo non consentiunt
Doctores; permitto si quantitas permissam quantitatem frugum non exaequet. Ibid.
For what concerns Pottage of Almonds and Pulse, the Doctors agree not; but he
allows them, provided the quantity of them be not so great as that of fruit. As
soon as things concerning manners come to be deliberated of, and we begin only
to doubt, these Doctors, who profess an easy and officious Divinity, will not
fail to take the part of the flesh and blood, and to conclude for sensuality,
and the carnal humor of worldly men.

We must conclude and finish this Point with a passage of Tambourin who speaks
yet much more boldly, and is not so scrupulous as the rest. He says, Dico de
cibis communibus quadragesimalibus, hetbis nimirum, five crudis, five elixis,
piscibus five parvis, five magnis sale coctis, fouctibus five recentibus, five
siccis, dulciariis, pultibus ex amygdalarum cremore, ex leguminibus, ea accipi
possunt in jentaculo quae cuilibet arrident, dummodo conflatum ex pane ut fit
and praedictis quod accipitur, non excedat uncia^ ^cto. Tambur. lib. 4. decal.
cap. 5. sect. 3. number. 3.
That the meats which are used in Lent, to wit, raw and boiled herbs, little or
great fish salted, fresh or dried Fruits, Confections, Milk of Almonds or other
Pulse, may be taken for Collation, which soever we love best, provided that the
whole, with the bread eaten with them, exceed not the weight of eight ounces.

He must be very squeamish who cannot find in so great a diversity of meats
what may satisfy his appetite, Christmas-Eve we may double the weight, and
take the quantity of sixteen ounces. Perhaps this is because on that day the
Fast is greatest and most solemn. He proceeds in his indulgence, and says, We
may add two ounces more to these eight, because some hold it is too little; and
though it may happen that eight ounces may suffice wholly to satiate, it ceases
not to be lawful to eat them; which was prudently introduced to remove scruples
from some very religious persons. N. 1. Sive iis ccto unciis fames prorsus
extinguatur, sive nequaquam. Id quod prudenter inventum est pro praxi, ne
scilicet scrupulis pateret paulo religiosioribus via. Dixi autem octo circiter
uncias. N^m parum excedere addendo unam vel alteram unciam supra praedictas
octo, esset ex nonnullorum sententia provisio materiae, nec mortale peccatum
constituens.


This without doubt is an excellent way to remove scruples, to take away all
pains of the body for fear of creating any to the mind, and to allow religious
Souls to satiate themselves at Collations, that they may be delivered from the
care of watching over themselves, and from the pains they should take to
restrain and moderate their appetites.

II. POINT. That according to the Jesuits Divinity we may on Fast-days drink as
much as we please during our Refection, or after it, and take, every time we
drink, a morsel of bread or some other thing, and be drunk also without
intrenching on the Fast.
IT seems that all humane condescendence cannot reduce Fasting lower than these
Jesuits do, whose opinions we are about to report. After they have said that we
may anticipate the hour of Refection, and both dine and breakfast on
Fast-days; that we may make our repast as good as we please, and better than on
the days we fast not, so far as to proceed unto excess; that we may continue
and lengthen it as much as we please; and after this make a Collation in the
evening, which should be a true Supper; it might seem that there remained no
difficulty in fasting, nor any appearance of any foot-step of that holy
Severity wherewith it was instituted and faithfully observed in the Church,
until these last Ages of Ignorance and Corruption have changed it in this
manner.

Yet because the people of the World bred up in luxury and pleasures, are never
contented with the indulgence and relaxation that is granted them, but demand
always more, and find Fasting, such as it is at this day, too severe and
troublesome, the Jesuits Divinity searches out new ways to satisfy them, and
easily descends unto the lowest point of complacency.

First of all it maintains, that we may in the morning, Non violat jejunium qui
extra consuetam corporis refectionem bibit etlam vinum and cervisiam: id enim
consuetudo tempore immemoriali permittit. Layman lib. 4. tr. 8. c. 1. n. 7.
page 194.
He breaks not his Fast, says Layman, who out of the time of the ordinary
repast drinks Wine or Beer; because the custom of time beyond all memory allows
it.

He must never have heard of the manner of Fasting according to the Discipline
of the Church in Ages past, to call it, as he does, a custom beyond all memory,
which was not introduced until of late times, and which is contrary to the
Declaration which the Church has publicly made in the Office of Lent,
testifying to its Children that the Fast of Lent requires abstinence from drink
as well as meat, whilst it causes daily to be said to excite us to keep it
faithfully: Vtamur ergo parcius verbis, cibis, and potibus, without putting any
difference betwixt the one and the other.

But besides this custom so corrupt and opposite to the Laws and Discipline of
the Church, this Doctor alleges also a reason which seems to him to be solid,
saying, Ecclesia nunc dicbus jejuniorum non prohibet potum, quandoquidem is per
se ac principaliter non tendit ad corpus nutriendum, sed ad sitim sedandam.
Ibid.
That the Church does not at present forbid us to drink out of the time of
refection on Fast-days, because it is not principally to nourish the body, but
to quench thirst. If this reason be true, eating will be no more forbidden than
drinking. For as drinking is of it self a remedy against thirst, so eating is
also a remedy against hunger; and if eating nourishes by delivering us from
hunger, drinking nourishes us also by delivering us from thirst.

There are even some drinks, Bauny in his Sum, Chap. 16. page 250. and many
others, the Church thereby testifying that wine nourishes and strengthens more
than fish and other Lenten provision, which have been always allowed.

Yet if Layman had said, as some others, that thirst being more difficult to
support, and in some sort more inconvenient than hunger, we might sometimes in
case of necessity drink out of the time of refection, it had been more
excusable; but he and most of his Brethren with him will have it, that we may
drink as much and as often as we will on Fast-days, and even without necessity
and without thirst, drinking to nourish our selves, and to allay our hunger,
without offending against the Commandment of the Church. Quam^brem si quis
vinum aut cervisiam bibat gratia famis sedandae, non agit contra Ecclesiae
praeceptum. Ibid.
Wherefore, says Layman, concluding his discourse, if any one drink Wine or
Beer to appease his hunger, he does nothing contrary to the Precept of the
Church.

But what shall we say of a person that drinks on this fashion purposely to
clude the Fast? Tambourin, provided he drink neither milk nor broth, he may
drink what he pleases, even for the pleasure alone which he takes therein. See
his own words here: Non licet intra diem jejunii ebibere lac vel jus, sed licet
bibere vinum, mustum, cervisiam, aquas ex herbis vel codem vino distillatas,
etiam de mane, etiam ob solam delectationem, etiam multoties in die, etiam in
fraudem jejunil. Tambur. lib. 4. decal. c. 5. sect. 2. number. 4.
It is not lawful on a Fast day to drink Milk or Pottage; but it is lawful to
drink Wine, Must, Beer, Waters distilled from Herbs or Wine, and these even in
the morning, and for pleasure only, and many times in the day, and to defeat
the Fast.

And for fear the drink should discompose or distaste us, especially taken on
this manner in the morning without necessity or thirst, Layman holds that we
may take a bit of bread after we have drunk. His add cadem ratione colligi cum
extra tempore refectionis bibitur, licitum esse psucillum panis adjicere ne
potus neceat. Ibid.
Thence it follows by the same reason, says he, that when we drink after the
hour of repast, it is lawful to take also a bit of bread, for fear that
drinking should offend our health. And if any person will drink ten or twelve
times, as he may, according to these Casuists Rule, and yet more frequently
without breaking their Fast, he may also every time take a morsel of bread, ne
potus noceat.

Bauny who takes many things commonly out of Layman, follows him also in this
point, saying in his Sum, Chap. 16. page 258. He who, after he has drunk to
quench his thirst, eats a little bread, or who during the day shall hold in his
mouth some Confection, does he sin? He would shelter himself under some Authors
whom he cites, saying, That they answer boldly, No, in as much as those things
supply the place of medicine rather than food.

He would notwithstanding in this great facility, which is as it were natural
unto him, appear sometimes severe. For in the same Chapter amongst the things
about which he would have a Confessor examine his Penitent about the matter of
Fasting, he places this for the seventh: Whether during the whole day he have
taken any crum of bread never so small. For in this, though there be no fault
when it is done out of necessity; yet he cannot be excused from venial sin, who
herein has no other Rule but his concupiscence, which is so much more
blameable, the oftener he bath taken the boldness to return thereto, and to take
the same quantity at many several times, though it be little in it self. For
though every one of them, considered singly, nourish not much, yet they do it,
being joined altogether; besides strengthening the body, they remove the
difficulty of Fasting; and so deprive it of the end for which God and the
Church instituted and ordained it to be done, which is to curb the flesh as
with a bridle, and to bring the appetite into subjection unto reason.

It seems that this is a great severity for him to condemn this man of venial
fin, but he sweetens it presently, and corrects himself in the same page where
he makes this question. And he who without hunger or thirst shall take on a
Fasting-day at the request of a friend, some wine with a little morsel of bread
and some few Comfits, He names many Authors who blame this action as contrary
to Fasting; but he forbears not to conclude with others who exempt it from sin,
even from venial, whereof he relates this reason: For that, say they, to act
well and prudently is no offense.

This is without doubt a rare prudence to prefer our being complacent to a
friend, before the Laws of God and of the Church, and humane Courtesy before
Christian Discipline. There is reason to call this wisdom of the world, and
even to doubt if there be any wisdom in the world like this: For the people of
the world would not have had the confidence to have violated the Laws of the
Church at this time and at others more important, if others more wise than they
in this worldly wisdom did not furnish them with reasons, and give them
Expedients to confirm, or rather to deceive their consciences, in committing
these excesses.

Escobar accords well enough with Banny in this point. Die jejunil ab amico
rogatus sumo modicum cibi urbanitatis gratia, number venlaliter delinquo? Negative
cum Fagundrz respondeo Escob. tr. 1. ex. 13. number. 77. page 214.
A friend prays me, says he, to taste a small morsel on a Fasting-day; I do it
out of civility to him, is it a venial sin? I answer, with Fagundez, that it is
not. I permit him the liberty to drink as much and as often as he pleases. And
taking it for granted, that to drink breaks not the Fast, he demands, Dixl
pocum non violare jejunium, an vinum assumi poteft quoties quis voluerit, licet
in magna quantitate? Potest. Ibid. number. 74.
Whether we may take wine as often as we please, though it be in great
quantity? And he answers in one word, Yes. And acknowledging that by virtue of
this permission we may be carried out unto excess, and drink beyond reason and
temperance, he adds to justify his opinion, Dixl pocum non violare jejunium,
an vinum assumi potest quoties quis voluerit, licet in magna quantitate?
Potest. Ibid. number. 74.
That excess in drinking may indeed violate temperance, but not the Fast.
Whence he draws this Conclusion, which is a general Maxim in this matter,
Immoderatio potest temperantiam violare, sed non jejunium. Ibid. number. 75.
That whatsoever we drink, though it be taken frequently and in great quantity,
as he said before, breaks not the Fast at all.

The common reason of all those who hold this opinion, is, as we have already
seen above, that drinking of it self nourishes not. But there being drinks
which nourish, as wine, they forbear not for all that to say, that we may take
as much of it as we please, even without thirst, and only to nourish and
strengthen ones self.

Escobar supposing, Itaque quidquid potus est, jejunium non solvit. Ibid. number.
75.
That a man takes wine after dinner to appease his hunger, and to nourish and
sustain himself, demands whether this be to break his Fast? He says, Vinum
quis in sustentationem sumit, and ad sedandam samem extra prandium, an frangit
jejunium?
That Azor believes it is. But he condemns him boldly and strongly, saying,
That by the common opinion it is not to break it. His reason is that which I
now related: Asserit Azorius p. 1. l. 7. cap. 10. q. 4. at certum est ex
communi non frangere; quia vinum alit per accidens: Ecclesia autem prohibet
(...) quae per se alunt. Ibid.
Because wine nourishes not but by accident, and the Church forbids only
things that nourish of themselves.

It is true in general, that drink nourishes accidentally, because there are
drinks that nourish, and others which nourish not at all. But this is not by
accident that wine nourishes; it has a force and natural virtue to nourish;
and there is no wine that nourishes not, more or less, according as it has
more or less strength. And when the Church forbids or regulates the use of
things which nourish, it considers not whether they nourish by accident or
otherwise. Lent, as well as of eggs and flesh.

As this Casuist gives liberty to drink wine or any other liquor as much and as
often as we will, quoties quis volueris, and in magna quantitate, he gives also
liberty to eat as often as we drink. For propounding this question himself:
Licebit toties quoties frigidus potus hauriendus, aliquid ne noceat praesumere.
Ibid. number. 28. page 261.
It is lawful, every time we would drink, to take beforehand some little thing
for fear the drink should hurt us? He answers, Licet Azorius q. 7. aliquos
cibos ab h^c regula excipiat, Doctores modica inquantitate omnem. cibum
permittunt. Ibid.
That though Azor (who holds that this is lawful) except from this Rule certain
meats; nevertheless the Doctors allow to take indifferently all kind of meats,
which we use in Lent, provided we take them not in great quantity.

There are Casuists who allow us to take somewhat after we have drunk, but he
permits us to take it before we drink. They commonly allow us only to take
bread, but he gives us liberty to take all that we can cat on Fast-days, omnem
cibum, fish it self. For he excepts nothing.

Fasting will not without doubt be too severe for them that can do in this
manner, drinking at all seasons whatsoever they will, and as much as they
please, cating likewise every time they drink, bread, cheese, fish, or any
other thing, whether after drinking, according to the more general Rule of
these Casuists, or before it, Escobar gives; assuring us that we shall not for
all this fail in fasting, provided that every time we cat we take but a little,
though we may drink as much as we will, even to excess.

Though Emanuel Sa speaks nothing singular nor novel upon this matter, which
has not been already said by others whom I have already quoted, yet because
his contains in it the opinion of many, he doing nothing but collect and reduce
into an Abridgment the most common opinions of the Society, it will not be
impertinent to relate his words in this place. Jejunium non violat potus aquae
aut vini, etiamsi aliquid edatur ne potus noce^t: nec si statim finito prandio,
parum edat, rogatus ab amico comedente. Illud enim pars prandii censetur, nec
si horam prandii ex causa praevenias. Sa verb. jejunium number. 8. p. 317
To drink water or wine is no violation of the Fast, though you eat something
therewith, for fear it should do you some hurt, no more than to eat a little
after dinner, when a friend not yet risen from dinner, entreats you; because
this passes also for a part of your dinner, as also to hasten the hour of
dinner when there is some cause to do it. These words are as it were an
Abridgment of all that others have said concerning the liberty of drinking
wine, of eating with our drink, of prolonging our refection, and preventing the
hour of dinner. For he speaks of all these things absolutely, and almost
without any limitation.

III. POINT. That according to the Jesuits Dispensations which they give in
Fasting, hardly any person is obliged to Fast.
AFter Fasting is reduced to this point, changed and corrupted in this manner,
that it deserves not so much as the name of a Fast, and cannot serve so much as
to regulate the life of a person who is any thing sober, it may seem that there
is no more occasion to speak of a Dispensation for fasting, there being indeed
no more any real Fast, nor difficulty to pass over the Fasting-days, according
to these Doctors Maxims, since sobriety alone commanded all men, and at all
times, obliges us to more than what these people pretend that we are obliged to
by the Churches Fast. Nevertheless these moderate Divines that take such part
with the flesh and the world, proceed yet farther, and dispense with the
greatest part of men in all sorts of conditions for Fasting, not only to ease
them of the pain and difficulty, if any be to be found in Fasting, according to
their Rules, but also to take away from it every thing which might put a stop
to their lusts, and to give them an entire liberty to do whatsoever they please.

1. First, They will have the obligation to Fasting to commence only at the age
of 21 years; and that it ceases commonly at sixty. Whereupon Tambourin raises a
question worthy himself. Si quis in prima hora mediae noctis hoc die quo
jejunandum est, impleat annum vigesimum primum; tenetur si prima hora pertinet
ad annum vigesimum secundum talis aetatis in quo urget praeceptum. Si sit natus
in ips^ prima hora mediae noctis, non obligatur. Tambur. lib. 4. decal. cap. 5.
sect. 7. number. 2.
If one, says he, accomplish the age of twenty one at one of the clock after
midnight of a Fasting-day ensuing, is he bound to fast that day? He answers,
That if this first hour belong not to the twenty second year, So exact is he to
maintain intemperance against Fasting, that he would not lose one single hour,
and by this one hour he will gain a whole day entire, and thereby discharge it
of the obligation of Fasting; as if the liberty he gives to eat, could avail
more in one hour than the most holy Law of God and the Church in a whole day.

2. In the second place, Father Bauny dispenses for this obligation with
Laborers, Vine-dressers, Masons, Joyners, and generally all Handicrafts and
Artificers.

This is in his Sum, Chap. 16. page 262. and 263. Out of other Casuists, whose
opinion he rather approves than condemns, he adds unto them Painters, Tailors,
Barbers, Surgeons, with Weavers, Bakers, Shoomakers; as also Scholars,
Travelers, Pleaders, (Atturneys and Counselors) and poor People.

To these he adds such as have any infirmity of body or mind: And in the 261.
page he says generally, They who complain of pain in head, heart, or stomach,
and who being empty and without food cannot sleep, are not comprised under this
Precept. His reason is, that the Church intends not to oblige us with this
rigor, that we ought to the prejudice of our health, or lessening our strength
to follow its pleasure.

Fasting moderated and regulated, according to the order of the Church, does
rather repair our strength and health than diminish them, as appears by the
testimony the Church it self gives in its Prayers,

Tambourin extends the Dispensation for Fasting yet farther than Bauny. For
after he had said, Exculari a^ jejunio notablliter infirmos and valetudinarios,
res est certa nimis, etiamsi il in infirmitatem inciderint propria culpa --
Idem de eo infirmo cui forte conducerent ad sanitatem jejunia -- Idem de co qui
noctu dormire per notabile tempus non potest nifi coenet. Iis enim esset
onerosum sic jejunare -- neque hunc obligo mane jentare seque sero plene
reficere, quo pacto jam jejunium sartum tectum conservare, non obligo, inquam,
licet commode id facere queat. Nemo in jejunando est obligandus ad
extraordinaris remedia, and ad relinquendum suum jus comedendi circa meridiem.
Tambur. lib. 4. decal. cap. 5. sect. 7. number. 14.
That it is very certain that those who are notably sick, are exempt from
Fasting, though they have fallen into this sickness by their own proper fault,
he adds, that the same must be said of a sick person unto whose health Fasting
might happily conduce. For being otherwise truly weak, he is exempt from the
obligation to fast, though by accident Fasting might be beneficial unto him.
Whence it follows, that if he fast not, he sins indeed against the temperance
and charity he owes to himself, but not against the Precept of the Church.

He speaks of a man who is fallen into a disease by his own fault, for example,
intemperance, for the expiation whereof he is obliged to fast,

The same must be said of him, adds the same Author, who cannot sleep in the
night of a considerable time, unless he sup. For he would be overcharged too
much by fasting in this manner. I would not oblige him neither to so much as to
make his Collation in the morning, in which case the Fast would continue
without intermission, though he might do it conveniently; for no man is bound
to do extraordinary things that he may fast, and to abandon the right which he
has to eat about Noon.

The Indulgence of the Church in suffering and permitting to eat at Noon on
Fasting-days is a right, according to this Casuist, which its Children may make
use of against it to the neglect of its Commandment. He finds not that it is
needful to do any thing extraordinary, nor to the least change in the order or
hour of our repast to keep the Fast,

Idemque dico de to qui de necte absque perfecta coena calefieri notabiliter
nequit. Ibid.
Finally we must say the same, so this Author goes on, of him who unless he sup
well, is troubled to get heat; because this is judged in some sort prejudicial
to his health. There are who pretend to be dispensed with for Fasting, because
it heats the blood, say they, and causes headache; and this man would dispense
with it, because it chills the feet, and hinders sleep. I pass by these
ridiculous excuses and visible contradictions, and observe only that these
people take the liberty to say whatsoever comes in their minds, and make use of
all sorts of reasons to fight against the truth, and know to turn to the right
and the left, not as S. Paul, to go unto God, and conduct his neighbor
thither; but rather to confound the ways of God, make his Commands obscure, and
to teach men thereupon to violate them without fear of punishment. I'la
infirmitas notabilis est quae operationes ordinarias cujeslibet personae
impedit, ita ut qui consueto suo operandi modo eas exercere commode cum jejunio
nequeat; si Scholasticus quomodocunque cum difficultate studeat; si mulier ex
debilitate jejunii servitia domus incommode operetur: si vie suum officium
artemque jejunando difficulter exerceat, ex hoc capite a jejunando legicime
excussbuntur. Ibid. number. 17.
That infirmity or some notable prejudice of health hinders the common actions
of every person, and we judge that he who after his usual labor cannot, if he
fast, conveniently perform these actions, is much damnified by the Fast. That
is to say, that Fasting which is commanded for our mortification, is not
obliging when it mortifies us; and that we may be obliged to fast, we must be
able to do it commodiously and without difficulty.

It appears clearly that, according to these Maxims of the Jesuits, few people
are obliged to the Fasts of the Church, though they have been generally
instituted for all the Faithful, observed in all Ages past by all those who had
any fear of God, of what condition soever they were, and that the Church has
always thus understood it, as may yet farther appear, seeing that in the
general Commandment which it has given so many Ages since, it does not, nor
ever did except any condition, exercise, or sort of life.

But the Jesuits leave hardly any Profession which they exempt not from
Fasting. Officium and ars quam quis exercet, si lit ex se laboriosa, hominem
per se libtrat a jejunio; and ita quidem etiamsi in illo exercitio quis
inveniatur posse tolerare jejunium, adhuc ad illud non adstringetur -- Arator
etiam robustus patientissimusque inediae; imo etiam ditissimus, non obligatur
ad jejunium, quia per se omnes aratores excusantur, and ex alia part Ecclesiae
non intendit privare Fideles suo officio modoque vivendi. Tambur. lib. 4.
decal. cap. 5. sect. 7. number. 18.
The Office or Mystery, says Tambourin, which a man exercises, if it be
laborious, as (there are scarce any which are not) exempts him of it self from
Fasting, and though there be some in the same Trade who can endure Fasting, yet
he is not obliged -- For example, It must be added, that in establishing the
Precept of Fasting for all those who could bear it, it had an intention not to
exempt those who should make false pretenses for their not observing it. It
seems that he would have us believe that the Laws of the Church regard not the
Salvation of every one in particular; but that they are only general Ordinances
of an outward Policy, and therefore odious and unjust, from which every one may
save and exempt himself that can.

He adds also more particularly, Dico propter authoritatem Dectorum esse
probabile nullos artifices, a^que adeo Sutores obligari ad jejunia. Ibid. number.
28.
That it is probable, because of the Authority of the Doctors who are of that
Judgment, that no Handicrafts, and by consequence neither are Tailors obliged
to fast. And so the Artificers, and those who labor in bodily occupations,
making up the greater number, in comparison of whom the rest of Mankind are
small in number, the Precept of Fasting shall be of small use, and shut up in
very narrow bounds.

But least any resentment of Christianity should induce the Artificers to fast,
Escobar cited and confirmed by Tambourin, Propter candem tationem poterit quis
ex Escob. tr. 1. exam. 13. de jejunio cap. 3. opttarios co^ducere cum pacto ut
non jejunent, ne alias minus laborent. Ibid. sect. 6. number. 4.
permits those who hire Workmen, to condition with them not to fast, for fear
they should work less.

The Monks and Clergymen themselves may find reasons in these grave Divines to
exempt them from Fasting For 1. They who work with their hands, or who travel
abroad about their affairs, may enjoy the privilege which Bauny has given
Workmen, Artificers, (Counselors and Attorneys) Those who are employed in
Study, Confessions, Missions, Preaching, should not be used with less favor
than Advocates and Students. Those who climb the Pulpit, says Bauny also, page
263. every day in Lent, are not obliged to fast, because of the extreme toil
they are obliged unto by their Profession. And there is the same reason for
Confessors and Missionaries, who spend whole days almost in Confession, and
Professors who commonly ascend their Chairs twice a day, and continue therein
commonly longer than Preachers.

It is true he dispenses with Preachers under a condition which he has taken
from some Authors a little straiter laced than himself, who restrain, says he,
page 263. this universal and general Proposition, to those who have not
strength enough to preach and fast both at once, in which case they exempt them
from the obligation to Fasting, and not otherwise. And he says after the same
thing of Readers and Confessors. As for Readers and Confessors, Fagundez and
Diana hold it for an indubitable Maxim, that they cannot be exempted without
sin.

I know not how it comes to pass, that they perceive not that the same reason
they have in this manner to restrain the Dispensation for Fasting which they
grant to Preachers and Confessors, does also oblige them in like manner to
restrain that which they give unto Artificers, Laborers, Travelers, and all
other sorts of people. For if they can fast in their exercise and labor, by
what reason should not they be obliged as well as Preachers who have strength
enough to preach and fast both at once?

If Confessors and Readers ought to consider, that upon their strength depends
the Judgment they ought to make of themselves and their obligation to fast,
wherefore may we not say the same thing indifferently of all sorts of persons,
of what quality, age, or profession soever? And what hinders but that we may
declare unto them, that if without prejudice to their bodies, they can fast and
do all that also which belongs unto their duty, they are thereunto obliged, and
that it is an indubitable Maxim, that they cannot dispense with themselves
therein without sin?

Father Bauny should remember the Doctrine of S. Antonin and others whom he
quotes upon the same subject, page 261. who speaking of the age at which we are
obliged to fast, hold, says he, that herein we ought to have regard to every
ones strength and complexion, and to the proportion of their greatness and
littleness, for judging of the obligation of this Precept.

Some Rules may well be established to judge who are obliged to fast; but there
is nothing more certain nor more reasonable than to say, that this ought to be
regulated by the strength of every one particularly. For if we can fast without
any notable inconvenience, what pretense can we have to exempt our self from
it? We dispense with them who, according to the opinion of the Casuists
themselves, are of age to fast, and who are not engaged in any profession nor
exercise which might excuse them from it, when they have not strength for it.
Wherefore then do they not oblige those to fast who are strong enough, and who
can do it without prejudice to their bodies, though they are in some toilsom
Trade, or are not yet of the age which might oblige them thereto, according to
the Rules of these Casuists themselves?

Emanuel Sa alleges these same causes with Father Bauny to dispense with
Fasting, Causa reddendi conjugi dabitum, vel non displicendi, si haec jejunio
impediuntur. Sa verbo jejunium number. 9. page 338.
When Fasting hinders the Husband from performing the Marriage-duty toward the
Wife, or causes the Woman to be disliked by her Husband.

Filliutius says the same thing in other words: Sequitur uxorem excusari a
jejunio ratione conservandi amorem mariti erga ipsam. Filliutius tom. 1. tract.
10. cap. 9. number. 306. page 317.
Hence it follows, that a Woman is exempt from Fasting, for the preservation of
the love which her Husband bears toward her. He repeats it again in another
place, where he says, Tum vir non potens reddere debitum jejunando, tum uxor
non valens se reddere gratam viro ob maciem vel pallorem, excusantur a jejunio.
Filliutim com. 2. tract. 27. cap. 6. number. 119. page 289.
That if a Husband cannot discharge his Marriage-duty fasting, or a Woman
become displeasing to her Husband through leanness or paleness, they are both
exempt from Fasting.

Heretofore Fasting dispensed with persons for Marriage-duties, according to
the order and custom commonly observed in the Church; and at this day the
duties of Marriage dispense with Fasting, according to the Rules of these new
Casuists.

They who say that the Wife for fear of displeasing her Husband, and Husband
his Wife, causa non displicendi, may be dispensed with in a Fast ordained by
the express Command of God and the Church, might very well by the same reason
have excused Adam from sin, or at least have said, that he had not committed
any great sin in eating only an Apple, giving way thereto, that he might not
grieve his Wife, causa non displicendi, as many of the Ancients speak.

Tambourin has not only taken care of married persons, he speaks also in
favor of those who would marry. Liberatur puella nubere volens, si ex
continuato jej^nio quadragesimae speclositatem faciel notabiliter amitteret.
Tambur. lib 4^ decal. e. 5. sect. 7. number. 45.
A young Maid, says he, that would marry, if by Fasting continually all the
Lent, she notably blemish her beauty, is exempt from Fasting.

Emanuel Sa says also in the same place, Dispensandi causa justa est, magna in
jejunando difficultas. ^a verbo jejunium n. 10. page 338.
That one may be justly excused from Fasting, when he cannot do it without
great trouble. As if Fasting were not in it self troublesome, and were not
instituted to cause pain, to subdue and mortify the flesh, being an action of
Penance which brings along with it pain and difficulty; besides they who have
most pain in, and most opposition unto Fasting, have commonly more need thereof
than others, and their trouble is oftentimes more in their minds than in their
bodies, and comes rather from effeminateness and daintiness than want of
strength.

Escobar says the same thing, and brings the same reasons with Bauny and Sa
for dispensing with Fasting: and thereupon proposes this question: Quid de
laborante ob malum finem, ut libidinis, v.c? Non potest jejunlum solvere ut
vires colligat ad crimen perpetrandum, sed potest ad vires reparandas,
laffitudini, jejunio soluto, occurrere, Escobar tract. 1. exam. 13. cap. 2.
number. 23. page 204. Tambur. lib. 4. decal. cap. 5. sect. 7. number. 32.
What must be said of him who toils to an ill purpose, as in debauchery with
women? His reason is, that he cannot break his Fast, that he may be abler to
commit that crime; but if he have committed it, he may break it to recover his
strength, and for fear of tiring and enfeebling himself yet more. If he had not
fallen into debauchery, he had been obliged to fast, so that the penance for
his crime shall be a dispensation from Fasting. Tambourin says that he
willingly admits this opinion as certain.

Filliutius proposes in a manner the same difficulty, Dices an qui malo fine
laboraret, ut ad aliquem occidendum, vel ad insequendam amicam, vel quid
simile, tenetetur ad jejunium?
Whether he who labors in some wicked design, as to kill a man, or in pursuing
a woman whom be would abuse, or in doing some such like thing, be obliged to
fast. He answers, Respondeo talem peccaturum quidem ex ma o fine; at secuta
fatigatione excusaretur a jejunio. Filliutius supra number. 123. page 289.
That such a person would sin indeed, because of the wicked design he has; but
that having toiled and wearied himself in the execution thereof, he is to be
excused from Fasting. He adds that there are some who are of the same opinion
with him, but upon this condition; Nisi ficret in fraudem jejunii.
That this be not done with an express intention to elude the Commandment of
Fasting. But he finds them too rigorous, and taking part with others, who are
more favorable to these persons tired with debauchery, and overwhelmed with
crimes, he adds, Sed melius alii culpam quidem esse in apponenda causa
fractionis jejunii at ea posita, excusati a jejunio. Ibid.
That there are others who say with better reason, that these persons have done
ill to reduce then selves to that inability to fast; but that having done it,
they are exempt from Fasting.

Quid si in jejunii frauden sese nimium fatigasset? Escobar tract. 1. exam. 13.
number. 45. page 209.
Escobar puts the same question, supposing that some person had given himself
unto debaucheries till he is tired, with a design to deliver himself from the
obligation of Fasting. And knowing well Filliutius's answer, though he
disapproves it not, yet he finds it so infamous and shameful, that to spare the
reputation of his Brother, he cites it without naming him. Adhuc liberatur a
docto.
There is one learned man, says he, who dispenses with Fasting in this case.

If Dispensations be favors, as all agree they are, without doubt a Murderer
or a Rake-hell deserves well of the Jesuits that they should grant,

If Dispensations ought not to be given but only to those who have just cause
to demand them, according as the Laws of the Church ordain, and the Bishops and
Popes practice, never granting any but upon reasons that are alleged to them,
we must say, according to these Casuists, that an honester and lawfuller reason
to demand a Dispensation for Fasting cannot be alleged than that which is
grounded on these two horrible crimes. And if sincerity and honest meaning be
required also much more for the just obtaining of a Dispensation, and to the
right usage of it, there is no doubt but it is to be found altogether in him
who being resolved not to fast, and seeking out some means to deceive the
Church, and to elude its Command, sees no better pretense to exempt himself
therefrom, than to dis^enable himself to observe it, by tiring himself in the
pursuit and execution of a murder, adultery, or other crime. So that two
horrible crimes joined with contempt of the Church, and a will not to obey its
Command, will be a just cause and sufficient motive to give him a Dispensation,
according to Filliutius words: Qui malo fine laboraret, ut ad aliquem
occidendum, aut insequendam amicam, vel ad simile quid -- secuta defatigatione
excusaretur a jejunio, though the design of this man were to deride the Church,
deceive it, and elude its Command: Etsi fieret in fraudem.

After this, all pretenses which may be taken up to dispense with a Fast, be
they most unjust, may appear reasonable: Pap^n posse dispensare quemcunque,
etiam per totam vitam, etiam sine causa. Ibid. n. 126. p. 290.
That the Pope may dispense with all sorts of persons for Fasting, though it
were for their whole lives, and even without any cause.

Tambourin says the same thing in a more odious manner against the Church and
Pope. Sufficit ad dispensandum, quia Papa vult se benignum a licui been merito
ostendere. Tambur. lib. 4. decal. c. 5. sect. 7. number 53.
It suffices, says he, to the Pope for to dispense with Fasting, that he has
a design to show his kindness toward some person who has obliged him. If it
be kindness to dispense with Fasting commanded by the Church, it is rigor
contrary to the affection and humanity of the Church to command it. And this is
to use the Pope in a base manner, and unbecoming his Holiness and Greatness, to
will that he should pay his debts, and acknowledge the Services done him, at
the charge of the Church, and to the prejudice of the obedience which all the
Faithful owe unto its Commands.

That which Escobar says is no less extravagant: Dormire quis nequit nisi
sump^a coe^, teneturne jejunare? Minime.
That no person who cannot sleep when he has not supped is obliged to fast.
And he adds, that which is more strange: Si s^fficit mane c^liatiunculam
sumere; and vespere coenare, teneturne? Non tenetur; qula nemo tenetur
pervertere ordinem refectionum^ Escobar tract. 1. exam. 13. number. 67. page 212.
That if this person by making his Collation in the morning, and reserving his
supper till night, could fast, he would not be obliged thereunto, because no
person is obliged to pervert the order of his repast.

If he had been well informed of the order of Fasting, and the manner wherein
it was instituted in the Church, he would have known that there was no order of
repast in Fasting; Bellarmin himself and many others acknowledge; and so they
that dine on Fast-days do pervert the order of Fasting rather than they who
make their Collation in the morning, and sup at night, if the Church of its
usual kindness did not tolerate dinners on these days, and slight Collations at
night.

Potes^ne aliquis alio se con^e^re ut j^ju^ium vitet? Fagundus pesse respondet.
Ibid. number. 64. p. 212.
This same Jesuit gives us also another Expedient to exempt us from Fasting
without necessity and dispensation; which is to depart from the place where the
Fast is, and to go to another place where it is not observed. And if any think
that this is to deceive our selves, whilst we think to deceive the Church,
Filliutius, as we have already observed, answers in a like case; Proprie
loquendo non est ulla fraus si quis jure suo utatur; and potius est fugere
obligationem praecepti. Filliutius mor. qq. tom. 2. cap. 7. n. 116. page 261.
That this is not to deceive the Church, nor to elude its Command; but only to
avoid the obligation of the Commandment, in pursuance of the right which every
man has to do it when he can; that is to say, that if the Church has a right
to command a Fast or Mass, we have also a right to avoid them, and to do all we
can, that we may not be obliged to obey it; and after this we shall not cease,
in the Judgment of the Jesuits, to be faithful and obedient Children of the
Church; because we neither offend nor deceive in making use of this right: Non
est ulla fraus si quis utatur jure suo.

The last question which I shall report here concerning the dispensing with
Fasts, Escobars also. Quid de pueris? Ante septennium comedere carnes poslunt.
Ibid. number. 10. p. 201.

Darine possunt carnes pueris ante septennium si sunt deli capaces? Possunt,
quia accidentale est quod in aliquo usus rationis acceleretur. Ibid. n. 52.
page 210.

Quid de Paganis? Etiam, quia non tenentur legibus Christisnorum.

Quid de amentibus? Cum pueris ante septennium computandi. Ibid. n. 52. p. 210.


He demands if we may on Fast-days give flesh to children under seven years
old? To which he answers, that they may eat it before they attain that age. He
demands a little after whether in case they have the use of reason before that
age, we may make them cat flesh? And his answer is, that we may; because it is
by accident that the use of reason in any person prevents that age. It behooves
them therefore who would give flesh to these children not to seem to know that
they have the use of reason; and that they may eat with a safer conscience, to
present it to them without acquainting them that the Church forbids them to eat
it. That we may hold them in this ignorance, and conceal from them their fault,
they must be hindered from learning the Commandments of the Church, and must
not be brought to Church, where they are published every Lord's Day.

He says the same thing of Pagans, and those that have lost their Wits,
consenting that we may make them eat flesh on Fast-days as well as children;
because the one sort have no use of reason, and the other are not subject to
the Commands of the Church.

By this same reason we may suffer Fools and Infants to blaspheme, and tolerate
them in all sorts of crimes; because having no reason, they sin not in
committing them. We may make them also to violate all the Laws of the Church
who are Infidels; because they acknowledge not the Church, and are not subject
unto it; but rather are its declared enemies. As if a Father who had forbid
something to be done in his house under grievous penalties,

They must be Fools or Infants that can believe so great a Paradox, and worse
than an Infidel, to have so little care of their Household, and to proceed to so
gross and visible a contempt of the Church and Religion.

But may we not at least condemn those who induce others to violate the Fast?
Tambourin who has had a care to secure Victuallers in this point, says,
Quando probabiliter putantur accedentes non violatu ri jejunium, possunt
caupones and vendentes cibos iis ministrare, venders, atque Invitare. Std quid
si sit dubium? Adhuc poterunt; quia nisi certo constet contrarium, nemo est
praesumendus malus. At quando probabiliter vel certo sciunt violaturos,
concestu est difficilius: Concedimus tamen satis probabiliter...... quia
ministratio illa, imo ultronea invitatio non fit a caupone vel venditore,
direct alliciendo ad non jejunandum; atque adeo ad peccandum: sed ad lucrum
expiscandum. Tambur. lib. 4. decal. cap. 5. sect. 6. number. 4. and 7.
That when they probably believe that those who come to their houses, break not
their Fast, it is evident that an Innkeeper or Cook may give and sell them
victuals. And though they doubt whether or no they violate the Fast, they yet
may do it, because we ought not presume that a man is wicked unless we know it:
And by consequence we must not presume that he will break his Fast. But if they
know probably or certainly that they will break it, it is more difficult to
grant them this permission; yet we grant it them with probability enough;
because the Victualler provides not these meats, nor provokes us to buy them
with a direct intention that we should break our Fast, or sin; but that he
might get their money, as all Buyers know.

See here a motive very capable to purify this action. Interest which spoils
the best things, and corrupts the most holy actions, purifies and justifies
this which of it self is vicious. By this reason it will be lawful for a
Merchant to sell poison to a man whom he knows certainly will take it or give
it to another to destroy him; since as poison kills the body, so meats taken
against the Churches Prohibition kill the Soul: and he that sells the poison
has no more than he that sells the meat, a direct intention to kill or commit
a spiritual or corporal murder; but only to benefit himself by this murder, and
to get money by the sale of this meat and poison, which are the cause of this
murder. And so it will be lawful to induce any person whomsoever to violate all
the Commands of the Church and God himself, if therein we find our interest,
and can draw thence some temporal benefit.

ARTICLE III. Easter, and of the Confession to be made every year. That
according to the Jesuits Divinity these Commandments may be satisfied by true
Sacriledges.
THe Jesuits expound not the Commandment to communicate at Easter more
Christian-like than the other Commandments of the Church. They pretend that it
may be satisfied by a sacrilegious Communion, and by receiving the Body of
Jesus Christ with a criminal conscience, nay, though we know that we are in
this estate and in mortal sin. This opinion is common in their School, and
passes there for indubitable. Eucharistiam indigne sumens in die Paschatis,
satisfacit praecepto. Sa verbo Eucharist. in fine. page 233.
He that receives the Eucharist unworthily on Easter. day, satisfies the
Precept, quoth Emanuel Sa.

Quid si indigne communicem? Imples tamen per voluntariam susceptionem
praeceptum. Escobar tract. 1. exam. 12. cap. 2. number. 15. page 196.
Escobar supposes a person to communicate unworthily, and says that he fails
not for all that to accomplish the Precept, though he receive the Body of Jesus
Christ in this estate voluntarily: that is to say, though he commit Sacrilege
voluntarily, as the rest whom we shall relate hereafter say it openly.

Filliutius says the same thing almost in the same terms. He demands, An
impleatur praeceptum per voluntariam susceptionem Sacramenti, etiamsi indigne
suscipiatur? Repondeo and ^ico primo impleri. Filliut^ qq. mor. tem. 1. tract.
4. cap. 2. number. 60, page 74.
Whether this Precept may be accomplished by receiving the Sacrament
voluntarily, though unworthily? And his answer is, that it is accomplished.

Amicus is of the same opinion, Ecclesiasticum praeceptum Eucharistiae omnino
censeo impleri, etiam per sacrilegam manducationem. Ami^u^ tom 8. disp. 29.
sect. 5. number. 53. page 401.
I hold absolutely, says he, that the Precept of the Church touching the
Eucharist is fulfilled even by a sacrilegious Communion. This is a strange
manner of obeying the Church by committing Sacriledges, and it is to honor it
very much to imagine that it may be satisfied with Sacriledges. It must needs
be that they who believe it to be capable of this, have an horrible opinion of
it; they must believe that it commands Sacriledges, if they believe that by
obeying it, they may be committed, and it may be satisfied by these same
Sacriledges. For when it commands any thing, it cannot be satisfied otherwise
than by doing what it commands.

Jesus Christ has said in the Gospel, that they who despise the Church and its
Pastors, despise himself; and these Jesuits make the Church to say, that those
who despise Jesus Christ, and dishonor him outragiously by a sacrilegious
Communion, cease not to obey and satisfy it by fulfilling its Commandment.

Celot having undertaken to prove against Aurelius, that the Laws of the Church
and Gospel may be accomplished without love, speaks thus against him: Non enim
post disputata cum Judaeis disputare potest Aurelius, q^i Paschalem synaxim cum
conscientia lethalis peccati celebraverit, quin is nihilominus Ecclesiae
paruerit, and justitiam operum, si non justitiam legis impleverit. Celot lib.
3. cap. 3. page 124.
Aurelius cannot doubt but that he who communicates at Easter in mortal sin,
satisfies the Command of the Church, and yet though he accomplisheth not the
Justice of the Law, he accomplisheth for all that the Justice of Works. He
would not that his Adversary should doubt of this Maxim, though he knew well
enough that he did not only doubt of it, but condemn it.

Coninck, Easter. Ut patet in jejunante eb vanam gloriam; aut in Paschate
indigne communicante. Coninck de Sacr. q 83. a. 6. d. uni. n. 296. p. 286.
As it is clear, says he, in his case who fasts for vainglory, or
communicates unworthily at Easter. Which he propounds as a constant Maxim, and
of which it was not lawful to make any doubt, saying, N^m certum est eum
satisfacere praecepto Ecclesiae qui simulat se jejunare ex pietate, and pie in
Paschate communicare, etsi jejunet ob vanam gloriam and sacrilege communicet.
Ibid.
That it is certain that he satisfies the Precept of the Church, who makes show
of Fasting for devotion, and of communicating at Easter with requisite piety,
though he fasteth out of vainglory, and commits Sacrilege in communicating.

This is also the opinion of Azor, answering those who demand, An qui in die
Paschatis Sacramentum Eucharistiae accipit indigene, videlicet aut sua peccata
non legitime confessus, aut alio quolibet modo lethalis peccati conlcius,
Ecclesiae praeceptum implear?
Whether he who receives the Sacrament of the Eucharist unworthily on Easter-
day, whether it be that he has not well confessed his sins, or for some other
defect which renders him guilty of mortal sin, do accomplish the Precept of the
Church? For he says, Respondeo eum implere. Is enim licet jus divinum frangat
aut violet male ad Sacramentum accedendo, legis tamen Ecclesiasticae
substantiam servar. Azor Instit. lib. 7. cap. 30. page 734.
That he accomplisheth the Precept of the Church. Because though he violate the
Law of God by approaching the Sacrament in a wicked estate; yet he observes the
Law of the Church in the substance of it. Whereunto he adds for a second
reason, or as an explication of the former, Nimitum Ecclesia nihil aliud sus
lege sanxit, nisi ut in Paschate ad sacra mysteria accedentes ejus participes
efficiamur. Ibid.
That the Church by its Command requires no other thing, but that approaching
at Easter unto the sacred Mysteries of the Eucharist, we receive them in some
manner whatsoever it be.

Nay he says, that not only he who is guilty of mortal sin, but also an
Excommunicate or interdicted person approaching to the Altar, and receiving the
Body of Jesus Christ in that disposition, does satisfy the Commandment of
receiving the Sacrament at Easter. He inquires, Rog^bi^ an idem sit judicium de
eo qui excommunicatione vel interdicto adstrictus ad hoc Sacramentum accedit?
Whether the same judgment may be past on him who being excommunicated or
interdicted approaches to the Sacrament, with that he had already made of him
who receives it in an estate of mortal sin? And his answer is, Respondeo cum
quidem peccare, ac non solum contra jus divinum, sed etiam contra jus Canonicum
seu Ecclesiasticum facere. Jus enim divinum prohibet, ne male quis accedat: and
jus Canonicum in universum excommunicatos and interdictos a Sacramentis
excludit and prohibit: attamen ab eo susceptum indigne Sacramentum est ratum,
and ipse Ecclesiae legem leu praeceptum adimplere videtur. Ibid.
That indeed he does really offend not only against the Divine but also against
the Canon and Ecclesiastic Law; because the Divine Law forbids him to approach
the Sacrament in a wicked estate, and the Canon Law does absolutely exclude the
excommunicate and the interdicted persons from the Sacraments themselves, and
forbids them to approach them: notwithstanding the Sacrament which he receives
is a true Sacrament, though he receive it unworthily; and it seems that herein
he accomplisheth the Precept and Law of the Church.

The Canon Law is nothing else but the Laws of the Church transcribed, and the
Commandment to communicate at Easter, is part of the Canon Law. So that if we
may satisfy the Commandment of communicating at Easter,

Dicastillus is of the same opinion, and maintains that it is more probable.
Magis communis and probabilior sententia est praeceptum hoc impleri per
quamcunque voluntariam susceptionem Sacramenti Eucharistiae, etiam sacrilegam.
Solum enim praecipitur substantia actus, non vero modus. Dicastill, de Sacr.
Eucharist. tract. 4. disp. 10. dub. 8. number. 175. Suscipiens reverenter, ad
minus in Pascha Eucharistiae Sacramentum, nisi forte de consilio proprii
Sacerdotis ob aliquam rationabilem causam ad tempus ab ejus perceptione duxerit
abstinendum. Council. Lateran. sub Innoc. 3. cap. 21. de paen. and remiss. c.
Omnis.
The more common and probable opinion, says he, is that this Precept is
fulfilled by a voluntary receiving of the Sacrament, in what sort soever, even
sacrilegiously, because the substance of the act only is commanded; and the
manner not at all, according to Suarez. Could the Church express better the
manner wherein it would have us communicate, than by joining the Command of
Confession and Penance to that of the Communion, and ordaining that we should
receive this Sacrament with reverence, reverenter? And to the end we might not
mistake this Reverence for any external Ceremony, it allows none to communicate
at Easter whom their Confessors judge not fit, that afterward it might be
performed with the greater preparation and respect. Could it say more clearly
that it would not be obeyed by Sacriledges?

As for what concerns the preparation unto the Communion, as the Jesuits make
the Command to communicate altogether outward and politic, and maintain that
we may accomplish it in any state of sin wherein we are,

And because they hold Confession to be a principal preparation to the
Communion, it seems they believed that it was not reasonable to require it to
be done in any better manner than the Communion. Escobar says, Potro
probabiliter asseritur invalida confessione praecepto satisfieri; quia Ecclesia
internos actus non potest praecipere, sed solum externum confessionis. Escobar
tract. 1. exam. 12. cap. 3. number. 27. page 199.
That it is a probable opinion that we may satisfy the Command which obliges
us to confess, by an invalid Confession, because the Church cannot command the
internal, but only the external act of Confession.

He had said already before, not as a probable opinion, but as an assured
thing, that we might satisfy it by defective Confession, answering this
question: Satisfitne praecepto Ecclesiae confessione informi? Ita, quo modo
proxime de praecepto divino affirmavi. Ibid. cap. 1. number. 9. page 195.
May we satisfy the Churches Commandment by a Confession out of form? And
answering thereto in these terms; We may satisfy it truly, as well as the
Commandment of God made thereupon, as I have but now said.

Filliutius had said before the same thing, It is demanded whether we may
accomplish this Precept (of Confession) by a Confession valid, but without
form. He answers, That we may accomplish it. His reason is: Because we
accomplish the Precept in substance. And as to the end of the Precept, which is
Grace, it falls not under the Precept. That is to say, that when the Church
commands sinners to confess themselves, it intends not to oblige them to return
into a state of Grace, and reconcile themselves with God; but only to confess
as they please themselves.

He says the same thing a little above, and adds that being not obliged by the
Command of the Church to confess our selves worthily, and receive Grace in the
Sacrament; neither are we bound to prepare our selves to confess well, nor to
do what lies in us to attract the Grace and Mercy of God. Nec tenetut homo se
disponere ad gratiam ex vipraecepti confessionis, quia etiamsi reciperet
Sacramentum inform, dummodo recipiat verum Sacramentum, satisfacit praecepto.
Dispositio autem ad gratiam, est finis ejus, vel quid consequens. Finis autem
non cadit sub praecepto. Ibid. tract. 6. cap. 8. number. 209. page 158.
Neither is a man bound, says he, by virtue of the Precept of Confession to
dispose himself for Grace: For provided the Sacrament he does receive be a true
one, though it be without form, that is to say, without Grace, he satisfies the
Precept. As for the disposition unto Grace, it is the end or consequent of the
Sacrament, which falls not under the Precept.

Amicus holds with the same Doctrine, and grounds it on that Principle,
Poenalia sunt potius restringenda quam amplificanda. Cum igitur confessionis
praeceptum fit poenale, non debet amplificari mandatum confessionis formatae;
sed potius restringi ad actum confessionis informis, modo quoad essentiam
Sacramenti sit valida. Amicus tom. 8. disp. 17. sect. 3. number. 30. page 277.
That we ought rather restrain than extend things that are imposed as
penalties. Whence he draws this Conclusion; that the Precept of Confession
being imposed as a penalty, we must not extend it so far as to say, that it
obliges to make such a Confession as may restore the sinner into a state of
Grace: but we must rather restrain it, saying, that it is enough to make one
that does not confer any Grace on him, provided it be a true one, and have
every thing else that is of the Essence of a Sacrament.

This is not to honor the Sacraments very much, to pretend that they are not
Gods gifts and graces, but penalties: and that when Jesus Christ commanded
Confession, he ordained it not for our good, as a remedy and a means to deliver
us from our sins, and to restore us into Grace; but that he imposed it upon us
as a yoke and a punishment, as this Jesuit says. Cum igitur praeceptum
confessionis sit poenale.

He that should say that a remedy ordained by a Physician to a Patient were a
punishment, and not a relief and a favor; or when a Prince ordains that a
Malefactor shall confess the crimes whereof he desires the abolition, that he
uses him rigorously, and imposes an odious Law upon him, would pass for a man
of little discretion and without common sense. The Malefactors hold this for a
favor in such sort, that they ordinarily set down their crimes in the Letters
of Grace which are given them, in the most effectual and odious terms they can,
and are for the most part ready to say therein more than they have done, rather
than less, to heighten the favor of the Prince, to render it more ample, and
the better to assure themselves of it, though this Declaration be public and
in writing. And yet Amicus dares say that the Confession which God and the
Church demand of a sinner, Praeceptum confessionis est poenale.

He proceeds farther, and is not contented to say the Church commands us not to
confess Christianly and faithfully, according to the Institution of Jesus
Christ; but he dares maintain also that it cannot so much as command us to
receive the Sacrament of Penance in the manner instituted by Jesus Christ. Non
posset Ecclesia praecipere totum Sacramentum poenitentiae, prout est formaliter
a Christo institutum.
The Church, says he, cannot so much as command all that which is required to
the Sacrament of Penance as it was instituted by Jesus Christ. He expounds
himself better, Quae^itur an impleatur praeceptum confessionis per confessionem
validam, sed informem? Respondeo and dico impleri: ^u^a impletur praeceptum
quo^d substantiam: finis autem qui est gratia, non cadit sub praeceptum.
Filliutius qq. mor. tom. 1. tract. 7. cap. 2. number. 42. page 171.
by rendering a reason of this opinion. Quoniam hoc Sacramentum prout est a
Christo institutum, essentialiter includit dolor^m internum, and conf^ssionem
omnium peccatorum, etiam internorum. Sed Ecclesia non habet potestatem supra
actus mere internos. Igitur non posset hoc Sacramentum prout a Christo
institutum est, praecipere. Ibid. sect. 2. number. 12. page 274.
For that, says he, the Sacrament as it was instituted by Jesus Christ,
contains essentially an inward grief for sin, and a confession of all even
inward sins. Now the Church has no power over acts purely internal. And by
consequence cannot command the Sacrament in the manner it was instituted by
Jesus Christ.

This language stifles the prime notions of Christianity, and the most common
apprehensions of the Church, which believes on the contrary that it cannot
command the Sacrament of Penance otherwise than Jesus Christ has instituted
it, and has no other design in this Commandment, nor in all the rest, than to
follow the orders of Jesus Christ, and to execute his will, it being far remote
from its thoughts and all appearance that it would have us receive the
Sacraments otherwise than Jesus Christ has ordained. Docentes eos servare
omnia quaecunque mandavi vobis. Matthew. 28.


So that the Commands of Jesus Christ are contained in those of the Church, and
are as it were the Soul, Spirit, and Rule thereof; since it does nothing but
confirm or determine what it is that Jesus Christ has ordained and instituted,
as the usage of the Sacraments and the exercise of virtues, which are good
works.

Which shows that the Jesuits know not the estate of the Church, nor its mind,
nor its conduct; considering it as an humane and secular Society, which regards
only what is outward; since it has no other scope than civil peace and
temporal happiness; or as the Synagogue of the Jews which adhered only to the
letter and outward exercises of Religion and Gods Law. Though we cannot find in
the very times of the Synagogue it self any Jews who have affirmed that the Law
might be fulfilled by Sacriledges, and manifest and voluntary impieties, as the
Jesuits, who say that we may satisfy the Commandments of communicating, Paul;
because it neither acts nor sees but by Faith, and not by sense and reason all
alone.

The second disposition which the Jesuits require unto the Communion besides
Confession, is Fasting. Amicus treating of this condition, puts it in question,
and demands: Dubium est de saccharo quod retinetur in ore, ad temperandas
capitis distillationes, an impediat Eucharistiae sumptionem?
Whether putting a little sugar in the mouth to stay defluxions from the brain,
be a bar to the Communion? And he answers that this is Suarez's opinion.
Affirmat Suarez; negare tamen videtur Tabiena and alii viri docti quos ego
consului, qui addunt hanc opinionem tutam esse in praxi. Et sane non videtur
improbabilis, cum talis liquor in stomachum descendat per modum salivae. Amicus
tom. 7. dub. 27. sect. 1. number. 5. page 385.
Nevertheless, says he after, Tabiena and other learned men whom I have
consulted, seem to be of a contrary judgment, and say moreover, that this
opinion is safe in the practice. And in truth it seems probable, this liquor
destilling down into the stomach in the form of spittle. This opinion which was
not received in Suarez's time, is become probable in Amicus's, and it may
quickly become very common, because it is favorable unto sensuality.

Escobar puts another question, Frangitue natural jejunium folium aut puivis
herbae illius quae ^abac vocitatur? R^pondeo ex Praeposito in 3. p. 280. art.
8. d. 1. n. 34. Per os sumptum in folio non frangere nisi deglutiatur.

Addit Tannerus tom. 4. disp. 5. number. 1. neque si quid salivae incorporatum
trajiciatur in stomachum.


Whether Tobacco in leaf or powder breaks the natural Fast? He takes his answer
out of Praepositus who says, That being taken in the leaf, and put into the
mouth, it breaks not the Fast, provided that it be not swallowed down. Tannerus
goes beyond what he says, and holds, That this is true, though something of it
do fall into the stomach, being mingled and incorporated with our spittle. And
as for the smoke of it, Granado whom he cites, says, De fumo idem asserendum
Granado in 3. p. contr. 6. tract. 10. dub. 8. number. 4. putat, etiamsi sit tantae
quantitatis, ut ad aliqualem nuttitionem sufficiat.
That it is all one, though it be taken in such quantity as may in some fashion
serve for nourishment. That is to say, that it hinders not nor breaks at all the
natural Fast which is necessary for approaching to the Communion. And his
reason is, Quia fumus non sumitur per modum cibi. Ibid.
That smoke is not taken in form of nourishment. We may communicate, according
to this reason, after we have taken some medicine, or drunk water; because
neither are taken in form of nourishment.

There remains nothing behind to the resolving of this question in all these
instances, but to know what must be said of taking Tobacco in powder. Escobar
fortified by the advice of those whom he has made to speak before him, De
pulvere autem idem omnino censco, quia ad hoc jejunium observandum solum
prehibetur cib^ and potus. Ibid.
That his opinion is, that we must affirm the same thing of the powder as of
the leaf and smoke: Because to keep us fasting, it is only forbidden to eat and
drink.

Amicus allows us to take Sugar, Escobar Tobacco, so every one may please his
own taste. And if any one have an aversion from Tobacco and Sugar, he may
according to the reasonings of these Casuists, take in his mouth all sorts of
Essences, Electuaries, Tablets, Comfits which may be taken without chewing,
suffering them to melt, like Sugar, by little and little in the mouth, so the
liquor which falls into the stomach with the spittle, shall not break his Fast,
nor hinder him from communicating.

If any too scrupulous person should say that to take Comfits, or such like
things, and to make them dissolve in the mouth, is a sort of eating and
drinking; he may perhaps find satisfaction in that which this Jesuit adds for
the explication of his thoughts, and supportation of his opinion; Jejunium non
violatur, nisi cibus and potus per^os sumptus in stomachum vitali quidem
action comestiva and potativa tra^ciatur. Ibid.
That we break not our Fast, if the meat and drink, which we take by the mouth,
be not eaten and drunk by a vital action, and pass not on presently into the
stomach.

And if you urge him farther, showing that these things may serve for
nourishment as well as what we eat and drink; Tannerus and Granado that this
matters not; for though these things nourish, it is always true to say that in
rigor and in the letter we neither cat nor drink in taking them, as Granado
affirmed of Tobacco: quia non sumitur per modum cibi, though it do nourish.
Etiamsi sit tantae quantitatis, ut ad aliqualem nutritionem sufficiat.

This is very new and unheard of in the Church of God until these Authors. But
that which he says in the same place, relating the opinion of Praepositus is
more strnage. Praepositus asserit esse praeceptum Ecclesiasticum, and
intelligendum to modo quo Ecclesis in quadragesima and quatuor temporibus
principle sesunium. Ibid. number. 65. page 870.
Praepositus, says he, speaking of the Commandment to communicate Fasting,
maintains that it is a Precept of the Church, and must be understood in such
manner as the Churches command to fast in Lent and Ember- weeks. From whence he
draws this consequence, that it has some latitude, Colligitur hinc parvitatem
admitti materiae. Ibid. Addunt aliqui peccarei (...) post modicum cibum synaxi
reficitur. Ibid.
and some small matter may be allowed. Upon which we may consequently jud^
whether there be any evil in it or not, and what evil or sin it is to
communicate after we have taken something.

That is to say, that we may eat before we communicate, provided we eat not
much; all one as in Fasting days commanded by the Church, we may according to
these Dictors, take a morsel of bread, and drink once without breaking our
Fast. But if there be any fault in communicating thus, the most rigorous can
make it but a venial one.

So the Jesuits acknowledging hardly any, save these two dispositions and
preparations necessary to communicate, that is, Confession and Fasting, yet are
found in truth to destroy them both,

As for Priests who are the Ministers of the Eucharist, and who consecrate the
Body of Jesus Christ upon the Altar, and who give it to the Faithful after they
have taken it first themselves, Emanuel Sa says that for to say Mass, they
Potest quis, secundum quosdam, in necessitate profanis lin^eis uti, eaque
postea Domino reddere utenda. Sa verbo Missa, number. 7. p. 501.
may make use of the same Napery whereof they make use to spread common tables,
when they have no other, and make use of them after Mass, as they did before,
at table.

But if this Casuist be so liberal in this, he will appear very severe in
another of less moment, when he supposes that it is a great sin to say Mass
Celebrare sine calceamentis, si absit contemptus, non est mortale; est autem si
celebretur corporalibus valde immundis. Ibid. number. 15. page 503.

Azor existimavit mortifere eos peccare qui sine justa causa, tertia horae
part ante auroram vel post meridiem faciunt Sacrum. Ibid. n. 27. page 509.


without shoes, though he dare not say that it is a mortal sin when it is not
done by comtempt, as he assures us it is when the Consecration is celebrated on
very foul Corporals. But he is yet more rigorous afterward, when he says, it
is not lawful to say Mass before day nor after noon without a dispensation,
Azor.

Amicus says the same thing, and acknowledging after Baronius, that the Mass
has been heretofore celebrated in the Church at diverse hours, and many times
in the evening it self; he says that this ancient custom has been interrupted
for some time, and another new one introduced into use, to say it only from the
time it is day until noon. And after he adds, Quod autem haec consuetudo vim
habeat legis obligantis sub mortali, colligitur tum ex privilegiis quae
Pontifices concedunt Religiosis, etc.
That this Custom is instead of a Law, and has a virtue to oblige upon pain of
mortal sin; as may be collected from the Privileges that the Popes give unto
Monks to say Mass before day and after noon.

He would say, that if it were only a venial sin to say Mass before day or
after noon, there would be no need to demand a Dispensation, for neither he nor
his Companions make any great account of venial sins, mortal ones only in their
opinion requiring a Dispensation, that they may be committed without fear or
danger. So that all Laws and Commandments that oblige not under mortal sin,
have not any need of a Dispensation, according to these Doctors, and we may
boldly violate and contemn them.

We have seen hitherto in diverse places of this Book, and particularly in this
Treatise of the Commandments of the Church, that, according to the Jesuits,
when the Church commands the Faithful to pray, to assist at divine Service,
Easter, to confess at least once a year; we may satisfy and accomplish all its
Commands by doing only the outward actions which it commands, though we do
them by compulsion, in hypocrisy, with a formal design not to obey it, through
any wicked motive, and by committing in the very outward action of the
obedience we render it, crimes and Sacriledges. It is now pertinent for us, and
as it were necessary in the prosecution of this Work, to discover the cause of
this mischief, and to ascend unto the Spring and Principle from whence the
Jesuits draw these Maxims so pernicious and contrary to all good Manners,
Christian Purity, Sanctity of the Sacraments, Authority and Conduct of the
Church and of the Holy Ghost who animates and governs it in all things. This we
are about to do in the next Chapter, where we shall show that the Jesuits hold,
that the Church is no other than an humane Assembly and a Body Politic; and by
consequence that it has no Power nor Authority over internal and spiritual
actions, which are out of its Jurisdiction; because they are hid and without
its cognizance. Whence they infer, that when it commands any practice of
Virtue, exercise of Religion, or use of the Sacraments, its Commandment reaches
only to, and stays at what is external in these actions,

ARTICLE IV. That the Jesuits teach that the Church cannot command spiritual
and internal Actions; that its Laws and Guidance are humane; that it is it self
only a Politic Body.
IF you inquire of the Jesuits wherefore, according to their Divinity, we may
be discharged of the Prayers ordained by the Church by praying with voluntary
distraction, and reciting the divine Service without intention? Wherefore we
may accomplish the Command of saying Mass on Feast and Lords-days, by attending
without devotion; that of Fasting, by fasting for vainglory; that of
Confession, by confessing without sufficient sorrow for sin; that of
Communicating at Easter, by receiving with hypocrisy, and knowing we are in
mortal sin? Wherefore we may acquit our selves of Penance enjoined us by a
Confessor; accomplish a Vow made unto God; satisfy a Promise, an Oath made
unto men and God; by doing only in outward appearance what we are obliged to
do? And why we may generally accomplish all sorts of Precepts by actions which
in truth are sins, by doing them without any design to discharge our duty, and
on the contrary with a formal design not to discharge it, and by a formal
contempt of the Commandment,

If you demand, I say, of the Jesuits the reason of all these so strange
things, which we have already made appear that they teach for the most part;
some will answer you with Sanchez, that this is because the Church has not the
power to make Laws which command other than the substance of a thing: that is
to say in his language, what is external in the actions it wills you to do:
Quia leges praecipiunt solum substantiam actus, non modum. Sanchez opermor.
lib. 1. cap. 14. number. 1. page 65.


Others will say with Filliutius and Layman, that it is because when the Church
commands any thing, it cannot prescribe the manner of doing it, nor the end,
nor motive wherefore it ought to be done; Finis praecepti non cadit sub
praeceptum, says Filliutius. Filliutius mor. qq. tom. 1. tr. 7. cap. 2. n. 24.
page 171.
And Layman adds; imo nec cadere potest. Layman l. 1. tr. 4. cap. 4. n. 6. page
49.


Finally, the greater part and almost all of them will tell you with Amicus,
Coninck, and Escobar, that the Church has no power over internal actions, and
that it cannot command them, nor oblige us to accompany the outward actions,
which we exercise by its order, with the inward actions of virtue which are
necessary to their being well done. Ecclesia non habet potestatem supra actus
mere internes, Amicus tom. 8. dub. 17. sect. 2. number. 12. page 274.
Ecclesia absolute non potest actus mere internos praecipere aut vetare, says
Coninck, Coninck q. 83. de Sacram. art. 6. dub. unico, number. 291. and 292. page
285. and 286.
and Escobar after him; Ecclesia actus internos non potest praecipere. Escobar
tr. 1. exam 12. cap. 1. n. 2. page 199.


The last of these answers is most general. And indeed the other two depend on
it, and are referred unto it as Conclusions unto their Principle. For the
reason wherefore, according to them, the Church cannot prescribe the manner of
doing things which it commands, nor the end wherefore they ought to be done, is
because the end and good motion for which they ought to be done, that they
might be well done, are acts of the will and internal power, upon which they
pretend that the Church has neither power nor command: Ecclesia actus internos
non potest praecipere.

So that being here to declare the Principles of all the mischievous Maxims
which we have reported before, which tend to the ruin and entire abolition of
the Commands of God and the Church and all Christian Piety, I will only stand
upon the Examination of this: That the Church cannot absolutely command or
forbid internal acts; Ecclesia non potest absolute praecipete actus internos.
because this comprehends all the rest.

To make appear that this Principle is common amongst the Jesuits, we shall not
need fresh proof. For besides that they make no difficulty to confess it, I
have already before in diverse places reported many passages wherein they use it
to elude the Commandments of God and the Church, and teach men to undervalue
and despise them. And to refute this so pernicious Doctrine, it will suffice to
have represented, as I have done, the wicked sequels which infallibly arise
from it, and the consequences contrary unto the Foundations of Religion and
Christian Piety which depend thereon, and are inseparable from it.

But because that this point is very important,

Layman speaking of this matter, gives a charitable advice, or rather a Law to
the Pastors and Bishops of the Church, saying, Non poterit facile legislator
aut Praelatus sub peccato obligare subditos ad adhibendum intentionem, aliamve
internam dispositionem accidentalem. Layman lib. 1. tr. 4. cap. 4. number. 13.
page 51.
That it is no easy matter to find occasions wherein a Lawgiver or a Superior
may oblige his Subjects under pain of sin to have an intention or other inward
accidental disposition.

He puts no difference betwixt Secular Lawgivers and Pastors of the Church,
nor betwixt Authority of those, and the Ordinances of these. He denies equally
to both a Power of regulating what is internal of their Subjects, and to
prescribe unto them the intention and other spiritual dispositions in which
they ought to do what they command them. He excepts not the Superiors in
Religious Orders, unto whom yet he gives in this point more power than unto the
Bishops and the Pope himself: Praelatis tamen regularibus paulo major potestas
in suos competit, ratione voti religiosi obediendi Praelato in omnibus, quae
secund um regulam and consuerudinem Ordinis praecipiuntur. Ibid.
The Prelates Regulars, says he, have a little more power over their
Inferiors, because of the Religious vow they have made to obey their Superior
in all that he shall command them according to the Rule and Customs of their
Order.

He grounds this pretended advantage of the Superiors of the Religious Orders
above the Pastors of the Church,

But he grounds himself also upon the Authority of Suarez, Qua de re Suarez
lib. 4. de legibus cap. 12. in fine, ubi monet discrimen esse inter
obligationem regularium ex voto obedientiae and obligationem aliorum ex lege
civili vel Ecclesiastica Nam lex fundatur in jurisdictione quae solum data est
quantum expedit ad bonum communitatis. Praeceptum autem Praelati regularis
fundatur in voluntate voventis, seu pacto and promissione ejus, quae quia
principaliter fit Deo, and actu etiam mere interno fieri potest. Ibid.
Who, says he, treating on this subject, observes that there is difference
betwixt the obligation of Religious persons by virtue of their vow of
obedience, and that of others by virtue of Civil and Ecclesiastic Law. For the
Law is founded upon Jurisdiction and Authority, which is not given the
Lawgiver but for the common good. But the command of a Superior in a Religious
Order is founded upon the will of him who makes the vow, and upon the covenant
and promise by which he is obliged to obey. And this promise being principally
made to God who has power over the internal acts, it may be extended to these
acts as well as the external.

If this arguing be good for the Superiors of Religious Orders, it must needs
be good also for the Superiors of the Church. For we submit our selves
voluntarily to the Superiors of the Church, as the other submit voluntarily to
the Superiors in a Religious Order. We become Christians voluntarily, Christ:
Qui vos audit, me audit. Luc. 10. v. 16.
He that obeys you, obeys me. And according to that of S. Paul: Pro Christo
ergo legatione fungimur, tanquam Deo exhortante per nos. 2 Cor. 5. v. 20.
Gods speaks unto you by us; we are but the Ministers and Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ. If then the Superiors of a Religious Order can command the internal
actions; because the submission rendered unto them depends on the will and
promise of their Inferiors which regards God in them it must also be confessed
by the same reason, that the Ecclesiastic Superiors and Prelates have the same
power, and may as well command the internal actions of them that are subject
unto them for their Salvation.

Also it is incredible, and contrary to the most common apprehensions of
Christianity; that the Superiors of Religious Orders should have more Power and
Authority in their Congregations, than the Bishops and Pope himself have in the
Church, and that the Power of the Pope and the Bishops should not be more
internal and spiritual, than that of Magistrates and Secular Princes, unto whom
these Jesuits compare them, setting them all equally in the same inability to
command internal things, without acknowledging any difference betwixt them in
this point, and giving this advantage above them only unto Superiors of
Religious Orders, Discrimen est inter obligationem regularium ex voto
obedientiae and ob^igationem aliorum ex lege civili vel Ecclesiastica.
That this is the difference which is betwixt the obligation of Regulars, who
come under a vow of obedience.

And if the Laws of the Church differ not in this point from the Civil Laws;
and the Prelates of the Church, no more than Civil Magistrates, have any power
to command internal actions, we must say that the Superiors of Religious
Orders, unto whom they ascribe this power, hold it not from the Church, and
cannot receive from it that power which they say it has not it self.

Also they pretend to hold it from the will of those who make vows of Religion,
since they say, Praeceptum Praelati regularis fundatur in voluntate voventis
and pacto seu promissione eju^, etc.
That the command of a Superior in a Religious Order is founded upon the will
of him who makes the vow, and on the covenant and promise by which he is
obliged to obey him, etc. They would then that the Superiors of a Religious
Order receive not from the Church the Authority and Power which they have to
command; but from the will of those who become Religious; and they are herein
sovereign and independent on the Church. Which is both against the modesty of
Religious persons, the Order of the Church, truth it self, and evident reason,
the Superiors of the Religious Orders being not capable of so much only as to
receive any Religious into their Order, but by the power which they have
received from the Superiors of the Church, who consequently have all the power
of the Superiors of the Religious Orders, and much more; but they have it in a
manner more eminent, as the Spring and Principle of this Power.

And if the Inferiors can by their will and by their vows give to the Superiors
of Religious Orders Authority and Power to command them even internal things,

So that he might give the Church all power over us, which private persons can
give over themselves to Superiors of Religious Orders by their vows, and much
more.

Which shows that the Ecclesiastic is far different from the Civil
Jurisdiction, with which the Jesuits nevertheless do confound it; and the
Ecclesiastic are other than the Civil Laws, which they notwithstanding would
make equal. For the Jurisdiction which Jesus Christ has given the Church over
all Christians, is more extended, holy, and divine than that of Secular
Magistrates, and it respects Souls more than bodies, the inward than the
outward; since it respects eternal Salvation, which depends altogether on the
actions of the Soul, and not of the body, which do nothing without those of the
Soul.

Also Jesus Christ has not given unto Secular Powers the Holy Ghost to govern
their people, as he has given it to his Church. He has not given them the
power to open and shut Heaven unto them; to cut them off and reunite them to
his body; to nourish them with his flesh and blood, and to fill them with his
Spirit, and he has not said unto them that when they speak, it is the Holy
Ghost who speaks in them; that it is the Holy Ghost who commands what they
command; that whosoever despise and dishonor them, despise and dishonor the Holy
Ghost. For thus the Apostles have spoken in the Scripture, Peter says to
Ananias and his Wife, that they lied unto the Holy Ghost, because they had lied
unto one of the Ministers of the Church. And this is the reason that the
Councils and the Fathers so often call the Laws of the Church Sacred and
Divine, knowing that they proceed from the Holy Ghost, who is always in the
Church as Jesus Christ was with the Apostles, and conducted them till his
Passion and death.

Which is so true, that Layman himself could not refrain from acknowledging it
more than once, in very clear terms, Quis enim neget quin lege vel praecepto
Ecclesiae, utpote animarum salutem sptctante, praecipi possit ut ministri
Ecclesiae vere and non simulatorie orent, Sacramenta ministrent Fidelibus
omnibus, ut Sacramenta vere and non per fictionem suscipiant? Qui autem sine
interna intention orant, sine ullo animi dolor peccata confitentur, etc. si
non vere sed ficte orant non verae sed fictae poenitentiae Sacramentum
postulant. Ergo non satissaciunt Ecclesiae praecepto. Ibid.
Who doubts, says he, that the Church which in all its conduct regards the
Salvation of Souls, may command its Ministers to pray and administer the
Sacraments with sincerity, and not only in appearance, and to all the Faithful
to receive in like manner the Sacraments with a true internal disposition? Now
they who pray without inward attention, and they who confess without a true
sorrow for their sins, neither pray nor confess truly, but in appearance. And
by consequence they satisfy not the Commandment of the Church. Which may be
extended to all the Commandments and all the Laws of the Church, since they are
all of the same nature, and all have reference to true piety and true virtue,
and the eternal Salvation of Souls,

He repeats the same thing afterward, and he says it also more clearly and
strongly in these terms: Duplex est lex and legislatrix potestas: Ecclesiastic
and civilis. Differunt inter se, tum ratione originis, quia Ecclesiastica
potestas proxime and immediate a Deo instituta est; civilis vero ab hominibus
provenit; tum ratione objecti and finis: quia Ecclesiastica versatur pe^ se and
direct ^rga res spirituales ad salutem and vitam aeternam ordinatas, sicut
constat ex verbis Christi, Matthew. 16. Tibi dabo claves regni coelorum; and
Joan. 21. Pasce oves meas; and ex Apostolo Paulo, cap. 2. Act. Posuit nos
Spiritus Sanctus Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei quam acquisivit sanguine suo.
Ibid. cap. 6. number. 1. page 53.
There are two sorts of Laws, and two sorts of Powers to make Laws;
Ecclesiastic and Civil. They are different, as well in their original, because
the Ecclesiastic Power is instituted immediately from God, and the Civil Power
comes immediately from men; as in their objects and their ends; because the
Ecclesiastic Power regards properly and directly spiritual things which
conduct Souls unto Salvation and eternal life, as those words of our Savior in
Matthew. 16. do testify. I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and
in S. John 21. Feed my lambs; and those of S. Paul in Act. 20. The Holy Ghost
has established you Bishops to govern the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his Blood.

He explicates the same truth yet more fully, and discovers the principal
foundation thereof, pursuing his discourse, and drawing this consequence from
what he now said. Quare cum Christus sanguinem suum fuderit ut acquireret and
fundaret Ecclesiam sanctam and ad vitam aeternam ordinatam; idcirco etiam
Pastores and Episcopos el constituit, qui ad cundem vitae ae^ernae finem
Ecclesiam dirigerent and gubernatent. Civilis vero potestas per se ac direct
temporalem tantum commoditatem ceu pacem spectat. Ibid.
Wherefore Jesus Christ having shed his Blood to purchase and found a Church
which is holy and ordained to eternal life, he has also given it Pastors and
Bishops to govern and conduct it to this very eternal life. But Civil Power
regards properly and directly wealth and peace temporal only:

For the Civil Power regards the outward order and civil tranquillity alone,
and prescribes none but outward and humane means to attain this end. But the
Church being established for procuring unto men eternal life, inward and divine
peace, it ought to have power to ordain means, and to give commands
proportionate to that end, whereunto we cannot attain but by actions of the
Soul altogether spiritual and divine. And for that cause it must needs be that
its commands should be more internal than external, spiritual than corporal,
divine than humane.

We need then no other proofs against the errors of Layman and his Brethren
than his own confession, which is more than sufficient to overturn all that
they said before; that we might satisfy the Commandments of the Church by
actions of vainglory, lust, avarice, and Sacriledges: That we may fulfill them
without any will to fulfill them, and even with an express will not to satisfy
them, and to despise them; provided we do outwardly what is commanded. For
these actions thus done, have no communication with the Salvation of Souls and
eternal life, and being rather formally opposite thereto, they also have
nothing common with the Commandments of the Church, which ordains for its
Children no other than means to attain unto eternal life, and works which
procure the Salvation of the Soul,

For to answer unto a truth so clear, what Sanchez does, that the Church
commands only a material obedience, is to forget the respect due unto the
Church, and to oppose the light of reason as well as of Faith and the Gospel.
Quod si objicias, praecepra obligare ad ^bedientiam, quae non adesse videtur
ubi non adest intentio satisfaciendi praecepto. R^spondeo non obligare ad
obedientiam formalem, sed materialem; nempe ut fi^t quod praecipitur, quamvis
non fiat proprerea quod praecipitur. Sanchez mor. qq. lib. 1. cap. 13. number. 9.
page 63.
But if you object, says this Jesuit, that the Commandments oblige unto
obedience, and that it seems that he has it not, who has no intent at all to
satisfy the Commandment. I answer that they oblige not to a formal, but
material obedience; that is, to do that which is commanded, though it be not
done for the reason it was commanded.

And if this Explication make you not to understand sufficiently what this
material obedience is, Layman will declare it unto you more perspicuously, and
will tell you that it is a corporal and purely external obedience, maintaining
that the Church demands no other, and proving it by Seneca's Authority, who was
without doubt very intelligent in the Government of the Church, and an
excellent Judge of the Authority it has received from Jesus Christ for
conducting Souls unto eternal life. Convenienter videtur ut humana potestas
fire jurisdictio solum se extendat ad actiones humanas, quatenus in externam
materiam transeunt, ut signo aliquo produntur; quod etiam Seneca notat lib. 3.
de Beneficiis. Etrat si quis puter servitutem in totum hominem descendere. Pars
enim melior excepta est. Corpora obnoxia sunt and adscripts dominis, men's sui
juris est. Layman l. 1. tr. 4. c 4. n. 5. page 49.
It seems, says Layman, that it is reasonable that humane Power and
Jurisdiction should not be extended farther than to humane actions which are
discernable by their objects and some external sign. Which Seneca also observes
in 5. Book de Beneficiis. It is an error to believe that servitude extends it
self over all that which is in man, his best part is exempt from it. The body
only is subject to the will of a Master, and depends on his power; but his
spirit is always independent and its own.

We must then believe, according to the opinion of this Jesuit, since he has
learned it of Seneca, that the Church has no power save over the bodies of
Christians, no more than Masters have over those of their slaves, and Princes
over their Subjects; that Christ has not subjected unto it the whole man, but
the least part of him, which is his body, and it has no power over Souls,
which are free and independent in respect of it, and in their own governance.
And so Arma militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt: sed potentia Deo, ad
destructionem munitionum, consilia destruentes, etc. and in captivitatem
redigentes omnem intellectum in obsequium Christi. 2 Cor. 10. v. 4. and 5.
S. Paul did amiss to pretend that he had received a power altogether divine to
bring all Spirits into subjection unto Jesus Christ, and to make them Captives
to his light and guidance. All this is not conformable to the Judgment of
Seneca, nor by consequence to that of Layman, who exempts the Soul from the
Jurisdiction of the Church, and allows it only over bodies, for the outward
conduct of the Faithful, and to enjoin them material and corporeal actions and
virtues, and to forbid them sins only of the same sort, i. e. external and
gross ones.

Neither will he leave it a power to command all these visible and carnal
virtues, Qui aliquas, non omnes actiones virtutum humana lege imperari posse
Quaedam enim sunt nimis arduae ac difficiles, ut in consilio esse debeant, non
in praecepto, v. c. Evangelica paupertas, castitas, etc. Layman ibid. c. 4. n.
1. p. 48.
I have said that humane Laws may command some virtuous actions, but not all;
because there are some that are so high and difficult, that they ought indeed
be counseled, but not commanded; as Gospel poverty and Chastity.

He says moreover, and declares, Sed neque omnia peccata criam externa ab
humano Magistratu prohiberl possunt, sed multa permitti debent, ut graviora
evitentur. Ibid.
That a public Magistrate cannot forbid all sorts of vices and sins; but that
he ought to tolerate many, though grievous ones, to avoid greater. And the same
thing ought to be said of the Church, according to him and his Companions;
since they hold, that its Power and Laws are altogether humane, as those of the
Secular Magistrates.

And to give us to know what the crimes are which a Secular Magistrate or a
Prelate of the Church may forbid, and what he may tolerate, he speaks thus in
general terms, and he establishes this Rule, which is as it were a reason and
a proof of what he had said. Lex humana ponitur multitudini sive communitati in
qua major pars est hominum in virtute non perfectorum. Quare ferme nonni si
gravia peccata legibus prohibiti solent, a quibus moraliter possibile est man
jorem partem multitudinis abstinere.
Humane Law is made for the many, and for all those who live in a Society, of
whom the greatest part are such as are imperfect in virtue. Whence he draws
this consequence; Wherefore Laws are not wont to forbid other than the most
enormous sins, from which, speaking morally, the greater part of the Commonalty
may abstain.

So that when people are grown very corrupt, we must release the more the
rigor of the Church, as well as Civil Laws, and forbid no sins but such as are
not common and ordinary. And because they are all such in a manner at this day,
there being hardly any that is not done without fear of punishment against God
and the Gospel by the greatest part of the world, who give themselves up to
them, and pamper themselves in them with quiet of conscience, by the favor of
the Doctrine of Probability, which authorizes them all in a manner; it will
follow, that the Church can hardly forbid any by its Laws, and that it will be
obliged to tolerate them all. And so we must speak no more of reformation of
Manners in Church Assemblies and Councils. And though in these Propositions
which we now observed, Layman expresses not formally the Ecclesiastic Power,
yet he includes it in the general of humane Power and Law, pretending as he
does, that the Power and the Laws of the Church are humane, as well as the Laws
of the Secular Magistrate, as we have made appear already.

Amicus testifies this also where he faith, E^ potestas concessa est Ecclesiae,
quae accommodate est humano regimini. Amicus tom. 8. dub. 17. sect 2. number. 12.
page 275.
That the power which God has given unto the Church, is such as was needful
unto an humane conduct. Non possunt esse intra sphaeram humanae gubernationis.
Ibid.
Because, as he speaks there, they pass the bounds of humane Government and
cognizance. Whence he infers, that whatsoever Laws the Church may make, Nam
totum id quod p^aeciperet esset actus externus conducens ad externum regimen
and gubernationem Ecclesiasticam. Ibid. number. 15. page 275.
all that it ordains, must be of external acts proportionable to the
Ecclesiastical Government, and which may help in the outward conduct of those
who are under its charge.

And what he says generally of the Pastors of the Church, that their conduct
is but humane and external, he says particularly of the Pope, and proves it by
reason. Cum enim Deus suam Ecclesiam regat per homines; eam tantum potestatem
suo Vicarlo contulisse credendum est, quae necessaria est and sufficit ad
humanum regimen. Ibid. number. 14.
As God, says he, conducts his Church by men as his Instruments, so we must
not believe that he has given unto his Vicar other power than what is
necessary and sufficient for an humane Government.

He acknowledges not in Jesus Christ himself any other than an humane and
outward conduct, whether he believes he could or would not take up any other
Government in the Church. Putandum est Christum praecepta dedisse hominibus
more humano, quo solent terrestres Principts suls subditis praecepta dare, quae
non obligant nisi ad id quod exprimunt. Ibid. sect. 3. number. 31. page 277.
We must believe, says he, that when Jesus Christ gave these precepts unto
men, he did it in an humane manner, and as the Princes of the Earth are wont to
make their Ordinances and Laws for their Subjects, which oblige them to no
other thing than what they contain and express precisely.

After this the Bishops and the Pope himself have not, as it may seem, any
cause to complain of the Jesuits, since they treat them no worse than Jesus
Christ, whom they think not that they have offended in saying, that he governs
the Church and Faithful as well as they, in an humane manner as the Princes of
the Earth govern their Subjects.

I know not whether ever there were any Heretic that had so base a thought of
the Power and Conduct of Jesus Christ, since they themselves who will not
acknowledge him for a God, hold nevertheless that his conduct was divine, and
that God himself, with whom he had an alliance and very peculiar union of
affection and perfect correspondence of will, acted by him, and he by the
Spirit of God who conducted and governed him. And if the Jesuits themselves had
not set on foot and published in their Writings these excesses against Jesus
Christ never heard of until this present, there are few persons that would have
believed, or who durst have objected to them so great an impiety, as which
renders Religion altogether humane, outward and politic, though it be
contained in the bottom of their Doctrine, and be a necessary and evident
consequence of the Principle of their Divinity, which we examine in this
Chapter.

For the Power of the Church, Amicus speaks of Jesus Christ. Putandum est
Christum praecepta hominibus dedisse more humano quo solent terrestres
Principes suis subditis praecepta dare, quae non obligant nisi ad id quod
exprimitur. But that we may see yet more clearly that these so strange
discourses and propositions are not found by chance in the Books of the
Jesuits; but are, as I have said, the sequels of their Maxims which they bring
forth upon a formal design they have to debase the Church in its Pastors, and
to render the Kingdom of Jesus Christ all carnal and earthly;

For Father Celot after he had divided piety into that which is internal and
true, and that which is only external and apparent, says, that this latter
suffices to the exercise of the Offices of the Church. I call, says he, the
Holiness whereof the question here proceeds, external; and there needs not
precisely any other to Jurisdiction and Hierarchick functions. Which he
expresses also in such manner, and in terms so strong and express, that I dare
well say that the most criminal and infamous persons are not unworthy of an
Episcopal Charge considered in it self, nor because of its greatness and
Holiness, but only by reason of the Ordinance of the Church which has judged
them incapable. Gratiani sententia est c^minibus nonnullis infames ab
Episcopatu procul haberi, non vi stau^s ipsius, sed optimo Ecclesiae instituto,
eximiam, quantum quidem fieri p^test, sanctitatem in ministris suis exigentis.
Celot lib. 9. cap. 20. page 947.
Gratian holds, says he, that he who is made infamous by some crime, is
excluded from being a Bishop, not by the proper condition of Episcopacy, but by
the Ordinance of the Church, which requires in its Ministers the greatest
Holiness that is possible.

For this cause they fear not to say that we may advance our kindred or friends
to the highest Offices in the Church, Attamen ego fieri dicam and sint vitio,
eos etiam assumi posse qui non sunt perfectioris virtutis: modo politicis
virturibus sint praediti. Ibid.
though they be no Saints, provided they have politic and apparent virtues.
And that you may not contemn all these virtues, he calls them perfect, and
maintains this name may be given them with reason; because they appear such in
the eyes of men. And he pretends that we ought thus understand the virtues
which S. Paul requires in a Bishop. Quas tu perfectiores, ego illustiores and
hominum oculis magis expositas voco, indeque ostendo caput illud tuum
Episcopalis perfectionis, quod perfectiores virtutes exigat, facile explicari
de splendidioribus politicisque, non de iis quae majorem Dei amorem pariunt.
Ibid.
The virtues, says he, speaking to Mr. Hallier, which you call most perfect, I
call most resplendent, and most remarkable in the sight of men, and I show that
which you call perfection of the Episcopal estate, which requires more perfect
virtues than the common ones, may easily be understood of more resplendent and
politic, and not of those which produce a more perfect love of God. This is
that which he had expressed a little before in other terms, when he propounded as
a certainty, Apostolus certe, sive ad Titum, sive ad Timotheum, virtutes non
admodum supra vulgares desiderat in Episcopo. Ibid. page 946.
That the virtues which S. Paul required in a Bishop, writing to Titus or
Timothy, are not at all above the vulgar.

Finally, it will appear by these excesses which would seem to us incredible,
if our eyes did not oblige us to believe in seeing and reading them in the
Books of the Jesuits, that these men destroy the Church from its Foundation,
Lessius says in express terms, calling it a Body politic, Corpus politicum.
After this we cannot think it strange, if other Jesuits, in conformity to the
Opinions, and in consequence to the common Doctrines of the Society, have said
that there need only politic virtues to govern the Church, and to exercise its
principal Offices, which are Government and Policy, and that its Laws are but
humane and politic, which oblige only to the external part of its Commands,
not only in those made by the Ministers of Jesus Christ, but by Jesus Christ
himself, who according to these Doctors, has commanded nothing but in an
humane manner, as other Princes do.

So that whereas Jesus Christ has called his Kingdom not of this world, the
Jesuits maintain that it is, and like to that of the Princes of the Earth. And
whereas he has said that his Kingdom is within us and in the innermost parts
of our Souls, they maintain on the contrary, that it is external and without
us, and that the Church, which is his Kingdom, is no other than a politic Body
and Church. And so by the wonderful Judgment of God they fall into the
condemnation which S. Cyprian has pronounced so many Ages ago against the
Novatian Heretics who introduced an humane Church. Ecclesiam humanam faciunt.
And in this they make themselves like the Libertines of our times, who reduce
all Religion into Policy, and deserve as well as they to bear the name of
Politics,

FINIS.

