OATHS appointed to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
And Declaration.
I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be faithful and bear true
Allegiance to His Majesty KING WILLIAM the Third.

So help me GOD.

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as impious
and heretical, that damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes
Excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; And I
do declare that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within the Realm of England.

So help me GOD.

I A. B. Do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of GOD, Prosess, Testify and
Declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is
not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Body and
Blood of CHRIST, at or after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever;
And that the Invocation or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint,
and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are
Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do solemnly in the presence of GOD,
Profess, Testify and Declare, That I do make this Declaration and every part
thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of the words read unto me, as they are
commonly understood by English Protestants, without any evasion, equivocation
or mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any Dispensation already granted
me for this purpose by the Pope, or any Authority or Person whatsoever; or
without any hope of any such Dispensation from any Authority or Person
whatsoever, or without thinking that I am or can be acquitted before GOD or
Man, or absolved of this Declaration or any part thereof, although the Pope or
any other Person or Persons or Power whatsoever, should dispense with or annul
the same, or declare that it was null and void from the beginning.


