THE New TEST OF THE Church of England's LOYALTY, Examined by the Old TEST OF
Truth and Honesty.

LONDON, Printed by R. G. 1687.

THE NEW TEST OF THE Church of England's LOYALTY, etc.
THE reason why the Church of England may above any Separatists from her
appropriate to her self the Principles of true Loyalty, is so apparent from her
constant Practice and Doctrine, that one would think this Scribler of the New
Test never considered it at all (though he tells us he has often considered)
because he cannot find it. For I challenge him or any man to show me any that
are not of her Communion (not excluding even the Calves of the Hind, the Sons
of the Church of Rome it self) that did constantly maintain the Doctrine of
Non-resistance to the Supreme Magistrate and practice according to it; as our
Church and her true Sons have always done. Was there ever any such Doctrine as
the Deposing of Kings, the subjecting them to a foreign Bishop, or to an
Assembly at home, the making them Trustees of the People, or ascribing an
Authority Coordinate to theirs in the Peoples Representatives, the founding
Dominion in Grace; or Lastly, owning a Power in the inferior Magistrates to
Act without, or contrary to their Commission taught by our Loyal Mother: and
have not some or all of these been taught by some of the other Parties? So that
if they are Loyal it is no thanks to their Religion for it. Have not all the
other Parties acted according to these Antimonarchical principles? Or can the
worst of our Enemies with any truth accuse our Church or her true Followers of
any such Actions? But, what (says this Test-maker) can be more ridiculous then
for such, who cannot pretend to infallibility even in matters of Faith, to
assume to themselves an inerrability in civil Obedience? Oh profound Sense and
Reason! what cannot Men be Loyal, and Act according to their constant
Principles of Loyalty without being infallible? Or will not this Gentleman give
us leave to be so kind to him, or any of the Members of the Church of Rome, as
to think them endued with Loyalty without robbing their Holy Father the Pope of
his Prerogative of Infallibility, and ascribing part to his Sons? Did ever any
Man of the Church of England assume to himself an inerrability in his
Obedience; only so long as he kept close to his Rule his Church has given
him? I am sure on the contrary, the Sons of that Church that assumes to her
self Infallibilty in matters of Faith, can never be endued with that singular
Gift of Loyalty, so long as they keep themselves out of the reach of the
Anathema of their infallible Council of Lateran, affixed by an inerrable Canon
upon all such as deny the Pope's power to depose Heretical Princes or Favorers
of Heretics. So that I must needs own (if they are Loyal) their Loyalty far
exceeds ours, since they are Loyal at the peril of their immortal Souls,
whereas we can only venture our Temporal concerns for our Prince.

If therefore you will show your selves truly Loyal, in the next Address
renounce that disloyal Canon of the Council of Lateran; or else we must believe
either, that you are not Catholics (as in your Religion, you love to be
called) or else do but serve a turn in your Pretenses of Loyalty.

Out of his abundant kindness to the Members of the Church of England, this
Gentleman is pleased to allow them to have been Faithful and Serviceable to
King Charles the First; we are extremely obliged to him for this so favorable
a Concession; and indeed I could not but have some thoughts of presenting an
Address of thanks to him for it: But that he has saved me the trouble in so
well explaining it. For he tells us, that this was only in our own defense, and
not joining with the common Enemy to cut our own Throats; nay further, that the
Ambition of our Church occasioned the late War, and the loss of the King's Life
and Crown. If so; then our Church was serviceable to King Charles the First
with a vengeance. This (me thinks) looks something like a Dear-joye's
Witticism, or in plain English a downright Bull, that we should be serviceable
to our King, and yet, occasion the loss of his Crown and Life: But it is no
matter what Contradictions he writes, if he can but thereby bespatter the
Church of England; he knows he is to deal with a People of an implicit Faith
that can swallow any Contradictions, or false Stories. Did ever any Man thus
outface the Sun as he has done in these Aspersions? Do not all Men (that know
any thing of the History of the late times) know that if we of the Church of
England would have joined with the Rebels, or, but have owned the Usurpers
Authority, we might have enjoyed all our Rites, and have expected much greater
Preferments? Was not this then very like consulting our own present Interest to
suffer Sequestrations, Decimations, Plunderings, Imprisonments; nay Death it
self, rather then Act against our Duty to our Prince? Is it not as visible as
the Sun, that the first pretense for the late War was for securing of Property,
and that Religion was but made a stalking Horse to catch the Rabble? How then
was the Ambition of our Church, the occasion of it? But, Oh the admirable
Loyalty of the Romanists, That served the King without any Prpspect of
advantage to themselves; Nay, when their Services were rejected by the King,
and their Persons banished from his Presence! Did not the Rebellious party cry
out against Popery, and pretend that they only designed to secure the Nation
against Papists? they knew, or at least at first believed (as he says) they
should meet with no quarter from the Rebels, and therefore where should they
fly for safety, to the Royal party? but as soon as His Majesty was forced by
his Parliament to discard them, and that they saw the other party would receive
them, how many of them Listed themselves under their Banners? And, Vid. the
Works of K. Charles the Martyr. fol. 323.
All Men know the great numbers of Papists which serve in their (the Rebels)
Army, Commanders and others; and has not Old Peter Du Moulin long since
asserted, and offered to prove it by undoubted Evidence, that a Jesuit at the
very execution of his late Majesty K. Charles the First, was seen amongst the
Rebels throwing up his Cap for Joy; insulting in the most barbarous manner over
that poor Prince in his last Tragic Exit? So true is it, That never any of
that Communion served that Party.

This infallible Author is resolved he will do the Church of England's business
for Loyalty, and therefore he rakes up all the odious Acts that ever have been
done, since the infancy of our Church (as he words it, p. 4. in fine) and very
obligingly fathers them upon her. Of all which the Scotch Answer, viz.
Bellarmine thou lie is a sufficient confutation.

For as for that, that she [the Church of England] endeavored with all her
might to set up a Brat of her own to exclude Queen Mary. It is so void of all
appearance of Truth, that it would puzzle any man by the History of those Times
to guess what he means by it. I suppose he means the Lady Jane Gray. But was
not she set up by the Ambition of Dudley D. of Northumberland, who thereby
hoped to have raised his Family [his Son being her Husband] to the Royal
Dignity? Did not the Members of the Church of England, who were then in Power
join against him? Nay did not Northumberland himself after he was taken [so
true a Son of our Church he was] offer to embrace the Communion of the Church
of Rome to save his Life? Was it not easy for the Protestants at that time to
have set up her Sister Elizabeth, whom they knew to be of their own Religion,
and to have excluded Queen Mary; but so far were they from opposing the right
Succession, that upon her Arrival into Framingam-Castle, they readily joined
with her, and set her upon her Throne.

But after Queen Mary's Death, (says he ibid.) Elizabeth a known Bastard
raised the Church of England as a Prop to support the Weakness of her Title. Is
not this said like a true Loyal Jesuit, showing the Honor he has for Crowned
Heads, by fixing upon one of the most renowned of them, the most Honorable
Title of a plain, downright Bastard? Nay, it is by so much more like him, by
how much it wants of Truth. Was not Queen Elizabeth Daughter of King Henry the
Eighth born in Wedlock after a most solemn Divorce, grounded upon one of the
justest Causes that could be, viz. The Nullity of his former Marriage with the
Lady Katherine of Spain? Was not it thought at first so by Cardinal Wolsey,
nay, by the Pope himself, who had he not been overaw'd by the Emperor, would
have determined the Marriage unlawful, nay, did not he sign a Bull to that
purpose? I dare appeal to this Gentleman himself, whether there be not far more
Reason to believe it unlawful for a Man to Marry his Brother's Wife, than there
is to think it Lawful? Now if this Question must be determined in the
Assirmative, does it not directly follow that Queen Mary's Legitimacy was far
more uncertain, and consequently her Title did more need a Prop to support the
Weakness of it, than her Sister Queen Elizabeth's? Henry the Eighth their
Father knew this well enough, and therefore settled the matter (as well as he
could) by Acts of Parliament; which right I shall not dispute. But however if
the Romanists thought it good against the Scotch title for Queen Mary, why
might not the Protestants think it as good for Queen Elizabeth? But they (says
he) no sooner found themselves so established, then they fell to making those
Canibal-Laws to Hang, Draw, and Quarter the Priests of the Living God, etc. Not
so fast, I beseech you Sir, were these Edicts made or consented to by the
Convocation? were these ever made Canons of our Church? Why then is not the
Saddle set upon the right Horse, and they owned to be the acts of State, and
not of our Church? Again, how can these be said to be true Priests of the
Living God, who would not own the Power that God had set over us in our Nation,
but looked upon the supreme Magistrate, as one deposed by the Popes Authority,
and adjudged to Death, and therefore were continually Plotting and Contriving
against her Life and Dignity, and setting up the Queen of Scots Title against
her, which forced the Queen and her Council (which had it not been necessary, I
am sure the Members of our Church would have thought most inhumane) to take
away the Life of that unfortunate Princess? Now I pray what Crime is it, or
what fault is it in our Church, if the Supreme Power of our Nation does enact
Laws to secure the Government? Or what disloyalty is it for the Church of
England not to join with Rebels, or for the State to punish them by Law?

Oh! but these Laws are exclaimed against by all the Reformed Churches of
Christendom, etc. (p. 5.) But for this we must only take this Gentleman's bare
word; of the Sincerity of which, this Pamplet has already given us such
undoubted Instances as cannot but prevail with us, if we resolve never to be
believed our selves, to believe him; but supposing any of the Reformed should
speak against them, have not our Governors the Power of determining by Law
what is necessary for the public Peace?

But however who can endure to hear Papists crying up Moderation, and
exclaiming against Sanguinary Laws, etc. For, this is for the Kettle to accuse
the Pot of Blackness. Who I pray first enacted that Act, De Heretico
Comburendo, and as long as they had Power, nay sometimes, (as in the Case of
John Husse, etc.) contrary to the most solemn Promise of an whole Council of
their Clergy) put it in Execution?

Who was it that found out that old meek Method of converting Heretics by the
Inquisition? or that more Harmless way (now so much celebrated by the French
Clergy) of persuading them by Booted Apostles, who will neither let them Fly,
nor Dye, nor Sleep, nor Eat in quiet, till they have owned their Conversion?

Who was it that Muthered such numbers of the Albigenses in cold Blood, in the
days of Yore, and in latter times butchered so many Thousands of the English in
Ireland, and since that put to the Sword so many Protestants about Piedmont?

Who was it that murdered two Princes one after another, viz. Henry the 3d.
and Henry the 4th. of France, and raised that Bloody League, called the Holy
League (a pattern to our Protestant-Jesuits- Scotch-Covenant) by which so many
Thousands were destroyed by War? Who was it that approved these things, and
made Panegyric Orations upon them? Were these Members of the Church of
England, or of the Church of Rome? I leave it to this Gentleman to tell us in
his next Pamphlet, if he desires to hear any more of these matters: and shall
conclude this affair with an Expression of his own rightly applied, viz. That
if Murderers of their Lawful Sovereigns; if making holy Leagues against them;
if raising Wars and Commotions in all Kingdoms; and Canons of Infallible
General Councils that bind them to such Actions under an Anathema be sufficient
Testimenies of Loyalty, we must own the Church of Rome to have been hitherto
unparalled in her Duty, but if this be not the true Test of Loyal Subjects,
our Rock of Loyalty is already degenerate into a Rock of Scandal, of
Desobedience, and Rebellion. p. 5, in fine and p. 6.

The rest of his Discourse from p. 6. line the 7th. is taken up in base and
false Insinuations of the Church of England's Disloyalty, or at least
Ingratitude to our present King, in that notwithstanding his Gracious Promises
and Royal Word to maintain our Religion, we dare not trust him, nor had not so
much Gratitude to take off the Sanguinary Laws and the Test at his request.

But (Good Sir) if our Parliament of England will not do this, what is it to
the Church of England? Why must the Church answer for the Acts of the State? or
why is it Ingratitude or Disloyalty to secure our selves against Popish Priests
who hold there is no Faith to be kept with us, and teach this Doctrine to all
sorts of Persons? Why (I pray you) is it not more Ingratitude and Disloyalty in
the Church of Rome, to a Prince that has been so prodigiously kind to her, to
venture these Kingdoms for her sake, not to take off that Bull that hinders
them from Communicating with the Church of England; and Pius Quartus his Creed,
and the Injunction of Subscribing to it, which would go very far in Uniting the
two Churches? If this be not ingratitude in her still to keep her Post, why is
it in the Church of England to do the same? Let us see the Pope and Clergy of
Rome set us this Example of Gratitude, and this may be a great inducement to
our Church and Nation to follow it. Suppose a Man has good flights of Pigeons
in his Dove-house, and loves them well, and therefore has provided such a Trap
as he has experienced, does keep out the Vermin, that otherwise would creep in
and destroy his Pigeons, would you not think him a Mad man, or else very
willing to suffer his innocent Doves to be utterly destroyed that should take
away his Trap, and thereby give leave to all the devouring Weezles, Polcats,
Hawks, Owls, Buzzards, and Carrion-crows to come in amongst them and not only
disturb, but destroy them at their pleasure?

If the Test be so Ungrateful and Disloyal a thing to our Church, why is not
the Test in France (which was a Pattern to ours, nay, does far exceed it, for
the Right Heir to the Crown is excluded there without taking it) a greater sign
of Ingratitude and Disloyalty in the Church of Rome?

But this Test was contrived by Shafsbury and designed against the King
himself. (ibid. p. 6.)

Was it so? why then do you throw it upon the Church of England? is the Church
of England to answer for Shaftsbury's inventions who was her greatest Enemy?
but however (to give the Devil his due) how can this Test be designed against
the King, when the Royal Family are particularly exempted from taking it; which
was on purpose so contrived by the Loyal Churchmen in the Parliament to secure
the Succession in a right Line?

But the House of Commons made an Adress to his Majesty, that none should be
Employed, who were not capacitated by the said Laws and Test. (i.e.) in short;
Your Majesty must have none either in the Army, or as Court, but such as really
believe, and will swear to it, that you are an Idolater; These are his words,
ibid. p. 6.

Why in the first place, such as will swear, etc. The Oaths that are required
by the Test, are only the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. Now why any should
be trusted with the Power of the Nation, who will not swear Fealty to the
Government, my dull Politics I confess cannot understand. As for the
renouncing of Transubstantiation, a bare Declaration and Subscription without
Swearing is all that the Test it self does command. But this it is for a Man to
write (as he believes) by an implicit Faith (i.e.) to take things upon Trust
without any Examination, and to set them down for Truths.

But suppose now the worst that can be, that it was Literally true as he would
have it. What harm would it be to his Majesty, to be served by none but such as
believe, and will swear that he is an Idolater; if they are all such (as the
Sons of the Church of England) who do believe and think themselves bound to
serve him faithfully, though he really was not only an Idolater, but an
Heathen? Is he not far safer in such hands, than in the hands of such, who
though they think him not an Idolater, yet if they think him an Heretic, or a
favourer of Heretics, may think themselves bound to destroy him; especially if
a Foreign Power shall give them Authority, as too many Popes have done, even
against those Princes that have professed the Roman Religion? Lastly, who is
there of the Church of England, that because he himself does not believe
Transubstantiation, does therefore think that the King does not? or that will
pronounce him an Idolater for Worshipping that which he believes is God?

Since then Slandering and Mis-representation will not do, the Gentleman
proceeds in the next place ( Page 7.) to Wheedling; but the best on it is, he
has made a Rod for his own Britch, and his own Words reflect more upon his own
Church than ours; for is it not a delicate innocent Church, that cannot be safe
but in a fortified place? It is a great Argument of her modesty, to own her
self weak and unable to subsist without a Law to burn Heretics; or what is
worse, to clap them up, and stifle them, or starve them, or wrack them to death
in the Inquisition, who cannot conform to all their Superstitions. Prayer,
Fasting, Mortification of the Flesh, and other Austerities are not, it seems,
so proper means to remove her Fears and Jealousies, but She must have a
Coercive Power even over Kings themselves, The Primitive Christians flourished
for three hundred years under Persecution, but yet their number increased more
in three years in Constantine's Reign, than almost in all the three hundred
years before. If this Church be from God it will-stand; has not the
Apostolical Church, (nay, the only Catholic Church, as Rome styles it self)
the assistance of the Holy Ghost, who is to continue with the true Church till
the end of the World? Why then does not She, who pretends to be the
Mother Church, of all others, set her Children an Example in the discarding her
Sanguinary Laws against all Heretics, and granting a full Liberty of
Conscience to all sorts of Men? If She would do this, by her Success therein,
we should the better judge the Expediency of it for our selves; if She will not
do this, and afford Protestants Places of Profit and Honor, why should we take
off our Laws for their Sakes, who will abate nothing for ours.

Page 8. He acts the Divine, and would fain urge Transubstantiation for a
probable Doctrine, because of the many Wise and Learned that believe it, or at
least pretend to do so: By the same Argument he might as well prove Mahometism
to be a probable Opinion; for there are many Wise Men, nay, some Learned men
amongst the Turks as well as amongst the Papists. Whom he reflects upon by his
new Tenet, which makes it Idolatry to adore the Divine Body of Chirst; whether
there be a Transubstantiation or not, I am not able to judge, for I assure him
this is the first time I ever heard of this Opinion: It cannot be the Church of
England's (nor the infallible Parliaments) as he calls it, for the Reason that
is given by our Rubric, is because the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still
in their very natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored, etc.

In the last Place, he proceeds to give us Advice, but the Advice of Enemies is
always dangerous to be taken, and surely none more dangerous than this, viz.
That the Loyal Church of England should change her old Principles of Loyalty,
and learn of her Catholic Neighbors how to behave her self toward Princes.
What Principles would he have us change, and for what? Would he have us
renounce our constant Principle of Non-resistance to Princes, and change it for
that of the deposing Doctrine? Would he have us learn of our
Neighbour-catholicks how to make Holy Leagues against our King, and to murder
our Royal Masters? but he proceeds.

Or She must give his Majesty leave not to nourish a Snake in his Bosom, but
to withdraw his Protection from such as withdraw their Fidelity.

This part of his Advice we are ready to take, for we are not for restraining
of Princes, nor would we desire him to nourish Snakes in his own Bosom, such
Raviliacks and Jaques Clements (I mean) who carry a mortal Sting full of deadly
Poison against Princes, even in their very Principles, and have always shown it
upon all opportunities in their Actions. Neither are we against his withdrawing
his Protection from such as cease to be Loyal; nor are we for his protecting
such as never were so, such as his Wise and Learned Grandfather, James the
First, said, were never to be obliged by Benefits. May his Majesty find his new
Friends and Converts, that he has endeavored so highly to oblige by his
Toleration, to be as True and Loyal to him as his old Friends of the Church of
England are, and always were; and may God Almighty preserve him to protect all
his Subjects, and then we shall not regard the grinning Threatenings, and
snarling Insinuations of any scribbling Animals.

FINIS.

