THE OBSERVATOR IN A DELEMMA, that while he justifies the LORD MAYOR and his
Aldermen, he reflects on Mr. Box, and while he Vindicates Mr. Box, he pleads
the Protestors cause against the Lord Mayor and his Aldermen.
WHereas the Guide to the Inferior Clergy, in his Observator, Number 206, does
insinuate as if the print on the back side of the Citizens just Protestation,
did reflect on my Lord Mayor's Aldermen as Perjured, which nothing can be more
Malicious, there being not one word that does in the least sound like it, but
it is like him; Now Mr. Observator, if I am not mistaken, I have found you in
some of your Prints, if not expressly, yet implicitly declare, that any Subject
(tho he pretends never so much Loyalty, and faithful performance of his Oath of
Allegiance) that shall refuse when Legally qualified, to serve his Majesty in
any Legal Office, when Legally called thereunto, does not only forfeit his
Loyalty, but break his Oath of Allegiance too; now Mr. Ralph Box having of late
been by you in Print declared to be one most eminent for Loyalty and
Allegiance, which is so great a Truth, that I affirm that none but the most
malicious dare think to the contrary; he has also been declared by my Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen (that is his Party) to be Legally and duly Elected
one of the Sheriffs for the Year ensuing, according to the Ancient Laws,
Customs and Usages of the City; and on Tuesday last the aforesaid Legality of
his Election was Confirmed by a hundred and odd Petitioners; now that Mr. Box
after the missing the Office of Sheriff for two years last past, is this year
declared Legally Chosen, and that Confirmed too by a Cloud of Loyal Witnesses,
should after all refuse to hold, has put multitudes of Pople to inquire into
the Cause.

For to question his Loyalty and faithfulness to his Oath of Allegiance, is to
murder his Reputation, to question his Willingness is to give himself the Lie,
to question his Estate is to prejudice his Credit, and to question his Judgment
and Understanding, his natural and acquired qualifications for such an Office,
is to deny the experience of all that know him; Wherefore the most Judicious do
conclude, that the true reason why he refused to hold, is from his being so
faithful to his Oath as a Citizen, and from his so much Understanding and
Experience of the Laws and Customs of the City, than to hold upon such an
Election, which if true, as most certain it is, for I challenge you or any
other to show any reason for his not holding besides the Ilegallity of his
Election, and then what is become of your reflection on the back side of the
Protestation? for it is not the declaration of great men, nor a great number of
men (without the greatest number) that can make a Legal thing Illegal, nor an
Illegal Act Legal.

Printed for A. Green. 1682.


