THE LETTER Which was sent to the AUTHOR of the DOCTRINE OF Passive Obedience
AND JURE DIVINO Disproved, etc.

ANSWERED and REFUTED, Wherein is Proved, That Monarchy was not Originally from
GOD. That Kings are not by Divine Appointment, but that all Government proceeds
from the People. That the Obedience required in Scripture, is to the Laws of
the Land, and no otherwise. That Resisting of Arbitrary Power is Lawful. That
the Oath of Allegiance to the late King James was dissolved before the Prince
of Orange (our present King) landed. That upon the Nonperformance of an Oath
on one side, the other becomes void, is plainly proved from several Examples in
Scripture. That Protection is the only Cause of Allegiance, and that Obedience
or Allegiance is due to the present Government is proved from Scripture, Law
and Reason; and those Texts of Scripture which relate to Government, or
Monarchy, are Explained.


The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Harrison at the White Swan over against the West End
of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1689.

A VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF Passive Obedience and Jure Divino Disproved,
etc.
SIR,
I Question not but that your Answer is the Idea of your Mind; which I doubt
not but to make appear to be not only pernicious, but tends to the Destruction
of all Humane Societies; and likewise, that you have wrested the Scripture, and
have made Notorious False Assertions. For brevity sake, I shall leave out your
unnecessary Prologue. You say, you will not recite any of my Words, but refer
to my Propositions, in that order as I have set them down, being Thirty Eight
Breaks or Sentences.

I do desire you, and all impartial Men that read this Book, to take the pains
to read my former Sheet, and number the Breaks or Assertions therein, and
compare them with your Answer (which I have set down Verbatim,) that they may
the better judge of the Ridiculousness thereof.

1. To begin: (you say) By the Word of God it appears, That Monarchy is the
Government which God has chosen above all others, and that the People were
always obliged to accept that Form of Government which God had chosen for them,
before they did actually bind themselves: See him, said Samuel to all the
People, whom the Lord (not you) has chosen, 1 Samuel 10.24. Jeroboam indeed was
a King of the Peoples making, and presently after (you know) they made a golden
Calf. This Act of the People (though permitted by God for the punishment of
Solomon 's sin) is more than once called Rebellion in Scripture, 1 Kings 12.19.
2 Chronicles. 10.19.

1 Samuel 8.19, 20 The Children of Israel importuned him for a King over them,
that they might be like all the nations, and that he might judge them, and go
before them, and fight their Battles. Chap. 10.24, 25. And Samuel said unto the
People, See him whom the Lord has chosen: And he told the People the manner of
the Kingdom (which was the Law of the Kingdom), and wrote it in a book, and
laid it up before the Lord. Surely no man will say, but that this Law was a
Rule for the King to go by as well as the People: And then where was his
Absolute Authority? Chap. 11.14, 15. Samuel said to the People, Come, and let
us go to Gilgal, and renew the Kingdom there. And all the People went to
Gilgal, and there they made Saul King before the Lord. 1 Samuel 12.12, 13. Ye
said unto me^ says Samuel, Nay, but a King shall reign over us, when the Lord
^our God was your King (by which it appears, there was no other King but God):
Now therefore behold the King whom ye have chosen. But though he was made King
by the appointment of Almighty God, yet it was thought necessary the People
should confirm, and make him King again: And 1 Chronicles. 29.22. The people made
Solomon King the second time; Which makes not a little for the Peoples Right in
Electing their Kings. Jeroboam was a King by the appointment of Almighty God,
(though Elected by the People) 1 Kings 11.35. Where the Prophet Ahijah,
speaking to Jeroboam, Thus says the Lord, I will take the Kingdom out of
Rehoboam's, the Son of Solomon's hand, and will give it to thee, even Ten
Tribes. But with what face can you wrest the Scripture thus, in saying, that
the Peoples choosing of Jeroboam, is more than once called a sin, when both
these Texts which you quote relates to the aforegoing Verses, wherein it is
said, That King Rehoboam sent Adoram, that was over the Tribute, and all Israel
stoned him with stones, that he died; which was Rebellion, because it was
resisting the Lawful Authority: Besides, Jeroboam is not mentioned as King till
after this Act was committed.

2. The true and real greatness of the Sovereign is never inconsistent with the
Public Advantage.

The true and real Greatness of the Sovereign, both from God and Man, is not to
annihilate or destroy Government, but to preserve it, with Justice and Peace.
All Acts contrary to the Laws of the Land are far from being a true and real
Greatness; and therefore are inconsistent with the Public Advantage.

3. Those things which God has joined, let no man put asunder: The head cannot
be well, if the Members be much out of order; neither can the Members rightly
perform their office, if the Head be sick and weak. The good of the Society is
indeed the End of Government; but it is Nonsense to talk of the good of a
Society, without including the Governor as well as the Governed.

The People are no ways commanded by God to put themselves into this or that
Form of Government, but it is wholly left to their choice: And all Government
whatsoever, tho after the mutual ties of Reciprocal Oaths, are not joined by
God, tho permitted by him: But how do you wrest the Scripture which
particularly relates to Man and Wife (and apply it to Government), as may be
seen, Matthew. 19.6. But verse 9. allows a man to turn away his Wife for
Fornication, tho joined by God. But suppose the King and People are joined
together by God, is it not much more reasonable to turn away that King who
shall endeavor to destroy the People, or overthrow their Laws, Rights and
Privileges, and make them Slaves to his Arbitrary Will and Pleasure, than for
to turn away one's Wife for Fornication? I say, if a Woman forfeits her right
to her Husband, by breaking of her Marriage-Vow, in committing of Fornication,
surely it is much more reasonable, that a King who breaks his Oath, and
endeavors to overthrow the Government, and establish an Idolatrous Religion
(and by consequence robbing God and the Nation of their Rights), should forfeit
his Right to the People. The Safety of the Body (that is the People) is to be
valued before the Head, (which is the Chief Governor) because it is an easy
matter to get a Head to the Body, but not a Body to the Head.

4. The Law preserves the King from Force and Violence, tho he should not
always make it the measure of his Power. It has also more respect for the mere
Instruments of his Arbitrary Will, than to treat them as Robbers and Banditi;
otherwise a man would much rather choose to be the Lord Chief Iustice's Servant
than the King's; because the one can assure me, that his Commands are Law, when
as the other (rather out of Ignorance of the Law than Malice) may unadvisedly
engage me in those Services which are not warranted by the Law.

The Law preserves the People from Force and Violence as well as the King; but
no Force or Violence has been used to the late King James, tho some Law with
Force has been used to some of his Instruments: And the Law of the Land,
Nature, and Self-preservation, will justify us in what has been done. The Plea
of Ignorance in matters of Law, is not allowed on in the meanest Subject the
King has; and can the King plead Ignorance, when he has a Learned Council,
with Judges always to advise with?

5. If the People had made the Law the measure of their Privileges, as well as
King Charles the 1st did make them the measure of his Power, we might probably
before this time have seen a good agreement between these Two Zealous
Competitors. A little Passive Obedience in the business of the Ship Money,
would, I Am persuaded, have done the Kingdom no harm in that Conjuncture.

King Charles the First did not make the Law the measure ^f his Power, when he
raised the Ship Money, which was ^ontrary to Law, and the people refusing to
submit to it, ^ade the Law the measure of their Privileges; for they ^ere
bound by no Law to consent to any thing the King should command contrary to
Law, much less a Privilege of ^uch vast Importance, as the parting with their
Money contrary to Law.

6. Absolute and unconditionate Obedience is, I grant, due ^nly to God, who
alone has absolute Authority; and to the king no otherwise than as his
Vicegerent, which Character ^e does not altogether lose by the abuse of his
Power. 7. Insomuch that they who resist, do resist not only the Usurpations of
men, but the Ordinance of God, though the person be a Claudius or a Nero.

A Vicegerent is one that is appointed, but God has no where appointed or
commanded the World to be governed by Kings (though he permits them) therefore
they are not God's Vicegerents; but they may be very properly called his
Vicegerents whilst they administer Justice and Equity to every man: There is no
Absolute Authority given to Princes in Scripture, nor no Absolute Subjection
commanded to them beyond the Laws of the Country; and therefore Kings do lose
the Character of God's Vicegerents, when Guilty of a habit and constant tract
of Arbitrariness and unreasonable Actions contrary to the Laws of the Land. All
Acts of Kings or Magistrates, contrary to the Law of God or Man, are no Legal
Acts, but Usurpations, therefore they are the Acts of private persons, and we
are no ways in Scripture commanded to obey such Acts; therefore we may right
our selves from all such Unreasonable and Tyrannical Usurpations. We ought to
Obey all Magistrates whilst they keep up Rule, Order, and Government, letting
the people live peaceable and quiet lives according to the Laws (which is the
design of all Government) but instead of Executing wrath upon evil doers,
(according to the Scripture) they become evil doers themselves, endeavoring to
make the people slaves to their Arbitrary Will and Pleasure; in such cases they
are not Magistrates according to Scripture or Law, and therefore it is lawful
to secure our selves from such designs; for as the King may with Law and Reason
secure himself from the designs of all evil men, so may the People secure
themselves from the unlawful designs of any man or men whatsoever. Sir, you are
pleased to make God the Author or Approver of the Usurpations of men, which I
absolutely deny, and doubt not but I shall make it appear to the contrary: Romans
12.17. Recompense no man evil for evil. If a man robs me, or sets fire to my
House, I ought not to do the like to him, but right my self by the Law; but if
he shall endeavor to take away my life contrary to Law, it is no Evil, but an
incumbent duty to defend it: Verse. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all men. It is not possible we can live peaceably with
those who endeavor to destroy us, Ergo we may secure our selves from such
endeavors, and reduce such men to peaceable lives: Verse. 19. Dearly beloved,
avenge us your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; That is, rather suffer
by an unjust Law than resist, though it be to a Heathen Prince. I would fain
know where was the Absolute Authority of Kings, when the Children of Israel
received the Law from the Levitical Priesthood, and whether those Laws were not
binding to the King as well as the People; and whether our Kings have an
Absolute Authority; if not, by what Scripture or Reason we may not secure our
persons, our Rights and Privileges from the unlawful and unchristian Designs
of the Prince?

8, 9, 10, 11. I object nothing against your eight and ninth Aphorisms, no nor
your tenth, if it be meant only of that Defense which one private person may
make against another. But to your eleventh Maxim I can by no means assent; for
if every man has the right of self-preservation as entire under Civil
Government, as in a state of Nature, what difference, I beseech you, is there
betwixt the one and the other state? And why was Civil Government instituted
and appointed by God? Surely for no other end, but that men should not be their
own Carvers, and involve the public in those miseries, which intestine bro^les
and quarrels would daily produce. Though sub^dinate Magistrates may be punished
for Acts of illegal Vio^nce, because they are no part of their Office; yet as
long as ^^ey continue in Office, they are public Ministers, and ought (...) be
accounted as such till for their crimes they shall be be^aded.

If the King himself has Authority to take away a man's ^^se contrary to Law,
then he can give this Authority to ten ^housand persons (if he pleases) and
then they would be no ^rivate persons, because they would act by his Authority.
^n a state of Nature every man acts according to his Reason ^n righting or
preserving himself; but every man has more ^ight of self-preservation in a
Civil Government, than in a ^ate of Nature, because the Law allows of
self-preservation, and punishes those that endeavor to take away a man's life
^ontrary to Law. If one meets me, and endeavors to take ^way my life, and I
must either die upon the spot, or defend ^hy self, in this case, if I kill him,
it is no Murder; but if he ^ills me, it is Murder. Civil Government was surely
appointed by God and Man for no other end, but that men ^hou'd live peaceable
and quiet lives, and not that Magistrates should be their own Carvers, and
instead of protect^ng and governing the people (according to the Laws of the
^and) destroy them.

12. This is right Commonwealth Rhetoric, they were Children of Belial (i. e.
Masterless persons, as the word signi^^es) who said, How shall this man save
us, and they despised him, ^ays the Text, 1 Samuel 10.27. More Throats have been
cut by the Doctrine of Resistance, than ever were by that of Passive Obedience,
witness our Nation in all Ages.

These are Passive Obediences with a Vengeance, and right Antichristian
Principles, to set up one Member so much above the rest, that if it endeavors
to destroy them, they are obliged to make no Resistance: more Throats have been
cut by this Doctrine of Passive Obedience than that of Resistance, witness all
the Cruel Persecutions under the Roman Emperors, the Massacres of Paris,
Piedmont, and Ireland, and many more Instances might be given. But suppose the
contrary, the sin lies at their doors, who by their Cruel Persecutions and
Violations of the Rights of the People, force them to right themselves. It Is
certain the Gospel does no where require or permit the planting of Religion by
the Sword (tho the Papists have practiced it in all Ages, to the destroying of
many Thousands of Souls): We ought not to defend our Religion when the Laws of
the Country are against it: But the Scripture does not require us, not to
defend our Religion (or Civil Rights), which is established by the Laws of the
Country; Ergo, we may defend them; for where there is no Law there can be no
transgression. If it is not lawful to defend our Religion, then any Army, or
number of Heathens may come, and settle their false Religion here: And if it is
lawful to hinder the settling of Religion hereby a Foreign Power, it must be
lawful to hinder the settling of a False Religion amongst our selves (as the
Romish Religion is, if the Scripture is true): And I think no man can without
Impudence deny, but that King James had a design to settle his False Religion
here; by consequence it is lawful to hinder him. When Julian the Apostate told
the Christians, their Doctrine was to suffer, an Eminent Man of that Age wrote
a Tract (de Regibus Apostaticis), and approved as Orthodox Doctrine by Bishop
Athanasius, wherein the Emperor was informed, That the Christian Religion,
when Established by Law, allowed them to justify their Rights, and not to be
ruined and destroyed, to gratify an Idolatrous Prince: Eccles. 8.4. Where the
Word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, What do thou?
The Word or Command of a King is supposed to be according to the Law or Custom
of the Country; in which Acts no body ought to control him. But suppose a
King be guilty of all manner of Illegalities and Cruelties, must not a Bishop
or a Nobleman, in an humble manner, tell him of his Faults? Surely the
Scripture never meant it in such a sense. 1. Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves
to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, (which is every Law of man)
whether it be to the King as supreme (that is, the Chief Executor of the Laws)
or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him, (which are Officers
appointed by the King for the executing or fullfilling of the Laws) for the
punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well. Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, (that is, to the Laws or
Customs of the Country, and to the Prince as the Executor thereof) for there is
no power but of God, (the greatest Villain amongst Mankind acts by the Power of
Almighty God, but not by his appointment or approbation) the powers that be are
ordained of God: (the power which every man has is from God) ver. 2. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, (he that resists
the Laws, resists the Powers, beyond which a Prince has no power, except to
act by Fraud or Force, which is against Divine and Humane Laws) and shall
receive to themselves damnation, ver. 3, 4. For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil; for he is the Minister of God to thee for good, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: (He is the Minister of God
for good, whilst he administers Justice and Equity to every man, and punishes
him that does evil, or violates the Laws) Verse. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake; which can be nothing else
than to suffer according to the Laws of the Country, tho never so unreasonable.
The Laws of Countries are supposed to be made agreeable to the Inclinations of
the Majority of the People; and therefore the lesser number ought to conform to
the greater; but if against their Conscience, to suffer; for it is impossible
to make Laws for the Security and well-Government of a Nation to please every
body. Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: That is, by
the appointment or permission of God Kings and Princes reign, and decree
Justice; but it cannot from hence be inferred, that he commands, or allows of
their Injustice, and endeavors to destroy the People whom they ought to
preserve. Romans 12.17. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor: That is, Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor, to whom it is due by the
Laws of the Land. There is no Fear due to a Prince from him who lives
according to the Laws of the Land, but from him that does not. What a sin are
you, and all other men that are for Passive Obedience, guilty of? that wrest
the Scriptures which was appointed for the Suffering State of Christianity,
whilst under Heathen Princes, and without Laws to support them, and compare
them to our present Circumstances, and would oblige us to be passive, as they
were, though our Religion and Liberties are Established by the Laws of the
Land? All that Men can blame us for, is for doing that which is Just; viz. for
rescuing a True Religion from an Idolatrous one, and preserving our Laws,
Ancient Rights and Liberties, from the Ruin and Slavery of Arbitrary and
Unreasonable Men, and Establishing them upon a sure and lasting Foundation. I
ask, whether it can be found, that one Christian in Ten or Twenty God has
given so much Courage and Strength (as he did to the Primitive Christians), to
withstand the cruel persecutions of their Enemies, for the sake of Religion?
Witness France and Hungary: And many more Instances might be given, by which it
appears, that God has not only left us to Humane Means, for the preservation
of our Religion, when Established by Law, but that he expects it, it being for
the preservation of our own and our Childrens Temporal and Eternal Happiness.
As it is not lawful to persecute contrary to the Laws of the Land, it follows,
that it is lawful to withstand such Persecution: And is it not better to dye
with the Sword in the Hand, in defense of the Gospel and its True Religion,
against a False one, which is endeavored to be be set up contrary to the Law
of God and the Country, than to be forced by Cruel Tortures and Persecutions
to worship god in an Idolatrous way? But some may object, It can be no Real
Idolatry without the Heart joins with the Ceremony of the Body; yet an outward
Idolatry is a great sin: But who can secure to us, that our Children, or
Childrens Children shall not be Real Idolaters? Then the sin of Idolatry, which
they shall be guilty of, will be laid at our Doors, when by a timely Defense we
might have prevented it.

13. Kings ('it is true) were made to govern and protect the People, the People
to reverence and obey their Kings; both Kings and People to serve God, and keep
his Commandments.

The People are obliged to obey their King in every Act of Command of his which
does not derogate from the Law of God and the Nation.

14. The Design of the Corporation-Oath was most plainly to prevent all
Rebellions, upon any pretense whatsoever.

Can any man be so mad, as to think the Parliament did give up themselves, and
the Community, to obey whatever the King should command? For what is it else,
if the Oath of Allegiance, or Corporation-Oath is to be taken in the strictest
sense? This were to make the King a Tyrant by Law, or at least allowing him to
be such. No Oath is or can be binding beyond the Design of the Giver: It is
plain these Oaths were not designed for our Ruin; and therefore cannot be
taken or kept in that sense: All Oaths to a Governor, or Government, are
designed for the Good, Safety and Welfare of the Governed as well as the
Governor. So no Oath can bind us to our own Destruction; though Lawful
Authority should command such an Oath, it were a Sin to take it, but much
greater to keep it, because such Subjection is inhumane, and contrary to the
very Design of Government both from God and Man; and the lesser Evil ought to
be chosen before the greater: Rebellion is resisting the Lawful Power of the
Government; but it is no more Rebellion to resist the Unlawful and Exorbitant
Power of the Prince than War Tyler or Jack Cade, etc. They are Rebels who arm
against the Government (which is the Laws), not they that arm to defend it.

14. David made no Resistance at all, neither Offensive nor Defensive. As for
your Negative Resistance by Flight (as you term it), I do not understand it: As
for the Forces which he had about him, it is most probable that he raised them
for no other purpose, but to be Spies and Scouts, to give intelligence of Saul
's Ambushments: For what would Six Hundred Men have signified to Saul 's
Numerous Army, had it been David 's intent to have made any Resistance? We read
indeed that Athaliah was deposed; but what was the Reason? Not because she was
a monstrous Unnatural Tyrant, but because she was an Usurper.

He who does not obey the Commands of his Prince, when according to Law, makes
Negative Resistance, because he resists the Law, and by consequence the Prince
What could David mean by having Six Hundred Men, but to secure his Person, and
make positive resistance, if he had been forced to a strait, and could not have
secured himself otherwise? Surely Fifty or an Hundred Men would have been
enough for Spies and Scouts: Could not God have delivered Readiness Numerous Army
into the Hands of his Six Hundred Men, as well as the Numerous Army of the
Amalekites into the Hands of but Four Hundred of his Men, 1 Samuel 30.10.17. 1 Samuel
26.9. David said to Abishai, Destroy him not; for who can stretch forth his
hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless? ( Abishai had a Design to
destroy Saul; and in stretching forth his Hand with that Design, had been a
great sin): But he that defends himself from his Prince, who, though in his own
Person, contrary to the Laws of the Country, endeavors to take away his Life,
and being reduced to a strait, it is not properly to be said, stretching forth
his hand against him, when at the same time he designs not to kill him, or do
him any harm, but to disarm him, and secure himself: Joash was made King of
Israel, and Athaliah was slain; but it may with more Reason be thought, for
murdering all the King's Sons, except Joash, who was hid from her, than for
Usurping the Throne; for there is not the least mention made of the cause of
her death, 2 Kings 11. For do we not find in the next Chap. verse. 20. that
Joash was killed by his Servants; but so soon as the Kingdom was confirmed to
Amaziah his Son, he slew his Servants which had slain his Father. The Proofs of
Scripture which I quote, have a particular Relation to the Primitive Christians
under the Heathen Emperors, and to the Children of Israel, and 'twas usual
with God to set up one King (over his People the Jews) and pull down another
for their Misgovernment: But we cannot expect God to act so for us, because he
does not set up or appoint our Kings; therefore we ought to turn out such
Governors who endeavor to destroy the Government, and set up such who will
preserve it.

16. Neither an Invasion actually made, or eminently feared by a Foreign Power,
does authorize Subjects to depose their King.

We have not deposed the King; neither was there any other design than to
recover our Rights and Privileges, and secure them for the time to come to our
Posterity, which every man is bound to endeavor (it being for the Common Good
of the Nation) against the destructive designs of the Prince. But by what
Reason (say some) should King James lose the Right he was born to, and by the
Law ought to have? To which I answer, If King James had kept to Law, he had
never lost his Rights, for in so doing the Subjects were bound to assist and
defend those Rights; but if King James invading the Rights of his Subjects, and
endeavoring to support that Power by Force, if by Force he lose his Rights, he
may thank himself for invading the Rights of others. Does not a man, though
freeborn, forfeit his life by firing of a House, Robbing, etc. which are but
particular Calamities, and shall not a Prince, who is guilty of a General
Calamity by destroying the Laws, and endeavoring to inslave the Nation, lose
the Right of Governing that Nation, which is infinitely more reasonable, than
that the other should suffer death? The Law allows a particular man, for just
Causes, to disinherit his eldest Son, and settle his Estate upon others of his
Posterity, for the preserving of his Family; What Reason can be given (in an
extreme Necessity) why such an Advantage should be denied for the preservation
of the Nation? But to proceed: The Constitution of our Laws is the happiest in
the World, it having Instituted the Legislative Power in three Heads or Parts
of Government, that is, the King, Lords, and Commons, and that neither one or
two of these parts can make or annul a Law, is most certain; and if either one
or two of these parts should assume that Authority, that part of the Government
or Constitution is dissolved and broken off. If I prove King James did take
upon him this Authority, it will appear he thereby became no Governor or part
of the Government* Which premised, I proceed: What could the complete
Legislative Authority done more, than in making a Law to annul any Law or Laws
of the Land? Did not the King take upon him this whole Authority, that is, to
make a Law to dispense with the Laws of the Land? And was not its effect
accordingly by putting Papists into places of Trust, and by setting up Popish
Schools and Chapels, Monasteries, Frieries, etc? What was this but making
himself the whole Fountain of the Government, when he was but a third part of
it; in doing of which Act, he has dissolved that part of the Government which
related to himself, by laying aside his Kingly Authority (which is to govern
according to the Laws of the Land) and Governing by his Absolute Will and
Pleasure, whereby he ceased to be King; upon which the Oath of Allegiance is
void as truly and really, as if he was actually dead, or had signed a
Resignation of his Crown, because it was taken to him as King ruling according
to the Laws of the Land, not according to his Will and Pleasure. But suppose no
Forfeiture could be made for his male Administration. If King James has Power
to absolve his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, by resigning up his
Crown (which is allowed on by all men) then the Stipulation, which has been
taken, does naturally fall by his deserting the Throne, and leaving no
Commissioner or Commissioners to officiate in ^is stead; and throwing away the
Seals of England, was nothing less than a public Resignation of his Throne to
the Nation. But what can be said for Scotland (say some) he having a
Commissioner there? To which I answer, That he never was a lawful King there
(if what they say is true) that he never took their Coronation Oath, as well as
for his Ruling by, and declaring of an Absolute Authority, and that the People
ought to obey him without reserve: But though they obeyed him for the sake of
Peace, yet it was highly reasonable, as well as necessary, to throw off this
Arbitrary and Unlawful Governor. If no Forfeiture could be made, as some would
insinuate to the World, what Anarthy and Confusion by consequence must this
Government have run into? For if we could only oblige him to promise or swear
to govern according to Law, and not to commit the like Enormities for the
future, what would this signify to a Prince, whom no Oath can bind; and by the
same Rule he has broken one Oath, he can break a thousand? But suppose he had
sworn this, and immediately after should have committed all manner of Outrages
and Cruelties, what must we have done in that case? Why, we must have made him
swear again and again as often as he should break his Oath. But if he had refused
to take such an Oath, or declared he neither could, nor would keep it, which is
much the same thing as if he had taken it; then after having given our selves
all this unnecessary trouble, we must e'ne have set down and cried, Lord, have
mercy upon us, and expect our deliverance by Miracle, though Miracles are
ceased. I say, what Destruction and Confusion must we by consequence hereof
have run into, even to the utter Extirpation of all our Civil Rights, and what
is most dear to us, our Religion, and destroying of many thousand Souls, which
he could not have stuck at for the promoting his Religion, by which he is
obliged (under the pain of Damnation) to root out all Heresy and Heretics
(for so they call the Protestants) if he could not have perverted us by English
and Irish, or French Soldiers, he must have consented to the cutting our
Throats (or else damn himself by the neglect thereof) to prevent the spreading
of Heresy, by which Act he would have merited Heaven in the highest degree,
according to the Doctrine of their Church. Ah, but say some, we might have
bound up his Hands from breaking of the Laws for the future. How absurd is
this, to talk of binding a King's hands, whom no Oath could, or can bind, and
who has declared himself Absolute, that is, above all Laws, his Will being his
Pleasure, his Pleasure his Law: Besides, all forced Bonds or Contracts are void
by the Law (as for Example, if A. Debtor to B. gives him Bond for so much Money
to release him out of Prison, it is of no force, he being forced to it in order
to get his liberty) and that such an Agreement, though by Lords and Commons in
Parliament, would not be voluntary, but forced, is most certain, because it
would be to get a peaceable Possession of his Throne, and therefore it would
become ipso facto void to all intents and purposes. There could be no other way
of binding his Hands, than in effect to dethrone him, by taking from him the
Authority, and leaving him only the Title of a King, and appointing of a Regent
to Execute the Kingly Office for him, which he would never have consented to,
because he would have been nothing but a mere stalking Horse; and the result of
this Action could have been nothing less than a continued Confusion during his
life, if not a Civil War; for, no doubt, he would have endeavored to get a
full possession of the Throne, and to that end the King of France would have
assisted him with Men, who, with the Malcontents already here, would have
occasioned a Civil War; for we must have defended the Regency. I say, if the
Nation has Power to take from him his Authority, and make him only a Titular
King, surely they have Authority, when an absolute necessity requires such, (as
in our present Circumstances) to set up or appoint another King.

17. This Apothegm gives just as much, and no more to a Crowned Head, as to a
private person.

This Assertion I deny; for a private person has no Autho^ity at all but to
live according to the Laws, whereas a King ^s an Executor of the Laws. But you
would fain set the King ^bove the Laws, though it is certain the Laws are his
Rule, ^s well as the People's, and he cannot go contrary to them, without
robbing the People of their Rights.

18, 19. The eighteenth is much the same with the 4, as also ^ith the 23 and 24
following, which yet I shall take notice of ^n their places. As to the 19. I
answer, Simnel and Warbeck ^ad either of the Cheats succeeded, might properly
have been cal^ed Counterfeit Kings; but a King who ascends the Throne ^y a
regular Title, is a true and real King, though he does not (as he ought) make
the general good of the people his chief and main end.

Were the Kings over the Children of Israel counterfeit Kings, because they
were not by regular Descent, of which there are many Instances, 2 Kings 23.30.
2 Kings 23.26. (...) Chron. 3.16, etc. and Obedience was paid to them as much
as to the others: a King is a true and real King, when in possession of the
Throne (though not by regular Descent) having taken the Coronation Oath, and
Governing according to the Laws of the Land, it is not the Title, but the
Office, that makes him a King, which if any King derogates from, he forfeits
his Right of Governing: For Example, Sigisbert King of the West Saxons, for his
male Administration was driven out of his Kingdom by the Nobles and People
assembled together, and King John. King Edward the Second and Richard the
Second were for breaking their Oaths, and Governing contrary to the Laws of the
Land, turned out out of their Thrones, and others appointed in their stead, and
a Clause of King Henry's Charter says, If the King invades those Rights
(meaning the Rights of the people) it is lawful for the Kingdom to rise against
him, and to do him what injury they can, as though they owed him no Allegiance.
Whilst the Lady Elizabeth, the true Heir of the Crown was living, Henry the
Seventh was declared King; without joining her in the Title, or so much as
making any mention of her Right, yet notwithstanding the Kingdom bore
Allegiance to this King de facto before he confirmed his Title to the Crown by
marrying her. By a Law made in King Edward the Confessor's Reign, it is
declared, That if the King does not perform his Office, he shall not so much as
retain the Name of a King. If a King that comes to the Throne by regular
Descent, should refuse to take the Coronation Oaths, the People are not bound
to swear Allegiance to him, and he neither ought, nor can be obeyed as a King
in the least Command, though he should promise to govern according to Law, he
being not qualified according to Law, therefore could not be Head and
Governor. A King acting contrary to the Laws of the Land, is so far from being
a true and real King, that in every such Action he is no King at all, because
his Kingly Office is to Act according (but not contrary to the Laws.

20. Here let me speak to you in the words of Solomon, (...) counsel thee to
keep the King's Commandment, and that because of the Oath of God, Eccless. 8.2.
The Obligation of our Oaths does not cease, though the King be not in a
capacity to prote^^ us. If protection be the only ground and foundation of
Allegiance, we ought to become Subjects of the strongest Monarchy. If the King
of France be best able to protect me, it is not only my Interest, but Duty
(according to this Doctrine) to swear Allegiance to him, though he be (as you
say) one of the greatest Tyrants that ever the World produced.

The Oath of God that is mentioned Eccles. 8.2. was the Oath of Obedience,
which the People had taken to the King, of obeying him in the Execution of the
Laws, which were the Laws appointed by God for Kings to Govern by, 1 Samuel
10.24. Nehem. 10.29. the Children of Israel took a Curse and a^ Oath to walk in
God's Law, and to observe all the Commandments of the Lord, his Judgments and
his Statutes, which were the Laws of the Kingdom; but when they did ^bey their
Kings contrary to Law, God did punish them, and likewise their Kings by
delivering them into the hands ^f their Enemies, etc. Ezekiel 17. The King of
Babylon made ^he King of Jerusalem's Son King of Jerusalem (during his father's
life, whom he had taken Captive with him) and ^ade a Covenant with him, and
took an Oath of him, Verse. ^2, 13. The King of Jerusalem broke this Covenant in
^ending for Horses and much people from Egypt, Verse. 15. ^ut Verse. 16. the Lord
does declare he shall die for breaking ^he Covenant, which is called the King
of Babylon's Covenant. What is breaking of a Covenant, but one's cancel^ng of
the obligation to the other by the nonperformance ^n his side? It Is plain from
hence, that the sin lies at his ^oor who breaks the Covenant, and that it
thereby becomes ^s void to the other, as if never taken. Jos. 2. The two ^pies
that were sent by Joshua to Jerico, swore to Rahab that she and all her
Father's house should be saved alive, ^ers. 20. But if thou utter this our
business, then we will be quit ^f thine Oath which thou have made us to swear.
What can be ^nore plain, but that upon the Nonperformance of an Oath ^n one
side, the other becomes void? Can any man believe ^he Nation would have been so
mad, as to have taken the Oath of Allegiance, if King James should have refused
to ^ake the Coronation Oath, which are mutual Ties of Faith^lness one to the
other? What greater Nonsense can there be ^han to say, That one man must be
true to another, when he ^ath broken his Oath, and endeavors to ruin or
destroy ^im? Certainly in this case his Oath is void, and his right^ng or
defending and securing himself, is no falseness to the ^ther, and the mischief
that in that case happens, is a sin ^o the Invader, not to him that endeavors
to right himself; this is allowed on by the Laws of the Land and Nature. ^or
there is no Oath can bind a man contrary to the Duty which is due to himself,
then how can a man be true to himself, if he lets another ruin or destroy him?
Numb. 30. If a woman vow a Vow unto the Lord, and bind her Soul by Bond, if her
Father disallow thereof, the Lord shall forgive her: And speaking of a married
Woman, Verse. 13. Every Vow and every binding Oath to afflict the Soul, her
Husband may establish it, or make it void. Surely it is more reasonable to
believe that God does absolve men from their Oaths of Fidelity to a Prince upon
the breaking of his Oath (which is the Covenant) by endeavoring to destroy the
People, or make them Slaves, than that a Father or a Husband might make a
Woman's Oath void (and that God would then absolve her) without any
considerations of the unreasonableness thereof. The obligation of an Oath
ceases, viz. if I borrow a Sword, and swear to return it by such a time, and
the person grows furiously mad, the Obligation is void; or if I swear to pay a
man so much Money, and he forgives me, the Debt cease as much as if I had
paid him the Debt, though no such Condition was specified; or if two persons bind
themselves by Oath to a perpetual Friendship or Allegiance one to the other not
to wrong, molest, or kill the other, and one shall be guilty of the great sin
of Ingratitude, and cheat, rob, or endeavor to ruin the other, or to kill
him, in these Cases he becomes his Enemy, and the Oath which the other has
taken is thereby become void, because the Covenant is broken, and it is no
Ingratitude in the other to right himself by Law, by imprisoning him, etc. or
to defend himself. Was not King James guilty of this sin of Ingratitude in a
very high Nature, by breaking of his Natural and Political Allegiance which was
due to the Community, in destroying the Government (that is, the Laws) and
hanging many persons contrary to Law, by not allowing them to plead for
themselves, and endeavoring to make the people Slaves to his exorbitant Will
and Pleasure? Now I appeal to all the World, whether or no our Allegiance is
not void, as to King James, upon his breaking of his Allegiance, and whether
our Allegiance ought not to be transferred to their present Majesty's, who
protect us, and preserve us in all our Rights, etc. Protection is the only
Ground and Foundation of Allegiance, because the Prince swears to protect and
govern the People according to Law, for which Reason they swear to be true to
him; but if he cannot or will not protect and govern them according to their
Laws, Rights, and Privileges, they may seek for it where they can get it: For
no Allegiance can be due to him from the Community, who endeavors to destroy
it. If one Prince conquers another's Country, the People are at the mercy of
the Conqueror; and if he swear to protect and govern them according to the Law
of the Country; they ought to swear Allegiance to him, and protect him in his
Throne by fighting for him against all his Enemies, as long as he continues so
doing. We ought to be subject to him whom the Law has set over us, and who
does protect us, and not to the French King, or he that is best able to protect
us. I could have instanced many more moral Arguments, which would induce any
unbiased man to believe that all Oaths and Contracts have a tacit meaning, and
upon the Non performance on the one side, the other becomes absolutely void,
though not specified at the Agreement; but for brevity's sake I shall leave
them out, these Proofs being sufficient to satisfy all rational impartial men.

21. Though the King do not perform his Coronation Oath, yet his Subjects are
not therefore absolved from the Oath of Allegiance; and on the contrary, the
King is bound by his Coronation Oath, though his Subjects do not keep that of
Allegiance.

The Subject is not absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, for every little
Violation of the King's; but if the King endeavors to overthrow the Government
which he is sworn to uphold, or to make the People Slaves, or destroy them, they
are not obliged by this Oath to stand still and let him: For the Design of this
Oath could be nothing less than the Safety of the People as well as the King:
For if it was to be taken in the Litteral Sense; the Parliament bound
themselves, and the rest of the Body, to the King, as Head, that we should
submit to the Invasions of our Religion and Liberties, and the Establishing of
Idolatry; and to all the Outrages and Cruelties that the Devil or Man could
invent, even to Death it self, which is Diametrically opposite to all Laws,
both Divine, Natural and Civil, and to all the Sense and Reason of Mankind; and
that this Oath cannot be taken in the strictest Sense, though the Parliament
designed it, is plain, because all Oaths contrary to our Duty to God, our
Neighbor, or our selves, are invalid; and by Consequence this Oath is without
a tacit meaning, because it tends to our own and our Neighbors Destruction.
There is another thing very observable here; that is our Baptismal Vow, by
which we oblige our selves to perform all Christian Duties to God, our
Neighbors and our Selves, which is, to be pious, do Justice and Charity, etc.
which we cannot perform, if we were obliged by this Oath to let the Prince be
guilty of all manner of Outrages: Besides, all Oaths opposite to the First a
man takes are not binding, till the Obligation of the First ceases; yet the
taking of such Oaths is a great sin, and ought to be avoided. There is an
Allegiance due to the Government as well as to the King; and he that bears true
Allegiance to the Government, bears true Allegiance to the King; and he that
bears true Allegiance to the King, bears true Allegiance to the Government:
There is a Natural Allegiance due from the King to the Government, of
preserving it, as well as a Political one, by his Coronation Oath. It is truer
Allegiance to defend the Government against the King and his Adherents, who
shall endeavor to destroy it, than to defend the King and his Adherents
against the Government. Then how do we bear true Allegiance to the Government,
if we stand still, and let it be violated every day? If King James, by his
Illegal Administration, gives accasion for an Invasion, and cannot hinder it,
and makes himself incapable to give Protection, by deserting the Kingdom; and
so leaves his People to the Mercy of the Invader, who cannot fight against him,
without fighting against their Religion and their Conscience. Whilst they
remain thus, they have neither Government, Justice, or Benefit of the Law; in
this Case the Oath of Allegiance, or Bond which tied them together, is broken,
and ceases as much as if he was actually dead, he being dead in Law; and they
are no longer his Leiges, but at liberty to get protection where they can find
it. Upon the Fortune of War, in Flanders, and many other Countries; where Towns
and Cities have been one while one Prince's, and another while another; and so
have been transferred forwards and backwards several times, and with them the
Peoples Allegiance: And that this is the Practice of the whole World, I need
not intimate to you. Now will any man say, that these men have broke their
Oaths, by swearing Allegiance to him in Possession, which must be, if their
former Oaths are not void, and their Allegiance transferred to him in
possession? From hence it follows, That Protection is the only Ground and
Foundation of Allegiance. The Scripture does not direct Obedience to the Right
Heir, but the Powers in being. If the People endeavor to destroy or kill the
King, the Coronation Oath neither does nor can bind him to protect them, but on
the contrary, he commits a notorious sin against the Law of Nature, if he does
not defend himself, and destroy them, if there is a necessity for it to
preserve, himself.

22. It Is not an reasonable that an arbitrary King should be dep^^^ (for that
must be the meaning of forfeiting and losing the Right of governing) as it is,
that Subjects should suffer Death for conspiring against him. My Reason is,
because the public would suffer more by the impunity of had Subjects, than of
evil Kings.

It Is more reasonable a King should lose his Right of Governing (call it what
you will) for endeavoring to overthrow the Government, than that it should be
overthrown by him, and the People lose the Right of being governed according to
Law; which being done, they must by Consequence be Slaves to his Arbitrary Will
and Pleasure: The Community would suffer more by one Evil King than by an
Hundred Bad Subjects, because the Subjects are punishable for the least
Misdemeanour, and the King not. When a King ceases to govern by Law, he ceases
to govern; and when he ceases to govern, he ceases to be King: And this was the
Case of King James, before the Prince of Orange Landed. Pray observe the Reply
to the 18th and 19th Paragraphs.

23. The Authority of no King, but the King of Kings, is boundless and
absolute: So that the Kings of the Earth may command things that are sinful,
and which none are obliged to perform:

This is a certain Verity, and it agrees with my Quaery:

24. The Word Loyal, it is true, comes from the French La Loy, and signifies one
that is true to the Laws. Now he who is so, will perform his Duty both to his
King and his Country, and will not be Rebel either to the one or the other.

How can I be true to my King and Country, if I let men rebel against the
Laws, by violating them every day? Though they Act by the King's Command, by
the Advice of false Counselors, yet are they Enemies to him, and Rebels to
the Government, because it tends to the Ruin of both.

25. Passive Obedience is neither Popery nor Slavery established vy Law, but the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, grievous to none, but those who desire to use their
Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness.

This is far from a direct Answer to my Assertion, wherein I said, and do again
affirm, That Passive Obedience is Popery established by Law, and by consequence
Slavery, when ever the Prince shall please. I ask, if King James when here, had
put Papists into all Places of Trust, relating to the Choice of Parliament Men
(which he had already begun) throughout England, and required them to return
Papists to Parliament, and upon their Meeting they should have Established
Popery, as the Parliament did in Queen Mary's days, (as no doubt they would,)
I would fain know how far we should have been from Slavery, and all this by the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, without which they could not pretend to
Establish their Religion. It is not the Doctrine of the Gospel, or of Jesus
Christ, to be Passive beyond the Laws and Customs of the Country, this were to
make Christ the Author or approver of Confusion and Destruction amongst
Mankind, instead of Justice and Order. It Is against all the sense of Scripture
and Reason of Mankind, to say that God Almighty created Mankind to be subject
to Princes, (and of the Peoples making too) that in Case they should overthrow
the Government, or use the People like so many Beasts instead of rational Men,
and Persecute them with all manner of Cruelty, or endeavor ^tterly to destroy
them, though they lived quiet and peaceable Lives, (yet that they should not
defend and secure themselves from all such evil Designs:) If God expects such
Subjection, surely it would have been mentioned in Scripture; but as he is no
Respecter of Persons at the great Tribunal, so who can imagine that, he is such
a Respecter of Persons on Earth, as to set up or allow one Man so much above
another, as in the foregoing sense? What can be said of such Men that assert
Passive Obedience in the strictest sense, but that they have degenerated from
Nature, in cherishing a Doctrine which tends not only to the Destruction of
themselves, but to the rest of Mankind, according to the Will and Pleasure of
the Prince? Good God! to what a degree of Folly and Madness are some Men
arrived at, to assert a Doctrine, which if once believed and practiced,
inevitably tends to the Destruction of Christianity, and to all humane
Societies; it is a Doctrine not fit for savage Heathens, much less for rational
Men. These are the only Men fit to be compared to Papists, and are as necessary
for the support of the Mother Church as Fire and Faggot, the one prepares them
for Destruction, whilst the other Destroys them.

26. The Assistance which Q. Elizabeth gave to the Hollanders and French
Protestants against their lawful Sovereigns, as also the Business of Rochel in
King Charles the First's time, are improperly argued against the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience: Independent Princes, for Reasons of State (best known to
themselves) may help their Neighbors, without injuring the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience.

One Prince may assist another for Political Ends against another Prince or
State, but he cannot assist his Subjects, who are in actual Rebellion against
him, though their Pretensions be never so reasonable, without committing a
notorious Sin, according to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, because, He that
is aiding and assisting to Rebels, is as guilty of Rebellion as if he were
actually in it.

27. Oh, do not revile the King though he lay in Ashes, much less whilst he is
on this side of the Grave! I question not but that the Unfortunate King James
's Life will be more favorably represented in History than you have here
described him. You seem to be bery angry with him, because he endeavors to
re-establish himself with the Sword, and yet you have given to every Man (even
the meanest Cobbler) the Right of Self-preservation as entire under Civil
Government as he had in a State of Nature: Upon my Word, Sir, this is very hard
and unequal dealing, at once to Abdicate your King, and at the same time
complain of him for endeavoring to recover his Right.

I have as Honourary a Respect for a King as any Man whatsoever, whilst he
continues his Kingly Office, that is, Governing according to the Laws of the
Country; but when he shall degenerate, and break all his Sacred Oaths and
Promises, and destroy the very Foundation of Government, which ought to be kept
inviolable, then have I Reason to turn my Love into Contempt, I having (as all
Men ought to have) a real and truer Love for my Country and its excellent
Constitution, than for ten Thousand Kings who shall endeavor to destroy it. I
have not reviled the ^ate King James, but spoken the Truth, as will appear by
what follows. Were not his Creatures, as Papists and Popishly affected, put
into Places of Trust by his Means during his Brothers Reign, and Parliaments
Prorogued and Dissolved? And was he not believed by most of the Nation to be
the Head of the Popish Plot? these are sufficient to prove that he Conspired
against the People and Government when Duke of York: I need not mention his
Actions when King, ^hey being fresh in every Man's Memory. Self-preservation ^s
inherent to all Men, but it does not follow that a King who has ^enounced his
Throne, and abandoned the Kingdom, should endeavor to re-establish himself
through a ^ea of Blood, though the Government is provided with another
Governor. What right has a King to the Throne ^ut from the People? If you can
make out your Doctrine of Jure Divino, then you may lay Claim to such Rights
for your King James, as neither the Law or Reason does or can allow.

28. That God did originally Institute Monarchy, I do say; but that we are
Commanded to obey Kings exclusively to all other Government, does not follow,
and I do not maintain.

If God did Command or Appoint the World to be Governed by Kings, and that he
has not revoked that Decree, then it does follow, that all other Government is
sinful, because any thing contrary to the Appointment or Command of God is a
Sin.

29, 30. We have very little Account of the World from the Creation to the
Flood, but by what appears, we may safely conclude, that God then Governed his
People by a Paternal Monarchical Authority; and afterward Melchizedeck,
Abraham, and the Patriarchs, were great Kings and Princes; Moses was King of
Jeshurun; the Judges were so many Monarchs for the time being, and so all along
the Jews were under a Monarchical Government, and therefore it was their Fault
to desire a King after the manner of the Nations, when they already had such a
Regal Government as God thought fit to appoint. Nimrod is not the first
Monarch, but the first mighty Hunter (or cruel Tyrant) we meet with in
Scripture: but consider I pray, whether the Dominion which God gave unto Adam
did not make him the first and greatest Monarch upon Earth; and if so, this
makes not a little for the Jure Divino Doctrine, (which term of Art yet I
prosess my self not to be in love with:) Does not God himself tell us, That by
him Kings reign? does he not say of David, He has exalted one chosen out of
(not by*) the People? does he not call Cyrus (an Heathen King) his Anointed?
and are we not told what horrid Wickedness was committed when there was no King
in Israel? All these things show that Monarchy is from God, and that there were
Kings in the World before Nimrod; unless you understand by Kings only such
wicked Persons as he was, (as you seem to do:) But yet though this be true, yet
it is not absolutely necessary that all the World should be Governed by Kings,
any more than that all Churches should be necessarily governed by Bishops,
because it is certain that Episcopacy was Instituted in the Church by our
Savior and his Apostles.

I never 'till now heard, That a Paternal (which is a Fatherly) Authority was a
Kingly Authority. It cannot be supposed that Adam was a King, upon the
Authority which God have him of having Dominion (without it be understood) over
the Fish of the Sea, and the Fowl of the Air, and the Cattle, etc. nor because
God bid him be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it,
because there was nothing to subdue, (except Beasts) he being the first Man of
the Creation. It can mean nothing else, than that he should have Power or
Authority as Father over all his Children, and subdue them if they were
Rebellious in disobeying his Commands. But to proceed, After the Flood, the
Twelve Sons of Jacob were Patriarchs, that is, chief of the Fathers, or chief
Head Prince of the Family; and such was Abraham, who was called a Father (not a
King) of many Countries: The Judges were not Monarchs for the time being, but
Rulers over the People, Act. 4.8. With what Face can you assert that the Jews
were all along under a Monarchical Government, when it is certain there is not
the least Intimation thereof in Scripture. Melchisedeck was a Type of Christ,
being both King and Priest, he was King of Righteousness, and King of Salem,
which is King of Peace, without Father or Mother having neither beginning of
Days nor end of Life, Heb. 7.2, 3. He was a Sovereign King and High Priest of
the Church, and such was Christ, not using Authority like unto worldly Kings.
Deuteronomy. 34.10. speaking of Moses, There arose not a Prophet since in Israel, whom
the Lord knew face to face; he being a very Holy Man, and such a singular
Prophet, and whom the Lord had such a respect for that he buried him Himself,
Ver. 6. therefore it may with Reason be concluded that God gave him an Honor
above other Prophets by making him a King, and likewise Milchisedeck ^as a Type
of Christ: But these Kings did not act by their own Will, but by the Will and
Appointment of Almighty God: We read of no other King or Kings over the
Children of Israel, 'till they desired a King. Isa. 44.28. and 45.1. Thus says
the Lord to his Anointed Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure, whose right hand I have holden to subdue Nations before him: But does
God call any other Heathen Kings his Anointed, of which there was a great
Number during the time of the Children of Israel? Was not St. Paul by the
appointment of the Almighty one of the chief of the Apostles, though he had
been a violent Persecutor? And it may very well be thought that God by a
particular Providence caused Cyrus to be made King, by whom he designed to
subdue Nations, and therefore may be very properly called his Chosen or
Anointed, for in the first Year of his Reign he made a Decree to build the
House of God, etc. Ezra 5.13, 14. I do once more affirm, that Nimrod is the
first King mentioned in Scripture, Genesis 10.9. Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. The Children of
Israel are commanded to make Judges and Officers throughout their Tribes, (of
which they had Twelve, Genesis 49.28. Mat. 19.28. which were Societies,) And they
shall Judge the People with just Judgment, not wresting Judgment or respecting
Persons: This was the Government that God had appointed over the Children of
Israel, which was by Judges and Prophets, not by Kings: But suppose these
Judges were Kings, according to your Assertion, it follows, that the People
have right to Elect their Kings by Divine Appointment. This makes not a little
against the present pretended Jure Divino Doctrine; yet it is certain that there
was many Kings by Divine Appointment in the time of the Children of Israel, but
that they are so now, I do absolutely deny. Pray Sir examine this Paragraph
well, for I do positively charge you with Wresting the Scriptures, and making
very false Assertions: I require you to prove that Kings are by the Command or
Appointment of Almighty God, which done, I Will prove such Government to be
necessary, and that all others are sinful.

31. Some sort of Allegiance is due to hint from whom we receive Protection;
that it is the only Foundation of Allegiance, I do again deny.

The Coronation Oath, and Oath of Allegiance, are mutual Ties of Protection,
and of Obedience to the Laws; the King to obey the Laws in Administration of
Justice, and the People to obey the Laws in being Passive to them. It is
impossible for a King to Govern with that Justice and Equity, but he will have
some Enemies; and if the People do not protect him, how can he be safe in his
Throne? There is a Natural Allegiance due to all Men, that is, from one Man to
another; and there is a Political Allegiance due to the King for protecting me
in my Civil Rights, etc. and this is the only Cause and Foundation of
Allegiance, to which I have spoken more large in the 20, and 21, Replies.

32. The Law indeed Indemnities the People for Obeying an Usurper, ( or a King
only de Facto) but this supposes a Fault which without this Law was severely
punishable; besides, it does not say that they shall assist the King de Facto
in his Wars, etc. but only take care to secure them if they do so.

What Fault can there be supposed in Obeying or Assisting an Usurper or King de
Facto, when the Law does not Punish, but allows of such Obedience and
Assistance. Treason cannot be committed against a King out of Possession of the
Throne, but it is Treason to be aiding or assisting toward his Restoration,
which is Conspiring against the King de Facto: And as long as a King in
Possession (tho not by regular descent) governs according to the Laws of the
Land, he ought to be assisted, and may require his Subjects Assistance in his
Wars. After all the Clamor and Noise that has been made about the Obligation
of the Oath of Allegiance, it appears by this that it is only Conditional, and
that it is dissolved whenever the King ceases to Govern or Reign.

33. As for your Aphorism the Safety of the People, etc. I do not dispute the
truth of it. But whether the Way to observe this supreme Law, be, to violate
the Right of Succession, I do, and so will you, I believe, upon second thoughts
very much question.

The Divine Law is the same in one Country as in another. I would fain know
whether the Law that is made in France, That no Woman shall Inherit the Throne,
and the turning out the King of Portugal, and setting up his younger Brother,
who was more fit to govern, (and many like Instances might be given) be against
this Divine Law; and whether or no England for its Security may not exclude the
next Heir to the Crown, or turn out He that shall be upon the Throne, who are
incapable, or will not govern according to the Laws of the Land. I do affirm,
that there is no other Right of Succession than what proceeded from the People,
and that this was given to the King for the time being, and to his Heirs, upon
Condition that He and they should Govern according to the Laws and Customs of
the Country; else to what purpose was these Rules and Bounds of Government
given, but that he should be obliged to govern according to them, and not
according to his Will and Pleasure? What an Essay would it be upon our Reason,
to think that our Ancestors who made Kings, were such Fools or Mad Men, as not
to reserve to themselves a Power of turning them out if they endeavored to
destroy them, or act contrary to those Rules they had set them: If they had no
such Intention or Reserve, yet it follows they had such Power, and that it
still remains; because there neither was, ^or is any Law to the contrary, and
this has been several times Executed, as may be seen in the 18, and 19, Reply.

34. The Kings of England (as all other Kings) came to their Crowns by Divine
Appointment, and are only recognized or received to their Rights by the People.
The Prerogatives and Authorities of the Crown are given to the King for the
time being, only to prevent what Mischiefs might otherwise ensure to the
Community.

Sir, You are pleased to take no Notice of the latter Part of my 29th. Query,
which is as distinct a Head as any one, and begins at the ending of a full
Point, tho not in a Break like the rest, which being very proper, in Answer to
this Assertion of yours, I shall here insert it, viz. If Kings are by Divine
Appointment, is it not rational to believe that God would have commanded all
the World to have been Governed by Kings, or at least the Christian World; and
have given them a Law to Govern by? The Prerogatives and Authorities of the
Crown are nothing but the bounds and supports of the Regal Authority, and are
given to the King for the time being; but if he exceeds those Bounds, it is no
Prerogative or Authority, and then most certain the People who gave him his
Authority has Authority to take it away. Now I would fain know what your Jure
Divino King would signify, (more than a stalking Horse) when his Prerogatives
and Authorities are taken from him, (for you allow them to be in the People)
for I am sure this is the only way to prevent the Mischiefs which would
otherwise ensue to the Community from a false and destructive Governor. It
cannot be proved that there has been a King by Divine Appointment for these
many Ages last past: If they were by Divine Appointment, then they would be set
up by the immediate Appointment of Almighty God, as over the Children of
Israel; or else the Scripture would have said, that their Issue should be
Kings, (and then you must prove a right Line from that Issue, which is
impossible to beproved) or that the World should be Governed by Kings. Since
God Almighty has no where Commanded or appointed the World to be Governed by
Kings, it absolutely follows, That it is the Peoples Right to choose their
Kings and Governors; and then what greater Nonsense can there be, than to
affirm the People has not Right to Punish their Kings, by turning them out of
the Throne for not Administering of Justice!

35. In the first Ages of Christianity, the Right of Succession was not a
settled Title to the Empire, neither were the Christians of that time bound by
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; And this is the reason most probably why our
Savior and his Apostles only warned them in general to Obey the Emperors who
were then in Power, without enquiring into their Right and Title.

Although in the first Ages of Christianity the Roman Emperors were seldom by
a Hereditary Right, and the Christians were not bound to them by Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, yet the Commands of our Savior and his Apostles for
their Obedience to those Heathen Princes, under the Pain of Damnation, was more
binding than any Oath those Princes could have required of them.

36. As for your Challenge, I do undertake to prove the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, and Unlawfulness of Deposing of Kings, by Scripture, Law, and
Reason, when you shall think fit to make any material Objections against them;
but yet when I have done this, I am, (I assure you) and shall be as averse as
you are from having my Throat cut either by French or Irish Dragoons. As for
the Jure Divino Doctrine (in your sense) I do not undertake for it.

Sir, You undertake to prove the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, why did you not
join Jure Divino to it, (which you have strove hard to prove in your 29th.
Answer, and have asserted in your 34th. Answer) for they used to go together,
during the time of the Children of Israel, when God set up their Kings; but
since he has ceased to set up or appoint Kings, Passive Obedience and Jure
Divino do cease also. In your sixth Answer you have afferted that which is
diametrically opposite to this Answer of yours, viz. For you there assert, that
He that resists, (meaning the King) does not only resist the Usurpations of
Men, but the Ordinance of God, tho ^e were a Claudius or a Nero, who were two
great Tyrants; especially Nero, who I believe cannot be paralleled. And you
likewise there declare, that Absolute and Vnconditionate Obedience is due to
the King as God's Vicegerent, what is this but asserting Passive Obedience in
the strictest sense imaginable? which Doctrine if true, then if the King
destroyed the People by Hundreds and Thousands, they ought not to resist; for
that God would punish him himself, as he did the Kings over the Children of
Israel: But where have we had an Example or Examples for these several Hundred
Years last past, where God has sent his visible Judgments upon wicked Kings,
whereof the World has been pestered with a great many: I say, if God should
send his private Judgments upon Kings (or Damn them) for their Wicked
Government, (which we ought not to Judge) what would this signify by way of
Example to other Kings? What a notorious Hypocrite are you become, to Preach up
Passive Obedience to others, yet at the same time assuring me, that you are and
shall be as averse from having your Throat cut as I am? if so, then you are for
resisting any Man or Men whatsoever, who shall endeavor to take away your Life
contrary to Law; and you could not but understand these were my Sentiments by
my 6, 7, 8, and 10. Paragraphs. I would desire You, or any Men else to
reconcile these Contrarieties together if they can. As for the Unlawfulness of
Deposing Kings (as you call it) I need say no more, having already spoke
sufficient in Answer to your sixteenth Apothegm. But pray Sir, what do you mean
by not Undertaking for the Jure Divino Doctrine in my sense, when it is plain I
have not asserted any such thing by my Challenge to the whole World for to
prove that Doctrine?

37. At last you turn Conjurer, but you see that your Charms have had no
Opperation upon me; I am still unsatisfied with your Auertions and
Propositions, and I doubt not but that all honest Men who shall impartially
Judge betwixt us will be so too. I am equally against Rebellion in the State
and Schism in the Church. I am far from sowing Dissentions amongst the People,
or persuading any Subject from the true Allegiance: Let those who are guilty of
this double sin, beware lest they be doubly Punished, with the Judgments of God
in this World, and Damnation in the World to come.

If your Answer be your Sentiments, (which no body ought to doubt of) then
there is great Reason to believe that your Conversation amongst Mankind is to
the same purpose, and then you are guilty of this double sin, of sowing
Dissentions amongst the People, and dissuading their Majesty's Subjects from
their true Allegiance. Now let all impartial Men that read this Book judge
between us two.

38. Thus Sir you have a short and I hope a direct Answer to your Propositions,
if you shall think fit to Print it, you have the consent of N.N.

I Challenge you and all other Men that do still persist in these inhumane and
damnable Principles to answer what has been said: I could wish that you and
they would consult together, that the strongest Arguments that can be said for
your Doctrine may be there inserted, which if short, and sent to Mr. Harrison
the Bookseller, I do Promise once more to defend what I have asserted, and
Print the Answer that shall be sent, with my Defense annexed to it. But I hope
that you and all other Men that have such Erroneous and destructive Principles,
will upon the whole examine well what has been said, and like good Christians
acknowledge your Faults, and not add sin to sin in Justifying your selves in
such an ill Principle; and in so doing you may be a means of adding Happiness
to this Golden Age: And that Peace and Plenty, Justice and Judgment may flow in
our Streets as long as the Sun and Moon endures, is the desire of him who
wishes an Eternal Happiness to this our Israel,

A. A.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
THE Author has received two other Answers, but thinks them not worth
Answering; and being resolved to expose that Irrational Doctrine, and the
weakness of the pretended Justifiers thereof, (but that the World may say that
they have a fair Adversary to deal with, who is not willing to expose their
Persons, but only their Folly, least some Persons might know their hands) does
promise to leave the true and exact Copies of those Letters at Mr. Harrison 's
the Bookseller in Cornhil, where any Gentleman that desires it, may see them.

The Anatomy of an Arbitrary Prince, or King James the Second set forth in his
proper Colors, and what England may Expect from such an one: Wherein is set
forth his Unlawful Actions when King of England, and his first Speech which he
made to the Council Feb. 6. 1684. and the Heads of several other Speeches, with
many of his Actions in Ireland since his Arrival there. Written for the
Information and Satisfaction of all the Grumbletonians in their Majesty's
Dominions, but especially of the poorer sort. Price 1 d. They are to be Sold at
Mr. Harrison's.


