THE SPEECH (Without an OATH) OF PHILIP HERBERT, LATE Earl of Pembrooke, At his
Admittance (as a Member) Into the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament
Assembled, April the 6th, 1649. After he had been duly elected a Burgess for
Bark-shire, instead of Sir FRANCIS PILE, lately deceased.
Taken Verbatim by Michael Oldisworth.
Printed in the year 1649.
Many worthy Members coming out of the House, recived his Honor in with all
respect, as a Member Elected by the County of Barkshire and instead of Sir
Francis Pile Deceased; where being no sooner Entered, but he speak as follows.

GENTLEMEN,
FOr so I can but now rightly call you all, though I know there be amongst you
many worthy Lords, Knights and Burgesses; yet since all Dominion and Lordship
is cried down by the People, I think it my duty to lay down the Vanity of my
Titles at the feet of this Supreme Authority; and Sink me, I hold it the best
Policy so to do, and the best honesty too; Lords, Earls, Kings, Dukes, are all
but Marks of the Gentiles, and cannot be proper to us Christians, that should
have wit enough to Rule our selves, and not exercise Lordship over our
Brethren. He that would be Chief among you, let him be your Servant. Dam me, I
have been your Servant, and will be your Servant till death. I am an Elect
Member of this House, and no Ruler, neither have I any desire to Rule, for a
Ruler should have his Rule. Z'blood, do you make a Carpenter, or a Coxcomb on
me, that ye think I Will be a Ruler? Sink me, I grow Old, it is enough for me to
Rule my Horse, and nor to Assume a Power to Rule others: for ruling Lords in an
overruling sense, is a thing that stands neither with Reason, Law, Justice,
nor Christianity. Dam me, I think I am Lawfully Elected, and have as good
qualities as another, and therefore may claim, have, and make use of any
Privilege of Parliament, either in relation to my Person, Quality, or Estate.
Sink me and dam me, if I exercise Lordship over a Worm; Judge me, I am as proud
of Philip Herbert, or Burgess of Barkshire as I am of Earl of Pembroke: and my
reason (Mr. Speaker) is this, I was Philip Herbert, before I was Earl of
Pembroke; and now I am Burgess for Barkshire; and if I bark not, and bawl not,
(if I see occasion) as well as the best of you all, then let the County that
chose me their Minister and Servant, complain of me, or turn me out, and choose
another. No, Sink me, the Country ought not to be at the Charge of keeping Dogs
and bark themselves; or feed their Dogs so high and lusty, that like Actaeon's,
they devour their Master. Pardon me (Mr. Speaker) I hope you do not conceive
that I call the Parliament Dogs; I speak concerning their Vigilance to preserve
their Master's Estates; and in that point, I may (in my blunt Language) liken
them to Dogs; but every like is not the same. Mr. Speaker, Conceive me aright,
I would have you not to be Dogs, but as Dogs; that is, as I conceive, not to be
dumb Dogs; I shall ever hate a dumb Dog. But, Sir, I know you are no dumb Dog,
because you are Speaker.

Gentlemen;

I am now received in, and made a Member of this Honorable House of Commons;
though it be a thing strange, and not common in England, for an Earl (as not
long since I held my self to be) and a Member of the Lords House, to be made a
Commoner, or removed from the Upper-end, to the Lower-end of the Table. I am
not so void of Understanding, or Common Sense, as not to think my self highly
honored therewith. I am no respecter of Persons or Places. Sir, I know how to
humble my self, and do acknowledge it my duty, not only to lay down my Titles
and Dignites, but my Life and Honors for the good of the Common-weath. Dam me,
it is not my Wealth that I prize above the Commonwealth, though I love both,
and would do my utmost to preserve both, which I take to be the chief cause of
the Peoples choosing me to be their Representative. It Is true, I was formerly
chosen Chancellor of Oxford; not only by this Honorable House, but the House of
Lords then being; but considering my weak Abilities in Divinity, being (I thank
God) little troubled with the same, nor guilty of any more confused or
confounding Languages, than my own Mother Tongue; and for Arts and Sciences,
they never shall trouble my head, I hold it my best Art and Science, to
preserve my Self and my Estate, and get more if I can. Dam me, he that cares
not for his Wealth, can never care for the Commonwealth: for how can he that
will not do good for himself, do good for others? Charity ought to begin at
home.

Mr. Speaker!

Truly, Gentlemen, I know not what Errors are lately crept into that
University; but at my last Visitation, I think, I plagued them to purpose.
Confound me, they had as good to have been Visited with the Plague, as with me,
for I spared none, right or wrong. Dam me, I think the University, was never
better weeded since it was an University; I pulled up all the Popish Poppies,
the Malignant May-weed, the Thistles and Hemlock that choked the Wheat: Dam
me, they had nigh choked me with Fuming and Swearing at them. A Pox of their
Reasons, they were Logic to me, for I could understand not one of them; and if
I could, I would not, I had no such Order in my Instructions; I acted as
vigorously as God would give me leave, I spared never a Son of Rome amongst
them all; Dam me, not my own Godson. 'Zblood, If my Father had been there a
Scholar, and Popishly affected, (as I was told they were) he should have turned
out with the rest. Mr. Speaker, I hate a Turn-coat, and a Black-coat too; I
love a Buff-coat, or Mrs. May's Petty-coat, better than Popish-Canonical Coats.
Dam me, If ye were all of my mind (Gentlemen) you would pull down the
Universities; they are but the Nurses of Learning and Superstition: Dam me,
Learning and Superstition has occasioned all these Wars and Blood. Refuse me,
I had rather be a Sculler than a Scholar; these Arts and Sciences (as they call
them) are dangerous Enemies to the State, and steal and draw away the Hearts
and Affections of the People from Martial affairs; and therefore (in my simple
judgment) it would redound much to the strengthening of the State, to change
the property of them, and instead of making them Nurseries of Learning, to make
them Fencing-Schools, or Nurseries of War. Dam me, This Kingdom has more need
of Warring than Learning; for all Christendom threatens us: therefore (Mr.
Speaker) let us not be always Fools. Z'blood, I have so much Wit in my
Blockhead, that if I see a Storm a coming, I can provide for shelter; the very
Hogs teach me that. Gentlemen, I hate humane Learning, Dam me, I can learn as
good a Lesson from a Hog, a Horse, a Dog, or a Cat, as from the best Divine in
England. Pox! Am I not a Layman? And can I lay out my time in any thing better
than Lay-learning? Besides, I am a Statesman; I know nothing to the contrary,
but that I may state my Question then, That as I am no Divine, so that I may
not medlde any more with Divinity: I am no Ruler, and therefore if they cannot
learn the Wit to rule themselves, let them be unruled; for I have done my part
with them. Gentlemen, I hold the Chancellorship a fitter place for my man
Oldsworth, or Mr. Peter's, than for my self; and therefore if your Wisdoms
think fit, I desire to be discharged therefrom, because the Self-denying
Ordinance forbids (as I take it) to hold two Places in the Commonwealth;
therefore I desire to leave the one, to the intent that I may mind and apply
my self the better to the other. Dam me, I cannot serve two Masters, the Church
and the State too, God and the Parliament: If it please this Honorable House
(I conceive) one Office is enough for one man; therefore I shall betake my self
only to do my business in this House, that the County that chose me may be the
better for it. Gentlemen ^, need not be ashamed to do my business in this
House; and was never backward ye know in any good Office, and would strain my
self as much for the good of the State, as Alderman Atkins, or any Member of
you all; and shall untruss my Purse-strings too, upon any just and honest
occasion. Gentlemen, as I have always loved you dearly, so I hope you will love
me again; for my great Affection to you, should draw your great Affection to
me: And indeed we are Brethren, and Brethren ought to love and agree with one
another. Dam me, the very Devils can agree with one another, and cannot we?
Z'blood, are we worse than Devils? Our Grand Enemy (the King) is now cut off,
and must we needs be Enemies to one another, and cut off one another too?
Believe me, Lilburne deserves to be hanged, and Overton to be turned over the
Ladder, and Prince the Cheesemonger to be served in the same kind as the
Prince of Wales, that they dare be so impudent bold, as to tax the Parliament,
or the Council of State, with Injustice or Tyranny. Dam me, it is at least
Treason and Nonsense but to think so: and, Sink me, it is a thousand times worse
to say so, or to write so, and show the People Reason for it too. A Pox of all
Reasons and Reasonings for me, I never loved it in all my life. 'Zounds, Break
a man's Head, and give him a Reason for it; as the Scot served me, when he
switch'd me over the Face, broke my Head with my own Staff of Office, and then
gave me a Reason for it; and that was all the Satisfaction I could have for
that Affront. Dam me, I hate a Scot as I hate a Reason; and hate a Reason, as I
hate the Devil: Reasoning is neither better nor worse than Treating, and we all
know Treating is a Malignant, and an Enemy to the State. And if the Treaty had
taken effect, Z'blood, we might all have been Hanged and Damned before this.
No, Reason is dangerous in a State; neither is the State bound to render any
Reason to Lilburne, Overton, or any body else, for their Actions, or whatever
they do. Had it not been for Reasoning, we had settled the Supreme Authority on
the People long ago; and then we had had Peace, and a settled State. How simple
is it to think, that a Parliament is unjust, or can err? That Is a likely
matter indeed! No, Parliaments are chosen by the People, because they cannot
err: Kings may err; as David, and the late King did: But when did you ever
read In the Bible, that a Parliament could err, or had erred? And thus, I
hope, I have given you Satisfaction in this Point.

For this your Act of Leavying Money, I give you my free consent. Pray what can
be done without Money? Dam me, Soldiers that fight for Money, must have Money;
and though I am no Soldier my self, yet Dam me, I love a Soldier with all my
heart; and he that fights for Money, let him win Money; and (Sink me) if he
wins it, let him wear it too. Z'blood, where should we have Money for
Soldiers, but of the Countries and Cities whom they fight to preserve; unless
they would have us pay them out of our own Estates? But surely there is none in
this Honorable House, but has more frugality, or at least more wit, than to
part with any of their own Estates; do we not labor and spend our time for the
good of the Commonwealth, and shall the Commonwealth deny to spend their
Money for us? Z'blood, time is precious, (Mr. Speaker) and, God refuse me, we
have spent a long time in their service (at least eight years) and cannot so
much as have a good word for our pains. Ram me, Sink, me and Dam me; it were a
good deed to give over, and leave them to themselves, and then we should have a
Kingdom well Governed. Dam me, I am out of breath, and therefore will conclude
my Speech.

Your Affectionate Servant Pembrook and Montgomery.

Vera Copia
FINIS.

