A Faithful NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF That Holy and Laborious PREACHER
Mr. JOHN MACHIN, Late of Astbury in the County of Chester.

With a Praefatory Epistle there unto; Written by that Excellent Person Sir
Charles Wolseley Baronet.

Published for the furtherance of Real Piety in Ministers and others.

LONDON, Prinred for Nevill Simmons at the three Crowns at Holbourn Conduit.
1671.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
PRactical Sanctity is the great End of Religion while we live here; he that
attains farthest therein, will be found wisest to himself, and most beneficial
to others: It Is much in Divinity, as it is in Philosophy, where the Practice
augments the Science above all bare Theories, and renders it most useful and
intelligible to Mankind. When men confine Religion to Speculation, they turn
Divinity into Metaphysics, where they dispute and divide without End: to
reduce it to practice, is to pursue its proper tendency, and to make it (as
indeed it is) the great Principle of Union and Peace. This ensuing Discourse is
not a little subservient to that Highest End of Religion; being in its own
Nature, an earnest persuasive to a serious Practice of Holiness, by setting
before us the Example of one singularly Eminent therein. The Lives of Holy Men
teach us what ought to be done, and at once convince us that it may be done;
they supersede all those lazy excuses, men are too apt to make about the
practicability of what God requires, and give us the most taking prospect of
the Ease and Excellency of all Christian Duties in the Beauty of a Heavenly
Conversation; It Is to Record a great instruction to the World, to Write the
Life of a good man, and he is a Public Benefactor to Religion that Rescues such
a Treasure from the common Consumption of Time, and Stores it up for Posterity.
'Twere pity, that what will be ever rewarded in Heaven, should be soon forgot
upon Earth; or that the best Subject of Story should silently Expire in
Oblivion We owe no small Additions both to Learning and Religion to such, who
have Transcribed the Lives of Excellent Men, and thereby made them the
Companions of every Age. No Humane Motivelike Example, nor is there any
Attractive to worthy Actions, so great as such Actions themselves. 'Twas the
Story of Alexanders Life, that first inflamed that Noble Genius of Caesar; and
'twas the Example of some Primitive Martyrs, that first made the famous Justin
Martyr a Christian: St. Paul found how prevailing Example was, and therefore
Preached the Gospel from his own; those things, says he to the Philippians,
which you have heard and seen in me, do. God himself eminently commends to us
this way of improving the World, by proposing the best Patterns, since so
considerable a part of the Bible, is a Sacred Register of Holy Men's Lives, and
one whole Book, that of the Acts of the Apostles, seems chiefly designed, to
conveigh to us the History of St. Paul's Life after his Conversion.

This following Collection may modestly expect a fair Reception from all hands:
he must be a Reader very unkind to Religion and himself, that dislikes the
Revival of such a Holy Man's Life; in which there is no real Offense given,
either to the Jew, or to the Gentile, or to the Church of God. Such a man as
lived and dyed free from all corrupt and unsound Opinions; one who in the
course of his Ministry, never sophisticated the Gospel with any fancifull
Speculations; one wholly untainted with the least Faction or contempt of
Authority; one that lived not in the impalement of any Party. In short, a man
of a Catholic Spirit, who made Religion his Business, and Traveled with the
Salvation of Mankind. A worthy Pattern both as a Minister and a Christian; in
either capacity, the best Advice I can give the Reader, is in the Words of our
Savior upon another occasion, Go and do thou likewise.

Chapter Wolseley.

The Life and Death of that Holy Man of God, and Laborious Preacher, Mr. John
Machin late of Astbury.
MR. John Machin, was Son to John Machin of Seabridge near New Castle in the
County of Stafford. His Mother Katharine was of the Vernons of Audley in the
same County. His Father was a Yeoman of good Estate, an ancient Freeholder;
that Estate of Seabridge having continued in the Name of the Machins from the
23 Hen. 8. (as this precious Servant of God has himself computed out of his
ancient Deeds) and he finds himself the seventh Generation of the Name that
have Inherited that estate. And what a pious improvement he makes of that
Observation, we shall mention in its due place.

He was born at Seabridge, October 2. 1624. and baptized the same day at
Newcastle.

He was the only Son of his said Parents, and therefore carefully brought up by
them in his Youth at the best Schools that were near, especially with honest
Mr. Orme at Newcastle, and that famous Mr. John Ball at Whitmore, who brought
up several Youths in School-learning, together with his own Sons.

He was sometimes intended for the Inns of Court, but his Parents tenderness of
him, and unwillingness to part from him, is supposed to be the greatest
hindrance of that design. Whereupon being taken from School he was employed in
husbandry for some years, and other youthful recreations, as some well
remember, and often did recount with admiration, when they saw him afterward
so highly engaged in the exercise of the Law of God, day and night.

In particular he was addicted to cock-fights, which made him say thus (in some
Memorials that he left off himself and family for the use of his son) Twenty
years did I live the Devils bondslave, which is time lost, and not Living in a
good sense, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. And has often said to some of his dear friends
when they have been walking with him in some of the ways at Seabridge, O with
what an heartfull of vanity have I in days past gone this way? And at other
times, This way have I followed sin where now I follow Christ; I am now
ungoing, and un-ravelling my sinful journeys: but I that have tried both, find
these the better ways.

He was very prone to hearken to any motion of marriage made unto him, though
not then closing with any; one at Vttoxeter he was nearest to a conclusion
with, who dyed in the mean time, which was some occasion of his going to the
University.

Upon the occasion of the nameing of his first child Samuel, he says thus, I
was the rather inclined to give him that name, because it should have been mine
own by right, as my Father has told me, especially since I came from
Cambridge: for said he, I begged thee of God in thy Mothers straits, and
promised thee to the Lord, as Hannah did her Son Samuel; but having quite
forgotten my promise, or not thinking at all of the way wherein God intended
thee for himself, I intended thee for a Husbandman, until God fetched thee
from me into the way of the Ministry, which was after some improbabilities, and
besides the thoughts of all Friends. God had another plough for thee to follow,
and another match to make, than that which I and my Friends had thoughts of.

His Father was induced by the advice of a Friend to let him go to Cambridge
for a quarter of an year, scarce intending him to be admitted, but to abide
there for some short time for further breeding. And he gladly accepted the
Motion, and went thither in December, 1645. and finding some kindred and
acquaintance there, he was admitted in Jesus College.

The first year it pleased God to make a gracious change in him, of which, he
says himself, The time of my conversion was in the twenty first year of my
age (as I remember) the place was Jesus College in Cambridge. The Texts that
most overturned me were Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 14. and 1 Cor. 16.22. the one by Dr.
Hill, the other by a Stranger. He often showed some of his acquaintance the
seat in which he was first wrought upon, and told them how dearly he loved the
sight of it, and that ever after he chose to sit in that seat rather than in
any other, if it were possible to crowd into it. One evidence among many others
of the eminent success which God gave to the faithful plain preaching of that
Holy man D. Hill, who went over that whole Epistle to the Ephesians in a
Lecture every Lord's Day in the morning at six of the clock, which he continued
for several years. Learned D. Arrowsmith also about the same time preached over
a succinct body of Divinity in Aphorisms in St. John's College in the evening
of the Lord's Day (part whereof is since published) of which he has often said,
that he found his heart so molded to the truths delivered upon the hearing
thereof, that it was greatly to his spiritual joy and satisfaction.

No sooner did he find this change in his own heart, but his Friends at
Seabridge found it in his letters, which spoke the new frame of his soul, and
were most instant pathetical persuasions to his Father and Mother and Sisters,
to look after their souls, and to mind the things of Eternity, which he
seconded afterward with his holy and exemplary society with them, so that he
was an instrument to convert all his three Sisters early unto God, and to
prevail very hopefully with his Parents in like manner, as appeared afterward.

He so followed his studies in the University, that being of ripe years, very
good natural parts, and religiously making conscience of his time, he made good
progress therein, and was not inferior to any in the College of his year, in
University-learning when he left it. And though he made no Show of learning (as
some did) in his preaching, yet he made good Use of it, and well understood the
necessity of it for his work.

About the time of his great Grandfathers death which was in March 1647. he was
sick of a dangerous spotted-feaver at Cambridge and that unto death, as himself
and most about him concluded, which he thus mentions; That it was in
Jesus-Colledge in a middle chamber next to the Chapel on the right hand; but
(says he) God having some work for me to do had mercy on me, Phil. 2.27. saved
me, and brought me back again to say, Psalm. 56.13. for thou have delivered my
soul from death; will thou not deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk
before God in the land of the living? And Psalm. 118.17, 18. I shall not dye but
live: and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord has chastned me sore, but he
has not given me over unto death. In this sickness the Lord dealt most
powerfully with his soul, planting therein great and firm resolutions of
serving his God eminently upon Recovery, which by his grace he afterward
faithfully performed. And hereupon he began a Meeting of Scholars for religious
ends, which continued in the College for several years after his departure, to
the restrayning (at least) of some, and the great spiritual advantage of many
young Scholars there; which he managed with such caution, as they might not
easily become nurseries of faction, or false doctrine, whatever the ignorance,
or malice of senseless frothy persons did slanderously vent to the contrary.
Take a further account of him, and of his usefulness in the College in these
few clauses of several letters to him from some Worthy Members of that Society
--

Dear Friend, I received your loving Letter, which breathed nothing but piety
and good affection. The next Companion to him who is both Fundator, Socius, and
Praeses of the College of Graces, and comforts of Believers, is he whom God
has warmed with the same principles to be instrumental for the inlivening them
in others -- I bless God, the society you were the founder of in the College,
do grow numero et mensura -- And you have here my real thanks, in that you have
been instrumental in setting religious meetings on foot, wherein you reap much
of the answer of your prayers, in that they carry it so prudently yet, as I
hear of nothing but what malice and guilt tax them withal -- In all my serious
thoughts I see you represented to me, either as a pattern of strict walking, or
an upbraiding of my little serviceableness, but always a blessing and a
comfort in this, that I have known you, and the manner of your life, and that I
reap the benefit of your prayers and best affections, which is a treasure I
always desire to prize above all the Jewels in the world, etc. And from
another eminent Person: My Dear and Precious Friend, I received yours -- your
lines sweetly refresh me. O that I could hear oftener from you. It glads my soul
to see your constancy. O that your example might be a motive and incentive to
me, to be more steady settled and fixed upon God, in the way of God, etc. These
are but a taste of many letters from Cambridge, wherein several do bless the
Lord that ever they saw his face.

But his Activity in Gods service was not a little disturbed by the malice of
Satan, who frequently after his recovery from sickness, annoyed and tormented
him dreadfully in his Dreams (which greatly confirmed him in his christian
zeal) so that he has often immediately upon waking run in his wastcoat into
his Study, and betaken himself to his earnest prayers against that mischeivous
Fiend.

He Commenced Bachelor in Arts, Anno 1649. and after his Commencement came
into the Country; and spent part of the year among his Friends, and in
visiting some neighboring Congregations, that were destitute, with his pains.

He was Ordained Minister at Whitchurch, Feb. 20. 1649. In which service he
engaged before hand all the prayers he was able to muster up, not only of
friends near at hand, but some scores of miles distant for a blessing upon that
Ordinance; and when we consider how pathetically he engaged them, (thus in one
Epistle, Upon the 20th of February, Pray and prevail for us,) what a
conjunction of prayers there was in several places on that day, and the rich
crop and harvest reaped afterward; we think it worthy the reflection of those
Ministers, who never won a soul to Christ, from what principle, in what
manner, and for what ends, they first engaged in this sacred Function.

Though he was not at present dispoesd to settle at any place, yet he was loath
to go about his work without Ordination; and that which induced him to continue
unfixed for a space, was his large desire after souls, not only of his friends
and kindred, but of all his neighbors, as far as he could see, or know, or
go; he even traveled in birth for such as had not seen his face, that Christ
might be formed in them. And the largeness of his heart herein, was frequently
expressed in his most earnest prayers unto God, for the enlarging of his
Kingdom, in Families, Towns, and Counties; which he would name with the
greatest affection both in his prayers and letters, crying out, O that whole
Staffordshire and Cheshire might be saved!

And by this time he had acquaintance and intimacy with all that were eminent
for Piety in all the parts adjacent, and greatly did he stir up the grace of
God in them. And he was extraordinarily qualified and prepared by the Lord for
this work, in an especial juncture of time, the heat of controversies managed
by Sword Pen and Pulpit, having sadly prevailed to the justling out the lively
sense of the main things wherein all were agreed. And diverse Ministers were so
taken off these great matters by other work which the Enemy had found them,
(the tares he had sown in the fiield) that to preach of Death and Judgment, of
Christ and Conversion, were almost new things to many people. And this good man
was singularly fitted to retrieve the Great work back again into the hearts and
hands of his Brethren; having never intermedled with the controversies either
in Church or State, but setting out with all his might upon the main things,
and driving on the work of conversion wherever he came.

And his success was great: In his Fathers house at Seabridge the Lord made him
eminently instrumental for his three Sisters conversion: His Parents greatly
favored the ways of God, much furthered him in his work, and were cheerful
entertainers of well-disposed people upon solemn occasions. And there was such
an habituated course of gracious converse set up in the family, by his staying
there the first year, that an eminent Minister at his first coming thither, and
beholding their order, zeal, and forwardness in Christ, could not forbear,
insisting the next day on those words of Moses, Numb. 11.29. Enviest thou for
my sake? being the result of that dealing he was forced to, with his own heart
upon that occasion. And this Ointment on Aarons head ran down to the skirts of
his Clothing, for he was a precious savor to the very poor servants of the
house, with whom he was unweariedly importunate to be holy, and prevailed much.
A notable pledge of the future success of his Ministry upon others.

In reference hereunto, he takes occasion himself to say thus of his Father;
My Father John Machin did more for our family than his progenitors, building
both House and Barns from the ground, etc. But most of all he may be remembered,
for bringing up me his Son to, and at the University, who was (through Grace)
instrumental to bring the Gospel in its power into our Family, which was more
glory to the same, than if the materials of the house had been all turned into
pure Gold, whereof let those Scriptures (upon the Chimney-stone in the Parlour)
be witness, Genesis 28.15 -- 22. 2 Chronicles. 6.7 -- 42. 2 Samuel 7.18 -- 25. 1 Chronicles.
29.10 -- 20. Psalm. 116.1.12 -- 19. Psalm. 118.17. Genesis 32.10. Jer. 30.21. Ezekiel.
48.35. 1 Samuel 7.12 Exodus 17.14, 15, and 20.24. 1 Cor. 15.34. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
when it may be said, blessed be he, and they, who brought His Name hither to
record it. To God aolne be the whole Glory.

His usual way after preaching was to repeat, and to assemble together as many
as he could to the place where he lodged, and there to spend as much time as he
was able, in pressing things further upon them, and in holy and pertinent
discourse, with unspeakable heat and vigor; which made one of his Kindred say,
that he liked his Cosen Machin well, but that he made his house a Chapel when
he came to him.

And during this time he was unfixed, as he expresses himself in a Letter to a
Friend of his in Cambridge; I am yet placeless, Charities servant, desired to
many places, but in part resolved to fix at Ashburne, for every other Sabbath,
reserving the other for the service of Necessity and Charity which may be found
in these parts.

And accordingly he did, as himself records. At the beginning of An. 1650. I
was called co Ashburne in Derbyshire, where God was with me two years, and
though my labors were not in that Town so successful as I desired, yet I had
Gods presence much comforting my soul, and the souls of many Christian
friends thereabout.

About this time he was with a Quaker on his deathbed, presently after the
first springing of that Sect in Staffordshire, and the more earnestly he prayed
with the sick person, the more raging he was; which was an argument to him, as
also to several of the company then present, that Quakerisme was a degree of
Possession.

Whist he was at Ashburne, he was a laborious preacher, and very useful, and
his spare days he laid out to the utmost advantage of the Gospel, by
forecasting heavenly work in the Morelands and dark corners of Staffordshire,
where the power of the Gospel had scarce ever come before: so that he might
truly say, that he gloried not in another man's line, he sowed where few had
effectually sowed before, nor then, save by his procurement. There was no man
likeminded in the parts he lived in, that did so naturally care for the state
of souls, for indeed he sought not his own, but the things of Jesus Christ. He
would prevail with his Brethren, that were intimate with him, and knew the
sincerity of his heart, and design herein, to meet him in those parts, and to
preach at several places near together, sometimes three or four days together.
And the people were ordinarily so far made willing, that they would flock (to
his great joy) from place to place after the means of Grace; and he had the
comfortable testimony of Gods approving his wrok, in the good that many souls
received thereby.

Take a taste of his heavenly spirit in a Letter of his sent to a Ministers
wife, that thought her husband long from her, then with him in the Lords Work
-- July 9. 1652.

Dear Friend, I do heartily bless our God for what he has done for you, and
especially for your soul; I pray believe, you heard these following words as
coming out of the mouth that first spoke them, Psalm. 27.14. And say in faith,
as you may in his own language, Psalm. 138.8. It is to me a great sign of what
the Lord has done for you, that you are so willing to part with your (I know)
dear Husband for the Lords sake, and his works sake, but He is, and It is
worthy. Think still it is to the Lord, and should a Husband be between a
gracious heart and Christ our Lord? God forbid we should think so, who have had
already in hand for every step word and thought for him, from him more weight
and worth, than a wedge of Ophirs Gold, besides those thousands of years in
glory that are yet in reversion -- and wherein I cannot thank you or him, my
Lord shall, my Lord shall, my Lord shall; else his word fails and I Will
complain, Heb. 6.18. 2 Chronicles. 25.9.

After two years spent at Ashburne he says, he saw nothing to contradict his
resolutions to part from them, and that the Lord cut out work for him
elsewherere, judging his reasons sufficient for removal, he proceeds -- I was
called thence to Atherston in Warwickshhire, where I spent one year in a
Lecturers place, and the Lord did abundantly crown my poor pains on a sudden
with conversion-work, which made me say, Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware, my
soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadib. But I saw not the Lords mind and
will to continue me there, in which I saw the Lords hand, and for the time was
content, for I wanted nothing, having a Seabridge-home for supply: And I had my
hearts desire in opportunities to extend my labors to Staffordshire, and
otherwise some Lords-dayes, and many week-dayes, no one gainsaying; which I saw
was for the destruction of the Devils work, and an aking-tooth he carried
against me, but two things stayed my thoughts in my travels from place to
place, and house to house: My Saviors leading the way, Acts 10.38. And this;
The more the Devil hates me, the more my God loves me.

This year was his time to have Commenced Mr. in Arts, which he inclined to
do, chiefly to give testimony of his respect to Learning, and the Schools
thereof, in a time when too many were bent against them; but his Estate being
enough to make him a Compounder, whereby some extraordinary charges would be
expected from him more than he could well spare, he sat down with this
consideration, that he thought he might lay out that money more to the Honor
of the Gospel, than to part with it for the Honor of a Degree, though the
single charge he could willingly have born upon the other account.

His removal thence to Astbury he thus records himself: I was ordered and
called to Astbury in Cheshire about Novem. 17. 1652. but expressed not my full
consent until the Spring following -- Then I left Atherston. About this time
his Father dyed, of which he says thus, He dyed on March 12. 1652. being the
Sabbath day about ten of the clock at night, about the 55th year of his Age,
with these words in his mouth, Psalm. 39.5. Behold thou have made my days as an
hand breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee; Verily every man at his
best state is altogether vanity. And said to his Mother and Sisters standing by
and weeping; why do you so? you have a God that will be better than ten
thousand Husbands and Fathers.

He wisely observed, when such an unthought of loss befell him, how he was
employed at that instant -- saying. At the time he dyed I was at prayer, and
that with the most remarkable impressions that I ever had, both in pleading for
mercy for him, and on a sudden submitted to the Lords determination. Many
observable warnings he had from the Lord of this Event, before it came to pass;
His serious and solemn exposition and application of Job 21.23, 24. in the
Family, before any sickness appeared, March 9.2. His earnestness to know his
Fathers Soul-estate, before they parted the next morning, and also to thank his
love and care in his behalf, and to understand his mind and will concerning
himself and outward estate, while he yet continued in perfect health. 3. The
day following (having occasion to send home) he recommended by the messenger
that Scripture, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. to his Father. These with several other
notable passages, and pious improvements he made hereof, gave him hope that
this sad providence was in love to him, and in mercy to his Father, whom he
could not reach to see in the land of the living.

Not long after he removed to Astbury, and changed his condition, whereof he
says thus himself, The good hand of my everliving Father so disposing, I had
some Christian acquaintance in Darbyshire, especially I observed one forward in
the Profession at Mickleover near Darby, who might be to me as Rebecca to
Isaac, by name Jane Butler (Daughter to John Butler) on whom my thoughts much
settled, with submission to my heavenly Fathers will, and she became my Wife
Sept. 29. 1653. at Vttoxeter, whom God gave to me, and with her what I expected
in an humble and gracious woman, Prove. 31.11, 12. and 29.30, 31. her price was
above Rubies, her Portion of outward Estate very considerable.

His managing that affair was in such an holy and heavenly manner, that all
their meetings on that account were improveed to the utmost advantage of both
their souls, and their very marriage fixed on one of his Lecture-dayes, where
two of his Brethren preached and joined in the Solemnization thereof; and after
two days stay with his Wife, went a long journey to the work of the Lord for
many days following; whereby he made it evident, how much the greatest worldly
comforts were made subordinate to the joy of the Lord, and wore so far from
hindering, that they rather enlarged and fitted him up in the ways of God.

His first contrivance of a Lecture was some months before his Fathers death,
and no sooner was the Estate his own, but he resolves a share of it for God,
and will not serve the Lord with that which costs him nothing. Take his
intentions in his own words, out of his own papers thus. I intend a monthly
Lecture to be preached at these following towns of greatest concourse, viZ.
Newcastle, Leeke, Vttoxeter, Lichfield, Tamworth, Walsall, Wolverhampton,
Penkridge, Stafford, Eccleshall, Stone, Muckleston in the County of Stafford
the last Friday in each month, allowing (of the Lords fullness in my hands)
thirteen shillings and four pence to the Ministers that preach to convert
souls, and one Shilling to be given to twelve of the poorest people in the
Church. In all Eight pounds and twelve shillings in the year. This was the
resolution of an heart engaged to him, one that would honor the Lord with his
Substance, and is J.M. July 31. 1652. And presently after his Fathers Burial,
he wrote this following Paper about this thing. I believed the Lord could give
more days, but yet do will, that 8 l. 12 s. per Annum, be for ever set apart
for the Gospel, of my own estate, that immortal souls may be won, and Gods
portion in the world increased. To be disposed as abovesaid, or as my Brethren
Mr. N. and Mr. S. my dearest fellow laborers shall judge and find most
abundantly, and effectually to accomplish Christ's ends and mine, saying Romans
10.1. my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
saved.

This Lecture he set on foot this Summer. The first day was at Newcastle, Aug.
4. 1653. where his two foresaid friends did preach, as also the third course
which was at Vttoxeter Sep. 29. following, being the day of his marriage. And
this business was so much in his heart and purpose, that when some scruple was
made about it in the settlement of his Land at marriage, he has these words in
a Letter -- Whether I change my condition or not, I have cause and call to
respect my promise to the Lord and his Gospel, in the thing I intended; which I
think will now be preferred before the change of my condition.

And that you may discern the undissembled holiness of his heart, and bent of
soul also to this good work, we shall transcribe some passages of the Will he
made Nov. 16. 1653. not two months after his marriage -- I commit my soul to
God, my God and my Savior, that created and redeemed it, even into the bosom
of the Father of Spirits; my body to my Father Corruption, and to the Worms my
Mother and Sister, Job 17.14. In hopes he will make good to me (who with them
some time have endeavored to serve him) his promise of Eternal Life, Romans 2.7.
As for my dear beloved Wife, I freely return (and I pray it may be with
advantage) to him that has lent her, to whom I leave, Joh. 17.24. Revel. 21.
last, Jude 24. Psalm. 84.10, 11. hopeing that I leave them heirs together with
me, or rather with Jesus Christ, of a Kingdom that cannot be removed. If the
Lord should graciously give me Issue, (I pray it may be of his Heritage, and
prepared for a Room in Heaven!) to it I would leave, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and I pray
God see it executed according to my will. And it is my will concerning my Heir,
(if the Lord give one) that he may be a Samuel lent to the Lord and his Service
in the Ministry; for I can say, he is an asking of the Lord, as was Samuel. And
that he may have my inheritance, performing his Fathers and my will concerning
my Lecture. As for my Personal Substance, etc. ending thus -- Praying whoever
rules here, may keep open house for God and his, and all I leave may be his, to
whom I would in faith say, Psalm. 31.5. hereunto subscribing with my heart and
hand, J. M.

And in a Schedule dated herewith as follows. Some particulars concerning the
thing that has long been in my heart to do for God, written as my last will,
as an occasion of some standing Service, when I am not.

Motives. Gods Glory, Christ's Kingdoms increase, and poor Souls Salvation, an
expression of my thankfulness for what he has done for our family, and for me
the least and last of it. And the rather, because I am here in my own
apprehension so little serviceable in speaking, doing, and suffering for him,
and nothing at all advantageous in writing, as others have been, and I could
have desired. Those Motives, together with that blessed experience I have had
of its advantage already through Gods sealing work with it, makes me to think
my self favored the more of God, if I may do this for him; and I doubt not but
he can and will, if need be, give me and mine much more than this, as is said,
2 Chro. 52.9. and if I could say as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. I would think it
little betwixt him and me, who has said, That whosoever shall give you a cup
of cold water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say
unto you, he shall not lose his reward; and my Prayer is, that those that come
after me (whose it might have been) think it is better bestowed, than the rest.

The Thing. A double Lecture, viz. of two Sermons once a month, chiefly
intending Souls Conversion.

The Ministers. The most Orthodox able and powerful that can be procured for
love to Jesus Christ and his Service, or the will of the dead; chosen by my
Trustees successively.

The Trustees. Four Ministers, and four Laymen. The Ministers I leave in
trust, and question not their faithfulness herein for Christ sake, are my
dearest fellow laborers in our Lords work, Mr. N. Mr. S. Mr. B. and Mr. J.
with whom I only leave for their direction and encouragement, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Mat. 28.20. The Laymen whom I put in joint trust are Mr. B. Mr. M. Mr. B. and
plain-hearted T. H. all whose faces I hope to see in Heaven; with them I leave
for their refreshment when taking some steps about it, Mat. 25.39, 40. -- for
Eternity is the place I would be for, to which when gone, I am but a little
before, and you a little behind.

This Lecture he kept up by his constant cost and care, from Aug. 4: 1653.
monthly, until Jan. 2. 1659. whereof he kept an exact account in a Catalogue,
wherein he took notice of the day of the month, the place, the persons that
Preached, and their Texts, some hints of the Congregation both number and
seriousness (...) continued it, until the times would neither encourage nor
bear it, and thereupon it not only fell, but also (wanting public liberty for
such an Exercise according to the purpose of his heart) he suspended his
intentions, and disposed this Land otherwise.

It seems to be like the pious intention of David, upon the most holy and
affectionate motives, 2 Samuel 7.2. (and such, as we read not that Solomon had,
that after did it) to build an house to the Lord. But the Lord accepted his
desire, blessed him for his pious design, but would have his Son do it. So God
may revive this design on the hearts of his Son or Successors, who finding the
blessing of their Fathers Prayers, Piety, and Promises descending upon them,
may arise to build and finish what he began.

We find him now settled at Astbury, whether he came to keep house in May 1654.
where he says himself, -- I was entertained without exception or interruption.
And though for some years we met with troubles, yet did the Lord stand betwixt
me and all my trouble, so that many times I was as a man wholly free, and was
made amends for all my Sufferings of that nature, by the Lords presence, sweet
and powerful in his Ordinances, especially in that of the Lords Supper, there
set on foot in March 1654. and continued without interruption monthly, or once
in six weeks till Anno 1660.

And the Lord did mightily strengthen his hands and encourage his heart in this
ordinance, and great care he took in preparation for it, spending the Friday
before the Sacrament in public prayers and preaching Gods Word, and the day
after the Sacrament in thanksgiving at his own or some other neighbour-family,
especially where there fell out in any Communicants family any occasion of
special thanksgiving, as recovery from sickness or the like.

A faithful account he has taken and left hereof, noting the Text preached
upon, by himself or his Brethren on those days, and according to his
observation giving a general character of Gods dealing with them in his
Ordinance in such words as these: The Lords supper was Sep. 21. 1656. a day of
breaking bread indeed, for Christ was broken to the breaking of some hearts,
that thought they could never be broken. -- The Thanksgiving was at -- whereby
many it was said, Psalm. 103. 1 Samuel 7.20. Again, S^p. 1660. His last Sacrament
there thus -- A good and great day as formerly, the Lords presence and
Communion with his Blood made it so. And as much cause of thanksgiving for all
the Ordinances that day: especially I, etc.

By Mr. Ms. coming to Astbury, he had only opportunity of preaching there each
other Lords day, and had liberty on the other for his Charity-service, which he
heartily rejoiced in, and was ready freely to help any of his Brethren, so that
he was seldom a day at ease. And now he had opportunity to be acquainted with
the Ministers and Congregations in Cheshire, where the Lord blessed his
endeavors to many souls.

For his labors here were much enlarged by the many Fastdayes which he kept
upon occasions offered, unto which he was very ready, and would gather up such
special things as any in or out of his family desired to be recommended unto
God in prayer on such days, and at other times, and press them to particularize
some special thing, lest they should come unto God on a sleeveless errand,
which things he would frequently write down in a paper for that purpose, that
those who were employed might read it, and so be enabled pertinently to pray
for one another. And he did much desire to make these days, and indeed all
Ordinances very serious, and to rescue them from that formality that ordinarily
accompanies them, being little content with the work done, unless he found
something done thereby upon his own and others hearts. Great benefit and
comfort he knew was to be had in these ordinances, and he would not rest
contentedly without it; but diligently observed the success of them, and upon
Gods withdrawing from him, made it his business to seek his God until he found
him again, and the Cause also of his withdrawing.

The strength of affection which he had in Gods worship was discernable to all
that joined with him, so that he seemed Deum toto ictu animae tetigisse, and
particularly in singing of Psalms, which he did with such an apparent intention
of mind and heart as is not ordinary, and diverse yet living shall never forget
with what faith and fervency he would pronounce Amen, Amen, at the end of a
prayer.

And after holy duties his heart was (commonly) greatly lifted up in the ways
of the Lord, and though he fared never so well in it, yet he had not done with
an Ordinance when it was over, but had the heart unto, and the art of improving
an enlarged heart and would then with a Dexterity and Sincerity of his own put
on to holy discourse; as not only publicly urging things pro forma, but would
follow it after with all his might, as if (being the Lords Ambassador) he
waited for an answer to him that had sent him.

A most unwearied man he was in Religious Duties, and was never observed to
give our, though sometimes on special occasions they continued all night
therein. After one of these days of special Communion with God, he retired
with two or three beloved friends in private, and there moved each of them to
name some one thing they would chiefly desire of the Lord, and so each of them
prayed over all those particulars that were cast in. And the impressions and
affections raised in their hearts by this occasion, will not easily be
forgotten by such as yet survive.

And for the increase of Knowledge and Holiness, he held up a Conference to his
own and peoples great benefit, and that no time might be lost, nor any ones
Mite neglected, he would take the answers of those that were absent at the
stated times, when he occasionally and opportunely met them, and sometimes
before the whole Assembly were gathered together at days of Prayer; so that he
was always doing and designing the best advantage of the peoples Souls upon
all occasions.

Whilst he was Minister at Astbury, it pleased the Lord to give him four of the
five Children which the Lord made him Father of; concerning whose births he
thus spakes in the faithful Memorials which he left. The first Will I made was
suddenly after Marriage [he means the first formed Sealed Will] and in it spoke
of a Son Samuel, as if I had seen him by faith, though he was not then in
being; and it was a full quarter of a year before we had sensible hopes of a
Child, which was given us about March 9. 1653. at which time the Orchard was
planting. In May following we came to set up housekeeping at Astbury, where God
gave us the birth of our asking of God, 1 Samuel 1.20. Samuel born, Nov. 13.
about eleven of Clock at night, Baptized the Sabbath day following; chiefly
called Samuel, because asked of God by Father, Mother, by both, and many
Christian friends there and elsewhere, with great ends propounded at such times
of Prayer, viz. that he might be one to bear Gods Name here in his Church on
Earth, and one to take up a Room prepared for him in glory. The Lord be Surety
for thee my Son! The Lord forbid thou should come short of these ends,
prayed thy Father. Thus did he set upon his head the Remembrance of the Mercy
of God in his Birth, as the Servants of God of old did make the very names of
their Children, the means of remembering Gods signal mercies to them, and so
constant occasions and provocations to Gods praise, which this gracious Man
abounded in. Again -- In the first year of his life, he was by sickness twice
under the sentence of death; but Prayer that obtained him, kept him.

Another great Deliverance to this Child he recorded, which if it affect his
heart when he is able to consider it, as it did his Fathers (who would make
large Narratives thereof, and beg the serious praises of his friends for it
with extraordinary affections) it will be of no small advantage to his Soul to
in dear him to the God of his life. Thus he records it -- Memorandum, That July
10. 1656. the Lord prevented the death of my Son Samuel, which in all
probability might have been with my own hand, bowling a stone with all my might
toward the Child, whether I saw him before it went out of my hands or no, I
know not; but its motion was directly toward his face, coming up the steps in
the Garden-walk, and the visible means of prevention in Gods hand was another
stone that turned it out of the Pathway within a few steps of him. This was an
awakening Providence to me and my Wife that day, and sent us to our God on our
knees, partly for Humiliation, partly for Gratulation. And this stone he kept
in his Study, and (without Superstition) made it his remembrancer to continue
his thankfulness to God for this great Deliverance. And O that Parents would in
this sort transmit to their Children an account of Gods dealings with them,
when they knew him not! what obligations would it lay upon them to love and
serve the Lord, when grown to age and understanding? That the Generation to
come might know them, even the Children that should be born, who should arise
and declare them to their Children, That they might set their hope in God, and
not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments, Psalm. 78.6, 7.

Of his second Child he thus says. My Daughter Lydia ( so called for that good
woman's sake, Acts 16.14.) was born at Astbury, March 29. 1656. and there
baptized, Apr. 6. etc.

My second Son John was born Sept. 1. 1658. about six in the morning, at which
time Mr. R.M. (a dear Brother and Fellow Laborer) and J might be at Prayer for
my wife, as I understood at my return. And he was no less a Son of Prayers. The
Lord make him a Son of his blessings, taking him with the rest into that
Everlasting Covenant, Jerem. 32.40. John was baptized at Astbury, Sept. 12.
when I gave him this name John, and prayed, The Lord be gracious to him.

Our second Daughter Sarah was born October. 8. 1660. and I baptized her at
Astbury, October. 23. by the token of that word then and there, Joh. 3.5. etc.

When this Winter was past, this Holy man removed to Whitley, May 17. 1661. of
whose success there, he himself gives this account. -- After some time I found
that God was with me in Ordinances, to make Conversion work; and in Providence
to prevent evils, and to reach good things to us. Let it be remembered to his
praise, that October. 23. 1661. my Son John was within a step of drowning, and
Providence ordered me within fight at that time, though I had been from home
the fortnight before. And not an hour after, my Daughter Sarah was almost
choked with a thread, to our great affrightment; but we saw the Lords hand
very notable in her preservation, as we had done the Spring before from
sickness in answer to Prayers, Psalm. 103.4.

Another merciful preservation of his Son John he subjoyns in these words:
Memorandum, That our Son John had a notable escape and preservation from
drowning, as he and his Brother were coming from School, Jun. 18. 1664. but
blessed be God, who is present, when Parents are absent.

Here he continued laboring in the Lords Vineyard unto Aug. 24. 1662. at which
time he took his Civil Death with many of his Brethren, being unsatisfied to
Conform as the Act of Uniformity then required. But no man took his Death with
less reflection upon Superiors, or more grief for that affliction. But yet
there he continued, laboring for the peoples advantage with all his strength,
and was a singular blessing to the Neighborhood round about, having his heart
uncessantly bent toward the good of Souls. And the Neighboring Gentry, though
of a different Persuasion, yet offered him not the least molestation in his
honest endeavors, as being convinced of the Innocence and Peaceableness of his
Spirit, and uprightness of his ends therein.

After this his youngest Child was born, which he thus records; My Daughter
Esther was born, Jan. 28. 1663. and baptized at Whitley, Jan. 31. and called
Esther, because hidden. Hidden, as to Conception until time of life; and hid,
as to the time of Travel. It was then prayed, Lord give her the hid treasure of
his fear, Isa. 33.6. and make her a hid treasure to his house and ours also!

And having thus made use of these his Memorials, we shall add what himself
said of the writing of them in these words; The occasion of making and writing
this Book, was a thought I had, what was become of all my Forefathers, and
what price I should set upon one of their Manuscripts concerning the State of
our Family, Nation or Church of God in it 500 years since. Whereupon I resolved
this Work for my Sons sake, and Posterities imitation; when it may be said of
us in this Generation, as of Israel once, in that Exodus 1.6. And Joseph dyed
and all his Brethren, and all that Generation. I John Machin, called by him who
separated me from the Womb, ( Gal. 1.15.) to the hope of having my name in the
Book of Life, and likewise to be an Ambassador of my Lord Christ Jesus, was in
my great Masters work at Astbury in Cheshire, Anno 1655. when I first set Pen
hereunto. And so he continued it, observing things remarkable toward him and
his Family to the last year of his life, which we have made use of in diverse
places of this Narrative.

And now having brought him within the view of his Fathers house, before we
give an account of the last part, wherein he took possession of his expected
Crown, we shall give you his just Character. 1. In his Personal, 2. his
Relative Capacity.

I. In himself; 1, he was of an excellent Spirit, in the sense of Pro. 17.27.
as dispassionate as most we ever knew. One that lived with him for some time,
says truly of him, That he knew not that ever he saw him transported with
passion; but angry he would be at Sin, yet still exactly after his Lord and
Masters passion, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. yet
his Reproofs were always so moderated with Love and Compassion, that the
Offender could not but see, that he intended them for his good.

2. He had good natural Parts, and was no Novice in all that learning which was
necessary for his work. For though he was more abundant in public Preaching
than most others, which must needs hinder his Studies, yet what time of vacancy
he had from this work, he diligently redeemed for his Book, and took in
Philosophy, the Tongues, History, Positive and Practical Divinity, in his
course of Study; being never well, unless in Study, or in immediate Duties, or
holy Conference: though (as it was once said of Plato's Household Stuff) it was
truly said of all his Studies, There was nihil in pompam, omne in usum. And
like one of the Architects in Plutarch, who when the other had made an
artificial discourse of his skill to contrive a new building, before those that
were to make their choice of them; He only said, All that this man has said, I
can do. So this Holy Man had the Knowledge of Doing; what others could
learnedly Dispute and Discourse of, he could learnedly live in every point,
that became a Learned Preacher.

3. He had an extraordinary measure of Holiness and Heavenliness; according to
the Observation that a Judicious Divine long since made of him That he had more
than ordinary degrees of Sanctification. He was of a quick understanding in the
fear of the Lord, and had the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season
to the state of all Souls. This was his Masterpiece, and was naturalized to
him.

He had a singular ingenuity in improving Scripture Similitudes, and every
Occurrence with unimaginable dexterity, each Tree, and Bird, and Stone, would
be a Text whereon he would aptly enlarge; having a mighty wit for the
Spiritualizing of every thing, and gathering occasion of good Converse in every
Company, and almost upon every matter, and it was apparent, That out of the
abundance of his heart his mouth spoke.

His holy jealousy and fear of himself was very great. A dear friend that well
knew him, writes thus of him. Never man more watchful against Relapses, nor
more jealous to maintain his first love to the height. I have sometimes told
him, that it was not usual for Converts to retain that Land flood of comfort,
that intention of zeal, and extension of affection which flourished in him, and
was preserved to the height; he must expect an abatement in time, and the
Current thereof to be contracted and settled in a narrower Channel. He often
reflected on these words, Ore tenus, and in his Letters intimating he was what
he was heretofore, not without an admiration of supporting Grace. Thereunto he
ascribed all he was. And indeed he was so habituated unto Spiritual Communion
with his God, that he could not patiently bear his withdrawings, and was far
more sensibly and sooner aware of it, than many others are, that can to their
great loss admit of other delights instead of his face and favor; but this
Holy Man did most eagerly seek for him upon all occasions, till he found Him
whom his Soul loved.

He was a great Observer of the frame and bent of his heart at all times; a
worthy Minister writes thus of him. I have admired at the constant frame of his
Spirit; he was not subject to that deadness and indisposedness as other good
men seem to be; his heart was continually burning with an holy zeal. Take a
taste of his excellent sweet frame of heart in this short Letter-passage to a
Friend. My dear, dear, dear Brother, I pray thee, I pray thee report the loving
kindness of the Lord unexpressible unto a poor vile empty altogether
undeserving worm, for I have found an answer this day, this day more than ever
to our Prayers, and can say, the Lords work will on, though hell say no: and
still Believe, Preach, Pray and Believe, Lam. 3.25. I am constrained to say,
Isa. 63.7. Neither thou nor any of my friends can conceive how good the Lord is
to me, even to me. I pray thee and others think and study how good he is to me,
to me, to me.

And a constant watch he kept over his thoughts, especially of his last
thoughts that he slept with, and his first thoughts that he waked with; and
usually they were some precious Scripture or other, which he would discourse of
to his friends with great alacrity.

He kept a Diary of his Life, wherein every day he wrote in Characters where he
was, what Scriptures he found any sweetness from, what was the state of his
Soul toward God; and such other remarkable passages that did occurr each day,
from the year 1650. to the year he dyed.

His love to the Word of God was superlative: it was his Meditation day and
night. He did constantly in a morning pitch upon some Verse, which he would
endeavor to infuse into his heart; ever unwilling to leave it, till he had
sucked some virtue from it. He was chewing by Meditation the 119th. Psalm, at
the time of his sickness, daily squeezing the virtue of one verse thereof into
his Soul, as appears by his Diary; and this he did, not formally as a task, but
with that effectual seriousness and relish, that his family at home, and
friends at a distance, in his Letters might perceive exactly, what dainties he
had tasted. And at every vacant time, he would be looking for a word, and would
find out by the casual turning down a leaf in his Bible (which was his usual
way) such passages as were very remarkable and not observed before. A Scripture
thus met with, was as food to him, exceeding sweet to his taste, he would make
much of it, and usually would not leave it, till he had improved it to the good
of others by speaking or writing, that others might see what he saw, and feel
what he felt in the word of God.

Another usage he had also, which showed him to be both a good Textuary, and a
good Christian; and that was usually to take leave with his Friends and
Relations, by leaving some Scripture with them, and those most suitable to
their condition; nay he hardly sent commendations to a friend, but it was
accompanied with some pertinent Scripture, that he seemed to breath no other
air but Scripture. His Bible was his constant Companion in the day, and
usually his Pillow at night; and many scores of emphatical lively expressions
he had found therein, which the constant reading and diligence of others could
never light on. And wherever he came, he was engraving some Scripture or other
on the Mantle-posts, and Walls, and Trees; which was so constant and peculiar a
course with him, that his acquaintance often knew he had been in such a place, by
the marks he usually left. His design therein being, the advantage of all men's
Souls; that the very novelty of seeing such things, might set people upon
enquiring and looking those those Scriptures in their Bibles, not knowing what
good one Verse of the Scripture (thus met with) might do upon a Soul, if God
set it on. At least he found this advantage to himself, that when he came to a
review of them, he was put in mind of that frame of heart he had when he was
there before; and might taste over again, what he had before felt, in that
passage of the Word of God. He seldom wrote a Note or Letter, but he made it
up with some suitable Scripture (the word of God dwelling plentifully in him)
and in the Memorials forementioned, he inserts Scriptures upon every occasion,
saying in the conclusion, The Texts of Scripture herein mentioned, are best
worth thy finding and noting in thy life, as they were in mine.

His moderation was remarkable to all sorts of godly people, though of
differing judgments; his heart and heat being wholly taken up with the great
and necessary parts of Religion, that all true Christians agreed in: and making
the substance of Religion his work and business, he never had leisure to
trouble himself with controverted circumstances, nor would put his Soul out of
tune with such things, as had caused so much jarring and disharmony among
Christians. He was never (or very seldom, and then not out of choice) heard to
discourse of the dividing Controversies of the times.

A peculiar trial he was exercised with, soon after his entrance on his
Ministerial work, and that was by strange and horrible apprehensions in the
night season, as if he were cut in pieces with knives, or the like; and he was
in as real agony and distress, as if he had felt the pain of such torment
indeed. Perhaps it proceeded from natural causes, occasioned by his
extraordinary pains which did heat his body, and that might influence upon his
fancy and disturb it, and thereby beget such apprehensions in him. But he still
apprehended it to be the buffetings of Satan: they usually followed days of
great pains, and days of great inward comforts, and he was often forced by
them to leap out of his bed in the night, and go to Prayer for ease and
delivery. He would very pathetically bewayl those gloomy nights, and (what
cause soever they proceeded from) they were great occasions to realize the
apprehensions of hell to him, and to keep him humble.

II. In his Relative Duties, he was abundantly diligent and faithful.

1. In his Family, he walked in a perfect way in the midst of his house. There
he constantly read the Scripture: a portion of the Old Testament in the
morning, and of the New Testament in the evening, and sung some verses of the
Psalms in order, at every Duty. After Reading, he examined each one present
what they remembered and observed, and then would open and enlarge upon each
ones portion, and also on what was most observable and practical in that
Scripture. Neither did he circumscribe Religion to Family duties (as many do,
who from morning, to evening Prayer scarce ever think or speak of spiritual
things) but had familiarized holy Discourse in his house all the day long, as
there was any occasion or opportunity. He always repeated at home the Sermons
he heard abroad. The Lords-days Sermon, he used to repeat the Saturday
afternoon following, or some other Sermon to prepare for the ensuing Sabbath.
On the Lord's Day evening he would take his Children in private, and there
instruct them, and there teach them how to pray. He constantly Catechized his
Children and Servants twice in the week, causing them to get some verses of the
Scripture and of their Catechism daily by heart. He often had private Fasts
with his family only, and was well versed in secret humiliation also. His
ardent desires and endeavors after the Salvation of his Children and other
Kindred are further evident, in a serious Discourse to his Son, on 1 Chronicles.
28.9. which he has prepared; and another, which he called, A word to my merely
Natural Friends, on Isa. 55.7. which (if not with this Narrative) may in due
time see the light, to the great advantage of his Relations and others; wherein
the precious breathings of his Soul after his Children and Friends in the flesh
are largely manifested. And upon this account he gave twenty of Mr. Baxters
Calls to the Unconverted amongst his Kindred and Servants; in diverse whereof he
framed and wrote such pertinent Dialogues, as were most suitable to their Souls
Estate.

2. In his Ministry indefatigable. He was in Labors often, in Journeyings often.
We may truly apply to him, that which the Apostle said of Timothy, Phil. 2.20.
We have no man like minded that does naturally care for the State of Souls. His
mighty forwardness and earnestness in this work, his traveling, and toyling,
and procuring all the help he could for the work, was so great, that it could
not have been more, if he had foreseen the shortness of his own days, or the
length of our night. And the more universal was the influence of his labors,
in that he was strangely stirred up to Preach in several parts of the Country;
Ministers and people generally promoting and accepting his holy and sincere
endeavors, where envy or prejudice did not manifestly interpose.

When other Ministers or himself have been employed in the usual courses of the
day, he would often choose rather to repeat the Sermon to the people at Noon,
than go to his Dinner; according to the pattern of his dear Master before him,
Joh. 4.33, 34. And indeed sometimes his zeal to the work of God would carry him
to do more than his body or the peoples convenience could well bear; but as it
was sincerely meant by him, so it was generally well taken by them, and God
made it answerable in the event.

It is said of Mr. Latimer, that when he had reproved some peccant persons in
his time somewhat sharply, and was complained of for lack of discretion, he
would reply, that he was glad they had no allegation against him, but want of
discretion; it being evident thereby, that the substance of his business was
right: so for this our glorified Brother, the worst that could be laid to his
charge was, sometimes want of Prudence in respect of the length and frequency
of his labors. A thing he might well be excused in, when so few transgress on
that hand: many being too wise to be serious, too exact to remit the least of
their conceited neatness for the benefit of their hearers, or to go out of
their rode to fetch a Soul in to Christ.

For this good Man, such was his heavenly spirit and way in his work, that
though the matter he brought was ordinary, yet the manner he delivered it in
was not ordinary, and his success was great in the Conversion of many Souls.
One says that well knew him, and often accompanied him: I cannot forget how the
people after a day of Preaching, would meet him with tears in their eyes, some
following him, many thanking him for his pains, and by their Countenances
showing they had met with God in the Ordinance. And this is sure, That he that
wins Souls is truly wise. If that great Man on his deathbed could profess,
that one Soul Converted by his means, would be a greater honor and comfort to
him, than all the Greatness and Honors he had enjoyed: with what glory is this
Holy Man gone off the Stage, that was an Instrument in the hand of Gods Spirit
to Convert many, and to Convince and Quicken more?

His Converse was a continual Sermon. He never went, but the Minister, and the
warm-hearted Christian went with him. He was the same out of the Pulpit as in
it. A lively Comment on the Apostles words, Let your Speech be always seasoned
with Salt, that it may minister grace to the hearers: far from that common
formality of most Preachers, that as if they had left all their Divinity and
Heat in the Pulpit, come down and talk like other men; which tempts people to
rest little affected with those Truths, that seem so little to affect the
Preacher himself, and to hold those things but mere notions, when (like the
Actor of a Tragedy that has done his part) the Minister talks and walks as if
he were unconcerned in the solemn things he has treated on.

Some that have traveled with him a journey (which usually were upon some
religious account) have been even ravished in their souls with his heavenly
expressions, and to prayer he would immediately go either publicly in the
Family, or privately in his Chamber, in every house where he came.

He had an undaunted boldness in the reproving of a sinner: How have some of us
seen him in an Inn upon his journey, Thunder-striking a Swearer in this
manner, Who was it there, that durst abuse the Name of the God of Heaven? And
he would ever on purpose, when talking with his friends on the way, choose some
weighty word to speak, as he met with people that passed by, that so it might
stick, and this bread of his that was cast on the waters, would some times
return to him after many days.

He had a singular presence of heart and matter, to speak to whomsoever he met,
and great condescension to explain himself, wherein any did not understand him;
as once in a Snowy day, meeting suddenly with a man driving his horses, that
saluted him, and said, well met Sir; I but, says he, we shall be better met if
we meet in Heaven, and such like. Few poor ever went from his door, without a
most powerful spiritual alms; and he would order them a larger allow a^^e,
that would admit of his caelestial relief.

But especially his faculty excelled, in Discoursing with people on the way,
with whom he would very handsomely insinuate, into very material and yet
familiar discourse of Eternal things, find out their ignorance, mightily amaze
and convince them, and lay thereby the happy foundation of future acquaintance
upon this best count, which practices of his may shame and teach us: for alas!
what through the earthlyness, and vanity, and what through the bashfulness of
our hearts, Christ and Heaven are generally excepted out of our discourse. We
can speak of any thing but the soul, of any person but of Jesus, and of any
place but of Heaven; and it is almost a crime for a Christian to talk of
Christiani^^. What an unreasonable thing is it, that we who pretend for Heaven,
should not as readily, ordinarily, and cheerfully fall into discourse concernig
Gods word, and our Salvation, as the worldlings and wicked ones can of their
Lands and Lusts? No other talk but what leads toward God shall be worth
talking over again in the Kingdom of Heaven. Diverse Dialogues that were on such
occasions framed by him, are dispersed in the hands of friends, that would (if
published) show his excellent Genius this way, and perhaps stir us all up to be
more fruitful in such discourse. One Instance hereof is remarkable. Riding one
morning to a Lecture, he met with some young men carrying their Cocks to a
Cockfight; he overtaking them, dropped this word to one of them: Friend, our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ never came into the world to set up such sports as
these. These words and some further discourses (though the young man went on to
his sport that day) stuck like an arrow in his liver, and he could not be at
quiet, till he had learned who this Minister was, and after gained acquaintance
with him, and thereupon laid these and his other sins to heart, and made an
happy change of his courses.

He was a zealous improver of good society. His ordinary visits, were seldom
finished without prayer with his friends before they parted. And when diverse
good people were all night together, he would be tying them as it were end to
end, and engaging them to pray one after another, often to midnight, or else to
produce their several evidences for Heaven and would sometimes raise the
company an hour before day in the morning to wrestle and weep together, that
the fire might not go out upon the hearth of their souls being so constantly
blown up; yea the very crumbs of piety that fell from him at his table, were
most refreshing and heavenly, and a plain argument, that it was his meat and
drink to do his Fathers will and finish his work.

He had most ingenious devices and witty artifices, flowing from his rooted
affection to God, whereby after some Solemn days, he would engage his
Christian friends to a closer conversation. Take an Instance or two hereof, as
we find them left on record -- Articles betwixt Christ and two souls.

1. That we be his willing, loving and obedient Spouses.

2. That we labor by all means to know more of his mind, and then to tell it
one to another, and draw to the practice of it.

3. That we be always jealous, left each other take his room, and to be
indifferent, and moderate in everything, and every one, but to Him and His.

4. That whatever creatures are betwixt us, they be improved to highest
advantage betwixt Christ and our souls.

5. That we connive not at sin in each other, but be tender of one another
souls and bodies.

6. That we love and live each day as the last.

7. That we faithfully endeavor performance of each others will, while living
and when dead, so far as Reason and Religion may bind.

8. That we be in every condition more willing, to go live with Christ our
Husband, than stay here one with another for pleasure sake.

9. That we endeavor seasonableness and suitablenes^ in every duty, etc.

And another to this effect -- Seabridge Oct. 8. where His name was that day
recorded. Before the Lord and in his strength, I promise to draw near to God,
believing he will draw near to me. I pass away and part with my own power to
Him, that I may be His, not another. Subscribing with heart and hand, praying
and believing the Lord will undertake for me, that I never go back in a
thought; Or else this will stand in full force against me at that great day to
come, Phil. 4.13. H. N. Cant. 8.5. J. M. Psalm. 119.106. J. M. Zach. 8.21. M. M.
Psalm. 119.80. N.B. Isa. 38.10. E. H. 2 Cor. 3.5. etc.

He was one that set great store by the prayers of his Friends, and was a very
faithful remembrancer of them that desired his prayers; which he used to do
with that heartiness, and sympathy, and inlargedness of heart, that it would
much work upon their hearts, and engage them to more seriousness in their own
business, and in affection to him, that so kindly concerned himself in their
affairs. And with great fervor would he plead with God in their absence, not
only to satisfy his conscience and promise of remembering them, but with strong
cries to prevail for them. Besides that frequent course he held, of putting on
persons to tell him before prayer began, what they would have chiefly begged
for them at the Throne of Grace, by which they were sent into their own souls,
to study their inward and present condition.

A dear friend upon this account says thus. He gave this Rule touching praying
for friends, which I have, endeavored since to make my directory in that Case.
Always, when you think on your Friends, let it be with a praying thought. He
would sometimes have his intimate friends write down in his Day-book, and so
mutually, what especial thing they should intercede for in one another behalf
till their next meeting.

His Letters were frequent and full of Heaven, commonly setting time apart for
writing such letters, as he was in arrear, and seldom upon any business but
Religion was interwoven; and such plenty of sweet Scriptures and postscripts,
that sometimes some Scripture would be indorsed on the outside of his letters,
when sent by a friends hand. In this useful part of Friendship he was abundant
and very profitable; there remaining yet (as is verily believed) many hundreds
of his good letters in the hands of friends, wherein was scarce a syllable of
any business but Religion. O how much good might many Able and Holy Divines do
this way! to wit, by serious letters to their Kindred, and Acquaintance, yea
even to strangers, which would do good not to one only, but many, yea, to the
generation to come. How much does the Church of God owe to the letters of some
modern and primitive Divines and others? Since a great part of our New
Testament is the Letters of the Apostles, the heavenly plainness of whose style
this good Man did much imitate, and it is well observed, that the best part of
the works of famous Writers is their Epistles.

And lastly, he was eminent in Real Charity: he had a faithful sympathy with
those that were in any strait and affliction, and a ready hand to help them. He
was far from that clumbzy frozen and strait-hearted manner of many, that are
ready to say, go and be warmed, and go and be clothed; that are readier to
censure their Brethrens necessities, and increase their burdens by reproaches,
than to reach out their hand to their assistance. No, he was a doing Christian
according to, yea, and beyond his power. In his accounts to his Father from the
University, they seldom found less than twelve pence a week to the poor,
besides sometimes half a Crown at a time. And afterward it was his delight to
engage others, and to contribute himself in a liberal manner, twenty shillings,
and five pound at a time to Charitable uses; sometimes to make a stock for such
as were poor and pious, sometimes to help a Minister or other out of his
straits, for which the bowels of many have blessed God for him in diverse places.

In short, he was a Starr of the first Magnitude in the impartial judgment of
those that thoroughly knew him. Thus says an Eminent Divine to him in a
familiar Letter. Dear Brother, I earnestly desire correspondence with thee; Thy
Letters are precious and weighty to my Soul; Thou art more in my heart and eye
and thoughts, than all the acquaintance I have in the world; I have seen that
in thee, that has no little convinced me of the Reality of Religion. These are
not the words of a flatterer, but the overflowings of a sincere heart, etc.

When we view him in his Natural and Moral accomplishments; in his graces, in
his Relations, in his public and private behavior, and in his true humility
and sincerity which crowned all the rest; we must needs say, he feared God
above many, and has left but few such Ministers behind him.

He had apprehensions of his Death long before it came. In a Letter May 1659.
concerning an Old Disciple, this Clause: Will he not let me see him before I
dye? In another November. 1659. these words; Lam. 3.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 32. To
which let thoughts be directed, when no more is to be seen or heard of me, but
that I am thy Friend in store, not lost but laid up, J. M. In March 1663, he
complains of frequent dejectedness and melancholy. And this passage he had in a
letter June 28. 1664. I have been very melancholy some while by fits, what this
precedes I know not. But the all-wise God, whose ways are past finding out,
well knew, that the shadows of the Evening were coming upon him.

For intending shortly to remove to Seabridge, he took in his way the house of
a worthy Gentleman, and there treated on these words Acts 20.24. Neither count
I my life dear unto my self, etc. which he studied and preached as his last
farewell to this world in a sickly condition, having spent many Sermons before
on Rev. 22.3, 4, 5. sweet preparations to life everlasting. He grew worse and
worse at Seabridge, and it proved an high malignant Fever. His Wife was sent
for, who found him in his bed, and then he told her, he was ill, but whether it
were life or death he would not choose, his Father should choose for him. The
season for opening a vein, through the Physicians absence from home, was mist,
and so his distemper prevailed. Looking his Face in the Glass, he brake out
very affectionately into these words, Ah Adam, Adam, what have thou done? what
a beautiful happy Creature wast thou, but now how poor and sorrowful, etc. art
thou? Ah Adam, what have thou done? which greatly affected some that were
present with him.

But his distemper grew higher, whereby his Spirits were deadned in him, so
that when his Wife and Children were about him, and she said; Love, thou say
nothing to me, nor to thy Children; he only answered, That he had said to her
and them too. How good therefore is it to observe, what Parents and Husband say
to us, forasmuch as we know not, which counsel may be their last, and must
stand for their deathbed charge unto us.

On the 4th. of September, being the Lords day, though through his distemper he
was scarce sensible, yet perceiving it to be the Lords day, he would needs be
helped up, and held up with pillows, that he might kneel down and offer at
prayer, though he was disabled from performace.

On Tuesday Sept. 6. in the evening this holy Man breathed his last, being the
17th day of his sickness, and in the 40th year of his age; and was buried Sept.
8. at Newcastle with a particular Encomium by the Preacher, and the profound
grief of all the Congregation. The truth is, this world was not worthy of him,
scarce any that began no sooner, and lived no longer, having done so much good
in the world, as he did in his capacity.

It is the sense and character of a learned and pious Divine and at this time a
Dignitary in the Church -- I am so well satisfied as to his extraordinary piety
in the general, which I never yet heard, or believe he departed from, that I
wish my everlasting portion may be with him -- And after -- To conclude, I
never knew one more public spirited, more sensible of men's spiritual
necessities, and more ready (to his ability) to supply them, more zealous for
Gods glory, more delighted, incessant, importunate, and succesful in prayer,
and more thankfully sensible of the returns thereof, than this Holy Person was,
of whom this degenerate world was not worthy, and therefore having been
abundant in the work of the Lord, God has satisfied him with never ending
experience, that his Labor (from which he now rests) may not be in vain in the
Lord. The following of whose example will be the best amends, and greatest End
of writing this his Life.

FINIS.

