Dr. PETTER's SERMON, Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY OF THE County of
KENT, November. 17. School.

Veneris xviii die November. School.
IT is Ordered at a General Meeting of the Stewards for the SOCIETY of the
County of Kent, That their hearty Thanks be given to Dr. Petter, for his Sermon
Preached on the 17th Instant, at St. Mary le Bow; and that He be desired to
Print the same.

Robert Rowland, Treasurer.

A SERMON, Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY OF THE NATIVES OF THE County
of KENT, November. the 17th. School.

At St. Mary le Bow, LONDON.

By John Petter, D. D. Rector of Greens-Norton, in Northamptonshire, and
Chaplain to her late Majesty's Regiment of Horse, Commanded by the Honorable
Major General Lumley.

LONDON, Printed by J. Dawks, for J. Back, (Bookseller to the said Honorable
Society,) at the Black-Boy on London Bridge, School.

TO MY MUCH Esteemed Countrymen, Mr. Robert Rowland. Mr. William Baker. Mr.
John Pettet. Mr. Edward Stephens. Mr. William Pemble. Mr. Samuel Broughton. Mr.
Matthew Tongue. Mr. Thomas Austen. Mr. Robert Smith. Mr. Richard Watts. Mr.
Richard Cook. Mr. Peter Weston.
STEWARDS OF THE Kentish-Feast.
Gentlemen,
Your great readiness to do the utmost to make the Honorable Society of ^our
County, both Lasting and Useful, was a sufficient Motive to me to contribute
all in my Power, to promote so Generous and so good a Design; and that this
following Discourse, Preached before the same, and now made Public at your
Request, may produce these Effects, is the hearty Wish of him who will gladly
Embrace any Opportunity of advancing the Honor and Welfare of our County, and
of convincing you with how much Sincerity and Respect he is,

Gentlemen, Your Faithful Friend, Affectionate Countryman, and Humble Servant.
John Petter.

A SERMON Preached at the Kentish-Feast.
Esaias XXXII. 8. But the liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal.
things he shall stand.
THE Verse which I have chose for my Text, contains the Character and Reward of
the Liberal Man, and ends with that part of the Chapter taken up in Prophetic
Expressions of a new Government, wherein Virtue should be exalted and Piety so
cherished and caressed by the Favor and Countenance of the Prince, that such
Men alone as were distinguishable by the rectitude and integrity of their
Principles and Actions, should be advanced to Places of Dignity and Honor;
that none but Ministers so qualified should sit at the Helm, or administer
Justice to the People; and this News was so much the more joyfully received,
and had this Advantage on its side, to render it acceptable and welcome, That it
was predicted in Ahaz his time, it had his unjust Reign for a Foyl, to bring
some new accession of Satisfaction to the whole Nation; it then felt, very
sensibly felt and smarted under the Iniquity and Injustice of those who were
raised to, and set up in Places of Honor and Trust, and for the Administration
of Justice: And it was then, as the Rabbines and Commentators on this Chapter
tell us, that the Prophet very seasonably, very compassionately raised the
Spirits of the Oppressed, by foretelling them the happiness of the state they
should soon be in, by intimating to them the Government of the Righteous
Hezekiah, who was to succeed his Father Ahaz, and that after the Deseat of
Senacherib, King of Assyria, the Government should be so Established, That
Justice should thenceforth flow down like a River, that the Poor and Oppressed
should be relieved and refreshed, which the Prophet expresses in such
Similitude and Elegancy, in such Metaphors and Schemes, and Beauties of Speech,
as are convincing to show, that plainness of Language was not sufficient to set
off the energy and life of his Thoughts on this Occasion; and so you have it in
the second verse of this Chapter, And a man shall be as an hiding place from
the wind, and a covert from the tempest, us Rivers of waters in a dry place, as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land: And after this he represents the
happy state of Religion and Virtue, as if this change of Government should new
model the very Minds of the People; so that the blind and inconsiderate, those
who were unwilling to understand their own Duty, or to hearken to any Precepts
concerning it, should be disposed to receive Instruction and new Impressions of
Piety and Goodness: And in the next place, he very artfully, very rhetorically
sets off the Liberal Man, by comparing him with the vile Man and the Churl,
that is (as Expositors agree, and as it appears by the comparison of them with
the Liberal Man) the Niggard or Covetous Wretches; to set the Liberal Man in a
true light, to draw his Picture the more beautifully, he sets it off with
shadows, even with the blackness of the Characters of the vile person and
Churl, and adds, That in the new modeled state, they should not be encouraged,
they should not be ceremoniously flattered nor soothed by the Name and
Character of Liberal Men, as they were in the former Reign, and his Reason is
very good, because whatever show and color of Religion and Justice they make,
they contrive to make empty the Soul of the Hungry, and to make the drink of
the Thirsty to fail: And again, their Instruments are Evil, and they devise
wicked Devices to destroy the Poor, etc. But the liberal man devises liberal
things, and by liberal things he shall stand. But as the Kings that reigned in
Righteousness under the Law, shadowed forth Christ, the King of Peace, so the
Virtues then recommended, had a peculiar tendency and respect to those of the
Gospel; they were lame and imperfect till they grew up by degrees, 'till they
were heightened and spiritualized, and arrived at perfect Maturity under the
Occonomy of the Gospel; 'till Men, after some Ages of Instruction and
Discipline, were refined and come up to the measure of the fullness of the
stature of Christ: Then Liberality wore the Name of Charity and the liberal and
merciful Man was to receive Mercy. To do right therefore to the Text, in the
sense of the and Law Gospel, as well as to the Occasion of this present
Assembly.

I shall show, First, what Obligations lie on us all to be Liberal and
Charitable.

Secondly, How advantageous and necessary it is that persons of Rank and
Quality, and Fortune, should distinguish themselves in this respect.

Thirdly, What a vast Improvement of this Grace it is to devise Liberal Things,
by entering into SOCIETIES.

Fourthly and Lastly, The Reward of the Liberal Man, by liberal things he shall
stand; or, in the Gospel sense, the merciful man shall receive mercy.

But before I speak to these Particulars, I think it may not be improper to
premise these two things:

1st. To show what Liberality is.

2dly. What it is to devise Liberal Things.

Now Liberality is a Communication of what we have to others, either for the
benefit of their Souls or Bodies, or both.

2dly. To devise Liberal Things, is to study and consider what Liberality is,
and what Liberal Things are to be done, and to conclude that we will do them;
for thus much the Original Word signifies, it denoting Counsel and
Deliberation, and Conclusion upon Premises.

Having thus laid down these things, I shall proceed to speak to the
Particulars beforementioned, and show,

1. What Obligations lie on us all to be Liberal and Charitable; and this we
are obliged to,

First, From Instinct and mere animal Motion.

Secondly, From Reason.

Thirdly, From Revelation.

Fourthly, From the Example of Christ.

1st. We are obliged to be Charitable from Instinct and mere animal Motion.

Pity and Compassion are so interwoven with our temper and constitution, that
Nature must suffer no small violence to divest it self of the native softness
with which it was born; when we see our Brother in distress and in labor, we
naturally sympathize, as if we would lessen the burden, by dividing the weight
and bearing a share in it. I cannot say whether our tenderness can easily
resist, sure I am, uncorrupted Nature cannot but be touched and moved when such
Objects present themselves, it seems to be made to go Mechanically, like some
Machines, that move the better by the greater weight: when we see Humanity and
our own Nature sinking under the pressure, it is but relieving our selves to
help and raise it up; we our selves suffer in Effigy, we rise and spring
against the weight, and are mightily eased at the unburthening of another. We
are impelled by an inborn desire of bringing Nature to the Primitive Level, and
as we feel a certain pleasure at the lowering of the proud and haughty,
perhaps, because they arrogate and usurp Superiority, and get so very much
beyond the equality of state wherein we were created; so are we in trouble and
distress at the sinking of others so much below that level and condition; so
that to succor those that are in Want, to feed the Hungry, and cloth the
Naked, is to redeem them from the Miseries the Fall of Adam has plunged them
into; it is in a manner to re-establish them in their Original state, it is as
much as in us lies, to take away all Wants, Infirmities and Diseases, and to
induce a sort of Immunity from them; it is exempting for a time from Death here,
as a certain pledge and earnest of an Immortality hereafter. And if we are
carried by a natural impulse, and desire to propagate our Kind, and to love and
fancy what we have, as it were thus created. Is it not a God-like action, to
preserve and support this Species and Image of God and our selves, and to love
and admire the Mirror and Similitude of our own Natures? this is a sort of
selfishness, it naturally arises from the affection we bear to our selves, it is
gratifying our own Inclinations, it is aspiring after Immortality, and desiring
to perpetuate our own being in some moving Image, and to live still in the
Persons of others; and this principle is so common, that I venture to say, we
are acted and moved by it as mere Animals. Children, e're they arrive at
maturity, e're their weak glimmering light of Reason can direct them, e're they
grow up to the age and capacity of Instruction, before they can imbibe the
rudiments of their Duty, are touched with a sense of Misery, and seem to be
tenderly and compassionately affected: When they breath only the life of
Animals, they seem to be grated on, and offended at the Miseries and Pains of
another, and their spirits and tender parts seem to feel more sensibly, to
receive the impression more easily than others: and perhaps for the same reason
that Women, whose Blood is more purified, and consequently their Spirits more
refined and more active than those of Men, are more capable of Compassion and
Pity; and I doubt not to say, that as these Passions and Affections are real,
not only the shadows of such affections in these, neither are they only such in
Children, or other Animals. But

Secondly, When our Spirits grow strong enough to bear up the weighty Thoughts
of Reason and Goodness, when they have learned to perform their functions
readily, and to run in their Channels easily, and when we are instructed to
make reflections clearly, then the sense of having done good, of having
answered the end of our Creation, and acted according to the good inclinations
planted in our Natures, is a perpetual entertainment to us; a pleasure not like
that of the Body, which is gross and heavy, this indeed may tickle the Fibers
and endings of the Nerves, the conveyers of Sensation, but we must at length
proceed to a dull repetition of the same things, and then they become flat and
familiar, and cannot surprise nor sooth any more; our sensories are wearied with
the active pleasure, and then they require their refreshment and motion of
restitution; but the pleasure of the Mind is a pleasure that never cloys, it is
like that of Heaven, that is manly and rational, and lasting too; for that that
pleases true Reason once, pleases it for ever, there is that satisfaction,
delight, and content in the review, and memory of good actions; there is that
harmony, proportion, and beauty in them as they are governed by right reason,
that we cannot but approve the fair picture, we cannot but cast some glances of
Honor on our selves, for having acted according to the dictates and directions
of our most refined faculties, and divine principles; and this pleasure is as
much transcending that of the Body, as Reason is above Sense, or Man Superior
to a Beast; and our complacency in, and love of this beauty of Holiness is as
inseparable from us, as the love of Reason, or Wisdom, or of any other
perfection; and this satisfaction is so natural, that a Man may as soon quit
his Nature and Reason, as be displeased with any of these beauties of the Mind;
and the more we view them, the more we love them; and the more we love them,
the more we delight in them; and the more we are delighted in them, the more
frequent are we in viewing, and in loving, and in being delighted anew: And
this cheerfulness of the Mind, like that of Heaven has a very propitious
influence on our lower Nature, on the Earth and Body we wear; the complacency
of the Mind keeps the Spirits in an uniform, regular motion, and our pleasure
like that of Health, is calm and sweet: But when this Heaven within us reflects
on us more favorably, when it shines more serene and clear, the very Body
receives new warmth and vigor, the Spirits swell up, and flow more briskly,
the Blood is exalted and purified by this new heat and motion, and the whole
Man shines with a fresh Air and Gayety, the Body is so closely tackt to the
Mind, that they immediately affect each other, and the Mind draws up a
Contagion and Vapor from our lower Nature that mightily disturbs it, and when
the disorder and disease of the Body rises higher, and does discompose the
upper Man, and when the Distemper and Passions of it does overcast and darken
our Reason and Understanding, the Mind returns the Malignity in an ill aspect
on the Body, as the Vapor and Venom exhaled in some Climates from an
unwholesome Soil, falls again in deadly Showers upon it. In short, the Body
looks fresh or withered, gay and lively, or dull and unactive, as the Mind
shines or lowrs upon it. So that the approbation of the Spirit does cheer and
quicken the Body, it communicates new Life and motion to it: Since therefore we
are carried by instinct, and by our mere animal motion and tendency to
Compassion and Pity, or to raise and assist our own drooping Natures in the
Persons of others, as I have shown, and that besides this Inclination and Bias
impressed upon us, we have the dictate of reason, and the cheerful reflection
of the Mind, which spreading new pleasure upon us at the review of our good
actions, to inspirit anew, and heighten the quickness and life of the Body, and
to make it go on easily and with pleasure, because we have both these
advantages on our side, we are obliged on a double account, not only to
exercise acts of Compassion and Goodness, but to make a mighty advance in them.
When wise Men advise how to make a Progress in any Science, or Art, or Calling,
they often consider and study the genius and tendency of the Man's temper, that
they may apply him to that which he is most strongly biased and inclined to,
not doubting but that he will go on more smoothly, when he goes along with the
grain of his Nature; the pleasure he finds in following his own fancy and
humor, makes him apply more closely, and the difficulties he meets with, do
but whet his desire, and make him pursue his Business with more appetite and
keenness than before; and this is such an advantage as a Man would wish for, to
attain to a dexterity and perfection in any thing: Since therefore we have
these Advantages and Inclinations rooted in our Natures, not only as we are
Men, and endued with Reason, but as mere Animals; how strongly are acts of
Mercy and compassion enforced upon us; nay what a mighty proficiency may justly
be expected from us herein; and therefore if we do violence to these
Principles, if we so deprave our native tenderness, (and not only come short of
that perfection that may be hoped for from these of our Talent) and which is
yet lower, not go one step or degree toward it; but which is worst of all, if
we have so corrupted our own Natures, that we have acted counter to these
Principles, and have hardened and contracted our Hearts so, that our selves or a
few more have engrossed all our kindness and affection; when our covetous and
penurious temper takes off from that universal tenderness we were born with,
and not only so, but which was farther recommended to us by our common Reason:
When the Seed sown in good Ground, is choakt up by Thorns and Briars, and the
Cares of this World, when we not only omit doing good to others, but do suffer
and commit many acts of Unkindness and Oppression upon them, and are fruitful
of Tares instead of that wholesome Grain which the Divine Husbandman had planted
in our Natures; when we do all this, we are liable to a complicated Guilt, to
many Guilts comprised in that one, of dealing unkindly by another; for it is an
offense not to go on by the spring and good tendency of our lower Nature; and
when the reflections of right Reason do carry us farther, and are a new
incitement to us, it is an offense of an higher nature, but when we do not only
offer our selves this violence, when we not only omit acts of kindness and
compassion, but commit their very contraries, we arrive at an high strain and
pitch indeed, and this last is comprehensive of the two former, and has besides
a special Malignity superadded. That saying of Nero in the beginning of his
Reign, e're his tenderness was perverted, is remarkable. I search, says he,
every where for some object worthy my Liberality, I take pity on the Poverty of
one, I encourage the Merits of another, the Youth of one, and the old Age of
another, and if I find a miserable Creature that deserves not to be helped, I
consider my self in his Person, and I solace my self in solacing him, so that
there is no body I would not do good to, on the account of his being a Man, and
yet this Idolater had not the Motives we have to persuade him to this Duty, he
knew not that eternal Inheritance promised in lieu of that perishing Portion we
exchange for it. And now I have made it sufficiently appear, that our Reason as
well as very Frame and Constitution, obliges us to be tender, compassionate and
kind to others: But if we look yet farther, and consult Thirdly, Holy Writ, how
closely, how inexcuseably is the duty of Compassion and Charity tied upon us!
It Is enforced upon us with all the earnestness and vehemence possible; we are
allured and excited to it by sweet perswasives and endearing promises; and
least we should not be drawn by the Cords of a Man, lest we should become
insidious to our selves, and countermine our own Happiness, lest there should
be base and ungenerous Men, that would not be drawn by the disinteress'd love
and kindness of God, and the prospect of an undeserved mighty reward, God
endeavors to lay an Holy force, and a kind of necessity upon them, he would
awaken these by threats and menaces, assuring them that the Unmerciful shall
receive no Mercy, and thus he stirs them up by hopes and fears, the Springs of
Humane Actions.

Sacred Writ does thus press Charity upon us with that holy Warmth, that
plainly shows the great Value of this Grace; our good Works are there made the
characteristick and mark of our Christianity and Discipleship; as if our
Initiation in Baptism, by which we have a Right to the external Privileges of
the Church, were not to be named when compared with these; there is such a
stress laid on it in the Gospel, that it seems to intimate, That the whole
Process of the day of Judgment shall be grounded on this one Grace of Charity,
and truly it is so recommended, that perhaps it is not altogether unnecssary to
Observe, That, as the Moralists, as well as Divines agree, that the Virtues are
connected and joined together, so should the Graces go hand in hand; and as you
may read it in the 2d Epistle of St. Peter chap 1. That we should give all
diligence to add to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to tempeannce patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity: Here Charity
finishes the Catalogue, and crowns the rest. And by Moses it is made the sum of
the Old Law, as it is by Christ made the sum of the New: the price and value of
this Grace may arise, in a great measure from hence, That it gives occasion to,
and is productive of several other Virtues; it gives an Opportunity to the Poor
that are relieved, not only to pray, but to praise God for their Benefactors.
An act of Charity seems also to be an act of Faith and relyance on the
Promises; it is laying down what is certain, and in our power, for somewhat at a
distance, and in the dark, whereof we have no other assurance, but that which
is founded on the veracity of God, which dependence on his Word, and submission
to his Will, without any farther Evidence, must needs be very acceptable and
well-pleasing to him.

And when we consider Fourthly, That God himself came down from Heaven, out of
pure Love and Charity, to give us this new Commandment; and as he was
infinitely perfect and infinitely desirable from all Eternity, no accession of
Happiness could accrue to him, that he had not in his own Bosom before, his own
unbounded Nature and Essence, containing all the the Variety that can be
enjoyed to all Eternity, it being the nature of Infinity never to be Exhausted;
when we consider this, and that it must be the diffusiveness of his Goodness,
and his disinteress'd Love to us, that induced him to condescend to wear our
poor dress of Flesh and Blood, and to teach us familiarly in our own Nature, by
his own Example and ocular Demonstration, which is the plainest way of
Instruction; to go about to do good as he did, how much moreforcibly does this
press the exercise of Charity upon us? And to refine upon this Duty to the last
degree, he not only forgave his Enemies, but did them good, and prayed for them
at his very Death; and his Death and Passion was designed for their Welfare and
Happiness; and he fell like that Tree that affords Balm to Cure the Wounds of
those that cut it down: And when this great light disappeared, he left
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all good Men, that after the setting of this
Sun, should shine like Stars in the Firmament, to enlighten and direct our
Paths, by their Instruction and Example; and this brings me to show,

Secondly, How advantageous and necessary it is, That persons of Rank and
Quality, and Fortune should distinguish themselves in this respect.

Liberality is a quality that shows that largeness of Soul, and clearness of
Spirit, that is essential to a truly Generous and Noble Person; it is by this
Temper of Mind that a Man shows himself the Master, and not the Slave of what
he possesses; and by holy aspiring after Goodness and Perfection, he gets above
himself, makes some approaches and is allied to Divinity: For, as Clemens
Alexandrinus Remarks, A Man doing Good is the Image of God, he carries in his
Person the Character of the Divinity, for he imitates the greatest and the
noblest of the Divine Attributes, that is Mercy and Liberality; and can any
thing reflect a greater honor or luster on a Man, than thus to aspire and gasp
after Goodness, to take such flights toward Heaven, and to perfect his Nature?
Persons of Rank and Quality, and Fortune, should be a mighty defense and
protection, not only to the Poor and Distressed, but also to the Injured and
Oppressed, they should by the interposeal of their Authority and Credit, ward
off, as much as possible, the Violence, and check the Insults and Insolence of
wicked Men; and it is the best Argument of a greatness of Mind and true Honor,
to descend to, and comply with the low Estate of the Poor, to lay by that Pomp
and stiffness of Deportment, that as it keeps them at an awful distance, does
quite unqualify them for that Familiarity that is necessary to let a Man into
their secret Wants and Exigencies; affability, condescension, and obligingness
of Humor, are the best marks of an high and exalted Mind, and that disposition
and suppleness of Temper that carries a Man to be a Succor to the Afflicted,
and to descend to their low liness and condition, is found to be the most
Erect, the least capable of bearing Affronts or Insolence, and is the most
ready to spring against Insults and Oppression; the Complexion and Temper of
such Men are so incorrupt, so tender, and so much in the primitive state and
purity, that they cannot bear the Wrongs that are oppressive of Human Nature,
and men that signalized themselves in this respect, were in the Old World
Deify'd and ranked in the number of Heroes, and distinguishing Marks of Honor
were awarded for them, as for those that deserved best of Human Nature; and
this Honor and profound Respect was paid to the Memory of those Worthies:
There is an outward Respect and Ceremony due to the Rank and Quality of a Man,
which men study to pay too officiously to the Living, whether deserving or no,
perhaps imagining that every such act must please, because it seems to suppose
a Worth answerable; though perhaps these men only discern a weakness in Great
Men, by the means whereof they endeavor to wind themselves into their Favor:
But these Men that deserve so well of the Public, have the real Esteem of the
Heart, which puts forth these external Ceremonies with warmth and affection; so
that a great and a good Man may have mighty Opportunities of doing good, people
are biased to receive his Dictates, and to be led by him without a nice
enquiry into, and examination of his Actions: Virtue and Goodness are so
becoming and fashionable, especially when worn by Great Men, that we are very
ready to conform our selves to them; they lend Piety some Ornaments and Luster,
that other Men have an ambition and curiosity to wear and Mimick; and truly,
habits of Virtue, like fine Clothes upon a right and well shaped Body, sit
gracefully upon an erect and goodly Mind, and are very decent and becoming: And
such great Examples and shining Lights carry some authority and power to direct
our Paths, which Authority we are inclined to follow, and to pay a natural
submission to; and the Rhetoric and Eloquence of their Actions, persuade more
forcibly than that of their Words and Discourses; either because it discovers
some new Beauty in Virtue, or teaches the Practice more plainly, or that it
smooths and sweetens the Difficulties of it; whether or no these altogether, or
any of them, is the cause of the great power and efficacy of Examples, this is
certain, That Learning by Examples is most compendious and lively, and that
Instruction by Rule and Discourses, is tedious and slow: He that exhorts to,
and displays Virtue in its due Colors, must lay out a great deal of time and
discourse in describing its Nature and Beauty, and to inspire the Practice of
it; but if he lays this plain to the Eye, if he practices himself what he
Taught before, he must smooth the way, and clear his Doctrine wonderfully, and
he will perform incomparably more by his Example, than by all his Reasoning.

A Man may understand the Art of Painting much easier and better, if he see the
Artist handle his Pencil, and lay his Colors, and draw the Lines, than if he
had taken pains to instruct him in the Rules, and to discover the Secrets of
it; we have all that Inclination to imitation and Mimickry, and Examples move
and insinuate themselves with such secret Charms and Attractions, that we find
by Experience, that we cannot well resist the power and virtue of them, and we
begin to act the same things by pure habit and familiarity, without reflection
or thought; and living Examples have a Life or Spirit, or whatever you call it,
which we desire to Rival and come up to, and which is beyond the Art of
Rhetoric or Painter to set forth in due and lively Colors; And besides, the
dullest Spectator has the advantage to understand the broad Language of Actions
and Examples, when he may be at a loss to trace and discern the Thread of a
fine and goodly Discourse; and when he sees the Actions of Men answer and keep
close to the warmth of their Words and Language, then is he easily induced to
believe their conviction and sincerity, and the persuasion they have of the
Truth of what they offer; and truly, if we take the Picture from the Original,
when we copy all the living charms and loveliness from living Examples, that
represent the Beauties of Virtue in most decent and graceful motion and
carriage, they animate it with that spirit and warmth that makes it look
Natural, then Virtue walks in our own Dress, and so lays a more lively and
deeper impression upon us, and recommends it self in its most endearing
comeliness, and agreeable gestures; but Virtue drawn from Precepts and
Discourses is a transcript and copy, the statue and picture of a living
Example, and is languid for want of that air, and life and motion that
inspirits the former; and in a word, Virtue in Example does much more
charmingly endear it self, than the most Rhetorical Descriptions of it, and is
as much above the most lively Discourse and finished Panegyric upon it, as the
Creator is above the Painter, or Nature and the Original above Art and the
Picture: Since therefore Examples have all this power and efficacy, and that we
have generally a secret itch and desire to ape Grandeur, when we cannot attain
to it, how mighty advantageous and necessary is it that persons of Rank and
Quality and Fortune should be shining Examples, a Spectacle set on High, that
people may copy after these Originals, that such Patterns should be set in a
true Light, that others may the more advantagiously take and draw from them all
the Beauties and Features of Virtue and Goodness. And if the Nobility and
Gentry, and Men of Fortune of our County, degenerate not from the Ancient Glory
of their Ancestors; if the brightness of their Examples serve not to Illustrate
our shame, what a strong Tie and Obligation have we to outshine others* in
Religious Duties, in Pious and Charitable Actions? Our County, in Caesar's
time, as Historians tell us, was accounted the Civilest among the Britains, not
Conquered, but Compounded with by the Romans, and, as if Providence had
designed us peculiar Favors, we are so situated by Nature, that we seem to be
planted to receive more, especially the benefit of Commerce and Traffic with
other Countries: And this convenience occasioned the Importing the richest of
Commodities, and greatest Blessing, the Christian Religion into our County; the
Daylight from on High first shed it self there, and the light of the Gospel
was cherish't and encouraged by Ethelbert, King of Kent, Anno 596. and long
before this, Kent had received the Faith; for it is Recorded, That Lucius the
first British King in this Island, built a Church to the name and service of
Christ, within the Castle of Dover, and plentifully Endowed the same; and if
our Forefathers had the privilege to be Witnesses of the first Dawning of the
Gospel, to receive the first warmth and springing Light of it? if they did so
encourage and establish the Church; if they built it upon a Rock, against
which, though the Wind rose and the Waves beat, it was safe and unshaken, because
it was well founded; if this was their Privilege and great Advantage beyond
the rest of this Island; and if this their gratitude and return to God for such
a peculiar Favor; and if they have devolved and entailed these Blessings upon
us, with new accessions of Purity and Advantage to Religion; how deeply are we
Indebted? with how many years Interest are we encumbered? and what a Fund and
Bank for Piety and Charity are we obliged to make, to discharge the Dues and
Arrears owing from us, for the primitive Purity and increase of the Gospel
Light among us? and if the Saints above, our Pious Predecessors, the Founders
and Patrons of Christianity in our County, have any sense of what we are doing
this day; if they are made Privy to or concerned at the behavior of us their
Friends and Countrymen here below; or, if (as some are of Opinion) according
to the Influence of their good and bad Works, the departed feel an increase or
abatement of Joy or Torment in the other World; then what a new accession of
Happiness and Bliss, what new Raptures of Joy and delight may we suppose to
break in upon them? and when they rise up to the highest key and top of
Heavenly satisfaction, what Complacency must they then take in the Designs and
Offices of this Day? And if there be Joy in Heaven, at the Conversion of a
Sinner; Sure there must be a more Intense, a more raised Sublime delight at the
improvement of Virtue, when Persons meet to set their Heads together, and
contrive to do good, when so many great and good Men join themselves in Holy
Confederacies, to project and devise Liberal things, to cast about how to be
always doing good, how to make their Charity most lasting; and most useful, and
this leads me to show

Thirdly, What a great Improvement of the Grace of Charity it is to enter into
Societies, for the devising of Liberal things.

If the universal disposition of every single Man to do good to all Men, and
the shining example of each great Person in his private Capacity, be so
commendable in this respect as I have represented to you, what a mighty
improvement of Charity must it be, to Unite into Artificial Bodies and
Societies, not only to give new strength and power, but also a sort of
Immortality and Perpetuity to this Grace among us: The Original Institution and
design of Civil Bodies began from the exigencies and necessities of private
Men, their divided power was too slight and feeble to defend or promote their
own or the common good, and at best there was this defect in the state of
Nature, that although one Man might have followed the light and direction of
right Reason, and might have acted according to the Law Impressed and Engrav^^
on his Mind, yet his rectitude and equity were subject to Mortality, and no Man
could promise himself that his next Heir or Successor should not swerve from
this Law, or that he should not invade the Right and Privilege of another: But
Bodies Politic do provide against these flaws and deficiencies, they are
Deathless and Perpetual, and if a Branch chance to be Lopt off, there sprouts
up another in its room, and there is a continual supply of Mortality, the Vital
heat and warmth continues, and the Heart is supposs'd to be still sound and
free from Change and Disease, and from Death it self; and therefore when People
make Holy Leagues and Confederacies, and reinforce and strengthen their Charity
by their United Power; and by Custom and Example, at least enjoin and entail
this equally with their Estate, upon Posterity, they procure a lasting
Duration, and a sort of Eternity to it; And since such Communities are as one
Body inspired and moved by the same Life, since they breath the same Spirit of
Love and Amity, and if general and public Judgments and Calamities pursue
general and public Vices in a Country or Nation, as it is observed they always
do, how do such Bodies of Men, not only Ensure the Community, but also stand in
the Gap, and procure Blessings to a Country and People? their* Virtues will
very perswasively expostulate with God, and so many Righteous Men are
sufficient to atone for, and to ward off Wengeance from a Nation.

But beside this lasting advantage of entering into Societies, for the devising
of Liberal things for the Body, at all times, and in all places expedient and
necessary; there is more pecularly in this Age, a pressing Inducement to
persuade us to enter into Holy Alliances and Confederacies, for the devising of
Liberal things for the Soul too.

Atheism, Irreligion and Profaneness are openly avowed and professed; and Men
Ambitious of surprising the Worl^, (...) somewhat that is daring or new, or
uncommon, desire to be noted and observed; and endeavor to signalize
themselves by Singularity, and laying memorable Impressions on their Hearers;
this is the common Topic of Men of Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit, they break
out into some flashy Jests, and study to dazzle by the sprightliness of their
Wit and Fancy on this occasion: They are always upon new Enquiries, and for
having their Phoenomena's in Religion laid before the Company, that they may
have some opportunity to show their Ingenuity, to convince them of the
clearness of their Senses, and the penetration of their Judgment; that they may
let them understand that they have discovered that long hidden Fallacy of
Religion, that they have looked through the deceitful Mystery, and by a particular
acuteness of Spirit, found out the Politic Cheat, and penetrated the last and
abstrusest recesses of it: And in a word, that they are Wiser than the greatest
Men of this Age, and all that went before it; and these sort of Men have got to
such a head, and are grown so numerous, that they draw up into Parties, and use
all their Skill and Discipline to attack us openly; and when they meet some of
little Learning, and mean Capacity, scattered and unprovided, they seldom lose
the opportunity of setting upon such unequal Matches, with Show and Solemnity,
and of plying them vigorously, till by their weakness they have obtained the
Victory, in which they Glory and Insult with Insolence and Clamor, which
sufficiently convinces, that their design is only to Triumph in their own
Abilities, and like Mountebanks on a Stage, to raise Trophies of their own
Conduct and Capacities: But since many of these Men are otherwise, Persons that
generally make some Figure in the World, and such as the sprightliness of their
Blood and Youth, as well as their Fortune and Education have flushed to fly at
some things above the common level, such who upon the account of their Birth or
Station deserve some Deference, and who are therefore sufficient to gain some
Reputation and Modishness to Irreligion and Profaneness; I think it highly
necessary, that Men of Rank and Quality, of Fashion and Authority should muster
their United Forces, should Marshal and Discipline, and draw them up to receive
and repulse so pernicious an Enemy; and when we are thus prepared to Encounter
our Enemy, when we are thus begirt with the Armor of Righteousness, the
Courage and Countenance of our Enemy will be ready to fall by our forwardness;
and when they find their number and quality inferior to us, 'twill quite break
their expectation and measures; and when we shall have thus, like the true
Church Militant, shock't and discomfited our Enemies, let us always use the
Victory with moderation and temper, let not the Conquest be shewy and vain,
lest they rally their Forces, and return out of regret and revenge to their old
Opinions: But above all, let it be provided that our Adversaries have it fairly
hinted and pressed upon them, and let our Actions convince the Truth of it,
That the Principle by which we are acted, is that of true Love and hearty
Affection to Mankind; and when we have thus reduced our Enemy to some Reason,
when we have sweetn'd and calmed him by our easy carriage and candor to him, it
may not be unseasonable to model and dispose him to receive our Impressions,
and so by our kind conduct and management, to win and engage him to our Party;
it is a mighty Advantage to gain Number and Credit to an Opinion: It often
happens, That when Men of a lower rank and sphere, and whose smaller number
renders them yet more despicable and insufficient, encounter those of much an
higher order and condition, that they are somewhat dazzled and dashed at their
splendor, they sink the lower, by a fanciful sense of their own meanness, and
then grow giddy with looking up at them; hence it is sometimes, that Men
conform themselves to their Humor, agree to their Sentiments, and out of a
sort of Modesty and Deference to their number and quality, seem to submit to
their Judgments and Authority, and subscribe their Opinions, how un-Orthodox
soever. Since these Men of manners, these Men of Effeminacy and Cowardice
indeed, that dare not follow the Captain of their Salvation, maugre the
opposition the Pomp of the World can give them, there is need of Quality,
Fashion and Number, to keep such Men in Countenance, to animate them to do
their Duty, and to behave themselves manfully in the face of their Enemy; and
to do this perswasively, to retrieve and recover the ground and credit that
Religion has lately lost in the World, 'twill be necessary, That Men of
Quality, Fashion and Fortune should espouse her Cause warmly, in public Places
and in Company, the common Stages whereon the Adversaries of it display their
vain Philosophy.

I mean not that Men of Virtue, and such as have a regard for Religion, should
force this unseasonably, and prescribe it as an Entertainment to the Company;
but I would have them by some Intimations of their Mind, and Inclinations at
least, bespeak the good Behavior of those they Converse with, and obviate the
Affronts that are usually done to God and Religion, in common Conversation; and
what is this, but to let our light shine before men, that they may see our good
works and glorify our Father which is in Heaven: And this is to devise Liberal
Things for the Souls of Men, to reclaim which, and to minister to their most
distressed Condition at such a time, is the truest Compassion, and highest
degree of Charity we can do them; by which means we shall strike in with His
Majesty's late Proclamation against Atheism, Irreligion and Profaneness: and let
the World, to the eternal Honor of our County, see we make it our study to
execute aright his Royal Will, and Gracious Directions; and to lend him in this
(as we have in every thing else) our utmost Assistance in promoting the Glory
of God, and the public Welfare of this Nation: Then can that Complaint never
be justly made of us, that the Prophet Isaiah makes of those that met to Feast
together in his time, That the harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and wind
are in their feasts, but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider
the operation of his hands, cap. 5. verse 12.

But there remains one principal Advantage of entering into Societies, not yet
spoken to, the blessing of mutual Friendship: it is true, we are enjoined to
bear an universal love and kindness to all Men, and the propension of our very
Nature leans that way, but though this holy Fire is never to be extinguished,
yet may it burn more fervently, and warm some more kindly than others; it ought
indeed to have its degrees, it ought to be more intense or remiss, with respect
to some than others: Nature and Alliance, Virtue and Merit claim the greatest
share of our Affections; Prudence and the dictates of right Reason, enforce and
recommend this more powerfully; Wisdom and Counsel command us to look about,
and to examine whom we admit into our Bosom and Affections, into our Secrets
and Favor: But when we have once determined our Choice, when Nature and
Kindred, Country and Neighborhood; but above all, Virtue and Descent fix our
election, then our Love and Friendship are laid on a sure Foundation, we
contract much of the expanded and dilated Fire, and it burns more ardently and
affectionately within the compass of our Friendship. Love indeed is the
primitive Foundation, and true Cement of all Societies; and when this Fire grew
feeble and weak, cool and indifferent in the World, there was a necessity to
recruit it, and minister Fuel to the dying Cynders: it is therefore that Laws
were made to draw Men into Corporations and Societies, where they might live in
dependence, and expect Succors of one another, but these are but subsidiary
helps to repair that Love and Frienship so much decayed in the World; and these
are miserable shifts, which lay a constraint upon Men, and do secure only the
overt act. But when Friendships and Societies are cemented together by Love and
Nature, by Virtue and true Election, there Affection becomes regular and
steady, because the Reason on which they are founded, affords constant Charms
and Attractions: And because even this Celestial Fire has gone, and may go out
again, it is not the least important Concern of our present Meeting, to stir up
the old Sparks and Cynders of it, to commence and enter into new Friendships,
and to cherish and inflame the Hearts and Affections of one another; and though
our Friendship is so disinteress'd and free, that it has little in view beside
the prospect of doing good, and enjoying the sweets and delights of true Amity,
yet it is accompanied with other Blessings and Advantages; and though we feel
nothing but pleasure spread over our Hearts, in the company and conversation of
our Countrymen and Friends, yet there is somewhat else of Moment that we
lightly pass over, without observing it.

For besides this Feast of the Mind, there is another mighty Advantage arising
from Friendship; it is a Guard and a mighty Defense to us too. The Son of Syrach
tells us, Eccles. 6. 14. 16. That a faithful friend is a strong defense, or
medicine of life, and he that finds him finds a great treasure. And this
brings me to show,

Fourthly, and lastly, The Liberal Man's Reward, by Liberal things he shall
stand, or be established; or, in the Gospel sense, the merciful shall receive
mercy.

The best and surest way of establishing or securing of any Man or Society, is
by engaging the Affections of those in whose power it may be to offer Violence
to either; this is the method of Nature, this the Primitive Charm whereby it
drew Men together, and captivated and united their Hearts: this is it that in
in the Primitive state superseded the use of all Laws and Constraints; which,
as they were compulsive of doing good Offices, as they forced and blew up the
languid decaying fire of our Love and Affections, took off so much from the
freedom of the Will, and excellency of the Virtue, on which alone the happiness
of Men and Societies is founded and established; and what more effectual course
of restoring this Law and Virtue to its primitive Excellence and Freedom, than
by Liberality and Benificence; the Charms and Attractions of this Virtue are so
powerful, that the Affections are not only invited and sweetened, but
irresistibly drawn and captivated by them; we lay some Debt or Encumbrance on
the person obliged, which Nature is inclined to acquit it self of, it is a
Burden and Weight, and it seems to be in some pain till it eases it self of
the pressure: Liberty is so natural, that we are impelled by the Springs of our
very Constitution, to Ransom and Enfranchise our selves, by making at least an
exchange or return of the Obligation; we are but too sensible of another right
to us, of our own slavery and dependence, when he loads us with Obligations and
Favors; and we are naturally inclined to regain the property of our Selves,
and to rise again to the common Level; and even our very Enemies, by the warmth
of our love and kindness, by our heaping Coals of fire on their Heads, may have
their hard Tempers sweetly disposed, and softened and melted down: And though I
could insist longer on this, and evince clearly, and exemplify plainly, That
the very animal Nature is disposed and carried on to Acts of Gratitude; yet do
I choose rather not to transgress too much on your Patience, but to proceed.

And since by Liberality and Benificence, the love and affections of Men, which
is the principal Foundation and best Security of Societies, are sweetly
engaged, and that Society and true Friendship united in Charity, is as a strong
Fort and Citadel against our Enemies. I think it plainly appears, That
devising liberal things is the best means and surest method, to stand, or be
established in this World; and since I have, in the former part of this
Discourse, laid before you the Spiritual Promises made to the Liberal or
Charitable Man, I hope it will no more be doubted, but that he will stand or be
established in the next World too; or, that the merciful shall receive mercy.

To sum up all:

You have heard what Liberality is, and what it is to devise Liberal Things:
you have heard what Obligations, Instinct and mere Animal motion, Reason,
Revelation, and the Example of our Savior, do lay upon us to be Liberal and
Charitable: you have heard how advantageous and necessary it is, That persons
of Rank and Quality, of Fashion and Fortune should distinguish themselves in
this respect; and in a particular manner, what strong Ties and Obligations the
Nobility, Gentry, and Men of Fortune of our County have to outshine others in
Religious Duties, in Pious and Charitable Actions; you have heard what a great
Improvement of the Grace of Charity it is to enter into Societies, for the
devising of Liberal Things, not only as it respects the Bodies, but also the
Souls of Men: you have heard lastly, the Liberal Man's Reward, how that by
Liberal Things he shall stand, or be established in this World, and that which
is to come.

And this, I doubt not, will be sufficient to make you steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in these Works of the Lord: To conclude therefore,

May the honor of God, and benefit of Mankind, be the Spring of all your
Actions and Devices.

May your SOCIETY long continue an Ornament to our Own, and a shining Example
to other Counties.

May the Indigent, the Fatherless and Widows, find occasion of Rejoicing from
your Christian Entertainment.

May no Excess or Intemperance, no Discord or Divisions, give a just cause of
Offense, or occasion of Interrupting your Agapae, or Feasts of Love.

May your Entertainment serve to Warm your Affections, and to Cherish and Raise
your Friendship.

And, as the Wise Man has it, May you eat your bread with joy, and drink your
wine with a merry heart, Eccles. 9. verse 7.

And, whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, may all be done to the
praise and glory of God.

And, May you all, after a long and innocent Enjoyment of each others Society
in this World, be Translated to the Blessed Company of Just Men made Perfect in
that which is to come.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 23. read Law and Gospel. p. 18. l. 18. r. vengeance. ib. l. 23.
r. peculiarly. p. 19. l. 3. r. sense. p. 21. l. 32. r. wine. p. 22. l. 17. r.
desert.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary's Forces, at
Gant in Flanders, the Sunday before they marched into the Camp, 1694. By the
same Author.

PEace and Gratitude. A Sermon Preached before the Honorable Society of the
Natives of the County of Kent, November. 23d. 1697. at St. Mary le Bow, London.
By Samuel Prat, D. D. Chaplain to his Highness, William Duke of Gloucester,
Printed for John Back (Bookseller to the said Honorable Society) at the
Black-Boy on London Bridge.


