A PLAIN DISCOURSE ABOUT Rash and Sinful Anger; AS A Help for such as are
willing to be relieved against so sad and too generally prevailing a Distemper
even amongst Professors of Religion.

Being the Substance of some SERMONS preached at Manchester in Lancashire.

By HENRY NEW COME M. A. and a Minister of the Gospel there.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel. 1693.

TO THE Christian READER.
I Have of late been much pressed by a dear Friend (not only to me and mine,
but to all good Men, and to the Church of God) that I would have done something
this way, about Family Worship. A thing sadly dis-used even amongst great
Professors of Religion. A thing greatly to be complained of and lamented, as
that which betokens decay of Piety amongst us; and that Hypocrisy in the
Professors of Religion herein expressed, joined to the professed profaneness
amongst us, may portend Ruin and Destruction unto us. I confess I have upon
occasion insisted often on this Subject, but it having been still by the by, and
of no one Subject on purpose, it seemed too much for me, both for want of
strength and leisure, to gather into one, what lies so dispersed: And besides,
I could not per swade my self into any opinion of such a Performance if it had
been done by me; especially when so much is extant already on that Subject.
Besides some of former date, as Mr. Paget's Demonstration of Family Duties; and
Mr. Ambrose in his Media: so of late the Reverend Mr. Baxter in his Christian
Directory, has spoken fully to it, and proved the Divine Appointment of it, p.
489. and p. 594. to this Question, Is a Man bound to pray ordinarily in his
Family? He answers; I have answered this affirmatively, and proved it. One
grain of Grace would answer it better than Arguments can do. And the truth is,
if Men out of wicked partiality, and love to their neglect of their Duty, will
take it for granted, and venture to go on, and will not so much as consider
what is thus offered against their Course. they may die in their sin, and be
damned, and who can help them, or will pity them. And the latter answer about
one grain of Grace, is mighty startling, I should think. Implying a total want
of true Grace, where these Duties are wilfully neglected. True Grace sets upon
Prayer naturally; a newborn Child is not better known to be alive by crying,
than a newborn Soul by praying: Acts 9. 11. Behold he prays; and therefore
doubt not but he is converted -- And this grain of Grace does so naturally
carry the Soul out unto God, for assistance and only satisfaction, that it is
rather inclined always to be in Prayer, than to neglect it at any time when it
may lawfully do it. And his Zeal to God and the good of Souls disposes him to
take his Family with him; and if there were not a Duty to God, to do other
Business, (which God allows of, and is mediately served in) he would do nothing
but read, and pray, and praise, much less refuse it, when he is permitted as
often as he can. There is a great deal of difference between them that would
always be in these Duties if it were lawful, and those that are so apt to
neglect them as much as they can, as not necessary. And worthy Mr. Doolittle,
in his Sermon on that Subject in the Morning Exercise, in p. 74. Sermon. 15. has
so learnedly, exactly, and pathetically spoken to that Subject, that I know not
what can be added to it. I did sixteen or seventeen years ago my self earnestly
move him, that he would print that Sermon by it self, as that which I was
desired to press him to by some in the Country, that thought it might do much
good in a single little Book by it self; whereas, as it was, it lay out of the
reach of the most, (especially that most needed it) as not being able to come
up to the Price of the whole Volume. His answer was, That the Copy was the
Booksellers, and not his, and so it could not then be done. But I would humbly
renew my Request to my Reverend Brother, thinking that that Objection in this
time should cease to be of any force, and that the Bookseller might have no
cause to complain, if he had the Profit of it in a single Book, of which it
need not be doubted, there would be a ready Sale. I cannot but be grieved at
what I remember I was affected with, (to hear when I was but a Youth)
concerning London, that it would have ravished a Man's heart almost, to have
gone in the Streets on a Lord's Day at night, and to have heard them almost in
every House singing or reading or praying, that one would have thought himself
almost in Heaven. I was much surprised and troubled when many years after I
came first to London, and found so little of these practices; Singing of Psalms
almost quite disused in Families (and prosessing Families too) a practice that
obtained from the very beginning of the Reformation, and that whereby Bishop
Burnet has observed the Protestants were distinguished from the Papists; the
Lord's Day much neglected and made common (and it is so in most other Towns)
whereas it was the Badge of a Primitive Christian, without which he could not
assume the name; implied in that Dominicum Servasti? Christianus sum, if not
misapplyed and true, it had been a great Charge. This Man is not of God that
does not keep the Sabbath Day, Joh. 9. 16. It is observable, that in times when
these practices were least favored, that a Law should pass, That all and every
Person and Persons, whatsoever, Act for the better observation of the
Lord's Day. An. 29 Ca^. 2. 1677.
shall on every Lord's Day apply themselves to the Observation of the same, by
exercising themselves thereon in Duties of Piety and true Religion publicly
and privately. How this is consistent with unrestrained walking about the
Streets, that Day, many making their Visits, and discoursing of Dogs and
Horses, and such like; that have so heavily reflected on others for not
observing the Laws (which have been of disputable matter) and yet this Law to
be no way binding, it remains un-understood. It has been observed that Nations
and Places have flourished, or not flourished, as the Lord's Day has been more
or less observable. [See the Epistle to the Reader to Sabbatum Redivivum, the
first part.] Some may be sure that Religion shall never keep up in that Town,
Family, or particular Soul where the Lord's Day is profaned or neglected.
Famous Judge Hales was so strict an observer of the Lord's Day, that he
observed things went well or ill with him in the Week, as he had been strict or
negligent on the Lord's Day. And let Men observe it in their Families, and in
Persons, that Religion shall languish, and sensibly go back, where the
Christian Sabbath is neglected. I shall take it for a sign and a means of
Proficiency or Non-proficiency in Religion, as this holy Day is observed. And
let me here suggest a word of humble Advice: 1. That all Persons would make
Conscience of needless neglect of their Attendance on the Public on the
Lord's Day. Not to make necessities, nor easily and pleasingly to admit them;
but to account it a burden and a loss to be hindered. Pray ye that your flight
be not on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24. 20. Some make this savoury and likely sense
of it, That though if necessitated, they must fly for their Lives on that Day,
yet it would aggravate their Grief and Misery, that it must be on that Day, to
deprive them of the Comforts of the Ordinances of that Day in the full
Liberties of it, Psalm. 65. 4. and 27. 4. As the good Woman, that when with
Child, prayed still, that if the Lord pleased she might not Travel on that day,
as if she were desirous that others might not be hindered for her necessary
help, and that she herself might have the Comforts of the Sabbath to help her
to bear up under her Pains. It is very sad when People cast to set out, or to
keep on a Journey on that day, as if they counted it so much time gained; or to
cast to take Physic that day, etc. The conscience of never having needlessly or
willingly neglected the Public, when in a capacity for it, will be a great
Relief when by sickness or weakness a Person is under an unavoidable detention:
And on the contrary, it will gaul sadly when a Person cannot go, that he has
wantonly and carelessly neglected to go when he might have gone. And 2dly, when
the Public is done, to make conscience of keeping within the rest of the day,
to attend to Catechizing the Children and Servants, and to secret Duties, etc.
There needs no part of this holy Time to lie upon your hands, if you consider
your own Needs, and the Advantages of a total and thorough Improvement of it.
Renowned Judge Hales was so afraid of loosing any part of that holy time, that
wherever he was, he pursued some pious Subject for holy Meditation, the product
whereof mostly are those excellent things of his that are printed. And this I
will subjoyn as a matter of (true, though) sad Observation, That as many have
at the Gallows acknowledged that the beginning of their Ruin was in the
profanation of the Sabbath, and in the total neglect of it; and many on their
sick Beds have been laden with their sin this way in a chief place: So the
Scandal that some Professors have run into, has been justly ascribed to their
too much Liberty on that Day, being either needlessly going out, or having
Company coming in for Diversion or common Converse, without the respect due to
that holy Time. And for Family Duties, I desire it may be considered and
observed, 1. Whether Success in Affairs can be expected, when not prayed for?
2. If Crosses unexpected befall you, you could look for no other, when you did
not commit your self and Family and Affairs to God's Blessing and Protection by
solemn Prayer. And 3dly, for your Souls, how should they thrive, when no
Worship of God among you? No marvel if unfaithfulness be in Servants,
disobedience in Children, drunkenness, and bastardy, and what not break in upon
the House, where there is neglect of Religious Duties in it: what is there to
keep such Mischiefs out? As I remember a holy Man once to a Family related to
him (where he called at the Door to enquire of their health and welfare) asked,
Whether there was any thing done to keep the Devil out of the House? meaning,
was there any religious Duties in the House to entitle and relate the House and
Family unto God. If it be Carnality and Flesh-pleasing, and love of Ease that
makes you lie in Bed so long, that you have not time for Duties when you get up
(and it may be you cast for it that it may be so) because you love it not. I
remember what I have heard a reverend Minister say that knew the famous Mr.
Bruen, that he had-heard him say, That it was better to deny the Body a little
rest, than deprive the Soul of the benefit of a good Duty. Old Christians would
have got up on purpose, that they might be ready to worship God in the first
place with all their Family. Good Men in the former Age, they would have robbed
themselves of rest at a night, to have read the Scriptures and good Books,
whereby they became brave knowing Men, and got up early in the Morning to have
Duties with their Families, and so had orderly and religious Families. If
worldly Business crowd in upon you, and hinder religious Duties, to neglect
them or shorten them, you must cast to be up before them, and be afraid lest
any thing should come in before the Blessing. But if these Necessities are
consented to, and frequently hinder your Duties, it will be a load to you when
you come to die. A good Man on his Deathbed (dying from home) desired me to
warn People of their being too busy and eager in the World, to the neglect of
Prayer in their Families, as what he found then a burden to him. And for
Duties at Night, I will suggest one thing, that Men should make conscience of
keeping good hours in coming in; that by tarrying out late, they do not unfit
themselves for performing them, or unfit the Family for joining in them. And
for Friendship and good Neighbourship, I should never be against it, provided
you consider the time, with respect to Family Duties to be performed, both in
the House you are in, and at your own House too. But there is another great
Fault, and sadly general, and that amongst Professors of Religion, who do keep
up Family Worship, and that is of rash and sinful Anger; of which the Men of
old (and Women too) professing Godliness, made conscience, as well as of the
Sabbath and Family Duties; and to be guilty of such Outrages as many of us are,
was counted little less than scandal. I have therefore very lately taken up
that Subject to testify and help against it, if it pleased God. The same
Friend requiring at my Hand to publish these Notes, I was not willing to deny
it. Out of my great and deserved respects and deference to him, whom I rejoice
to oblige, and for that being so lately preached, I could with some more ease
recollect what I have on the Subject; but chiefly for that I am satisfied in
his Reason for such a Work, for the great Necessity of it, only a better Hand
for it had been desirable. I have often said it, That there is scarce any sin
that prevails so generally as this does, that does so much mischief as it does,
and that so little conscience is made of, as is of this. They generally make it
the Professors sin, and set it against the Profaneness and Drunkenness that
abounds amongst the Irreligious. And though under favor we may say it is not
only the Professor's sin, for there is Rage and Wrath enough with them,
together with their other Wickednesses; they can be angry and drunken too, etc.
yet it is a reproach to Religion that there is so much of it amongst the
Professors as there is, and though it be not proper to us, yet it is sadly too
common amongst us. I do not design an Invective against it, nor any Persons
guilty of it, but a compassionate charitable relief and help against it; and so
it may prove, if God bless it, and set it on, and it be taken as it is in
sincerity intended and designed. And if it should take effect, that Men and
Women should make more conscience of it, and be more watchful against it, so
that it might be less amongst us than it has been, I shall account it as
considerable a Success as almost of any Subject I could have preached of. And
why should we despair of seeing such an effect, what is too hard for Grace and
the Spirit of God to work us unto? To make Lions and Lambs to lie down
together. I deserve no Applause, nor look for any; nor yet will beg pardon of
any, for being to bold with his sin. And if I meet with Scorn from some, it is
what I look for, and have had Experience of in those few things I have troubled
the World with. But he that will not bear a Scorn, if he can hope to do good to
any Soul, is of too narrow and selfish a Spirit for a Minister of Christ. The
humble modest Christians that shall get good hereby, I desire they will be
thankful to God, and pray for

Their Servant in the Gospel, Henry Newcome.

TO THE READER.
THere are two Discourses lately come to our view, by two very excellent
Servants of Christ, the Authors whereof both laboring in the Lord's Vineyard
in the same Country Lancashire.
, and not at a remote distance from one another; are however much nearer to
each other in Spirit, Judgment; Design, and dearness of mutual Affection. And
the agreeableness of these Discourses to one another, and their joint
subserviency to one common End, the promoting of practical Godliness, is not
less conspicuous than that which is between the Authors themselves. The one
treating of Personal Order, the other of Domestical. Viz. Mr. Heywood's
Treatise, entitled, A Family Altar, now comeforth at the same time with this.
That, Christian Reader, which is here offered to thy view, is a most useful
Preparative and Prerequisite to the other. It Is plain, they can neither be
capable of being good Governors, nor indeed useful Members, of Families (much
less of larger Societies, Sacred or Civil) that have not learned to govern
themselves, or bear rule over their own Spirits. So unruly a Creature as Man
is, within himself, must undergo a great transformation, to make him regularly,
and profitably sociable with others.

It was predicted by the Evangelical Prophet, That in the happy Times of the
Gospel, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid; and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a
little Child shall lead them, Isai. 11. 6 -- 9. By which Metaphorical
Expressions, is represented in lively colors, the strange effect, which the
Government of Christ shall have upon those, who by the Ministry of the Word,
shall be subdued by him, and made the obedient Subjects of his Spiritual
Kingdom, and his willing People in the day of his Power, in the Beauty's of
Holiness. They shall through the efficacy thereof upon their Hearts, be so
changed, that they shall seem New Creatures, metamorphosed, or transformed, as
it were, out of Beasts into Men: Such as before were of a fierce, hurtful,
venomous Disposition, like the forementioned savage and venomous bruit
Creatures, should become meek, and gentle, harmless and tractable, and converse
together in peaceable and friendly manner, as becomes the Subjects of the
Prince of Peace, and Professors of the Gospel of Peace. But how, or by what
means shall this strange and stupendous change, be brought to pass? This is
rendered as the Reason, for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. The abounding saving Knowledge of God in
Christ, revealed in the Gospel, and made effectual by the Spirit, shall thus
new mould and transform Men into the Image of God, and make them conformable
unto Christ, who was meek, and lowly in heart, and was love incarnate. We live
in Times wherein Knowledge does abound; but how little of the forementioned
effect, and powerful change of the temper and disposition of Men's spirits, is
discernable, or to be found? Has the Gospel, which at its first Promulgation,
was so powerful to change sinners of the Gentiles into Saints; and to turn them
to God, from Idols, to serve the living and true God; by calling them out of
darkness into mavelous light: has it now lost its power, and become like the
Law, weak through the flesh? No certainly, the everlasting Gospel is still the
Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes; and is mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every
high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing
into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

But though we have the Gospel, yet we have too little of the Spirit of the
Gospel, though the Gospel be come unto us in Word, yet too little in Power and
in the Holy Ghost: for how little of the fruit of the Spirit, which is Love,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, etc. is to be found
amongst those who profess themselves to be the Disciples and Followers of Jesus
Christ? But the Works of the Flesh, are so manifest, that they need not be
named; unless it be to reprove them. Amongst these, rash and sinful Anger, does
partake, and discover much of that Root of Bitterness, from whence it springs,
in its mischievous effects, in which it is so fruitful, that they cannot be
numbered for their multitude, nor enough bewailed for their sinfulness; the
Tongue is called a world of Iniquity, when set on fire by this Passion, yea,
set on fire of Hell, as the Spirit of Truth, who speaks both of Persons and
Things as they are, does assure us, James 3. 6.

No Passion stands in more need of Moderation than this, because it is one of
the frequentest that Men are troubled with, and the most unruly, and does the
least admit of restraint, from Reason, or Religion, the one being dethroned,
and the other quite forgotten, while the Passion prevails and is predominant.
How useful then and seasonable is this Treatise, as a Remedy to so common a
Malady* as an Antidote against so pestilential an Infection; for it is very
catching, and speedily spreads from one to another.

The Reverend, Pious, and Learned Author, has comprised much in a little room,
convincingly setting forth the sinfulness, with the mischievous Effects of rash
Anger; and also the most effectual Means to prevent, restrain, and keep it
within its due Bounds. The Treatise may serve as a Glass, wherein they that are
subject to this Passion, and the Excesses of it, may behold how ill it becomes
any, who pretend to the Government of Reason; and much worse becomes those who
make profession of Religion; for if it be considered, how much of Religion lies
in Love, (Love being the fulfilling of the Law; yea, he that dwells in love,
is said to dwell in God, and God in him.) It Is easy to infer, or whether Men
will make the Inference or no, because unwilling to condemn themselves, (as the
Jews in the Question about John's Baptism) yet the Consequence is unavoidable,
that where there is much Passion, Strife, and Contention, there is but little
of Religion: He that bridleth not his Tongue, may seem to be religious, but his
Religion is vain, James 1. 26. i. e. comes short of obtaining the end of
Religion, which is Salvation. But how lovely and endearing in it self, and what
an ornament to Religion is Meekness, Slowness to Anger, Readiness to Forgive,
and not only so, but to render Good for Evil? A meek and quiet Spirit is in the
sight of God of great price. Reader, let it be so in thine, and then thou will
answer much of the Design of this Treatise, and ours in recommending it, who are

Thy Servants in the Lord, JOHN HOW, JOHN STARKEY.

PROVE. XXV. 28. He that has no rule over his own Spirit, is like a City that
is broken down, and without Walls.
THE Proverbs of a latter Collection, ascribed yet to Solomon (which begins in
this Chapter) admit of more connection than the former did; yet some of them are
entire Sentences, as this is for one, entreating of a Matter diverse to what
went before, and so admits of no Light from the Coherence. And it will be our
work to handle it as an Entire Proposition, and as a Doctrine, in the very
words, viz. That he that has no Rule, etc.

And so show, 1. The sense of the Similitude, A City that has had Walls, and
has them broken down, or is an unwalled Town, is of no Defense. Jeremy sadly
laments the Walls of Jerusalem to be broken down, and Nehemiah also, and was at
great, care and cost to rebuild them; and thought the People but half restored
till this was done: A place that lies open is in a sad condition, and next to
being ruined, especially when Invaders are abroad, and Enemies near, as were
about Jerusalem. In such a Case, (1.) Any Body may come in unnoted, and rob and
spoil; and Forces may come upon them, and nothing to make resistance with, they
may take such a City without the cost or trouble of Besieging. (2.) Any Body
may go out and escape Justice, and go over to the Enemy and betray it. (3.)
Strangers may come in and inhabit, and so spoil it is Riches; may swarm all over
it, and eat up the Inhabitants. The Safety, Honor, and Government of the Place
all void when it lies open on this manner; they are sure of nothing; can call
nothing their own whilst in this Condition.

This in the Application of the Parable signifies, 1. That the Soul of Man was
at first made a defenced City, encompassed with Walls, and bravely secured from
Enemies both from without and from within. 2. That these Walls by the Fall are
broken down, and in the Unregenerate all lies open to Invasion without
Resistance or Defense. 3. That there is something of great value in the Soul
which is worthy to be kept, and in danger to be lost. 4. That it is the great
Work of Grace to build up the Walls which Sin has broken down, and to set up
the necessary Defenses and Fortifications. 5. That to keep them in constant
good repair, is a good Man's great care and duty. The Muringer is a great
Officer in this City. 6. That it is a most deplorable and lamentable thing to
have these Walls broken down that sometimes have been up, and betokens ruin to
that Place (and Soul) if it be suffered to lie in that order.

2dly, In likeness to this, What is it for a Man to have no rule of his own
Spirit; the Man that has no Cohibition or Retention to his own Mind. No
Bridle, says one, no Command or Empire, says another, who does not, or cannot
keep in himself homo animi sui incontinens. Such a Man is obnoxious and liable
to many Losses and Dangers.

Now his own Spirit, the Subject of this Empire and Rule is, 1. By many taken
largely (and truly) for all his Affections; they ought to be bridled and
restrained, The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and the Spirit
that is within us lusts to Envy. James 4. 5. It may signify the force of
both the Concupiscible and Irascible Appetite, that we should check and
restrain the inward corrupt Lustings of the Soul, that they may not break out
into inward or outward act to his own or others prejudice. And Judicious
Cartwright on this place says, It concerns us to search especially what Vice we
are most addicted to, and to take special care that we do not in that thing
break out, by leaving our Spirits without guard. We must take care to compass
about our Mind and Affections with a Wall, Gates and Bars, and all little
enough, that what should not go out be kept in, and what would not come in be
kept out. All Excess in any of our Carnal Affections, restraint must be
carefully and duly laid and kept upon. There are those Men that have no
government of themselves, and their Fort lies open to be taken upon every
Summons by the Enemy. Such are the Lustful and Unclean, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Having
Eyes full of Adultery, and cannot cease from Sin. Every Whore-masters then.
Prove. 7. 21, 22 The Drunkard, that counts it a piece of Kindness and Civility
and good Nature to go with every one that asks him to the beloved Alehouse, and
that on the Lord's Day it self. He has no Walls, can see no time to give over;
he has no rule of himself at all; when he awakes he will seek it yet again,
Prove. 23. 35. He loves drink at first (at least as he says) for Company sake,
but he will soon love it for Drink's sake) that he cannot be without it. Ale
and Wine is his Element, he has commenced and taken his Degrees in Debauchery,
and now adds Drunkenness to Thirst, (Deuteronomy. 29. 19.) has attained to a drunken
Thirst, and now he has made Excess natural and necessary. We have a
distinction of seasoned Drunkards, such as have arrived to a great habit, and
cannot but drink; and can drink too, and not be prejudiced by it. These are men
of Empire in their Slavery: but many Well-wishers to the Trade are spoiled in
the seasoning. But seasoned or seasoning, they have no power in the case. And
for Unrighteousness, Oppression and Covetousness, many have no rule of
themselves at all. If they can but get in the World, they care not whom, nor
how much they hurt, nor how much wrong they do to their own Souls. And some
have no rule of their own Spirits for Acts of Charity; they have no power to
part with any thing, but are scandalously sordid and base in their
Contributions; hardness of heart and covetousness has the whole Empire in
them; they forget to distribute, Hebr. 13. 16. or not at all proportionable to
their place and havings.

2. The Passion of Anger, many restrain it to that Eccl. 10. 14. the Spirit
there signifies Anger. So Prove. 16. 32. he that is slow to anger is better
than the mighty; the more truly great and valiant Person, that keeps down and
keeps in his Passion. He is a Man of great strength that is rarely Angry: 1.
Because there are always Provocations enough: 2. Because a Man is naturally apt
to be provoked. Men are the most mistaken in their Judgments in this thing, to
count him a poor pusillanimous Man, that is not angry when provoked and
injured; it is not weakness of Mind, but great strength and mightiness; He is
better than the mighty, and is liker to God, and in greater honor with God,
Angels and good Men, than the most valiant Man; Fortior est qui se, quam qui
fortissima vincit moenia.
and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City. He that can keep
out of Anger, or can keep it down, is a mighty Conqueror. He is more honorable
than the most glorious Victor over a strong City. He is better, 1. Because it
is a sorer War that a Man has with his own self and with his own Affections,
than to fight with others, because the Enemy is more unseen, and has more
interest, does all by Treachery and Ambuscade; and the danger and loss is
greater to be beaten; in the other Warfare it is but loss of Honor or outward
Goods, etc. but this is in the loss of the Soul. A Man fights with himself to
save his Soul. 2. Because this Victor profits himself, and hurts no Body else;
in the other case Men are sure to hurt others, and it may be not much profit
themselves. 3. Because the other overcomes by the help and hazard of others;
the Patient overcomes per seipsum and in seipso, by himself (assisted only by
Divine Grace) and in himself. 4. The Dispassionate Man overcomes not only Flesh
and Blood, but the powers of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. And I will assure you the
Powers of Hell are no little concerned in these Wars and Victories, since he
that moderates not his wrath gives place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. Now how
aptly does my Text annex to this, That he that has no rule over his own
Spirit, is so far from being such a mighty Man, and a Conqueror, that instead
of being better than he that conquereth a City, he is one so base, that he
loses his City: He makes his City, that might be a strong Hold for God, to lie
open and naked, and to be invaded and spoiled at every turn, as being broken
down and without Walls.

3dly, Some will have it signify the neglect of the Tongue, and certainly
there is much unfortifiedness on this account, and so great damage, when Men
have no rule of themselves in what they say, make no choice in their words, but
to say what is next. Psalm. 39. 1. and 141. 3. When Men pour out every thing
without respect, 1. to Time, 2. Place, 3. Company, (4. many times Truth) to
throw out what comes next, much damage comes to the poor Creature this way; In
the multitude of words there wants no sin, Prove. 10. 19. It is a great thing to
have Walls in this case. It is something of government when a Man can hold his
peace, so as (1.) Not to trouble the Company with impertinent Stories of
himself; and (2.) To be sure not to speak what shall hurt them that are
present, or them that are absent: Prove. 29. 11. A Fool utters all his mind
(or spirit, Marg.) and such an one to be sure has no rule of his Spirit: But a
wise Man keeps it in till afterward; says not all always that ever he can,
but keeps some for another time. The known story of Pambo's Lesson is of
great Instruction. Some wise Heathens had such bounds on their own Spirits,
with respect to their Tongue, as to say, they would never speak at all, but
when their speaking might do more good than their silence. And Thomas Kempis,
It is an easier thing to be silent than not to offend in speech and multitude
of words. Talkative People want rule, and walls about their Spirits. James 3.
2. If any man offend not in word, the same is comparatively a perfect man, and
able also to bridle the whole Body. As if, rule the Tongue and rule all. Prove.
17. 27, 28. He that has knowledge spares his words. It is want of wisdom to
be too talkative. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise; and
he that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of understanding. When some
Stranger was among the wise Men of Athens, (if I misremember not the story) and
took notice of, and writ the wise Sayings as they came from each of them; and
when one among them let nothing fall toward the Collection, and was solicited
to do as the rest had done, he answered, You may report where you go that there
are some in Athens that can hold their peace. Where there are no Doors about
the Lips, nor guard there, there often much hurt is done. Prove. 15. 2. The tongue
of the wise uses knowledge aright; venteth not all at a time, nor at all
times; but the mouth of fools pours [or belcheth or bubleth] out foolishness.
And Verse 28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer [considers to speak
appositely and to purpose] but the mouth of the wicked [for want of that due
consideration speaks at random, and so] pours out evil things.

Now this rule over a Man's own Spirit (to serve my design) I shall take in the
latter Senses conjunctly, with respect to Anger expressed by Words (and Actions,
if it goes so far, as often it does.) But Anger and angry Words seldom are
asunder. Men have no rule of their own Spirits, and lie open without Walls,
that offend this way. 1. Anger is a natural Passion, and may be without Sin;
nay, is given us for the due resisting Sin, Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry, but sin not.
If you be angry, be sure you sin not with it. Our Savior looked on them with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their heart. Anger and grief for men's
sins are justified by our Savours example (as Mr. Baxter on that place). Anger
at sin, and an Anger with grief and pity to the sinner, is the only lawful
Anger. It is Anger at sin, but not an Anger to sin. They that are Angry and
sin, are seldom angry at sin, as sin, at all. Pure Zeal is sanctified Anger. In
human things (says one) Anger is lawful, when it is for Virtues sake, or in the
cause of others, but then it must be in measure. And this modus irascendi [the
measure in Anger] cum ne plus aequo irascamur, tum ne aequo diutius [is when we
are not angry more than is fit, nor longer than is fit.] We pretend Anger (says
a great Divine) to the Sins, not to the Persons, for God's, not our own Cause.
But this may be discovered, 1. In the partition of God's and our own Cause;
Numb. 16.
as Moses in the Rebellion of Korah, he was Angry; God's and his own Cause
engaged in it. But see them single, Miriam and Aaron offered a private Injury
(though a great one) and he gave them not a word. Numb. 12. 3.
The People make a Calf, he throws down the Tables, Exodus 32. 19
and chides all. A meek Lamb in his own Injury, a fierce Lion in God's. 2. If
it be against Sin, we shall not sin in it. As David about Nabal, falls to
swearing, 2 Samuel 25.
and conceives a bloody Intention of Murder, and an ungodly Revenge. 3. Holy
Anger does not unfit us for any Duty toward God or Man. As Moses was angry
with the People, and chid them and more, yet even then he prayed to God for
them. Jonathan angry at his Father, yet a Son and a Subject at the same time. 1
Sa. 20. 34.
Sincere Anger is a loving Anger and a devout Anger (says the same excellent
Man.)

2. Anger therefore to Sin (which is sinful Anger, as God knows most of our
Anger is) is a great Evil, as Mr. Baxter (on the fore-quoted place) but use it
not blindly, rashly, and inordinately to sin. Those that have Walls strong
enough to keep in just Anger and Zeal for God, that it degenerate not into some
selfish end at some side of it, may have no Walls to keep out intemperate
Wrath. Now it is sinful,

1. When it is against that which is good. To be angry when Men do well, and
will not sin with you, nor sin as you do, and to speak evil of good Men and
good Practices, this is Diabolical Wrath. The Spirit that is within us (if we
have no rule over it) lusts to Envy, James 4. 5. Men may be really and
wickedly Angry, when others do better than they can find in their hearts to do.
And hence proceeds detraction and lessening others all that ever we can. And
some have no rule over their own Spirit in this respect. If no Body were better
nor stricter than thou, It would please thee better.

2. When Men are angry at their Brother without cause. No design to offend
thee, and no real true Cause of offense, if examined; yet upon misapprehension
Men often are angry. This is for want of rule of your Siprits. That Men often fly
at others in the dark, and are in a rage without scarce any color of
Provocation; like the barking Dog that flies at the next comer, and it may
prove his own Master.

3. When Men are angry for a small Cause. Anger is too great an Effort of the
Soul, to be let out for a Trifle; like as to raise the Militia to set a
Vagabond in the Stocks. The matter, whether real or no, however it goes, will
not bear so great a commotion, so great a ruffle and disturbance. Thou could
not have been in a greater heat if some body had offered to have killed thee,
than thou art for a wrong look, or a misplaced or mis-accented word. Some with
some sort of People, know not when they shall offend, they will be offended for
so little a thing. It is all one almost what is the occasion, if they can be
angry they will be angry, as if they were big of it, and it were an ease to
them to be delivered.

4. When Men are angry too much for a real great Occasion. To be angry without
Cause, Aristotle expresses it to be quibus non oportet, de quibus non oportet,
and magis quam oportet; with whom we ought not, and for what we ought not, and
if Person and Thing would bear it, yet we must not be angry more than we ought.
The Party has done greatly amiss, yet you should not be angry without bounds,
as to break out into all manner of bad words; some times against God himself.
Some will curse and swear when angry, and speak any thing to villifie his
Brother that has offended him. Racha and thou Fool are nothing with some of
you. Where are your City Walls and Gates and Bars this while? And if it proceed
to Blows it is sadly Excessive; thou art in too great a Passion to strike for
Correction, or indeed to intend it; and to do it for Revenge is a great and
dangerous Usurpation upon the Sovereign Avenger, and he will be avenged on
thee. A moderate Anger and Resentment might have served for a Fellow Servants,
that has a Master in Heaven to account unto.

5. When Men are angry too often. We should be slow to wrath, and
long-suffering, and not easily provoked. But when Men are as often angry as ever
they can; when it may be said to some, when did you ever avoid Anger if there
were occasion for it? where are your Walls this while? The holy and blessed
God, it is truly to his glory said of him, Psalm. 78. 38. Yea, many a time
turned he his Anger away, and did not stir up all his Wrath: But far be it from
you to do so; you have waved many an Opportunity for the Soul, many an
Opportunity for Charity, and of doing Good; but an Opportunity for Anger many
can truly say they have rarely, if ever missed.

6. When Men are Angry with too many. An ordinary thing, when some has angered
us, to be angry with all about us; some one has displeased thee, and now no
body can please thee; the Innocent are disquieted, and* equally treated with
them that have offended; a most unreasonable and unjust thing: This is one way,
that the Fool troubles his own House, and shall inherit the Wind by it, Prove.
11. 29. A hard task some have for their desired Peace, that to please for their
own parts will not do it, unless every body else please too, which is in no
ones power to procure.

7. When Men are Angry too long: Can never give over when they begin. How great
a matter a little fire kindles, James 3. 5. If you intend amendment to the
Party, fewer words in love were liker to effect it; but this length of Dispute
provokes more sin, and no one knows when it will be at an end; and then to let
the Wrath settle, no one knows what it will end in: when you cannot end your
Wrath at one bout, but fall into sullenness, and keep it up for days: O sad!
what a dismantled City is this? Is the Sun gone down upon your wrath? Was there
so great matter for it? or rather, will you so far give place to the Devil
(Ephesians. 4. 26, 27.) as to take him to be your Bedfellow. God is slow to wrath,
and will not keep his Anger; but you are ready to be angry, but not ready to
lay it aside, unless it be quickly to return to it again.

8. When it proves digested wrath, and ends in hatred (which is ira inveterata,
inveterate Anger) and desire to revenge. If you are Angry with any one, so as
to be willing to do them hurt, this is sinful and unchristian. You should not
admit every one that has crossed you, (nay, if he has wronged you) into the
List of your Enemies (for you are to keep no such Roll). And none should be
your Enemy so far, but you should love him, and be ready to do him good so much
the rather, that you may win him with kindness, and overcome evil with good,
Romans 10. 20, 21. To do any one any hurt in your sudden Passion, is a great
wickedness; and to say you did it in your Anger, will not excuse it, (no more
than doing such a thing when drunk) but rather aggravate your sin, and double
your guilt. Who gave you leave to be Angry? To cast Firebrands about, and to
say it was in sport, (Prove. 26. 18, 19.) is as good as to say, I was angry when
I did this undecent thing. What Mischief had David like to have done in his
wrath? and how thankful is he to God that he was restrained and prevented. What
a grief of heart might the angry Expedition of that Day have been unto him,
when he had been in best Prosperity, as was wisely suggested by Abigail, 1 Samuel
25. 31, 32, 33. John Cardinal de Medicis, Son to Cosmo Duke of Florence, rode a
hunting with his Brother Cortia, at the killing of the Hare, the Brothers fell*
to debate about the first hold, each of them attributing the honor of it to
his Hounds; one word drew on another, till the Cardinal gave Cortia a Box on
the Ear; Cortia immediately drew upon him, and thrust him into the Thigh, of
which he died presently: A Servant of the Cardinals, in revenge, gave Cortia a
sore wound, so that (says the Historian) with the Venison, they carried home
to Duke Cosmo one Son dead, and the other wounded, of which he died soon after.
The brave Achievement of Anger let loose, and the destruction upon destruction
upon the City without Walls. But to premeditate Revenge, and to bear Grudges
after you have fallen out, and to dare to say, I will do to him as he has done
to me, (or as in our own Dialect, I hope to be even with him) Prove. 24. 28. or
to rejoice when any Evil comes to him, Verse. 17. This is sublimate Wrath, and
no way consistent with the Religion of Love and Forgiveness, of which you make
Profession. Here is a Spirit ruled by the Devil himself; for you know not what
Spirit ye are of; for the genuine Spirit of the Gospel is Diametrically
otherwise: Luke 9. 55.
Whereas there is envying and strife -- are you not carnal, and walk like Men,
1 Cor. 3. 3. but if you design Hurt and Revenge, you walk like Devils; and
where are your City Walls this while? This poor Soul lies open, naked to all
the Invasions of the Enemy; and where this is in this height* there is
confusion and every evil work, James 3. 16.

I shall subjoyn in this place once for all that famous passage of our Savior
on this Subject, Matthew. 5. 21, 22. where he to vindicate the Law from the
corrupt and too scanty Interpretations of the Jewish Teachers, he speaks of the
Law about Murder; where he takes notice that they made the Law to reach only
the outward Act, and the Punishment only to reach the outward Man: but he shows
that this Law may be broken by the heart, and a Man may be a murderer that is
unjustly angry with his Brother, and hates his Brother. For (1) such a one
would kill if he could, for the time that his Passion is up. And (2) often
murders are owing to such Causes. And such Passions, if indulged, none knows
what they may end in. But the Punishments are from God sure to fall on them
that kill, and on them that are angry in order and tendency to kill, in
allusion to their several courts and degrees of punishment, which rise from
simple Death, Stoning and the Sword; and for heinous and most flagitious Crimes
to burning alive, or burning their Bodies when dead, an execrable thing among
them; and this was counted the Punishment of the Valley of Hinnom; you shall
find worse from God than all this comes to. If you be angry without cause, so
as to be wrathful and evil-minded toward your Brother, to hate him, and wish
him hurt; if it go no further than the heart* it is a damnable sin, if not
repented of; but greater the sin and danger if it break out into words: To say
Racha, a vilifying expression, and the action that usually accompanied it is
implied, spitting on him or at him; vilifying him unjustly, as the vilest of
Men; with respect to his Person and outward Condition, to treat him with the
greatest Scorn and Contempt. A thing God allows not toward any, for the honor
of our common Nature. A Malefactor that deserves disgraceful Scourging yet he
must be beaten within such a number of stripes, (Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3.) least thy
Brother (even such a one as this, even as one at the Rogues Post) should seem
vile unto thee. And will God suffer it unrevenged, that ye shall in your Spleen
and Passion vilify any one on some private (it may be but conceited) Injury,
to call him ugly, beggarly, pitiful Fellow, because he has angered you. But it
is higher yet to call him Thou Fool; in Scripture sense this reflects upon his
Mind and Morals, as a most wicked Person, to be cast out of all Society, as an
Heretic and one Accursed, and judged fit for nothing but Hell. To reprobate
them in thy Rage and Malice, and wickedly to pass thy doom upon him, and to
damn him as far as in thee lies, by making him a Scripture Fool, which is a
flat wicked Man. Dr. Lightfoot will have rash Anger to be guilty of the
Judgment of God, and these two latter to be obnoxious to Punishment from the
Magistrate, as things not to be tolerated, as tending to break the Peace, and
to further Mischief if not curbed. And Dr. Gell on this place says, There ought
to be in the Church, Courts and Councels to judge and censure reproachful words.

All shows the great evil of unbounded unjust Wrath, the evil of it and the
mischief that it does, and that much more if it take degrees with you, and
break out in unchristian words, it shall not escape the Judgment of God, and if
not repented of, it shall meet with his Hell fire properly so called.

Men must not begin Anger without a just Cause, nor continue in Anger above a
just time. One reckons up (appositely enough) four sorts of angry Men: 1. Some
it is soon kindled in, and soon goes out; the choleric People, like Gunpowder,
no sooner touched, but instantly fire in your face, yet all but a sudden flash.
2. Some long in kindling, and long in going out. These are of a melancholy
temper, long before they burn, but last a great while. 3. Some soon kindled,
and long in burning; and these wrathful Wretches are worst of all. 4. Some long
in kindling and soon cooled; and these are best of all, and likest unto God;
they will not begin Anger unreasonable, nor continue it unseasonable.

There are two things to be done to pursue this Similitude to the designed end
of it.

1. To show the Damages we are liable unto whilst thus unwalled and
unfortified, which may serve as Motives to the Duty implied.

2. To show the way to be fortified better, as the best Means against this
great Evil.

1. The Damages we are liable unto, by not having due rule over our own
Spirits, by being unwalled and unfortified. Our Wall is broken down, and we lie
open.

1. In General. 1. To our vigilant Enemy to break in upon us at pleasure, and
that is the Devil; if we abide in Wrath, we give place to him, Ephesians. 4. 27.
which implies he has a chief hand in kindling this fire, and adding fuel to
it, and is highly pleased with it, and gets great Advantages against us by it.
You make one another sad, but him merry by your clamours and quarrellings. Now
is his time, 1. To destroy Love; 2. To aggravate the Offenses; 3. To help you
with provoking words; 4. To put you on in your heat to say or do something,
that else would not have been said or done; and 5. To lay a foundation for more
work of the same kind for the future, by boiling it to hatred and malice and
enmity and perpetual uncharity.

2. To our base Corruptions to break out (which yet had been kept in) to the
disquiet of some, and scandal of others. One would not have thought there had
been such a superfluity of naughtiness in thee, as this Passion has let out to
the hurt of all about thee. That gets out now which will not easily be gotten
in again; and that gets vent now, that will not be fetched back again. Such base
words had never took Air but for this occasion: but where there is no Walls,
these Salleys will be frequent as they are filthy and mischievous, such as are
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and evilspeaking and malice, Ephesians. 4. 31. If
there be any thing within against thy Brother, that were fitter to be kept in,
now it breaks out to his reproach and great prejudice, by the hurt it may do
him, and the hurt it may tempt him to do in his own defense or vindication, or
it may be Revenge. Any thing that is evil within (and there is always enough)
may now break out, for the Walls are down, and there is nothing to keep it in.

2. Both these ways more particularly, there is great hurt done by, and to,
this unguarded Spirit. By the Incursions and Excursions beforementioned. It
damnifies

1. In thy Innocence, and lays thee under guilt; thou can not be innocent,
and do thus from time to time; thou art a Transgressor of the holy Command,
that forbids unjust and inordinate Anger. Thou sinnest in thy self, within thy
self, and thou sinnest in thy words and actions. He loves transgression that
loves strife, Prove. 17. 19. and an angry man stirs up strife, and a furious
man abounds in transgressions, Prove. 29. 22. It is sin, and that is no little
evil; but the Sin of Anger seldom goes alone. You should rather hate Anger,
that occasions you to swear, than think to excuse swearing by being angry
abominable.
Swearing, In the fit of Anger Men care not what they say, true or false, and
after often to cure and mitigate the matter, they stick not falsely to represent
the whole thing.
lying, reviling, violence, etc. do often attend it.

2. In thy good frame and disposition for holy duty, without which thou can
not live. The performance and acceptance of Religious Duties is sadly hindered
hereby, because rash Anger is so great a sin; therefore before you offer your
gift you should end your quarrels, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. Take special heed of Anger
that your Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. that it hinder not the duty, or
the success of it; you must remember to pray lifting up holy hands, without
wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8.

3. Consequent, or a part of this, it will damnifie in the presence of God to
thy Soul, without which thou will have a poor dull life, Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3.
Thou have fumed him to a distance from thee, and shall not find him to
influence thee and comfort thee, as sometimes he has done. He may well take
his turn to be angry, and thou may find it to thy cost.

4. In thy Peace. If you would not grieve the Spirit that should seal you, you
must put away all bitterness and wrath, Ephesians. 4. 30, 31. The sweet Spirit will
not abide in the House, where there is so much noise, that good men have no
mind to be there, if they could help it. No marvel if you want inward peace,
when you are so unquiet, that we cannot know by this work, what Spirit you are
off. To be sure in this temper and outrage you are not of the Spirit of Christ,
choose what you are in the main. And if the Truth of Grace can be consistent
(at least evident) amidst such habituated Passion, is very hard to understand.
That sad word (of a great Man of God) I have often mentioned, That they rarely
have much Peace of Conscience that do not make Conscience of Peace. Who will
wonder, or almost pity you, when you complain of unassuredness, when you
indulge Anger as you do. How can you hope that God should be well pleased with
you, when no body almost can please you.

5. In thy wisdom. It is want of presence of mind (that is, of Wisdom) or thou
would not turn thy self out of doors, on this fashion, for a slight cause, or
for any cause, Prove. 17. 27. a man of understanding is of an excellent (or as
it is in the Margin) of a cool Spirit. It is a Nabal, and folly is with him;
that is, morose and evil humoured that he cannot be spoken to, (1 Samuel 25. 17.
25.) that sets Will and Humor above Reason. Anger rests in the bosom of
Fools. Eccl. 7. 8, 9. The discretion of a Man deferreth his Anger, Prove. 19.
11. It is want of Discretion to be angry. Ira [Anger] is ab ire, to go out of
himself, and to be pacified, is redire ad seipsum, to return to himself. A
proud man (says one) has no God, an envious man no neighbor, and an angry man
has not himself.

6. In thy Honor and Reputation. It is a great abatement to any man that he is
a rash and passionate man. Proud and haughty Scorner is his name that deals
in proud wrath, Prove. 21. 24. It is a blemish to him to be under such a
Character. An Heathen advised an angry man to look in the Glass in the
Paroxysm, what a disfigurement it is, Eyes flaming, Countenance distorted,
Mouth frothing, etc. Nescio utrum magis detestabile vitium an deforme, Seneca.
I know not whether it be a more detestable or deformed Vice. Men have no
pleasure in converse with such a man, lest he be hurt or infected by him, Prove.
22. 24, 25. And is it not a fine credit for thee to be marked, and to be warned
of, as one to have as little to do with as may be? Make no friendship with an
angry man, etc. He is too hot to make a Friend of, or to keep in with any
while, or to have much comfort from, or not to be prejudiced by at some turn,
or at the long run. But especially it damnifies the honor of the Religion thou
professest; when Men shall have an occasion to say, If this be your Religon, or
these be your religious Folks, fair fall a good quiet Carnal man, as People
call them.

7. In thy Authority, where thou should have it and use it for God. He that
knows not how to rule his own House, how should he rule in the Church of God,
1 Timothy 3. 5. And how should he rule his own House, that cannot rule himself?
This passionateness makes him cheap to those he should govern. They will not
heed him when he speaks importantly, because he often speaks passionately and
unadvisedly. Such a one is an angry passionate Person, and therefore not so
much to be heeded. The words of the wise are heard in quiet, more than the cry
of him that rules among fools, Eccl. 9. 17. A quiet sedate man that speaks
quietly and weightily, shall be more heeded and obeyed, than those that make a
noise* and think to rule with great words, and by strong hand, whom none but
Fools will much regard.

8. In thy ease and comfort of life. Anger of it self is trouble, and brings
troubles from those we converse with, and God often severely punishes this Sin in
crosses and disappointments, in sickness and sin of relations to tame them. God
does not fail to afflict to make men see, and repent of this sin, and to seek
Peace with God and Men: Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who
has babbling? who has wounds without cause? Prove. 23. 29.
but the angry man as well as the drunken; as well he that has no rule of his
own Spirit, as he that tarries long at the wine.

9. In the danger of the Soul. He that is angry with his brother without cause,
is in danger of the judgment, Matthew. 5. 22. that is, of God's wrath and
judgment, if it be not repented of and forsaken; and this judgment of God
reaches the Soul with respect to eternity: And the truth is, the danger is
greater, because men are loath to be in a fault for Excess this way, and so to
humble themselves, as they should do, that they may obtain mercy and favor of
the Lord. And if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
which is in heaven forgive you, Matthew. 6. 15. the sad Process of habituated
Anger. The poor Wretch is so used to it, that Salamander-like, he lives in the
fire, always crossing, and chiding, vexing himself and those that are about
him; it is his Element. Angry with Enemies and angry with Friends; angry for
little things, angry for nothing; angry at his work, angry at his meat; angry
in health, angry in sickness, Eccl. 5. 17. Has great wrath in his sickness. It
may be he is angry at his sickness, or at least angry with all about him when
sick, and no body can please him] and it may be sadly feared it will end in
wrath passively, least the remainder of wrath the Lord put on [as some read
that instead of restrain; Psalm. 76. 10.] least he now take his rightful turn of
Anger, and make thee feel it to all eternity.

To improve our Parable, I shall conclude this Head in comparing this City
broken down to the lamentable condition of a glorious City, in the taking of
it, and the desolation of it. 1. In the taking of it (Jerusalem I mean) Jer.
39. 2, 3. the City was broken up. And all the Princes of Babylon came in, and
sat in the middle gate [where their own Kings and Rulers use to sit, to rule
and do Justice, and acts of Government] even Nergal-sharezer, Samger-nebo,
Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergah-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the residue of the
Princes of the King of Babylon. Now I sometimes think that it was in no honor
to these men, that they are named thus in the holy Records; but it is to give
Emphasis to this sad change which sin had brought upon this famous City. To
have men of such names, of such uncouth sounds sit here, so diverse to Hilkiah,
Eliakem, etc. Strangers, Heathens, Psalm. 79. 1.
etc. O God, the Heathen are come into thy Inheritance, Jerusalem have they
defiled. So when thy City is broken up and dismantled by the Enemy, that always
lays siege to it, and thou suffer thy self to be invaded. O what a gang of
Aliens sit in thy Gate, that where Reason and Grace and the Spirit use to rule,
now Nergal and Rab-saris and Rab-mag sit in thy Gate, and has the whole Command
for the time of thee. Envy, and Hatred, and Malice, and Jealousy, and Rage,
and Cruelty, with the rest of the Princes of Babylon, have the sole rule in
thee. And not unlike 2. to the Desolation of this City, will it be here, if
Repentance do not relieve. A poor Wretch given up to his Passion is like the
City. Isa. 13. 21, 22. The wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, Zijm and
Ochim.
and their houses shall be full of doleful Creatures; Owls shall dwell there,
and Satyrs shall dance there, and the wild Beasts of the Islands shall cry in
their desolate Houses, and Dragons in their pleasant Palaces; that is, Anguish,
and Vexation, and Sadness, and Darkness, and Discontent, etc. shall overrun
and possess this Soul.

Enough sure is said to persuade us against this great Evil, of having no rule
of our own Spirits, but to lie broken down and without walls.

The second thing to be spoken to, is, What is to be done, so as to be
fortified, to have the rule over our own Spirits, so as not to be as a City
broken down, and without walls. We see the Mischief that is done to, and by
ungoverned Spirits; what is to be done for remedy? And this may serve for helps
and means in this important case.

1. A true Principle of Good in the Soul. To be transformed by the renewing of
your mind, Romans 12. 2. To be brought into the true Spirit of Christ, which is a
Spirit of Meekness. The hidden man of the heart, is the ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4. A Soul full of the true fear of God, to be truly
regenerate. The old man is a man of wrath; put off all these, anger, wrath,
malice, for you have put off the old man with his deeds, 3 Col. 8. 9. True
Grace builds up the Walls, and engarisons the Soul for God. Grace reduces the
Soul to its rightful Lord, and at the same time it is restored to the rule of
it self; like a City delivered from a Usurper is restored to its lawful
Sovereign, and to its own Franchises the same day. Base men in Office before,
and now the best bare rule that were turned out before. Then Lust and Pride,
and Passion, and Covetousness ruled, now Reason and Discretion, and a good
Understanding do bear sway. Prove. 2. 10, 11. When Wisdom enters into thine
heart, and Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul, Discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee.

2. The Example of Christ; whose Name we bear, and after whom we are called
[Christians] for his Patronage and Imitation. Frustra appellamur, Christiani,
nisi sumus imitatores Christi.
He did not cry, nor was his voice heard in the streets. Learn (says he) of me,
for I am meek, dispassionate. In a world of provocations it was great wisdom in
that great Man, that to keep him out of Anger, had that saying Matthew. 11. 29.
written in his Study always before him, to temper himself by whenever he was
provoked; Christ endured the contradictions of sinners against himself. Hebr.
12. 3. Christ has left us an example that we should follow his steps, who when
he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. and that
in the case of Life it self, and great bodily Sufferings; and will not this
Example serve to bear slight Indignities, which is our usual Exercise at most?

3. To live in a constant sense of God's presence. Psalm. 119. 168. I have kept
thy Precepts and thy Testimonies, for all my ways are before thee. To break his
Law before his face is very daring; It Is dangerous to threaten or strike in the
King's presence, nay, in the Verge of his Court. If you can get out of God's
Court, you may chide on. Besides the undecency, rudeness, and unmannerliness,
not to forbear your Contests, whilst he stands by, is unaccountable, a respect
expected by any stranger, not much better than your selves. It may cool you,
one would think, to consider that God has seen and heard all. Potest miles
coram rege suo non irasci, ob solam Regiae Majestatis eminentiam, Basil. A
Soldier (though Wrath and Envy seem to be the essential qualities of a Soldier)
can bridle his Rage, and put up an Injury in the presence of his King, how much
more should not God's Eye check us in these transports of ours?

4. To labor for true Humility, and low esteem of your selves. If you were
lowly in heart you would be meek, Matthew. 11. 29. Only by pride comes
contention, but with the well-advised is [humility and] wisdom, Prove. 13. 10.
You are too good to be controlled, and no body knows any thing but you, and
Wisdom no doubt shall die with you, and that makes you testy and touchy, and
impatient of any Contradiction or Noncompliance, as if you were infallible, and
none must think or speak otherwise than you do, on pain of your high
displeasure. Prove. 28. 25. He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife, but
he that puts his trust in the Lord shall be made fat. He that over-values
himself despises other men, and is impatient of Contradiction, and the least
Slight or Injury, and indulgeth his own Passion, shall not be fat, but shall be
lean and miserable: But the humble man is one that trusts in the Lord. He is
mean and vile in his own eyes, and therefore trusts not to himself, but to God
only; making God's Will, and not his own Will and Passion, the rule of all his
Actions, and can easily deny himself, and yield to others; all which are
excellent Preservatives against strife. He shall live happily and comfortably,
because he avoids that strife which makes men's lives miserable. (Mr. Pool on
the place.) Mr. Ball hated Passion in Professors, and would say, Look well to
your hearts, for Passion is the effect of Pride. Keep a fresh sense of thy own
vileness upon thy Soul. This humbleness of mind will make us for bearing and
forgiving, Col. 3. 12 Alas! all Wrath and Contention, and spiteful Words, and
Revenge comes from Pride, and some rooted conceit of some Worthiness in thy
self. Remember thy self, and it may make thee meek and placable, though abused
and provoked. Alas! Who am I, they vilify me, and am I not vile? I am beholden
to my Enemies or my Friends when Angry, to know my faultiness and
imperfections. Can they say worse by me than I know by my self? A great matter,
if it be true who speaks it: This poor man knows not me; or this is not all the
evil he would have said by me.

5. To be mortified to the world. Often your great quarrels are about worldly
Concerns, which if you were mortified to as you should be, you would not count
them worthy of so much heat and passion about them. Those that are covetous,
are often horribly cross; they are afraid the World should overgo them, and so
often withold more than is meet, and trouble their own House, Prove. 11. 29. How
should sinful Anger be kept out, when Wives are straightened, and have not honor
(of due maintenance as the word imports) and are not used as fellow- heirs of
the grace of life, (1 Pet. 3. 7.) And in other Occurrences and Occasions, men's
too much love to the World will hazard the greatest kindnesses, if any thing of
Meum and Tuum be touched upon; then these Dogs snarl and fight about their
Carrion. Let the World rule you less, and you will rule your selves better.

6. To live by faith. There is an evil heart of unbelief in all roots of
bitterness, that spring up among you, Hebr. 3. 12. 12. 15.
one toward another at any time. Faith in unseen things sets a huge wall about
our Spirits, against all Incursions or Excursions to our prejudice. Actual
believing gives reality to greater things, which may possess our Minds, and
stir up other Affections in us, to employ us, so as not to be vacant to such
mean things as these are that we vex about. Moses endured, as seeing him who is
invisible, (Hebr. 11. 27.) And Faith will fetch in help from Heaven, to repel
and overcome all Assaults made upon us, Luke 17. 4, 5. Our Savior spoke
considerably to this matter, when he advises his Disciples to take heed to
themselves, and that is about passing by and forgiving many provocations, for
you are sure to have many; and unless you take great heed, you will be liable
to miss in this, as in any thing, in not forgiving as you should do: but it is
your duty to forgive, and that again and again. And on this the Apostle said
unto the Lord, Increase our Faith; without more Faith then yet we have, we can
never pass by such reiterated Provocations; but if our Faith be increased, it
will furnish us with Arguments enough, why we should do it, and with strength
in Soul whereby we may be able to do it, and a great deal more. When your
Passions are so high, your Faith is low; believe, and you would be calmer at
any time; Faith is a mighty stickler of Tumults in the Soul; and Faith is set
aside when you give way to such intemperancy of Spirit as you do. Through Faith
(and it alone) you do more than subdue Kingdoms, [you may subdue your selves]
and work righteousness [even the righteousness of God, which the wrath of men
never works, Jam. 1. 20.] and out of weakness be made strong, Hebr. 11. 33,
34.
wax valiant in fight, and turn to fight these armies of the Aliens. What a
disappointment and defeat does believing Patience give to your Enemy, when
Anger and Wrath is suppressed and turned by? He thought by it to have had the
Plunder of the City, and to have quartered his Legions upon you, to have
enthralled you, and to have kept possession for him. But by the Fortifications
of Faith and Patience you hold out, and keep your Peace and a good Conscience,
and it may be you cause your Enemy to fly to his loss, and gain to your selves
by it, to increase your strength against another time, from the Success and
Comfort you find in this stout resistance.

7. Live in Love. Christian Love in its genuine Latitude would rule thy Spirit.
It will cover a multitude of Sins of other Folks, and prevent abundance of thy
own. If Love suffers long, and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not its self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 7. Where could Anger
get in? If love had this ascendency in the Soul, there would be no room for
Passion. And it is evident that so much the more Anger, so much the less Love,
at any time, look and judge where you will. He that covers a Transgression
seeks love, Prove. 17. 9. And he that truly loves, will cover what
Transgressions he can. Uncharitable suspicion (says one) is a cause of Anger, a
good disposition makes a good exposition. Love one another, and then you will
not willingly offend, nor easily be offended with one another. And study the
Love of God; 1 John 4. 11. If God has so loved us, we ought also to love one
another. Under sense of the Divine Favor, it is so taking, that we can do no
less than love all about us: In a sense of his turning his wrath from us, and
forgiving us, it cannot but make us lay down all wrath, and forgive all that
offend us. And if we labor under the want of the manifestation of Divine Love,
and feel his Displeasure, that he may be pleased with us, we would sure be
willing to let our displeasure toward others, to fall, and to be at peace,
that we might have peace. A thing not to be expected whilst we continue our
Anger and undue Wrath toward any, Matthew. 11. 26. But if you do not forgive,
neither will your Father which is in Heaven forgive your trespasses, Matthew. 18.
35.

8. Labor to have the heart always possessed with some holly thing. To be
always under the powerful influence of some good word of God, to keep the heart
savoury toward God; Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee. The word of God should dwell in you richly, Col. 3.
16. If the Book of the Law is prescribed to the King, that he must have it with
him, and read in it all the days of his life; among other reasons, that it
might help the temper of his Spirit, that his heart might not be lifted up
above his brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 20. Why should not this blessed word, read
constantly by every good man (with understanding, observation and application)
help his heart to carry without pride and passion toward all about him? If it
be sufficient to temper the heart of a King, shall it not be enough to temper
such poor Wretches as thee and me. You should have Forces from Heaven to keep
Garrison, or you can never keep Enemies out, nor keep order within. An empty
drained heart will easily be surprised and disturbed.

9. Keep constant watch in this case. We must, because of the many Enemies that
are ready to come against us, make our Prayer unto our God, and set a watch
against them day and night because of them* Neh. 4. 9. In the case of Offenses,
and passing by and forgiving, you will easily miss it, (there will always be so
many occasions) unless you take great heed, implied in that of Luke 17. 3. (as
I hinted before). If you would carry as you should, do toward all Relations
and others you have to do with, you must take heed to your Spirits, Mal. 2. 15,
16, you must cure your Miscarriages at the root, by getting your Spirits better
compounded, and mixed and made up with the Graces that make a right Spirit, and
then you must watch to keep it so, that you may neither deliberately nor
suddenly deal treacherously. Though your Walls be built, you should keep a
watch too, and all little enough.

10. Religious and rational Consideration. Have you no consideration with you,
that you are thus transported on this manner? Consider,

1. That rash Anger does not work the Righteousness of God. Jam. 1. 20. It
hinders duty to God, and often brings in much sin.

2. That it seldom rightly intends our own good, and rarely effects it. What
does Anger do, but what Calmness might do, and do it better, and escape this
trouble of vexation? unless like the Dog in the Fable, that would not have his
Bone unless he might fight for it. The soft tongue breaks the bone, Prove. 25.
15. Wise men speak quietly, and do their business without noise, (Eccl. 9. 17.)
and by this means prevail more with the weightiness of their counsel and calm
delivery, than he that has more power, and deals all in proud wrath. If what
I would have done, may sooner and sooner be done by fair words, who would chide
to have it done? What a fine Life is it to have all things done in quiet?
Unless you love Anger, who would be angry, if he could do things as well, nay
better, without Anger.

3. Consider that provocations are either intended, or not intended, (as to the
Party you are provoked by). If not intended, you do wrong to the Party to lay
such an imputation upon him, to lay to his charge the thing that he knew not,
or thought not of. If intended to provoke you, you are a Fool to gratify him,
and to fulfill his Design upon you. None can vex you, unless you will your self.

4. Consider the quality of the person you are concerned with. Seneca has
almost done this to my hand. Is it a good man that has done thee the Injury,
do not believe it. Is it a bad man, do not wonder at it. To strive with thy
Equals is doubtful, with thy Superiors madness; with thy Inferiors sordid and
base; either he that has wronged thee is stronger than thou, or weaker. If
stronger spare thy self; if weaker spare him. A Christian may argue much more
on this manner. If the Person provoking be above you, let good manners make you
bearing. If below you, contend not, least it savor of pride, etc. It is some
want of your part to conceive an offense, or possibly they would not give you
offense. Their Ignorance is to be pitied, and not contended with. Answer not a
fool acccording to his folly, least thou be also like unto him, Prove. 26. 4. If
a bad man, have a care of exposing Religion by thy salleys of wrath, that you
prejudice him not to Religion for want of a little Self-denial. The Turk that
suffered a Renegado to beat him, and being asked by a Christian why he would
suffer it, said, If you will turn to our Religion, you shall beat me too; may
shame us to high degree, that will abate nothing of our Humor, let it be never
so great a prejudice to our holy Religion. If a good man, be loath to grieve
him. If both good, more shame for you, that neither of you should have wit nor
grace to forbear, or take up the matter betimes. If good Folks cannot spare one
another, what can be expected from Enemies? or what could the most Carnal do
worse to you, or to one another?

5. Consider that nothing can be got by contention, if you carry the day, that
can countervail the loss of your Patience and Love in the contest. That
celebrated saying of Gregory, It is better many times to fly from an Injury by
silence, than to overcome it by replying.

6. Consider that all must be repented of. And if it be as bitter to you as it
is to some (that are rarelier guilty and less transported) you will not buy no
pleasure and repentance at so dear a rate; and you will find your selves
further off, the oftener you repent of this, unmanly, much more unchristian sin;
you might at any time, when all in a Tumult, with the Town-Clark, dismiss the
Assembly, Acts 19. 40. with this, We are in danger to be called in question for
this days uproar, there being no cause, whereby we may give an account of this
concourse.

7. Consider that nothing in any anger with others is lawful, farther than you
design and effect their good thereby, and not at all to satisfy your own
Humor, or promote Revenge. And it is easy to see that another way is more
likely to compass this. One advised, That we would not be angry at men that do
amiss, but rather endeavor to cure their Faults, by the example of Physicians,
that are not angry at the sick, but apply themselves to cure their Disease* 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance.

8. Consider, least besides your own, you contract hereby the guilt of others
sin, which you occasion. You provoke them to wrath too, to think, and speak,
and do amiss as well as you, and so sin abounds in more than in your selves, or
you occasion grief to others, and no good to your self. Thus Eccl. 9. 18. one
of these sinners destroys much good, spoils Peace and Devotion in others; and
when thy Anger is done, it may be his will continue to do hurt for a great
while. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water, Prove. 17. 14.
[He pulls up the Flood-gate, or cutteth the Dam, and can neither stop the
water, nor know how far it may overflow, nor what mischief it may do] therefore
leave off contention before it be medleth with, Prove. 30. 33. It cannot be
expected, but that as the churning of Milk brings forth Butter, and the
wringing of the Nose brings forth Blood [instead of blowing it, that should
purge the Head, and cleanse the Nose] so the forcing of wrath brings forth
strife. Unless we did more good in the world, we should be mighty tender of
doing hurt to others, as we are sure to do hereby; such as we know not, how
much or to how many, nor for how long. One is angry, and he angers another, and
then he is angry at the others anger, and so in infinitum, there is no end when
it is once begun.

9. Consider that you should do as you would be done unto; Eccl. 7. 21, 23.
Also take no heed to every word that is spoken, [so as to catch at it, and be
angry at it, and take it proudly, etc.]. (1.) Have thou never done as much to
any other; what does thine own heart tell thee on this account? (2.) Or may
thou not soon do as much, Gal. 6. 1. Or (3.) would thou be willing to be
screwed, and aggravated, and no defense admitted, as thou do no with thy
Brother with whom thou strivest? Or (4.) would have God deal so with thee?
Job 31. 13, 14, 15. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my
maidservant, when they contended with me; [As if Servants may not sometimes be
in the right, and must have their Cause despised, and their just Defense
refused; because Servants, they must take it right or wrong. Would thou be
willing to be thus born down, and not suffered to speak if thou had Truth on
thy side, merely because thou art an Inferior?] But what then shall I do when
God rises up, and when he visits, what shall I answer him? [if he be extreme
to mark what is amiss, Psalm. 130. 3.
who can stand?] to mark every little thing, and to aggravate our real
Transgressions, as we do Appearances, it would be very sad; and how can we look
for other? Col. 4. 1. Masters give to your Servants that which is just and
equal, [one part whereof is imputing fault unto them] knowing that ye have a
Master in Heaven, that will judge you without Passion, and call you to account
for unjust judging of those that are under you. But Job goes on, verse 15. Did
not he that made me in the womb, make him; and did not one fashion us in the
womb? There is no such difference between us, that there must be such a
distance, we are even in the Womb and the Grave, and therefore what needs this
insulting and proud wrath. In a word, if Servants could observe that duty of
not answering again, and Masters and Mistresses that of forbearing threatening,
(Tit. 2. 9. Ephesians. 6. 9.) there would be more peace in our Families and in our
Consciences too, than there is.

10. Consider that none gains by all your Anger (or is pleased with it) but the
Devil. He has the pillage of the Field, whoever gets the Battle. He rejoices
in your vexings and bitter words, whereby you grieve one another. He makes the
matter worse, if he can, and gets it to settle into prejudice and hatred, that
there may be matter for Anger from this day forward, for what was done at this
time. Chrysostom has an ingenious concession in this case: Will thou remember
Injuries? will thou be an Enemy? will thou revenge thy self? Spare thy own
Members, and be an Enemy to the Devil; never forget the Injury he has done
thee and whole Mankind. You may thrust your Sword-hilt and all into his Heart,
and add another stab; and how is this done? why, when we spare one another, and
are kindly affectioned one to another: It is what defeats much of the Devils
work in the world, and will as much subvert his Kingdom as any thing you can do.

Lastly, Consider and believe the universal Sovereign Providence of God, which
extends to every thing, and all the actions of men. There is nothing you can be
angry at, but what he has ordered and appointed. A Sparrow falls not to the
ground without the Father, Matthew. 10. 29. The thought of this may curb me to
dare to kick it when it is down, or any the like thing, because it fell not
without him. If any one acts crossingly, or speaks provokingly, it is what God
has appointed, and who can say to him what do thou? This quieted David when
Shimei cursed him; Let him alone, God has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16. 11. He orders
all these things, to correct what evil I have done, to try my grace, to do me
good by it; and therefore I will keep my mouth and heart too, under all
occasions of wrath.

The 11th Help is, Have a care of a prejudice in your heart toward any one. A
pique is a very ill unchristian thing; to lay up an aversation in the Heart
toward any, lays in for Anger toward that Person upon every occasion. Such a
one can never say or do any thing right with thee; old grudges makes Anger stir
upon every occasion; Ill Will never speaks well. Genesis 37. 4. When Joseph's
Brethren saw that his Father loved him more than all his Brethren, they hated
him, and could not speak peaceably to him. Some that we have prejudice to, we
cannot endure to hear them speak, but are snapping and snarling at them,
nothing is right which they say, nor we cannot afford to speak kindly to them,
nor are willing to hear any speak well of them, 2 Samuel 13. 32. By the
appointment of Absalom, this has been determined, from the day that he forced
his sister Tamar. A grudge conceived, lies, and breaks out sadly. From such a
day, such a passage, there has been ill will toward such a Person, and thence
is all this passion toward him. I shall suggest two things under this Head.

1. That we take heed of Tales and Reports of others to their prejudice. Prove.
16. 28. A froward man sows strife, and a whisperer separateth very friends;
and so he that loves to repeat old things, does the same, to set men at a
distance one from another, Prove. 17. 9. Lev. 19. 16. Prove. 11. 13. and 26. 20.
therefore love not Tales, Non vis iracundus esse, ne sis curiosum. Sen.
and take no heed to every word that is said. Hear both sides, He that is
inquisitive is often vexed.
and conceive not a prejudice upon hearsay. Isa. 11. 3. The blessed Messiah
would not reprove after the hearing of the ear. To judge by hearsay; a great
fault and weakness in many, that if any has spoken ill of a man, (whether true
or no) that they take up with it, and judge and blemish him by it always, as if
it pleased you rather to hear evil than good by another. Now a right
Christian-heart desires that others should do good, and so are not hasty to
believe evil of any. 1 Cor. 13. 6, 7. He rejoices not in iniquity, but
believes all things, hops all things. Many may have cause to say as David,
If they be the children of men that have stirred thee up against me, cursed are
they before the Lord, 1 Samuel 26. 19.

2. That we clear our hearts of all prejudices toward any one whatsoever, to
retain no Offense, though never so real, but to forgive and forget too.
Injuries hurt not more in receiving them, than in remembering them. A small
thing (says one) shall go as it comes, a greater may dine and sup with me, but
it shall not lodge with me. Of the two (says another) it is better that the
Scum boil over by Anger, than boil in by Malice. Some say they forgive, but
they will never forget; a Divinity the Scripture knows not. God says, he blots
out our inquities, and remembers them no more, Isa. 43. 25.
[as if he did not only cross them out, but blot them out] And we are to
forgive, as God for Christ's sake does forgive us. Ephesians. 4. 32.
You cannot remember the Offense, but you retain it, and you are thereby in
readiness to revenge, by words at present, and in act too upon a temptation.
Some Heathens have done worthily this way: Tully said of Julius Caesar, That he
was wont to forget nothing but Injuries. It is a notable Gloss that the Jewish
Writers have on Lev. 19. 18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against
the children of thy People, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. They
distinguish between avenging and bearing a grudge. They illustrate it thus,
Thou shall not avenge. If Reuben ask Simeon such a Courtesy, and he deny him;
and soon after he himself comes to Reuben to ask the like of him, and he says,
No; I will no more do it for you, than you did it for me. Now bearing a grudge
is, when in such a case, Reuben should do the thing, but should say, I will do
it, and will not do by you, as you did by me: in this he transgresses, for he
remembers the offense, though he does not retaliate it. God forgives thoroughly,
his wickedness shall not be mentioned if he repent. Ezekiel. 18. 22
So our Brethrens failings should not be mentioned by us; they are not to be
upbraided with any thing they have done unto us; this through forgiving should
be studied and practiced. It is an observable thing, that if we go to
Ordinances (Prayer, Sacraments, etc.) if thy Brother has ought against thee,
thou must leave thy Gift at the Altar, and go and satisfy thy Brother, and
then come to offer thy Gift, Matthew. 5. 23. but if thou have ought against thy
Brother, Mark 11. 25. thou may make a short work of it, forgive that thy
Father may forgive thee. Injury to thy Brother thou must satisfy, before thou
prayest or come to the Sacrament: but Injuries to thee must not hinder; thou
have the power within thy self, that want of Charity shall not hinder thy duty.
Thou must (and may) forgive without any more ado, and so need not delay on
that account to offer thy Gift. This clearing thy Soul of all Offenses toward
thee, is of great concernment. To rid thy self of any grudge toward any Person
in the whole world, will be of great ease and comfort to thee. Like a good Man
whom I knew, that in viewing his Shop-Books, and found here and there some old
Debts standing, he took his Pen and crossed them all, and said, If you will not
be even with me, I will be even with you. If the Debt has been satisfied, it
ought to be crossed and blotted out too; but if not satisfied, nor never like
to be, what should it stand to trouble me in the frequent review of it. If it
be uncrossed by due payment, I can cross it out by forgiveness, and there is an
end of it. Such a clear Soul you should get and maintain, and it will take away
much of your occasion of anger.

12. Inure your selves to defer anger, and to put it off some times. The
Heathen will rise against us that counted Anger so unmanly (and so unmanning) a
Passion, that between the Commotion and any Word or Action, he would repeat
over the Greek Alphabet, that Reason might have a little time to recover its
Seat, and to rule in the case. If there be Reason in it, it will be so anon, or
to morrow. But it is a sign of an ill Cause, when it is all for present
Execution; it will not bear consideration, why then in reason never meddle with
it. It is some cure of this Passion to delay it; Anger is not like other
Passions that grows by degrees (says one) but it is at full height at first.
Prove. 19. 11. The discretion of a Man deferreth his anger. Frederick Duke of
Saxony, when he was angry, would shut himself up in his Closet, and let none
come at him till he had mastered his Passion.

It is easier to exclude than to govern pernicious things, Facilius est
excludere perniciosa quam regere, and non admittere, quam admissa moderari --
Nam cum intravit hostis, and portis se intulit, modum a captivis non accipit.
Sen.
not to admit them than to moderate them when admitted -- For when the Enemy
has gotten himself within the Gates, he does not receive Law from the
Captives. As if any should be guilty of such a transparent folly, as to let in
a Conqueror, and think to make him a Prisoner. Use your selves to put off the
present motion, it may spoil many a chiding match, and who will loose by that?
you would by this know the difference between a denying and a fulfilling of
this Lust, and whether has more true sweetness and satisfaction in it. An
Experiment, I am afraid, few have made. You have tried and tasted the
bitterness of being angry, but did you ever try the sweetness of putting anger
by? Do it therefore that it may appear you can do it, and that you are not such
Slaves to your Passion that it must be observed, whenever it comes, though Reason
comes after, and brings Repentance with it. Now what if you made trial to put
off Anger at certain times? 1. When Strangers are by. Is it handsome to
entertain Strangers with brawls? They will say, you might have forborne till I
had been gone. Prove. 27. 15, 16. Bishop Hall says upon it, His grief cannot be
avoided, so his shame cannot be concealed. An angry person will shame one
before company. 2. Before and after any solemn Ordinance. Before, that thy own
heart may be prepared to do Service that may be accepted, and made beneficial
to thee. After, that what is gotten may not be presently thrown away. To admit
Anger after Ordinances, is to turn Swine into the new-made Garden. And besides,
just, or soon, afte Duties in Secret or in the Family, to fall a quarrelling,
implies that it is more than like, that that matter possessed your mind all the
while of the Duty: However, that it becomes you not so soon to forget where you
have been, and it seems rather too great an Extreme to turn from Devotion to
Passion, from Praying to Chiding: This is as if out of the same Fountain should
proceed sweet water and bitter; with the same mouth to be e're while blessing
(and worshipping) God, and cursing (as it were, and reviling) Man, that is made
after the similitude of God, Dr. Parker in his Continuation of his
Ecclesiastical Polity, p. 695. has this severe Reflection. -- Some men will
pray with the ardours of an Angel, love God with raptures of joy and delight,
be transported. with deep and pathetick Devotions, talk of nothing but the
unspeakable pleasures of Communion with the Lord Jesus, be ravished with devout
and seraphick Meditations of Heaven; and like the blessed Spirits there, seem to
relish nothing but spiritual delights and entertainments: who when they return
from their transfiguration, to their ordinary converse with men, are churlish
as a Cynick, passionate as an angry Wash, envious as a studious Dunce, and
insolent as a Female Tyrant; proud and haughty in their deportment; peevish,
petulant, and self-willed, impatient of contradiction, implacable in their
anger, rude and imperious in all their conversation, and made up of nothing but
pride, malice, and peevishness. [A Book not at all liked by Judge Hales, in the
design of it; but if my Adversary will write a Book (if he say nothing but
true) surely I would take it upon my shoulder, etc. Job 31. 35, 36. so] pudet
haec opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Isa. 3. 9, 10. My Brethren, these things ought not to be. And let it be for a
lamentation and great shame to us, that any occasion should be given for an
observation to be made of any of us, that after some solemn days, we are most
cross and peevish, and harder to please than at other times. For shame let it
be so no more. (3.) And all the Sabbath Day. What if you made a resolution,
that whatever occasion you have, you will not be angry on that day; not finding
your own pleasure, [to be angry for your own pleasure though you can find no
pleasure in it] nor speaking your own words, Isa. 58. 13. The Sabbath would be
better sanctified, and your Souls more profited, I am sure, if you did so.
These are but modest Intervals, unless your Passion be such an advantage to
you, that you dare not loose any opportunity for it, least you should not meet
with the like again, which there is little danger of. But it may be, the
occasion of Anger thus put by, Reason may in the interim recover it self, and
you may not, when cooled, admit it all; and will not this be matter of Joy to
you? and may you not, by finding the feasibleness and sweetness of putting it
by at some times, be strengthened rarely to admit it at any time?

13. Be thankful to them that would deliver you, when you are near seized by
it; and count them not Enemies, or not taking your part, when they would divert
your present madness. This is the way never to be helped, but to live a Slave
to the tyranny of his base Lust. Consider the sad Example you follow in this,
even of Saul (from whom the Spirit of the Lord was withdrawn for his sin, and
an evil Spirit from God troubled him, 1 Samuel 16. 14.) who was enraged against
Jonathan for endeavoring to pacify him toward David, 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31, etc.
albeit once before he had taken Jonathan's intercession much better in the same
cause, 1 Samuel 19. 4, 5, etc. It looks as if an evil Spirit from the Lord was
upon us when we do on this fashion. But David was thankful to God and Abigail,
for appeasing him in a like case, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. What a rich and lovely
Ornament in Religion is a wise reprover to an obedient ear? Prove. 25. 11, 12. I
have, I am sure, read a story (which I cannot so far recollect, as to fix it on
the Person to his just honor, but it was) of one that was a Tutor in the
University, and when his poor Sizar had broken a Glass, or some such thing, and
he fell into a great Passion about it; the young Man (that had had religious
Education in some poor Puritan Family) naturally and innocently said to him, to
this effect; That he wondered that such a Man as he should be angry; for (says
he) we in the Country dare not do so, but count it a great fault to be so
passionate as you are on any occasion; and my Father put me to you as a good
Man, but if he had known what a Man you are, he would never have put me to you.
The good man took it so well, that he said, say thou so: and forthwith, as a
reward, gave him money to buy him a new, instead of a ragged, Gown. Such as
these love to be helped, and so do not love the sin. What a mighty huff was the
whole Congregation in, Josh. 22. 31, 33.
against the Ultra-Jordanists, that they are up in Arms against them. Now here
is much Instruction in this holy story. (1.) Their Anger is against a feared
Sin. (2.) They show much love and self-denial in their pleading with them, to
recover them rather than force and punish them. (3.) When they are satisfied,
how glad are they that they were mistaken. Now our Passion often is not so glad
to be allayed, but rather to add more Anger to it, Quasi sufficiens causa sit
irascendi, graviter irasci. Seneca. As if to be inveterately and greatly angry
was a sufficient cause for the first Anger; where Anger is not loved, to be
appeased is pleasing. A good Man had rather let it fall, than keep it up.

15. Be unfeignedly humbled for this sin, that you have had such a long course
in, and have done your selves and others so much hurt by; you little think what
mischief you have done by it, and would not be checked: you may over this, above
any sin, say, I have sinned, I have perverted that which is right, and it
profited me not, Job 33. 27. Men will never offer to make head against it,
unless they see cause to be humbled for it as a sin; and the concomitant of
forgiveness upon true Repentance for it, will be some help in Soul against it.
If it be matter of shame and sorrow after, it may be hoped it will not be so
easily admitted at present as it has been used to be, as a matter of delight
and pleasure.

15. Pray mightily for help in this thing. Pray for the Grace and Spirit of
Meekness. Ye meek of the earth (much more ye that are not so) seek meekness,
Zeph. 2. 3. And when assaulted in this kind, lift up thy Soul in Prayer for
present help. The very thoughts of God, and directing the Soul to him, may help
to stickle in this Tumult that is arising: but the effect of thy Prayer may be
very discernable, especially if after thy long custom, that Sin be not grown
natural and pleasing to thee; or that thou have tasted enough bitterness, as to
escape from it as much as ever thou can. It is possible victory may be had in
this case, that thy broken walls may be repaired, and thou be restored to the
rule of thy own Spirit, and whose blessing this will be, thou will quickly
know. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are
called in one body, Col. 3. 15. Earnestly, and without ceasing, pray for it.

16. Help one another in this case. 1. Take this for a Rule for Peace and
Comfort every way, Design not to vex or anger any one: this we ought not to do,
this does but cause sin, this hurts our neighbor, and this we are forbidden:
We cannot live, but we shall anger one another, do what we can; but to intend
to anger one another, is ill advised, and is not from the Spirit of the Gospel.
If either thy word or action be designed to vex another, it is to make thy
Brother sin, and thou art the Devil's Deputy that while. And if what thou faist
or do by mis-interpretation, does provoke any, it will be a great relief to
thee, that it was never intended by thee. 2. Take heed of a peevish touchy
Spirit; it proceeds from great weakness, that every little word should be taken
in snuff, and every little thing should offend thee: Use thy Spirit to more
hardiness, and let not every little thing make impression upon thee; we must
have more strength of Spirit, if we will live among men on earth; we are
disquieted, not because things are hard we suffer, but because we are so soft
and tender that suffer Some will be angry at just nothing. Men sometimes of a
peevish spirit, take all for Enemies that join not with them in their
extravagant Passion. They take part with their Enemy that are not as mad as
they. One expostulated with Demonax, why he would be a friend to his enemy? he
answered, why he would be an enemy to his friend? there is as much reason for
the one as for the other. Saul under an evil Spirit (and this peevish Spirit is
little better) is angry with all about him, because they tell him no Tales of
David, 1 Samuel 22. 7, 8. Use your selves to more hardness, he not so fond and
tender of your own will, you may spoil your selves as well as a child with
fondling. Let neither child nor self have all their will, (1 King. 1. 6.) Come,
come, we must be crossed or spoiled; It is good for us, and we are sure of it;
we must bear more then thus, if we will be Christ's Disciples. Jesus Christ
endured reproaches etc. and so must I. Expect crosses, and then thou will be
able to bear them with patience. Who am I, that I should not be crossed, when
few have their will in every thing? And the great God, from me and others too,
has scarce his will in any thing. A tender, nice, delicate, ill natured Spirit
is always wrong with some body, or some thing. 3. Do not provoke the weak. Deny
your selves to prevent anger, and add not to it by angry replies to unjust
anger. Pro. 15. 1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up
anger. When one had angered his Brother, and he said, If I live I will be
revenged on thee; the other calmly answered, Let me not live if I do not make
thee love me again: and this took up the quarrel. Answer not passion with
passion, but with compassion; Mr. Dod. Bear ye one another burdens, and so
fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. Demosthenes could not pacify a Mutiny
with all his Oration, till he told the People a story of a man that hired an
Ass to ride on, and the Sun was so hot, that the rider got off the Ass's back,
and took to the shadow of the Ass; The Owner pretended the shadow of the Ass
was not hired, and so the contention grew as hot as the Sun; and the story
diverted the Peoples rage, and quieted them. The grave Author makes this
remark, We cannot find out a diversion so impertinent, but it is better than to
let Anger have its course; Mr. Herle. Prove. 27. 15. A continual dropping in a
very rainy day, and a contentious woman are alike. They are both equally
troublesome; the one not suffering a man to go abroad with comfort, the other
not permitting him to stay at home with quietness [Mr. Pool on the place]. The
truth is, one would not be wet in our Journey, nor unquiet in our House, if one
could help it. Let me here suggest to you a matter of great observation and
instruction, that these do mutually cause one another; the Woman's unquietness
at home, often drives the Man out for a little rest, and so proves a temptation
to him to be an ill Husband; and his coming in disordered and spending unduly,
often provokes the Woman to excess of Passion at home; let both mend, that ye may
have peace and comfort together. Let the Woman take heed, when she complains of
the hurt her Husband does abroad, that she be quiet and pleasing at home, that
she do not drive him out, and then quarrel that he keeps not at home; and let
the Man be a better Husband abroad, and keep better hours, that he may not
tempt the poor Woman to unquietness at home. 4. Study sweetness of conversation
with all men. Study peace, and sour not company by quarrels. To keep peace in
discourse avoid censures, comparisons, and contradictions; the golden counsel
of Bp. Hall. Causinus in his Holy Court, in his Agathopolis. p. 270. has this
instructive passage; That he fancying himself to travel into such a City (which
represents not what is, but what should be, and might be) says, that he took a
singular content, when one day passing through a Street, he heard two old men
discoursing in their language of foreign Countries; and the one said to the
other, that Duels and Quarrels were used there; the other would not believe him
at all, thinking that two men that bare one and the same figure, could not
contend one with another; but he persisted and said, he knew it to be true; and
that the source of all their debates was to say, It is mine, It is not, It is
so; Yea, No. This narration so enkindled them, that they resolved to imitate
them of whom they spoke, and to have at least once in their lives a quarrel.
But what endeavor soever they used, they could never say confidently, Yea, No:
For as one had pronounced Yea, and made show of contestation, the other said
take it, I yield it. If Persons were not too positive and peremptory in their
Assertions, as too much trusting to their own judgment and memory, and others
would not think the matter worth the hazarding of peace for, but let the
confident Person have it for the time, it would keep quietness. He gets not so
much though in the wrong, as I should loose though in the right, if I lost my
present peace. Let not the one be so absolute, but think I may mistake, I may
misremember, and I have been mistaken before now, when I have been as confident
as I am now: And let the other say, I may be mistaken, though I think I am not,
but let him take it at present, and if it be not his, he will bring it again,
and I keep peace in the mean time. And it may be the matter is not so much
worth, choose who is in the right. I could wish it might pass into a Proverb
what is lately mentioned, Remember the shadow of the Ass. Labor to be like the
brave Woman, Prove. 31. 26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue
is the law of kindness. She talks wisely and kindly with every body, and
talks of kindness and love and mercy, and peaceableness. These are the Lessons
she inculcates every where, she talks according to that Law, as the rule: and
of that law as the subject of her talk. Study to be quiet, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
Forecast for it, to give no occasion of disquiet, and to be armed and fortified
against occasions that will be given. True friendship requires patience: There
is no man in whom I shall not mislike somewhat, and who may not mislike
somewhat in me; Bp. Hall. Go then and build thy walls by these helps, and the
Lord be with you.

Object. 1. Would you have us tame fools, and let folks abuse us, and not let
them know that we can understand what they do, and that they have not fools to
deal with?

Answ. And will nothing serve but you must make your selves fools that you may
not be accounted fools; beware of the standard you judge a fool by; God's is
one, and Man's is another; you count him a fool and a mean spirited man that
does not resent every injury; God judges him a wise man that does pass by such
things as below his notice, or being so much as moved by them. When one had
stricken Cato in the dark Bath, and he that did it, not knowing who he was,
afterward offered satisfaction; he answered, That he did not remember that he
was stricken. Melius putavit (says Seneca) non agnoscere, quam ignoscere. He
thought it better not to know it, than to forgive it. And readier and cheaper
it is. He is a man of understanding that is of an excellent (alias cool)
spirit, Prove. 17. 27. You count him a weak man that does not quickly take fire
at a provocation: God says he is a great man, and a mighty conqueror, that
overcomes himself, Prove. 16. 32. You think it a disgrace, and God says its a
man's glory to pass by a transgression, Prove. 19. 11. It is the greatest honor
and gallantry that can be to be above abuses. Ille ingens animus and verus
estimator sui, qui non vindicat injurias quia non sentit, Sen. He is the great
mind and the true valuer of himself, that does not revenge injuries, because he
does not feel them. It is the part of a great mind to despise injuries.
Spernere mundum spernere nullum, spernere sese, spernere se sperni, quatuor
ista b^a^t.
It is the most disgraceful revenge (says Seneca) when a man seems not worthy
from whom one should seek revenge. The noble Soul scorns to take revenge. I
remember a story of a great Minister of State (a Cardinal of mean extraction,
but of great parts) in Spain, when a Duke in great heat sent a Priest to revile
him with his birth and pride, and some threatenings withal; and when the Priest
kneeled down, and begged pardon for bringing the Message; the Cardinal umov'd,
said, Go back to thy Master, whom thou shall find repenting the foolish words
which thou have delivered. And so he did; for he was angry at the Priest that
he was so ready to go, and at all about him, that they had not hindered him in
his present Passion, from sending such a Message. And they were soon after
reconciled. The numbering of the Transgressions you have for Christ's sake, and
Religions sake passed by, are as so many Trophes and Marks of Honor as
Achievements of the Grace of Christ in you. Never talk of Injuries you have
received, but what Injuries you have christianly born, and bravely despised and
passed by. Learn well the Preacher's counsel, Prove. 26. 4, 5. Answer not a fool
according to his folly, least thou also be like unto him, [as foolish and mad
as he] And if you must answer him, or may answer him according to his folly,
[in the matter of his folly] remember, 1. That it is for his sake to cure his
Error, and to prevent his Self-conceitedness. And 2. you must not do it
foolishly and passionately, but gravely and mildly, lest it attain not your
end. A man may be forced sometimes for the love of truth to answer a Fool, but
he must look to the manner of doing it, lest he do more hurt than good by his
Answer, but nothing of self, or to vent his spleen, will be allowed as the
cause of answering a Fool. The instance of ruffling, as the objection pleads,
is that of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34. 31. Should be deal with our sister as with
an harlot? No, he ought not to have done so, but he married her upon your own
terms, and should you have dissembled at that rate as you have done, and
murder a whole City, for the abuse of one unwary young Woman, etc. You think
it was bravely done to avenge your Religion in the horrid abuse of it? but see
how this is remembered by God? in the Prophetic blessing of the Tribes, they
are cursed, and their Posterity branded for this outrage, Gen 49. 5, 6.

Object. 2. Sure this is no such great sin to make such a stir about to be a
little angry, can be no such great matter.

Answ. 1. There may be a great difference in the Case, and in the Person; As,
1. to be rarely angry, 2. to be soon appeased, 3. to be troubled for it, and to
repent of it, etc. may mitigate much.

But 2dly, as it ordinarily prevails it is a great sin. Does Christ for nothing
say that he that is angry with his Brother rashly, is in so much danger? And is
it nothing that Moses, 1. the meekest man of all the Earth, and 2. was greatly
provoked, and spoke unadvisedly with his lips, and 3. was so severely punished
for it. And even slighty efforts of it are often great sorrow to some Souls, and
is it nothing to you?

Object. 3. It is my nature; I have not the felicity of such a temper as some
have; I am naturally hot and passionate.

Answ. 1. So some are naturally lustful and gustful; but will this excuse acts
of Uncleanness and filthy Gormondising. 2. What is Grace for but to correct and
relieve Nature; let it suffice for unregenerate men to be children of wrath;
Ephesians. 2. 3. actively as well as passively; but let not the regenerate talk at
that rate. Are ye carnal, and will ye walk like men? 1 Cor. 3. 3. In some of
your Transports, what could the vilest carnal Wretch speak or do worse? and if
persisted in, take heed lest you prove your self unrenewed, after all, and for
all your Professions, your holy Religion will not allow allowed Anger, you have
not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 24. And it reaches to all that follows, as well
as to what went before, and so pursuant of that, you are to put away all
bitterness and wrath, etc. ver. 31. It is the victory and triumph of Grace to
change men's natural tempers. 3. Men have had help in this case. It is said of
Beza, that he was naturally passionate, but he had got such victory over it,
that it passed into a Proverb, That Beza had no Gall. And Judge Hales would
say, that of himself he was inclined to be passionate, but unless he had said
it of himself, no body could in the least have thought it by him, he had such
an absolute command of himself in all his converse, that nothing like Passion
was to be seen. It is what has been cured, and if thou be willing, why not in
thee?

Object. 4. But I am so accustomed to it, I cannot help it.

Answ. 1. Your being accustomed to it, will not make it no sin, if it be a sin.

2. It will be no Excuse nor Plea against Judgment in the case; no more than
for a Thief to plead I cannot help it, for I have always used it, the greater
the Malefactor; and in this case it will be no better.

3. True Christians have new work, and new conversions (in some particulars) as
long as they live. And this of being as a little Child, against Envy, Pride,
and Passion may claim a considerable part in a Christian's Progress: Matthew. 18.
3, 4. The Spirit that is in us lusts to Envy, [and so to Pride and
Revengefulness] but he gives more grace to overcome these most rooted lustings,
James 4. 5, 6.

4. Some Christians have made Conscience of striving in this case,
notwithstanding their nature and custom, and have had help and great comfort.

Object. 5. But I have more than ordinary provocation.

Answ. 1. To be patient unprovoked is no patience, what thank have ye? 1 Pet.
2. 18. The Devil (ye say) is good if he be pleased.

2. Here is the truth and exercise of grace, to be meek when provoked, and
herein you imitate Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled
not again, and when he suffered he threatened not, [what he would do at them, or
what God would do to them in his cause] but committed himself to him that
judges righteously. Flesh and Blood cannot bear such Affronts you will say;
but (as one says) I have not Flesh and Blood to deal-with, for Flesh and Blood
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; I hope, I speak to believers, to whom
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 51. 7. Hearken to me ye that know righteousness, and
in whose heart is my law. Such as these will govern themselves, and keep their
Anger down.

3. If you take no care to moderate Anger when provoked, you will be angry when
unproked, or but lightly provoked. And angry People, if they dare be angry, and
use to be angry, it is too usual with them to be so, when they have little or
no cause at all.

4. It must be a great provocation indeed that will excuse wrath without bounds
at any time. The Ass kicks you, and you kick the Ass again.

Object. 6. But I have ungodly Relations that I cannot flee from, they are a
constant eyesore and provocation unto me, I cannot forbear.

Answ. 1. Such Cases should be constant exercise of Christian Patience, and not
of Carnal Passion.

2. Does Anger mend them, or not make them worse? A good Medicine will not go
down when scalding-hot. Angry Reproofs (says Mr. Dod) are scalding Potions,
they might do good, if not too hot to be taken.

3. You may be grieved at their sin, and pity them, and pray for them, and not
fret and vex and rail at them.

4. You may find some sin of your own, that had a hand in this trouble, if you
have indulged the Child, when you should have bended him, his stubbornness and
rebellion is a punishment for your sin toward him. And it is seldom that any
can carry so undutifully and ungratefully toward you, but your heart will tell
you you have carried it worse toward God. Mend your self, and 1. this may be a
means of their mending, or 2. at least a help to you to bear it better.

5. But if they are irreclaimable, why should you destroy your own comfort, or
fall upon your self for their wickedness? were it not more rational to leave
them unto God, and preserve your own City as well as you can? resolving (as
once a grieved Father said to me) that he would not hence forward lay that to
his heart, which his Son cast at his heels.

Object. 7. But I am old and sickly and full of infirmities, and this makes me
peevish.

Answ. 1. I would have others for their own ease, and in conscience of their
duty, to take it so. And to give all manner of allowance to persons in these
circumstances; and to exercise unwearied patience and forbearance and pity
toward them, considering that for ought you know, some may have the like
trouble and exercise with you.

Yet 2. one would think that old age should teach you better, and that you
should have had enough of the folly and vanity of this sin, so as not to admit
it after all the sorrow it has cost you.

But 3. it is the most unseasonable now of any time, when the Lord's hand is
upon you, and you have so much need of his pity toward you, for you then to be
quarrelling with all about you is very unsuitable. It is just as if a Child,
when his Father is beating him, should be fighting with the Servant; a Parent
would whip again in such a case. If your Spirit were broken and humbled to God
under affliction, it would make you calm, and not cross toward all about you.
It concerns me (may one say in such circumstances) to be so taken up with
making my peace with God, that I might have little heart to indulge any
difference with any other. David in a sense of his Affliction from God for his
sin, was calm and merciful to Shimei, that did most wickedly abuse him, 2 Samuel
16. 11. how much more with the rod on thy back should thou be calm with them
that do all they can to please thee, which often is thy case; but very unbecoming
it is to be cross, where you should be thankful, and especially when the hand
of God is upon thee.

To conclude, It is not any one particular person that has been aimed at in
this Discourse; it were well for us, and would be better with us, if but one or
two were guilty this way; but it is a prevailing and noted sin, and charged
upon Professors, not only poor Women, but Men too; but if any think themselves
hurt hereby, it is a sad sign they are sadly guilty, and that they love the sin
(which is sad'st of all) and would not have it spoken against. At this rate we
must speak against no sin, for some or other in the Congregation is guilty of
it. But how must you be cured, and others warned, if your sin must not be
named? I am sorry if any have been uneasy under this Subject for their own
sakes: But see (says a worthy man) the sad condition of God's Ministers, if
they preach Generals, O he is a good man; but if he come to preach
particularly, and to come home to the conscience, then he is a railer, Veritas
luceus amatur, redarguens odio habetur.
etc. The brighter the Sun shines, the more afflicting to a sore eye. The
Lawyers were content to hear Christ speak against the Scribes and Pharisees,
but when something came that reached them, they wince at it, and very perversely
are aggrieved, Luke 11. 45, 46. Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also.
Why who are ye? that we must be so cautious lest we touch your Freehold? And it
is observable, that he does not say, thou reprovest us, but thou reproachest
us. Jer. 6. 10. The word of the Lord is to them a reproach; they take
themselves affronted, and exposed, and abused, when their sin is spoken
against; they cannot bear close dealing, they take no delight in such things.
But see what they get by it; our Savior falls directly upon the Lawyers, and
gives them woe's of their own, Woe unto you also ye Lawyers. We may sometimes
come close and hit you, when we know nothing of it, and if it anger you (as often
close work has that effect) and you take yourselves reproached. I tell you,
when we know it touches, we shall say the more of it, for now we know it is
needed, and do not expect, though we have done with this Subject, that we will
ever have done with Anger, till you leave it. But alas, alas, there are two
many concerned for any one to be offended that they are particularized. But
what a mercy would it be, if many might be humbled instead of angered:
Ministers aim, and satisfaction should not be the praise, but the profit of the
Hearers. Docente te in Ecclesin, non clamor populi, sed gemitus suscitetur,
Lachrymae auditorum tuae lauds sunt. Hier.
If there might be many cast down in their own eyes, in a sense of their sin
and guilt in this thing, it would be more than applause unto us. And I should
account Success in this Discourse, to a general lessening of this Sin, worth
all my labor, and worth coming into the World for. And I shall have cause to
be grieved, and greatly humbled, if after all this, any one that professes
Religion should persist in unbounded and unbridled wrath, so as to be noted for
a Person extravagant this way, to the dishonor of Religion, much more that
they should be unashamed of such disgraceful transports, so as to report
themselves how they have let fly toward any this way; an Achievement that
pleases none but the Devil: And to have passed by such occasions with meekness
and patience and holy silence, would be matter of more true glory and peace to
thy own Soul whoever thou art. Take heed to your Spirits, repair your Walls,
keep up your watch, mount your Guards, and study to be quiet. Let the meeek
seek meekness Zeph 2. 3. That the Peace of God may rule in our hearts, That we
may learn of Christ to be meek and lowly in heart, That we may find rest to our
Souls. That we may study to have quiet Hearts and quiet Houses, That God may
continue to make us a quiet habitation. Isa. 33. 20. And we may be under the
proper qualification for Heaven, that Land of Quietness, and Peace, and Love,
never to have End. Amen.

FINIS.

