A TREATISE OF OATHS, Containing Several Weighty Reasons why the People called
QVAKERS refuse to SWEAR: And those Confirmed by Numerous Testimonies out of
Gentiles, Jews and CHRISTIANS, both Fathers, Doctors and Martyrs.

Presented to the King and Great Council of England, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all.

Jam. 5.22. Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not.

Jer. 32.10. Because of Oaths the Land Mourns.

Theognis, He ought to Swear neither this thing nor any thing.

Maimonides, It is a great Good for a Man not to Swear at all.

Chrysostom, It is not lawful to Swear, neither in a just nor unjust Cause.

Printed Anno 1675.

TO THE King and Great Council OF ENGLAND, Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The Case of
the People called QUAKERS relating to OATHS further Represented; and
Recommended to their Consideration, in order to a Speedy and Effectual REDRESS.
THe common Benefit of the Free People of England being undoubtedly both the
first and greatest Reason for the Ancient, Just and Necessary Constitution of
Parliaments; and being also informed that it is your Resolution, to employ this
Session to the Redress of Public Grievances: And since We cannot but repute
our selves a Member of this Great Body you represent, by Birth and English
Descent; and are not only involved in the Common Calamities of the Kingdom, but
in Particular very cruelly Treated in our Persons and Estates, because we
cannot for pure Conscience take any Oath at all ( though we have again and
again tendered our solemn Yea or Nay; and are most willing to sustain the same
Penalty in Case of Lying, that is usually inflicted for Perjury) To the End we
may not be interpreted to decline the Custom out of mere Humor or Evasion (
though our frequent and heavy Sufferings by Fines and tedious Imprisonments,
sometimes to Death it self, should sufficiently Vindicate us against any such
Incharitable Censure) WE do, with all due Respect, present you with our Reasons
for that Tenderness, and many Testimonies and Pr^sidents in their Defense; and
we entreat you, to express that Care of a Member of your own Civil Body, which
Nature and Christianity excite to; We mean, That it would please you to
consider how deeply we have already suffered, in Person and Estate, the
Inconveniences we have daily to encounter, and those Injurious not only to our
selves, but others we commerce with, in that both they and we, because of our
Tenderness in this Matter, are constantly at the Mercy of such as will Swear
any thing to advantage themselves, where they are sure that a Contrary Evidence
shall be by Law esteemed (however True) Invalid; under which Difficulty several
of us at this Hour fruitlesly labor: That being sensible of our Calamity, you
may please to endeavor, as for others, so for this Grievance, both a Speedy
and Effectual Redress; otherwise, besides ordinary Cases, wherein many of us
extraordinarily suffer, we may perhaps prove in this of Oaths the Greatest, if
not the Only Sufferers of the Kingdom; a Cruelty, we hope, you do not design
against us.

God Almighty, we beseech him with all Sincerity of Heart, incline you to
Justice, Mercy and Truth, Amen. London, the 25th of the 3d Month, 1675.
Subscribed on the behalf of the rest of our Friends by, Alexander Parker,
George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, William Mead, Gerrard Roberts, William Welsh,
Samuel Newton, Thomas Heart, John Osgood, James Claypool, Thomas Rudyard,
Richard Richardson, and William Penn.


A Catalogue of the Authors, Testimonies and Presidents cited in Favor of this
Treatise.
AESchylus, p. 31. Albertus Magnus, p. 10, 115. Albingenses, p. 100, 121. W.C.
Albrid. p. 12. Alexander de Ales, p. 115. Alexander ab Alexandro, p. 18.
Alexid, p. 34. Alphonsus de Avendano, p. 134. Ambrosius, p. 10, 68, 135.
Ambrosius Ansbertus, p. 112. Anabaptists, p. 100, 101. Antiochus Palest. p.
109. Anthelmus Cantuar* p. 120. Tho. Aquinas, p. 115, 132. Aristophanes, p.
102. Aristoteles, p. 18. Athanasius, p. 50, 54. Augustinus, p. 10, 95, 132,
133. M. Aurelius Antoninus, p. 36. Ausonius, p. 36.
B
Bagool, page 100. Baptista Folengius, p. 115. Baro^ius, p. 100, 121. Basil.
Magnus, p. 10, 60, 100. Basilides, p. 41. J. Bechet, p. 124. Beda, p. 110, 141.
Counc. Berghamsted, p. 111. Bernard, p. 100, 113, 115 137, 144. Beza, p. 102,
141. Bible folio, printed 1578. p. 144. Bible 4 to. printed 1559. 143. Biblioth
vet. patr. p. 116. Blandina, p. 41, 45. Blastaris, p. 62, 111. Brugensis, p.
10, 115. Otho Brunfelfius, p. 114. Beat Bruno, p. 46. Wall. Brute, p. 123. J.
Burrel, p. 126.
C
Cajetan, p. 133, 135. Caesarius, p. 67. Joac. Camerar* p. 143. Gui. Carmelite,
p. 100. Cassiodorus, p. 46, 108. Castro, p. 100, 141. Caten. 65. Graec. Patr.
p. 108. Cathari, p. 100. Hug. Cardinal. p. 115. Pet. Charron, p. 144 Geff.
Chaucer, p. 122. Cheril, p. 33. Chromatius, 10, 104. Chrysostom, p. 10, 11, 17,
50.70, 100, 112, 120, 141. Cicero, p. 18, 33. Clemens Alexandr. p. 15, 43, 47.
Clemens Roman. p. 58, 101, 142. J. Clements, p. 124. Clineas, p. 31, 62. Qu.
Curtius, p. 29. Cyprian, p. 51. Cyril, p. 107.
D
J. Damascen. page 107. Diodorus Siculus, p. 28. Diogenes Laert. p. 33.
Druthmarus, p. 114, 141.
E
Archiep. Ebur. Egbert, p. 111. J. Edward, p. 124. Epictetus, p. 34.
Epiphanius, p. 50, 67. Erasmus, p. 128. Esseni, p. 37. Eusebius, p. 40, 41, 99.
Evagrius Scholast. p. 104, 107.
F
Jacob Faber, p. 138. Festus ad Lapidem, p. 18. J. Fox Martyrol. page 121, 122,
123.124, 125, 128.
G
Bp. Gauden, p. 10, 14, 30, 154. Gentian Hervet. p. 48. Gennadius, p. 99 Gloss.
Ordin. p. 107, 115. Hug. Grotius, p. 31, 34, 37, 150.
H
J.M. Hadingtonian. p. 143. Haimo, p. 112. Hercules, p. 29. Hesiod, p. 29. R.
Herbert, p. 124. Hierocles, p. 31. Hilary, p. 50, 57 Hilary Syracus. p. 100.
Huetius, p. 50. Humiliati, p. 100. J. Huss, p. 126.
I
James on the Fathers, page 78. Jansenius, p. 100, 114. Jerome, p. 11, 92, 127,
136, 141, 143. Jews Antiquities, p. 154. Josephus, p. 37, 136. Justin Martyr,
p. 41. Irenaeus, p. 97. Isidorus Pelusiot. p. 104. Isodor. Hispalens. p. 109.
Isocrates, p. 32.
K
Hist. ref. Kirk Scotland, p. 127.
L
Lactantius, p. 43. Laertius Hermip. p. 30. Libanius, p. 36. Lindenbrogius, p.
18. Lodovicus Pius, p. 148. Lollards, page 127. Lotharius, p. 148. Ludulphus,
p. 10, 115, Luitprandus, p. 158. N. Lyra, p. 106, 115. Lysander, p. 32.
M
Maimonides, page 37. Menander, p. 33. Maldonat, p. 101. 144. Manichees, p.
100. Marlorat, p. 144. Fra. de Mendoca, p. 136. Archiep. Mentz. p. 111. S.
Morland, p. 128.
N
Grave of Nassou, p. 160, 161. G. Nazianzen, page 42. 64, Nicodemus's Gospel,
p. 59 Nilus, p. 107. G. Nyssen^s, p. 63.141.
O
Oecumenius, page 119. Olympiodorus, p. 108. Prince of Orange, p. 162. Origin,
p. 30, 49, 100, 101. Orthodoxographa. p. 59.
P
Paschatius Ratbertus, p. 113. Patrini, page 100. Pelagians, p. 100, 101
Persians, p. 28. Philo Judaeus, p. 36, 38, 138, 146. Plato, p. 32. Plinius, p.
18. Plowman's Complaint, p. 121. Plutarch, p. 29, 32, 35. Polybius, p. 10, 18.
Polycarpus, p. 40, 45. Ponticus, p. 41, 45. Potamicna, p. 42. Jer. of Prague,
p. 126. Prateolus, p. 100. Le Pricur, p. 45. Protestants of Piedmont, p. 128.
Publicani, p. 100. J. Purrey, p. 124. Pythagoras, p. 30, 31.
Q
Quintilian, p. 34
R
Rabanus, p. 107, 115. Raimundus, page 37. Reiner. p. 120. Remigius, p. 115.
Rhadamanthus, p. 32. Rigaltius, p. 46. Ruffinus, p. 115. Rupertus, p. 115.
S
Mich. Sadler, page 127. Ger. Sagarel, p. 128. Grae. Sages, p. 30. Rob.
Sanderson, p. 20, 101, 104. W. Sawtree, p. 126. Scapula, p. 102. Scultetus, p.
43, 46. Scythians, p. 29. Simocat. p. 34. Smaragdus, p. 115 Sociad. p. 30.
Socrat. Schol. page 51, 60, 63, 71. Solon, p. 30. Lod. Soto Major, p. 144. H.
Spelman, p. 111. Spotswood, p. 127. Stobaeus, p. 30, 34. Swarez, p. 47, 58,
100, 140. W. Swinderby, p. 122. Jer. Tailor, page 155. Tertullian, p. 42, 52,
100. Gr. Thaumaturgus, p. 51. Theodoret, p. 11. 106. Theognis, p. 30.
Theophylact, p. 100, 113, 141. W. Thorp, p. 124, 126. Titelmannus, p. 10.
Treatise of Peace, p. 163. Archiep. Triers, p. 111.
V
Valerius Max. p. 30, 33. Villerius, p. 143. Vossius, p. 100. J. Usher, p. 100,
121, 128, 152.
W
Walden, p. 100. Waldenses, p. 100, 120. Bp. Walton, p. 102. W. White, p. 126.
J. Wickliff, p. 121. Wickliffists, p. 101. Widsord, p. 100 Em. Willy, p. 124.
X
Xenocrates, p. 33, 15. Xenophon, p. 102.
Y
Eliz. Young, p. 125.
Z
Euthymius Zagabonus, p. 126.
Some Inducements Offered TO Answer this REQVEST, From a Consideration of the
Cause and End of an Oath, And those REASONS AND TESTIMONIES, Given by us
against the USE and IMPOSITION of it.
The GROUND or Reason of Swearing.
THis (we think) all will agree to have been the Degeneration of Man from
primitive Integrity, at what time Yea and Nay were enough; for when men grew
corrupt, they distrusted each other, and had recourse to extraordinary Ways to
awe one another into Truth's-speaking, as a Remedy against Falseness; else,
what need had there been of an Oath, or any Extraordinary Way of Evidence, when
every Syllable was freighted with Truth and Integrity? It had been a mere
taking of God's Holy Name in vain: Truth then flowed naturally, and wanted no
such Expedient to Extort its Evidence.

Thus, Lived before Chr. 200. years. H. Grotius on Mat. 5. Bp. Gauden of Oaths,
p. 36. in Psalm 14. ^amb. 20.
Polybius, though an Heathen, in his Story of the Romans, says, Among the
Ancients Oaths were seldom used in Judicatures themselves; but when
Perfidiousness increased, Oaths increased, or then the Use of them first came
in.

Basilius Magnus says, Oaths are an Effect of Sin.

Gregorius Nazianzonus in his Dialogue against Swearing, says, An Oath is
nothing else but a certain consumation of Mischiefs.

Commen^. on Hebr. c 6.
Ambrosius says, Swearing is only in Condescension to a Defect.

Hom. 9. on Acts 3.
Chrysostom says, An Oath came in when Evils increased, when men appeared
unfaithful, when all things became Topsy Turvy. Again,

Hom. Psalm. 5.
To swear is of the Devil, seeing Christ says, What is more (then Yea, etc.)
is of Evil.

Ad Pop. Antioc.
Swearing took its Beginning for want of Truth or Punctuality.

on Mat. 5.
Augustine says, An Oath is not among good, but Evil Things, and used for the
Infirmity of others which is Evil, from which we pray that we may be daily
delivered.

on Mat. 5.
Chromatius says, What need we swear, seeing it is unlawful to Lie. Which
shows that Lying was the Occasion of Oaths, and by leaving off Lying, Oaths
vanquish as unprofitable.

on Psalm. 14. on Mat. 5. Vit. Chr. p. 2. c. 12. on Mat. 5.
Titelmannus says, that an Oath belongs not to Virtue.

Albertus Magnus says, Swearing is by Indulgence.

Ludulphus says, An Oath was permitted of Infirmity.

Burgensis cites Jerome saying, Our Savior teaches that an Oath sprung from
the Vices of Men.

p. 17. and 23.
Bp. Gauden also tells us, That the Evils of men's Hearts and Manners, the
Jealousies and Distrusts, the Dissimulations and Frauds of many Christians,
their Incharitableness and Insecurities are such, as by their Diseases do make
solemn Oaths and judicial Swearing necessary, not ABSOLUTELY* MORALLY or
PRECEPTIVELY; but as a Remedy or Expedient.

Jerome (with many of the Fathers, Chrysostom, Theodoret, on Mat. 5.3, 37.
and others here omitted, because largly cited hereafter) make this the Reason
why God indulged the Jews in the Use of Swearing, That they were but in the
State of Infancy, and that they might be kept from Swearing by false Gods;
which the Scripture is plain in: For thou shall fear the Lord thy God, Deutr.
6.13* 14, 15.
and swear by HIS Name; Ye shall not go after other Gods, for God is a Jealous
God, etc. Which shows, that he dispensed with Swearing by his Name, that he
might take them off from Swearing by False God's, because they would thereby
acknowledge them, and not the True God; so that Swearing is only better then
Idolatry.

It will remain that we give our REASONS why we cannot take this Liberty, and
Swear, as well as other Men have done, and yet do.
I. THe first is drawn from the Cause and Ground of Oaths, viz. Perfidiousness,
Distrust and Falsehood: God's Injunctions to avoid those hateful Crimes; The
Ability he has given man to answer his Commands; and Man's Duty to make that
use of God's Gift: For if Swearing came in by Perfidiousness, Distrust,
Dissimulation and Falsehood, it is a most just Consequence that it ought to go
out with them; or that as the Rise and Increasing of those Evils were the Rise
and Increasing of Oaths; so the Decreasing and Extirpation of those Evils
should be the Decreasing and Abolishing of Oaths; otherwise there would be no
Truth in the Rule of Contraries, nor Reason in that ancient Maxim, Cessante
ratione Legis cessat lex; That the Ceasing of the Reason of the Law is the
Cessation of the Law: Expedients are no longer useful then to obtain what they
are designed to. Means are swallowed up of their Ends; Diseased Men only want
Remedies, and Lame Men Crutches; Honesty needs neither Whip nor Spur, She is
Security for her self; and Men of Virtue will speak Truth without Extortings;
for Oaths are a sort of Racks to the Mind, altogether useless where Integrity
swayes.

This we presume no man of Reason will deny, viz. That Swearing came in, and
ought to go out with Perfidiousness; and we hope it will be as easy to grant,
at least it will be very easy to prove, That God has frequently, both by
Prophets and Apostles, reproved men for such Impieties, and strictly required
Truth and Righteousness; as, Isa. 59, 3, 4. Jer. 9.3, 5. Romans 12.19. Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Col. 3 8, 9, 10. Josh. 24.14. 1 Samuel 12.24. 1 King. 2.4. Ephesians. 4.25. and
by abundance of other Places in Holy Scripture. And that God should enjoin man
any thing that he has not empowered him to perform, is unworthy of any man
acknowledging a God, so much as to conceive. It is true, that the unprofitable
Servant in the Parable is represented to entertain so blasphemous a Thought of
his Maker, that he was so hard a Master, as to reap where he did not sow; but
the same Parable also acquaints us of the dreadful Consequence of that
Presumption: The Prophet Micha preached another Doctrine, Mic. 6.8.
The Lord has showed thee, O Man, what is good: and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God? For
this End has the Grace of God appeared unto all Men, as speaks the Apostle
Paul to Titus, that they should be taught to deny Ungodliness and Wor^dly
Lusts, which entering and overrunning the World, made way among other
Expedients for that of Oaths; so that to live that Life which needs No Oath,
man is both required and empowered: And as it is only his Fault and
Condemnation, if he does not; so certainly there can be no Obligation upon him
who lives that Life of Truth and Intetegrity to perpetuate that which rose,
and therefore ought to fall with Falsehood and Perfidiousness: the Reason of the
thing it self excuses him; for, he that fears Untruth, needs not swear, because
he will not lie, to prevent which men exact Swearing: And he that does not fear
telling Untruth, what is his Oath worth? He that makes no Conscience of that
Law that forbids Lying, will he make any Conscience of Forswearing? Veracity is
the best Security; and Truth speaking the Noblest Tie and Firmest Testimony
that can be given. This we declare to you to be both our Judgment and
Attainment; We speak not Boastingly, but with Humility before the Great Lord of
Heaven and Earth, to whose alone Power we do unanimously asscribe the Honor:
He has taught us to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, as plainly and readily without an Oath as with an Oath, and to abhor
Lying as much as Perjury; so that for us to swear, were to take his Holy Name
in vain: Nor are we therein singular; for that not only Christian Fathers, Mar-
and Doctors, but also Jews and Heathens have had this Sense of the Rise and Use
of Oaths, as will hereafter fully appear.

II. Our second Reason, why we refuse to comply with this Custom, and our
Superiors ought not to impose it, is this, It would Gratify Distrusts, Humor
Jealousies, and Subject Truth, and those that love it, to the same Checks,
Curbs and Preventions that have been invented against Fraud; whereby the Honor
of a Nobler Profession, the Power of a veracious Example, and the just
Difference that ought to be made betwixt Trustiness and Diffidence, Integrity
and Perfidiousness, are utterly lost*

How is is possible for men to recover that ancient Confidence that good men
reposed in one another, if some don't lead the Way, and hold forth to the World
a Principle and Conversation beyond the Necessity of such extraordinary
Expedients? At present People lie all in a Heap; and the Greatest Truth finds
no more Favor then the greatest Fraud; Fidelity must wear the Shackles worldly
Prudence has made against the Evil Consequences of Couzennage, and subject her
self to the Customs brought up through Fraud, or go to Gaol. Be pleased to
consider, that Trustiness did not all at once quit the World, nor will it
return universally in the Twinkle of an Eye; Things must be allowed their Time
for Rise, Progress and Perfection: And if ever you would see the World planted
with Primitive Simplicity and Faithfulness, rather cherish then make men
Sufferers for Refusing to Swear, especially if they offer the same Caution to
the Law with him that will swear. We dare not Swear because we dare not Lie,
and that it may appear to the World, that we can speak the Truth upon easier
Terms then an Oath: For us then to be forced to swear, is to make us do a
needless thing, or to suspect our own Honesty. The first we dare not, because,
as we have said, it is to take God's Name in vain; and we have no Reason to
distrust our selves, being no ways conscious of fraudulent Purposes: Why then
should we swear? But much rather, Bish. Gaud. of Oaths, p. 41.
why should we be imposed upon? It is a Saying asscribed to Solon, That a good
man should have that Repute as not to need an Oath; that it is a Diminution to
his Credit to be put to Swear. It becomes not an Evangelical Man to Swear, was
a primitive Axiom; but more of that anon: In the mean while please to remember,
you have a Practice among you, to exempt your Lords in several Cases, placing
the Value of an Oath in their bare Avouchment upon their Honor, supposing that
men of those Titles should have so much Worth, as that their Word might be of
equal Force with a Common Man's Oath: And if you will please to understand
Honor in the Sense of the most ancient and best of Philosophers, to wit,
VIRTVE, your own Custom gives Authority to our Reason, and makes you to say
with us, That Virtue needs not Swear, much less have Oaths imposed upon her, to
tell Truth, the only Use of Oaths. It was Evangelically spoaken of Clemens
Alexandrinus, That a Good Life is a firm Oath; which was memorably verified by
the Judges of Athens, who, though Heathens, forbad the Tendering of Xenocrates
an Oath, because of their great Opinion of his Integrity, which was Three
Hundred Years before Christ came in the Flesh.

III. Our third Reason for Non conformity to your Custom is, the Fear we have,
lest by Complying we should be guilty of Rebellion against the Discoveries God
has made to our Souls of his ancient holy Way of Truth; and consequently of
concealing his Goodness to us, and depriving him of that Glory and the World of
that Advantage this honest Testimony may bring to him and them. He has redeemed
us from Fraud; It Is he only that has begotten this Conscientiousness in us;
and we dare not put this Light under a Bushel, neither can we deny his Work, or
him to have the Honor of it. We entreat you, take this Tenderness of ours into
Christian Consideration.

IV. Oaths have in great measure lost of the Reason of their primitive
Institution, since they have not that Awful Influence which was and only can be
a Pretense for using them; on the contrary, they are become the familiar parts
of Discourse, and help to make up a great share of the A la mode Conversation:
and those who decline their Company, or reprove their Practice, are to go for a
sort of Nice and squ^amish Conscienc'd Men. These Swear without Fear or Wit,
yet would be thought Witty in Swearing, Fearless they cannot: Some are curious
in their Impiety; Old Oaths are too dull for men of their Invention, who almost
shift Oaths with their Fashions: Nay, the most judicial Oaths are commonly
administered and taken with so little Reverence and Devotion (to say nothing of
the Perjuries, that through Ignorance or Design, are too frequently committed)
that we cannot but cry out, Oh the great Depravity that is in the World! How low
is Man fallen from the primitive Rule of Life? Well may the Prophet's Complaint
be ours, for, If ever Land mourned because of OATHS, with great Sadness we say
it, this does. And what more effectual Remedy can any People propose against
the notorious Abuse and evil Consequence of Swearing, then Truth-speaking? for
those that dare not Lie, need not Swear; and they that make no Conscience of
Lying, do not much fear an Oath, at least their Consciences are very crazy in
taking it. This only Reason, were we destitute of all other Allegations, would
be a strong Disswasive from Swearing; for we hold God's Honor, and our
Profession greatly concerned to prove to so False an Age, that there is a
People who are so far from vain and false Swearing, that they dare not swear
the Truth; but whose Yea and Nay shall weigh against other men's Oaths, and that
with a free Offer of sustaining double Punishment in case of Miscarriage.
Expedients may last a while, but TRVTH only shall have the Honor of conquering
Falsehood, and Virtue will and must be greater then an OATH.

V. The Omnipresency of God rightly understood, shows the Uselesness of an
Oath, and is with us a good Argument against Swearing; for what need is there
of that Man's being awed into true Evidence by such sort of Attestations and
Imprecations as make up the common Form of Oaths, who knows God to be always
present to reside and preside in his Soul, according to that New and
Everlasting Covenant which he has made, that his People should be his Temple,
that he would dwell IN them, and walk IN them. Did the Children of men know the
Power, Glory and Majesty of God, Acts 17.28.
WHOM the Apostle preached NIGH to the Athenians, and declared to the Ephesians
to be Father of all, Ephesians. 4.6.
above all, through all and IN THEM ALL, there would be no Oaths, and but few
Words, and those uttered with Reverence and Truth.

VI. We do not find that Oaths answer this part of the End for which they are
imposed, viz. To convince those for whose sakes they are taken, of the Weight
and Truth of a Man's Testimony by Force of God's Witness joined therewith: For
they don't behold God's concurring Witness by such an Assistance or Avenge of
that Party, as the Truth or Falsehood of his Testimony deserves; for the
Judgments of God are secret, and rarely so publicly seen to Men, perhaps once
in an Age, that he should give any memorable Discovery of his good Will or
Displeasure in such a Case; but whenever he does it, it is not at Man's
Appointment: And it is an evident Sign that God approves not of that sort of
Invocation, because he does not answer them that invoke him, according to their
Wish; as neither did he in the old Law or Custom of Combating appear on his
side that had the better Title or Cause, Numb. 5 21, 22.
as he promised in the Law of Jealousy, that their Thigh should rot, and their
Belly swell, etc.

VII. We look upon it to be no less then a presumtuous Tempting of God, To
summon him as a Witness, not only to our Terrene, but trivial Businesses; such
as we should doubtless account it an high Indignity always to solicit an
Earthly Prince to give his Attendence about. What! Make God, the Great God of
Heaven and Earth our Caution in worldly Controversies, as if we would bind him
to obtain our own Ends? It is to make too bold with him, and to carry an undue
Distance in our Minds toward him that made us; An Irreverence we can by no
means away with, and upon which Chrysostom is most sharp, as will be seen anon.
Besides it is vain and insolent to think that a man when he pleases, can make
the Great God of Heaven a Witness or a Judge in any matter to appear by some
signal Approbation or Judgment, to help or forsake him, as the Truth or
Falseness of his Oath requires, when he says, So help me God.

VIII. Besides what we have hitherto urged in Defense of our selves against the
Substance of the Oath, we justly except against the Form of it (which further
adds to its Unlawfulness, and consequently to our Vindication) as by the
Contents and kissing of the Book; Swearing by a Sign, being Heathenish or
Jewish. Fest. ad Lapid. Polyb. l. 3. c. 25. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. gen dier. 10.
Cic. l. 5. Ep. 1. Arist. 3 Pol. 10. Plin. in pan. ad. Trajan. c. 64.
For the Romans held a Stone, and said, If I deceive wittingly then let
Diespiter cast me out of my Goods, as I this Stone: The Heroes swore by lifting
up of the Scepter: Caesar swore by his Head, his House, that is, consecrated
them to the Wrath of God, if he wittingly deceived, etc. The manner of the Jews
is from Genesis 14.22. that Abraham lift up his hand to God, (...), If, etc.
putting the Hand under the Thigh, on the Head; passing betwixt Beasts divided,
as God did to Abraham, etc. see more in Lapid. Sophoc. in Antiq. v. 270.
Scoliast. Baptist. Hansen of passing through Fire, swearing by the right Hand,
etc.

The Use of So help me God, we find from the Law of the Almans, Lindenbro. c.
3. sect. 7.
of King Clotharius: The laying on of three Fingers above the Book is to
signify the Trinity; the Thumb and the little Finger under the Book, are to
signify the Damnation of Body and Soul, if they forswear, So help me God.

Further be pleased to consider that the English Custom has very much overgone
English Law in this Business of Oaths; they were anciently but solemn
Attestations, As the Lord lives, etc. which are now improved to Imprecations,
So help me God and the Contents of this Book: Though it was ^o of old at
Combat; but that concerns not our Case. For the Kissing of the Book, that is
also Novil: Indeed after they rise from solemn Attestations to Imprecations,
the Law required a Sight and Touch of the Book; The Saxon Jurors were
Sacratenentes; In the first Norman Times it was Sacris tactis; and in later
Writs, Evangeliis tactis; nay, the Priest's Hand was on his Breast (in Matthew
Paris) not upon the Book. However Jew and Gentile, Superstition and Ceremony,
have made up the present Form of Oaths, which the true Christian-man neither
wants, nor we conceive, ought to perform; much less impose where Tenderness by
sober Consciences is pleaded, and equal Caution offered to the Law for the
Integrity of Yea and Nay.

IX. But were we also destitute of this Plea, and the usual Oaths of our
Country the most inoffensively formed, and best penned that ever any were, we
have both the Example and Precept of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, to
oppose to any such Practice; for in all that History delivered to us by the
four Evangelists, we never read him to have used any further Asseveration then
what in English amounts to Verily, Verily, or Truly, Truly, I say unto you:
Thus by his Example exciting us the more readily to obey his express
Prohibition of Swearing, Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. which runs thus, Again, Ye
have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto you,
SWEAR NOT AT ALL; neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth,
for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great
King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one
Hair white or black; but let your Word be YEA, YEA; NAY, NAY; for whatsoever is
MORE then THESE comes OF EVIL.

He here prohibits even the lesser Oaths, as They thought them that reverenced
Swearing by the Name of the Lord, which in old time he suffered by reason of
the Falseness of their Hearts, and great Pronness to Idols; even as Moses
permitted them to put away their Wives, which in the precedent Verse also is
disallowed by Christ, though with the Exception of Fornication; but Swearing
without any Exception: He does not say, Swear not except before a Magistrate
(though he says, Put not away thy Wife, except for the Cause of Fornication)
but SWEAR NOT AT ALL: why? because it is OF EVIL; which reason reaches the
Oaths taken before Magistrates, as well as other Oaths; for Distrust and
Unfaithfulness are the Cause of one as well as the other: And there is equal
Reason in that respect, that a Master should swear in private to his Servant at
his Entrance, that he will pay him his Wages, as that the Servant should swear
in public to a Magistrate, that at his Departure his Master would not pay him
his Wages; both which Oaths the Certainty of their Words, their Yea being Yea,
and their Nay being Nay, makes vain and superfluous.

Obj. We are not unsensible of the common Objection that is made against this
Allegation of our Master's Command, That he only prohibited Vain Oaths in
Communication: But if the words of the Text and Context be considered, every
Oath will be proved Vain and Unlawful; for Christ's Prohibition was not a mere
Repetition of what was forbidden under the Law, Bp. R. Sanders. de Jur Oblig.
p. 141.
but what the Law allowed, as Bp. Sanderson well observes; It was not needful
that Christ should forbid what was forbidden in it self, or was always
Unlawful, which vain Swearing was and is by the third Commandment, Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; therefore Christ exceded the
Prohibition of the Law: And the whole Chapter is a Demonstration of a more
excellent Righteousness then that which either needed or used Oaths; for Christ
brings Adultery from the Act to the Thought; in lieu of Revenge he commands
Suffering, and extends Charity not only to Friends, but Enemies; so in the
Place controverted, in the room of such Oaths and Vows as ought to be performed
unto the Lord, he introduces Yea and Nay, with a most absolute SWEAR NOT AT
ALL. This was the Advance he made in his excellent Sermon upon the Mount; he
wound up things to an higher pitch of Sanctity then under the Law, or the
childish State of the Jews could receive. Again, says he, Ye have heard of old
time, thou shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths; but I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL; as plain, general and emphatical a
Prohibition as can be found in Holy Scripture. However, those Persons that
usually advocate for the Continuance of Oaths under the Gospel, tell us, it is
not a general Prohibition, but is limited to Swearing by Creatures, either by
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem or Head, etc. Which is wholly inconsistent with the
Scope of the Place, as we shall make appear from these Four Considerations: 1
st, The Prohibition reaches as well to serious as vain Oaths, such as men made,
if they swore at all, and ought to make to God only; for to him alone should
they perform them, and are they accountable for them: These very allowed Oaths
of Old Time, are the first prohibited by Jesus Christ; It was said of Old, thou
shall not Forswear thy self; but I say, SWEAR NOT AT ALL. It Is true, it is not
particularized what Oaths they were to keep of old; but in general Terms, that
they were not to Forswear themselves; and it is clear that God enjoined them
that would Swear, that they should only Swear by his Name. Now what can be
hence inferred more evidently, then that men ought not to swear those Oaths
under the Gospel, which they might swear, and ought not to forswear, but to
perform unto the Lord in the Law. 2 dly, Christ himself gives the Explanation
of his own Words, Chap. 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. where he teaches us,
That he that swears by the Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells
therein; and he that shall swear by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by
him that sits thereon: So that he that swears by the Head, swears by him that
made it: and he that swears by the Earth, swears by him that created it; which
leaves no room for the Objection, for it is as if Christ should have said, I
not only command you not to Forswear, but perform, as it was said to them of
old time; but I charge you, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL: I mean, not only that you
should not swear by God, and those Oaths that the Pharisees account binding;
but also that you should not so much as swear by those lesser Oaths, as they
esteem them, and which they are wont to swear by; for they are not less nor
more allowable, in that they that swear by them, swear by him that is the
Author and Maker of them: wherefore being of the same Nature with the other, I
forbid you to swear by them as well as by those Oaths that were of old time
made, and ought not to be broak, but performed unto the Lord; for this is one
of my great Commandments, which they must keep that will be my Disciples, that
is to say, SWEAR NOT AT ALL. Our 3 d Inducement to believe this to have been
the Intention of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the concurrent Testimony of the
Apostle James, which is not only a Repetition of his Master's Doctrine, but an
Addition and Illustration, we hope sufficient to determine the present Question
with every unprejudiced Reader; But above all things, my Brethren (says he)
swear not; which runs parallel with Swear not at all: The Negative is as
general and forcible. He proceeds, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth;
Words of equal Import with the latter part of Christ's Prohibition: and as if
he had foreseen the Cavils of our Swearing Adversaries, he adds, neither by any
other Oath; which though as clear as the Sun, if yet for their last shift they
should tell us, that he only meant any other Oath of that kind, not that he
prohibited Swearing by the Name of the Lord, it will not do their Business; for
that Christ has already assured us, Whosoever swears by Heaven, swears by him
that sits thereon; and the very next words show that it was not his Design only
to prohibit vain, but plainly to exclude all Swearing, But let your Yea be Yea,
and your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation; else why had he not said,
but you may swear by the Name of God before a Magistrate? Why must Neither by
any other Oath be added after such a plain Prohibition, as, My Brethren, Above
all things Swear not? And why must Yea and Nay be substituted in the room of an
Oath, if it was yet intended by the Apostle, that Christians might rise higher
in their Evidence then a bare Affirming or Denying? that is, Though their Yea
be never so truly Yea, and their Nay never so sincerely Nay, or the very Truth
of the Matter be spoaken, which is the Import of the Words; yet that they ought
to swear. What is this but to contradict the natural Tendency of the Command of
Christ and his Apostles? which is plainly this; If your Yea be Yea, it is
enough; if your Nay be Nay, it is sufficient; for Christians ought not to
swear, if they do, they fall into Condemnation, in that they break their
Master's Command, who has told them, that Whatsoever is more then Yea or Nay,
comes of Evil, which is the Ground of all Oaths; for they ought to mean so
simply and honestly in what they say, as that they should never need to swear
in order to tell the Truth. Our 4 th and last Consideration, and that which to
us seems of great Moment to clear up our Lord and Savior's sense, and rescue
the Passage from the Violence of Objectors, is this Clause, For whatsoever is
MORE then Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, comes of Evil. This cannot be intended of
more Words then Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, provided they are not of an higher
Strain, but of the same Degree of Speech importing a plain Assertion or Denial
of a thing; for it is not the Number, but Nature of the Words spoaken, that is
here prohibited: Nor can it be only understood of Perjury; for every body knows
that to be evil in it self, which is more then that which comes OF, or because
of Evil: Therefore* it must be understood as well of Swearing, as of
Forswearing, which is not Evil it self, yet comes of, or by Reason of Evil in
the World: Nor is there any thing more then Yea and Nay besides Perjury, which
can be intended, but an Oath; and therefore that was intended. Christ does not
only prohibit Evil it self, but that which is Evil by Superfluity to
Evangelical Sincerity, and that Swearing is (be it of what sort it will)
wherever Yea is Yea, and Nay is Nay. In short, If what is More then Yea and
Nay, comes of Evil; then because any Swearing, as well as Forswearing, is more
then Yea and Nay; it follows, that any Swearing comes of Evil, and therefore
ought to be rejected of Christians. Nor will our English Translation of (...)
shelter our Objectors: For, Communication does not exclude those many Cases
that require Evidences among men, no nor any the least Action of Man's Life; on
the contrary, they have a great Place in Human Communication, which is
comprehensive of the various Discourses and Transactions of a Man's Life, as 2
Kings 9.11. 2 Samuel 3.17. Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 3.8. 1 Cor. 15.33. It is a word of the
same Extent with Conversation, which takes in all that can happen between man
and man in this World: Thus the Psalmist, To him that orders his Conversation
aright, Psalm 50.23. So the Apostle, Let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Besides, (...) may be rendered Word, as in Joh. 1.1. and the
Italian and French Translations have it, Let your Word be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay;
as much as if Christ had said, As I do not only condemn the Act for Adultery,
which the Law did, but also the Conception of the Mind; and not only Murder,
but Revenge likewise; so I do not only condemn Forswearing, which is done to my
hand in the Law of God, but prohibit Swearing at all; for I make that to be
Unlawful, which the Law does not call Unlawful: Therefore when your Evidence is
called for, Swear not at all, but let your Word be Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay; that
is, Do not speak Untruth; for that is Evil: Don't Swear; for that comes of
Evil. To conclude; People swear to the End they may speak Truth; Christ would
have men speak Truth, to the End they might not swear: he would not have his
Followers upon such base Reserves, but their Word to carry the Weight of an
Oath in it; that as others ought not to be guilty of Perjury, Christians ought
not to be guilty of Lying: For such is the Advance from Moses to Christ, Jew to
Christian, that as the Christian needs not the Jew's Curb, so his Lie is
greater then the Jew's Perjury, because his Yea or Nay ought to be of more
Value then the other's Oath.

X. And lastly; Besides these express Prohibitions, Swearing is forbidden by
the very Nature of Christianity, and unworthy of him that is the Author of it,
who came not to implant so imperfect a Religion, as that which needed Oaths, or
should leave Fraud, the Ground of Swearing, unextirpated; but to promulgate
that Gospel which retrives ancient Sincerity, builds up Waste Places, restores
those Breaches Oaths entered at, and leads into the Ancient Holy Paths of
Integrity they never trod in: He is that Powerful Lord, which cures the
Diseases of all them that come unto him, and Mystical Serpent exalted, that
relieves all that believingly look up to him: His Office is to make an End of
Sin, that made way for Swearing, and introduce that Everlasting Righteousness
which never needs it; The Religion he taught, is no less then Regeneration and
Perfection; such Veracity as has not the least Wavering; Sincerity throughout,
that it might not only exceed the Righteousness of the Swearing Jews, but that
Law which permitted it till the Times of Restitution, which he brought to the
Degenerated World, who said, Swear not at all; for the Law that permitted
Oaths; was given by Moses; but Grace and Truth, that ends them, came by Jesus
Christ, who therefore prohibits them. And not only is this Gospel of Christ, or
the Holy Religion he taught, of so pure and excellent a Nature; but those who
will be his Disciples, are obliged to obey it, insomuch that he himself has
said, Joh. 14.15.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments; and if ye keep my Commandments, ye shall
abide in my Love. Again, and 15.10, ^4.
Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: For I say
unto you, Mat. 16.24.
that except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter the Kingdom of Heaven: Be ye therefore
Perfect, Mat 5.20.48.
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. These are the weighty
Sayings of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and certainly, he who
breaks not the least Commandment (forbidden Verse. 19.) who can Suffer rather
then Revenge, love Enemies, and be perfect as his Heavenly Father is perfect,
is above the Obligation of an Oath unto Truth-speaking. His Disciples preached
not another Gospel then their Master's, who prayed, that those who believed
might be sanctified THROUGHOUT, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
in Body, Soul and Spirit, Phil. 3.14.
which is a perfect Removal of the Ground of Swearing; and they were exhorted
to press after the Mark of the Price of this High and Holy Calling, until they
should all come unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ Jesus: Ephesians. 4.13.
For even hereunto (says Peter) were ye called, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23.
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that ye should
follow his Steps, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth: 1 John
4.17.
And says John, As he is, so are we in this World. If No Guile be found in our
Mouths, then No Oaths; for they came because of Guile: And if we ought to
resemble him in this World, then must our Communication be Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay; that is, we must live the Life of Truth, and speak the Words of Truth,
which ought to be of greater Force then Oaths, that come of Evil. If the
Righteousness of the Law ought to be fulfilled in us, we ought not to swear,
because we ought to be so Righteous as not to Lie. This is Evangelical; for as
he that conceives not a foul or revengeful Thought, need not to purge himself
of Adultery and Murder: Neither is there any Reason, that man should purge
himself of Lying by Sweating, that does not so much as countenance an untrue
Thought. The Language of the same Apostle to the Ephesians further explains
this Evangelical Evidence, But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye
have heard him, Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
and have been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus; That ye put off
concerning the former Conversation the Old Man, which is Corrupt, according to
the Deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and that you
put on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness: Wherefore PVTTING AWAY LYING, SPEAK EVERY MAN TRVTH with his
Neighbor: Beyond which, there can be no Assurance given or desired. And if
Christians ought never to Lie, it is most certain they need never to Swear; for
Swearing is built upon Lying; Take away Lying, and there remains no more Ground
for Swearing; Truth-speaking comes in the room thereof: And this not only the
Christian-Doctrine teaches and requires; but Christ, the blessed Author of it,
is ready to work in the Hearts of the Children of Men, would they but come and
learn of him, who is Meek, Lowly, filled with Grace and Truth. And we must
needs say, It is a shameful thing, and very Dishonorable to the
Christian-Religion, that those who pretend themselves to be the Followers of
Christ, for so true Christians ought to be, should so degenerate from his
Example and Doctrine as to want and use scarcing Asseverations, dispensed with
in some of the weakest Times of Knowledge, and such horrible Imprecations
(never known to ancient Jews and Christians) to ascertain one another of their
Faith and Truth: Religion must needs have suffered a great Ebb, and
Christianity a fearful Ecclips since those brighter Ages of its Profession: For
Bishop Gauden himself, in his Discourse of Oaths, confesses, That the ancient
Christians were so strict and exact, that there was no need of an Oath among
them; yea, they so kept up the Sanctity and Credit of their Profession among
Unbelievers, that it was Security enough in all Cases to say, Christianus sum,
I am a Christian.

But to fortify what we have hitherto urged in Defense of our Judgment and
Practice; and to the End it may more fully appear, that our Tenderness in this
great Case of Oaths comes not from any Sower, Sullen or Superstitious Humor, or
that we would trouble the World with any New fangled Opinion, we shall produce
the concurrent Testimonies of several Famous and Good Men for above these Two
Thousand Years, among Gentiles, Jews and Christians, enough to make an
Occumenical Council; We shall cite them out of the best Editions we have been
able to procure, and as truly and punctually as we can render them, digested in
Order of Time.

Memorable TESTIMONIES against Swearing, collected out of the Writings of
Gentiles, Jews and Christians; some of which were delivered to the World
several Ages before Swear not at all was writ by Matthew, or spoaken by Christ;
which makes Swearing, but especially Punishing for not Swearing, among
Christians, so much the more Disallowable.
The Whole published not only in Favor of our Cause; but for the Instruction of
the World, and to their Just Honor that said and writ them, as durable
Monuments of their Virtue.

I. The Sayings of the Gentiles or Heathens, in Dislike of Oaths.
Our two first Testimonies shall be the Practice of two great People, the
Persians and Scythian:.

Diodorus Siculus, lib. 16.
These Nations were many Hundred Years bef. Christ.
I. AMong the Persians, says Diodorus Siculus, Giving the Right Hand was the
Token of Truth-speaking: He that did it Deceitfully, was counted more
Detestable then if he had Sworn. Which plainly implies, that Swearing was
Detested among them, as well as that they needed not to Swear, who so much used
Truth-speaking.

Quint. Curt. in vit. Alex.
II. The Scythians, as it is reported by Q. Curtius, in their Conference with
Alexander, upon Occasion of an expected Security, told him, Think not that the
Scythians confirm their Friendship by Oath; They Swear by keeping their Word.
Which is not only a Proof of their Disuse of Common Oaths, but Swearing at all,
even in Matters of greatest Importance.

Plutarch Romans Quest. 28.
III. So Religious was Hercules, says Plutarch, Lived before Christ about
1280. years; being in the days of Gideon, Judge. 8.
that he never swore but once. If it was Religiously done to swear but once in
a Man's Life, it had been more Religiously done not to swear at all. How just
and severe a Censure is this out of an Heathen's Mouth upon the Practice of
Dissolute Christians?

Hesiod Theogon. p. 88.
IV. Hesiod in his Theogonia places an Oath amongst the Brood of Contention; An
Oath, says he, Bef. Christ 800. years; in the days of Hosea, Joel and Amos.
greatly hurts men. Again presently, An Oath goes with corrupt Judgments; or an
Oath flies away together with cotrupt Judgments, that is, when Justice appears
among men, Oaths vanish, as his Scope in that place shows.

Seciad. in Stob. 28.
Bef. Christ 620. years; in the days of Josiah.
V. It was one part of the Doctrine of the Seven Sages, so famous in Greece,
That men ought not to Swear.

Stob. Sermon. 3.
VI. Solon, the famous Lawgiver of Athens, and one of those Seven Sages,
exhorted the People to observe Honesty more strictly then an Oath. As if he had
said, Honesty is to be preferred before Swearing, as another Saying of his
imports, A good Man should have that Repute, as not to need an Oath; it is a
Diminution to his Credit to be put to Swear, Bp. Gaud. of Oaths, p. 41.

Theognis ver. 660.
Bef. Christ 593. years.
VII. Theognis, the Greek Poet, writing of a Person Swearing, says, Neither
ought he to swear this or any thing: This Thing or Swearing (it self) shall not
be. What is this less then, Swear not at all?

Valor. Max. lib. 8. cap. 18. Laert. Hermip. and Orig. contr. Cells.
Bef. Christ 500. years; These Three Persons lived in the time of Jeremiah and
Ezekiel.
VIII. Pythagoras, a Grave and Virtuous Person, being earnestly entreated of the
Crotonian-Senators for his Advice in things relating to the Government, did in
his ^ra^ion, among other Excellent Sentences, with more then ordinary Emphasis,
lay this down in the Nature of a Maxim, Let no man attest God by an Oath,
though in Courts of Judicature; but use to speak such things, as that he may be
credited without an Oath.

H. Grot. on Mat. 5.34.
IX. Clineas, a Just Greek, Bef. Christ 560. years.
and Follower of Pythagoras, out of Love to Truth, and Respect he bore his
Master's Doctrine, that enjoined him to fear and shun an Oath, chose to pay
Three Talents, which amount to about Three Hundred Pound, rather then he would
take any Oath: Whose Example Basilius Magnus upbraided the Christians of his
Time with, that were then learning to Swear.

Hierocles Comment in Carm. Pythag. p. 28.
X. Hierocles testifies, That Pythagoras, Bef. Christ 422. years; in the time
of Ahasuerus, Ezra 4.
in enjoining them to revere an Oath, not only prohibits Forswearing, but
requires them also to abstain from Swearing.

And Aeshilus makes a sincere Beckon to a Matter a firm Oath.

Stobaus Sermon. 114.
XI. Socrates, that worthy Gentile, Bef. Christ 422. years; in the days of
Haggai and Zachariah.
and great Promoter of Virtue among the Athenians, among many Excellent
Sentences delivered this, That Good Men must let the World see, how that their
Manners or Dealings are more firm then an Oath. Which both proves that he saw a
more Excellent Righteousness then Swearing Truth it self, and believed it
attainable; for he manifestly exhorts Good Men to that Integrity, which is a
greater Caution then an Oath. He was put to Death for testifying against the
Heathen Idols, acknowledging one only God.

Plut. in Lacon. Epoph.
Bef. Christ 400. years.
XII. Lysander, the great Spartan Captain; thought an Oath of so little Value in
comparison of Truth, that he bestowed this contemptuous Saying upon Swearing,
Children are to be deceived with T^yes, and Men with Oaths. Implying, that
Sincerity is a greater Security then an Oath.

Isocr. ad Demon.
Bef. Christ 394. years. These two lived in the days of Malachi.
XIII. Isocrates, a Greek Orator, in his Oration to Demonicum, advises, Not to
take an Oath for Money Matters. Also he teaches, That Good Men should show
themselves more credible then an Oath.

Plat. de Leg. 12.
Bef. Christ 266. years.
XIV. Plato (called Divine) forbids Swearing in solemn Cases, That none swear
himself; That none require an Oath of another. He speaks there, how
Rhadamanthus brought in Swearing by the Gods; but that his Art therein was not
agreeable to that Time (it seems he accounted it an Art of Policy) But that in
all Actions or Causes, Laws which are made with Understanding, should take away
Swearing from both Adversaries. For (says he) it is an Horrible Thing, that
when many Judgments are done in a City, well near half the People are forsworn
in them -- Therefore let the Presidents of Judgments not permit any to swear in
Actions, not even for Persuasions sake; but that he persevere in that which is
Just, with a fitting Speech, etc.

Valor. Max. 10. Cic. pro Corn. Balb. Diog. Laert. in vit. Xenocr.
XV. Xenocrates was so renowned at Athens, Bef. Christ 337. Years.
for his Virtuous Life and great Integrity, that being called to give his
Evidence by Oath, all the Judges stood up and forbad the Tender, because they
would not have it thought, that Truth depended more upon an Oath, then the Word
of an Honest Man.

Menander.
XVI. Menander, the Greek Poet, says, Bef. Christ 336. Years.
Flee an Oath, though thou should swear justly.

Cherillus in Perseid.
XVII. Cherillus says, Oaths bring not Credit to the Man, but the Man must
bring Credit to the Oaths. What serve they for then? to Deceive? It seems by
this, that Credit is better then an Oath; for it is the Credit that is the
Security, not the Oath.

Stobaeus in Jur. c. 27.
XVIII. Alexides in Olynth, says, A Wise Man ought always to give Credit, not
to Swearers, but to the Things themselves. Then Oaths are vain; for it is not
the mere Oath, but the Likelihood of the Truth of the Evidence, from the
Consideration and Comparing of the Circumstances, that turns the Scale.

Simocat. Epist. 33. F.
XIX. Simocatus, Perfidiousness appears securer then Faithfulness; and an Oath
imposed is a fit Engine for Deceit. Strange! that faithful Yea and Nay is stopped,
when Perfidiousness with an Oath can pass all Guards, Courts and Offices. He
manifestly links Oaths and Perfidiousness, and gives the Praise to Faithfulness.

H. Gr^t. on Mat. 5.
XX. Epictetus, a famous and grave Stoic, counseled, to Refuse an Oath
ALTOGETHER.

Quint. l. 8.
XXI. Quintilian says, that in Time past it was a kind of Infamy for Grave and
Approved Men to Swear, as if their Authority should suffice for Credit:
Therefore the Priests or Flamins were not compelled to it; for then to compel a
Noble Man to Swear, were like putting him upon the Rack, etc. Which shows an
Oath to be an Unnatural and Extorting Way of Evidence, and that they preferred
V^rtue and Truth before an Oath.

Plutarch Romans quest. 44.
XXII. Plutarch in his 44th Romans qu. upon the Custom of the Romans, holding it
Unlawful for the Flamen Dialis, or Chief Priest, to Swear, puts the Question,
Why is it not Lawful for Jupiter' s Priest to Swear? Is it because an Oath
ministered unto Freemen is as it were the Rack and Torture tendered unto them?
For, certain it is, that the Soul, as well as the Body of the Priest ought to
continue free, and not be forced by any Torture whatsoever; or for that it is
not meet to Distrust or Discredit him in small Matters, who is believed in
Great and Divine Things? or rather because every Oath ends with Detestation
and Malediction of Perjury? And considering that all Maledictions be odious and
abominable, therefore it is not thought good, that any other Priests whatsoever
should Curse, or pronounce any Malediction: And in this respect was the
Priestess of Minerva in Athens highly commended, for that she would never curse
Alcibiades, notwithstanding the People commanded her so to do; For I am (quoth
she) ordained a Priestess to pray for Men, and not to curse them. Or last of
all, was it, because the Peril of Perjury would reach in common to the whole
Commonwealth, if a Wicked, Godless and Forsworn Person should have the Charge
and Superintendence of the Prayers, Vows and Sacrifices made in the behalf of
the City? Thus far Plutarch, whose Morals have the Praise among all the
Writings of Philosophers; who is also commended himself very highly for his
Virtue and Wisdom. See his Life.

M. Aur. Ant. in Descript. bon. Vir.
XXIII. M. Aurelius Antoninus, that Philosophical Roman Emperor, in his
Description of a Good Man, says, That the Integrity of a truly good man is
such, that there is no need of an Oath for him. Certainly then he was far from
imposing Oaths upon his People, who both by his Exam-and Precept prefrr'd
Integrity before an Oath.

Libanius.
XXIV. Libanius, a Greek Orator, though otherwise no Admirer of Christians,
reckons this amongst the Praises of a Christian Emperor; He is (says he) so
far from being blackt with Perjury, that he is even afraid to swear the Truth.
It seems then, they swore not in his time; and that Libanius, an Enemy to
Christians, preferred and admired Swear not at all.

Auson. Epist. 2.
XXV. We shall conclude with Ausonius, whose Saying seems to be all contracted,
or those other Testimonies digested into one Axiom, that is, To swear or speak
falsely, is one and the same thing.

These are the Reflections upon Oaths we receive from Heathens, who by the
Light they had, both discerned the Scope of the Evangelical Doctrine, Swear not
at all, preceptively laid down by Christ our Lord, Mat. 5.34. and pressed it
earnestly: And which is more to their Honor, but to the Christians Shame,
several of them lived it sincerely.

II. Testimonies from the Jews in Dislike of all Swearing.
H. Grot. Com. on Mat. 5.34.
XXVI. Maimonides, out of the most ancient of the Jewish Rabbis extracts this
memorable Axiom, IT IS BEST FOR A MAN NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL.

Raimund. p. 135.
XXVII. Raimundus quotes him thus, If it be a great Good, not to Swear at all;
what is it to Impose an Oath?
Maimonides in tract. de juramentis; IT IS A GREAT GOOD FOR A MAN NOT TO SWEAR
AT ALL; The ancient and lawful Doctrine of the Synagogue.

Jofeph. de bello Judaico l. 2. c. 7.
XXVIII. The Esseni or Essaeans (says Josephus) keep their Promise, and
account every Word they speak of more force then if they had bound it with an
Oath; and they shun Oaths worse then Perjury; for they esteem him condemned for
a Liar, who is not believed without calling God to witness.

These Essaeans were the most Religious of the Jewish Pepole, though the
Pharisees made the greatest Noise amongst the Rabble.

Philo de decalogo, p. 583.
XXIX. Philo, that excellent Jew, relates thus much concerning the same
Essaeans, That what soever they said, was firmer then an Oath; And that to
Swear was counted amongst them a thing superfluous.

Philo Judeus on Com. 3d.
XXX. The same Philo himself thus taught in his Treatise on the Ten
Commandments; Commandment 3 d. Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain:
Many Ways (says he) do men sin against this Commandment; so THAT IT IS BETTER
NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL; but so well accustom thy self to speak Truth always, that
thy Bare Word shall have the Force and Virtue of an Oath. Page 583.
It is become a Proverb, That to swear well and holily is a second Voyage; for
he that swears is suspected of Lying and Perjury. It is, says he, Page 515.
most profitable and agreeable to the reasonable Nature, to abstain ALTOGETHER
from Swearing. Whatsoever a godly Man speaks, let it go for an Oath.

The Wisdom and Moderation of this worthy Personage reflects just Blame upon
those that Pillage their Neighbors, because they Conscientiously Refuse an
Oath: But that men, who pretend to be the Disciples of Jesus Christ, should
commit these Cruelties, aggravates their Evils, and doubt less their Guilt. How
can they ever hope to look their Lord with Comfort in the Face, who so severely
Treat their Fellow Servants? Certainly Jews and Heathens will one Day rise up
in Judgment against such Christians, for their Unnatural Carriage toward their
Brethren: This is not to Love Enemies, but injure Friends. Jews and Heathens
are become Names of Reproach; yet to the Rebuke of Christians, as they call
themselves, they not only discerned the Rise and Ground of Oaths, but the Evil
of using them, even while they were tolerated; and both avoided them, and
exhorted others to that Integrity which had no need of them.

These Testimonies, though they are of Weight with us, and we hope they will
have a due Impress upon the Minds of many of our Readers; yet because nothing
produced out of Jews and Gentiles, may advance our Cause with some, or render
it ever the more acceptable, We shall next betake our selves to the more
Christian Ages of the World, for Approbation of our Judgment, who we are sure
will kindly entertain us, their Liberality being Extraordinary to our Cause;
and from whom we shall never want Votes for SWEAR NOT AT ALL, while their Works
are in the World: May our Superiors join theirs with them, and we have Reason
to believe, that our Deliverance from the Yoke of Oaths will be the happy Issue
of this necessary Address.

III. Testimonies from Christians, both Fathers, Doctors and Martyrs, in
Dislike of All Swearing.
Polycarpus.
XXXI. The first Testimony recorded against Swearing, after the Apostles Times,
was that of Polycarpus, who had lived with the Apostles, and was said to have
been Disciple to John, not the least of the Apostles; for at his Death, when
the Governor bid him Swear, Defy Christ, etc. he said, Fourscore and Six
Years have I served him, yet has he never offended me in any thing. The
Proconsul still urged and said, Swear by the Fortune of Caesar; to whom
Polycarpus answered, If thou requirest this Vainglory, that I Protest the
Fortune of Caesar, as thou say, feigning thou know not who I am, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 15.
hear freely, I AM A CHRISTIAN. This Good man began his Fourscore and Six
Years, which was about Twenty Years after James wrote Above all things, my
Brethren, Swear Not; and several years before John the Apostle deceased; for he
is called his Disciple. See his History and Commendation in Eusebius.

We know it is objected by some, That he refused to Swear only because he could
not swear by that Oath, which is a Guess, and no Confutation of what we
allege: But if that had been Polycarpus's Reason, why did he not rather say,
The Law of God forbids Swearing by Idols? It Is certain, the first Christians
would not Swear, but thought Polycarpus's Answer Security enough to them that
demanded their Oath: He refused all Oaths as a Christian; therefore saying, he
was a Christian, was Reason sufficient why he would not take that Oath.

Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. pro Christianis, ad Anton. Pium oper. p. 63.
XXXII. It was some time before his Suffering that Justin Martyr, who is the
first we find writing of it, published an Apology for the Christians in the year
150. as himself says, and a second after that, wherein he tells us, after the
Doctrine of his Master, That we should NOT SWEAR AT ALL, but always speak the
Truth. He, that is, Christ, has thus commanded, SWEAR NOT AT ALL; but let your
YEA be YEA, and your NAY, NAY; and what is more then these is of Evil. See his
Praise and Martyrdom in Eusebius, soon after Polycarpus. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 16.


Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
XXXIII. Under the same Emperor (says Eusebius) suffered also Ponticus, of
Fifteen Years of Age, and Blandina, a Virgin, with all kind of Bitter Torments;
the Tormentors now and then urging them to Swear, which they constantly Refused.

Eusebius. ibid. lib. 6. cap. 4.
XXXIV. And in the next Emperor's Reign, Basilides, a Soldier of Authority
amongst the Host, being appointed to lead Potamiena to Execution, and by her
convinced of the Truth in Christ, was after a while required to Swear; But he
affirmed plainly, It was not lawful for him to Swear; for (said he) I am a
Christian. He did not lay the Unlawfulness upon that Oath, but upon Swearing at
all. The History only says, His Companions would have him swear upon some
occasion or other, not mentioning by what; His Answer was, It is Unlawful for
me to Swear; and why? because, says he, I am a Christian: The Consequence is
plain, Christians took no Oaths, therefore not their Oaths.

Tert. Apol. pro Christianis advers. gent. cap. 32.
Tertullian was a Lawyer, Son to a Centurion of Pro^consular Dignity. See his
Life.
XXXV. In the same Emperor's Reign lived Tertullian, a strict and learned Man,
who wrote a very notable Apology for the Christians, wherein he answers the
Objection of the Heathen, who accused them of not being Well-wishers to the
Emperor, nor Caesar's Friends, in that they refused to Sacrifice and Swear by
the Genius, Fortune and Health of the Emperor (we begin with this because it is
urged by some against us) says he, We do Swear, as not by the Genius of the
Caesar's, so by or for their Safety, which is more August then all Genius's or
Petty Gods; for we reverently look up unto the Judgment of God in the Emperors,
who has set them over the Nations; and we know that to be in them which God
wills, and what God wills, that we will to be safe (that God save it) Hoc
salvum esse volumus, et pro magno id juramento habemus; i. And that we account
for a great Oath, Rigaltius adds, I will speak plainly, that the Emperor is
Lord, but after the common manner.
or that we have instead of a great Oath; namely, our Well-wishing to Caesar:
the thing that was desired, the Substance of the Oath; that Oath which the
Pythagoreans said was in all reasonable Creatures, viz. a full Resolution of
Mind not to transgress the Law of God, which Tertullian says here they had
Respect to; That Oath which a Just Man swears by his Deeds, as Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks. In like manner Tertullian says, Tertul. ad Scap. c. 1,
2.
to Scapula, We do Sacrifice for the Health of the Emperor, but that Way that
God pleases, by pure Prayer; so says he, Apol. c. 33.
Here we do swear by the Health of the Emperor, by willing his Health; and I do
work for the Health of the Emperor; for I commend him to God I do offer
Sacrifice by Prayer, c. 30.
Otherwise, if we take the Words of this Doctor strictly and properly, who in
writing is difficult, as Scultetus notes; and obscure, as Lactantius says, we
shall both cross the Scope of the Place, and accuse him and the Primitive
Christians and Martyrs of his time, not only of Swearing, but Sacrificing for
the Health of the Emperor; neither of which do we ever read they did, nor as
much as offered to do, had they, doubtless we should have heard off me Release
or Favor shown them on that Condescension: Besides we shall also make him to
contradict himself (which Scultetus accuses him not of, in this) For in his
Book de Idololatria, Tertul. de Idololatria, cap. 11.
he speaks without any Obscurity; saying, I speak not of Perjury, seeing it is
not Lawful to Swear. And in Chap. 23. he proves, That he which signs a Bill of
Security containing and confirmed by an Oath, is guilty of Swearing, as if he
had spoaken it, and transgresses Christ's Command, who has prescribed not to
swear. He is before speaking of the Idolatry, Christians are obnoxious to in
regard of Employments, as Schoolmasters by reason of Heathenish Books and
Customs; and Merchants or Trassiquers of Covetousness and Lying; not to speak
of Forswearing, says he, SEEING IT IS NOT LAWFUL SO MUCH AS TO SWEAR; which if
any should do, he should surely be the Servant of Covetousness, in undertaking
an unlawful Practice for Gain, as he says Lying was; but if they should also
Forswear, so adding Swearing to Lying, that should be a Servant of Servants to
Covetousness, that is Idolatry: Which if Christians had committed indeed, it is
unlikely that Tertullian would have made such a slight and short preterition
with a Sentence of Eight Words. And further observe, that both Tertullian and
the Martyrs make use of the most Universal Proof, to make their Testimony for
God full and complete. And though their Enemies Trial of them were short of
proving them Christians, and distinguishing them from Jews; yet in the Wisdom
of God, their Answer and Argument being General and Christian, including the
Special and Jewish, proves them not only true Jews, who were forbidden by God
to Forswear, or to Swear by Idols; but true Christians, not to swear, because
it was unlawful; for Christ had forbidden it: And as his Argument in the
Apology aforesaid, was, It is Unlawful to Swear, much more to Forswear; so
here, Christ (says he) has prescribed not to Swear, then sure not to Swear
and subscribe Gentile Oaths. So Basilides, Because I am a Christian, it is not
lawful for me to swear; then not your Oath: this is the just Sense and
Consequence of it. And said Polycarp, I would have thee to know, that I am a
Christian, and the Doctrine thereof, if thou will appoint a Time, I shall teach
thee (that is, not to swear) therefore it is in vain for thee to bid me swear,
and defy Christ: So Blandina and Ponticus were urged to Swear (by what it is
not said, and it matters not) but in vain; for they were Christians: We do not
read that any used the Jewish Argument, the old Commandment, Thou shall not
Swear by Idols; but the Christian Argument, the new Commandment, It is not
lawful to Swear, Christ forbad it, I am a Christian, etc.

And to this Purpose speaks Le Prieur on this Place of Tertullian, in his
Annotations (which the Publishers desired because of his Obscurity; see their
Preface) Although, says he, the Christians did believe that It is confessed by
le Prieur, that the Christians did deny all Swearing.
All Swearing was Forbidden them, they before all Oaths were aware of Swearing
by the Genius, or Fortune of the Prince. Here he confesses they were aware of
All Swearing, much more that which was never lawful, to wit, Swearing by Idols.
And thereupon he brings the Example of Polycarpus: But if all Oaths, then of
Swearing by the Health of the Emperor; for that was an Oath. And this African
Writer's intricate Sense (as the Publisher's Terms are) must needs be in this
as in the other, all along mystical: and as he says a little before, I offer a
Sacrifice (oratione) by Prayer; so going along he says, Bruno and Cassiodorus
on Psalm 14. and Psalm. 61.
We Swear, juramus, i. jure oramus; for so Bruno and Cassiodorus derive the
Word, Jurare dictum est, quasi just orare, hoc est, just loqui.

This Cassiodorus was a Roman Senator and Counselor of Theodoricus, about the
year 490.
Again, Ps. 61. They swear in God, or to God, or by God, who Promise an
inviolable Odience of Mind to him. Jurare to swear (says he) is, jure orare,
to speak Equity, that he will not decline to another Party, from what he has
promised. Again, Here Swearing is firmly in mind to resolve to fulfill the good
Purpose. And that this must be Tertullian's Sense, not only the Scope (for
which see Scultetus on the Place) but his Explanation of it, by willing what
God wills, and that to be to them for a great Oath; plainly declares to
sagacious Readers, and such Tertullian's African Speech requires, as Rigaltius
says of his Writings, which have been There are about 2000. Corrections in
Tertullian his Works.
altered of them that could not comprehend them. But is it likely that a Man so
severe, that condemned the very subscribing of a Writing wherein an Oath was
contained, and for this Reason, because Christ forbad to Swear at all; and
thought it needless to speak of Perjury, because it was not lawful to swear,
should yet allow it in himself and others to swear even by that which was not
God? Besides, Suarez reckons him amongst those Fathers who were more especially
against Swearing. Suarez. de Juram. c. 2.


Thus are the Conspirers against this part of the Doctrine of Christ, and his
Apostles, Primitive Fathers and Martyrs, forced out of that Sanctuary they
betook themselves to, in the Sentence of this intricate Doctor.

Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
XXXVI. Clemens Alexandrinus, his Contemporary, famous for Learning and Strict
Living, to help him in his Mystical Meaning of an Oath, says, He who is once a
Believer, why shall he make himself an Infidelity keeps Company with Swearing:
And for a Christian to Swear, is with Clem. Alexandr. to turn Infidel again.
Unbeliever, as that he has also need to Swear, and does not so lead his Life,
that the same (to wit, his Life) be a firm and definite Oath, and show the
Faithfulness of Confession in a constant and stable Speech -- Far be it, that
he who is approved and discerned in such Piety, should be propense to Lie or to
Swear -- He who lives justly, transgressing in nothing of these things that
should be done, the same swears truly and holily by his Deeds and Works (Mark
how this agrees with Tertullian's improper Swearing) the Testimony of the
Tongue is superfluous to him -- It suffices to add unto his Affirming or
Denying this, viz. I SPEAK TRULY, that he beget Faith in them who perceive not
the Stability of his Answer: For it behooves him, as I judge (says he) to have
a Life worthy of Credit (or Faith) among those that are without, that an Oath
be not sought from him -- Neither does he Swear, as being one, who has
determined to put for his Affirming YEA, for his Denying NAY.

-- Where is there any need of an Oath to him that so lives, as one that is
attained to the height of Truth? He therefore that does not Swear, is far from
Forswearing: He that transgresses in nothing that is covenanted and agreed, HE
MAY NEVER SWEAR.

-- Seeing he is fully persuaded that God is every where, and is ashamed not to
speak Truth, and professes that it is a thing unbeseeming, and unworthy for
him to speak False; he is content with this, that God and his own Conscience
know it, and therefore he does not Lie, nor do any thing besides or against
what is covenanted and agreed: By that means he neither swears, if he be
asked; nor denies, so as to speak false, though he dye upon the Rack for it.

Likewise in his 5th, 7th and 8th Books of Strom. also in his 3d Book of his
Paedagogue with Gentianus Hervetus's Notes on it, where he forbids to set Two
Prices, and commands but one single one, and to speak Truth WITHOUT an Oath,
etc.

Origin in Matthew. Tract. 25.
XXXVII. Origin, his Successor, a Man of equal Fame for Learning and Piety,
succeeds him also in this Testimony concerning Swearing: Because, says he, the
Jews have a Custom to swear by Heaven; to the foregoing (Prohibition) Christ
added this also to reprove them, because they more easily swore by Heaven then
by God; because he deals alike unreasonably, who swears by HEAVEN, as he that
swears by the TEMPLE, or by the ALTAR, in that who swears by Heaven, seems
to swear by him that sits in that Throne, and does not escape Danger, as he
thinks, because he swears not by God himself, but by the Throne of God: And
these things he speaks to the Jews, forbidding them to give heed to the
Traditions of the Pharisees; He makes two Prohibitions, as we do: 1. Swear not
by God; 2. by no Creatures.
otherwise, before, HE MANIFESTLY FORBAD TO SWEAR AT ALL.

The Chief Priest said unto him, Ibid. Tract. 35. Mat. 26.
I adjure thee by the Living God, that thou tell us if thou be the Christ, the
Son of God.

In the Law we find the Use of Adjuring; Number. 5.19.
The Priest shall adjure the Woman with the Adjurations of this Curse.

Also Ahab said unto Michaeas, I adjure thee that thou tell me the Truth in the
Name of the Lord. 1 King. 22.16.
The King adjured the Prophet, not by Command of the Law, but by his own Will.
And now the Priest adjures Jesus by the Living God. But I account that a Man
that will live according to the Gospel, MUST NOT ADJURE ANOTHER: For it is even
like that which the Lord himself forbids in the Gospel, BUT I SAY UNTO YOU,
Orig. against all Swearing with us; and Compelling.
SWEAR NOT AT ALL. For if it be not lawful to swear, as to the Gospel-Command
of Christ, it is also true, that it is not lawful to Adjure another, or compel
him to Swear.

Huetius upon him adds, that Athanasius, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Hilary, and
many more were of of the same Mind with him: and if so, we may without Offense
add, upon that Respect our Superiors seem to carry to their Names, that it must
needs be very remote from the Doctrine of the ancient Church, to fine,
imprison, and bitterly treat those that for Conscience of that Gospel-Command
do scruple an Oath in this Age.

Orig. on Jer. 4.1, 2.
If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, and put away thy Abominations,
then shall thou not remove. And thou shall swear the Lord lives in Truth, and
Judgment, and Righteousness.

Origin here tells us, That this is a Reproof of them that did not Swear in
Judgment, but without Judgment: Howbeit, we know (says he) that the Lord said
unto his Disciples, But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL. Perhaps formerly it
behoved them to Swear in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness; that after any had
given Proof of his Integrity, he might be thought worthy of being believed
WITHOUT ANY OATH AT ALL. But once having YEA, he needs no Witness that it is
YEA; and having NAY, he needs no other Evidence to prove that it is NAY.

Thus does Origin prefer and extol Evangelical Verity, wrapped up in solemn Yea
or Nay, above the Swearing that was in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness under
the Dispensation of the Law.

Socrates Scolast. lib. 4. cap. 22. of his Ecclesiastical History.
XXXVIII. Gregory Thaumaturgus, so called from his working of Miracles, on
Eccles. lib. 46. cap. 8. says, It is meet to give diligent heed to the Words
of the King, and to flee an Oath by all means, especially that which is taken
in the Name of God. See his great Praise, his Works and Miracles.

Cyprian Lib. 3. Testim. ad Quirin.
XXXIX. Cyprian, a famous Father, and faithful Martyr (who lived about the
middle of the Age, in the beginning of which Origin flourished) in his third
Book of Testimonies to Quirinus, Who has desired me (said Cyprian) to draw out
of the holy Scriptures certain Heads, belonging to the Religious Discipline of
our Sect (for so he calls his own, the Christian Religion) His 12th Head
amongst them is, Not to Swear.

Again, Writing of Pastors and Teachers, Cypr. Epist ad Corn. n. 5
he bids them, Remember what the Lord taught, and said, Let your saying be
Yea, Yea; and Nay, Nay.

Cyprian de Mortal.
In another Place he says, It is unlawful for any man to compel another to take
an Oath.

Hitherto the Christians, being under most cruel Sufferings, generally kept
faithful to the Command of Christ in this Point; and so we find very little in
their Writings about it, besides a simple and bare asserting of it as the
Doctrine of Christ, not to swear at all, as well as it was of Moses, not to
swear falsely or vainly; for more was no way needful, in that it was not
Contested, but universally so Received. But after that Christian-Emperors had
engaged themselves in Parties, then it seems many out of Flattery, and to
engage them to their Sect, took Liberty to Swear, even by the Health of the
Emperor, as is objected against us by some out of Eusebius; but such he did not
account Religious; neither that a Religious Part so to do, much less an August
Act; and least of all, a most August Act of Divine Worship, as some would have
it; seeing Stobaeus observes from him, That whereas many exhorted that they be
honest and faithful in an Oath, Eusebius. apud Stob. de Jure^ur. c. 27.
he, for his part, esteemed it not the Part of a Religious Man, not to avoid
even Swearing it self. And we believe it will be a hard Matter to find any in
the Greek Church, especially for the first Three Hundred Years, that would
allow Swearing so large a Place in Sacred Things, yea, or in later Ages either,
even in the Latin Church; nay, of those who have allowed it in some Cases, many
or most of them have denied it any Place at all in the Worship of God, as of it
self, accounting it an Abatement, rather then an Advancement to Christianity,
which no part of the true Worship of God can be. But some perhaps taking of
Tertullian's word Augustior, or more August, (which he says, the Safety of the
Emperor is, in Comparison of all the Genius's) to be the highest Act of God's
Worship, they would have us swear by that, after the Example of those mentioned
in some Christian-Emperors Times. Tertullian's Sense we shall easily grant; for
it is so, and we do so, in that we commend our Prince and Governors to God, to
God only, with earnest and sincere Desires for his and their Safety, above all
such Genius's, as Tertullian calls Daemonia. But we justly deny upon the score
of what we have made appear to the contrary, even from Tertullian himself, and
others, That he, or the Christians in his time, or for Two Hundred Years
before, or a Hundred Years after, did swear, as some would have us, least of
all as a most August Act of the Worship of God, without which all others are
unacceptable; or that those who did swear afterward were the most Religious;
seeing Eusebius esteems otherwise, and not he only, but also those very Devout
Men that we have already produced, besides many which might and may be
mentioned: For, all that we have yet met with, in those Times, that speak of
it, speak against it; and of the following Times Men of greatest Renown and
Authority, labored with all Earnestness to expel Oaths the Society of
Christians, and cure them of that Distemper by inculcating the Doctrine of
Integrity, that needs no Oath; proving by holy Scripture, that it was the plain
and absolute Law of Christ, that Christians ought not to swear at all; and by
other Arguments, that the Original of Oaths was neither from God, nor good Men:
But they crept into Use through the Corruption of Times, and mere Carelessness
of Governments; for, when they could not trust one another, they called their
God's to witness; but God separating Abraham and his Posterity from among them,
to himself, the better to draw them from Idols, commanded them to swear by him
only: as much as if he would have said; If you will Swear, let it be by my Name
rather then Idols, that so you may, though it be after a mean manner
acknowledge a real Deity, the Only Lord of all: But how long was this
Condescension to last? But till the Fullness of Time came; That, with other
Permissions, removed all Swearing, Christ bringing men to the Truth in the
Inward Parts, as in the Beginning, before Swearing was in being; for from the
Beginning it was not so.

But to show what other Fathers Reasons and Testimonies against this Heathenish
and Jewish Usage, indeed Bondage, were, at the coming in of the Apostasy, we
shall begin with Athanasius, a Man that was in great Renown in the days of
Constantine the Great, and whose Creed is the Faith and Test of Christendom at
this day.

Athanasius on the Passion of Christ.
XL. The Evangelical Sentence of the Lord is, Let your Yea be Yea, and your
Nay, Nay: Thus far we, who are in Christ, may confirm our Words with
Asseverations, and with no further Progress let us flee to or approach Oaths,
that we allege not God for Witness for Corruptible Money's sake, especially
since Moses so sets down the Law; Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in a vain thing. For if any one is plainly worthy to name God, he is also
worthy of Belief; For, whosoever is meet for greater things, he will be much
more fit for less: On the contrary, if he be not worthy Belief, that he may be
credited without an Oath, surely he is not one that is worthy to name God. If
he be not faithful in Word, how will God by any means be the Witness of an Oath
for him, who is destitute of Faith, to which God has Respect? Again, The Lord
is nigh to all that call upon him in Truth; by which alone the Lord can be
called upon: Wherefore why do they swear by God, who are not trusted even in
small Matters? Otherwise, Athanas his Abhorrence and Derision of Oaths.
an Oath is a Testimony of Truth, and not a Judge of Businesses, since men do
swear, not that they may signify Businesses, but that they may confirm the
Truth; and that they may show, that those things which they produce, are
without Lying: If therefore he that swears has Faith and Truth, WHAT USE IS
THERE OF AN OATH? But if he has no Faith nor Truth, why do we undertake such
an Impiety, that for poor silly Men, and those mortal too, we call to Witness
GOD, that is above men? For if it be a base Part to call to witness an Earthly
King to the lowest Judicatures, as one that is greater then both Actors and
Judges; why do we cite him that is uncreated to created things, and make God to
be despised of men? HOUT, Athanasius his Reason and Dislike of Oaths.
that exceeds all Iniquity and Audaciousness: What then is to be done? NO MORE
but that our YEA be YEA, and our NAY be NAY; and in short, THAT WE DO NOT LIE.
But if we shall seem to speak Truth, and imitate the true God, some perchance
may thus contradict.

If an Oath be forbidden to men, Object.
and a man imitates God in not Swearing, how is it that God is related in the
holy Scriptures to swear? for, he swore to Abraham, as Moses witnesses: And it
is written in the Psalms, The Lord swore, and will not repent, etc. For these
things seem to be repugnant to the former; and that thereby there is permitted
to men a Liberty of Swearing.

Answ.
But this is not so, nor can any think so: For God swears by none; for how
can he, seeing he is Lord and Maker of all things? But if any thing, this must
be said, that His Word is an Oath, inducing the Hearers by a sure Faithfulness,
that what he promises and speaks, shall certainly be effected; since God
swears not as Man, but his Word to us is as an Oath for V^rity. And speaking
to men, he is said to swear: And this also the Saints do utter after the manner
of men; that as they themselves speaking would have Credit to be given them, so
likewise they themselves should give Credit to God: For, as a man's Word
confirms an Oath, so also those things that God speaks, Athanasius will not
have it, that God ever swoar, properly and strictly taken; only in a way of
speaking, having the Truth and Immutability of the truest and greatest Oath
because of the Firmness and Immutability of his Will are to be reputed Oaths.
The same also that is there written confirms my Saying, For the Lord has
sworn, and will not repent; as a thing not to be retracted by Repenting, but
certainly to be effected, according to the Engagement of an Oath. This also God
does declare in Genesis, saying, I have sworn by myself: But that is not an
Oath; for he swore not by another, which is proper for an Oath, but by himself,
which contains not the Estimation of an Oath. But this is done that the
Sureness of his Promise may appear; and how confidently that ought to be
believed which is spoaken. That sweet Psalmist will witness for me in his
Psalm, calling God to mind, when he says, Where are thy ancient Mercies, O
Lord, which thou swarest to David thy Servant, in (or by) thy Truth? For God
swears not by his Truth; But because he, who is True, speaks in his Word,
That to men is for an Oath unto Belief. So God does not swear after the manner
of men: neither must we be induced thereby to take Oaths; but let us so Say,
and so Do, and so approve our selves in saying and doing, that we need not an
Oath for the Hearer; and that our Words of themselves may have the Testimony of
Truth: For, by that Way we shall plainly imitate God.

Hilary on Mat. 5.34.
XLI. Hilary, a Father, very Famous in the days of Constantius, Son to
Constantine (but an Arrian, and which was worse, a Persecutor, so that this
Hilary was banished) in his Commentary on those words in Matthew, Ye have heard
that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not Forswear thy self, etc. thus
expresses himself, The Law set a Penalty for Perjury, that the Conscience of
Religion or Fear of an Oath might restrain the Deceitfulness of Minds; for the
rude and insolent People made frequent mention of their God by a familiar
Course of Swearing: But Faith does remove the Custom of an Oath, making the
Businesses of our Life to be ^etermined in Truth, and laying aside the
affecting to deceive; prescribing the Simplicity of Speaking and Hearing, that
what WAS, WAS: what WAS NOT, WAS NOT; that the Business of Deceiving might be
apparent between IT IS, and IT IS NOT; and what is more, is all of Evil: For
what is, it is its Property always, that so it is; and what is not, it is its
Nature, that it is not: Therefore to them that live in the Simplicity of Faith,
there is no NEED of the Religion (or Superstition) of an OATH; with whom
always what is, IS; what is not, IS NOT: And by these both all their Words and
Deeds are in Truth. Neither by Heaven] God not only suffers us not to make
Oaths to God, because all the Truth of God is to be held in the simplicity of
our Word and Deed; but also condemns the Superstition of old Disobedience,
etc. This, if that Clemens, should have been first, because he lived in Paul's
time; but we were not willing to begin our Testimonies with a Suspicion:
howbeit it is an Ancient Writing.


Suarez de Juram. l. 1. c. 1, 2.
XLII. The next Testimony we shall pitch upon in Confirmation of our Reasons,
and the Sense we take our Master's Precept in, Swear not at all, is afforded us
out of the Apostolical Institutions asscribed to Clemens Romanus, reported by
Suarez, in his Book de Juramentis, Our Master (says Clemens) has commanded,
that we SHOULD NOT SWEAR, no, not by the True God; but that our Word should be
more credible then an Oath it self. Which is a plain Indication of the
Apostolical Doctrine to have been the absolute Prohibition of Oaths, in that
Sense wherein they were only reputed Lawful: for if men ought not to Swear, no,
not by the true God; then consequently by no other Oath, as his following words
not only imply, but express, viz. That the Word of a Christian should be more
credible then an Oath it self. Again, He that in the Law established to Swear
well, l. 6. c. 25.
and forbad False Swearing; commanded also, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL.

Orthodoxagrapha p. 11.
LXIII. There is a Tract, called, The Gospel of Nicodemus: We know it is
reputed spurious, but that makes nothing against us; that disputes the Author,
and not the M^tter; for though Nicodemus never wrote such a Book, certain it is
that such a Book was written, which is in Favor of Christianity, as then
received: In the Place cited Pilate is made to say, I adjure you by the Health
of Caesar, that these things that you say, etc. They answered, We have a Law,
not to SWEAR, because it is a Sin. Whoever wrote it, this Benefit comes to our
Argument, that the Christians, at that time, thought an Oath a Sin; for it is
not to be doubted, but he that gave that Answer* knew it to be the Doctrine and
Practice of Christians; for he was therein to represent them.

Basilius Magnus on Psalm 14.
XLV. Basil, called the Great, another Champion of the like Fame, and in the
same time of Valens, Socrat. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 21.
the Persecuting Arrian Emperor, by whom he suffered Imprisonment and Cruel
Threatenings (see their Praises in Socrates Scolasticus) on the 14th Psalm, with
us the 15th, He that swears, and deceives not his Neighbor; so Basil has
it, and upon it these words:

Here he seems to allow an Oath to a Perfect Man, which in the Gospel is
ALTOGETHER forbidden; But I say unto you, not to Swear at all.

What shall we say then?

That every where the Lord, as well in the old as in the new Law, has the same
Consideration of Commanding; for desiring to anticipate the Effects of Sins,
and prevent them by Diligence, and to extinguish Iniquity at the first
beginnings, As the old Law says, Thou shall not commit Adultery; the Lord
says, Thou shall not Lust: The old Law says, Thou shall not Kill; the Lord
ordaining Perfection, says, Thou shall not be Angry: So also in this place,
the Prophet indeed seems to assent to an Oath; but the Lord, to take away all
Occasion of Perjury, and willing to prevent the Dangers of Swearers, takes away
Swearing ALTOGETHER: For he names an Oath in many places the immutable and firm
Constancy of any thing or purpose. I have sworn, and have steadfastly purposed
to keep the Judgments of thy Righteousness: Also, The Lord has sworn, and will
not repent. Not that David brought the Lord for a Witness of his Sayings, and
to get Belief to his Doubting, but that he confirmed the Grace of his
Profession by an Immutable and firm Decree: so also he could have said here,
that is, He that swears, and deceives not his Neighbor, that it may agree
with the Saying of our Savior, Let your Word be YEA, YEA; NAY, NAY. To things
that are, thou may affirm and assent; but of things that are not, although
all men urge thee, yet thou may never be drawn by any means to affirm against
the Nature of the Truth: Is the thing not done, let there be a Denial; is it
done, let it be affirmed by Word. And he that shall not assent to him so
affirming, Pray mark where Basil lays the Blame, if a Word go not for an Oath.
let him look to it, and feel the Harm of his Unbelief. It is a base and a very
foolish thing to accuse one's self, as one unworthy of being believed, and to
betake and refer one's self to the Security of an Oath. Now, there are some
Speeches which have the Forms of Oaths, and yet are no Oaths at all, but rather
Remedies to persuade; Joseph swore not.
as Joseph to make the Egyptian familiar with him, swore by the Health of
Pharaoh ((...) live Pharaoh) And the Apostle, willing to show his Love to the
Corinthians, said, By the Glorying of you, which I have in Christ Jesus, our
Lord: Paul swore not.
For he did not depart from the Doctrine of the Gospel who, by a thing before
all most dear unto him, simply sought Belief to the Truth. He refused to swear
at the Council of Chalcedon: And speaking of Clineas, Ad Nepotes.
a Pythagorean, who might have avoided a Mulct of Three Talents, above 300. l.
if he would have sworn, which he rather suffered; says, In keeping these
things he seems to have heard that Command concerning an Oath that is forbidden
us. And he upbraided the Christians of his time with it, that would swear.

This Basil the Great, in his 29th Canon to Amphilochius, Basil. Mag. can. 29.
writes thus, Because an Oath is ALTOGETHER FORBIDDEN, such an one as is taken
to an Evil Purpose, is much more to be condemned -- Again, If an Oath, simply
as such, be prohibited, of greater Reason when it is to effect some Mischievous
End -- The Cure consists in a twofold Admonition; Basil's Expedient, to
remove Oaths.
1. NOT TO SWEAR; 2. TO SVPPRESS THE FORM OF OATHS.

Blastaris Syntagma Tit. E. c. 32.
XLV. There was an ancient Law made to this effect, It is FORBIDDEN to all,
from the Bishop and Clergymen to the Readers, to TAKE ANY OATH AT ALL.

Blastaris also brings in this Objection, But since those are punished who
swear falsely, and those are passed by who swear well, some may say, Therefore
it is permitted to swear. To which he answers, But where shall we dispose, o^
how shall we dispense with the Evangelical Precept in the Gospel, THAT FORBIDS
STAKING ANY OATH AT ALL? Adding, The Reason of prohibiting Oaths.
But I believe that the Gospel endeavored to root out that Wicked Stem (as I
may say) which is in sinful me^, and FOR THAT CAUSE PROHIBITED AN OATH, which
is as the Door or Inlet to Perjury.

Gregor. Nyssenus on Cant. orat. 13.
XLVI. Gregory Nissenus, Brother to Basil, spoaken of by Socrates Scolasticus
in the same place, and in lib. 5. cap. 9. His Works are Famous: And in his
Explanation on the Canticles, bestows this Testimony upon us: He, who by Moses
established the Beginnings of the Law, by himself fulfilled all the Law and the
Prophets, as he says in the Evangels: I came not to destroy the Law, but
fulfill it; who taking away Anger, abolisheth Killing also; and together with
Lust, took away Adultery. He also casts out of men's Lives accursed Perjuries,
whilst by the Prohibition of an Oath, he has put in his Since as it were to
Security: For it cannot be, that any should not keep an Oath when there is no
Oath; Therefore says he, You have heard, that it was said to them of old time,
Thou shall not Forswear, but shall render to the Lord thy Oaths; but I say unto
you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL, neither by Heaven, etc. but let your YEA be YEA, and
your NAY, NAY; for whatsoever is more, is of the Devil. Thus do they mostly
end; which shows how they understood Christ's Words.

Greg. Nazianz. in his Dialogue against Swearing, Jamb. 20.
XLVII. Gregory Nazianzen, a great Man in the Church, also speaks to the same
Purpose, in his Dialogue against Swearing, saying, B. What Oath do thou leave
to us? A. I wish I might leave none, and that there were never any more. But
thou say, We have heard that God himself sometimes swore: The holy
Scriptures record that; But is there any thing better then God? Surely nothing
is found better then He: If therefore nothing be better then he, God swears not.
it should follow, that he never swears. B. Why therefore do they record that
he swore? A. When God says any thing, that is the Oath of God. B. And how does
he swear by himself? A. How! He should not at all be God, if he should lie. B.
Thou speak strangely! A. No Wonder; that is the Nature of God peculiarly,
that he cannot lie: There is none that can deny this. B. But what will thou say
to me of the old Covenant? Surely it does not prohibit an Oath, but requires a
true one? A. No Wonder: At that time only it was prescribed in the Law
concerning Murder; but now it is not lawful for any Cause so much as to smite
or beat: then the End of an Evil Deed only came into Judgment; but now that
also which moves to the End. This is my Judgment: for now we have made, a long
Progress; wherefore a Wise Man will abstain from Oaths. B. What then? Do thou
give to some as Infants a kind of first Food, that they may at length receive a
succeeding kind of Meat? A. Thou judge right and wisely. B. But Paul also
swore, as they say? A. Who said so? Paul did not Swear.
Oh, what a vain Jangler was he that said it! Quoth he, God is my Witness, and
God knows: Those words are not an Oath, but a certain Asseveration in such
great things, constant and inviolable. B. Will thou allow the same also to me?
A. I wish, that to thy Power thou would plainly become a Paul, and so thou
would have a Right Rule of thine Actions. B. What if I use an Oath
Unwillingly, but to free me from Danger? See Tertullian before, to whom this
agrees.
A. Let another allow thee that. B. What if an Oath be written, and not
pronounced with the Voice? A. And what is the Meaning of a Writing? Surely
amongst all other Obligations, a Writing does more bind and obliege us. B. What
if we be drawn by Necessity to give an Oath? Mark how Gregor. Naz. speaks of
the Scripture, in Comparison of God's Omnipresence with the mind and the sense,
and regard man ought to have of it.
A. Why did thou not rather Dye? For surely, thou should rather Dye then do
that. B. What if the Books of the holy Scriptures be not used? A. What! Is
Religion placed in a Leaf? Is God absent by this Means? It is evident that thou
fear (Paper, or) Parchment, and I fear God more: This is a frequent Disease
to many, and usual; neither is it otherwise then if a Man beat the Master, and
Disgrace him, and make his Servant a Freeman, and do him Honor (What a
notable Reproach should that be?) or as if a Man should preserve the King's
Image, and in the mean time destroy the King. B. It is even as thou say: But
I would have thee say what is more to be shown. A. Many use to say, I swore
with my Tongue, but my Mind is free from Swearing. Any thing may be more
cunningly excused then an Oath: Let him not suffer any Color to be made for
himself; For this is an Oath: Greg. Naz. his Account of an Oath.
And how much Mischief, tell me, comes from Deceit it self? Let us see what an
Oath is: Nothing else but the very Meaning (or Mind) of those things which we
set down -- Thou would have me add what remains: Surely an Oath is nothing
else, but a certain Consummation as it were of Mischiefs: O Dangerous Flame! B.
But Plato does some such thing. He is Religiously aware, that he swear not by
any God. A. Truly I know what thou art about to say: There was a certain Plane
Tree, by which alone he made Oath: But he did not swear rightly, neither by
that; For he had an Understanding in something; but what a just and religious
Oath should be, that he could not understand. And what was this, tell me now? A
certain Shadow of an Oath; a Declaration without a Name; an Oath no* Oath, as
the Philosophers swore by a strange and unknown God. Lastly, it is nothing
else, but to make Oath by any thing. Here our Speech let be an End. Thou
threatnest that thou will leave me athirst sooner then I would. A. If an Oath
seem a small thing to thee, truly I cannot commend thee: But if it is, as it
is, in the number of horrible things, I will also dare to produce a mighty
thing: I do adjure by a very Oath it self, that thou abstain from, and beware
of Oaths, and thou have the Victory. B. I wish I had. What Fruit gets he that
often swears? Laughter. What more? That when he speaks Truth, he shall not be
believed.

In another place he says, Greg. Naz. on Cant. Hom. 18.
That to swear by Creatures is to swear with regard to God himself; so Christ
himself says, Mat. 5.35. and chap. 23.16, 23.

Caesarius, Number. 43.
XLVIII. Caesarius, Brother to Gregory Nazianzen; in his spiritual Sentences,
has this Sentence, Flee ALL Swearing, or EVERY Oath: How then shall we get
Belief? As well by Speech as by virtuous Actions and Carriages, that gain
Belief to our Speech. Perjury is a Denying of God: What need of God in this
Matter? Interpose and put in ure thy Actions.

Epiphan. adv. Here Is. lib. 1. ord. 19.. 6.
XLIX. Epiphanius, whom S^crates Scholasticus, lib. 6. cap. 9. calls a Man of
great Fame and Renown, and a Virtuous and Godly Person; in his first Book
against Heresies ^not accounting Denying to Swear an Heresy, but rather the
contrary, as may appear by his words, which are these) In the Law, as well as
the Gospel, it is commanded not to use another Name in Swearing: but in the
Gospel he commanded not to Swear, neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor other Oath;
but let Yea Yea; Nay, Nay; BE AS AN OATH as Petavius translates it) for what is
more then these is of Evil. Therefore I suppose that the Lord ordained
concerning this, because of some men's Allegations, that would swear by other
Names; and first, that we must not Swear, no, not by the Lord himself, nor by
any other Oath; for it is an Evil thing to swear at all. Therefore he is Evil
that compels not only to swear by God, but by other things, etc.

Ambros. de Virgin. lib. 3.
L. Ambrose, soon after, being a Lay man or Citizen of Milan, was by the
People, against his Will, chosen Bishop of that City, for his great Worth and
Godliness, whose Writings are of great Account; And speaking of the
Inconveniency occasioned by an Oath, says, Wherefore not without Cause does
the Lord in the Gospel command not to Swear, that there may be no Cause of
Forswearing, that there may be no Necessity of Offending.

Exhortat. ad Virgin.
He that Swears not, certainly he never Forsweareth; but he that Swears,
sometimes he must needs fall into Perjury, because all Men are subject to Lie.
Do not therefore Swear, lest thou beginnest to Forswear.

Therefore the Lord, who came to teach the little Ones, to Ambrose on Mat. 5.
INSPIRE Novices, to confirm the He was for Inspiration and Perfection.
Perfect, says in the Gospel, YE MUST NOT SWEAR AT ALL; because he spoak to
the Weak.

Lastly, He spoak not only to the Apostles, but to the Multitude; for he would
not have thee to Swear, lest thou should Forswear.

And he added, Not to swear, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, etc. namely,
by those things that are not subject to thy Power.

The Lord Swear, and shall not Repent. Psalm 109.
He may swear, who cannot repent of his Oath: And what did the Lord swear? That
Christ is a Priest forever: Is that Uncertain? Is that Impossible? the Lord has
sworn. Can it any way be changed?

Do not therefore use the Example of an Oath, because thou have not Power to
fulfill an Oath.

Also, in his Commentary on the Hebrews, Ambr. Com. on Heb. c. 6.
he says, Because Mankind is incredulous, God condescendeth to us, if even he
swears for us.

So that he shows, Oaths founded on Defect, not to be encouraged; then not to
be imposed.
that not to be an Argument for Swearing to be desired, seeing it is only in
Condescension to a Defect; not to be encouraged from it to swear, or to require
it.

Chrysostom. on Genesis hom. 15.
LI. Chrysostom, in those days very Famous in the Church, and therefore styled
the Golden Doctor; in his 15th Homily on Genesis, says; A Christian must flee
Oaths by all means, hearing the Sentence of Christ, which says, It was said to
them of old, Thou shall not Forswear; But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL. Let
none say therefore, I swear in a Just Business. IT IS NOT LAWFUL TO SWEAR,
NEITHER IN A JUST NOR UNJUST THING.

Id. Hom. Psa. 5.
To swear is of the Devil, seeing Christ faith, For what is more, is of Evil,
or the Evil One.

Ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 19. The Reason of Oaths.
Swearing took not its Beginning from the Will, but from Negligence only. Thou
have heard (says he) the Wisdom of Christ, saying, That not only to Forswear,
but also in ANY MANNER TO SWEAR, is Devilish, and all a Device of the Evil One.

Against the Dispraise of solitary Life l. 1.
IF TO SWEAR IS FOUND TO BE DEVILISH, how are they to be punished who Forswear?

Of Compunction of Heart, l. 1.
IF TO SWEAR TRULY BE A CRIME, and a transgressing of the Commandment, where
shall we place Perjury?

Against the Jews, Hom. 34.
Speaking of a Christian (so called; for he that dare do such things we cannot
call a sincere Christian) whom he saw compelling a certain Honest, Ingenuous,
Modest and Faithful Matron, to go into the Jews Synagogue, there to be Sworn
about some Business in Controversy betwixt them, she desiring Help, Agreeing
with Euse bius before.
and imploring to be freed from this Wicked Force, etc. I (says he) kindled
with Zeal, arose, and not suffering her to be further drawn into this
Prevarication, The Godly Zeal of Chrysostom Commendable.
rescued her; and enquired of him that had drawn her to it, Whether he were a
Christian or not? Who confessing he was; I severely urged and upbraided him
with his Folly and Extreme Madness, to go about to draw any Body, he professing
himself to be a Worshipper of Christ, TO THE JEWS DENS, who had crucified him.
And going on in speaking, I taught him out of the holy Gospel, Much less to
force others. Chrysostom. calls Swearing and Compelling to Swear at all, an Error;
then we are Orthodox.
THAT IT IS NOT LAWFUL TO SWEAR AT ALL, NOR TO INCITE ANY TO SWEAR, after that;
not one that is a Believer or initiated, no, nor one that is not initiated, to
be drawn to that Extremity: After I had spoaken much, and a long time of it, I
delivered his Mind from the Error of Opinion, etc.

Be pleased to observe how Chrysostom, See his great Praise in Soc. Schol. l.
6. c. 3. He was of the Race of Senators. Remember Tertullian's Case by this.
a Zealous and Famous Man, both for his Books, and the Persecution that he
suffered, being Patriarch or Prime Oversees of the Church at Constantinople,
one of the Four of the chiefest in the World, uses no Distinction of private
and public Oaths, the common Talk of our Imposers; for here he labors against
drawing any to Swear at all, even in Judicature, because it was not lawful TO
SWEAR SO AT ALL, no, not as the Jews swore, much less as the Gentiles.

Homil. 28. Ecclog. de juram.
Again, Let none say to me, What if any lay on me a Necessity of Swearing? And
what if he do not believe?

Hom. 5. ad pop. Avitioc.
Certainly where the Law is violated one, must not make any mention of
Necessity; for there is one unavoidable Necessity, NOT TO OFFEND GOD. Moreover,
this I say, That in the mean time we may cut off superfluous Oaths, those, I
mean, which are made rashly and without any Necessity amongst Friends and
Servants; And if thou take away these, in the other thou shall need me no more:
For that Mouth which has learned to fear and flee an Oath, if any would compel
it ten thousand times, it will never admit of falling into that Custom, etc.

Chrysostom. against giving an Oath.
But if thou fear nothing else, at least fear that Book which thou take in
thy hands, bidding another to Swear; and when thou turnst it, and markst what
Christ has there commanded concerning Oaths, Chrysostom. exexhorts to be Right
Quakers by Trembling, and not Swearing.
QUAKE and FORBEAR.

What does it say then of OATHS there?

Answ. But I say unto you, Swear not at all. Do thou make that Law an Oath,
which forbids to Swear? Oh Injurious, Oh Unjust thing! For thou do, as if a
man should take for his Companion a Law giver that forbids to kill, and command
him to be made a Murderer. As therefore, when a Fight is begun, although we are
often Reviled; yet we endure it well, and we say to him that does it, that
Patron of thine has hurt me, he holds my Hands; and this serves us for Solace.
After the same manner if thou will exact an Oath of any, restrain thy self, and
withold; and say to him that is about to swear, Against Compelling to Swear,
and shows how to avoid it.
What shall I do to thee, since God has commanded, neither to swear, nor to
compel to swear; he now withholds me? This is enough for the Law-giver's
Honor, for thy Security, and his Fear who should swear.

Do thus much for me therefore, He differs much from those that punish us for
not swearing.
that they that come hither may say, That is not to be seen in any City, which
is at Antioch; For they that inhabit that City had rather their Tongues should
be cut out, then an Oath should proceed out of their Mouth, etc.

What is it? Thou shall render unto the Lord thy Oaths: that is, On Mat. Homil.
17.^
in swearing thou shall speak true; But I say unto you, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL:
And then, to put off the Hearers, that they should not swear by God, he says,
Neither by Heaven, for it is the Throne of God; nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool, etc. For he said not, because the Heaven is Fair and Great, nor
because the Earth is Vile; but because that is the Throne of God, and this his
Footstool; by all which he drives them to the Fear of God.

-- What then, if any require an Oath, Object.
and impose a Necessity of Swearing?

A. Let the Fear of the Lord be more forcible to thee then all Necessity or
Compulsion: For if thou will always object such like Occasions, thou will keep
none of those things which are commanded: For thou might also say it
concerning thy Wife; What if she be a Scold? What if she be Nice and Curious?
And of thy Right Eye; What if I have a Delight in it, and be inflamed with the
Love of it, etc.? and so thou will trample upon all things that are commanded.
But in the Laws which Men command thou dare allege no such thing, as, What
if this or that, etc? And if thou will keep the Law of Christ, thou will not
suffer any Compulsion to hinder thee from the Observation thereof* Constancy in
not Swearing gets Veneration.
for he that heard the Blessedness that is before, in the same Sermon, and
shows himself such an one as Christ commends, he shall suffer no such
Compulsion from any, seeing he is Venerable and Admirable with all Men.

Object.
What then shall we say is beyond Yea and Nay?

A. Without doubt AN OATH, not Perjury; since this is altogether manifest, and
none needs be taught that it is of Evil; and not so much Superfluous, as
Altogether Contrary. Now, Great Reason.
that is superfluous which is added needlessly, and too much; which surely is an
Oath.

Object.
Why then shall this be said to be of Evil? And if it was of Evil, how was it
commanded in the Law?

A. Thou will say that also concerning thy Wife; How is it now Adultery, which
was sometime suffered? What then shall we say to these things? But that many of
those things which were then spoaken, the Weakness of them that received the
Law required: For it is a thing very unmeet for God to be worshipped with the
Smell of Sacrifices, even as it is not congruent for a Philosopher to stutter
and babble; Therefore such a Divorce is now called Adultery; This is True
Christian Doctrine.
and an Oath now comes of Evil, when the Increasings of Virtues are come to
their Perfection. But if these things had been the Laws of the Devil from the
beginning, they had never come to such Proficiency; for unless those things had
gone before, those other had never been so easily received. Do not therefore
desire the Virtue of those things, whose Use is now past: With Christians it
ought to be so. What Evil is it then to hale men back again upon Penalties?
They were available indeed then when the time required, yea, if thou please,
now also: For now their Virtue is shown in that same thing also, wherein we
most accuse; for that they now appear such, is their great Praise: For, unless
they had nursed us up well and profitably, and had made us fit for the
receiving of greater things, they would not now seem to us to be such. For as
the Nurse's Teat, when it has done all its Office, and brought the Child to
the measure of the stronger Age, seems to be unprofitable; and the Parents, who
formerly judged the Teat to be Necessary for their Child, do afterward pursue
it with very many Scorns, and usually do not only make it Uncomely in Words,
but also besmear it with certain bitter Juices of Herbs, that when they cannot
bridle the eager unseasonable Desire of the Child about it, they may quench it
at least with those things. So also Christ said, It was of Evil; not that he
might show the old Law to be of the Devil, but that also he might recall them
more vehemently from the old Vileness: And these things he said unto his
Disciples; but unto the stupid Jews, and them that persist in the same Impiety,
as with a certain Bitterness, he so compast their City, they being captivated
with Fear, as that he made it inaccessible: And because he could not hereby
restrain them, but that they again desired to see it, as Children running back
to the Teat, he took it quite away, destroying it, and scattering them, most of
them, far away from it; as men usually shut up Calves from their Dams, that
they may gain them to be weaned from their accustomed Food of Milk.

But if the old Testament were of the Devil, he would not have forbidden A
great Enemy to Images.
Images to be worshipped; and to the contrary, have brought in and commanded
such a Worship as this; for the Devil would have such a thing to be done. But
now we see that the Law did on the contrary; and for that Cause also the Way of
Swearing was in times permitted, The Reason why God admitted Oaths. No
Ordinance of God or man originally, but* Corruption insensibly brought it, and
God only suffered it by a true Deity till the Times of Reformation.
lest men should Worship Images, and Swear by them, Swear, says he, by the
true God. So the Law brought not a mean Good to men* but a very great one, if
it sought to bring them to solid Meat.

Object.
What Evil therefore has Swearing?

Much Evil, without question; But now at this time, His Reason our Reason.
after SO GREAT MANIFESTATIONS of Power; not then by any means.

Object.
Thou will say; How can it be, that the same is sometimes Good, sometimes not?

I will also produce too against thee, How is it that the same thing is
sometimes good, sometimes not good* Does not all that is in the World proclaim
the same, as, Educations, Arts, Fruits and all other things?

Therefore first weigh that in our own Nature: For to be carried in one's Arms,
is a good Part in the first Age, afterward a very pitiful thing. To use
Chewed Meats in the beginning of one's Life is good, afterward very full of
Indecency and Loathsomness: To be fed with Milk and to flee to the Nourishment
of the Teats, at the first is profitable and wholesome, but afterward hurtful
and noisome. Thou see how the same things are sometimes good, according to the
times, and sometimes appear to be of another Nature: For it is a comely thing
for a Child to wear a Child's Vesture, but shameful for a Man. Would thou
also learn on the contrary, how those things are not fit for a Child, which are
not for a Man? Give a Man's Vesture to a Child, and great Laughter will follow
thereupon, and greater Danger in Going, making him to reel this way and that
way: Commit unto him the Care of Civil Businesses and Affairs, either to
Traffic, or Sow or Reap, and again it will be very ridiculous. But what do I
speak of these? Even Manslaughter it sel^, which Christ calls evidently a Work
of the Devil, sometime in due season done, has been praised; as Phineas killed
a Man, and it was reputed to him for Righteousness; Abraham also was not only a
Homicide, but a Parrici^e; and Peter sl^w ^wo, but it wa^ ^ Spiritual Wo^k: So
we must not only consider the Actions, but the Time, Cause, Will and Difference
of Persons, and all other Circumstances. Much regarded and observed by
venerable Antiquity, said Jam^s and the Fathers, part 2. page 36. Act. Mon. v.
1. p. 701.


Again, in his (...) Work, cap 5.

It has been said, Thou shall not for^wear; but shall perform to the Lord thy
Oath^ But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT (...)] Behold the fourth Command, ^hi^h
Covetous Men account the least, because they do not account it a Sin to Swear,
without which the Command of the Law cannot stand? For unless Swearing it self
be forbidden, False Oaths cannot be taken away, A Great truth; Forswearing ends
in No Swearing.
because out of Swearing springs up Forswearing; for, whosoever swears often,
at one time or other swears falsely; for this Reason Solomon gives that
Admonition, Accustom not thy Mouth to Swearing; for there is much Danger
therein. For, as he that accustoms himself to talk much, must needs at one time
or other utter Unseasonable Words; and he that uses frequently to strike with
his Hand, cannot but sometimes strike Unjustly; so he that accustoms himself to
Swear in things Convenient, oft-times Forswears himself, even against his Will
(Custom prevailing in him) in things superfluous; for we can accustom our
selves to any thing when we will, but we cannot turn off that Custom when we
will. And what the Judgment of God is against them that swear, Solomon
teaches; A man, says he, that Swears much, a Wound shall not depart from his
House. If then a Wound depart not from them that swear, how shall it at length
depart from them that forswear. Tell me, my Friend, What do thou get by
Swearing? For if thy Adversary did believe that thou would Swear well, he
would never force thee to swear at all; Excellently distinguished, and the
Sordidness of Oaths fully represented.
but because he thinks thou will swear falsely, therefore it is that he compels
thee to swear; and when thou have sworn, he does not sit down as satisfied in
the Truth of thine Oath, but goes away full of Revenge, as it were in
Condemnation of thy Perjury.

An Oath never has a good End; for, According to Eusebius. The Unhappiness of
Swearing, especially against Conscience. His Advice about the -- Matter, when
drove to a Pinch. Object.
some will judge thou have sworn for Covetousness; and some too, that thou have
Forsworn: But they that are willing to suppose well of thee, although they do
not believe thou have sworn FALSELY, yet they are not able to affirm thou have
sworn IN TRUTH: But no man can maintain thou have done RELIGIOUSLY. By Swearing
therefore thou come into Reproach with thy Enemies, and into Suspicion with
thy Friends. But thou will say perhaps,

What shall I do; he neither does nor will believe me, unless I Swear?

Be content rather to lose thy Money then thy Salvation; set more by thy Soul,
then by thy Estate: If thou should lose any part of thy Estate, thou may
live notwithstanding; but if thou losest God, whereon will thou live? Do thou
not know, that what thou partest Self-denyingly with for the Fear of God, thou
receivest a greater Reward for it, then if thou had given Alms; because, the
more we bear the Gross, the more worthily are we crowned for it? His Caution to
those that impose Oaths, and Reflection upon the Practice.
Behold, my Friend, I advise thee not to Force any man to swear; if thou
think he will swear well, avoid it; or if thou think he will swear amiss,
avoid it so much the rather: For although he swear well, yet thou, as far as
relates to thy Conscience art become the Cause of his Perjury, because thou
compellest him to take an Oath with this Intention, not barely that he should
Swear, but that he should Forswear; for if thou had thought he would have
sworn honestly, thou would not have forced him to swear at all. Oh foolish
man, that compellest another to Swear! Thou know not what thou do: He,
although he forswear himself, yet does it with Advantage; but thou, without any
Advantage, art found a Partaker of his Perjury. He that does not stick at
Lying, does not fear Swearing; Lying as bad as Swearing in his Esteem.
for he that tells a Lie, goes beyond the Truth in his Heart; and he that
swears falsely, passes over God in his Words: What then is the Difference
between passing over God, and going beyond the Truth, seeing God is Truth it
self?

This is the only Difference, That when we Lie, we pass over the Truth in our
Heart; but when we Forswear, we pass over God in Words; For, to men we give
Satisfaction by WORDS; to God, by CONSCIENCE. God himself, who forbad
Forswearing, even he afterward commanded NOT TO SWEAR: He therefore that is not
afraid to set light by the Commands of God in Swearing, Admirably well argued.
will not be afraid to do the like in Forswearing. But what would thou have?
Does he fear God, or does he not fear him? If he be one that fears God, he will
not Lie, though he be not sworn; but if he be one that does not fear God, he
cannot speak Truth, though he be sworn. Hear, ye CLERGYMEN, His Rebuke to the
Clergy for tendering the Gospels (or Bible) to swear on.
who bring the HOLY GOSPELS for men to swear upon; How can ye be secure from
that Oath, who sow the Seed of Perjury? He that brings the Fire by which an
House is burnt, is he a Stranger to the Burning? or who reaches a Sword,
whereby a man is slain, is not he an Accessory to the Slaughter? So he that
gives the Opportunity of Forswearing, is a Partaker of the Perjury: If it were
well done to swear, ye said rightly, that we gave them the Gospel to Swear, not
to Forswear; But now ye know, THAT IT IS A SIN EVEN TO SWEAR WELL, how can ye
be acquitted that give the Occasion of Sinning against God? Let the Fire cease,
and there is no Burning; take away the Sword, and the man is not slain; SO TAKE
AWAY SWEARING, AND THERE IS NO FORSWEARING. Be these things spoaken of them
that swear by God* But as for them that swear by the Elements, their Iniquity
is more detestable; for Heaven and Earth, and the rest of the Elements God made
for his own Service; not for men to swear by: For, behold, in the Law it is
commanded, that they should swear by none but God: He therefore that swears by
Heaven, or by the Earth, or whatsoever it is he swears by, makes a God of it;
Therefore every one commits Idolatry, who swears by any thing besides God, if
it were at all lawful to swear, because he does not perform his Oaths to the
Lord his God, but to the Elements: And so he commits a double Sin; first, in
that he swears; and 2 dly, in making a God of that by which he swears, etc.

Again, in Chap. 23. Homil. 43. on these words, Woe unto you Blind Guides, who
say, Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall
swear by the Gold of the Temple, he is a Debtor -- Many Christians (says he)
now adays do so unwisely understand many things; for lo, if there shall be any
Cause, he seems to do a small matter, who swears by God; but he that swears by
the Gospel seems to have done some greater thing: To whom it may be said,
Fools! The holy Scriptures are for God, not God for the Scriptures; for God is
GREATER which sanctifies the Gospel, then the Gospel which is sanctified of
God.

Again, Hom 9. on Acts of the Apostles, chapter 3.

To this conduces not a little, not to Swear, and not to be Angry; for, in not
being Angry, we shall not have an Enemy; and cast off a man's Oath, and withal
thou shall cast off those things that concern Wrath, and shall extinguish all
Anger: For Wrath and an Oath are like the Wind. We set forth sail, but there is
no benefit of the Sail if there be no Wind: so if we do not cry out, nor swear,
we cut the Sinnews of Wrath. Come, tell me for what Cause an Oath was
introduced, and why it was allowed? Let us tell its Original, Again, the
Original of an Oath. He concurs with us.
and whence it sprung up again, and how, and by whom; and by our Declaration we
shall gratify your Attention: For, he that does justly, must necessarily be
also studious of Wisdom; and he that is not yet such, is not worthy to hear a
Discourse: For, Abraham made Covenants, and sacrificed Sacrifices, and offered
Offerings; and as yet there was not an Oath: Whence then came in an Oath? When
Evils increased, when all things became topsiturvy, when they inclined to
Idolatry; then verily when they appeared unfaithful, they called God to
witness, as giving a Surety for Security for their Words; for an Oath is a
Suretiship, The Definition of an Oath.
where their Behaviors have no Trust or Credit: Whereupon, first he that
swears is taxed, If he have no Credit without an Oath, and the greatest Surety:
And because men so little trust one another, they seek God for a Surety, not
Man. Secondly, He is in the same Crime who receives an Oath, if he draw God to
be a Surety for Contracts; and say, THAT HE WILL NOT TRUST EXCEPT HE HAVE HIM.
Oh monstrous thing! Oh shameful Disgrace! Thou a Worm, Dust and Ashes, and a
Vapor; dare thou snatch thy Lord, who art such an one for a Surety, A severe
Declamation against Compelling People to swear.
and compellest to accept him? Tell me, if a Fellow Servants should say to your
Children, striving among themselves, and not trusting one another, Unless the
common Master become a Surety, there is no trusting; would not many Stripes be
inflicted, that he might learn, that he should make use of him as a Lord in
other things, not in these? What do I speak of a Fellow Servants? For, if one
would have a more Venerable Man, would not the Case have Disgrace in it? But I
shall (says he) therefore neither compel him, because this is also amongst
men. He may say thus, Sometimes thou may not receive a Surety to thine. What
then? And I shall lose (says he) what is given. I would not say this; but do
not thou endure that God be reproached. Again, of the Danger of Compelling
People to swear*
Therefore he which Compels has a MORE Unavoidable Punishment then he which
Swears. Likewise he also which swears when none requires; this also is harder,
that one swears for a Halfpenny, for a little Commodity, for Unrighteousness.
And these things are so dangerous, when there are no Perjuries; but if
Perjuries are committed, then all things are confounded, and both he that
swears, and he that receives an Oath, are the Cause.

Object.
But there are some things that are not known, say they.

But sore-seeing these things, thou must do nothing rashly; but if thou shall
do any thing negligently, take the Penalty of the Inconvenience in thy own
Hand; better so to suffer Loss then otherwise. For, tell me, Thou halest a man
to an Oath; What do thou seek? Would thou have him to Forswear? But this is
extreme Folly; for the Loss will turn upon thy own Head: It were better to lose
thy Means, then that he should be lost; wherefore thou do this to thy own
Damage, and to God's Dishonor; such is the Soul of a Beast and of a Wicked
Man!

But I expect that he may not Forswear. Object.


Therefore believe him Without an Oath also.

But there are many, say they, Object.
who without an Oath dare Defraud, who with an Oath do not do it.

Thou deceivest thy self, O Man! A Man who has learned to Steal and to Wrong a
man, will also trample upon an Oath often: But if he has a Reverence in
Swearing, much more in doing Unjustly.

But thou will say, He suffers this unwillingly. Object.


Therefore he is worthy of Excuse. But what shall I say of Oaths of the Courts
that are left? for there thou can say no such thing; for there for Six Pence
both Oaths and Perjuries are made: For, because a Thunderbolt does not come
down from above, and all things are not overturned, thou stand, and WILT An
Oath is a Binding of God for our Security.
BIND GOD: Why? That thou may get Herbs and Shoes for a small Price, thou
call him to witness. Do we therefore think we do not sin, because they are
not punished? This is the Lord's Mercy, not our Desert. A Pathetical Censure of
Oaths, and them that use them even in Courts
Swear by thy own Child, swear by thy self; say, So let the Officer keep from
my Sides: But thou art afraid of thy Sides; IS GOD MORE VILE, more Contemptible
then thy Head? Say, So may I not be blind? But Christ so spares us, that he
FORBIDS US TO SWEAR EVEN BY OUR OWN HEAD. But we do so despise the Glory of
God, that he is drawn every where: Ye know not what God is, and with what a
Mouth he ought to be invocated. Moreover, when we speak of any Virtuous Man, we
say, Wash thy Mouth, that so thou may be heedful. But now we vainly distract
that Honorable Name, which is a Name above every Name, which is Wonderful in
all the Earth, which the Devils hearing do tremble at: OH MOST CONTEMPTIBLE
CUSTOM WHICH HAS DONE THAT! Lastly, If thou shall impose on any a Necessity of
Swearing in the holy House, how horrible an Oath do thou enjoin, if thou do
so? With what Tenderness God's Name should be used.
Is it that we abuse that simply, this not so? Ought not one even to Dread when
God is named? But even among the Jews this Name was so Reverend, that it was
written on the Pla^e of the Mitre, and none might bear those Letters of the
Name of God, but only the High Priest: And now also we so bear his Name
tenderly. If it was not lawful for all to Name God simply, how great
Audaciousness is it to call it in Witness? Tell me now, how great Madness is
it? Behold, I say* and Chrysostom's Boldness. He testifies our Mind.
testify to you, amend those Court-Oaths, and show me all those that do not
obey: Behold, even in your Presence I will command them that are set apart for
the Ministry, the House of Prayer, and admonish and show, THAT IT IS NOT LAWFUL
FOR ANY TO SWEAR, nor otherwise neither. Let him therefore be brought to me,
whosoever he be, because these things also ought to be done before us, because
ye are Children. Mark the great Zeal of Chrysostom. in this place.
Oh Shame! for, it is Confusion that ye have need to be instructed in some
things. Dare not thou that art initiated touch the holy Table? But that is
yet worse, thou which art initiated, dare thou touch the holy Table, and that
which it is not lawful for all the Priests to touch, AND SO SWEAR? but being
gone out, thou would not touch the Head of thy Child; but touchest thou the
Table, and do not dread nor fear? Bring such to me, I will inflict a just
Punishment; and with Joy will send both away with this Commandment, Do as you
list, I Men never could plead Conscience for not being believed without an
Oath; many have, to be credited without one.
Impose this Law, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL: What Hope is there of Salvation, when
you so contemn and despise all things? Have thou therefore received Letters and
Badges that thou should lose thy Soul? What so great thing have thou gained,
as that which thou have lost? Has he forsworn? Thou have lost both thy self
and him: But has he not Forsworn? Even so thou have lost, who have driven him
to transgress the Commandment. Let us expel this Disease from the Soul: Let
This was Chrysostom 's Exhortation Now its said, How can we Trade without an
Oath?
us drive it now from the Court, and from all Merchants and Tradesmen's Shops.
It was a greater Labor to us, do not you think, that Worldly things are
corrected by the Transgressings of Divine Laws. But he does not believe, says
he; for I have also heard this of some, Unless I swear many Oaths they will not
believe me: Thou art the Cause of these things, who swearest so promptly and
easily. But if this were not, but it were manifest to all, that thou would
not swear, believe me, more Credit would be given to thy very BECK, then those
who swear abundance of Oaths. Whom therefore do you more believe, me that do
not swear, or them that do swear?

Object.
But, says he, thou art a Prince and a Bishop.

What then, if I shall show thee, that it is not this only? Answer me in Truth
now: If I had sworn always, and at every season, what Privilege would my
Principality have? No, thou see that it is not for this: What gainest thou
then, Encouragement to sustain the Penalty.
tell me now? Paul Hungerd; and do thou choose rather to Hunger then to
transgress any of God's Commandments: Why art thou so Unbelieving? Shall thou
choose to do and to suffer all things, that thou may not swear, and shall not
he Reward thee? But he feeds daily Forswearers and great Swearers, Our Doctrine
made an Axiom by Chrysostom.
and will he give thee up to Famish, because thou hearkenest to him? Let all
men know, that NONE MAY SWEAR THAT ARE OF THIS CONGREGATION; and hereby we may
be assured, and by this Sign be distinguished from the Greeks and from all men,
and not only by the Faith ( or Christian- Profession.) Let us have this Mark
from heavenly things, that we may shine with it every where, as the King's
Flock. We are now known by the Mouth and the Tongue, as the Barbarians, and
they that know to speak Greek; for we are discerned from the Barbarians by the
Tongue. Tell me now, How are Parrets known? Is it not that they speak like Men?
And we also may be known, if we speak like the Apostles, and speak as the
Angels: For, if any one say, Swear; let him hear, that Christ has commanded,
EVEN NOT TO SWEAR: This suffices to bring in all Virtue. It is a certain Gate
of Godliness, a Way bringing on unto the Love of Wisdom (or Philosophy) It is a
certain Exercise (or Mastery) Let us keep these things, that we attain both
present and future good things, by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom, to the Father, with the holy Spirit, be Glory, Dominion, Honor, now and
forever and ever, Amen.

These Precepts were because of the Jewish Depravation; but those perfect ones,
to despise and relinquish Riches, stand manfully, lay down thy Life for
Preaching; despise all Earthly things; have nothing to do with this present
Life; do good to them that unjustly afflict thee; if thou be defrauded, bless
thou; if any slander thee, honor thou him; be over all things: It was fit to
hear these and such like things; But now we discourse concerning an Oath. And
it is even as if when a man should come to Philosophy, he should draw him away
from those his Teachers, and make him spell with Letters and Syllables.

Consider now, what a Confusion it would be for a man that has a w^ighty
Scrip, and a Staff, and a Gown to go to the Grammar School with Boys, and to
learn the same things that they do; would it not be a Matter of much Laughter?
but more from you; for there is not so great a Difference betwixt Philosophy
and the Elements of Speech, as between the Jewish Matters, and Ours; but as
much as is between Angels and Men. Tell me now, if any should call down an
Angel from Heaven, and tell him, That he must stand and hear our Sermons, as if
he must be thereby instructed, would it not be a ridiculous and confused thing?
And if it were a ridiculous thing to be yet instructed by these; tell me now
how great Condemnation, and how great Confusion were it, not to give Attention
to those former? And how then is it not Confusion, that a Christian must be
instructed, that he must not swear? But let us repress our Affections, that we
be not more laughed at. Let us now discourse concerning the Jewish Law to day:
What is that, will he say? Do not use thy Mouth to Swear, nor be familiar with
the Holy Name. Why? For as a Servant, if he be continually scourged, shall not
be clear from Marks, so neither he that swears. Consider the Wisdom of that
Wise Man; He said not, Do not use thy Mind, but thy Mouth; because he knew it
to be all of the Mouth, and which is easily amended, etc. The Punishment here
that is opposed to it, tells us, that it is not Perjury, but Swearing, that is
here to be removed; Therefore TO SWEAR IS A SIN. Verily the Soul is full of
such Wounds and Scars. But if thou swear because he does not believe; say thou,
Believe, or if thou will not, swear by thy self; and I do not say, that thou
art contrary to the Lawgiver: Far be it; for, says he, Let your Word be YEA,
YEA, and NAY, NAY; that herein I may condescend to you, and bring you to this,
that I may free you from this Tyrannical Custom. Will you learn why they
allowed them of old to Swear, not to Forswear? It was because they swore by
Idols: You must not be confounded in these Laws, in which they that were weak
were conversant. For, if I now take a Greek, I do not forthwith enjoin him
this; but now I admonish him, That Christ must be known: But a Believer, and
one who has learned him, and heard, if he should use the same Indulgence and
Liberty, as the Greek, What Profit and Advantage would there be?

Christ has made a Law, that NONE SWEAR; Tell me now what is done about this
Law, lest perchance coming again, Hom. 10. p. 101.
as the Apostle says, I do not spare.

We hope none will dispute whether Chrysostom was against All Swearing, or that
he understood Christ's Doctrine as we do; yet no Body can Promise for them that
endeavor to squeeze Swearing out of Christ's SWEAR NOT AT ALL. We have been
the larger in this Authority, partly because he excellently disputes it; and
partly, because our Case needs it; and lastly, to show Christians their
Apostasy, that they may reform.

Jerome. Libr. Epistol. part 3. Tract. 2. Epist. 2. Of Obedience, Knowledge and
Revenge.
LII. Thou said, if I mistake not, That on this Account thou may justly
render Evil for Evil, and ought to swear with them that swear, because the
Lord sometimes swore, and rendered Evil for Evil.

First, I know that all things are not fit for us, that are Servants, which are
agreeable to the Master, etc. I know the Lord oftentimes swore, who has
forbidden us to Swear* Nor must we rashly speak Evil of, or Blaspheme in this,
that he forbad another what he did himself; because it may not be said, the
Lord swore as Lord, whom none forbad to swear: It is not lawful for us as
Servants to Swear; because we are Forbidden by the Law of our Lord to Swear.
But lest we should suffer an Offense by his Example, since the time he forbad
Us to Swear, God never ^wore properly.
neither did he himself ever Swear, etc.

Upon Zachary, Book 2. Chap. 8.

And love ye not a False Oath] -- As to the Lord's commanding in the Gospel,
But I say unto you, Swear not at all; but let your Word be YEA, YEA; NAY, NAY:
He that shall Never Swear, can never Forswear: But he that swears, let him
hear that which is written, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
a vain thing; for (...) these things I hate, says the Lord, according to the
words of Malachy, saying, And ye did all that I hate. In Precepts which belong
to Life, and are clear, we ought not to ^eek an Allegory, lest we seek a Knot
in Rush, as says the Comic.

On Jeremy 4. Book 1. chap. 3.

And thou shall Swear the Lord lives in Truth and Righteousness, and Judgment,
etc.

And how does the Gospel forbid us to Swear? But ^ere it is said for a
Confession, thou shall Swear, and for the Condemnation of Idols, by which
Israel swore. Lastly, Offenses are taken away ^d he swears by the Lord; An
excellent Reason why Oaths were permitted.
and what is said in the Old Testament, the Lord lives, is an Oath, to the
condemning of all the Dead, by whom all Idolatry swears. And it is also to be
minded, that an Oath has these Companions, Truth, Judgment and Righteousness;
if these be wanting, it is not Swearing, but Forswearing.

Also on Matthew. Book 1. chap. 5.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc.

The Jews had always this Custom of Swearing by the Elements, as the Prophet's
Speech often reproves them. He that swears, either reverenceth or loves him
by whom he swears: In the Law it is commanded, that we must not swear but by
the Lord our God.

The Jews Swearing by the Angels, and the City Jerusalem, and the Temple, and
the Elements, did worship the Carnal Creatures with the Honor and Observance
of God. This between the Two Stars seems a self-contradiction; but doubtless he
intends it of the 2d Prohibition in a further Reason, why Oaths were permitted.
Lastly, consider, that here the Savior forbad not to swear by God, but by
Heaven, etc. This between the Two Stars seems a self-contradiction; but
doubtless he intends it of the 2d Prohibition in a further Reason, why Oaths
were permitted.
and this was allowed by the Law, as to little ones, that as they offered
Sacrifices to God, lest they should sacrifice to Idols, so also they were
suffered to Swear by God; Not that they did this rightly, but that it was
better to yield that to God then to Devils. But the Truth of the Gospel does
not receive an Oath, since every faithful Word is for an Oath.

Those of after Times, that in some respect allow of an Oath, ground most upon
the Authority of Augustine, as he from the larger acceptance of the Word Swear
and Oath, which he extends to that which Nazianzen (as before) calls but a firm
Faithfulness joined to his words, which yet he will not admit of, but to a
Paul, a Planter of Churches, speaking by the Spirit of God to them he had
begotten in the Gospel, in Danger to be seduced by False Apostles, and to
slight him, and seek a Proof of Christ speaking in him, compelled by them to
seem a Fool in glorying, and so driven, and no otherwise, to seem a Swearer
too, yea, even to an Augustine, and so to compel him (even Augustine) to say,
It is a hard Question; I have always avoided it. But though he durst not
condemn it altogether out of Reverence to the Apostle, which he thought used
it, because of the Form of Speech; yet to show that he did little encourage men
to practice it, as any Act at all of the Worship of God, much less an August
Act, He says, That False Swearing is Deadly; True Swearing, Dangerous;
No-Swearing, Safe; God only Swears Safely, who cannot be deceived.

Augustine de Sermon Domini, Sermon. 28.
LIII. And Augustine himself confesses, That it was usual to allege
Christianity for not Swearing, bringing in one Saying, It is not lawful for a
Christian to Swear, when an Oath is required of him; Lam a Christian; it is not
lawful to swear. And on Psalm 88. as allowing the Unlawfulness, he says, It is
well that God has forbidden men to Swear, lest by Custom of it (inasmuch as we
are apt to Mistake) we commit Perjury. There is none but God can If men cannot
Swear safely, then it is more dangerous to swear then not to swear and it is
better for People, nay, they are bound to refuse it.
safely Swear, etc.

And in that very Book, which is alleged for it, he says, I say unto you, de
mend^c.
SWEAR NOT AT ALL, lest by Swearing ye come to a Facility of Swearing; from a
Facility to a Custom; and from a Custom ye fall into Perjury. But if any think
that Book makes most for them, let them consider the Author has retracted it;
It is obscure and intricate.
for what Cause let himself speak in the end of his Book of Retractations: For
sure, that which we have here cited out of it, agrees with his other Works,
which contain much more to this Purpose.

De Verb. Jacobi, Ante omnia nolite jurare, Sermon. 28.
Where, says he, would thou choose to walk? Upon the Brink of a Precipice, or
far from it? I think far from it. So he which swears, walks in the Border, and
walks with unsure Feet, because humane: If thou stumblest, down thou go;
if thou fallest, down thou go.

We would fain know, if a most August Act of God's Worship be nighest the Pit's
Brink, or farthest from it? for there all ought to choose to walk; in whose Way
they that walk, walk safely; their Place is sure, and their Footsteps shall
not slide; but the Wicked's Feet are in slippery Places, where Augustine says,
Swearers walk.

Consider what he says on those words of Christ in Mat. 5. It is the
Righteousness of the Pharisees, not to Forswear; This he confirms, who
forbids to swear, which If it belongs to the Righteousness of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Not to Swear, then what will become of those that not only break that
Commandment of, Swear not at all, but teach men so to do? nay, punish men for
not obeying such Anti-Evangelical Doctrine.
belongs to the Righteousness of the Kingdom of Heaven: For, as he which does
not speak, cannot speak a Lie, so he cannot Forswear, which does not Swear. He
goes on to excuse Paul, and says, That an Oath is not among good things, but
among Then certainly they are to be rejected of true Christians.
evil things, and used for the Infirmity of others, which is Evil, from which
we pray, that we may be daily delivered.

But there is this to be said for Augustine, and some others after him, that he
and they write not clearer in a Point so constantly maintained; His Horizon
then was over-casting apace. Apostasy, as a mighty Torrent, did not only swell
and beat against the Simplicity of the Christian-Doctrine and Discipline; but
like an Unruly and impetuous Sea broak down the Banks of Primitive Society, and
made way for all sort of Superstition, worldly Interest and Fraud; that, to say
no more then he did, was to incur, perhaps, the Censure of the Grandees of his
Age, who had joined Earthly Policy to Christian-Religion, and cast off the
Blessed Yoke of their Self-denying Lord, to swim in the Delicious Liberty of
the World: A Time full of such Circumstances as seemed to conspire the Return
of Oaths, that were not dead, but retired only: For as men grew False and
Distrustful, Truth became burdensome, and Yea and Nay no Security with them; and
therefore declined, or rather exiled them their Government; Old Judaism or
Gentilism pleased them better. 'Twas harder Living that Watchful Life that was
sufficient to credit a Yea or Nay, then to take an Oath, that depends upon
the saying of so many Words only: This was considerable, and made Swearing
then, and continues it grateful to our very Times. But sad it is, that Oaths
rid thus in Sat, while Integrity went Barefoot, and Evangelical Yea and Nay
turned off for a Non-sufficient, and that too, not without Fines, Prisons, and
a great deal of Reproach. However, we must acknowledge, that the Gravity and
Christian Care of this Person, and other his Contemporaries, appeared in not
only dissuading, but deterring those Ages from the Brink (for so he calls
Swearing at all) and turning their Faces after the Woman, now on her Flight
into the Wilderness: During all which Time, the Witnesses, though fewest in
Number, and mystically clothed in Sackcloth, forbore not to prophecy even in
this Particular.

And we hope, having no certain Knowledge to the contrary, that most of them,
at least that were Men fearing God, and serving him according to what they knew
and in that Manner they were persuaded was most acceptable to him. And as
Irenaeus said of the Poets and Philosophers, These Men, every one seeing that
which was connatural from Part of the Divine-sown-Reason, spoak excellently,
and where right and consistent with themselves, they are ours, Iren. lib. 5.
cap. 18. So we sincerely declare of Men differing from us, that as we desire
the Good of all, so we can own the Good in all, and the Truth in all, and
receive it from them, though in other Respects our Adversaries; and would have
all to do the like with us and each other: And howbeit our Adversaries may have
hard Thoughts of some of the Persons our Matter leads us to instance, as Men
interessed in the Doctrine and Practices of those darker Times they lived in,
and of us for making Use of such for Authorities; yet we hope they would also
judge it an hard and very cruel Thing to repute them utter Cast-awayes. And
though we know that Men differ within themselves, and all of them more or less
from the Truth, yet since there may be some Truth and Sincerity, we cannot but
acknowledge and embrace: And we hope, the Reasons and Authorities of others
they bring, and the Concessions and Confessions they make, may, and indeed
ought to be of Weight in that Point, at least to show, that it is no new,
strange or unreasonable Thing for us to refuse Oaths. And though some might
with a Mixture of Sup^rstition and W^ll-worship, undertake and maintain that
Strictness and Preciseness, which some of the holy Ancients by the Spirit of
Truth were led to practice (the ancient Hist^ries of whom, from Eyewitnesses,
as the Word signifies, Eusebius. Pam. Socr. Schol. Evagr. etc.
of some of them, we in a great Part believe) And some later more Enlightened
and Zealous Men, taking Offense thereat, but especially at the Hypocrisy and
Abomination, palliated by such fair Pretenses, have streined much in Opposition
to that Evangelical Doctrine, yet is the Doctrine nevertheless a Truth in it
self. Nor can we believe that all that were accounted Heretics, were out of
the Catholic or Universal Church; for the Word Catholic signifies Universal,
containing all that are in the Church (that is in God the Father of the Lord
Jesus Christ) in all Times, These. 1.1.
and those were not all of the same Mind in all Things, Phil. 3.15.
as may be read in the Holy Scriptures, and also in Eusebius and other
Ecclesiastical Histories, where Men are commended for Holiness and Virtue, Soc.
l. 6. c. 1^ Evagr. l. cap. 11. c. 9.
yet at much Difference in some Things. Synesius, though he believed not the
Resurrection, was chosen to minister, and afterward was made a Bishop, the
Charity of Christians was so great in that Age. And some accounted Heretics,
suffered Martyrdom, that are commended or excused by Eusebius; Eusebius. Eccl.
His. l. 8 c. 28. l. 4. c. ^5.
one in particular that dyed with Polycarpus, and another called Asclepius,
called Marcionites. See also the beginning of his eighth Book concerning the
Divisions among them that afterward suffered for the Testimony of the Universal
or Catholic Truth; nor can we receive their Judgment, that branded those with
the Name of Heretics, Pelagiu^, a Britain, an. 400. wrote Notable Books,
says Sennaida, who lived soon after him.
Pelagians, etc. who denied Swearing in those declining Ages, and suppressed
their Works under that Name and Aspersion only; not allowing them to speak for
themselves to us of latter Times.

We see how unjustly we our selves are aspersed in almost every Doctrine we
hold, and that under Pretense of serving God; particularly, with seeking to
work our Salvation by our own Power, and when they have made us this Belief,
they bestow Pelagianism upon it (for Fathers have Right to name their own
Children) whereas of all other People, we especially disclaim our own Ability,
and wait to be renewed and guided by the Spirit of Christ, and to be found in
his Righteousness, and therefore on the other hand reputed Phanaticks,
Enthusiasts, etc. and mocked for being moved by the Spirit, following the
Light, etc. But let their Example or Authority be as it will, or however they
were in other Respects, the Doctrine of the ancient primitive Fathers, and
Practice of that Church, as also the Doctrine of famous Men among themselves,
neither of which Sort dare they condemn for Heretics, do sufficiently defend
them from the Aspersion of Heresy in that Particular: And so we shall come to
our remaining Testimonies, it being our Business, not to maintain every one of
their Principles we cite; but this Doctrine of Swear not at all, to have had
the Voice of several Ages to confirm it.

The ancient Waldenses, reputed to have continued Uncorrupted with the Grosness
of the Apostasy, ever since the Apostles Times (see their History in P. Perin,
S. Moreland and Bp Usher de Succes.) we have good Cause to say, denied the
taking of any Oath in what Sense the Primitive Christians and Fathers refused,
See Baronius, an* 1310. Joh. Walden against John Wickl^f and Waldenses. Reiner.
Rub. Capitan. W. W^dford. Gui Carmel. V^ss. Histor. Pelag. l. 5 p. 2. Bp.
Usher, de Success.
and that was altogether. Sure, their Enemies charged them with it for above
three hundred Years, and we cannot find they then denied the Charge: We suppose
none will attempt to prove they did; Though one of our Adversaries joins with
theirs, traducing them for Perjurers, and with them abuses that worthy and
learned Man Bp. Usher, who defends them from that improbable and contradictory
Aspersion, of Lying and Forswearing, and yet of Denying to Swea^; who says,
that they were as far from Lying and Forswearing, as their Enemies were from
Mod^sty and Truth, which did appear in that they were charged by them, Not to
swear at all: Peruse that part of his Book de Successione, where he treats of
them; and where also you may read of their Succession, how that the Syrians and
Armenians came out of the East into Thracia, thence in process of Time into
Bulgaria and Sclavonia, thence into Italy and Lumbardy, and were called by
several Names, of several People, or at several Times, as Manichees, Waldenses,
Albingenses, Cathari or Puritans, Patrins, Publicans, Humiliati, etc. who were
charged with denying Swearing; And how that several of the better sort of the
Clergy, and of the nobler Laity (who refused the present Use of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper) were burnt under the Name of Manichees. Suarez also reckons-up
the Catharists, de Juramentis, l. 1. c. 1, 2.
Alba. Bagnald, and others which Prateolus and Castro relate, the Waldenses,
the Anabaptists, etc. And which Jansenius also out of Augustine, Epist. 89. the
Pelagians out of Hilary Syracusanus, Epist. 88. Bernard homil. 69. on Cant. The
Fathers, says he, seem to favor this Opinion, especially Basil, hom. in Psalm.
14. Chrysostom hom. 19.78. ad popul. and 17. on Mat And Theophylact on Mat. 5.
Origin Tract 35. Mat. Tertullian de Idololat. Clem. Romans l. 6. Constitut.
Apost. Maldonat on Mat. 5.34. says, the Anabaptists, the Wickliffists, some
Syracusans, a kind of Pelagians, denied Swearing, and that Origin was not far
off that Opinion. Here the Heretics, as accounted, and the Fathers are
reckoned up together, as holding the same Opinions: Sure in this they were not
Heretics; for then the Fathers should be condemned with them, and called
Heretics too, as well as they, or else these Men are partial and contradictory.

On Jam. 5. of the words of the Apostle, thus, Ser. 30. Perhaps it is meet for
the Lord alone to swear, who cannot forswear. And so he goes on to show how
hard it is for men to avoid Perjury.

In Sermon. 3. ad competentes: Let them not only abstain from Perjury, but from
Swearing; because he does not Lie who says, A man Swearing much, shall not
depart from Iniquity, and the Plague shall not depart from his House, Eccles.
23.

But if it were an August Act of the Worship of God, he would on the contrary
have exhorted at least, if not commanded them to swear, which we never read any
Command for, but in Opposition to Idols, even in the time of the
Old-Testament-Writings, as the Testimonies before alleged declare, and in the
time of the New, no Command at all; but on the contrary, a Prohibition by the
Lord himself, and another by his Apostle, nor any Example; for that of Paul's
was but an Asseveration, as by the Testimonies already produced, and to be
alleged appears: For besides those of the Fathers and other Doctors, of late
Bp. To. Sanderson in his Oxford Lectures, shows, that is sometimes used in the
Form of an Oath which is no Oath; and so he defends Joseph from breaking
God's Command, that is, not to have sworn so; and therefore not to have sinned,
but to have used an Asseveration, Agreeing with Chrysostom.
as if he had said, as sure as Pharaoh lives ye are Spies: So may Paul be
defended against the breaking Christ's Command, as if he had said, as sure as
ye, or as some Greek Copies have it, We Rejoice in Christ Jesus: For (...),
which they translate, I protest by, has sometimes the same signification that
(...), yea, has, as may be seen in Scapula; For he says, (...) (translated, I
protest by) is a Particle, sometimes of granting and affirming; sometimes it is
put for verily, indeed; and he interprets (...) by the same word, which is
translated yea, which Scapula says, is also sometimes used in Swearing, and
cites Aristophanes and Xenophon for it: And that (...) is used also in
Composition, for affirming, as in (...), profusus, lavishing; which cannot
signify Swearing.

And how easily might the Transcriber, through that common Use, alter a Letter,
being of the same signification, seeing in that very Verse, in some Copies,
there is not only in another word an Alteration of a Letter (...) and (...),
our and your, but in another word five Letters, (...) and (...), referring it
to the Verse before; yea, a whole Word of Seven Letters added, (...). And of
about Thirty Greek Copies there are not Two of them that agree, but they
interfer, some in one place, some in another; insomuch that there are Thousands
of various Readings, which many of the ancient Fathers diversely follow, some
one, some another. See the (various Lections) Variae Lectiones Graec. Nov.
Test. in Bp. Walton's Polyglot, vol. 6. also the Preface and Beza's Epistle
therein: And consider how hard a thing it is to construe, limit, and lay the
Interpretation of the Sayings of Christ and his Apostles, and the Weight of a
Doctrine, and that as men would avoid Penalties too, upon a Letter (which yet
alters not the Signification) upon Credit of the Transcribers, especially in
Paul's Epistles, wherein Peter says, many things are hard to be understood,
and wrested by the Unlearned, which he must needs intend in such Learning as he
himself had, and that was not of Worldly Academics; but from the Holy Spirit.
And these words, which are joined with that Particle, are not such words as men
use in Swearing, but for a Ground of his Fidelity, and a Remedy against their
Incredulity, and questioning of the Weight of his Assertions, amongst whom
other Teachers were preferred, and who compelled him to speak as a Fool, he
says, even to commend himself. So that it is not strange, if to them, and not
to other Churches, he used such forcible Asseverations from the Testimony that
they had of him, of the Truth and Work of Christ in ^im, and the Record thereof
upon his Soul, and his Joy therein, that he spoak the Truth to them, and did
not lie; so that he brings his Perfections against their Imperfections, to gain
Belief, which can amount to no more then a Voluntary Condescension for the time
being, and cannot prove or countenance a Compulsory, Promissory, Formal,
Ceremonial Oath to be exacted or taken up for the future.

But Mark, that the word Oath, or Swear, used both by Christ and the Apostle
James in their Prohibition, is never used by Paul in his Asseverations, neither
does he ever apply it to Brethren; b^t speaking to them of the Oath that was in
old time, and of men (indefinitely) that use to swear, he says, Men swear, and
to them an Oath is for Confirmation; that is, as among the Jews and Heathen; he
does not say to Us, or to You; or We, or Ye swear, who are not in Strife,
which, if had that been true, it might have stood the present Oath-Advocates in
stead: So that such as will have it, that Paul swore, must being the word
swear, or Oath, to prove it; But if they could* his Example then were not
enough to invalidate to us now the Command of Christ, for the Abolishing of
Swearing, no more then his shaving his Head at Cenchrea, because he had a Vow;
or his purifying himself in the Temple, and offering with the four Jews that
had a Vow; or his circumcising of Timothy, because of the Jews, can warrant us
to the Observation of those legal Rites and Ceremonies, which so long since are
not only dead, but deadly, as the Fathers and Bp. Sanderson distinguish about
them. And those that would therefore bring in Swearing and Vows, might under
the same Color, bring in sacrificing and circumcising too.

L. 1. c. 15.
LIVE. ISIDORUS PELUSIOTA, who as Euagrius Schol. writes, lived at the same time
with Cyrill, and that the Fame of his Sayings and Doings was spead far and
near, and rise in every man's Mouth, that He led on Earth the Life of an Angel,
Ep. lib. 1. Epist. 155.
and wrote many notable Works, amongst which are his Epistles, in one whereof
he writes against Swearing thus; If thou art of our Flock, and art ordered
under a good Shepherd, deny the Nature of Wild Beasts, and obey his Voice that
Forbids to Swear AT ALL. Moreover not to Swear is, not to require an Oath of
another: Now, if thou will not swear, neither require thou an Oath of another,
Not to require an Oath by any means of another man.
for two Causes; either because he who is asked loves Truth, or on the contrary
to Lie: If the man speaks Truth usually, he will always speak Truth without an
Oath; but if he is a Liar, he will Lie, though he Swear: Therefore for both
these Causes, one ought not to require an Oath.

On Mat. 5.
LV. CHROMATIUS, Bishop of Aquileia, about or not long after that time, upon
these words, But I say unto you, Swear not at all, paraphraseth thus; The Law
(says he) given by Moses received a Growth, Proficiency or Perfection by the
Grace of the Doctrine of the Gospel. In the Law it was commanded, not to
Forswear; but in the Gospel NOT TO SWEAR: Which very thing heretofore the Holy
Ghost did premeditate that Solomon should command or teach, saying, Let not thy
Mouth use to Swear. And again, As a Servant beaten continually, is not lessened
from the Paleness of his Stripes; so every one that swears, shall not be
purged from Sin. Wherefore it is not meet for us to Swear AT ALL: For, what
need is there for any of us to Swear, seeing that it is not at all LAWFUL FOR
US TO LIE; whose Words ought always to be so True, so very Faithful, that they
may be accounted for Oaths. And therefore the Lord not only forbids us to
Forswear, BUT EVEN TO SWEAR; that we may not seem to speak Truth ONLY when we
swear; That we may not think that those whom he has appointed to be True in
all their Speech, may have Liberty to Lie without an Oath: For this is the
Cause of an Oath, Because that every one who swears, does swear to this End,
Suspicion, the Cause of an Oath.
that he will speak that which is true, and therefore the Lord would have no
Difference to be between their Oath and their Word: Because as in an Oath there
ought to be no Perfidiousness, so in our Words there ought to be no Lie, in
that both Perjury and Lying is condemned by the Punishment of the Judgment of
God, seeing the Scripture says, The Mouth which Lies kills the Soul:
Therefore whosoever speaks Truth, swears; because it is written, A Faithful
Witness does not Lie. And therefore holy Scripture (not without Cause) often
relates, that God has sworn, because whatsoever is spoaken of God, who is
true, and cannot lie, is counted for an Oath, because all which he speaks is
true -- Now we find God sometimes swearing, but it is for the Perfidiousness of
the Jewish Infidelity, who think that all Truth consists in the Credit of an
Oath; Therefore also God would swear, that they who would not trust God
speaking, might trust him when he swore: Therefore our Lord says, Ye have
heard it said of old, Thou shall not Forswear; But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT
ALL, etc.

On Deuteronomy. 6.
LVI. THEODORET on Deuteronomy. 6. page 57. Why does the Law command, that they should
swear by God? A smart and true Answer.
Lest they should swear by false Gods: For he said the same by the Prophet, If
thou take the Names of Baalam out of thy Mouth, and shall swear, The Lord
lives with Truth: And here, when he had said, Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve, and shall cleave unto him and shall swear
by his Name, he subjoyned, Ye shall not w^k ^ter other or strange Gods, which
are of the Gods of the Nations, which are round about you. Lyra says the same.

LVII. Ordinary Gloss. on Mat. 5.37. has this Sentence, A Faithful Speech
ought to be accounted for an Oath.

LVIII. Johannes Damascenus, Parallel. lib. 3. cap. 16. brings a Testimony of
one Nilus, against Swearing. There was one named NILUS in Egypt, a Martyr,
mentioned by Eusebius. Another Bishop of Constantinople, spoaken of by
Socrates, both very famous; the words are these: It is not profitable to Swear,
Nilus forbids Oaths.
but very pernicious, and execrable and abominable: Wherefore hereafter make an
End of Swearing; nor commit such a thing, as that thy Tongue use Oaths. In the
same place he alleges Testimonies out of J. Chrysostom, Hom. 13. ad Populum
Antiochenum.

LIX. CYRILL, On Jer. 4.
whom Evagrius Scholast. styles Renowned, in his Commentary on Jeremy the 4th;
And shall swear, the Lord lives in Truth, and in Judgment, and in
Righteousness; says, Let us look, who swear, how we do not swear in Judgment,
but without Judgment; so that our Oaths are by Custom rather then Judgment; we
are lashed therefore, and the Word reproving that same thing, says, and if he
shall swear the Lord lives in Truth, in Righteousness and Judgment: For we
know it is said in the Gospel by the Lord unto his Disciples, But I say unto
you, that you Swear NOT AT ALL. But let us consider also this Saying, and if
God grant, both shall be rewarded: For, perhaps, it first behooves to swear in
Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; and after one has made Proficiency,
he may be made worthy NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL, but may have YEA, not needing
Witnesses that IT IS SO; and may have NAY, not needing Witnesses that IT IS
VERILY NOT So.

Cyril. See Catena. 65. Grae^. Patr. on Luke 1. p. 23.
And says Cyrill further, Let none because he hears that God swore to Abraham,
use to swear: For, as that which is called Wrath in God, is not Wrath; nor does
it signify a Passion, but a Punishing Power, or some such like Motion; so
neither is Swearing SWEARING: For, God does not Swear; but shows the Certainty,
that what he says shall come to pass, certainly: For the Oath of God is his
own Word, filling the Hearers, and making every one believe, that what he has
promised and said, shall surely come to pass.

On Psalm. 94.
LX. CASSIODORUS, on Psalm 94. says, Hence it is, that men are forbidden to
swear, because by their own Power they cannot perform their Promises, agrees
with Augustine.
This Cassiodorus was Famous about the year 500.

On Eccles. 8.
LXI. OLYMPIODORUS was also Famous about the same time, who on Eccl. 8. says
thus, Keep the Mouth of the King, and do not study concerning the Word of the
Oath of God, but go far from the Face of it, viz. of an Oath; that is, Refrain
and depart from it, and do not AT ALL endure to take an Oath into thy Mouth.

LXII. ISIDORUS HISPALENSIS was famous about that time, and lived with him they
called St. Gregory, who disliked the bringing in the Title of Universal Bishop,
and also the Use of Swearing: his Words are these, Many are slow to believe
which are moved at the Belief of the Word: Chap. 31.
But they do grieveously offend, who compel them to Swear that speak to them.

LXIII. ANTIOCHUS said to be a Man famous for Holiness and Learning, living in
Palestine about the time of Heraclius, the Emperor, that was about the Year
614. In his Pandects of Scripture, Hom. 62. concerning Swearing says thus in
the Greek (which see; for the Latin Translation is in some things imperfect)
The old Law, as giving Laws to Children, which for their Age were not capable
of more holy Doctrine, not unseasonably commands, To Swear nothing to their
Neighbor in Deceit; But us our Lord and Savior commands, NOT TO SWEAR AT
ALL, neither out of Season, nor in Season; for he says to us, Let your YEA be
YEA, and your NAY, NAY; for whatsoever is more, is of the Evil.

And says he to the first People of a Stiff Neck, I commanded, Thou shall not
forswear, but shall perform thy Vows unto the Lord, as to them that were
Hard-hearted and Disobedient to me: But to you that believe in me, to whom I
have given Power to become the Sons of God, that are born again of the holy
Spirit, I command, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL, neither little, nor great Oaths; that a
Difference may plainly appear who are Bastards, and who true Sons. Let us
therefore, Dear Friends, fear him, who has vouchsafed us so much Honor, even
the Lord and Father, with all Fear; as sincere ingenuous Servants let us keep
his Commandments, NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL, lest he say as in Isa. 1. I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me: Let Us not
be Sleighters and Despisers of this Commandment of the Lord; for those things
that are said and done without an Oath, are more credited by Men, and more
pleasing to God.

LXIV. In the next Century, BEDA, an English man, Beda in Ep. Jam. c. 5.
the most famous of those Days, and styled Venerable, in his Exposition upon
these words, Before all things, my Brethren, swear not, etc. says, Because he
desires entirely to draw out the deadly Poison of the Tongue in his Hearers, he
forbad to detract or slander any man, or to judge his Neighbor, who forbad to
grieve in Adversities, which are open Sins; he adds this also (seeming light to
some) that he may take away the Custom of Swearing. For that this also is not
to be esteemed a light matter, plainly appears to them, that carefully consider
that Sentence of the Lord, where he faith, Of every idle Word that men shall
speak, they shall give Account in the Day of Judgment.

[That ye fall not into Condemnation.] Therefore (says he) I restrain you from
the Fault of Swearing, lest by Swearing frequently true things, ye fall
sometimes also into Forswearing; but stand so far from the Vice of Forswearing,
that you will not Swear neither, but by the greatest Necessity. But he also
falls under the Judgment of Guilt, who although he never Forswear, yet swears
true oftener then there is need; namely, he offends in the very Idleness of
superfluous Speech, and he offends the Judge, which forbad both every
unprofitable Word and OATH.

From this chief man among the English of that time, it is manifest that this
was the Doctrine they then held, as further appears from H. Spelman, that
learned English Knight, Spelm. Brit. Council. p. 260.
in his Book of British Councils, Canons, etc. in the Exceptions or select
Collections of Egbert, Arch Bishop of York, Artic. 19. That no Priest
wha^soever may swear an Oath, but let him speak all things simply, in Purity
and Truth. And in the same Author and Council, Art. 18. the chief of
Monasteries, Priests and Deacons should say (without Swearing) when they were
to purge and clear themselves, only thus, I speak the Truth in Christ, I lie
not.

And in page 259. In England, at the Council of Berghamst^d about the Year 750.
Artic. 17. That a Bishop or a King's Word or Affirmation without an Oath is
irrefragable.

This agrees with Blastaris Canons above mentioned. And at this Day in some
Countries, as the Electoral Archbishops in Germany, of Colen, Mentz and
Triers, and many Noble Men in their Station, speak without an Oath, upon their
Honor, etc.

Certainly then it is much below the Nobility of true Christians in their
Spiritual Station to Swear, as Chrysostom and the Ancients have well observed.

LXV. HAIMO lived about 840. who on the Revelations says, That it is lawful
only for Men and Angels to swear; but to Men it is forbidden.

LXVI. AMBROSIUS ANSBERTUS, Gallus Presbyter: Seeing the Lord cohibits the
Faithful from every Oath, saying, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. but
let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, On the Revelations, p. 196.
Nay; what abounds more then them is from the Evil: Who stretches out his Hand
to Heaven, and swears by him that lives forever, Are not his Sayings and
Actings set for Examples for Believers to imitate? But only in that men are
often deceived by an Oath; but he, who is the Truth, never is deceived; for he
would not have prohibited men from an Oath if he had not known Sin to be in it:
For, what do we understand to be figured by the Hand of the Angel, unless (as
before noted) a Dispensation of Redemption of Mankind? For, his Hand is the
Operation of our Salvation; although also, if it may be so said, the same Son
be his Right Hand, as when the Word of the Father speaks, he shows that he
is the Word of the Father.

LXVIII. THEOPHYLACT, Archbishop of the Bulgarians, whom some place in the
Ninth Century, others after; to be sure very Famous; being as it were their
Apostle; in his Comment on Mat. 5. says, To swear, or adjure more to Yea or
Nay, is of the Devil. Moreover (says he) if thou should say, That the Law
also given to Moses was evil, because it commands to swear, Learn, that then
it was not Evil to swear; but after Christ, it is Evil, as also to be
circumcised; and in brief, whatsoever is He makes Oaths Jewish, at least in
Opposition to Evangelical; because imperfect, and permitted to the Jews in
Condescension.
Jewish: For, it is convenient for a Child to suck, but not at all for a Man.

LXIX. Barnard; The Truth needs not an Oath. De modo been vivendi, Ser. 32. De
perjurio. A Faithful Word holds the Place of an Oath; as he cannot Lie who does
not Speak, so he cannot Forswear who does not undertake to Swear: grounded on
Matthew 5.

LXX. PASCHALIUS RATBERTUS on Mat. 5. Ye have heard, etc. In this place, as
also every where in those things, the Perfection in Righteousness is renewed;
for by what every one swears, he either worships, loves or fears it; Therefore
by the Law, for the carnal People it was lawful to swear by God, and this was
allowed as to little Ones, that as they offered Sacrifices to God, lest they
should offer them to Idols; so also it was permitted to them to swear by God:
Not that they did this well; but because it was better to give it to God then
to Devils.

LXXI. OTHO BRUNFELSIUS on Mat. 5. But let your Word be Yea, etc. That is the
Duty of a Christian man, to be so sure in his Words, that being Unsworn he
surpass any Jew or Heathen, swearing by all his holy Things, namely in these
bare Words only, Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay: Such Faithfulness and Constancy is
commended in good men by profane Authors; Read Seneca, Cicero, Valerius
Maximus.

But thou will say, I shall not be trusted, unless I swear: Even so it is
permitted by the Popes, to swear good Words in a good Cause. But such Distrust
ought not to reign in the Faithful: But if we trust not Words, what should an
Oath do? It is a Proverb, None is less trusted then he which shall often swear.
Moreover, Who gave Power to Popes, to break the Command of God?

LXXII. DRUTHMARUS on Math. 5. Lest the Jews should Swear by Idols Names, the
Lord suffered them to swear by his own Name.

-- The Lord taught us Perfection, that such Trust is to be among Christians,
that there should be no need to interpose the Name of God for Witness.

LXXIII. JANSENIUS on Matthew. 5. If all Christians were such as they ought to
be, it would certainly be needless both to require and take an Oath -- I think
this more Christian; and not to Swear at all, nor Compel to Swear, more
Spiritual -- Yea and Amen are the same, 2 Cor. 1. not Swearing, but Affirming:
So Christ swore not.

See Bernard, Hom. 69. in Cant. De more been vivendi, Sermon. 32.

LXXIV. ALBERTUS MAGNUS, on Mat. 5. Swearing is by Indulgence.

Thomas Aquinas cites Rabanus on Mat. 5.

LXXV. Alex. de Ales cites HUG. CARDINAL, saying, The Lord Forbad Swearing,
lest any should desire to swear as a Good Thing, p. 3. q. 59.
also that none might fall into Perjury.

LXXVI. REMIGIUS on Romans 1. Who never Swears, never Forswears.

LXXVII. RUFFINUS on Psalm. 14. Not to Swear at all is of Perfect Men.

See also Smaragdus on Mat. 5.

Titelmannus on Psalm. 14.

Brugensis on Mat. 5.

Ludolphus Carthusianus, vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 12.

Rupertus, de operibus spiritus sancti, fol. 453.

Baptista Folengius, on Psalm. 15.

Nic. Lyra and Ordinary Gloss on Mat 5.

See Bibliotheca veter. Patrum.
LXXVIII. EUTHYMIUS ZAGABONUS, on Matthew. 5. p. 43. says thus; Again, ye have
heard, that it has been said to them of old time, Thou shall not Forswear,
etc. but I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc. Now the old Law says, Thou
shall not Forswear, but shall offer to the Lord thine Oaths; which he added
that he might put Fear into the Swearer, that he should not Forswear, knowing
that God, which knows all things, undertakes the Oath. [But I say unto you,
Swear not at all] For he that easily swears, sometimes perchance may
Forswear, by the Custom of Swearing; but he that Swears by no means, will never
Forswear. Besides, thou that swearest, so be thou do not Forswear, thou
observest the Worship of God; but Swearing by no means, thou do promote it:
And the other is the part of mean and imperfect Philosophy; but this of that
which is the highest and perfect. The other, Thou shall not Forswear, is
written in the Book of Exodus; but this, Thou shall restore to the Lord thine
Oaths, in the Book of Deuteronomy, but in other words: Now he commanded this,
lest they should swear by Gods of a false Name. Again,

Not to Swear, and not to require an Oath, comes to the same thing: For, how
can thou induce thy Brother unto that, which thou avoidest thy self; if so be
that thou art a Lover of thy Brother, and not rather of Money?

Nor by Heaven; for it is the Throne of God, etc.

Lest they should think, that he forbad to swear by God only, in saying, By
God, he adds also other kind of Oaths, by which then the Jews did swear; for he
that swears by these things, swears again by God, who fills these things,
and rules them; for they have these things in Honor for him, and not for
themselves; for he says by the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is
my Footstool; the Prophet manifesting by this, that God fills all things: Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth? David also says, The City of the Great King.

Neither by thy Head.

Therefore thou should not swear the meanest Oath; I say, even by thy own
Head, lest thou proceed to greater, or by any other manner; for the Creature is
also the Possession of God; And again, the Oath is made by God, who has it
(the Creature) in his Power; for, although it (the Head) be made thine, yet it
is not thy Work, which is manifest from this, That thou can not make one Hair
white or black.

But let your Words be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay, etc.

Let your Speech be when ye affirm, Yea; and when ye deny, Nay; and use only
these for, or instead of Oaths to Confirmation, and no other then Yea and Nay;
what is adjoined besides these, he calls an Oath.

Quest. But if an Oath be of the Devil, how did the old Law permit (...):

Answ. Because the Sacrifices of Living Creatures were also of Evil, and by the
Deceit of Idols; yet the Law permitted them, because of the They all agree in
the Reason of suffering Oaths under the Law, viz. the Jews Weakness.
Infirmity of the Hebrews: For, whereas they were Gluttons and Smell-Feasts,
they loved the Sacrifices of Idols; and whereas also they were Unbelieving,
they also loved an Oath: And that they should not afterward either sacrifice
to Idols, or swear by Idols, the Law permitted them to sacrifice and to swear;
and if there were any thing else of that kind, they transferred all unto God.
Now it was to come to pass, that in process of time, he would cut off these
things also, by a more sublime Law to be brought in; because it is good for
Infants to be suckled; but for men it is very unfit: There we allow this to
them that live after the manner of Infants; but we withdraw or prohibit them
that are manly from it.

Quest. What then is to be done, if any require an Oath, yea, compel to Swear?

Answ. Let the Fear of God be more forcible then this Compulsion or Necessity;
and choose rather to suffer all things, then to transgress the Command, since in
every Precept Force and Violent Danger will often meet with thee: And unless
thou esteemest the Command of God every where more forcible, all things will
depart from thee Void and Unperformed. In the following Passages the Lord
says, The Kingdom of Heaven suffered Violence, and the Violent take it by
Force.

LXXIX. OECUMENIUS, a Famous Greek Writer, about Ann. 1070. writes on Jam.
5.12. thus, But some will say, If any be forced to swear, what is to be done?
We say, that the Fear of God shall be stronger then the Force of him that
compels. But some may doubt, How it comes to pass, that Grace does not command
this, as did the Old Law, affording Praise to him that did swear by the Name of
the Lord? We say, The old Law leading the Jews not to swear by Devils,
appointed to swear by God, as it commanded them to sacrifice, drawing them from
the Sacrifice of Idols or Devils: But when it had sufficiently taught them to
have a Religious Respect to God, then it rejected Sacrifices as unprofitable,
seeking not a Sacrifice by Beasts, but a Broaken Spirit; that is, a sweet whole
Burnt-Sacrifice, enflamed by the Fire of Love. That ye fall not into Hypocrisy
(so some Copies have it; for the words in Greek are something alike) Hypocrisy
he says, or Condemnation, which follows them that Swear without sparing, and
through the Custom of Oaths are carried out to Forswear. The Word Hypocrisy
signifies thus much, that which being one thing appears another; How then
falls he into Hypocrisy that swears? Answ. When he that is believed for
the Oath's sake to be true, and yet Transgression following, is declared to be
a Liar, instead of a true Man, not producing Yea in Certainty. He forbids to
swear by God, because of Perjury; but by Heaven and other Oaths, that men
should not bring these things into the Honor of God; for all that swear, do
swear by the Greater.

LXXX. ANSHELMUS, Bishop of Canterbury, about Ann. 1090. on that place of Mat.
5. thus, page 38. Thou shall not Forswear, etc. Moses seeing that he could not
take away Swearing, takes away Perjury. And again, Because men have in great
Reverence those things by which they swear, lest they should make the Creatures
Gods to themselves, he commands them, to render their Oaths to God, and not to
swear by Creatures: But the Lord removes them more perfectly from Perjury, when
he forbids them to Swear at all.

Vid. Baron. Anno 1310. Joh. Walden adv. Wicklif and Waldens. Reiner. Rub.
Capitan. W. Woodford.
LXXXI. The Ancient WALDENSES we have good Cause to say, Denied the taking of
any Oath in what Sense the Primitive Christians and Fathers refused, and that
was altogether: To be sure their Enemies charged them with it for above Three
Hundred Years; and we cannot find, that they then denied the Charge: We suppose
none will attempt to prove they did; for they were well known in the World as
to this Particular.

LXXXII. And Bp. USHER pleads for them, against the Papists, who were Swearers.
De Success. l. 6.


LXXXIII. Likewise, Ban. Anno 1310. n. 3.
a People of Albi in France, Ann. 1176. held, It was Unlawful to Swear.

LXXXIV. The Plowman's Complaint, containing, as abundance of mournful
Applications to God, so many notable and serious Reprehensions of the Lapst,
Erroneous and Cruel Nature of Men; among others it has this notable Passage to
our Purpose, Lord, thou give us a Command of Truth, in bidding us say, Yea,
Yea; J. Fox Mart. v. 1. p. 527.
and Swear for Nothing; but, Lord, he (Pope) that calls himself thy Vicar on
Earth, has broken the Commandment, so makes a Law to Compel men to Swear. Who
was the Author of this, is not certainly known; but to be sure it was embraced
of the Wickliffians, Men honored by Protestants.
as worthy of their Patronage; and remembered and recorded by John Fox, as not
unworthy to keep Company with Protestant Martyrs.

LXXXV. JOHN WICKLIFF, J. Fox Mart. v. 1. p. 554, to 558.
our Countryman, and in his time Divinity-Professor of Oxford (Famous for his
Learning and Godly Courage in oppugning the Doctrines and Practices of Rome, in
the time of Edward the third, and Richard the second, about the year 1370.) was
accused among other things, for maintaining, that all Oaths, which be made for
any Contract or Civil Bargain betwixt man and man, are Unlawful.

LXXXVI. We will bring in here a Passage out of the Plowman's Tale, as it lies
in GEFFRY CHAUCER's Works, not impertinent to our Purpose; whose Learning,
Honor and Wit was great in the time he lived, which was about 1360. John
Wickliff's Contemporary.

Geff. Chauc. Works, fol. 86.
'These Woollen make men to Swear,
'against Christ's Commaundment;
'And Christ's Members all to tear,
'on rood as he were new yrent:
'Such Laws they maken by common Assent,
'each one it throws as a Ball;
'Thus the Poor be full shent;
'but ever Falsehood foul it befall.
He has Expressions not less disliking Oaths in his Parson's Tales, where he
makes the Parson to say, After those, then comes Swearing, expressly against
the Commandment of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who says by St. Matthew's
words, Ne shall ye not Swear in all manner, or on no Account.

J. Fox Mart. v. 1. p. 614, 618.
LXXXVII. WILLIAM SWINDERBY, Priest, and a Zealous Follower of John Wickliff,
also lived in the time of Richard the second, as appears by his Appeal to that
King, from the Unjust Sentence of the Bishop of Hereford, in which, to this
part of the Charge exhibited (That no man ought to swear for any thing, but
simply, without an Oath, to Affirm or Deny) he answers thus, Whereas Christ's
Law forbids Swearing, the Pope's Law justifies Swearing, and compels men
thereunto: Methinks (says he) there is no need to Comfort or Encourage the
People in Swearing.

LXXXVIII. WALTER BRUTE, J. Fox Mart. v. 1. p. 623, 359.
also an early Dissenter from the Roman Church, and Intimate of William
Swinderby; being charged, among other things, with saying, That it is not
Lawful for Christians, for any Cause to swear by the Creator, neither by the
Creature; thus answered for himself, and indeed, it comprehends much of our
Belief in this Matter: As concerning Oaths, I believe and obey the Doctrine of
Almighty God, and my Master, Jesus Christ, which teaches, That Christian-men
in Affirmation of a Truth should pass the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, the old Testament, or else he excludes them from the Kingdom of God:
For Christ says, Unless your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as
concerning Oaths, Christ says, It has been said by them of old time, thou
shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord those things that
thou know: But I say unto you, Thou shall not swear at all, neither by
Heaven, nor yet by the Earth, etc. but let your Communication be Yea, Yea; and
Nay, Nay; for, whatsoever shall be more then this, proceeds of Evil:
Therefore, as the Perfection of the ancient Men of the Old Testament was, Not
to Forswear themselves; so the Perfection of Christian Men is, Not to Swear at
all, because we are so commanded of Christ, whose Commandments must in no Case
be broaken. Thus much of W. Brute.

J. Fox Mart. v. 1. p. 687.
LXXXIX. John Purrey, John Edward, John Becket, John Clements, Richard Herbert
and Emmot Willie, with many more in the time of Henry the fourth, through Fears
and Hopes deserted their Profession, and revolted (as John Fox tells us) from
their Faith, which was the Religion then professed of those called Wickliffians
or Lollards (the True, Poor, Persecuted Christians of that time) And of the
Fifteen Articles, by them abjured, this was one; Item, That neither the If they
could not, it was then held none could; so that then it was denying all Tenders.
Pope, nor the Prelate, neither any Ordinary can compel any man to Swear by any
Creature of God, or by the Bible-Book.

Ibid. p. 701, 702.
XC. WILLIAM THORPE, whom John Fox calls, The Constant and Blessed Servant of
God, and good Man and Servant of Christ, etc. refused to swear upon a Bible,
when the Archbishop tendered the Oath to him; for, he thought it Not Lawful to
take or give an Oath thereon, Because a Book is nothing else (says he) but
diverse Creatures, of which it is made; and such Swearing is ever Unlawful, as
witnesses Chrysostom plainly, blaming them greatly, that bring out a Book to
swear upon; charging Clarks, that in no wise they constrain any Body to swear
well, when that thing is sooth (or true) that they swear for. And also, full
many Men and Women now say, That it is well done to swear by God, and by our
Lady, and by other Saints, to have them in mind; others say, That they may not
swear, when they may otherwise be believed: But since all these Sayings are
Excuses, and Sin, methinks, Sir (says he) that this Sense of Chrysostom may be
alleged well against all such Swearers.

XCI. ELIZABETH YOUNG, who was brought to Examination in the Marian-days, J.
Fox Mart. v. 3. p. 910, 911.
before the Catholic Inquisitors of Heritical Pravity, as they then called
themselves, and commanded to Swear, this Language was used to her.

Dr. Martin, Thou shall he racked Inch-meal, thou Trayterly Whore and Heretic;
but thou shall swear before a Judge before thou go.

Eliz. Young, Sir, I understand not what an Oath is, and therefore I will take
no such thing upon me.

Dr. Martin, She refuses to swear upon the four Evangelists before a Judge;
for, I my self and Mr. Hussy, have had her before us Four Times, but we cannot
bring her to swear.

Then said the Bishop, Why will thou not swear before a Judge, etc?

Eliz. Young, My Lord, I will not swear, that this Hand is mine.

No, said the Bishop; and why?

Eliz. Young, Christ says, That whatsoever is more then Yea, Yea; or Nay, Nay,
it comes of Evil.

Then Dr. Cook brought her to a Book, commanding her to lay her Hand thereon.

Eliz. Young, No, my Lord, I will Not Swear. And so she persisted, till God
delivered her out of their Hands.

John Huss, Jerome of Prague, Walter Brute, William Swinderby, William Sawtry,
William White, William Thorpe, etc. are recorded by those of other Nations,
both High and Low Dutch, to have refused all Swearing; as well by God, as by
Creatures, in any Case, private or public. Though such as admit of Oaths in
some Cases, labor, as John Fox in England, and the Calvinists abroad, to
eclipse and mutilate their Testimony; as if they were one while only against
Book-Swearing, as being a Creature; another while, only against Swearing in
Private Cases; another while, as J. Fox relates in John Burrell, That it is not
lawful to swear, but in Case of Life and Death, etc. But most evident it is,
that they were against All Swearing, or Swearing at all; else, why should they
so frequently allege Chrysostom, who, though he accounted swearing by
Creatures a more execrable Sin, then to swear by God; yet constantly counted
Swearing at all, a Sin in Christians, as cleaving to that which Christ had
abrogated, being only permitted to the Jews, for the Hardness and Blindness of
their Hearts, their Unbelief and Propensity to follow the Course of the
Heathens, and swear by their Gods. Let it not be forgotten, that Chrysostom not
only inveighs against them that bring forth the Book to swear by, because it is
a Creature; but that he also upbraided them with Impudence and Audaciousness,
that dare make use of that Law to administer an Oath by, that so strictly
forbids an Oath.

Ridiculous it is, to make them deny Swearing only in private Cases, and to be
ready to swear in Case of Life and Death: For where is there any Shadow of such
a Law? And how should those Honest Men invent one? Christ's Law we read Mat. 5.
The Doctors, Chrysostom and Jerome's Judgment, whom they had mostly in their
Mouths, we have repeated here at large, in which is not the least Restriction.
These Good Men then must needs be understood to take the Law of Christ either
to have forbidden Swearing in any Case, and then not to swear in Case of Life;
or not to forbid Swearing at all, and then they not only might swear to save
their Lives, but Liberties and Estates, and ought so to do. But we hope there
can be no room left for this Objection.

XCII. Spots. Hist. page 61.
The LOLLARDS of Kille in Scotland were against all Swearing, as both Spotswood
in his Chronicle does relate, and the Book called, The History of the
Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland.

XCIII. W.C. Albrid p. 193, 194, 195.
MICHAEL SADLER (an Eminent Man, called a Lord) was Cruelly Tortured and put to
death by some Papists under the Emperor of Germany, whose Brethren were also
Executed with the Sword, and his Wife and Sisters Drowned, Ann. 1527. One
Article alleged against him was, that he had said, That men should not Swear
to, or before the Magistrate.

XCIV. The CHRISTIAN-PROTESTANTS in the Valley of Piedmont, who were Cruelly
Tortured to Death by the Papists, about Ann. 1655. Morl. Hist. p. 217, 218.
One Article alleged against them was, That they believed it was not lawful to
Swear any thing, be it True or False.

J. Fox Mart. v. 2. p. 420.
XCV. GERARD SAGARELD of Parma, and his Followers, Denied all Oaths and Vows. So
did several in Germany, mentioned by B. Usher, in his Book De Successione: In
Germany, Jury and Swearing is well excluded, and need not much to be required.

Comm. on Mat. 5.
XCVI. ERASMUS, Now ye shall hear another thing. Commandment was given unto your
Elders, none otherwise; but if they had made an Oath, they should perform it,
and not be Forsworn; for now they are bound to God, and not to man only:
Wherefore among the Jews only Perjury is punishable; but he that deceives his
Neighbor without any Oath made, he goes unpunished; but yet the Law of the
Gospel condemns him; the which, that ye may be the more remote from Perjury,
does utterly condemn all manner of Oaths; that it is not lawful to Swear,
neither by God, nor by those things which seem to the Common Sort to be things
of less Religion, that is, Neither by Heaven, because it is the Seat of God;
nor by the Earth, because it is his Footstool; nor by Jerusalem, because it is
the City of the Great King, that is to say, of him that has made all things:
Neither as the Heathen swear, by the Head of another Man, whereof thou have no
Authority; but it is consecrate to God, that has made all things as he would;
for thou can not make one White Hair Black, nor the contrary: And because all
things are consecrate to God, the Maker, thou ought to be fearful to swear
by any thing. And what needs any Oath among them, where no man, because of
their Simplicity, can distrust; nor no man can desire to deceive, though they
might do it? Such is their Sincerity and Perfectness, specially in those things
of the which they declare themselves to be Despisers. Therefore among you,
plain and simple Speech ought to be more holy and more sure then the devout and
solemn Oath among the Jews: For, among you, whose Hearts and Mouths ought to
agree, there is no other use of Speech, but to express your Minds each to
other. In your Bargains ye need no Oath, ye need no Execration, or Cursing, or
such like, to bind the Promiser, or to assure him to whom the Promise is made:
Two Words be sufficient, Nay and Yea, whereby thou denyest that which thou do
not promise, and whereby thou do perform that which thou did promise by
plain Word, that thou would do: For, there is no man less bound by his simple
and bare Word, then the Jew Swearing by all holy Things; and he whom thou
make thy Promise unto, does trust thee as much as if thou had made a solemn
Oath. If there be any Erasm. here plainly forbids all Swearing on any
account.
more besides these, it must needs come of Evil and Sin: For, he that swears,
either be thinks Evil of him to whom he swears,; or else, he that requires
the Oath, does distrust: But none of these ought to be in you, whom I would
have perfect in all Points. Therefore, when I utterly forbid Swearing, I do not
abolish the Law which does prohibit Perjury; but I make the Law more full, and
I withdraw men further from that, which the Law does punish.

Let your Mind be pure and plain, and let your Heart and your Mouth go both
together: Comm. on Jam. 5.
Let no man with feigned words deceive his Neighbor. But especially, my
Brethren, Swear Not, lest by little and little you accustom your selves to
Forswear. Among Jews and Heathens, for Fidelity's sake, there is an Oath put;
But among Christians, which ought neither to distrust any man, nor to deceive,
it is a Vain Thing to Swear. Whosoever is accustomed to Swear, is Cousen-german
to the Peril of Forswearing. Be you afraid, not only to Swear by God in humane
Affairs, and in light Matters, but also abstain from all kind of Swearing, that
you Swear neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, or any other thing, that the
Common People esteem for Then not by God; for the common people esteemed him
sacred.
Holy and Religious. Whosoever dare be bold to Lie without Swearing, he dare do
the same also when he Swears, if he list. To be brief: He that is a good man,
will believe a man without Swear^ng; and he that is naught, will not trust a
man though he Swear: But among you that are furnished with Evangelical
Plainness, there is neither place to distrust, nor to imagine Deceit; But let
your Plain Communication be regarded for no less True and Steadfast, then any
manner of Oath of the Jews or Pagans, how holy soever it be. As often as you
confirm any thing, confirm it with all your Heart; and perform indeed the thing
that you speak: As often as you deny any thing, deny it with your whole Heart;
neither let any thing else be in your Heart then your Mouth speaks, that
there be no Counterfeiting in you, seeing you are Disciples of the Truth.

Thus far, we hope, is put altogether out of Question, Whether many Learned and
Christian Men have not flatly denied the Use of Oaths to True Christians: And
though we need not the Contribution that is afforded us by several School and
other Roman Doctors, yet to evidence a kind of Succession, and Universality of
Testimony to this Doctrine, we think it not improper to mention some of them.

The Judgment of Shoolmen and others, in this Point.
Gloss on Mat. 5. p. 22.
XCVII. T. AQUINAS, Non j^rare omnino, etc. Not to swear at all, etc. The Lord
had taught before, Wrong is not to be done to our Neighbor, as in forbidding
Anger with Murder, Lust, Adultery, putting away of one's Wife; and now he
teaches consequently, that we must abstain from the wronging of God, when he
does not forbid only Forswearing, as Evil, but also an Oath, as the Occasion of
Evil, from whence he says, hear thou again, For it was said of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self: and lest that they might make to themselves the
Creatures Gods, he commands, to render the Oaths to God, and not to swear by
the Creatures; from whence it follows, Render to God, etc. that is, If one
shall happen to swear by the Creator, not by the Creature, whence he says in
Deuteronomy, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and by his Name shall swear; and
this was allowed by the Law, as to Children, that as they did offer Sacrifice
to Idols, they should not offer them to Idols; so they were permitted to swear
by God, not that they might do this rightly, but that it might be better to
give this to God, them to Devils. Chrysostom upon Matthew, For no man swears
frequently that sometimes may not forswear; as he that makes it a Custom to
speak many things, sometimes he speaks unfit things. Augustine against Fauslus,
The Lord was more willing that we not Swearing might come short of the Truth,
then Swearing the Truth, to come nearer to Perjury: Whence it follows, I say
unto you, Swear not at all. Augustine on the Words of the Lord in the Mountain,
in which he confirms the Righteousness of the Pharisees, which is, Not to
Forswear, For be cannot Forswear, that does not Swear.

XCVIII. CAJETAN, Again, On Mat. 5. fol. 18.
Ye have heard] He perfects another Precept of the Old Law concerning Perjury
(because it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not Forswear) Exodus 20.
Thou shall not take the Name of thy God in vain: And Levit. 19. Thou shall not
Forswear in the Name of the Lord; but shall render to the Lord thy Oaths. The
first part of this Precept (namely, Thou shall not Forswear) is negative,
forbidding Evil in its kind; for Perjury is Evil of it self, therefore by no
Reason it can be exc^sed. But the second part (namely, Thou shall render to the
Lord thy Oaths) is affirmative, and does not signify to fulfill the Oaths which
thou have promised (as it appears) and thereupon nothing follows of fulfilling
of Promises) but it signifies, that the Oaths to God are to be rendered; that
is, that Swearing must be by the Lord, not by the Creatures: For these words
are not in the Law, but the Sense of them is, Deuteronomy. 6. Thou shall swear by the
Name of the Lord thy God: Where Swearing is not commanded, but is but
regulated, that it should be by the Name of God, and not by the Name of the
Creatures: For, the Law commands, that this Act of Religion, which is, to
swear, should be exhibited to God, and to no Creatures or Idols whatsoever. But
I say unto you] He perfecteth both the Precepts, adjoining two Precepts; the
one negative, the other affirmative (Not to Swear at all) Lo a negative
Precept, wherein two things are contained, that is, Not to Swear, and Not at
all; he forbids us to Swear at all, by all means, as well in expressing God, as
not in expressing God; suppose by Heaven and Earth, and by the rest of the
Creatures: And in this he perfects the Precept concerning not Forswearing, not
only by taking away an Oath, but the Occasion of Forswearing; for, it is
impossible to incur Forswearing without an Oath: and also, the Precept of
performing the Oath to God, by taking away the Care of Performing; for where
nothing is sworn, there is no need of any Care of performing the Oath to God.

Comm. on Mat. 5.
CV. ALPHONSUS de Avendano, It Is to be noted out of Cajetan, that in this the
Lord perfected the Command of not Forswearing, by taking away not only
Forswearing, but the Occasion of not Forswearing; because, without an Oath it
is impossible to incur Perjury. An Oath was not necessary by the first
Intention of Nature; for if men had continued in the Truth, they had not lied;
and because Christ came, that he might bring back men to this first Innocence,
an Oath was not necessary, supposing that men ought to return unto it, then to
men that live according to the Simplicity of the Gospel, an Oath is not
necessary, and therefore not Good.

Reasons for avoiding Caths, from the same Author.

1 st, Lest by Swearing they fall into Perjury, for which Cause Swearing is of
an ill Report amongst the Saints, as in Ambrose, Psalm 18.

2 dly, For Reverence of the Name of God.

3 dly, For the mutual Confidence which one Christian should have of another,
which ought to be so great, that every one should be sure, and not possible to
be deceived in the least thing, although he should speak in a single Assertion;
and for the Authority of the Saints, which do seem to forbid all Oaths to
Christians, and that the Truth of the Gospel receives no Oath, as good and
desirable of it self; seeing every one is of Evil.

Lastly, Out of Cajetan, The Lord perfecteth this Precept of not Forswearing,
by taking away not only Perjury, but the Occasion of it, and taking away the
Care: For, where there is no Swearing, there is no need of Care of Rendering.

Oh! how Sincere and True would the Lord make his Christians, that all
Affirmations should be included in Three Letters only, all Denyals in other
Three, that the Truth should be so familiar to us, as to be included in the
Compendium of Three Letters?

C. FRANCISCUS de MENDOCA, Olysiponensis, Dr. Theol. in Eburens. Academia,
Sacr. lit. Interpres, On 1 King. 12. n. 3. II.
in 4. lib. Reg. Tom. 3. Speak, says he, of me, etc. In the Hebrew it is (...)
i. e. testify, from the verb (...), which not only sig^ifieth to speak but
also to bear Testimony, as it is to be seen Ex. (...). n. 14. Deuteronomy. 19. n. 15.
Job 16. n. 9. et passi^ alib^, and many other places* as if there were no
Difference with the Hebrews of speaking and testifying, nor without Cause; for
there ought to be so much Veracity of Good Men, that their Simple Speech may be
accounted sworn, and their private Conference be accounted a public Testimony,
which was to be accounted the Fidelity of Cato, who was believed in a
Court-Case even Unsworn; which also S. Jerome, in his Epistle to Celantia,
inculcates; Let there be, says he, so much Love of Truth in thee, that
whatsoever thou say, thou may think to be sworn. The same Jerome to that
of Mat. 5. Swear not, etc. The Gospel Truth, says he, does not receive an
Oath, since every Faithful Speech is for an Oath. To which Opinion is agreeable
the Doctrine of Philo Alex. in his Book of the Decalogue, It will be most
profitable, says he, and most agreeable to the rational Nature, to abstain
Altogether from Swearing; and be so accustomed to Truth, that one's single Word
may have the Force of an Oath. The like relates Josephus, in the second Book
of the Jewish War, cap. 7. De his Esseni, most sincere Worshippers of Truth
(vericultoribus.) The Hebrew Elders also, when they would make their Innocence
about the man killed by an Uncertain Author, testified with an Oath, as the
Rabbis, Solomon and Moses in Lyran. affirm, Deuteronomy. 21. Nevertheless, they are
brought in by the Scripture, asseverating it only with simple Speech; And they
shall say, says he, Our Hands have not shed this Blood, nor our Eyes seen it.
Because the simple and Naked Speech of a Wise Man, is equivalent to an Oath;
which St. Bernard vehemently commends in Comite Theobaldo, in Epist. 38. to
the same, And indeed, says he, in other Princes, if at any time we take a Word
of Lightness or Falseness, we account it neither new nor wonderful: But with
Count Theobald, we do not at all patiently hear Yea and Nay, to whom, as it is
said, Simply to speak, is to Swear; and a light Lie is accounted a heavy
Perjury; for among very many Ensigns of Virtue, which do very much ennoble your
Dignity, and make your Name Renowned and Famous throughout the World, the
Constancy of Truth is especially praised in you. 3. Certainly God himself has
(tantundem) so much to speak nakedly, and to swear by himself holily: For that
he promised with an Oath an Offspring to David, which should sit on his
Throne, is read no where in the Scripture; And yet Abner, 2 King. 3. n. 9.
acknowledges an Offspring sworn to David, The Lord do so to Abner, says he,
and add these things to him, unless as the Lord has sworn to David, so I do
with him. And in Psalm 88. God himself says, Once have I sworn in my Holiness,
if I Lie to David, etc. Also the Land of Canaan is no where found, in the holy
Scriptures promised to the ancient Fathers with an Oath; but God promised it
simply to Abraham, Genesis 12, 13, and 17. to Isaac, Genesis 26. to Jacob, Genesis 28.
Yet Moses, in Deuteronomy. 1. Possess, says he, the Land, for which the Lord swear to
your Fathers. Philo Alex. in the Book of Abraham, at the end looses the Knot
notably; That therefore the simple Promise of God in those places is called an
Oath, because it has the Force of an Oath.

On Mat. 5. p. 23, 24.
CI. JACOBUS FABER, It is the part of a Spiritual Man, not only Not to Swear in
a Vain Thing, but also not in any Serious thing; for, you which are such, are
true: Unto true men it is sufficient that a true man gain Belief, if he say,
that the Lord has commanded Yea, Yea, in Affirming; Nay, Nay, in Denying: But
if with incredulous and Evil men a Speech also be had concerning a serious and
necessary Matter, why shall one Swear for their Badness, that he may gain
Belief with them? Who ever spoke more seriously then our Savior? Who more
necessary things? Yet he never used other Speech then that, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, or some other such like, which was a true Form or Manner to them,
that swore not. Therefore that now some Swear, to gain Belief concerning some
profitable and necessary things, which they think is to be given rather to the
Oath then to the Person: Perhaps also there is a Danger when an Oath is
required in Judgment, lest he that exacteth it, sin; For if it be manifest,
that he that is called into Judgment be verily good and true, it is enough to
hear of him Yea or Nay; but if that be not evident, or that it be evident, that
he is bad, perhaps that is required of him which ought not to be required. What
then? It is lawful to Adjure: For the Lord made Answer to an Adjuration, but he
did not Swear; and Adjurations are found in the New Law: But if any one being
Adjured of another, speak the Truth, by answearing Yea or Nay, or by declaring
the thing required, neither the one nor the other offends; but if he speak a
Falsity, he offends, and incurs the Offense of a False Testimony, but perchance
he sins less then if by Swearing he had also fallen into the Guilt of
Perjury: For, as he that (being adjured) answers in Truth, does not Swear; so
he that answers in Falsness, does not Forswear, but he is a False Witness:
but he also who has adjured, is altogether guitless; for, there is no doubt
but he has required that which was lawful to require. And although its not my
Purpose to contradict the Ordinances of Judgments, yet I may think this to be
more Christian, both Not to Swear at all, neither to Compel to Swear, to be
more Spiritual: But yet, if the Badness of men would permit it, although you
would have this Sentence of the Lord concerning not Swearing, to be applied to
the Believers common and daily Custom of speaking (for he speaks to his
Disciples) which is very true, especially if the old Law, which the Lord
declares, Thou shall not Forswear, but shall render to the Lord thine Oaths,
was given concerning common and daily Speech; but afterward the Lord amendeth
another thing, which was written in the Old Law, that the Law might be perfect,
and that he might show how he has fulfilled it; and it may be fulfilled of
others, as Matthew shows.

De quaest. jur. Christ. p. 306.
CII. SUAREZ: He affirms, Christ did not Swear, because that which he could
not lawfully do, he could not simply do; but he could not lawfully swear,
therefore he could not at all: But that he never swore, is proved, because that
he himself commanded or counseled, Not to swear at all; but simply to speak,
Yea, it is; Nay, it is not, etc. therefore ought to go before the Example. It
is spoaken of him only sometimes that he said Amen, or Truly or Verily, which
we have before showed to be no Particle of Swearing.

It Is not only forbidden in the New, but also in the Old Testaments, Not to
Swear, as Hos. 4. Zach. 5. quoteth Tertullian, lib. de Idololat. cap. 11.
saying, I am silent about Perjury, seeing that indeed it is not lawful to
Swear.

page 227.
And those very words of Christ, Swear not at all, signify this (seeing he
subjoyns, Neither by Heaven, etc.) as if he had said, not only greater Oaths,
but also these, which seem less, you are to take heed of, and it is apparent
from the Reason which he adjoyns, saying, Neither by Heaven: If therefore
Christ forbids to swear by Heaven, because God dwells therein, much more he
forbids to swear by God, etc. Now he forbids all manner of Swearing by
the Creatures, and every Oath by God himself, Hom. 18. in Cant.
as Greg. Nyssen rightly argues, and Christ himself has plainly so declared,
Mat. 23.

Lastly, The following Words of Christ are opposite, Let your Word be Yea and
Nay; for, by them he declares, that he before forbad the Addition of any Oath.
2 dly, Jerome answers, Swearing was permitted to the Jews, as to Children; but
Evangelical Verity receives not Swearing, seeing every Faithful Word is for an
Oath. The same Doctrine and Exposition does Chrysostom follow. Theophylact,
after Christ, It is an Evil to Swear, as to be Circumcised, and in brief,
whatsoever is Jewish. Beda, also Castro and Druthmarus confess, and Bernard
himself denies not, that it is the Counsel of Christ, not to Swear. And
Precepts are not contray to Counsels.

Libr. 1. cap. 14. p. 282. Whether an Oath be an elicit Act of Religious
Virtue?

There may be a Reason of Doubting, because every Act of Religion is
Principally intended for the Worship of God: But an Oath is not made primarily,
and of it self (per se) for the Worship of God; but for confirming, etc. as
Heb. 6. From whence it seems plainly to follow, That an Oath is not an Act of
Religion.

It may be declared by Reason; page 276.
because,

1 st, It is impossible that man can bring God for a Witness, although he would
never so fain: Therefore the Name of God is taken in vain, as often as it is
taken to swear; Therefore it is Evil in it self (per se.)

2 dly, Grant this were possible, to bring God for a Witness; it seems
disorderly to bring the Person of God to confirm men's Businesses, Covenants,
or Words, because it is disorderly to order things of an higher Order to those
that are inferior: Much more is it disorderly, to mix the sacred Authority of
God to the profane (or common) Words, and Businesses of Men.

3 dly, Though-in some Case an Oath might be used without Inconvenience, yet it
is so exposed to Dangers, that it can scarce be done without Crime: But in the
Law of Grace; because of the Perfection of it, not only Sins are to be forbid,
but also those things which do morally and nearest entangle into Sin: For he
that loves Danger, shall perish in it. He quotes Clemens Romanus, lib. 6.
Constitut. Apost. as before; Constable. 6. and 11.
Our Master commanded, that we should not Swear, no, not by the true God; that
our Word should be counted more firm and credible then an Oath it self. He
quotes also Greg. Nazianzen, as before, upon these words, But I say unto you,
etc.] He forbids all manner of Swearing by the Creatures, even with Respect
to God: Hence it follows from the forcibler, as I said, that he forbad all
Swearing by God himself, as Gregory Nazianzen rightly argues, as before, on
Cant. Homil. 18. And Christ himself plainly so declared, Mat. 23. He that
Swears by Heaven, Swears by the Throne of God, etc.

Lastly, The words withstand, which Christ subjoyns, Let your Word be, etc.]
For, by them he declares, that he had before forbidden the adding of any Oath:
Therefore Jerome answered, That Oaths, etc. were permitted to the Jews, as to
Children.

He uses many other Arguments, and quotes many Authors, as may be seen at large
in his Book concerning Swearing.

CIII. JO. MAJOR HADINGTONIANI, on Mat. 5. Not to Swear at all: That Precept
was given to the Disciples (the Basis) of the first Church.

CIV. JO AC. CAMER. and P. LOSELER VILLERIUS's Marginal Note upon Mat. 5.37.
Whatsoever you vouch, vouch it barely; and whatsoever you deny, deny it barely,
without any more words.

CV. Bible, imprinted An. 1559. in Quarto. What is more is of Evil] Marginal
Note, From an evil Conscience, or from the Devil.

CVI. MARLORAT on Mat. 5. says, Some men, not bad, hold against Swearing.

Maldonat on Mat. 5. reckons up several against Swearing.
CVII. PETER CHARRON, Doctor of Law in Paris, in his Book of Wisdom, chap. 37.
An Oath, what is it, but a Symptom and shameful Mark of Distrust, Infidelity,
Ignorance, Humane Infirmity, both in him that Requires it, that Gives it, that
Ordains it (alluding to Christ's Words, says he) Quod amplius est a malo; What
is more, is from the Devil.

CVIII. BEZA, on James 5.12. That which you have to say or affirm, speak or
affirm it simply, and without an Oath; and that you have to deny, deny it
simply and flatly.

CIX. Folio Bible, printed Ann. 1578. Marginal Note on Mat. 5.34. Swear not at
all, Let Simplicity and Truth be your Words, and then you shall not be so
light, and ready to Swear.

Comm. on 1 Timothy 1. page 210.
CX. LODOVICUS SOTO Major, In the Gospel, this Particle (Amen) is often used by
Christ our Lord, confirming his Words by it, as Hierem also notes; yet it is
not to be thought (that none be deceived) that Christ our Lord swore, or would
have to Swear, as often as he uses this Word or Form of Confirming; but rather
so to have been willing, more to Confirm, and Persuade, and Commend those
Things which he taught, and especially, by Reiterating or Repeating this Word,
as he often uses; for neither in this doubling of the Word, for naught that
Christ our Lord sometimes uses it in the Gospel, but rather it has a great
Emphasis and Increase, that is, great Moment and Weight to persuade and gain
Belief, as Augustine rightly teaches and explaineth in his 41. Tract upon the
Gospel of John, expounding those Words of Christ, saying, Amen, or verily,
verily, I say to you, He that does Sin, is the Servant of Sin: although
therefore that it be not a Swearing, yet it is a certain greater Confirmation
and Asseveration of those Things which are spoaken; yet nevertheless it is not
Swearing; for otherwise, is it likely that Christ the Lord, who himself d^horts
others from Swearing at all, for Danger of Forswearing, should himself Swear so
often? for he not only forbad his to Swear, Mat. 5. but also at the same Time,
and that very wholsomly that they should only use in their Speech a simple
Affirmation and Denial, without any Oath, saying, Swear NOT at all, etc. for
this much more becomes the Simplicity, Sincerity, Piety and Modesty of
Christians; for nothing is more Simple, Brief and Effectual to persuade (the
Badness and Naughtiness of Men being removed) then a single Affirmation or
Denial, although there were no Danger of Perjury.

In this Sense in a Manner, do mostly all the graver Authors interpret that
Place of the Gospel, or Command of Christ, of Not Swearing at all; but
especially Augustine lib. 4. of the Lord's Words in the Mount, C^p. 30. and 31.
and in his Book de Mendacio, cap 15. and Epist. 154. to Publicola, and often
elsewhere; For which Interpretation or Understanding votes also Philo Judaeus
in his Book of the Decalogue, Tom. 2. p. 129. where treating of an Oath, he
thus congruently writes; Men sin in this Respect many and diverse Ways,
therefore it will be most profitable and most agreeable to the Reasonable
Nature, to abstain ALTOGETHER from Swearing, and so to accustom to Truth, that
simple Sp^ech may have the Force of an Oath, etc. Which Things Philo in the
same Place pursues to the same Sense, very congruently in the Gospel, that
which also he confirms in his Book of Special Laws, Tom. 2. page 137. And
afterward, If therefore, as I said before, Christ the Lord for the Danger of
Perjury, and also for the Reverence or Religion of an Oath, commands his NOT to
Swear at all, though otherwise, it be true which they affirm; If I say, there
be so much Reverence of an Oath, how great is the Perfection? It is not likely
nor agreeable to Reason, that the Lord Christ, the Pattern of true and solid
Virtue, every Action of whom is our Instruction, did Swear so often, that is,
should swear as often as he used this Form, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
etc. For how can every moral Action of his, or in his Conversation, be our
Instruction or Example, if he so frequently and every where seems to do that,
which he so vehemently and earnestly commanded his, even his chosen Disciples,
that is, his Apostles, that they should not do it at all? Yet Augustine in his
Book of the Apostles Words, Ser. 30. seems by his Authority to create some
Scruple and Ado for us, inasmuch as he seems to censure and say, That it is a
kind of Perjury when any wittingly and willingly (that is, with certain Reason
and Will, or of set Purpose) uses this Word VERILY, to confirm any Thing: Yet
if we diligently mark and weigh the Words of St. Augustine there, he intends no
other then what we intend, acknowledge and confess, and is necessarily to be
confessed, namely, that he which from a false Opinion and Persuasion, and an
Erroneous Conscience, as Divines call it, thinks and believes that he
Swears in very Deed in using this Word, as if this Word were an Adverb of
Swearing, that sometimes he happens in a Manner to Forswear, if that which he
affirms in this Manner be false; yet this is accidentary and adventitious,
namely, by the Intention of him that swears of his own Will, or rather Error
or Ignorance, and not by the Force and Propriety of the Word Amen or Ve^ely,
seeing, as we have said even now, that it is not a Word or Note of Swearing,
but rather of confirming, as we confess: and the same St Augustine teaches
elsewhere, but especially in Tract 41. on the Gospel of John, on those Words
of Christ the Lord, Verily, verily, etc. where Augustine moderating his Words,
says thus, Verily, verily, is, if we may so say, in a certain Manner, a
Sw^aring of Christ. Now these Words of Augustine are to be weighed; he deals
not simply, but with an Additament and Caution. Verily, verily, to be (if it be
lawful to say it) after a Manner a Swearing of Christ; for so he declares plain
enough, that Verily, verily, is not properly ^wearing, or a Note of Swearing,
but only improperly, and after a certain Manner, viz. So far forth as Christ
the Lord does familiarly use this Word as Swearing, although in very Deed, and
properly it be not an Adverb of Swearing, but rather affirming and asserting
simply and in good Faith, to gain a better Persuasion of the Matter or
Doctrine; for Christ never seems to have Sworn, if we will ^peak truly and
properly of Swearing, but always used a simple Speech though sometimes by
am^sicationem; he has used this, even repeated, I say, for the ^reater
Persuasion of his Heavenly Doctrine, that by this ^eans he might give his an
Example of Not Swearing rashly and every where, as we have already said, to
whom he plainly commanded, saying, Swear not at all, etc. but, etc. so great is
the Religion of Swearing, and the Danger of Forswearing.

The Approbation and Commendation of the Doctors of Paris.

We have carefully read these Commentaries on the Epistles of St Paul, and
Timothy, and Titus, wherein the most Learned Author, according to the great
Learning wherein he excells, largely and elegantly opens the more hidden Senses
of the Apostles; and we have thought them worthy to be printed for public
Profit, Act Par. 16. Feb. 1610. F. Coeff. F.J. Tourn, etc.

Lindenbrog. Cod. l^g. antiquar.
CXI. LODOVICUS PIUS Emperor, who in his Prologue says, That from his Youth, by
Christ's Inspiration, he had the Desire of the Worship of God, Capitul. Addit.
4. Tit. 96. Of not Swearing: That every one beware of Swearing; because
Forswearers as also Adulterers, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Ibid.
CXII. King LUITPRANDUS; The Law of the Lumbards, Tit. 28. Law 2. If he that
enquires concerning Theft, believe not the Witnesses, the Witnesses may confirm
it with an Oath, except they be such Persons as the King or Judge may trust
without an Oath.

Ibid.
CXIII. The Emperor LOTHARIUS, Of the Law of the Lumbards, Tit. 3. Law 10. Of
those that enforce Payment of Tithes, we will not have them to be constrained
with an OATH, for Fear of Forswearing.

CXIV. Of the Law of the VISOGOTHS, Ibid.
L. 2. Tit. 1. Law 23. which was ancient: Let none come easily to an Oath: For
the true Search of Justice rather commends this, that the Scriptures in all
things may intercur, and the Necessity of Swearing may altogether suspend it
self.

Thus much against Swearing from several Roman Doctors and others.

We shall in the next Place produce the Judgment of those Men, who run not so
high in their Censure of Oaths, as the Persons that we have hitherto cited, but
that believe it is not unlawful in any Case to take an Oath, and from them we
doubt not to make appear, that it is best Not to swear at all; so far they from
pleading for Swearing, or punish those that conscientiously refuse it.

CXV. WILLIAM TINDAL says, Our Dealing ought to be so substantial, that our
Words might be believed without an Oath: Our Words are the Signs of the Truth
of our Hearts, in which there ought to be pure and single Love toward thy
Brother. Again he says, Swearing can only be allowed in Charity, where Yea and
Nay have lost Credance; however, that no Judge or other ought in any Case to
compel any Man to swear against his Will.

Peter Martyr, who deserves well of the English Protestants, confesses, That
Christians ought to live so Charitably and Uprightly, as not to need an Oath,
and that they may not be called upon to Swear. Again, Let us so live that there
may be no need for us to Swear, either by God, or any other Thing at all; and
this (says he) is that same AT ALL, which Christ spoak of.

N. Zegerus upon Mat. 5.34. tells us, That the most Ancient Writers from thence
concluded all Oaths forbidden, and that the bare Word of Christians ought to be
more Sacred and Firm then the most Religious Oaths of the Jews.

CXVI. H. GROTIUS, a great and Learned Man, excludes all Oaths, On Mat. 5. and
De Jur. Bell. ac Pac. p. 2. c. 26. ad 47.
not only such as are used in common Conversation; but such as relate to Trade
or pecuniary Matters; allowing some others for avoiding Infamy, for preserving
a Friend, and for a great Service to their Country, as not morally necessary,
and by Precept, but only by Consequence and Remedy; concluding that it is best
to live so, as not to need an Oath: And so both many of those Oaths imposed
upon us, are laid aside by him; and also he gives many Cautions showing that it
is best not to Swear at all, if it may possibly be avoided: But in Answer to
his Interpretation; All Oaths are forbid that are performable to the Lord* Now
unles the vain inconsiderate, Oaths, such as are used in common Traffic are
only those that are to be performed to the Lord, Solemn Oaths, such as the Law
allowed, are also prohibited. Besides, the Yea and Nay of a true Christian is
as capable of all those good Services as an Oath, if the Sanctity of his Faith
and Profession be allowed: And if any Prejudices come to a Man's Friend,
Country or Self, because his Yea and Nay is rejected, it will never lie at his
Door, who offers all Christ permits him, and his Conscience will dispense with;
but on the Distruster's Side, especially, when he that in Conscience cannot
Swear, offers as large CAUTION as he that SWEARS, and is willing to undergo
Equal Punishment, in Case of Untruth, that the other by Law sustains for
Perjury. And those that will have it to relate to Rash, and not Judicial Oaths,
quite cross the Text; for Christ prohibits not only vain and superfluous Oaths,
as now called, such as were always unlawful, even under the Law; but such as
were allowed in the Times of the Law, rendering them also by Evangelical Verity
under the Gospel, Vain, superfluous and Unlawful: For well said Bp. Sanderson,
No Need to forbid by a new Command Things that of themselves were always
unlawful. De juram. Praelect. 5.
Otherwise, we must read Christ's Words thus, Ye have heard by them of Old
Time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths; but I say unto you, Swear not at all, except before a Judge; as if
Swearing before a Judge under the Law, were not an Oath performable to the
Lord; and such it self the Place most expressly forbids; or thus, Of Old it was
said, thou shall not forswear thy self, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay,
Nay, the is, perform to God thine Oaths in Truth and Righteousness: But I (who
say more then was said of Old) say unto you, Swear not at all, but perform
thine Oaths to God in Truth and Righteousness; The Inconherence of which must
needs be obvious to every considerate Person; yet it is the only Reading that
^an be left upon those Interpretations. We say, that what God dispensed with
under the Law, he resolved to remove under the Gospel, and to wind up Things to
a higher Pitch of Truth and Righteousness: from Adultery in the Act, to
Adultery in the Thought; from Revenge, to Sufferance; from True Swearing, to NO
Swearing at all, whereby all Abuse of Oaths and Perjury come to be removed with
the Oaths themselves, by working out of Man's Heart that Fraud and Falsehood
that brought them in, and implanting Evangelical Verity in room thereof, which
speaks the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth to his
Neighbor, and makes a like Matter of Conscience to t^ll a Lie, as to Forswear.
And it is known to Almighty God, and we most heartily desire it may be known
and belived by you, that we have no other End nor Inducement to this so general
Refusal we are found in throughout the Nation.

CXVII. Bp. USHER is so tender in this Point, that set aside his Vindication of
the Waldenses, in his Sum of Christian- Religion, he makes it necessary to the
taking of an Oath, that it be considered,

First, If the Party we deal with (really) doubt of the Thing we affirm or
deny, thereby making Distrust the Cause of Swearing, and implying, that not
Custom, but real Diffidenc^ should only continue Swearing; consequently, not to
continue where Distrust is done away.

Secondly, It is to be weighed if the Party's Doubt whereof we speak, be
Weighty, and Worthy of an Oath, which we fear, is seldom thought upon; Custom
prevailing even to Triffles, as well as most excessive vain Swearing in Common
Conversation.

Thirdly, If the Question be Weighty, w^e^her (says the Bishop) the Doubt may
be ended with Truly or Verily; or doubting, it Verily* Verily, as Christ did
for you, by his Example we ought to forbear an Oath? Mat. 5.37. Wherefore
should it not, especially among Christians.

Fourthly, Whether there be not yet any other fit Means to try out the Matter
before we come to an Oath.

This is our Case; and we make it our Sober Request, that it would please you
to consider this Particular; for doubtless, an Expedient may very easily be
found, without bringing us under the Bondage of an Oath.

CXVIII. JER. TAILOR, Chaplain in Ordinary to K. Charles I. and late Bishop of
Down and Conner, in his Book called '(...), A Course of Sermons, London printed
1673. Sermon. Of Christian Simplicity, fol. 228. Thus, Our blessed Lord would not
have his Disciples to Swear at all (not in public Judicature) if the Necessity
of the World would permit him to be obeyed. If Christians will live according
to the Religion, the WORD of a Christian were a sufficient Instrument to give
Testimony, and to make Promises, and to secure a Faith; and upon that
Supposition, Oaths were useless, and therefore forbidden; because there would
be no Necessity to invoke God's Name in Promises or Affirmations, if men were
INDEED Christians; and therefore in that Case would be a Taking in vain: Viz.
All their Reverent Fathers in God, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and the^
Judges of the Land, Justices of the Peace, and all Officers termed
Ecclesiastical or Civil, Judges, Priests and People NO Christians, else would
they suffer Christ's Doctrine to be obeyed, who not only enforce OATHS on
Strangers, but having the like D^ffidence, One Father in God of Another, one
Judge and Justice of another, impose them on their Brethren and Fathers, with
Equal D^strust.
But because MANY are not; and they that are in NAME, oftentimes are in nothing
else, it became necessary that Men should Swear in Judgment and in public
Courts. But consider who it was that invented and made the Necessity of Oaths,
of Bonds, of Securities, and all the Artifices of Human Diffidence and
Dishonesty: These Things were indeed found out by Men, but the Necessity, of
these was from him that is the Father of all Lies; from him that has made many
fair Promises, but never kept any; or if he did, it was to do a bigger
MISCHIEF, to slatter the more; For so does the DEVIL.

See Jews Antiquities, Chap. 12 Page 52. Concerning the Pythaegoreans, the
Esseni, and concerning the Just Man at Athens, which they would not have to
swear; And what the Scholiast on Aristophanes, Lib. 12. p. 286. says of
Rhadamanthus.

CXIX. Lastly, Bp. CAUDEN in his Discourse for Solemn Swearing, says thus much
against it.

1. That Dissimulations, Frauds, Jealousies, etc. gave Rise to Oaths.

2. That The Ancient Christians and Fathers, that they might not be short of
the Esseni, who WOULD NOT TAKE AN OATH, REFUSED TO SWEAR, saying to the
Heathen, Christianus sum, I am a Christian; to each other, Yea, yea; Nay, nay;
thereby keeping up the Sanctity and Credit of their Profession.

3. That as Christians, truly such, we should possibly need no Swearing; for an
Oath is not (says he) Moral or Preceptive, but an Expedient or Remedy only
against Falseness.

Lastly, That neither a true Christian and good Man need to be Compelled to
Swear, in Order to the Awing him into Truth-telling -- Nor is ill Men's Swearing
of much Credit; with more to that Purpose: What Need then is there of either's
Swearing?

The Substance of all which is this; Oaths rise with Fraud; Men's growing False
and Jealous, Swearing or Awing by Oaths into True Evidence, became an
Expedient; and during this imbecil and imperfect State of Mankind, Almighty
God, that has been ever wont to stoop to Man's Weakness, condescended to yield
the Jews that Custom, provided that they refrained from Common and Idolatrous
Oaths; and when they were called to Swear, they did it by the Name of the True
God* thereby manifesting their Acknowledgment of him; but Christ, who is the
Restorer of Breaches, the Builder of waste Places, the Bringer back of the
Captivity of his People (where Oaths were first wanted and learned) and the
Setter up of the Kingdom of God (which stands in Righteousness) redeems into
Truth-speaking which fulfils the Law by taking away the Occasion of an Oath;
and such as are the true, humble and faithful Followers of this worthy Leader,
need no Oath to compel them into Truth, to whom Truth is Natural, being freed
by it, Joh. 8.32. from Fraud and Falseness, and consequently from Swearing,
which took Occasion by it to enter the World. Now we profess our selves in the
Fear of Almighty God to be such as have thus learned Christ Jesus, and for the
Reverence and Holy Love we bear to his Righteous Commandment we cannot take an
Oath in any Case.

Object. It Is True, and you say well, Oaths only serve till Truth-speaking
comes, and you say, it is come to you; But how shall we know that?

Answ. We entreat you to try us: No Man can be justly condemned before he be
guilty; nor reputed guilty in the Sight of men, till discovered, You will have
as easy a Way to catch us at Lying, as others at Forswearing; and if you find
us such, inflict the same Punishment for Our Lie, which is enacted for their
Perjury.

Be pleased to consider: I. The Rise of OATHS. II The Prohibition of CHRIST.
III. The Judgment of so many good HEATHENS. IV. The Belief and Practice of so
many primitive CHRISTIANS, Celeb^ious FATHERS, Godly MARTYRS, and Learned
PROTESTANTS. V. The Caution they use who in any Sense allow of an Oath. VI.
That it is matter of Faith; and What is not of Faith, is Sin: And that we
cannot alter our Minds without Conviction, unless we should turn Hypocrites;
And what Security can or will you have from our Oaths, who must first make us
to break the Tie of our own Conscience before we can take them? It cannot be
thought, we should keep with you, when you make us break with our selves. VII.
Consider what express Scripture we have for it, and that in the Judgment and
Martyrdom of many good and famous Persons. VIII. Be pleased to weigh the great
PERJURY that is now in our World, and daily Numerous Oaths belcht forth by
some, to show they dare be bold with Sacred Things; by others, to vent Passion;
by too many (as they impiously think) to grace their Matter, whilst others have
so great Doubt of their own Credit, that they Swear, to drive, what they say,
home; and not a few use it, merely to fill up vacant places, being barren of
better Matter. We tkink that instead of taking Advantage against us for Not
Swearing, in so Forswearing an Age, we should rather receive Encouragement for
speaking That Truth without an Oath, which others are compelled to by Oath, if
yet they speak it. False-speaking necessitated the Use of Oaths (say many) But
Oaths proving now not the Remedy, but the Disease, What better Expedient can be
used then to come back to Truth-speaking, which ends Oaths in their first
Cause, or Occasion at least: However, that such as are not Sick should be
obliged to take the Potions of the Sick, only to keep them Company, That seems
Unreasonable. IX. Be pleased to consider the perishing Difficulties we meet
withal in our Commerce in the World, particularly as Creditors, Executors,
Merchants, Ship-Masters, Apprentices, etc. Men making us pay because of our
Tenderness in this Matter. Oh the OPPRESSION that is exercised in Petty Courts
and Sessions upon many Hundreds of us, who know not which Way to Right our
selves, an Oath still being required in the Case; the Refusal of which for
Conscience sake, exposing us to great Losses, both of Estate, Liberty and
sometimes Life by Tedious and Cruel Imprisonments. X. But the Loss and Trouble
is not always our own; Our Neighbors frequently become Sufferers against our
Wills: First, In that we can perform no Office in common with them, however
otherwise able to discharge it. Secondly, Nor can we serve them in the Capacity
of Witnesses, which Qualification goes a great Way toward the Maintenance of
Justice; and all because our solemn Word will not be received instead of an
Oath: Relieving us here is a double Benefit, for our Neighbors share with us
in it; and it manifestly tends to the Preservation of Society. And whatever any
may please to think of us, we are as willing and ready to contribute all Honest
Assistance to the Maintenance of Justice, and answering the Ends of Government,
according to our Ability and Conscience, as any Sort of Men that live under it.
XI. And Lastly, We entreat you further to consider, that Our CAUTION is as
large as the Man that Swears: For though you make a Difference between him that
tells an Untruth, and he that Forswears, in Favor of the former; yet we
cheerfully submit our selves to the Punishment of the Perjured, if we break our
WORD; do you but please to take us into equal Privilege with the Swearer: If
there be any Damage, we conceive it is done to Us, who sustain the same
Punishment for an Untruth, which is the only Due of Perjury; and if you
condescend to yield us the Kindness of the one, we offer our Persons to answer
the just Severity of the other.


We will add here out of Hoof^'s History of the Netherlands, a President, not
impertinent to our Purpose, fol. 464, 465. translated out of Latin as follows.

CXX. In this Assembly of the States (says Hooft) there was something
attempted toward the Oppression of the Menists, as appears by a certain
Letter, written from Dort, the last of March, by the Ld. St. Aldegonde, to the
Minister Caspanus Heidanus; which was thus worded.

The Cause of the Menists has since receipt of your and Taffin's Letters
yesterday been treated of with the most illustrious Prince; And verily, I find
it more difficult then I had hoped [for ever may and will such Cursed Hopes
meet with such Wise Repulses from prudent Rulers] For, he had at Middelburgh
given me great Hopes, that we should seclude from the Freedom of Burgesses, or
at leaft, not so solemnly receive those that refused an Oath. Now he alleges,
that such a thing cannot be concluded without a new Convulsion in the Churches,
because the States will never suffer, that such a Law be made, as they judge no
ways conducing to the Common Good of the Republic. Yea, he avers, That this
was the only Cause formerly, which brought their Consistories so far into the
Displeasure of the States, that it differed very little, but they had been all
at once voted down, and laid aside by the Council. That they [the Clergy] were
now again about the same thing, and that in such a season, that no doubt many
would pour in cold Water out of the Popish Hodg-podge. That his settled
Judgment was, that this would turn to great Disadvantage, and breaking down of
their Churches.

And when I [saith Aldegonde] fervently urged, That we could easily reject
those that broak the Band of all Humane Society, upon Pretense of Civil and
Political Order: and when I added (says he) how much Danger and Peril Church
and State were threatened with by such a Conclusion of the Council, in it self
Ungodly, He answered me sharply enough, That those men's YEA must pass for an
Oath; and that we must not urge this thing any further, or we must confess,
that the Papists had Reason to Force us to a Religion that was against our
Consciences; and that the North-Hollanders would not at all allow of it.

In short (says he) I scarce see any thing we can get done in this Point,
which verily [ye may believe him upon his Protestation] Is the greater Smart to
me, the more I observe that the Minds of many Honest Men, by the pretending of
I know not what unseasonable Stumbling Blocks, will be thereby embittered, yea,
I could almost say, wounded, to see them less affected ^o those, that to their
uttermost seek to advance the Cause of the Church.

The PRINCE (says he) partly in the Name of the State, and partly of himself,
chid me, as if we were about to set up in our Clergy a Dominion over the
Conscience; and as if they endeavor, by their Laws and Constitutions, to
subject all others to them: And he praised the Saying of a Monk that was lately
here, who answered to the Objection [of the Persecuting Spirit of the Romish
Church] That our Pot had not gone so long to the Fire as theirs, whom we did so
much revile upon that Account -- And that he clearly saw, That before two Ages
passed, the Church-Dominion would upon both sides stand on even Ground.

To which Hooft adds, By this we may observe, of what Consequence the Prince
and States then held Liberty of Conscience to be.

And that what we have hitherto said may not be thought a thing impracticable,
we shall present you with the Judgment and Edicts of Foreign Governments.

Here follow Two Letters of the Grave of Nassou and Prince of Orange, to the
Magistrates of the City of Middelburgh, in Behalf of the Menists there.
CXXI. A Copy of the First Letter.
FOrasmuch as a Supplication has been presented unto his Excellency in behalf
of certain Inhabitans of this City of Middelburg; complaining thereby, That the
Magistrates of the said City had lately caused their Shops to be shut, and
consequently prohibited their Trade, which yet the only means which they have
to maintain their Families; the s^id Prohibition proceeding from their not
having yet taken the Usual OATH, as others: The said Inhabitants further
remonstrating, how that they now, for a certain long Term of Years, have,
without taking the said Oath, freely born all Civil Burdens, Contributions and
Taxes, equally with other Burgesses and Inhabitants of this said City, without
ever having been in any Default: and therefore ought at present still to remain
unmolested, seeing they do therein not desire any thing else, then to live in
the Liberty of their Consciences, upon which Account this present War against
the King of Spain has been by his Subjects taken up, and all Ceremonies
contrary thereunto resisted; in which such Advance is, through the Help of God,
made, that the aforesaid Liberty of Conscience is preserved; and therefore it
would be an Unequal Thing to Deprive the Supplicants thereof, who have helped
to acquire the same by bearing Taxes, Contributions, and other Burdens, not
without great Peril of their Bodies and Lives; consonant to which they having
presented a Request to the aforesaid Magistrates, but got for Answer, That they
must regulate themselves according to the Policy and Order of the aforesaid
City: Whereby (says the Petition) the aforesaid Magistrates seem to endeavor
by the Oath, not only totally to ruin and expel out of these Lands the
Petitioners, with their Wives and Children, residing in Middelburgh; but
consequently innumerable others, in Holland and Zeeland, who have (according to
his Excellency's Proclamations) placed themselves under his Excellency's
Protection, by which no man can be any ways benefited; but all these Lands
received great and considerable Damage, because thereby the Traffic thereof
would be every where greatly diminished: Entreating therefore, and humbly
begging his Excellency, that looking upon their Case with Compassion, he would
take due Course about it, especially seeing that the aforesaid Petitioners do
proffer, that their YEA passing for an Oath, the Transgressors hereof should be
punished as Oath-Breakers.

Therefore, his Excellency having considered the Premises, and having maturely
deliberated upon the same, has, with the previous Advice of the Governor and
Council of Zeeland, ordered and appointed, orders and appoints hereby, That
the aforesaid Petitioners, YEA shall be received by the Magistrates of the
aforesaid City instead of an OATH; provided, that the Transgressors thereof
shall be punished as Oath-Breakers and Perjured Persons. His Excellency
charging and commanding the Magistra^es of Middelburgh, and all others whom
this may concern, No further to oppress the Petitioners contrary to their
Consciences, concerning the Oath; but suffer them to Open their Shops, and
Enjoy their Trades, as they formerly have done: all by Provision, and till such
time as there shall be, in more Tranquillity of Affairs, with ripe
Deliberation, regard being had thereunto, ordained therein, as shall be found
convenient.

This done under his Excellency's Name and Seal, in the City of Middelburgh,
upon the 26. January, 1577.

Guilliaume de Nassou.


By my Gracious Lord, the Prince, subscribed, De Baudemont.

CXXII. A Copy of the Second Letter.
The Prince of Orange, Grave of Nassau, Lord and Baron of Bueda, Die, etc.
Honorable, Honest, Worshipful, Wise, Discreet, Dear and Singular:
FOrasmuch as certain Housekeepers there inhabiting, being, as they say,
Menists, have, by way of Complaint diverse times signified to us, how that You
are daily Molesting them, and Depriving them of the Means of Gaining in Rest
and Quietness their Livings for them and their Families; forbidding them to
open their Shops, under the Pretense, that they should Refuse to take an Oath
in the same Form as other Burgesses; upon which we having taken ripe
Deliberation: And forasmuch as the aforesaid People do proffer to bear equally
all Burdens with other Citizens, and even in the Case of Arms, which mostly
moves them to contribute, do you such Performances at their Charges, as your
selves, or they that shall have the Orders shall find in all Reason and Equity
fit to be done, and they will bear it:

We therefore conceive, that ye do very ill, not to permit them to live in
Peace and Quietness, according to the Mind of their Conscience, according to
the Act which we, with the Advice of the Governor and Council formerly
afforded them, which they say, they have exhibited to you; And yet
notwithstanding, we find that you have hitherto refused to give heed unto it,
and to our precedent Letters, and so we are constrained for this last time to
write this, by which we plainly declare unto you, That it concerns not you to
trouble your selves in particular with any Man's Conscience, so long as nothing
is tre^ted or done that might extend to any Man's Scandal; in which Case we
will neither respect nor bear any Man.

And therefore we charge and order you expressly, To desist all further
Molestation or Hinderance of the said Menists in their Merchandise or
Handicrafts to gain their Livelihood for their Wives and Children; suffering
them to open their Shops, and work as they have in times past done; till such
time as there shall be otherwise ordered by the Generality (who are thereunto
qualified) And therefore take heed that ye do nothing against this, and the Act
to them granted, or to further any Fines from them upon that Account; provided,
nothing be by them attempted, which might tend to the Scandal of any Man: And
they shall bear all Civil and Equal Burdens, as other Men. Herewith, etc.

subscribed by Copy, De Baudemont.

CXXIII. Also, by the Treaties of Peace between the States General of the
United Provinces, and the Kings of England, Spain, etc. ann. 1674. there is a
special Article therein contained, That All their Ship-Masters of Merchant
Ships, shall carry along with them a Sea-Brief, according to the Form thereby
prescribed.

In which it is expressly declared, tha^ Such Master shall come before the
Magistrates, and by his solemn Oath testify, that such Ship, whereof he is
Master, does properly belong unto the Subjects of the said States General; unto
which Sea-Brief, under the Seal of the City's entire Faith and Credit is given.

And although by the said Treaties, the Master was to give his Oath, yet the
Magistrates in Holland do take the Solemn Affirmation of such as Cannot Swear
instead of an Oath, and insert it so accordingly in their Sea-Briefs; and then
it runs thus, These are to certify, etc. That A.B. has before us Solemnly
Affirmed and Declared, that the Ship C.D. whereof he is Master, does properly
belong and appertain to the Subjects of the States General of the United
Provinces, etc.

Which can be sufficiently evidenced, if required.

This was the Care, this the Condescension of other Governments, for the Relief
of Persons under our Circumstances: And we take Liberty to affirm, That the
Trade and Wealth of the United Provinces, are owing more to the Ingenuity and
Industry of those Indulged Dissenters then to them of the National Religion,
who would have slugg'd and tyrannized all into Poverty and Vassallage.

Have Regard to our Suffering Condition, we beseech you, and show your selves
both Natural to a Member (be we reputed the meanest) of your own Civil Body,
and so far Lovers of him who said, Swear not at all, as not to continue us
Sufferers for not acting against his Command, at least, our Sense of it, and
therein of our own Consciences; But make some Provision for us, as well as
other Countries have done before you, as in your Wisdom you shall think meet;
that all those, who are of the Society of the People called Quakers, and known
of themselves to be so, shall not be molested for the future upon the Account
of Swearing, but their S^lem^ YEA or NAY shall be taken in lieu thereof, and
their Untruth, or Breach of Word, Punishable as Perjury.

God, we know, that delights in Mercy, and in all Acts of Tenderness to the
Sons of Men, will favor so Natural, so Generous and so Christian an
Enterprise; and the Proposers, Promotors and Effecters of this happy
Deliverance from the heavy Clog of Swearing, under which we and our Families
have so long groaned, will not, we da^e believe, go without their Rewards at
the Hands of the Almighty, whom, at what rate soever ye shall deal with us, we
do, from the bottom of our Souls, humbly and heartily implore, That it would
please him so to dispose your Hearts, as ^ou may best Discharge that High Trust
reposed in you, to the Ho^ of his Great Name, and the Prosperity of this Famous
(...), the most certain Foundation of True Feli^ity (...) and which will give,
as a good Example (...) ^st Reputation to you and your Posterity.

This performed in the (...) for the Service of the Pe^le (...) William (...)
Richardson.


