THE Great and Popular OBJECTION Against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests
BRIEFLY Stated and Considered, AND WHICH May serve for Answer to several late
PAMPHLETS upon that Subject.

By a Friend to Liberty for Liberties sake

Licensed February the 4th 1687.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Three-Keys, in
Nags-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street, overagainst the Conduit, 1688.

THE Great and Popular OBJECTION Against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and
Tests, etc.
IF the Consequences that are imagined to follow the Repeal of the Penal
Statutes and Tests (and which so many give for the reason of their dislike to
the Liberty that is sought by it) were indeed so Terrible as they are
industriously represented, I should readily fall in with the common Jealousy,
and help to augment the number of those that are for their Continuance; but
when I consider how long our Government was Happy without Them, how much of
Heat and Partialty prevailed in their Constitution, and how troublesome and
impracticable their Execution are, and that, in our present Circumstances, They
appear a plain Barriere to our Happiness, instead of a Bulwark to our Religion,
I cannot but lament the misfortune of the Public, that those Gentlemen are yet
under the fatal mistake of thinking Them necessary to our Safety, that with
more Reason and Charity, in my opinion, should Endeavor to save us from the
Inconveniences of them.

For the Question being gained against Coertion in Religion, and the impiety
and impolicy of Persecution, agreed on all hands, all that is said by the most
averse to the extent of the Repeal desired, issues here, If the Papists should
happen to have Power or Ease, they are sure to use it to the prejudice of the
rest, and therefore it is the Interest of the rest to oppose all their attempts
to get it. The Consequence of which is this, It were better the Power of
Persecution rested where it is, then to come into hands that would use it more
Rigorously. I say, All Arts and Rhetorical Declamations set aside, This is the
Center and Substance of all that is said, by Any Body, against the Repeal of the
Penal Laws, and more especially the Tests: And to this I would modestly offer
what follows.

I can by no means imagine there should be so much Danger where there is so
little Trust: indeed none: And where one does not Trust one cannot be Deceived:
Now there is no Trust, where there is a Law that puts all Parties out of the
Power of one another: For therefore is a Law desired, that the hazard of
Trusting may be out of Doors. And as this Law may be framed, I humbly conceive,
it will not be impossible to secure every Party from the bigottry of the rest,
else, I must acknowledge, nothing will save us from the mischief of Relapses.
And whatever may be said against a Legal Security now, is as strong and
reasonable against the hopes of any, whoever has the Chair: For Ambition, we
see, is but too apt to creep into all Parties, and worldly Dominion has been an
old and powerful Bait: If Law cannot secure us against it, we shall ever be to
seek for the assurance we desire in this World. It will yet be said, That the
best Law Men can make, is nothing without Execution, and That being in the
Power of Those whose Principles or Interests may lead them to Evade or Perver
it, the Insecurity is the same; yet with their leave that think so, it is one
thing to dispense with a Pe^^^ Law against a thing, not evil in it self, and
another to violate a Law of common Right and Safety, which is evil in it self;
for this were both to Repeal and Make Laws without a Parliament, which the
Judges of no Reign have ever attempted to deliver for Law.

If the Law proposed, Repeal Penal Laws for Religion (and surely it is proposed
for that end) the Prince of himself cannot Enact a Penal Law to burt any body,
whatever be his Religion, and we are so far safe from the Mischief of
Persecution, tho our security went no farther. But that we should be less safe,
because the King, we so much Fear, is ready to Consent to a GREAT CHARTER for
Liberty of Conscience, by which, it shall be Declared the RIGHT of Mankind to
make a free and open choice and profession of Faith and Worship toward GOD,
and that any Constraint or Interruption upon that Freedom, is Impiety, and an
Evil in it self, and that Law, therefore Indispenfible, Is, I must confess, a
Notion very Extraordinary. However, It is not hard to Execute a Law, when it is
best Executed by doing nothing, for letting men alone compli^^ best with such
an One, and the Common Law secures them, as well as this, from those that
meddle with them.

I know it is further Objected, that tho this were done, it would not rest
here, A Parliament might quickly be Packt to overthrow this Establishment, and
then we should be all ruined; for we should not only have Laws of the severest
Nature, but force to execute them. But as Grave as the Objection looks, permit
me to say, there is more of Art then Truth or Force in it: For don't we see
that Wagers are every where laying by the present Enemies of Liberty, That the
King cannot, even with the help of his Dissenters, get a Parliament that will
Repeal the Penal Laws and Tests, and yet that they should pretend to fear he
may get One to Repeal Liberty of Conscience, and Enact the Bloodiest Laws in
lieu of it (to which to be sure the Dissenters will never assist) is a
contradiction, like that of Magnifying the Prerogative, and Railing at the
Declaration, Crying down Common Wealths Men, and Opposing the Monarchy
constantly with their Arguments; Fighting against the distinction of the
Natural and Political Capacity of the King, and making it every day to serve
their own turn, and upon the worst terms too, Persecution, I mean. But waving
the Humor, let us examine the Fear: In my opinion it is Groundless; for since
their Masterpiece, the Letter to a Dissenter tells us, that there can be no
danger of the Bet, where the Odds are so great as Two Hundred to One, we must
conclude that Objection is of no weight against our Liberty: For Number being
the Natural Power of a Kingdom, the Artificial (which is the Executive part of
the Government) must needs move heavily and dangerously when it works against
it.

But if a Law be no security, because of the fear of a Packt Parliament, and
Force to back it, what security, after all, can the Penal Statutes and Tests
be? are they any more then Law? If it be said, they caution and awe the Roman
Catholics. I say the Uiolation of a Great Charter for Liberty of Conscience
will do it much more, because the Penalty may be Greater, and better fixed and
applied. And since we only fear the Repeal of the One by a Packt Parliament, as
well as the Other, the Authority which abolishes either, is equally Invalid,
and therefore the Caution and Fear of Violating the one, must needs be as Great
as of Overthrowing the other.

This would be less difficult to us to apprehend, If we made the equal
Reflections that become our present Condition. We look on France till we
frighten our selves from the best means of our worldly Happiness, but will not
look at home upon greater Cruelties, if we consider Theirs were exercised
against those of another Religion, but Ours upon the People of our own; tho
when we observe their Conduct elsewhere, it is easy to see, it must have
something very particular in it. But at the same time we will take no notice of
the greatest Tranquillity in Germany and Switzerland under a complete Liberty.

Is this any thing but the Fruit of Law, The Agreement of Princes and States,
The Great Charter of those Countries inviolably kept these forty years, The
Thing his Majesty, with so much Zeal and Goodness presses to establish in his
Dominions? Why then may not that be done here that has been so happily acted
elsewhere? Are our Papists and Protestants worse here then there? Or are our
Differences greater? Or are our Numbers more dangerously unequal, that we dare
not trust a Law that others in our very Circumstances are so happy under? They
don't only endure one another Religion, but take their Turns the same Days in
the same Churches or Places for Divine Worship; and will not the same Kingdom
serve us? we must then have the worst of Natures, or be the worse for our
Religion. And tho many good reasons have been given, and may be elsewhere in
evidence of this Notion, I will venture to offer a few at this time that never
saw Light yet, that I know of, and which may happen to give some, to those that
labor under the disbelief of it.

I say then, a GREAT CHARTER for Liberty of Conscience, to be made and kept, is
not only the true Interest of the Roman Catholics, but they think so, because
they must think so: For if the Destruction of Protestancy, by a way of
Violence, had been their Project, as much as it is our Fear, they had but one
way in the World to have brought it to pass, and that was, to have made the
utmost use of the Church of Englands Penal Laws, which they found ready to
their Hands, for the Destruction of the Protestant Dissenters, and to which she
could not refuse her assistance, upon her principles of Obedience, if there
were no Inclination left in her to that Fierce and Inhumane chase. By this, one
Party of Protestants, had been easily made the Means of the others Extirpation,
and how far Pleasures, Honors, Offices and Fear would have gone to have made
an entire Conquest, easy upon her, is not the hardest thing in the World to
apprehend, when the Bodies of her Dissenters had been thus cruelly dissolved by
her. And if this have any sense in it, we must conclude, that delivering one
Party of Protestants from the Rage and Power of the other, cannot be a way to
bring in Popery. I own, it may affect the present Ecclesiastical Policy of the
Church of England, but I never took that for Protestancy: On the contrary, it
has evidently weakened the better part of the Protestant Interest in General,
in these Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation. But besides this, it is one thing
to Constrain a Law from the Prince, and another to have it offered by the
Prince: The one, to be sure, he thinks against his Interest, and the other he
takes to be as certainly for it. And if he thinks it is his Interest to
preserve such a Law, we are sure of our Safety by it. That which moves him to
it, must oblige him to maintain it; and if he does not heartily intend to
support this Liberty, his giving it, must needs increase the Power and Interest
he would suppress: An Error too gross to be made with so much Preparation and
Art. Nor is this all, in my opinion it is much more reasonable to believe that
a Law for Liberty of Conscience should preserve us against the thing we
apprehend so much, viz. Popery, because it is easier to fall from one Extreme to
another, then from a Mean to an Extreme: And it is certain, there are more
Parties concerned to support such a Law for Liberty, then to maintain those of
Severity; for the Church of England only appears to uphold these, but all
Parties besides agree to maintain That. And if it was the Interest of the Roman
Catholics to divide the Dissenters from the Church of England, to be sure they
cannot think it safe to unite Them: They have divided Them by the Liberty, But
any attempts to take it away will infallibly join them. And when I consider how
much more the Roman Catholics will in all probability want Liberty in after
Raigns, then the Dissenters in this, I am also led to Conclude, that they are
not so secure in the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests themselves, as in their
own Moderation in the use of the Liberty that follows: For a Parliament in
after Raigns may easily return them, and worse, if that can be, and will
certainly do it, if they use their present opportunity too Eagrely and
Partially; but no Parliament will ever think so harsh a Constitution fit to be
revived, when the Moderation of the Gentlemen against whom it was made, has
proved it Useless, Unreasonable and Unsafe. This consideration is a reciprocal
Caution to Us, not to refuse them the Rights of English Men, and to Them, not
to mis-use them. And since hitherto we seem not so angry at the Liberty, as at
the Manner of its being granted; if we are sincere in this, we cannot refuse
the King in our own way, I mean, by Law. And in my Opinion, it is a point
gained, not to have this ease Precarious from the Crown, as well as that it
shows the Kings sincerity beyond a doubt, that he is Solicitous to assure so
great a Good to us in our own method.

Let it not then be thought a Crime, that he does so, or that he takes the next
and plainest ways to discriminate Persons for that end; for if the Consequence
of his Endeavors were to ruin others for a Party, it might be thought Packing
indeed; but when it is to open Enclosures and Level Interests, and by Law, to
secure Them from the Ambition of one another, it seems to me to be Unpacking
for the Good of the Whole, that which has been so long Packt for the sole Good
of a Party. And truly if we will yet scruple the Sincerity of the Prince, I
know not an easier and better way to assure our selves, then by choosing such
Persons to serve in Parliament, whose Love and Sincerity for this Liberty we
have the greatest Confidence in; For as that will certainly help to facilitate
the Work, so where two Parties seem to conspire one end, nothing discovers the
Insincerity of one side, like the Truth and Integrity of the other in persuing
it. Let us not then dislike Liberty in the Kings way, and refuse it in our own,
because he would make it his; for that would justly question our Truth and
Charity, without which, our pretense of Religion or Safety is vain.

We have heard it said, that the Persecution of the last Reign came from the
Papists, and therefore we cannot expect they should be sincere for Liberty in
this; but if that were true, (tho it could not be the Roman Catholics that
forced the late King to cancel his Declaration for Liberty, or that couzn'd the
Dissenters of a Law for it) yet there is this use to be made of the Trick, that
now the Roman Catholics are for Liberty, the Church of England cannot, with
any credit, be against it.

On the contrary, it shows, if they did Move those Storms of Persecution, it
was to constrain the Dissenters to join with them in the Repeal of the Laws
that raised Them, that so they might be allowed to share in the Calm: People
are most apt to see the Necessity and Benefit of Liberty by the want of it.

It is a Misfortune to be lamented, the Church of England should always be
against Liberty, when the Court is for it, because the Court, in her opinion,
is not Sincere; when at the same time, she knows, it is at no time to be had
without them: A way for poor Dissenters, never to hope for such a thing as
Liberty of Conscience at her hands: For without offering any Violence to the
rules of Charity, she seems to excuse her unwillingness by their Insincerity.
But with her favor, They must be sincere when their Interest will have them
so. And tho it is Imagined the Dissenter has no other bottom for his Confidence
and Conjunction then the Roman Catholics Faith and Truth, it is too mean an
Insinuation against his understanding, that I assure that Author is yet Good
and Jealous enough, not to depend upon either the Council of Trent, or the
Thirty Nine Articles for his safety. By no means; those Spiritual Mortgages,
Folks give of their Souls, are too uncertain securities about worldly Matters,
unless Men had, at least, a better Practice. Nothing, humanely speaking, fixes
any Man like his Interest; And tho this Agreement were only Hobson's choice in
Roman Catholic and Dissenter, the security is not the less: For whatever be
the Morality of any Party, if I am sure of them by the side of Interest and
Necessity, I will never seek or value an Ensurance by Oaths and Tests. Interest
is the choice Men Naturally make, and Necessity compels Submission from the
unhappy Subjects of her Power.

And tho some do Insinuate that better terms are to be hoped from the Church of
England hereafter, then now from the Roman Catholics, I take leave to say,
that it is an unwarrantable use of Providence, for them to neglect the present
Certain Overtures (tho they were the effects of Necessity) out of hopes the
Church of England will use them better, when she has Power, not to do it, and
not to care: when all Parties show their abuse of Power in their turns, it is
reason enough to embrace the Benefit of Necessity from the first that offers:
And nothing else, I fear, moves the Church of England to promise; And if so
great a number may lie under such a Necessity, a less number cannot but be
under a greater, and that I take to be the Roman Catholics Case, and our
Assurance.

If the Church of England could secure the Dissenters without that compliance
she fears, 'twere something, if not, they are under an equal necessity to
accept what the Roman Catholics are under to offer: And for this reason, I
cannot but think her joining in the Liberty more reasonable, then their
refusing it for her sake. If she affects an Union, why should she uphold the
Means of Division? Ought not the Dissenters to suspect her Integrity, in
refusing a good Understanding, in the very way that must save those she would
gain? And since she is sure They will not turn Papists, how does she lose Them in
that way, in which she can only pretend to have Them, viz. as Protestants; for
otherwise they will as little conform to her. And if the Price of her Good Will
must be to uphold the Brand of her Conduct, and Means of their own Ruin, It is
what they can never give, and she in Conscience and Wisdom should never ask.

And what ever is suggested, it is too unwarily thought of any, that the
Dissenters intend only their security against the Power of the Church of
England, it is against the Spirit of Persecution in all Churches, they must all
seek to be safe; that, which so ever of them happens to have the Government,
the Rest may be secure under it; Else, it is but shutting one Door against an
Evil, and opening another to let it in. If she will please but to tell me what
way she can secure the Dissenters against her own Ambition, when one of her
Communion Ascends the Throne, I will undertake to tell her, how she and the
Dissenters may be safe from the Danger of Popery in the Reign of a King of that
Religion. For the Spirit of Persecution being the same every where, it must
have the same Remedy. She cannot think we ought to Trust Her, That will not Trust,
and That makes Trusting Dangerous.

And whatever the Gentlemen of her Communion are pleased to suggest of the
present good understanding, between the Roman Catholics and Dissenters, to
blow their Interest with the People, Men must be greatly Imposed upon, to
Imagine the present Affinity between them, can regard any thing but their
common Safety; and common Danger makes that every where, reasonable and
necessary. If this were not the case, I should hold my self concerned to act
another Part in this affair; And if this be the case, it plainly answers all
the Jealousy and Objection of the Times: For it is as lawful for them to join
in this as in any Society of Trade, and more requisite. I say, It can be no
just Reflection from the Church of England, when they must be ill read, that
don't know, that she is the Halfway House between the two Dissenters, and that
the Protestant Dissenter is a refine upon her, as she is upon the Church of
Rome. So that tho it be true that they join with the Papists, it is as true
that it is not with Popery, but for Liberty, which the same Author tells us, is
such a contradiction to Infallibility, which is his dangerous Popery: Tho I
must tell him, I think it a greater to Persecute People upon a professed
fallible Principle. Let it satisfy that Gentleman and his Followers, whose
main drift, is Rallying Dissenters for relying on Romish Faith for security,
that tho They join with Roman Catholics to get Liberty, They will trust them,
and every body else, as little as they can to keep it, and less join with them
to take it away. On the contrary, in case of such attempts, it is reasonable to
believe they will sooner unite with the Church of England to Preserve, what
they now so freely oppose Her to obtain. But it may be said, It will then be
too late, and therefore now too dangerous, to give that Interest, in the mean
while, so much Play and Progress. This were an Hazard indeed, if the Roman
Catholics could do any thing then, that they cannot do now, or if the
Dissenters were to be less Numerous, less Sensible, or less Free and Able to
resent it. I cannot see how the Roman Catholics can be in a better Cordition
to Hurt us, if the Dissenters are not in a worse to Help us. Certainly their
numbers must have the odds.

On the other hand, the Dissenters, under Persecution, can do nothing, and
while the Liberty is Precarious they dare do nothing; so that the way to render
them useful to oppose the Violence feared, is to make their Interest in the
Liberty Legal, as well as that a Legal Freedom is the best way to prevent all
violent attempts in the Roman Catholics. For when the Law supports their Joint
Interest, that will naturally join and lead Them to maintain the Law that
defends it. I shall be heartily sorry if the Church of England cannot tell how
to venture her self with those under Liberty, who have lived so well with her
under her Persecution: Tho, as I have said before, there is no Trust in the
case, since, therefore, a Law is desired, that we may not rely on so frail a
Security: And where a Law puts all Parties upon one Bottom, I cannot help
thinking all Parties are obliged in Example and Interest carefully to preserve
it. And if we would but reflect how much more Law in all Ages has preserved
Mankind then Force, we would less argue the Insecurity of Law; but it is utterly
Inconsistant at a time, when we plead the Almightiness of present Laws for our
Safety.

In short, If she only seeks to be Safe, let her not refuse the Security that
Others are ready to take, and if she desires more, it is an unhappy Instance of
her love to Dominion, and they can never be safe that Grant it. Let her not
then be Fond but Wise; and remember, that the Security is not destroyed, but
Changed and Enlarged: For from a Single, it becomes more then a Double Bond,
and They that reject such a Security, cannot be thought sincere in asking of
any. But, be that as it will, If we can but once see A MAGNA CHARTA for Liberty
of Conscience, Established in these Kingdoms by the wisdom of a Parliament,
They will be very Hardy, indeed, who Dare, at any time, Attempt to Shake It,
That has the Jealousy, Union and Resolution of so many Great, Serious and
Wealthy Interests to support It.

I will not say, what this Charter shall be, for it does not become me, nor is
it yet time; but I dare say, that it may be, and in such terms too, as all
Parties shall find their Account: And unless that be the Reason why any will
oppose it, It can neither miss to be, nor to be kept; and if such a Dissenter
be to be found to this common Good, his opposition makes him a Common Enemy. I
say, nothing can oppose such a Charter, but State Religion, and that which can
Govern the rest, will Hazard the rest. A National Religion by Law, where it is
not so by Number and Inclination, is a National Nuisance; for it will ever be
matter of Strife. If she seeks to be Safe, but not to Rule, that which
preserves the rest, secures her; If more is expected, it is less reasonable, in
my opinion, for the Rest to Sacrifice their Safety to her Authority, then only
to subject her Rule to their Security.

FINIS.

