CONCORDIA DISCORS, OR THE DISSONANT HARMONY OF Sacred Public OATHS,
PROTESTATIONS, LEAGUES, COVENANTS, ENGAGEMENTS, lately taken by many
TIME-SERVING SAINTS, Officers, without scruple of Conscience; making a very
unpleasant Consort in the Ears of our most faithful Oath-performing,
Covenant-keeping God, and all Loyal conscientious Subjects; sufficient to
create a doleful HELL, and tormenting Horror in the awakned Consciences of all
those, who have taken, and violated them too, successively, without any fear of
God, Men, Devils, or Hell.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.

Numb. 30. 2. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his
Soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his Mouth. Gal. 3. 15. Brethren I speak after the manner
of men, though it be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man
disannulleth or adds thereunto. Jer. 23. 10. Because of Swearing the Land
mourns, the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, their course is
evil, and their force is not right. Augustine de verbis Apostoli Sermo 30. Falsa
Juratio exitiosa est, vera juratio periculosa est, nulla iuratio secura est.
Tantum mali habet juratio, ut qui lapides colunt timeant falsum jurare per
lapides: Tu non times Deum praesentem, Deum viventem, Deum s^ientem, Deum
moven^em, Deum in contemptores vindicantem? Vis ergo long esse a perjurio?
Jurare noli. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Mat. 5. Nisi juramentu^ interdicatur, non
possunt amputari perjuria, Nemo est enim qui frequenter jurat, and non
aliquando perjuret. London, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1659.

The dissonant Harmony or sacred public Oaths, Protestations, Leagues,
Covenants, Engagements, lately taken, etc.
MAny are the public Oaths, Protestations, Leagues, Covenants, which all
English Subjects (especially Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, Ministers,
Lawyers, Graduates, Members of the Commons House, and all public Officers
whatsoever) by the Laws and Statutes of the Land have formerly taken to their
lawful Hereditary Kings, Bracton, l. 3. Tract. 2. c. 1. Britton c. 12.
Lambardi, Archaion, LL. Edwardi Confessoris Lex, 35. Spelmanni Glossarum, p.
267, 268. Cook 7 Rep^ Calvin's case. 1 Instit. f. 64, 65, 67, 68. Tottles Magna
Charta. f. 164. Kitt. f. 46. Exact Collection* p. 370. Joh. Seldeni, ad
Eadmerum Notae, p. 190, 191.
their Heirs and Successors, to bind their Souls, Consciences, to bear constant
Faith, Allegiance, Obedience, and dutiful subjection to them; and to defend
their Persons, Crowns, and just Royal Prerogatives, with their Lives, Members,
Fortunes, against all Attempts, Conspiracies, and Innovations whatsoever. Which
being almost quite forgotten by those who have formerly taken, and as
frequently violated them over and over, in the highest degree, if not abjured
them by contrary late Oaths and Engagements; I shall present them in order to
their own and others view, that they may conscienciously review, consider them
afresh, and bewail their perjurious atheistical violations of them, to prevent
those temporal and eternal Judgments, which otherwise may and will most
certainly fall upon them, and our Nation too for the same.

1. I shall begin with the ancient Oath of Fealty, a which every Person above
14. years old, and every Tithingman was obliged to take publicly at the Court
Leet within which he lived; and was anciently taken afresh every year by all
the Subjects under Edward the Confessor, and William the first, in substance at
least, though not in precise words.

I A. B. do swear, that from this day forwards, I will be faithful and loyal
to our Lord the King, and his Heirs, and will bear See Gratian Cause. 22. ^u. 5.
De forma fidelitatis.
Faith and Allegiance to him of life and of Member, and of terrene honor
against all people which may live and die; And that I shall neither know nor
hear of any thing which may tend to their hurt or damage, which I shall not
withstand to my power. So God me help.

2. The second is the ancient usual Tottles Magna Charta, f. 166. Iuramentum
Majorum and Ballivorum.
Oath of the Majors of LONDON, and other Cities and Towns throughout England,
and of Bailiffs or other Chief Officers where there were no Majors.

You shall swear, That you shall well and loyally serve the KING in the Office
of Mayor in the City of London, and the same City shall keep surely and safely
to the use of our Lord the KING of England, and of his HEIRS Kings of England;
and that the profit of the KING you shall advance in all things which belong to
you to do; And shall loyally preserve the Rights of the King, and whatsoever
belongs to the Crown in the said City; and you shall not assent to the
Distress, nor to the concealment of the Rights, nor of the Franchises of the
KING. And where you shall know the Rights of the KING of his CROWN, (be it in
Lands, in Rents, or in Franchises, or in Suits) to be concealed or subtracted,
you shall do your best endeavor to regain the same; And that if you cannot do
it, you shall tell it to the King, or to those of his Counsel, of whom you are
certain they will inform the KING thereof: And that lawfully and rightfully you
shall treat the People of your Bailywick, and do right to every one, as well to
Strangers as to Prives, as well to the Poor as to the Rich, in that which
appertains to you to do: and that neither for Honor, nor for Riches, nor for
Gift, nor for Promise, nor for favor, nor for hatred, you shall not do wrong
to any one: that you shall disturb no man's Right, nor shall you take any thing
by which the KING may suffer loss, or any Right shall be disturbed; And that
in all things which appertain to the Mayor of the said City so to do, you shall
well and lawfully demean your self. So God you help, etc.

The like Tottles Magna Charta, f. 165, 157. Claus. 35 E. 1. dors. 7. Kitchen,
f. 46. 47.
Oaths in substance were taken by all Privy Counselors of State, Sheriffs of
Counties, Recorders of Towns, Escheators, Constables, and other public
Officers of Justice, and by most Freemen of Corporations, in relation to the
King and his Heirs, and the Rights of the Crown.

3. The third is the 18 E. 3. stat. 4. 20 E. 3. c. 1, 2. Claus. 20 ^ E. 1. pars
1. do s. 13. 3 R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 38, 39, 40, 41. Rastall Justices, 2 Rot.
Parl. 25 E. 3. n. 10. Cooks 3 Instit. p. 145.
Oath of all the Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of the Peace,
prescribed by several Acts, thus formed,

Ye shall swear, That well and lawfully ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and his People in the Office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall
counsel the King in his Business, and that ye shall not counsel nor assent to
any thing which may turn him to damage or disherison by any manner, way or
color; and that ye shall not know the damage or disherison of him, whereof ye
shall not do him to be warned by your self, or by other: and that ye shall do
even Law and Execution of Right to all his Subjects Rich and Poor, without
having regard to any Person. And that you take not by your self or by other,
privilie or apertly, Gift or Reward of Gold or Silver, nor of any other thing
which may turn to your profit, unless it be meat or drink, and of small value,
of any man that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as
the same Process shall be so hanging, nor after the same cause. And that ye
take no fee, as long as ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of any man great or
small, but of the King himself. And that you give none advice or counsel to no
man great or small in no case where the King is party. And in case that any, of
what estate or condition they be, come before you in your Sessions, with force
and arms, or otherwise against the Peace, or against the form of the Statute
thereof made, to disturb execution of the Common Law or to menace the people,
that they may not pursue the Law, that ye do their bodies to be arrested and
put in prison. And in case they be such, that ye may not arrest them, that ye
certify the King of their names, and of their misprision hastily, so that
thereof he may ordain a co^^venable remedy. And that ye by your self, nor by
other privily nor apertly, maintain any plea or quarrel hanging in the Kings
Court, or elsewhere in the Country. And that ye deny to no man common right by
the Kings Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause: and in case
any letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such
Letters, but certify the King thereof, and go forth to do the Law,
notwithstanding the same Letters. And that ye shall do and procure the profit
of the King, and of the Crown, with all things where ye may reasonably do the
same. And in case ye be from henceforth found in default in any of the points
aforesaid, ye shall be at the Kings Will, of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to
be done as shall please him, as God you help and all Saints, Anno 18 E. 3.
Stat. 4.

The next Oath is that of Supremacy, made and prescribed to be taken by all
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, Recorders, Civil and Ecclesiastical
Officers, Barresters, Benchers, Graduates, Ministers, Attorneys whatsoever; and
all Members of the Commons House, before they ought to fit or vote therein, by
the Statutes of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 17 Car. cap. 7.

I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, That the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm; and
therefore I do utterly renounce all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities, and Authorities; and do promise that from henceforth I shall
bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my Power shall assist and defend, all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

5. The 5th. (Oath of equal Latitude and Extent, as the former of Supremacy) is
that of Allegiance, prescribed by the Statutes of 3 Jacobi, cap. 4. 7 Jac. c.
6. 17 Car. c. 7 tending only to tbe Declaration of such Duty as every true and
well-affected Subject, not only by Bond of Allegiance, but also by the
Commandment of Almighty God ought to bear to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; which Oath such as are infected with Popish Superstition do oppugn
with many false and unsound Arguments, the just defense whereof, his Majesty
(King James) has heretofore undertaken and worthily performed, to the great
contentment, of all his loving Subjects notwithstanding the gainsayings of all
contentious Adversaries. And to show how greatly his Loyal Subjects did approve
the said Oath, they prostrated themselves at his Majesty's feet, beseeching his
Majesty that it might be enacted, that the same Oath may be administered to all
his Subjects. The words whereof are these. I A. B. do truly and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my Conscience before God and
the world, That our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is lawful and rightful King
of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries: And that
the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any of the Church or See of Rome, or by
any other means with any other has any power or authority to depose the King,
or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize
any foreign Prince to invade o^ annoy him or his Countries; or to discharge any
of his Majesty's, Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or
to give license or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise tumult, or to offer
any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to
any of his Majesty's Subjects, within his Majesty's Dominions. Also, I do swear
from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or sentence of
Excommunication or deprivation made or granted by the Pope, or his Successors,
or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his See,
against the said King his Heirs or Successors, or any absolution of the said
Subjects from their obedience: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason
or color of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my
best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons and traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or
hear of to be against him, or any of them. And I do further swear. That I do
from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this
damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be excommunicated by the
Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.
And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any
person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof,
which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto
me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to the
express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion,
or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make, this Recognition and
Acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true Faith of a
Christian So help me God.

6. To these Oaths I shall subjoyn the Sea Exact Collection, p. 278, 296, 337,
340, 342, 361, 367, 491, 498, 522, 523, 666, 770, 828, 839.
Protestation, made and taken (in pursuance of these Oaths) by all the
Well-affected Members of the Lords, and Commons House the last long Parliament,
and voluntarily taken by all the best affected people throughout the Realm, and
by all, or most Officers and Soldiers of the Army; by their Authority.

We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been And have
they not been so more since and now, then ever before?
more boldly and frequently put in practice than formerly to the undermining,
and danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in his
Majesty's Dominions established: And finding also that there have been, and
having just cause to suspect that there still are, even during this sitting in
Parliament, As since and now, by doubled illegal Taxes, Excises, High Courts of
Justice, Arbitrary Junctoes, and their new Knacks.
endeavors to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyranical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots and Conspiracies: And that the
long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And
that diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions; jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and his people; a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesty's Royal Person, the New quite sold and consumed.
consumpsion of the Revenues of the Crown and Treasure of this Kingdom: And
lastly, finding a great cause of Jealousy, that endeavors have been, and are
used to bring the English Army into a Misunderstanding of this Parliament,
thereby to Have they not since that in 1648. and now again effected it?
incline that Army, with force to bring to pass those wicked Counsels, have
therefore thought good to join our selves in a Declaration of our united
Affections and Resolutions, and to make this ensuing Protestation.

I A. B do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; as also the power and privilege of
Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every person
that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in pursuance of the
same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all
good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign punishment, all such as
shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise,
do any thing to the contrary in this present Protestation contained. And
further, that I shall in all just and honorable ways endeavor to preserve
the Union and Peace between the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor other respect, shall relinquish this
Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

7. The next in time, is the Solemn League and Covenant, taken in the most
solemn manner with hands lifted up to heaven, and subscribed by all Members of
Parliament, in England and Scotland, by all Civil, Military Officers, Soldiers
and well-affected persons in our three Kingdoms, by A Collection of Ordinances,
p 327, 359, 390, 399, 404, 416, 420, to 428. 458, 459. 606. 690. 702. 751. 768,
769. 798. 802, 803. 806, 807, 808, 878, 879, 889.
sundry special Ordinances of Parliament; approving and ratifying the same.

A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and defense of Religion, the
Honor and Happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true Public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included;
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and practices of the Enemies of God, against the true religion and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three kingdoms ever since the
reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies: We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations and sufferings,) for
the preservation of our selves and our religion from utter ruin and
destruction, according to the commendable practice of these kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and Solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear.

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one, in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, Quaere, whether this be not violated in
every branch in the highest degree?
reality, and constancy, in our several Vocations, endeavor with our estates
and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments,
and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms; that the world may bear witness with
our consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfullness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil, Instruments, by
hindering the reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or other, having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to all posterity; And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Articles.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided, and withdrawn from this
blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concexneth the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever: and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; we profess and declare before God and the World,
our unfeined desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to
walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and private, in all duties we owe to God and man,
to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.
Subscribed by William Lenthal Speaker, Sir Henry Vane junior, and most now
sitting.

Yet notwithstanding all these most solemn, sacred, legal Oaths, this
Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, sweetly according with and ratifying
each other, the remaining Fragment of the Commons House, sitting under the
power of the Army, not only violated them all in the Highest degree, by their
proceedings against the late King, his Heirs and Successors to the Imperial
Crown, the Royal posterity, Kingship, Kingdom, Lords House, and their secluded
fellow Members, but also took upon them to suppress and set aside these Oaths,
yea to brand and stigmatize them, for Unlawful Oaths; to absolve themselves,
with all others from them; and to set up an Engagement of their own framing, in
diametrical Opposition against all and every of them, imposed on all the three
Nations with strictest severity, by their New Knack of 6. September 1649.
disabling all Freemen of this Nation to sue in any Court of Justice whatsoever,
or to enjoy any Civil, Ecclesiastical or Military Office, benefice,
augmentation, trust, or degree of Learning in the Universities or Innes of
Court, and debarring all Lawyers, Attorneys from their practice, by a new kind
of Praemunire, who should not take and subscribe this Engagement: which the
whole House of Commons (having not the least legal Power to Exact Collelection,
p. 769. Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 157. 176. 454. See
Oath in the Table.
administer any usual Oath to Witnesses, or any person whatsoever in any case
or Age,) had neither Authority nor Power to impose upon the Nation, were it
consonant to the precedent Oaths, Protestation, Covenant much less then the
Vnparliamentary Conventicle, sitting after the Kings beheading, the Lords and
Majority of the Commons forcible seclusion, and the Sea my True and perfect
Narrative, p. 22 to 40. 92.
Parliaments actual dissolution thereby; when diametrically repugnant to all
these legal Oaths, and to the Petition of Right it self, 3 Caroli, complaining,
providing against the future administering of any Oath not warrantable by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in precise Terms; and whether this Engagement,
be not such, let all Lawyers, Divines, and conscientious Englishmen resolve.

I do declare and promise, That I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established, without a King or House of
Lords*

All the Officers, Soldiers of the Army, and Garrisons through England and
Ireland, were the first men who subscribed it, and returned their Subscriptions
in Parchment-Rolls to their Journey-men and Creatures at Westminster; who
thereupon thought themselves and their Government, (though founded upon Blood,
Treachery, Perjury,) as lasting and perpetual, as if it had been founded on a
Rock, and the sincerest Principles of Piety, Justice, Righteousness, and
general public National consent. But those very first Engagers to them, when
they had done their Drudgery, and oppressed the Nation with doubled and trebled
Taxes to support their bloody wars by Land and Sea against their Protestant
King, and Brethren of Scotland and the Netherlands, on the 20th. of April 1653.
The true state of the case of the Commonwealth, p. 9, 11.
suddenly turned them out of Doors, and power, with force and highest contempt,
as persons wholly perverting the ends of Parliament, oppressing the people,
making Gain the main of their Business, and utterly impossible in that corrupt
estate, in the judgments of the most moderate men to come the instruments of
our long desired Establishment. And then setting up a Protector over their
Infant Commonwealth much against their wills, the Mock-Parliament under him
(whiles above 150 Members duly elected, most confided in by the Country were
forcibly secluded) by their Additional Petition and Address, the 26th. of June
1647. imposed this new Oath on all Counselors of State, and Members of
Parliament.

I A. B. do in the presence of God Almighty promise and swear, That to the
uttermost of my Power I will uphold and maintain the true reformed Protestant
Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, and encourage the Profession and Professors of the
same. And that I will be true and faithful to his Highness the Lord Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging as chief Magistrate thereof. And shall not contrive, design
or attempt any thing against the Person or lawful Authority of the Lord
Protector; shall keep secret all matters that shall be treated of in Counsel,
and put under secrecy, and not reveal them but by Command, or consent of his
Highness, the Parliament, or the Counsel; and shall in all things faithfully
perform the trust committed to me, as a Counselor, according to the best of
my understanding, in order to the good Government, peace and welfare of these
Natiions. And shall endeavor as much as in me lies, as a Member of Parliament,
the preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the People.

These Oaths were sworn (by many of those, who had taken the premised Oaths,
Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, and the Engagement too,) both to
their Protector Oliver and his Son Richard, with whom the Army Officers,
Soldiers, and sundry others in the name of most Counties and Corporations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, in their special Addresses to Richard,
faithfully promised to live and die: yet lo within few Months after,
notwithstanding these Oaths and Addresses, by a miraculous Divine providence
(admirable in all considerate men's eyes) they not only all deserted, but
degraded him from his Protectorship, without one stroke, or drop of blood
spilt, or Sword drawn in his quarrel; after so much Christian blood shed, so
many Millions of Treasure spent, and many years travel, care, by his Father
Oliver, to establish his Posterity in this new-erected Supremacy,
Protectorship; and that by his own Army Officers, and nearest, most endeared
Relations, even in a moment, beyond all probability or possibility in humane
apprehension.

To accomplish this strange unexpected work, the Army Officers called in the
old Vnparliamentary Iuncto sitting since the year 1648. till April 20. 1653.
whom they formerly dissolved and unparliamented, secluding all the rest of the
old Parliament sitting till December. 6. 1648. by force and armed guards, with
the whole House of Lords, re-creating them alone for a Parliament: who usurping
to themselves the name and power of a Parliament. against both Law. Equity,
Reason; dismounted his Son Richard from his Protectorship, unlorded, degraded
his New other House of Mushrom Lords, and new dubbed Knights, cashiered some of
the Army-Colonells, and other Officers, who helped to make them a Parliament,
and him a Protector; and may gratify the rest in this kind; Commissioned
some, whom Oliver cashiered; turned most of his Council, Commissioners, Judges,
Creatures out of their Offices; and pulled down most of that he set up with
force and blood. Who now thinking themselves secure, and forgetting all their
former, with these late sudden Revolutions, Changes, as the just rewards of
perfidious breaches of Oaths; Protestations, Covenants to their lawful
Sovereigns, they have now afresh to make us a Freestate, not only doubled our
former Taxes in effect, and more than trebled them by a most arbitrary new
Militia on many, but also by a New Bill, appointed an Oath to be taken by their
Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, in form following.

You shall swear, That you shall be true, faithful and constant to this
Commonwealth, without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Lords.

Which Juramenta illicita, jurari. et jurata servari non debent. Gratian Causa
22. qu. 4. throughout.
illegal Oath, so diametrically contrary to the former, it swallowed by their
unarmed Judges, Justices, and other civil Officers out of fear, will in time be
imposed on the Army Officers, Soldiers, and all others, as their former
Engagement was, with as severe penalties.

Having presented you with these contradictory, repugnant, irreconcilable
Oaths, Protestations, Covenants and Engagements, I shall propose some few
cases of conscience upon them, in this age, when Conscience is so much
pretended, and Liberty of Conscience so much pressed, that tenderness of
Conscience, and Conscience it self, are hardly to be found in the greatest
pretenders to them.

1. Whether all lawful sacred Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations. do not
St. Aug. de Verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 30. Gratian. Cause. 22. qu. 1, 2, 5. Grotius
de Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 2. c. 13. Jusjurandum habetur apud omnes ultimum
atque firmissimum and fidei mutuae and veracitatis pignus. Procopius Persi^
little. l. 2. Ultima fides inter homines tum G^a^cos, tum Barbaro, quam nulla
delebit aetas, est ea quam per jurata pacta sponseres adh^bet Deos. Dionys.
Hallicarnast. Antiqu. Romans Nullum Vinculum ad adstringendam fidem, majores
nest^i Juramento arctius esse voluerunt. Cice^^ Offic. l. 1.
firmly, immutably, inviolably bind the souls, consciences, of all that take
them, to an Absolute, indispensible, sincere, faithful performance, and strict
observation of them, to the uttermost of their power in all estates and
conditions, as is evident by Numb. 30. 2. to 14. Josh 9. 19, 20. Gal. 3. 15.
Deuteronomy. 23. 22, 23. Judge. 11. 30. 39. Job 22. 27 Ps. 15. 4. Ps. 22. 25 Ps. 61. 8.
Ps. 66. 13. Ps. 116 14, 18. Ps. 132. 2, 3, etc. Eccles. 5. 4. Jer. 44. 25.
Jonah 2 9. Isay 19. 21. Nah. 1. 15. Genesis 21. 23, 24, 31. c. 24. 3. to 10. 37.
to 47. c 26. 3 31. c. 47. 31. c. 50. 5, 6. Levit. 19. 12. Josh. 2. 12. 17. 20.
Judge. 15. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 8. 12. Josh. 21. 43, 44. 1 Kings 1. 13. 17. 29, 30. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezra 10. 5. Neh. 13. 25. Jer. 4. 2. c 11. 5. Mat. 5. 33. 1 Kings
15. 3, 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 21. 5, 6, 7. compared with Hebr 6. 16, 17, 18. An Oath
for confirmation is to men an end of all strife: wherefore God willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his Counsel,
confirmed it with an Oath, that by two Immutable things (his Oath and Covenant)
in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation. Ps.
89. 3. 34. I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
Servant. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David, Ps.
132. 11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it.
Jer. 33. 20. 21. Thus says the Lord, If you can break my Covenant of the day,
and my Covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
their season. Then may also my Covenant be broken with David my Servant, that
he should not have a Son to reign upon his throne. If Gods Oaths and Covenants
to mortal sinful men be thus true, constants, sincere, firm, unalterable,
immutable; then by like reason should men's Oaths and Covenants to God and their
lawful Kings be such, as Psalm. 15. 4. Eccles. 8. 2. Gal. 3. 15. Levit. 30. 2.
to 14. and the other forecited Texts resolve.

2ly. Whether the late violation through fear, or self-respects, much more the
wilful justification, perjurious repeal, abrogation, abjuration of our sacred
lawful Oaths, protestation, Covenant, be not a S. Augustine, Gratian, and
Grotius: ibidem. Caelius Rhodiginus Lectionum Antiq. l. 21. c, 15,
most detestable, crying, scandalous, damning sin, exceedingly dishonorable to
God, injurious to Religion; and drawing down sad, private, personal and
National judgments, on those who are notoriously guilty thereof, as is most
apparent by Ezech. 16. 59. c. 17. 13. to 27. Zech. 8. 17. c. 5. 3, 4. Hos. 10.
4. Lev. 6. 3, 4. c. 19. 12. Prove. 24. 21, 22. Jer. 5. 2. c. 7. 9. to 17. c. 34.
8. to 22. c. 52. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 31. 20. c. 29. 20. to 29. Ps. 78. 10. 37. 57. to
65. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Josh. 9. 20. 2 Samuel 21. 1. to 11. Jer. 23. 10. Romans 1. 31,
32. 1 Timothy 1. 10. worthy sad and serious perusal. And whether those who are
deeply guilty of these sins, can ever expect to enter into heaven, since this
is made the special character of a Citizen of Zion, Who shall dwell in Gods
holy hill, Psalm. 15. 1, 2, 4. He that walks uprightly and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth from his heart, He that swears to his
own Hurt and changes not, much more then when for his own and the public good.

3ly. Whether those who have made, taken, and equally violated all or most of
these contradictory Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Engagements alike, be not
perjured persons, and Covenant-breakers in folio, void of all real fear of God,
truth, faith, conscience, honesty, religion, if the premised Scriptures, or
Eccles. 9. 2 Acts 5. 3, 4, 5. may be credited? And whether those who have been
thus perfidious, perjurious, fidef^agus, treacherous to all others, can in
point of justice, conscience, prudence, policy, impose an Oath upon all or any
others, to be true, faithful and constant, in their Oaths Covenants, trusts
and obedience unto them? (especially before themselves have taken any such
Oath, to be true, faithful, constant to their own principles, or any fixed
settled Government:) since they have taught them to be treacherous, perfidious,
disloyal, by their own precedent examples; and God himself has denounced this
Woe, and retaliation against such, Isay 33. 1. Woe unto thee that dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou shall make
an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. Which we
have seen verified of late in sundry particulars even to admiration, by divine
retaliation, to deterr all henceforth from the dangerous sin of Perjury,
Treachery, Oath and Covenant breaking.

4ly. Whether it be not a most impious, unchristian, execrable, if not
Atheistical practice, for any persons whatsoever (especially without any color
of Parliamentary Authority) to impose any Oath, Vow, or illegal Engagement upon
others, diametrically repugnant to, inconsistent with their former legal Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants, imposed on them by unquestionable Parliamentary
Authority, to their lawful Sovereigns, to ensnare, wound their Consciences,
and involve them in the guilt of unevitable, most apparent Qui perjurare
compellit et qui compellitur utrique sunt perjuri and homicidae: Dominus quia
praecepit, Miles quia plus Dominum quam Deum and animam suam dilexit. Gratian
Causa, 12. qu. 5. Augustine, Sermon. 30. de verbis Apostoli.
Perjury, and breach of all their former Oaths, Protestations, Covenants? And
whether such incur not that woe in Isay 10, 1, 2, 3. Woe unto them that decree
unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousnesse, which they have prescribed,
to turn aside the needy from Judgment, to take away the right from the poor,
(exiled Royal Issue) and that they may rob the Fatherless; And what will ye do
in the day of Visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to
whom will ye flee for help, and where will ye leave your glory? If Ahabs and
Jesabels suborning of false Witnesses against Naboath to gain his Vineyard, who
attested, that Naboath did blaspheme God and the King, brought such a heavy
doom upon their persons and royal Posterity, to their utter extirpation. 1
Kings 1. 21, and 22. how much sorer judgments shall they incur, who shall
endeavor to make our whole 3. Kingdoms perjured in the highest degree, by
engaging them to renounce, blaspheme both God and the King, and abjure their
former Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, of purpose to disinherit the royal
Posterity of their Crowns and Royalties, which they have so precisely sworn,
protested, covenanted over and over, inviolably to defend and preserve?

5ly. Whether it can be just, equitable, prudential, rational, for any in
present power, to Commission, entrust, employ Anabaptists, Quakers, with other
Military Officers, Soldiers by Land and Sea, without prescribing any Military
Oath unto them, (after so many meetings, and violations of their trusts to the
late King, Parliament, and other new Governors, Governments of their own
erecting, to their total subversion) to be true, faithful, obedient, and
constant to them; contrary to the Discipline of all former Ages amongst the
Romans, Graecians, and most other Nations, who always See vegetius de Re
Militari, 1. 2. Alexander ab Alexandero. Genial Dierum, l. 1. c. 21. l 6 c. 23.
Calvini Lexicon Juridicum: Tit. Juramentum Militare, Fr. Connanus, l. 5. c. 3.
Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 2.
imposed a Military Oath on all their Army Officers, Soldiers, (warranted by 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4) And in the mean time, to enforce such a Oath upon all their
Judges, Justices, and Civil Officers, against their Judgments, Consciences,
who are Orthodox in Religion, approve of lawful Oaths, (imposed by legal
Authority of Parliament) Magistracy, and Ministry, which Anabaptists, Quakers,
and other Sectaries professedly oppugn, and now violently endeavor to
suppress? And whether those now sitting, or any others who have taken the
forecited Oaths to the late King and his Heirs, or the Protestation, League,
and Covenant, can without apparent perjury, and direct violations of them,
repute those few Relics of the old Parliament, now sitting (forcibly
secluding the Lords and Majority of their Fellow Members) to be a lawful
Parliament within the Statute of 17 Car. c. 7? or submit to any Oaths, Taxes,
Edicts of theirs as Parliamentarie or legal?

6. Whether the forecited Oaths of Supremacy, Allegigiance, Majors, Sherisss,
Judges, Recorders, Bailiffs, Parliament-Members, and others, in direct words,
extending not only to the late Kings person, but his Heirs and Successors, do
not inviolably bind both them, their Posterities and our whole three Nations,
Kingdoms in perpetuity, in point of Law and Conscience, so long as there is any
Heir of the Crown and Royal line in being? and that upon these unanswerable
Scriptural presidents and legal considerations.

7. Because Gods Oath and Covenant made to Eve, Abraham, Noah, their Seed and
Posterity, and to the Israelites and their children, and their Covenant made to
God, by Gods own resolution, did oblige God himself and them in perpetuity from
Generation to Generation, Genesis 3. 15. c. 8. 21, 22. c. 9. 1, to 17. c. 13. 16.
c. 15. 18. c. 17. 2, to 22. c. 21. 13. c. 24. 7. c. 28. 4, 13, 14. Exodus 28.
43. c. 34. 7. Levit. 22. 3, 4. Numb. 14. 24. c. 18. 19. c. 25. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 1.
8. c. 4. 31. 37. c. 5. 2, 3. c. 7. 9, 10, 11. c. 8. 18. c. 11. 9. c. 28. 46. c.
29. 1. 4, to 20. c. 30. 6, 9. c. 31. 21. c. 34. 4. Josh. 7. 11, 15. c. 24. 3,
to 29. 2 Chronicles. 20. 7, 8. Neh. 1. 5. c. 9. 8, 32. Ps. 25. 13. Isay 34. 5. c.
44. 3. c. 59. 21. c. 61. 8, 9. c. 62. 22. Mal. 2. 4, to 15. c. 4. 6. Acts 2.
39. c. 3. 25. c. 7. 5, 45. c. 13. 23. Romans 4. 13, 16. c. 9. 7, 8. c. 11. 1, 2,
27. Gal. 3. 16. to the end. Heb. 8. 6, to 11. c. 11. 18. c. 13. 20. Lu. 1. 72,
73. Rev. 12. 17. Levit. 26. 9, 15, 25, 42, 44. 2 Kings 17. 15, to 41. Psalm. 44.
17, 18. Ps. 78. 10. 38. Ps. 89. 3. 4, 5, 34, 35. Ps. 103. 17. 18. Ps. 105. 8,
10. Ps. 111. 5, 9. Isay 24. 5. c, 42. 6. c. 49. 8. c. 54. 3. Jer. 11. 2 to 12.
c. 22. 9. c. 31. 31. 32, 33. c. 29. 10. to 20. c. 33. 20. 21. c. 50. 5. Ezech.
16. 60. 62. c. 37. 28, 29. c. 44. 4. Hos. 8. 1. Heb. 6. 16. 17. Therefore men's
Oaths, Covenants to Kings and their Posterity, must likewise bind in succession
and perpetuity.

2ly. Because Gods Oath and Covenant made to David, and to his House, Royal
Seed and Posterity, touching their succession in the Royal Throne of Judah, was
hereditary, successive, extending to all his Issue and Posterity: and though
many of them were wicked, rebellious, yet this did not cause or provoke God to
dethrone, or disinherit them, or infringe his Oath and Covenant to David, 2 Samuel 3. 12. to the end. c. 22. 51. 1 Kings 2. 33. Psalm. 89. 2, 3, 33, to 38.
Ps. 132. 11, 12, 13. Ps. 18. 50. Jer. 33. 17, 19, 20, 21. 1 Chronicles. 28. 4, to
10. Jer. 17. 24, 24, 25, 26. 1 Kings 11. 12. 13, 36, 39. 2 Kings 8. 9. 2 Chronicles.
21. 5, 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 23. 3, etc. Jer. 23. 4 5. Zezh. 9. 9. John 13. 13, 15.
Lu. 1. 32, 33. Therefore much more where Oaths, Covenants are made by Subjects
to their Hereditary Kings and their Posterity, they must remain inviolable, and
not be abrogated by their transgressions.

3ly. Because the Oath, which Joseph took of his Brethren, the children of
Israel, to carry up his Bones, out of Egypt into Canaan, when God should bring
them out of Egypt, Genesis 50. 24, 25. though not made precisely for them and
their Posterity, was reputed by Moses and them, to be obligatorie to their
seed, as if made by them, even in point of Conscience: as is evident by Exodus
13. 19. And Moses took the Bones of Joseph with him, (though driven out of
Egypt by Pharaoh) for he had straightly sworn to the Children of Israel, saying,
God will surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones hence with you.
Which bones of his they (by virtue of this Oath) notwithstanding Pharoahs
pursuit after them, carried along with them through the red Sea, and through
the wilderness forty years, and through the Land of Canaan, till they had
quite conquered it, notwithstanding all their wars, Josh. 24. 32. near 500
years after this Oath first made. If then Moses, Joshua, and all the Israelites
held themselves thus conscienciously obliged by the Oath of their deceased
Ancestors above four hundred years before, to carry up Joseph's dead bones out
of Egypt, notwithstanding all Objections of have and danger from Pharaoh and
his Host, their forty years wandering in the wilderness, their wars in Canaan;
and meanness of the matter in relation to their public safety, no ways
concerned in it. Then much more must our Ancestors, and our own particular
reiterated Oaths in precise terms to our Kings, their Heirs and Successors,
which so much concern our public Government, Peace, Settlement, Safety,
Prosperity, engage our whole Kingdom and three Nations to a conscientious
observation of them to the uttermost of their power.

4ly. Because David's Oath to Saul and Jonathan extended to their seed, 1 Samuel
24. 21, 22. Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that thou will not cut off
my seed after me, and that thou will not destroy my name out of my Fathers
House: And David swore unto Saul: 1 Samuel 20. 14, to 18, 42. And Jonathan said
to David, thou shall not only while I yet live show me the kindness of the
Lord, that I die not, but also, thou shall not cut off thy kindness from my
House for ever, no not when the Lord has cut off the Enemies of David, every
one from the face of the Earth. So Jonathan made a Covenant WITH THE HOUSE OF
DAVID; And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him. And
Jonathan said to David, go in peace, for as much as We have sworn both of us in
the name of the Lord, saying, the Lord be beeween thee and me, and between thy
Seed and my Seed for ever. How conscienciously David observed these Oaths after
the deaths of Saul and Jonathan, is apparent, not only by his love, favor, and
affection to Mephibosheth for Jonathans sake, whom he restored to all that was
Saul, and made him eat continually at his Table. 2 Samuel 9. 1. etc. and by his
slaying of Baanah and Rechab for murdering Ishbosheth, Saul's son, his
Competitor, when they brought his head unto him, expecting a great reward, 2 Samuel 4. But more especially by his sparing Mephibosheth, the Son of Jonathan,
the son of Saul, because of the Lords Oath that was between them, between David
and Jonathan, (extending to their seed and posterity) when the Gibeonites
demanded 7. of the sons of Saul to be delivered up to them, 2 Samuel 21. 5, 6, 7.

5. Because Esther 9. 27, 28, 31. The Sea Levit. 23. 41.
Jews ordained and took upon them and upon their seed, and upon all such as
joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep
these two days of Purim, according to their writing, and according to their
appointed time every year (as those in the Parliament of 3 Jac. c. 1. and their
Posterity have observed the 5 of November annually ever since.) and that those
days should be remembered and kept throughout every Generation, every Family,
every Province, and every City: and that those days of Purim should not fail
from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed: which
they decreed for themselves and for their seed. If the whole Nation of the
Jews by an Ordinance and Decree, might thus bind their seed, posterity, to
observe the days of Purim for ever: With like reason they might by an Oath and
Covenant oblige themselves and their posterities for ever to their hereditarie
Kings, their heirs and posterities for ever: And so may we and all other
Nations, by the like Acts, Decrees, and the forecited Oaths, as is clearly
resolved, declared, enacted by the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. ^.
28 H. 8. c. 3. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 3. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 1. 3
Jac. c 4. 7 Jac. c. 6.

6ly. Because the president of the Rechabites, (who upon the command of their
Father Ionadab the son of Rechab, That neither they nor their Sons for ever
should drink Wine, nor build house, nor sow seed, nor plant, nor have any
vineyard, but dwell in tents all their days; held themselves bound in duty,
conscience to obey it, which God himself commends, records. rewards, for others
imitation, Jer. 35. 1. to 15. who might in like sort oblige them by his Oath
and Covenant;) Is a convincing gument that as the Littleson, Firzh. Brook, Ash,
Tit. Warranty, Covenant, Obligation, Condition, Tenure.
Warranties, Covenants, Bends, Contracts, Feofments, Grants, Reservations of
Rents, Services, Tenures in see, by the Laws of England, and other Nations,
firmly oblige men's Heirs, Posterity, Assignees, Executors, Administrators, on
both sides in succession and perpetuity; So likewise their Oaths, Covenants,
Protestations, to their here litarie Kings, their Heirs and Successors, oblige
them equally to them in Perpetuity and succession.

7ly. Because it is most evident by Genesis 3. 14, 15. c. 4 5. Exodus 17. 16. c.
20. 5. c. 43. 7. 1 Kings 2. 33. 2 Kings 5. 27. Jer. 22 30. c. 36. 31. That
Parents by their iniquities and transgressions may draw down and entayl the
curses, the judgments of God on them, and their Posterityes after them to
their prejudice: Therefore they may much more oblige them by their Oaths,
Covenants, to Obedience, Loyalty, Subjection to their hereditary Kings and
their Heirs, for their own particular, and the prove. 24. 20. 21. Romans 13. 3. 4,
5, 6. 1 Timothy 2. 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Public good, safety, as well as Freehold and Copyhold Tenants in Honors,
Manors, may oblige themselves, their Heirs and Successors for ever, by Homage,
Fealty, Tenures, Contracts to their Landlords, their Heirs and Assignees for
ever, by the Common, Statute-laws, of our own and other Realms, though they be
no Sovereign Lords and Kings over them.

8ly. Because the Saints and Churches of God in all Ages have held themselves
and their posterity bound in Duty and Conscience to pray to God for the life,
safety, prosperity of their Kings, and their Sons and Royal Posterity, in all
hereditary Kingdoms, as is apparent by Ezra. 6. 10, 11. Psalm. 72* 1, 2, 15. 1 Samuel 11. 14. 2 Samuel 16. 16. 1 Kings 1. 25. 34, 39. 2 Kings 11. 12. 2 Chronicles. 23.
11. Psalm. 149. 2. Ezech. 9. 9. Dan. 2. 4. c. 3. 9. c. 6. 6. 21. Mat. 21. 5. 9.
John 12. 13, 15. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. by all the ancient, modern Liturgyes,
Collects, Letanyes, Canons of the Churches of England, Scotland, Ireland,
France, Spain, and other hereditary Kingdoms; The Testimony of sundry Fathers,
Councils, Historians, and our own Clause Rolls in the Tower, my True and
perfect Narrative, p. 95.
elsewhere quoted. Therefore they may lawfully oblige themselves and their
Posterity, by Solemn Oaths, Covenants, Protestations to obey, protect and
defend their, and their posterities Royal Persons, Crowns and Royalties.

9ly. To put this out of further question, I shall only pressed one Scripture
president and testimony more, wherewith I shall conclude this point, and that
is the History of the Gibeonites, recorded Josh. 9. and 10. and 2 Samuel 21. 1.
to 13. The Gibeonites (a remnant of the Amorites, with whom the Israelites by
Gods express command were to make no peace nor covenant, nor show any mercy to,
but smite with the edge of the sword and utterly destroy, Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3. c.
20. 16, 17, 18.) circumventing Joshua and the elders of Israel by a stratagem,
of old bottles, shoes, bread, clothes, and a lying information, that they came
from a far country to make peace and a league with them. by reason of the
glorious victories God had given, and the miracles he had wrought for them;
thereupon, without asking any advice of God or the Congregation, or examining
the truth of their information, Joshua and the Elders of the Congregation
entered into a league with them, to let them live, and swear unto them in the
name of the Lord. Within three days after they heard they were their
neighbors and dwelt amongst them, and they came unto their Cities the third
day. Jesus pacem quam dederat revocandam non censuit, quia firmata erat
Sacramenti Religione, ne dum alienam perfidiam arguit, suam fidem solveret.
Ambrosius de Officiis, l. 3. c. 10.
But the children of Israel smote them not, Because the Princes of the
Congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. Hereupon all the
Congregation murmured against the Princes. But all the Princes said unto the
Congregation: We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, therefore we
may not touch them. This we will do unto them, we will let them live lest wrath
be upon us, because of the Oath that we swear unto them And the Princes said
unto them, let them live as the Princes had promised them, but let them be he
wers of wood and drawers of water to all the congregation. And Joshua called
for them, and spoke unto them saying; Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We
are very far from you, when you dwell among us? Now therefore ye are cursed,
and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and bewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my God. And they answered Joshua and said;
because it was certainly told thy servants, how the Lord thy God commanded his
servant Moses to give you all the Land, and to destroy all the Inhabitants of
the Land before you; therefore we were fore afraid of our lives because of you,
and have done this thing. And now behold we are in thine hand, as it seems
good and right unto thee to do unto us, do. And so did he unto them, and
delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them
not. And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
congregation, and for the Altar of the Lord even to this day, in the place
which he should choose. After this Oath and League the Princes and Congregation
were so far from slaying or suffering them to be slain by their enemies
contrary hereunto, that when as 5. Kings soon after came up with all ^h^ir
hosts and encamped against Gibeah, to destroy is because they had made peace
with Israel; the Giheonite sending this message to Joshus and the camp at
Gilgal; slack not thy hand from thy servants, to come up to us quickly and save
us, for all the Kings of the Amorites that dwell in the Mountains are gathered
against us; thereupon Joshua and all the men of War with him went up from
Gilgal all night, and came upon their Enemies suddenly, and smote, and destroyed
them with a great slaughter, delivering them from that danger. About 395 years
after this Solemn Oath and League, King Saul out of his zeal to the children of
Israel and Judah, sought to destroy all, and slew some of those Gibeonites
posterity, contrary to this Oath and League, For which (35 Archbishop vshers
Annal. Vet. Testamenti, Anno 2553. 2983. 2986.
years after its violation, and 430 years after its first making) God sent a
famine in the Land for three years, year after year: upon this David inquiring
of the Lord, what was the true cause thereof? The Lord answered him, It was for
Saul, and for his bloody house, because they slew the Gibeonites, who were not
of the Israelites, but of the remnant of the Amorites, and the children of
Israel had sworn unto them. whereupon David called the Gibeonites, and said
unto them: What shall I do for you, and Wherewith shall I make the Atonement,
that ye may bless the Inheritance of the Lord? And they said unto the King,
The man that consumed us, and devised against us that we should be destroyed
from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel, let seven of his sons be
delivered unto us, and we will hang them up in Gibeah of Saul which the Lord
did choose; which being accordingly done, after that God was entreated for the
Land, and removed the famine, 2 Samuel 1. 1. to 15.

Here we have an Oath and Covenant binding the Israelites, their Governors.
Heirs and posterity in perpetuity to the Gibeonites and their posterity;
which I shall parallel with our forementioned Oaths, Protestation, Covenant to
our hereditarie Kings, their heirs and successors, to prove them more obliging
to us and our posterities, than this Oath and League of the Israelites to the
Gibeonites, in regard of these observable circumstances and particulars, not
hitherto insisted on by any; which I beseech God in mercy to set home
effectually upon all our hearts, spirits, consciences, both for our
information, reformation, settlement, and avoiding Gods avenging justice on us
and our posterities, for our transcendent perjuries, breach of Oaths and
Covenants to our Sovereigns.

1. This Oath and Covenant with the Gibeonites Ambassadors, was procured by
mere fraud, circumvention, misinformation, and apparent falsehood, arising
merely from those to whom it was made and sworn: yet it obliged the Israelites
and their posterity, to the Gibeonites and their progeny in perpetuity: But
the forementioned Oaths, together with the Protestation, and Solemn League and
Covenant, were made without any fraud, circumvention, misinformation, or false
suggestion, upon grounds of loyalty, duty, justice, prudence, christianity,
Religion, and State-policie, voluntarily propounded by the makers, takers of
them, and ratified in full Parliaments: Therefore they must needs be far more
valid, obligatory to the whole English Nation and their posterities, than this
Oath, Covenant to the Gibeonites.

2. This League and Oath was made very suddenly, rashly, unadvisedly, without
any advice with God and the whole Congregation, or examining, debating the
truth of the Gibeonites suggestion; yet it bound them when once made: But our
Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant, were all made enacted, enjoined upon
long and serious debate, mature deliberation in several successive Parliaments:
Therefore ours must be much more obliging than theirs.

3ly. This League, Oath, was made only by the Princes of Israel, without the
Congregations privitie, assent or advice, who were discontented with and
murmured against them for it, yet it obliged both the Princes, people, and
their posterities: But our Oaths, Protestation, League and Covenant, were made
not only by all our Princes, Nobles, Peers, but likewise by the whole House of
Commons in full Parliaments, and assented to by the whole English Nation both
in and out of Parliament, the Sea 7 Jac. c. 6. 17 Car. c. 7. and here, p. 7.
Commons being the original movers, promoters, contrivers of all or most of
them: Therefore they must be much more obligatorie to us and our po^eri^ies,
than theirs.

4ly. Their League, Oath, was never ratified by any public Law or decree of
the whole Congregation and people of Israel in any public Convention, but only
by Joshua and the Princes alone; yet they bound the whole Nation: Ours have
been approved, ratified, established, perpetuated by sundry successive Acts,
Ordinances, Votes of Parliament from time to time, continuing still in their
full legal force: Therefore much more valid and binding to us and our
posterities, than theirs.

5ly. That Oath, League, was taken, sworn only by the Princes themselves, not
by the Congregation and people of Israel, yet they were all obliged by them.
Our Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant, have been sworn, taken not only by
all our Princes, Nobles, Officers of State, Justices, but likewise by all or
most of the Commons, and people of the Land from time to time, both in and out
of Parliament: Therefore much more obliging to us and ours, than theirs.

6ly. This Oath, League of theirs to the Gibeonites, was never taken and entered
into for ought appears, but once, and that sodeinly, without any subsequent
renovation or ratification; But our Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant,
have been swore, taken again and again, by all Members of Parliament, Officers
of State, Justices, Graduates, Lawyers, Ministers, most Soldiers, and others;
upon sundry emergent occasions, both in and out of Parliament: Therefore much
more obligatory to us and our posterities, then theirs.

7ly. This Oath, League, for ought we read, was not made explicitly in precise
terms with the Gibeonites, their heirs and posterity for ever, but only
indefinitely, with the Gibeonites then in being, whose lives they spared, as
the words import; yet because they were a People, State, City, Body politic,
having a permanent succession; it virtually and intentionally in their own and
Gods account too, extended not only to the Gibeonites then living, but to their
succeeding issues in Saul's time, near 400 years after, and all succeeding
Generations (as 1 Kings 15. 19. Cook 4 Instit. c. 26. p. 155, 156. 4 II. 5.
Rot. Parl. n. 24. ^ E. 4. 2. See Br. and Fith. Tit. Corporation, Abbie, Cooks 1
Instit. f. 2. 94. 102, 150. Grotius de Jute Delli, l. 2. c. 13. Sect. 4. 7. See
Magna Charta the Prologue, and cap. ult.
perpetual National Leagues use to do,) But our Oaths, League, Covenant in
direct terms extend not only to our Kings to whom they were first made and
sworn, but likewise to their heirs, successors, and Royal Posterity for ever,
(see 1 Jac. c. 1. 3. Jac. c. 4. 7 Jac. c. 6. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 3.) Therefore they
must needs be more binding to us, our Heirs and Posterities in present and
succeeding Generations, than their to the Gibeonites.

8ly. Their League, Oath, was only with foreign Pagans, Strangers, who became
their mere slaves and bondmen in perpetuity, and had not the least power,
jurisdiction over them; yet it bound them to strict observation. Ours are made,
sworn to our own Christian, natural Kings, Princes, Sovereigns, of our own
flesh, blood, Nation, to whom we are natural borne Subjects, and owe all
dutiful allegiance by the Laws of God, Nature, Nations; Therefore much more
obliging to and most religiously to be kept by us and our posterities after us,
than theirs.

9ly. (Which is most considerable) this their Oath, League, was made with such
an idolatrous remnant of the Ammonites, as God himself by express precepts had
commanded the Israelites to make no League, nor Covenant with, upon any terms,
but utterly to destroy with the edge of the sword without mercy, without
saving any of them alive, Exodus 23. 32. c. 24. 12. 13. Deutr. 7. 1, 2, 3, etc.
c. 20. 16, 17, 18. Psalm. 106. 34. 35.) yet notwithstanding having once entered
into a League with, and sworn to them in the name of the Lord, that they should
live, (though by their own fraud, circumvention, and misinformation) God was so
jealous of his own name, honor, glory, so unwilling that his own people should
perjuriously, treacherously, perfidiously break their Oathe, Covenant sworn in
his name, Hebr. 6. 16, 17, 18. Grotius de'Jure Belll.
being the highest, the most sacred inviolable Obligations, securities that can
be between God and men, man and man, Nation and Nation; that he would rather
have his positive judicial Law, (which Grotius de Jure belli, l. 2. c 13.. 4. 7.
some conceive to bave a tacit condition in it) violated and dispensed within
this case, (it being not simply evil in its own nature to spare the Gibeonites
upon their submission, but only a prohibited evil by particular Precepts) than
his Name profaned, dishonored, Religious Oaths wittinglie infringed, and
perjurie committed by his own people, against his moral Law, Precept, being
sinful, scandalous in their own nature, and of dangerous consequence to all
Posterity, if admitted, approved, to encourage them to commit perjurie, and
violate all lawful Oaths, Covenants, in succeeding Ages, to the scandal of
Religion, and prejudice of Mankind. Wherefore this Oath, League, though against
these judicial Precepts, not only, firmly bound the Princes who made them, and
all the Congregation in that Age, but King Saul himself, and all the Israelites
in succession four hundred years after. Of which we have another President of
Joshuaes and the Israelites care to perform their Spies Oaths made to Rahab,
and sworn unto her by the Lord, to save her, her Parents, Kindred, and Family
alive (though Canaanites devoted by God to destruction) Josh. 2. 1, to 24.
compared with c. 6. 21, 22, 23. Heb. 11. 31. But our Oaths, Protestation,
League, Covenant were all made not to, or with Amorites or Canaanites
particularly devoted by God to the Sword, Slaughter, and utter extirpation
without any Truce or League of Peace; but to and with our own hereditary
lawful Christian Kings, their Heirs, Posterities, and Successors, whose
Persons, Lives, Crowns, Rights, and Royal Authority we are all expressly
obliged, commanded by God himself, to defend, protect with our own lives,
fortunes, estates to the uttermost of our Powers, against all Attempts,
Treasons, Conspiracies, Traitors, and Invasions whatsoever. yea precisely
prohibited to offer the least violence, injury to their Persons, Lives, and
Regal Authority, in thought, word, or deed, Prove. 24. 20, 21. Eccles. 8. 2 c.
10. 10. 1 Samuel 24. 3, to 20. c. 26. 8, to 12. 2 Samuel 1. 12, etc. c. 4. 10, 11,
2 Samuel 18 3 c 21 17 Estch. 2. 21. 12. 23. c. 6. 2 Rom 13. 1, 2. 3. 1 Pet. 2 12.
13, 17. Tit. 3. 1 1 Timothy 2. 2. 3. John 18 36. Therefore our Oaths, League,
Covenant, are much more obliging, and conscienciouslie to be observed by us,
and our Posterities for ever, than theirs to the Gibeonites, as the only ready
way to our peace and settlement.

10ly. This League of theirs to the Gibeonites was ratified only with one
single Oath, yet it bound both them and their Posterity; but ours to our Kings,
their Heirs and Successors, is ratified with seven successive Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants, here recited, besides sundry others of like nature
taken by our Ancestors in former Ages, which I pretermit. Therefore much more
strong, indissoluble, obliging to us and our Postericies than theirs. If a
threefold cord be not easily broken, Eccles. 4. 12. much more then a sevenfold
Oath successively renewed, should not easily or quickly be broken, but remain
inviolable to all posterity.

11. The violation of this Oath League to the Gibeonites by Saul, and the
Israelites near 400 years after its first making, when perchance quite
forgotten by them, or conceived to be unbinding to them as gotten by surprise,
as not made or taken by themselves, personal to the Gibeonites and Israelites
then living when first made, or at least expired and grown quite out of date by
so long a tract of time; was reputed by God himself a great sin, perjury in
them, and exemplarie punished by God with three years famine on the whole Land,
though Saul and the Israelites then living never took this Oath, nor made that
League themselves, but only their Ancestors, so long time before their births.
Therefore our violations of the forecited Oaths, Protestation, League,
Covenant, so freshlie made, taken, sworn, subscribed with hands lifted up to
Heaven, successivelie one after another, by whole Parliaments, the generality
of our Nation; and not only by our deceased Ancestors, but by our selves in
person, and so often reiterated, yet infringed by us time after time in the
highest degree, most needs be a more detestable damnable Perjurie, crime, in
the eyes of God than theirs, and draw a more long-lasting famine, and other
sorer judgments of God upon our particular Persons, Vastat stirpemque,
domumque, Herodotus, lib. 11.
Families, Nation, than that breach of their Oath and League with the
Gibeonites, brought down on them.

12ly. That Oath, League, continued in force to bind the Israelites, both to
observation and punishment, when violated by King Saul and them, after the
whole frame of their Government was quite changed from a Principality or
Commonwealth (as most of our present Grandees would have it) into a Kingship
and Kingdom, by the earnest unanimous desire, consent of all the Elders of
Israel, the generality of the people, and by Gods own approbation, as is
evident by the 1 Samuel c. 8, to c. 13. Josh. 9. 2 Samuel 21. compared together.
Therefore our Oath, Protestation, League, Covanant forecited, must by like
reason, consequence, much more oblige our whole Nation in present and future to
our Kings, their Heirs and Successors, notwithstanding all late violent
forcible illegal Alterations, Revolutions of our Governments and Governors,
against the Votes of both Houses of Parliament, the desires of the generality
of our three Nations, since our Laws admit no Interregnum nor Disseisin of the
Crown, Kingship, Kingdom, (as the Statutes of Praerogativa Regis, 1 Iacobi, chapter
1. Cooks 7 Rep. f. 10. and See (...) B^ook, Ash. Title Intrusion, Prerogative.
other Lawbooks resolve) And so our violations of them must be more perjurious,
sinful, and exemplarily punishable, than theirs.

13. This Oath, League with the Gibeonites was violated by King Saul, only out
of zaeel to the Children of Israel, and Judah, who (it seems) solicited him
thereunto for their own selfends or advantage: yet this was no sufficient
excuse, nor justification thereof in Gods esteem, being punished with
exemplarie justice on his posterity, and a three years famine upon all the
Land. Therefore the violation of all our precedent Oaths, Protestations,
Covenants, by the Army Officers, confederate Members, and their Adherents
(against the Votes of both Houses, the dehortations of our Ministers, and
desires of our three whole Kingdoms) must needs (...) a far more detestable
crime, and be avenged with a more heavy punishment both on them and us, than
theirs was heretofore.

14. This breach of Oath, Covenant, notwithstanding all circumstances which
might extenuate it, was most exemplary punished, though not on Saul the chief
Offender during his life, yet upon seven of his Sons, and Family after his
death, in King David's Reign, 35 years after this Offense committed, and upon
the whole Nation by a three years famine, though it was never infringed but
only by one single Act, in slaying some of the Gibeonites posterity, and not
re-violated by any other subsequent slaughter of them. Therefore though many of
the grand Infringers of the precedent Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, may
perchance escape scot-free for a time in their own persons, and die without
exemplary justice inflicted on them for it, yet let them from this memorable
President conclude for certain, that God will sooner or later avenge it upon
their Children and Posterity to their utter extirpation, (and on the whole
Nation too, as he has done in a great measure already,) it may be 35 years
after the Perjuries, Treasons, committed in this kind, especially when not
committed only once, but perpetrated and acted over sundry times by a
continued, uninterrupted succession of New Perjuries, Treasons, and Violations
of them in the highest degree from day to day without fear or shame, as Exodus
20. 5. c 34. 7. Genesis 3. 14, 15. 1 Kings 2. 33. 2 Kings 5. 27. Jer. 22. 30. c.
36. 31. Isay 14 20 21. Mich. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. Jer. 6. 15 c. 8. 12. may assure all
our late and present. Delinquents in this kind and their Posterity, which texts
they may do well most seriously to peruse, with bleeding and relenting hearts.

15. This their violation of their League, Oath to the Gibeonites was never
openly justified, pleaded, written, preached, printed for, nor carried on with
solemn Fasts and Humiliations, (most Isay 58. 3, 4. 6. etc. c. (...) 1^. to 16
c. 6^. 3. Prove. 21. 27.
detestable unto God when thus abused) nor yet solemnly abjured by new contrary
Oaths or Engagements forcibly imposed on all the Israelites, by Saul and his
Counsel of State, to extirpate the Gibeonites: yet it was thus severely
punished by God himself on Saul's posterity and the Israelites. O then what
soarer overflowing, desolating Judgments, may our perjurious, Fidifragus
Grandees, Saints, Nations, most justly fear and expect will undoubtedly befall
themselves, their posterities and our Kingdoms, (now almost ripened for
destruction in wise men's apprehensions) who have not only infringed all our
Oaths, Covenants, Protestations, to our lawful Kings, their Heirs, Successors,
and Posterity over and over in the highest degree, but most impudently
justified, pleaded, preached, written, for the lawfulness thereof; yea kept
many Hypocritical, Atheistical Mock-Fasts and Humiliations, to promote our
most detestable Perjuries, Treacheries, Abominations; and publicly abjured
all our former loyal Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, by new Treasonable
enforced Oaths and Engagements, diametrically repugnant to them. Certainly if
this breach of Oath by Saul in slaying the Gibeonites could not be expiated,
nor the (...) years famine inflicted on the whole Land for it, removed by all
King David's and the Israelttes Fasts Prayers, Tears, Sacrifices; till this sin
of theirs was particularly be wailed, repented, removed, and full satisfaction
made to the murdered Gibeonites by David and his people, by delivering up seven
of Saul's Sons and Posterity to be hanged up before the Lord in Gibeah of
Saul, for this perjurie and bloodshed committed so long before by Saul their
Ancestor, the principal Malefactor. We may justly fear and conclude, that all
our prayers, tears, fasts, humiliations, will never expiate the manifold open
violations of these our Oaths, Protestations, Leagues, Covenants, by the
murders of our late King, and many thousands of our Protestant Brethren of all
sorts for adhering to him, his heirs and posterity; the violations of the
rights, privileges of Parliament, beyond all Presidents of former Ages; and
securing, secluding the whole Peers House, and Majoritie of the Commons
heretofore and now again, and trampling our fundamental Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Remonstrances, Declarations, as well as Oaths quite under foot, by
new Arbitrarie, Tyranical Acts, Impositions, proceedings of all kinds,
exceeding the worst of our former Kings; unless all these perjuries,
treacheries, breaches of Oaths, Protestations, Covenants in this kind be
particularly and publicly confessed, bewailed, reformed, repented if not
expiated with the like Justice and Executions upon the persons or Sons of some
of the most capital Delinquents in this kind, to appease Gods wrath, and
preserve our whole three Kingdoms from utter ruin; our perjuries and breaches
of all Oaths, Faith, Trusts, being now so generally and universally infamous
throughout the world, that FIDES ANGLICA, is become as proverbial AS Erasmi A
dagia. Walsingham Hist. Ang. Antiquit. Eccl. Brittan. p. 295, 296. Giraldus
Cambrenfis Typographiae Hyberniae, c. 20, 22, 24.
FIDES PUNICA, SCOTICA, or HYBERNICA in former Ages, to our perpetual infamy:
Which, if this Publication may redress, reform for the future, I shall bless
God for it, and have some hopes of better times, things, then yet we can
possibly expect whiles under the guilt, breach of so many contradictory Oaths,
Protestations, Leagues, Covenants, Engagements.

By the ancient Oath of Fealty and Allegiance, (which both the Subjects of
England, and Kings, Bishops, Nobles, and Subjects of Scotland, made to the
Kings of England and their heirs, as supreme Lords of Scotland, in these
words.) Ero fidelis and legalis, fidemque and legalitatem servabo, Henrico (and
Edwardo) Regi Angliae, et Haeredibus suis, de vita and membris, and terreno
honor, contra omnes qui possa it vivere and mori: Et nunquam pro aliquo
portabo arma, nec ero in consilio vel auxilio contra eum vel Haeredes suos, in
aliquo casu qui possit contingere, sed fideliter recognoscam, et fideliter
faciam servitia quae pertinent ad tenementum quod de eo tenere clamito, Sic me
Deus adjuvet and omnes Sanctos ejus. (Which Oath Roger de Hoveden, Annal. pars
porior, p. 545, 546
William King of Scots and all his Nobles swore to King Henry the 2. et
Haeredibus suis, sicut ligio Domino suo: And Tho, Walsingham Hist. Angliae, p.
22. 33, 34. Mat. Westminster. Anno 1293, 1294, 1297.
John Balliol, John Common with all the Nobles of Scotland to King Edward 1. and
his heirs: Anno 1293, 1294, 1297.) they all in express terms obliged themselves
and their heirs, to be true and faithful Subjects to the King and his heirs:
Which though valid, obligatories in it self to our Kings postertie, yet some of
our Kings in their life-times, made both the Scots and English Subjects to take
a new Oath of Fealty and allegiance to their heir apparent and his heirs,
saving the fealty, homage and allegiance done to themselves. Thus Hoveden, p.
545, 546, 549, 550,
William King of Scots with all his Nobles, Barons, and Knights of Scotland,
did Fealty and Homage to king Henry the 2. and to Henry his son, and his heirs,
as to his Liege Lords, salva fide Domini Regis patris sui. Hovenden Annal. pars
posterior, p. 480. Simeon Dunclmensis Hist, col. 254. Radulphus de Diceto
Abbrev. Chron col. 504. Chronicon Johan. Bromoton.col. 1006. Henry de Knyghton
de Eventibus Angliae l. 2. c. 9. Gul. Nubrigensis, Hist. l. c. 3. 4. 30, 3 a.
Mart. Paris, Mat. Westminister, Holinshed, Caxton, Fabian, Speed, in the live
of H. 1. Stephen, and H. 2.
Anno 1175. Yea before this, Anno 1128. by the commad of king Henry the 1. the
Archbishops, Bishos, Abbots, David King of Scots, with all the Earls and Barons
of England, swore homage and sealtie to Maud his daughter and heir ut filiae
suae Imperatrici Fide servata, regnum Angliae Haereditario jure post dies suos
sibi et haeredibus suis legitime procreatis servarent nisi sobolem virilis
sexus ipse Rex in posterum procrearet. The persidious violation of which Oath
by them after King Henry's death in crowning Stephen, brought Holinshed, Vol.
3. p. 46.
exemplary judgments on the wilful violaters thereof, and a bloody,
long-lasting civil war within the bowels of the Realm between Maud, her son
Henry, and the Usurper Stephen, to the great oppression, devastation,
desolation of the public, and peoples, as our Historians observe; all the
good they hoped for by disinheriting Maud, and crowning Stephen upon their own
terms, against his own and their Oaths, becoming void and null by his
perfidiousness, through divine, Justice, which will never permit any good
things to spring out of such enormous evils as perjury and treachery; which
produced sundry judgments and civil wars, never ceasing till Henry the right
heir was restored to the Crown by a friendly agreement; the only probable,
speedy way not now to end our present wars, oppressions, distractions, Military
Government, and restore peace, and prosperity in our Nations. After this, An.
1191. upon the dejection of the insolent Bishop of Ely from his Vicegerentship
under King Richard the first, Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 702. 718.
all the Nobles of England assembling together, swore Fealty to Richard King of
England, and to his heir against all men. The Citizens of London swore the like
Oath; and that if King Richard should die without issue, they would receive
Earl John his Brother for their King and Lord, and juraverunt ei Fidelitatem
contra omnes homines, salva fidelitate Regis Richardi fratris sui as Hoveden
relates.

In Claus. 24 H 3. m. 15. dorso, soon after the birth of Edward the 1. son and
heir apparent to King Henry the third, I find this memorable writ issued to all
the Sheriffs of England, to summon all persons above 12. years old, to swear
Fealty to him, as Heir to the King, and to submit themselves faithfully to him
as to their Liege Lord after his death.

Rex Vic. Eborum* salutem; Praecipimus tibi quod in fide qua nobis teneris, et
sicut teipsum et omnia tua diligis venire facias ad loca certa and ad dies
certos, sicut commodius fiery potevit, Omnes liberos homines de balliva tua
aetatis 12. Annorum et supra, et eos omnes coram te jurare facias; ita quod
haec sit forma juramenti sui, scilicet: Quod ipsi salvo Homagio et fidelitate
nostra, qua Nobis tenentur, and cui in vita nostra nullo mode renunciare
volumus, Fideles eritis Edwardo filio nostre primogenito, ita quod side Nobis
humanitus contigerit, eidem tanquam hearedi nostro et Domino suo ligio erunt
fideliter intendentes, et eum pro Domino suo ligio habentes. Et talem circa hoc
exhibeas diligentiam, ut inde merito debeatis commendari. Test meipso apud
Westminster. 24 die Febr. Ann. r. n. 24. Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus:
and it appears by Dors. 12. they were summoned and sworn accordingly. Exact A.
bridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 426, 427. 662. 663.
In the Parliament of 5 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 13. and 17. The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, were sworn to bear faith and true allegiance to the
King, to the Prince, and to his issue, and to every one of his Sons severally
suceeding to the Crown of England; and that of their own accord. The like Oath
was taken to the King, Queen, Prince Edward, and the Heirs of the Kings body in
the Parliament of 38 H. 6. rot Parl. n. 26. And to The first Part of my
Register of Parliamentary Writs, p. 108, 109.
Prince Edward Son and heir apparent to King Edward the 4th and his Heirs, in
the Parliament of 11 E. 4. entered in the Clause Roll of 11 E. 4. m. 1. dorso.
Yet in point of Law, Conscience, the first Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance to
each of these Kings his heirs and successors, 26 H. 8. c. 2. 28 H. 8. c. 7.
obliged all that took them as firmly to their heirs and successors, as their
Homages made by them to these Kings or other Lords, (which extend equally to
their heirs, and shall not be Littleton, Sect. 148, 149. Britton f. 175, 176.
Cooks 1 Instit. f. 103, 104.
reiterated, nor renewed to them upon this Account, unless in some special
cases) and bind not only those that took them, but their heirs and posterity
likewise, although they never took these Oaths themselves, at least to a
religious conscientious observation, though not to the actual legal penalties
of Perjury; as Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica, tit. Juramentum 5.
sect: 24. 40. and other Canonists distinguish; and the forecited Scriptures
infallibly demonstrate; especially being made for the public good, peace,
settlement. of the Kingdom, warranted by the policy, presidents of all ages,
prescribed by our Laws, Parliaments, for the safety, security, settlement,
as well of our Religion, Church, Kingdoms, Government, as of our Kings and
their posterities, and so not o to be violated, through fear, menaces, hopes of
worldly gain or preferment, nor dispensed with by any Papal or other human
power whatsoever; the sea Aug. sermon. 30. Gratian Causa 22. q 1. 25 summa
Angelica, Tit. Juramentum and Perjurium. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Galli.
canae, lib. 8. Tit. 13. De Jurejurando and Perjurio. Chrysostom Homil. 17 in
Mat. and Hom. 9 12. in Acta Apost. Dr Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 1.
c. 28 Cooks 3 Instit,. c 74.
breach of Oaths, Leagues, Covenants, being A GRAND VICKEDNESSE and high
profanation of the TRUTH, FAITHFULNESS, NAME, AND CONSTANCY OF GOD HIMSELF,
as well as transgression of his Law and Gospel, deserving the highest temporal
and Ecclesiastical censures in this world, as well as eternal condemnation in
the world to come, Ezech. 17. 16, to 22. and Jer. 34. Neh 5. 12. 13.

7. Whether the late illegal Oaths, Engagements to the New Republicans and
Protectors, enforced on the people against their Consciences, without any
lawful Parliamentary Authority (which only legally make, prescribe, impose new
Oaths upon the Nation, as the marginal Mag. Charta c. 28. 51 H. 3. Stat. of the
Eschequer, 51 H. 3. c. 22. 3 E. 1. c. 14. 40. 6 E. 1. c. 8. 9 E. 3. Stat. 2. c.
6, 14 E. 3. c. 5. 18 E. 3. stat. 3. 20 E. 3. c. 1, 2. 25 R. 3. c. 1. 27 E. 3.
Par. 2. c. 1. 10. 16. 24. 26. 5 R. 2. c. 2. 12, 13. 6 R. 2. c. 12. 12 R. 2. c.
28. 17 R. 2. c. 9. 21 R. 2. c. 5. 4 H. 4. c. 10. 18. 20. 21. 2 H. 5. c. 4. 6,
7. 4 H. 5. c. 2. 4. 2 H. 6. c. 10. 18 H. 6 c. 4. 10. 20 H. 6. c. 10. 23 H. 6.
c. 2. 33 H. 6. c. 3. 5. 3 E. 4. c. 3. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 8 E. 4. c. 2. 12 E. 4. c.
2, 3. 17 E. 4. c. 2. 1 R. 3. c. 6. 19 H. 7. c. ^4. ^ H. 8 c. 8. 3 H. 8. c. 2.
14. and 15 H. 8. c. 3. 21 H. 8. c. 16. 21 and 22 H. 8. c. 7. 23 H. 8. c. 5. 25
H. 8. c. 20. 26 H. 8. c. 2. 4. 13. 27 H. 8. c. 27. 28 H. 8. c 7. 10. 32 H. 8.
c. 45. 35 H 8. c. 1. 5 E. 6. c. 5. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1, 23 Eliz. c. 6.
2^ Eliz. c. 12. 43 Eliz. c. 12. 1 Jac. c. 31. 3 Jac. c. 14, 15. 7 Jac. c. 2. 6.
21 Jac. c. 7. 20, 21. The Petition of Right 3 Car. 17 Car. c. 7. 1 Car. c. 1. 2
Car. c. 1.
Statutes resolve, past all dispute) being directly contradictorie to their
former lawful Oaths to our Kings, their Heirs and Successors, be not
absolutely void in conscience, yea mere prophanings, abuses of Gods sacred
Name; and if taken out of fear or weakness, no ways to be observed, no more
than David's Oath, resolution to slay Nabal with all his Family, 1 Samuel 25. or
Herod's Oath to Herodias, which he had more justly violated than observed in
beheading John the Baptist, Mat. 14. 6, to 13. or those Jews Vow, who vowed
they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, Acts 23. 21. etc.
Which sinful Oaths, Vows, were no ways to be observed by shedding innocent
blood, as both the Fathers, Councils, Canonists, Casuists, and Scoolmen
resolve, as you may read at large in Gratian Cause. 22. quest. 4. Summa
Angelica, Tit. Juramentum, sect. 3. 45. Peter Lombard, Sent. l. 3. distinct 29.
and most Schoolmen on his Text, whose definitive Doctrine is this: Si quis
alicui juraverit contra fidem, charitatem and officium, quod observatu^ pejorem
vergat in exitum, potius est mutandum quam implendum: Qui enim sic jurat
vehementer peccat, cum autem mutat benefacit: Qui autem non mutat dupliciter
peccat; Et quia injuste juravit, et quia facit quod non debet. And Summa
Angelica. Juramentum 5. sect. 16.
that when a man has once obliged himself by a legal Oath to God and his
Sovereign, any latter Oath repugnant to, or inconsistent with it is unlawful:
Upon which account our Glanvil l. 9, c. 1. Mirror. c. 3. Bracton, f. 78, 80.
Britton, f. 170, 171. Littleton, sect. 85. Cook 1 Instit. f 64. 65. spelmanni
Glossarium, p. 356, 357, 358.
Lawbooks and Laws resolve, that when ever any man swears Fealty, or does
Homage to his Landlord for the Lands held of him, it shall be with this special
exception, saving the Faith which I owe to our Lord the King, who is the
Sovereign Lord of all his Subjects, principally sworn unto, and to be obeyed in
the first place before all or any others. Hereupon Cooks 1 Instit. f. 65.
Walter Bishop of Exeter, Anno 6 E. 1. for omitting this Clause out of the
Homage he received of his Tenants in Cornwall, IN CONTEMPTUM DOMINI REGIS, and
ad manifestam, quo ad PRIVILEGIUM IPSIUS DOMINI REGIS EXHAEREDATIONEM, ET
DAMNUM IPSIUS DOMINI REGIS ad valentiam DECEMBER MILL LIBRARUM, he had judgment
given against him for it upon an Information, and was put to a great fine and
ransom for this his transcendent offense. Upon this very account Honnore
Bonhor Prior of Salon, an eminent Doctor of the Canon law, in his Larbre des
Battailles, chapter 50, 51. resolves, out of other Doctors, That if the King moves
war against any Baron of his Realm, his Tenants and Homagers are not bound to
assist him in his wars against the King by their Homage or Fealty, but rather
to assist the King against him, BECAUSE THE KING IS SOVEREIGN LORD TO THEM
BOTH; and the Barons lesser and inferior Dominion, is swallowed up or
suspended by the presence of the King, the greater and superior Lord; and
because the Baron commits both Treason and Perjury against the King, by
violating his Homage, in taking up Arms against him;) Whereupon his Tenants are
not bound to aid him in his Perjury and Treason against his Sovereign. And chapter
100, 101, 102. he determines, That if a man be a Subject to two Kings, States,
or Cities, which afterward wage war against each other, he is bound to serve
the King, State, City in the wars, to which HE WAS FIRST SWORN AND OBLIGED,
because his latter Oath and Homage to his last Sovereign cannot invallid nor
discharge his first Oath and Allegiance to his old one; Much less then can
these later Treasonable Oaths, Engagements to a New Protector or Republic,
dispense with those antecedent legal Oaths, Protestation, Covenant to our
lawful King and his Heirs, nor oblige us in the least degree to fight against
or oppose their Persons, Titles, Rights, to perpetuate our wars, miseries,
taxes, oppressions, confusions, and prevent our future settlement.

Let us therefore all now seriously remember, consider in the fear of God, That
as all who have been Judges, Justices, Majors, Bailiffs of Towns, Barresters,
Benchers, Ministers, Graduates in Universities, Attorneys, Civil or
Ecclesiastical Officers in any kind, Members of the Commons House, or Tenants
to the King, before the year 1649. have often taken the premised Oaths of Majors,
Justices, Fealty, or at lest of Supremacy and Allegiance; So all Aldermen,
Governors, Assistants, Livery men, Common Counsel-men, and Freemen whatsoever
of every City, Corporation, Society, Company, Fraternity, throughout the
Realm, have likewise taken another Oath beginning thus, You shall swear, to be
good and true, or true Liegeman to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and to
his Heirs and Successors. Which if they will all now conscienciously verify
and resolutely fulfill to the Right Heir and Successor of the Crown, they may
soon put a period to all their present Oppressions, Taxes, Excises, arbitrary
Militiaes, Distractions, Fears, Dangers, under their New Egyptian Tax-Masters,
and make themselves real ENGLISH FREEMEN, without any new War, or much feared
foreign invasion, instead of continuing Bondslaves under a misnamed Free State,
in which no wise men can yet discern the least shadow of Freedom or Security,
but inovitable desolation in the present posture of its public Affairs, and a
necessity of involving himself in the guilt of New Oaths, more treasonable than
the Sea Cooks 3 Instit. cap. 1. 74. Capterburies Doom, p. 19. 26. 40.
Bishops late etc. Oath, which can neither be imposed, nor administered without
danger, and the guilt both of Perjury and High Treason to the King, kingdom,
and Parliament, by all our known Laws resolution.

I shall close up all with this memorable seasonable ancient Canon, Resolution,
and Anathema of the 4th. Council of Tolede in Spain Anno 681. Can. 74. as an
effectual means (through Gods blessing) to reclaim us from our former
Perjuries, Treacheries, Regends Disloyalties to our lawful Kings and their
Posterity, to restore them to their hereditarie Rights, divert Gods heavy
Judgments from us, to settle us in firm, lasting peace for the future, and
restore our pristine Tranquillity, Unity, Trade, Honor, Prosperity so long
expected, desired. Surius Council. l. 2. p 736, 737. See King James his Apoligy
for the Oath of Allegiance.
Multarum gentium (ut fama est, being then principally intended of the ancient
Gildas de excidio and conquestu Britanniae Council. c. 12 Calcuth, Spelmanni
Council. p. 295, 296. Malmesburi de Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 3. p. 16, 27. Mat.
Westminster. Anno 838.
Britains, Saxons, Northumberlanders, exceeding all other Nations in Perjury,
Treachery to, rebellions against and murders of their Kings, and now exceeded
therein by us of this Age) tanta extat perfidia animorum, ut fidem sacramento
promissam Regibus suis observare contemnant, et ore simulant Iuramenti
professionem, dum retinent mente perfidiae impietatem. Iurant enim Regibus
suis, et fidem, quam pollicentur, praevaricantur; nec metuunt volumen illud
judicii Dei, per quod inducitur maledictio, multaque poenarum comminatio super
cos, qui jurant in nomine Dei mendaciter. Quae ergo spes talibus populis,
contra hosts laborantes, erit? Quae fides ultra cum aliis gentibus in pace
credenda? quod foedus non violandum? quae in hostibus jurata sponsio stabilis
permanebit, quando ipsis propriis Regibus juratam fidem non servant? Quisenim
adeo furiosus est, qui caput suum manu sua propria desecet? Illi (ut notum est)
immemores salutis suae, propria manu seipsos interimunt, in semetipsos suosque
Reges proprias convertendo vires. Et cum dominus dicat, Nolite tangere Christos
meos, and David: quis inquit, extendet manum suam in Christum Domini, and
innocens erit? Illis nec vitare metus ett perjurium, nec Regibus infer
exitimn. Hostibus quippe fides pacti datur, nec violatur. Quod si in bello
sides valeat, quanto magis in suis servanda est? Sacrilegium quippe est si
violetur a gentibus Regum suorum promissa fides, quia non solum iu eos sit
pacti transgressio, sed et in Deum, in sujus nomine pollicetur ipsa promissio.
Inde est, quod multa regna terrarum, caelestis iracundia ita permutavit; ut pro
impietate fidei et morum, alterum ab altero solveretur. Unde and nos cavere
oportet, casum hujusmodi gentium, ne similiter plaga seriamur praecipiti, et
poena puniamur crudeli. Si enim Deus Angels in se praevaricantibus non
pepercit, qui per inobedientiam coeleste habitaculum perdiderunt; unde and per
Esaiam dicit: Inebriatus est gladius meus in coelo: quanto magis nos nostrae
salutis interitum timere debemus, ne per infidelitatem eodem saeviente DEI
gladio pereamus? Quod, si divinam iracundiam vitare volumus, et severitatem
ejue ad clementiam provocare cupimus, servemus erga Deum religionis cultum,
atque timorem, custodiamus erga Principes nostros pollicitam fidem atque
sponsionem. Non sit in nobis, ut in quibusdam gentibus, infidelitatis
subtilitas impia, non subdolae mentis perfidia, non perjurii nesas, et
conjurationum nefanda molimina. Nullus apud nos praesumptione regnum arripiat,
nullus excitet mutuas seditiones civium, nemo meditetur interitus regum; sed,
desuncto in pace Principe, Primates gentis cum sacerdotibus (filium ejus)
Soccessorem Regni Constlio communi constituant, ut dum unitatis concordia a
nobis retinetur, nullum patr^^e gentisque dissidium, per vim atque ambitum
moliatur. Quod si haec admonitio mentes nostras non corrigit, et a^ salutem
communem cor nostrum nequaquam perducit, audi sententiam nostram. Quicunque
ergo ex nobis, vel totius Hispaniae populis, qualibet conjuratione vel studio
Sacramentum Fidel suae, quod pro patriae gentisque Gotthorum (...), vel
conservatione Regiae salutis pollicitus est temeraverit aut Regem nece
attrectaverit aut potestate Regni exuerit, aut praesumptione tyrannica regni
fastigium usurpaverit. Anathema sic in con^pectu Dei Patris, et Angelorum,
Christi, (...) Apostolorum ejus, Spiritus Sancti et Martyrum Christi, atque ab
Ecclesia Catholica, Quam perjurio prophanaverit, efficiatur extraneus, and ab
omni caetu Christianorum alienus, cum omnibus impietatis suae sociis, quia
oportet, ut una poena teneat obnoxios, quos similis error invenerit implicatos.
Quod iterum, secundo, et tertio, replicamus et acclamamus. Qui contra hanc
nostram definitionem praesumpserint, Anathema, Maranatha; hoc est, perditio in
adventu Domini sint, et cum Juda Scarioth partem habeant ipsi and socii sui, et
cum Diabolo et Angelis ejus aeternis suppliciis condemnantur Amen,

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
MAny are the Presidents of Gods severe personal and National Judgments
inflicted upon perfideous perjurious Infringers of their Oaths and Covenants to
their lawful Sovereigns and their Heirs, See Huntindon Hist. l. 7. p. 367,
368. Hoveden Annal pars prior, p. 449.
Both at home and abroad: For domestique Presidents of this nature, I have
presented you with some signal ones, in the Second Part of my Legal and
Historical Vindication of the Fundamental Liberties, Rights and Laws of
England, London 1655. p. 29 to 37, 44, 46, 47, 56, 57, 60, to 65, 79, 80. and
Part 3. p. 23. 31, 54, 55, 58, 85, 97, 98, 102, 103, 106, 136, 138, to 146,
170, to 175, 201, to 229, 254, 256, 258. 260, 266, 267, 322, to 327, 333, to
370. before the Conquest. The like Presidents since, you may peruse in Henrici
Huntindonensis, Hist. l. 8. p. 291, 292, 293. Regeri de Hoveden Annalium pars
prior, p. 483. Holinshed, vol. 3. p. 46. and Doctor Beards Theater of Gods
Judgments, Book 1. chapter 28. I shall instance only in two remarkable foreign
Examples of this kind.

The first is in the usurping Ca^onis Chronicon. Grimstons Imperial History, in
the life of Rodulph. Dr. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 1. c. 28, p. 174
Henrici Mutii Chronicon Germaniae, l. 15.
Emperor Rodulph, Duke of Swethland. Pope Hildebrand, antichristanly
Excommunicating his Sovereign, the Emperor Henry the fourth, and absolving his
Subjects from their Allegiance to him, proffered the Empire to this Duke
Rodulph: who remembering his Oath of Allegiance sworn by him to this Emperor,
and how vile a part it would be for him to betray or supplant him he had sworn
to obey and defend, at first refused the Popes offer; yet afterward by the
sophystry and persuasion of some Bishops, he accepted and took upon him the
Title of Emperor, opposing his Liege Lord Henry in four several Battles fought
between them for the Empire; in the last whereof being vanquished, he was sore
wounded, and lost his right hand. When he was ready to die of his wounds, one
brought his right hand cut off in the Battle unto him, which he beholding with
much regret, in detestation of his Perjury, and Treachery through the Popes
violence, brake forth into these memorable words in the presence of many
Bishops who had persuaded him to this rebellion. Behold here the right hand
wherewith I swore faith and allegiance to my Liege Lord the Emperor Henry: this
will be an argument of my breach of faith before God, and of your Traiterous
impulsion and advice thereunto. Which having uttered, he immediately expired of
his wounds in a kind of despairing manner, as the just punishment of his
Perjury and Treachery by his own confession; magnumque mundo documentum datum
est, ut nemo contra Dominum suum censurgat Nam The right hand of a perjured
person was to be cut off by sundry Laws: Constitutionum Sicularum l. 3. Tit.
59. Capit. Caroli Magni, l. 5. Tit. 125. Legis Longobardorum, l. 2 Tit. 58.
abscissa Rudolphi dextera dignissimam perjurii vindictam demonstravit, qui
fidem Domino suo Regi juratam violare non timuit, et tanquam alia vulnera non
sufficerent, ad mortem accessit etiam hujus membri poena, ut per poenam
agnosceretur et culpa: as an Germaniae Historiarum Tom. 1. Francofurti 1558. p.
383.
Historian of that age observes in the life of Henry the 4th. Let those
perjurious perfidious Army-Saints and other Grandees who have taken, subscribed
the precedent Oaths, Protestation, League Covenant, with hands laid upon the
Bible, and lifted up to the most high God; and yet have since taken, subscribed
with the self-same hands, an Oath and Engagement diametrically contrary
thereunto, to the destruction of our Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments and their
Privileges; and are still stretching out their perjured hands against the
lawful Heir and Successor to the Crown, remember this sad president of Rodulph
with fear and trembling.

To which I shall annex another sadder and more tragical Spectacle, never to
be forgotten; Aeneae Picolominei Cardinalis Status Europae sub Frederico 3. c.
4. Knolls Turkish History, p. 297, 298.
Vladislaus King of Hungary, having made a Truce with Amurath the 2. (the sixth
King of the Turks) which he sealed and swore unto in the name of Christ: by
the command of Pope Eugenius, and persuasions of his Legate, Cardinal Julian and
other Prelates, who absolved him from this Oath, he violated it in a most
perfidious manner, and soon after taking Amurath unprovided to fight, gave him
battle at Varna with a puissant Army, and was likely to rout him upon the first
encounter. Upon which occasion Amurath being in extreme fear and danger,
beholding the Crucifix in the displayed ensigns of the Christians, plucked the
writing out of his bosom wherein the League was comprised, and holding it in
his hands with his eyes cast up to heaven, used these words. Behold thou
crucified Christ, This is the League thy Christians in thy Name have made with,
and sworn to me; which yet they have without any cause on my part, violated;
Now if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as we dream, Revenge the wrong
now done unto thy Name and me, and show thy Power upon thy perjurious People,
who in their Deeds deny thee to be their God. Upon the uttering of which words,
the Battle presently turned, Huniades, that valiant General and the Hungarians
fled, the whole Army was routed, many thousands of them slain, and taken
Prisoners; perjured King Vladislaus, Cardinal Julian, with most of the Prelates
and Nobles who persuaded him to this breach of Faith slain in the field; the
greatest part of Hungary overrun, gained, and ever since possessed by the
Turks, Vdalislaus his head cut off in the Battle, after was fixed on a poll,
carried through Grecia and Asia in triumph, and showed to the people as a
monument of Gods justice on him for his perjury. And will not the blood of our
beheaded King, the disinheriting of his Heir and Successor, the abjuration of
Kingship it self, and the House of Lord, the subvertion of all the Rights,
Freedoms, Privileges of Parliament, by those in late and present power, against
all the premised Oaths, Protestations, Solemn League and Covenant, sworn by
them in the name, presence of God himself, and the Lord Jesus Christ, with
hands laid on the Evangelists, and listed up to Heaven, and then subscribed for
a perpetual Memorial; cry aloud to God and Christ for the like avenging Justice
from Heaven against the perjurious Infringers of them in a far higher degree
than Vladislaus was guilty of, if spread and held up before them by the
disinherited King and Lords? No doubt it will in Gods due time, if not
speedily, really and deeply bewailed repented of, by a plenarie satisfaction
and restitution: And cause God to shake out every man (and his Posterity too)
from his House, and from his labor, and empty him and his of all present
honors and enjoyments, (as Nehemiah shaked and emptied his lap,) that
performs not these Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant, to which he and all
the Congregation have said Amen, Neh. 5. 12, 13. Since the Titus Livius Hist.
l. 1. and 20. Caelius Rhodiginus. Antiqu. Lect. l. 21. c. 15. Alexander ab
Alexandro, Genesis Dierum l. 5. c. 10. Grotius de Jure Belli. l. 2. c. 13.
very Pagan Graecians, and Romans insinuated as much in the Ceremonies of
their sacred Oaths, wherein they prayed, That if they did not faithfully
observe them without guile, that Jove and the other Gods would smite and slay
them as they did the lamb they then sacrificed to them, and that they might be
cast out and perish like the stone they threw out of their hands when they
swore; the Religion of an Oath, being so great amongst the very Heathens, that
they thought all human Society abolished with its violation, and those persons
unworthy to live or breath amongst men, who durst presume to infringe it,
though to their loss and prejudice. And shall they not condemn us Christians,
and those most refined Saints of this Age, who like the perfidious Atheistecal
Alexander ab Alexandro l. 5. c. 10.
Carthagenians, Thessalonians, and Parthians, regard neither God, nor Altars,
nor Covenants, nor Oaths, no farther than they serve their turns to cheat and
circumvent men; to whom profit is more sacred than Faith or Oaths? No doubt
they will.

Ezech. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21. Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the
Covenant, (when lo, he had given his hand) and has done all these things, he
shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord GOD, As I live, surely mine
Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant which he has broken, even it will
I recompense upon his own head. And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall
be taken in my Snare, And I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him
there, for his Trespasses that he has trespassed against me. And all his
Fugitives, with all his Bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain
shall be scattered toward all Winds; and ye shall know, that I the LORD have
spoken it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 13. l. 6. 1647. r. 1657. p. 16. l. 6. Justification, r. Prevarication. p.
18. l. 2. Meetings, r. Mutinies.

Margin. P. 23. l. 7. r. Sacramenti.


