A True and Full ACCOUNT OF A CONFERENCE HELD ABOUT RELIGION, BETWEEN Dr.
Tenison AND A. PULTON One of the MASTERS in the SAVOY.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross 1687.

A. P. having been Eighteen years out of his own Country, pretends not yet to
any Perfection of the English Expression or Orthography, wherefore for the
future he will crave the favor of treating with the Dr. in Latin, since the
Dr. finds fault with his English.

To the Indifferent READER.
IT was wholly beyond A P's. design, when he was invited to the Conference,
(now so much noised through the Kingdom) to proceed so far as to Print; but as
he went to it, as to a private meeting, so he never intended (being returned
home) to make any noise of it, more than by giving by word of mouth, a simple
account of the whole matter, to such as might privately desire to know the
subject, and success thereof. But being alarmed all Friday, Saturday* and
Sunday morning, with reiterated reports of his being run down, and silenced
with five, eight, fifteen of his fellow Jesuits, and of the Doctors putting
many Questions to him, without being able to obtain any Answer; at the instance
of many Roman Catholics, who had been derided by the Dr's Party, as though
their cause had been totally lost: A. P. thought himself obliged, after his
public exercise of Sunday in the Afternoon, to speak to his Auditors as
follows; There having been many false and scandalous reports of a late
Conference, I conceive many here present may be in expectation, of having now
some account thereof; but it is not our custom to give occasion of offense by
Pulpit clamours, and making private Affairs public: And being not yet informed
that the Doctor has begun, or countenanced these reports, I shall omit at
present to say any thing relating thereunto; though, if justly provoked, the
Sunday following, I shall give a sincere full, and modest account of the whole.
The Doctor having heard of this, was pleased on Monday in the evening, in
company of Dr. Cla. to give A. P. the honor of a visit in the Savoy, and to
use his own terms, to expostulate with him, concerning the unbeseemingness of
making such Conferences, the subject of a Pulpit discourse; adding, that he not
having taken those measures, it seemed reasonable A. P. should speak of it in
that nature, A. P. replied he was content, but that some means should be used
to disabuse the deceived multitude; to which the Dr. answered, he was willing
to prosecute the Question proposed, by writing, and that he would Answer the
difficulty out of St. Ambrose. But A. P. saying, that that was the least part
of his proof, he desired the Dr would allow that he might produce all those
Testimonies which he would have alleged in in the Conference it self, had not
the Dr. refused to hear them; and that then the Dr. should give his Answer. But
the Dr. desiring he might Answer that of St. Ambrose first, A. P. assented, and
both sides agreed, that the first Copy should be mutually sent to the opposite
Party. (Here the Reader is desired to note, that this was the only Agreement
made between the Parties in the Savoy) and there was no farther challenge on
either side, much less, did the Dr. come to ask Pardon, as some are said to
have reported. Now here was no mention made of giving, or not giving in
writing, a public account of the mere matter of fact past, but only of going
on with the points then in debate; and therefore if the Dr. charge A. P. with
not standing to his agreement, (as he seems by his Letters to threaten) it will
be without ground.

Now A. P. seeing the false and injurious reports daily increase, and that the
Dr's. Party spread them by written Copies, in Coffee-houses, thought himself
obliged in justice to the Truth, to write some short account of the matter of
Fact; the first Copy whereof, he sent to the Dr. the Friday following, and then
gave some few to his friends, so to stop the Torrent of the false and
scandalous reports which ran about the whole City, and great part of the
Nation. The Dr. seemed to take this ill, though without any grounds; he having
then completed a Narrative of seven or eight sheets. And whereas he says in
his Printed Copy, that he and A. P. had agreed of following this Method of
setting forth the matter at large, it is far from true, there never having been
a word mentioned of it. A. P. so far as by-hours from greater Employments shall
allow, will show that it is the Dr. who in his Narrative has truly inverted the
whole Order of the Conference, and slightly passing over the chief stress of A.
P's. Arguments, and most material Instances, has taken pains to Illustrate his
own Answers to certain by-questions, purposely thrown in by him to amuse the
Auditors, and divert their attention from the chief Argument, and take
occasion thence to tax A. P. with not answering his Questions. It is desired,
that every one will be so favorable to truth and equity, as to suspend his
judgment, till such time as they shall have read A. P's. Remarks on the Drs.
Narrative; by which he will evidence to the World his many mistakes,
misreprensations, want of sincerity, and his artifice, in confounding the
wholematter of fact; and that neither in his Narrative, or Conference, (though
much unlike) he has given any satisfactory Answer to the main Question, nor
gained any point against the Roman Catholics, unless A. P's. not calling to
mind Innocent the III's. Name, or a Verse of St. Matthew, be a total overthrow
of the Roman Catholic Cause.

A True and Full RELATION Of the late CONFERENCE BETWEEN Dr. T. and A. P. One
of the MASTERS OF THE SAVOY.
1. ON Monday the 26th. of September, there came a Youth to A. P. who desired
to know, if he was willing to accept a Conference with Dr. H. He answered, he
was; but on Tuesday it was told him, Dr. T. was the Person he must engage with,
at Three in the Afternoon on Thursday follownig.

2. On Thursday, as was appointed, the Parties met, A. P. cume with one
Witness, (no Priest,) the Dr. alone, who complaining that A. P. came with
Attendance, whereas, he had no body in his Company; A. P. replied, he thought
it reasonable, that some one should be present, that might be witness of all
should be said or done on either side; But if the Dr. approved not thereof, he
was content, the Chamber (which now was almost full of People) should be
cleared, and that the Dr. with the Youth upon whose account they met, should
remain alone with A. P. But the Dr. desiring the Man of the House might also be
present, A.P. assented thereto, upon condition he might also be allowed
likewise to have one Witness, to wit, Mr. M. the Dr. excepted against that
Gentleman, and had a private debate with him; Whereupon A. P. was content that
Gentleman should retire, and pitched upon another who casually came in, though
not known by name to A. P.

3. Here the Dr. sitting down, invited A. P. also to place himself by him,
which he did; but desired very much, that Pen, Ink and Paper might be brought,
and every thing writ down which should be said on either side; but this was not
accepted of.

4. The Youth appearing (for whose sake the Conference was) A. P. said, That
having of late in his Catechisms showed the necessity of true Faith for
Salvation, and of some assured means to find out the said true Faith, which he
had shown to be a True and Infallible Church; This Youth had been moved, to
entertain thoughts of joining himself to the Roman Catholic Church; he desired
therefore, that the Dr. (if he could) would be pleased to assign a better Rule
of Faith, and which might serve to keep the Youth in the Persuasion he had been
bred in: The Dr. replied, That the Boy had told him no such thing, but that A.
P. had told him of the contradictions of Luther; and when the Dr. asked him,
what Book of Luther it was, the Youth answered, a Book in Quarto; whereupon the
Dr. told him, That Luthers Works were not in that Volume, but in Folio. A. P.
granted he had spoke to that purpose of Luther, and had shown that Luther had
taught now Seven, then Three, then Two, and at last only One Sacrament, and
there being consequently no Unity in his Doctrine, he had no Spirit of Truth in
him: But he said, he never had brought any Book to the Pulpit with him; Then
the Dr. replied, The Boy began with a Lie, to which A. P. replied, That did not
follow, for he had showed him such a Book in his Chamber, which was not any
piece of Luther's Works, but had Quotations out of them: At which the Dr. had a
fling at Equivocation, saying, That A. P. had showed him no Book, to wit, in
the Pulpit, but he had in his Chamber, to the contradiction of Luther; he said
the Church of England depended not upon Luther, and that the Roman Church had
not always taught Seven Sacraments; to which A. P. replied, That the Church
then defined the precise number of Sacraments, when the debate began concerning
the Nature and Essence of a Sacrament, but had never taught and declared a
contrary number: Here A. P. to avoid wandering, pressed the Dr. to assign his
Rule of Faith.

5. He having assigned the Holy Scriptures, A. P. replied, There were two
things incumbent on the Dr. to prove. 1. That the Volumes he called Holy
Scripture, were truly such. 2. That when so proved, they were a sufficient Rule
by themselves of Faith. But to the Second Point nothing was said.

6. To the First the Dr. answered, they had been handed down from the Apostles.
A. P. desired the favor to know, by what hands? The Dr. answered, The
Scriptures were proved by the Testimony of Turks, Jews, Gentiles, and
Christians, and that he had the same certainty for them, as for there having
been such a Man as Cicero and Caesar. Here Mr. M. asked the Dr. (who then
turning toward him, seemed to speak to him) whether Turks, Jews, or Gentiles
made up part of the Testimony he alleag'd for Holy Writ? But A. P. desiring
that no body should argue but himself, desired to know further of the Dr. from
what immediate hands the Church of England had received their Bible, when she
began the Reformation? The Dr. answered, from the Universal Church, and that he
meant by the Universal Church, all those different Bodies which make up the
number of Christians. Then A. P. urged to know, whether all those different
Parts made one True and Uncorrupted Body, or whether at least there was then
any such thing, as a True and Incorrupt Part at least of the Whole; But the Dr.
would not allow the Whole to be so, nor yet assign any Part thereof void of
much Corruption.

7. Here a pleasant Schoolmaster perceiving the Argument to pinch, with wry
Mouths and antic Postures, offered to A. P. a Picture (as he said) of the
Blessed Trinity: A. P. perceiving that the standers by were disposed to
Laughter, replied, That God having been pleased to appear to the Prophet Daniel
under the form of an Ancient Man, he saw no reason why he might not be Painted
as he appeared, provided one meant not to delineate him in his own Nature;
Which said, he returned to his Argument, and pressed much to know how the
Scripture, having been delivered unto them by corrupted, and consequently false
Witnesses, could be held for the assured and undoubted Word of God. But the
Schoolmaster continuing to throw in impertinent Questions, with many
ridiculous gestures, A. P. said, he came not to argue with a Buffoon but a Dr.
This was ill taken, and the Dr. was pleased to read a Lesson of Charity upon
that Subject, and went about to prove, that A. P. had violated the Holy Day:
And when Mr. M. said in A. P's. defense, That St. Paul had used as sharp
Language on a like occasion, The Dr. replied, were he St. Paul, he might do so
too.

8. Here A. P. perceiving the Dr. willing to enter a Discourse of a different
Subject, he wished Mr. M. to withdraw to the Window, that the Dr. might have no
occasion of diverting the Argument, or complaining, there were two against one;
which done, he urged a great while the Dr. to declare, How he was assured of
his Bibles being the True and Uncorrupted Word of God, since he believed all
those who had delivered it, were Superstitious and Idolatrous, or (at least)
False and Corrupted: And how, since he taught they had Corrupted and depraved
the Sense of Holy Scripture, he could believe upon their Authority, the Letter
to remain Pure and not Corrupted, using thereto this Simile, That if one should
bring a Deed into a Court of Justice, attested only by Liars and Corrupted
Witnesses, although never so many, it would never make good any Action in Law,
or find Credit with any not Corrupted Judge; pressing this with much
earnestness, the Schoolmaster returned to his former humors, putting in
impertinent Questions, and saying, the Buffoon asks this. But A. P. neglecting
his impertinences, pressed the Dr. continually for a positive Answer, and the
Dr. said at last, There were True Christians of an Incorrupt Doctrine at such
time as the Reformation began, A. P. pressed to know, whether they were visible
or invisible, at that time? If invisible, he desired to be satisfied, how they
had taken the Bible from invisible hands? If visible, where they were? in what
Place or Country? But to this never could obtain any satisfactory Answer.

9. During two hours and a half, which this Debate lasted, all their Answers
were as follows. Sometimes the D. appealed to the Greek-Church, to which A: P.
said, That he had not then received the Scripture from the Universal, but a
Particular Church, and desired to know, if the Dr. would stand to that Plea,
and be Judged by the Greeks: If so, A. P. would demonstrate to him, That all
the Opinions, or at least the Chief wherein the Church of England Dissents from
the Roman Catholic Church, were Condemned and Anathematized by Two Great
Councels called in the East; on those Subjects since the pretended Reformation.
Here the Dr. said, the Greek-Church had been Corrupted by our Missions, which
is far from being so, they having been of the same Judgment many Hundred Years
ago.

10. Then he Appealed to the Bohemians; A. P. asked, Whether he would be Judged
by them? If so, he would find, how, although agreeing in some Points not
material, yet in the Substance they much Dissented from the late Reformers, who
descended not at all from them, no more than they from the Apostles.

11. Here the Dr. against A. P's. will, importuned Mr. M. to come from the
Window and sit by him, beginning a private Conference with him, which lasted a
considerable while; A. P. not being able to obtain of the Dr. a Prosecution of
the Question in debate, but called for a Bible, which when he would have
opened, (I know not on what occasion) A. P. said, it was the Question in hand
to prove that Book to be the Word of God; Then he called for a Greek Testament,
and asked A. P. if he at least would allow of the Greek Edition? A. P. replied,
he allowed of it, but from his hands could receive neither the one nor the
other, unless he made it out better than he had done yet, that it was the Pure
Word of God. The standers by seeing A. P. reject the Greek Testament, gave a
little shout, as though he understood it not; but A. P. would have shown himself
a sufficient Master of the Language, had he not been resolved to give no
occasion of diverting the Discourse from the main Point.

12. Continuing therefore to urge the Dr. for a positive Answer, he said in the
end, This Discourse, whereby he called the Authority of Holy Scripture in
Question, tended to Atheism: A. P. granted his Position, and said it was true,
in their Principles, who having taken all Infallible Authority from the Church,
there remained none for Holy Writ, which was left to each Man's fancy to
receive, reject, or interpret at discretion; and urged the Dr. very pressingly,
to assign One Body of Christians, which either had held positively or
negatively, as the Church of England does: And said moreover, That if the
Church of England were the True Church, she must derive her Succession from the
Apostles; to that the Dr. Answered, He must have a Library of 10000 l. worth of
Books to show it. A. P. replied, he believed it, and added, That had he 100000
l. worth, he would never make it out. Here the Gentleman mentioned above, in
the second place putting his hand into his Pocket, and taking out a little
Volume, said, he would show the Succession of the Roman Catholic Church at a
much easier rate.

13. Here A. P. was over-seen, in letting the Dr. slip to a new Question upon
the occasion of the Succession. Where the Dr. denied, that St. Peter had ever
been had Rome; to which A. P. replied, That Calvin himself, upon account of the
general Tradition thereof, granted, that Peter had been put to Death at Rome,
though he allowed not of his sitting there 25 years; And although A. P. said, it
was nothing necessary for the Truth of our Succession, that St. Peter should
have resided rather at Rome than Antioch: If the Dr. pleased, he would make out
to him, how, according to true Chronology, he might have resided there 25
years, and produced his Remarks relating to that Subject, and asked the Dr. who
had Planted the Christian Faith at Rome, of which St. Paul speaks in the First
Epistle to the Romans? whereas it is certain, St. Paul had never yet been
there; nor any other Apostle, except St. Peter. But the Dr. seeing A. P.
forward to prove the Point, passed to the Question of Transubstantiation, and
the Real Presence.

14. A. P. seeing there was no Answer to be got to the main Question, that he
might not seem to decline a particular Controversy, though he said, That was
far from the purpose intended, yet he would yield to the Dr. and accept
thereof. Consequently to which he demanded, who the Dr. would be Judged by in
this matter? He answered, by the Universal Church. A. P. demanded, whether by
the Universal Church now extant, or that of the Four First Centuries? If that
of the Church now in Being, he had at least Five to One against him; but he
replied, That his Appeal was to the Four First Centuries; Then A. P. desired
all present to take notice, that the Dr. would be Judged by the Testimonies of
the Four First Centuries.

15. Here mention was made (I know not on what occasion) of the Council of
Lateran, relating to the Real Presence, when the Dr. asked abruptly, what Pope
had presided at that Council? which not occurring to A. P. the Dr. was pleased
to say, he saw A. P. was a Man of no Reading; to which A. P. replied, The Dr.
was under a mistake, that he had Read all the Ecclesiastical History, and had
Volumes of Notes relating thereunto. He added moreover, That it imported
nothing who it was presided; that it was the great Council of Lateran, where
were Assembled near a Thousand Bishops, Prelates and Abbots; besides a very
great number of Divines, the Legates of the Kings of England, Jerusalem,
Cyprus; to say nothing of Neighboring Princes. The Dr. mistaken much more
grossly than A. P. in Point of History, denied, That there were any from
England, or that the Four Patriarchs were there so much as by their Legates.

16. Here A. P. perceiving the Dr. to begin to wander from the Question as it
had been stated, produced a Book which contained several Testimonies of Holy
Fathers, as also a Paper in English for the satisfaction of the standers by;
having moreover another Book in his Pocket relating thereunto: Here the Dr.
complained, he had hard measure, that he was come unprovided; and excepting
against Authorities cited out of Authors not at hand, said, let us take a Coach
and go to a Library, A. P. answered, he was content: But not to disappoint the
Company, he desired he would be pleased to hear the Quotations he had (as he
believed) very exactly Quoted; and asking of the Dr. whom he would be pleased
to hear first, naming several; The Dr. desired to hear St. Ambrose; whereupon
A. P. read one of his 4th. Book 4th. Chap. De Sacramentis: tu forte dicis meus
Panis est usitatus: Sed Panis iste, Panis est ante Verba Sacramentorum, ubi
accesserit Consecratio, ex Pane fit Caro Christi. Hoc igitur astruamus. Quomodo
potest qui Panis est, Corpus esse Christi? Consecratione. Which for the
satisfaction of the Hearers, A. P. read so in English. You say perchance mine
is usual Bread: But that Bread, is Bread before the Words of the Sacraments,
but the Words of Consecration being pronounced, of Bread it becomes the Flesh
of Christ, etc.

17. Here the Dr. as though be had gained a great Victory, calling for Pen and
Ink, made some Remarks upon the Authority Quoted; and then urged A. P. to set
his hand to it. A. P. desired the Dr. to have a little patience, and promised
that when the Dr. should have heard his whole Evidence, he would Sign it: But
the Dr. replied, he would hear no more, that A. P. was a Falsifier, that he who
would quote one false Text, ought not to be credited in another, A. P.
answered, It would be no easy matter to prove that the Work quoted, was not of
St. Ambrose; But if the Dr. doubted thereof, he was content to lay no stress
upon that Authority, and desired him to hear another of the same Author, to the
very same intent, out of an unquestionable Work: But he absolutely refused to
hear any more, and importuned A. P. by himself and some Women present, to
Subscribe; so that A. P. for the space of three quarters of an hour, could not
obtain the favor of being heard in order to his further Evidence, while the
Dr. rambled through several impertinent Discourses; and amongst other things,
falling upon Luther recounted I know not what Story of some Priest at Rome, who
pronouncing the words of Consecation, was heard to say, Bread thou art, and
Bread thou shall be; Wine thou art, etc. and offering at another long passage
out of Luther's Books, A. P. desired the Dr. not to trifle away the time with
idle Stories, saying, That little credit was to be given to Luther, who in his
own Works, had left written many Dialogues which he had with the Devil; and
acknowledges, that he left off saying of Mass, purely upon the Devils
persuasion: And then A. P. urged, that it was not likely if Luther had been of
a false Belief, the Devil would be zealous to put him into a true One, being
the Father of Lies.

18. A. P. labored in vain to reduce the Dr. from his rambling Discourses, and
pressed that he might go on in citing his Authorities, offering at least 20
times to read one out of Justinus, in his Apology to Antoninus Pius, which the
Dr. being somewhat spent with perpetual talking, was obliged to hear as
follows, That Food over which Thanks are given by Prayers, in his own, (to wit)
Christ's words, and whereby our Blood and Flesh are by a change nourished, is
the Flesh and Blood of the Incarnate JESUS. To which the Dr. Answered, That
Text made nothing for Transubstantiation. A. P. replied, It did at least for
the Real Presence, and he would produce other places, which also should prove
Transubstantiation. The Dr. said, he believed the Real Presence; that is,
(replied A. P.) you believe the Body and Blood of our Blessed Savior, to be
truly and really in the Sacrament of the Altar: To which the Dr. answered, he
would not declare what he held in that matter; And thence forward would never
be induced to hear a title more relating to a further proof of the matter in
debate. But pressed ever and anon A. P. to subscribe. A. P. being in a little
heat at so unreasonable proceedings, struck the Table with his hand (as on the
like occasions he had done twice before) saying, the Dr. believed certainly he
had a Fool to deal with; the Dr. replied, he would not come under his Ferula,
to which A. P. answered, it was usual to him in Schools to knock the Pulpit,
though he had never given Ferula in his life: Then he offered to read a Text of
St. Irenaeus, making for Transubstantiation, but the Dr. said, he had heard
enough, and the Mistress of the House offering A. P. the Dr's. Paper, pressed
him to Sign it.

19. Upon this occasion A. P. instanced as follows, Should I (said he) present
my self at a public Court of Justice, and having 30 Witnesses to produce; the
first of which being heard, and some exceptions taken (though perhaps
unreasonably) at his Evidence: Would not that be an unequitable Judge, who on
that occasion should refuse to hear any more; and summing up that single
Evidence, should require it should be signed: To which the Doctor answered,
that A. P. knew well enough simile's had little force to prove any thing; A. P.
replied, The Dr. had used many, much less pertinent, although this was not so
much a simile, as his very Case, The Holy Fathers being his Witnesses: And
presently after the Dr. giving a reason, why he would hear no more, made the
following comparison very improperly, Should one (said he) come to pay me 20 l.
and the first half Crown which he told out, prove naught, I would suspect all
the rest. Whereupon Mr. M. told the Dr. He would make use of his own
similitude, and therefore asked him; Whether if one coming to pay him such a
sum, and he disliking one of the half Crowns, he would refuse to receive the
Money, though the Play Master should offer another piece instead of that which
he disliked.

20. Here the Dr. forgetful that he had appealed to the Holy Fathers, said, He
did not much value what they said, and that many of them had fallen into
several Errors in other matters, and why not in this. To which A. P. replied,
That although one or two might have erred in their private judgments, yet that in
which all, or at least much the greater part unanimously agreed, had ever been
esteemed the Sentiment of the whole Church. The Dr. having Scripture in his
hand, and A. P. having on some past occasion cited that of our Blessed Savior,
He that hears not the Church, let him be unto you as a Heathen and a Publican:
The Dr. asked A. P. What Verse that was; A. P. answered, That was not to the
purpose, if the Dr. allowed it to be true Scriptore; and desired the Dr. to
tell him where it was, but he did not; At last turning from place to place, he
found it, and then endeavored to show how that Text related to a private
debate, and had no relation to any matter of Faith: Here A. P. complained
again, that all this was impertinent to the question in debate, although he
said, It was usual on particular occasions to make a general Law.

21. -- Here the Gentleman mentioned above in the second place, Desired he
might say something relating to the said Text; But A. P. desired the Dr. might
have no occasion of complaining there were more than one to encounter with him:
Though on the Dr. 's side, the Schoolmaster mentioned above, was constantly
throwing in some Quaerie or other, either to divert A. P. or to entertain the
Hearers: But as A. P. took little notice of what he said there, so he has not
much concerned himself to relate here what he there impertinently insinuated.

22. Here the Company breaking into different Parties, and A. P. seeing no
satisfaction could be obtained to any thing he had proposed, the Dr. nothing at
all provoked thereto, said, He wondered any body would entrust their Children
with him; for (said he) if he tampers with those who are not his Scholars,
what would he do with such as were under his care: To which A. P. replied, He
had engaged his Promise for the one, and not for the other: On this occasion
the Dr. said, There was no Credit to be given to Papists, being by there
Principles breakers of there Words: At which Mr. M. taking exceptions, said, He
would remain no longer, where such Scandalous propositions were vented, upon
which retiring out of the Room: A. P. desired to know, Upon what ground the Dr.
laid so injurious a Charge upon Roman Catholics: The Dr. in place of excusing
what Passion might have made him unwarily assert, proved it against A. P. as
follows, You believe yours to be (said he) the only saving Church; but you are
bound to save all you can: Therefore you are bound to break your Word given in
your Paper, of not tampering with your Scholars about Religion: A. P. replied,
The same medium would prove as much against His Majesty, as against A. P. which
so he made out. His Majesty believed His to be the only saving Church: But His
Majesty being Head of His People as much, and more than A. P. of his School,
was bound to endeavor their Salvation as much or more then A. P. of his
Scholars: Therefore His Majesty was bound to break His Royal Word given to His
People, of not forcing their Consciences.

23. The Dr. was offended at A. P.'s Retortion, and called out for Witnesses,
saying, He had said no such thing, And the standers by disturbed thereupon,
said, A. P. was come to entrap the Dr. and inform against him: A. P. returned,
That he had no such design, and believed that the Dr. had likewise no such
reflection when he spoke; but added withal, That he had done very ill to utter
a Proposition whence flowed naturally and unavoidably such bad inferences. Then
he desired the Dr., To name the Scholar that should prove A. P. either to have
opened his mouth in School-time of any controverted point; or tamperd with him
out of School; adding, That the Dr. was much mistaken in the Papists
Principles, who unanimously taught with St. Paul, That evil was not to be done,
that good might come of it: And A. P. said, He ought not to tell a lie, though
the Conversion of the World depended upon it: After which he answered directly
to the Dr. 's false Medium, viz. That no one was bound to do all the good
precisely possible ( if so the Dr. might be obliged to give all he had to the
Poor, and go to Preach the Faith to the Indians) and that it was a very good
action to teach Learning Gratis with the fear of God; although one meddled not
with Religion.

24. A. P. Unwilling to stay where Disputes decline to Calumniating, complained
how he, Had had no satisfactory Answer to any thing that was proposed: And
therefore desired the favor, that the Dr. would give a second Meeting, with an
Amanuensis and Witness in some fair Library: To which the Dr. replied, That he
was a man of much business, and had other Affairs in hand: But if A. P. for his
private satisfaction would meet him in his own Library, he was content.

25. The crowd being great, and the Room full of noise and disorder, A.P.
desiring again a second meeting, as above, began to withdraw; but the Master of
the House told him, If he would step into the next Room, he would dismiss the
People, and that Mr. M. had repaired thither: To which he assented, but the Dr.
as soon as he came in, began a long Parley with Mr. M. So that A. P. had no
more Discourse with the Dr. except that the Dr. at parting told, I know not
what Impertinent story of Pope Nicholas, as I take it (to wit) that he had
taught, that the Christians eat the Sacred Body of Christ like Collops: To
which A. P. replied, He had only the Dr.'s word for it; and desired to know
what the Dr. meant by Collops, which could have but two acceptations (to wit)
that they eat Christ's Body under an appearance of visible Flesh, or that they
eat it divided into many pieces, neither of which he was sure came into Pope
Nicholas's Head to teach.

31. Then the Dr. fearing his general Proposition, Of Papists being breakers of
their Word, might prove of no good consequence to him, he said, He spoke it
only of Jesuits, A. P. Then thanking him for his Complement, replied, It was
not so, but that his Proposition was general, as appears by the Medium he took
to prove it, to wit, that the Papists believed their's to be the only saving
Religion; which was not a point of Doctrine peculiar to the Jesuits, but common
to the whole Catholic Church; there being no more true Religions than there
are Gods. Then he told the Dr. He understood not the Jesuits Principles,
neither should he ever assign one different from those of other Roman
Catholics.

32. On this occasion the Dr. had a fling at the Deposing Power: To which A. P.
replied, That was so far from being a common Doctrine amongst the Society, that
it was expressly forbid under most severe Censures, not only to treat of it in
Schools, but even to speak of it in familiar Discourses: Then the Dr. cited
Mariana and Suarez, and added, That Parsons had taught it in Queen Elizabeth's
time: To which A. P. answered, The Jesuits obliged not themselves to follow any
private Author's Speculations; and added, That whatever Parsons had judged in
the Theory, it was the Reformers who had reduced it to practice; who had taken
the privilege upon a false pretense of Gospel Liberty to spill more Christian
Blood, through all Germany, Bohemia, France, Low Countries, Holland, England,
and wherever they assumed the Reforming Spirit, than ever the Roman
Catholics had done from from Christ's time, nor should he ever show they
propagated their Faith by the Swords Point: And since he by his odious
Insinuations had obliged A. P. to speak the Truth: It was manifest from
History, that the pretended Reformers had Deposed, and endeavored to Depose
more Princes in the space of 150 years, than the Roman Catholics had done in
1600. witness the King of Spain thrown out of his Possessions of the United
Provinces, witness Sigismond with his whole Race dispossessed of his Hereditary
Kingdom of Sweden; witness Charles the V. deprived of the Name of Emperor, and
called Charles of Gant by the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave of Hass at the head
of 100000 Men; witness the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, without any Authority
Deposed, and the Government transferred to the People: He added, That our own
Kingdoms of England and Scotland had embraced the same Principles, as was
manifest from the unjust Detainment and Beheading of Queen Mary Stuart: And he
said, He was unwilling to reflect on the Father of his most Sacred Majesty;
that the Scotch Covenant: And lately the Bills of Exclusion presented in three
Parliaments, were a sufficient Argument what Spirit run along with the
Reformation* And so bidding the Dr. Good night, Desired him to be more wary
another time, how he objected things that must naturally oblige his Adversary
to so severe a Recrimination.

FINIS.

