THE Present State OF THE EMPIRE OF MOROCCO. With a Faithful Account Of the
Manners, Religion, and Government of that PEOPLE.

By Monsieur de St. OLON, Ambassador there in the Year 1693.

Adorned with FIGURES.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bently, at the Post Office in Russel Street in
Covent Garden; W. Freeman, at the Bible against the Middle Temple in
Fleet Street; and S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhill, 1695.

The Audience given by the Emperor of Morocco to the French Ambassador

Printed for R. Bentley W. Freeman and S. Manship



TO THE Right Honorable Sir William Trumball, One of the Lords Commissioners
OF HIS Majesty's Treasury.
SIR,
Though I have long been Ambitious of giving some public Instance of the
Veneration I have for You, I would not have presumed to have done it now, had
not the Book, of which what follows is a Translation, been written by an
Ambassador, and dedicated to a King. The Character which you have so honorably
maintained, not only at the Court of that Prince, but with an Emperor greater
than that of Morocco, entitles You to the Protection of more finished Works
than this; the Author of which, though a Person of great Skill in Business,
perhaps not unjustly, thinks himself not altogether versed in the nice way of
Writing: Yet his Book contains so many pleasant and useful Remarks, and may
discover so many Mysteries to the piercing Eyes of a sound Politician, that You
are Master of too much Goodness not to allow it a Place, on that Score, among
that admirable Collection which You possess no less in Your Mind than in Your
Library. Fear, not, SIR, I should, like many Dedicators, attempt a Panegyric
instead of an Epistle; I know You are so far from being the least indulgent to
such a Practice, that You more carefully avoid Addresses of this Nature, than
some, who deserve them less, industriously encourage them. For still Your
Modesty seeks as much to keep Your other Virtues veiled, as most of us Writers
do to discover them; and it has bribed some of them into a Concealment of Your
real Merit, in a more liberal Manner than the Vanity of many has recompensed a
Publication of their imaginary Worth. I dare not then pretend to mention those
Qualifications that endear You to Your Country; nor am I so partial to my self
as to desire You to protect the Original or the Translation of this Book from
the Censures of the Reader, to whom I freely abandon it.

My whole Design is merely the Acknowledgment of Favors received; though at the
same time You cannot pardon this without conferring a new one; since I know You
would have bestowed on me fresh Marks of Your Generosity, had I consented to
spare You the Blush which the sight of this will raise. But, SIR, even those
who are not able to return Obligations, if of a grateful Principle, do not love
to be too much indebted; and it is some Ease at least to Acknowledge when we
cannot Requite. I only beg then, to let all those who will read this know, That
I have the deepest Sense imaginable of Your obliging Goodness, that singular
Humanity, or rather Charity, which, as it extends to many of our unhappy
Refugies, has made me a sharer in the Effects of Your Bounty, doubtless much
more than the most tolerable of my Attempts as a Writer. You pitied a Man, who,
having the real Love of a Loyal English Subject for the Great Prince under whom
we live, endeavors to appear as much an Englishman as he can, even in his
Writings, since he is driven on the barren Coast of Parnassus, that idle
Business Poetry, for want of better. May Heaven still preserve You for the Good
of Mankind, and more particularly of Your Country, to whom You so wholly devote
Your Self; and may You believe me with the greatest Zeal and Respect,

SIR, Your most humble, and Most obedient Servant, PETER MOTTEUX.

THE AUTHOR's Epistle Dedicatory TO THE KING.
SIR;
I Doubt not but that Your Majesty has, from Time to Time, been faithfully
informed of what relates to the State, Forces, Customs, and Religion of the
Moors; and indeed, what I have seen in Print on that Subject, generally agrees
with what I have observed while I was in the Emperor of Morocco's Dominions:
Yet, Sir, Your Majesty's Orders, and what I was enjoined in my Instructions,
having obliged me to make there some newer and less common Observations, I hope
Your Majesty will not dislike, that, without affecting to swell the Memoirs,
which I now have the Honor to lay before you, with superfluous Repetitions of
what some Authors have said, I only should give, as a kind of Supplement, such
Observations as seem to have been omitted by them, either in what concerns the
Nature and Particulars of the Trade of that Empire, the Character, Manners and
Genius of those who have the greatest share in the Government of it, or, as to
what the Conquests of the Prince, who Rules there at this time, may have
contributed to the Enlarging of his Dominions, the increasing of his Forces,
and the heightning of that Vanity that does not reign less in him than the
other Qualifications by which he is so particular.

When Your Majesty did me the Honor to make choice of me to go in Your Name to
conclude with that Emperor the Treaty of Peace, of which for some Years he had
showed himself so desirous that he even seemed to have removed before hand all
the Difficulties that might obstruct it, in the Letter which he had written
about it, and sent to Your Majesty by the Consul of Sally, You were already
convinced by frequent Trials, how little his Proposals and Promises are to be
relied upon.

Accordingly one of the most essential and most enforced Articles in my
Instructions was, That I should take care not to be deceived by them; and
therefore it is what I chiefly applied my self to prevent, by all the Means and
Expedients that seemed to me most proper, to conciliate the Artifice of his
Council and Ministers, with the fervency and fidelity of my Zeal for Your
Majesty's Service and Glory.

Even what I said to that Prince at my first Audience, which I insert at the
end of this short Treatise, may also convince Your Majesty that I have not been
sparing of such Encomiums and Insinuations as I judged most capable of
flattering his Ambition, and of inclining him to concur with Your Majesty's
Pious and Solid Designs for the Freedom of Your Captive Subjects, and for the
security of Your Merchants.

If the Memoirs or Journal which I sent to You of my Negotiation in that
Prince's Country, and at his Court, have been read to Your Majesty, You have
not only seen, that You had entertained very just Thoughts on that Subject, but
that, far from my being able to remove that Punic Faith so general here at this
time, or root out its Scions, grown stronger than their ancient Stock, it has
not been in my Power with all my Care and Endeavors to shake them in the least.

Here, Sir, I might have an opportunity to repeat the substance of many Things
which I have mentioned at length in that Journal, did not I fear this would be
too foreign to the Design of the following sheets, which, according to Your
Majesty's Orders, are only to relate to the Extent, Government, Strength, and
Trade of the Empire of Morocco.

However, I think my self obliged before I begin, to acquaint Your Majesty,
that by what the subtle Ways and Discourses of the King of Morocco's Ministers
have betrayed to me of his Designs and Resolutions, as to the offers he makes
from Time to Time to Treat with Your Majesty, it plainly appears, whatever his
Demonstrations of Sincerity may seem, that all his Aim and utmost Intent have
always been, and will ever be only to procure himself some Presents, Honors,
and Supplies for the regaining of the Towns which the Spaniards still hold in
his Country.

Besides, as this Prince and his Ministers know very well, that Your Goodness
and Compassion for Your poor Captive Subjects, are the only Motives that
incline You to hearken to his Proposals, there is no doubt but that he is not
likely to part with those Slaves as long as he hopes they may be a means to
procure him the Advantages I have mentioned; so that it is not to be expected he
will ever treat but upon Terms of this nature, and his Ministers will always
endeavor by all imaginable means, that the effect, which they think they ought
to expect in that case, may precede the Performance of what they shall Promise
on their side.

There remains now nothing for me to represent to Your Majesty, but that I have
taken such care in examining what ever is the subject of these Memoirs, that I
may well assure You they contain nothing but what is most conformable to the
Truth.

I also make bold to promise my self, from Your Majesty's Goodness, that You
will the rather excuse Omissions and Defects, seeing that, by the Journal which
I had the Honor to give You of my stay and Negotiation in that Kingdom, where
I was almost always detained and narrowly observed and where it is not allowed
to take Informations of the State of the Country, You may perceive how little I
could converse with those who might have enabled me to have given a more
perfect Account of it, and such a one as might better evince the Fidelity of
the Respectful and Inviolable Zeal with which I am,

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Subject and
Servant, Pidou de St. Olon.

Advertisement.
Newly published,
THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion,
and Government of that People. By Monsieur SANSON, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. Done into English.

Now in the Press, and will be speedily published,
THE Life of the Famous Cardinal Duke of Richlieu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis XIII. In Two Volumes, 8o.

A New Voyage into Italy: With necessary Instructions for those who undertake
the same. By Maximilian Mission. Done out of French, and Illustrated with
Sculptures.

THE Present State OF THE EMPIRE OF MOROCCO.
AS I do not design to trace the Original of every Part of the Empire of
Morocco, but to give an exact Account of its Extent, Bounds, Strength, Trade,
and Government, so it will be sufficient to begin with as short a Relation as
possible, of the Methods taken by the famous Muley Archyd, King of Tafilet, and
Muley Ismael his Brother and immediate Successor to reunite the Kingdoms of
Morocco, Fess, Tafilet, and Sus, with the vast Province of Dara, under the same
Power; and form that mighty State which the latter Rules at this time in so
Arbitrary a manner.

Muley Xerif, King of Tafilet, and Father to Muley Archyd, who by their
Genealogy give themselves out for the Offspring of Mahomet and his Daughter
Fatima, was succeeded by Muley Hamet, the eldest of 84 Sons and 124 Daughters
that survived him. But Muley Archyd, one of his Brothers, whose haughty and
ambitious Spirit disdained to obey him, did not suffer him to wear the Crown
long undisturbed, but with the assistance of some of the chief Alcaydes, whom
he had engaged to side with him, orm'd some Designs, whose Beginnings, however,
did not meet with a Success answerable to his ambitious Ends; for, the King
having prevented them, caused the Alcaydes to be seized and put to death, and
shut him up in a Prison.

Yet that Prince having found means to escape, was rather exasperated than won
by this moderate Usage; and, getting some Forces together, made some new
Attempts, whose Success was no better than that of the former; since he was
taken and confined a second time.

This restraint, though longer and closer than the first, did not produce a
better Effect; for, the Black to whose keeping the King had entrusted him, as
to the most Faithful of his Servants, was not Proof against the wheedling
Caresses and large Promises with which Muley Archyd plied him, to get his
Liberty; and the Prisoner having plotted with his Keeper about the manner of
his Escape, got out at last: But, persuaded it was not safe to trust one that
was thus false to his Master, lest he should happen to be served so himself,
the only Return he made to the Black's kind Office was to dispatch him out of
the World, in his Flight, with a stroke of his Scimiter.

He took shelter at Zaovias, where the Morabite Benbucar governed, whom the
Inhabitants of the Province of that Name had chosen to be their Prince, for the
sake of his Virtue.

Those who are called Morabites in Africa are like our Hermits: They seem
wholly applied to Learning and Holiness, and retire to Deserts, whither the
People, who have a very great Veneration for them, sometimes come to seek them
out, and take them out of their solitude to set the Crown on their Heads, as
they had done to Benbucar.

Muley Archyd, concealing his Name and Quality, offered him his Service as a
common Soldier; and that good old Man received him kindly; employing him
afterward in diverse Capacities, upon the Encouragement which his Merit that
exerted it self had given him; in all which Employments he behaved himself so
well, that in a little time he gained Benbucar's Esteem and Friendship.

At last he was discovered by some Arabs of Tafilet, who had brought some Dates
to sell, and immediately saluted him as their King's Brother. Upon which
Benbucar's Sons suspected he was not come thus disguised into their Country
without some Design, and resolved to have him put to death.

Accordingly they contrived to make him fall into an Ambuscade, out of which,
however, he escaped, and fled to Quivan, where, having also offered his Service
to the Prince of the Country, as he had done to Benbucar, he so effectually
discovered his extraordinary Worth, that he became his Master's chief Minister
of State and Favorite.

But the Authority his eminent Post gave him, the Trust reposed in him by that
kind Prince, and the Love of his Subjects, which he had industriously
purchased, proved only so many new Spurs to his Ambition. He persuaded himself
it would not be less easy to him to Conquer that State where he was already so
absolute, than to emerge and rise as he had done. The Master's very Treasures
served the ungrateful Favorite to bait those on whom he could not otherwise so
well depend; and having thus successfully drawn them in, he in a short time
with ease made himself Master of the Prince of Quivian, as also of his
Treasures and Country; and conceiving that his Death was the surest means to
secure these unjust Possessions to himself, he caused him to be made away, and
then raised an Army with which he disposed himself to pursue his Resentment and
former Designs against his Brother.

Muley Mehemet, who had notice given him of this, did his part to prevent him;
and to that end having taken the Field, several Battles were fought between
them, in which Muley Archyd having almost always worsted his Brother, reduced
him to shut himself up within the Walls of the City of Tafilet, where his Grief
for his Misfortunes, and his Fear of his victorious Brother's Cruelty hastened
his death. Muley Archyd, thus rid of his chief Competitor, and in a fair way of
enlarging his Conquests, pursued his Victories with so much Courage, Conduct,
and good Fortune, that he soon made himself Master also of Sally, which was a
free Town, and of the Kingdom of Fess, Morocco and Sus, some of which yielded
to the Power of his Arms, and the rest to the Terror which they spread over the
Country.

He did not enjoy them so long a Time as his Age and Fortune seemed to promise;
for, in his own Palace, and in his Fortieth Year, he could not avoid the stroke
of Death, which he had so often defied in the Field. Having invited the
Nobility on a certain Festival, and drank Wine to excess with his most intimate
Friends, which he used to do often enough, he took a fancy in this condition to
Curvet in his Gardens on a fiery Horse, that ran away with him with such a
fury, as he wheeled about under a Walk of Orange Trees, that one of their
largest Branches broke his Scull, and, in three days, put an end to his Life.

Good Order and Peace, which that Conqueror began to establish in his
Dominions, were soon banished by that unexpected Death, which happened in the
Year 1672. For, those of his Family whom he had entrusted with the Government
of his Kingdoms, endeavored to secure to themselves the respective Countries
where they Governed; but Muley Ismael, who proved the bravest, the most forward
and esteemed, was also the most successful.

He first caused himself to be proclaimed King of Tafilet, took Possession of
his Brother's Treasures, then marched into the Field with as many Men as he
could get together; and, having won some by Promises or Presents, overcame
others by Force of Arms, and made himself Master of all.

Of all his Competitors, Muly Hamet, his Nephew, was reduced with most
difficulty; for, having likewise caused himself to be proclaimed King of
Morocco and Sus, and opposed him with numerous Forces, this occasioned several
Sieges and Engagements, which, however, were generally so much to his
Disadvantage, that at last he was forced to submit as well as the rest, all his
Attempts having only served to give a greater luster to the Conduct and
undaunted Valor of this Prince, who owes only to these two Qualifications the
Sovereign Possession he now enjoys of all this Empire, whose extent is no less
considerable than its Situation.

It spreads it self about 250 Leagues in length from North to South, and 140 in
breadth, from East to West. Its limits on the East are the Kingdom of Algier,
by which it is bounded at Tremesen; on the West, the Atlantic Ocean; the River
Dara on the South; and the Mediterranean on the North, if you except three
Fortified Places which the Christian Princes still hold on its Coasts, Ma^agan
possessed by the Portuguese on the Ocean, and Ceuta and Melilla by by the
Spaniards on the Mediterranean, the one at the Streights-Mouth, the other
further up. The Spaniards had, not long since, two other very Strong Holds on
the Ocean, Larache and Mamora, which they have suffered to be taken from them
by Muley Ismael; the first in the Year 1681. the other in 1689. The English
also had Tangier there, near the Streights, but left it some Years ago, having
first ruined its Port and Fortifications.

So that the most considerable Seaport Towns the Emperor of Morocco has on
the Ocean, are Santa Cruz, Safy, Sally, Mamora, Larache, Arzilla, and Tangier;
and on the Mediterranean, Zaffarina, and Tetuan, if we may reckon the latter
among the rest, it being seated two Leagues within Land, and an open Town
without any Fortifications; yet pretty well built, and very populous.

The Inhabitants of Tetuan, who are said to be upwards of Fifteen Thousand,
report themselves to be Andalusians, and most of them speak Spanish; for every
one knows, that the Moors were possessed of Spain Six or Seven Hundred Years,
and that after many vain Endeavors, which the Natives used to drive them out,
Ferdinand, more Fortunate than the rest, wholly subdued them, and forced them
seemingly to profess the Roman Belief, while they secretly plotted the ruin of
the State: But Philip III. having found out their Designs, expelled them in
1610. Accordingly above One Hundred Thousand of both Sexes, Young and Old, left
Spain, and the greatest part of them having sheltered themselves in Africa,
settled at Sally and Tetuan.

They are White-men, pretty well Civilized, and very kind to Strangers and
Christians. The French Consul, and all the Merchants who have a Settlement
there, though of different Nations and Religions, besides the Duty of Three
Crowns Levied on every Ship, Tartane or Bark that touch there, toward the
maintaining of a little Hospital, and two Spanish Recollet Monks, equally
contribute toward the further Charges about it. There is another at Sally,
where the same Method is taken.

Of all these Seaports, not one can be esteemed a good Haven; Tangier, Mamora,
and Sally might be thought the best; but there is no coming thither but over a
Bar or Sand that absolutely hinders all great Ships from going in; for which
Reason, neither the King nor his Privateers can fit out any other Vessels than
Brigantines or light Frigates that go a Cruising, and rove on the Sea in hopes
of taking some Merchantmen.

There never is any fixed number of these Ships, it is greater or less as there
are old ones lost, or new ones built. It consists now in Twelve or Thirteen, of
which Six belong to the King, and the rest to private Persons; they are
generally of Eighteen or Twenty Guns, the biggest not exceeding Twenty four;
but they have often Two hundred Men on Board, yet are generally in very ill
plight, by reason of the want of Stores, Sails, Cables, and other Rigging in
those Parts; so that if the Moors did not now and then get some from the
English and Dutch, they would very soon and easily be reduced to a much smaller
number.

It costs the King of Morocco nothing to maintain his Ships; the Alcayde or
Governor of the Port where they lie, pays the Officers and the Men; if they
take any Prizes, one half is the King's, the other is divided between the
Alcayde and the Officers, who bestow also a small part of it on the Ships
Company; but as for the Slaves, the King takes them all; paying Fifty Crowns
for every one of those who do not belong to his Moiety.

Such Ships as are fitted out by private Persons, are kept wholly at the Charge
of their Owners, who reimburse themselves out of the Product of the Prizes, of
which the King has a Fifth, and all the Slaves, paying also Fifty Crowns for
every one.

The Kingdom of Morocco, and that of Fess, are the largest and most
considerable of the Four already mentioned, and the head Cities of both have
the same Names with them. The City of Morocco was formerly very Populous and
most Famous for its Wealth and Beauty, but is now much fallen from its ancient
State, and does not contain above 25000 Inhabitants; its Streets seem almost
unfrequented, and none takes care to repair the decayed Buildings, or prevent
the Ruins, the number of whose heaps increases every day, which altogether
disgraces it. Its Palace and that Mosque so celebrated for its Largeness and
Ornaments, as well as for its Brazen Gates, and three Golden Balls, which were
said to be Enchanted, are now dwindled to nothing. Muley Ismael has not been
afraid of the vain Prognostications of Malediction, with which those who should
dare to take them away were Cursed; his extreme greediness of Gold, stronger in
that Juncture than the Superstition so common to the Moors, prevailed with him
to cause them to be removed and buried among his invisible and useless
Treasure: I shall take an opportunity, before I have done to explain why I call
it so.

It Is pretended that these Golden Balls were set on the top of that Mosque by
the Wife of that great Almanzor, so famous in History for having Conquered
Spain; and that this Queen, to leave a Monument of her Grandeur to after Ages,
laid out the greatest part of her Jewels and Dowry in the building of that
Mosque; that these Balls had been placed on its top during such a Constellation
of the Heavens as did not admit of their being removed; the Architect, by the
means of certain Spells and Conjurings, having also obliged some Spirits to
guard them. They even affirm, that several Kings who had attempted to take them
away were always hindered by some accident; and the Moors, who are very
credulous in point of Magic, had all along believed, that, according to the
Import of this Spell, the Devil should break the Necks of those who should dare
to take them away. But this King, less credulous and scrupulous, has undeceived
them at last.

Safy and Mazagan, both on the Ocean, the latter a fine large City, in the
hands of the Portuguese, who keep in it a good Garrison, are the only Places in
all the Kingdom, which, besides the chief City, deserve to be mentioned; for
though its extent, which is very large, be divided into Seven Provinces, it is
not very Populous, because its Sandy Soil, dry and barren in most places,
neither admits of Plenty of Corn, nor of Cattle; and abounds in nothing but
Camels, which are cheap there, besides Copper, Wax, and Almonds, of which great
quantities are vended in Europe.

It Is thought there may be in its Plains about Thirty Thousand Huts of Aduars,
which contain near One Hundred Thousand Men, paying Garam, that is, who Yearly
pay the King a Tribute of the Tenth part of all they have, to which they are
liable as soon as they are Fifteen Years of Age.

An Aduar is a kind of a rambling or flying Village (there being very few of
another kind in all Africa) that consists of some Families of Arabs, who Incamp
in Tents, which they pitch, now in one place, and then in another, according as
the goodness of the Soil invites them to stay, and the subsistence of their
Cattle, in which their Wealth wholly consists, requires it. Each Aduar has its
Marabot, and submits to the Conduct of a Chief, whom they choose among
themselves; every Family has its Tent or Hut, in which they all lie pell-mell
with their Oxen, Sheep, Camels, Poultry, Dogs, etc. Their Misery and Nastiness
are greater than can be imagined; yet from them the King draws his most settled
and certain Revenues: A Black of his Guard is commonly sent to Collect their
Tributes, and, though alone, bestows plentiful Bastonado's as he pleases on the
least Delinquent, non daring either resist or complain.

When the Arabs remove their Aduars, they set their Wives and Children on
Camels in some Wicker Conveniences covered with Linen-Cloth, and contrived
like Niches or Arches, but quite round, which wholly secure them from the heat
of the Sun, yet at the same time afford them means to take the Air on which
side they please. If they have not Camels enough to carry all their Lumber,
they load with it their Bulls and Cows that wear Pack-Saddles; which I don't
remember to have seen any where else.

The Kingdom of Fess, known of old by the Name of Mauritania Tingitana, is of
no less extent than that of Morocco, and, like it, divided into Seven
Provinces; but much more Fruitful, better Peopled, and affords a much greater
plenty of all sorts of Corn, Cattle, Pulse, Kitchen-Herbs, Fruits, and Wax; its
Fertility might yet be increased, were there more Care taken to Cultivate it,
but the Goodness of the Soil, that produces almost of its self, the slothful
Negligence of the Natives, who content themselves with what just serves for
their Subsistence, and their scrupulous Obstinacy, in refusing an Exportation
of Corn, cause above half the Lands to lie fallow.

They have some Mines of Iron, but do not know how to refine that Metal, and
can put it to no other Use but making Nails, and other course Iron-work.

This Kingdom is bounded on one side by that of Morocco, and by that of Algier
on the other. The River Sebou, whose Stream is very rapid, runs through it, and
flowing about half a League from its Metropolis, afterward loses it self in
the Ocean at Mamora. That River is the finest in all the Empire of Morocco; and
on its Banks, above Mamora, stands a large Forest, that might yield Materials
for the building many Ships. It Is also said, that not far from its Spring there
is a very fine Bridge, made of Brick and Stone, and One hundred and fifty
Fathom long; which would be a remarkable and extraordinary thing were it not
ancient; for, they are so far from raising Public Buildings at this time in
that Country, that not the least Care is taken even to Repair the Highways,
for the easier Carriage of Goods; though indeed it must be owned, that as there
is no Traveling in those Parts, but on Horseback, or with Camels, it is not so
absolutely necessary to repair the Ways, as in some other Countries.

There are neither Public Wagons, Carriers, nor Posts settled in those
Kingdoms; so that all Correspondencies, which indeed are not frequent there,
are only kept by the means of Expresses on Foot or on Horseback, who, however,
go and come with speed, and cost but little; first, because the Men and the
Horses are hardy and inured to Toil; and then by reason of the cheapness of the
Provisions, of which a small pittance satisfies them.

Upon urgent and important Emergencies they make use of Dromedaries, a sort of
Camels only differing from the rest by their Swiftness and Leanness, which are
natural and altogether peculiar to this kind of them; for it is observed, as the
Natives report, that a Dromedary can carry a Man as many times ten Leagues a
Day as it has been Days asleep, and blind immediately after its Birth: So that
if it slept six Days as soon as it was born, it performs sixty Leagues a Day,
and proportionably more or less.

I saw one of this kind at Mickeness, with which some endeavored to make me
believe, the King's Uncle traveled one hundred Leagues in a Day; but this
seems to me to be stretched somewhat beyond Truth; those who assured me of
this, add, that the Fatigue which attends this way of Traveling is equal to
its Speed, and that it would be impossible to hold out, or bear the Dromedary's
most precipitate Ambling, did not he that rides him cause himself to be tied
fast to the Saddle, and cover his Mouth for fear of being stifled; and indeed,
if this be true, there is no doubt but that a Traveller must needs find himself
intolerably tired, at the end of such a Journey.

The Aduars of Arabs, in the Kingdom of Fess, are judged to consist of about
Three hundred thousand Men paying Garams. Its Metropolis, that gives it its
Name, is absolutely the finest, richest, and most trading City in all the
Empire of Morocco: It Is divided into two, one called the Old, and the other the
New Town, both fairly built, and stocked with above Three hundred thousand
Inhabitants; the Old Town is Peopled with Whitesmen, and the New with Blacks;
and both have so many Gates, Bridges, Fountains, and Piazza's; so many Gemmes
or Mosques, Colleges, and stately Structures, that the large Description which
Dapper gives of it, in his History of Africa, no less deserves the studious
Reader's perusal, than all these Things themselves are worthy the Curiosity of
such Travelers as go thither. As for my Part, not having been permitted to
come to it, though it lies but a Day's Journey from Mickeness, I am obliged to
trust to what others tell us of it.

The other Places of Note in this Kingdom, are Theza, Mickeness, Mamora,
Arzilla, Larache, Sally, Tangier, Ceuta, Alcasar, and Tetuan.

Mickeness is the Place where the King resides, and lies pretty high up in the
Land: It Is but a little Town, but so crowded with Inhabitants, the Number of
which is said to exceed Sixty thousand, that there is no passing through its
Streets, which besides are very narrow, without justling one another; I shall
speak of it more at large before I have done.

Theza is a little fortified Place between Fess and Morocco.

The other Towns lie on the Seacoast, and are all Populous enough, and Places
of great Trade: They might have a greater Trafick yet, were their Havens
better; but, as I have said, the Bar that lies all along the Coast does not
permit any such.

Tetuan and Sally are the Ports where Ships most easily and frequently arrive:
For which reason many Merchants of diverse Nations have settled there, and the
King of France has established a Consul in each Place, for the Convenience and
Safety of Trade; at least they are appointed with that Intent, which yet I may
say is rendered ineffectual by the barbarous and mean-interested ways of those
Enemies of Civility and all sense of Honor, who, as I have seen, have a
greater Consideration for the least Factor, with regard to the Gain they hope
to reap by him, than for a Consul, whose Character, as being unprofitable to
them, is every Day exposed to the Insults of their capricious ill Humors, and
Contempt.

Sally is more known and celebrated than the rest, on the account of its
Privateers and Haven, which, however, is only fit to harbor Shipping of small
Bulk and Draught. It Is also considerable for its Forts, for its two Towns
divided, as at Fess, into Old and New, and for its great Trafick: Its
Inhabitants, who are not above Twenty thousand, take upon themselves the Name
of Andalusians, like those of Tetuan; it had formerly some beautiful Buildings,
which the Wars and its Rebellions have almost all ruined. It has put the Kings
of Morocco to some trouble for some time, when it strove to cast off their
Yoke; but Muley Archyd reduced it in 1666, by the great Victory he obtained
over the famous Gayland Lord of Tetutuan, Arzilla, and Alcasar, under whose
Protection it had put itself. Its two Towns are parted by the River Guerou,
that on the Southside has two Castles on the top of a little Hill by the Sea;
these have a Communication by the means of a great Wall, and contain about
Thirty Pieces of Canon in no very good order; above the old Castle, at the
mouth of the River, there is a small Fort with three Iron and three Brass-Guns
in it, from twelve to fifteen Pounds Shot, to facilitate the Retreat of those
Pirates when the are chased in.

Alcasar is also become famous by the bloody Battle, which Sebastian King of
Portugal lost near it, with his Life, in the Year 1578, in the Plain between
that Town and the River Mukazem: It is little, thinly Peopled, and very ill
built, but stands most pleasantly by that River, with fine Gardens all round
it. Gayland most commonly chose to reside there in a large Palace, which is now
altogether ruined. I cannot forbear to mention, by the way, that this Town may
be said to be the Nest of all the Storks in that part of Barbary, and their
Number exceeds that of its Inhabitants; I never saw so many together in one
Place; which yet is less strange if we consider that they are safe and secure
there; for, the Moors account it a Sin to kill any of them, and most strictly
forbid it; because they believe that God, at Mahomet's Request, transformed
into those Birds a Company of Arabians, who robbed those that went on
Pilgrimage to Mecca.

Ceuta, as I have said, belongs to the Spaniards, who, besides that
considerable Port, hold another called Melilla in the same Kingdom, and on the
Seaside toward Algier, or also Pennon de los Velez, a little Fortress built
on the Point of a Rock that is surrounded by the Sea, and almost impregnable by
its situation.

The Kingdom of Sus is contiguous to that of Morocco, about its South-West
Part; it is but small, very indifferently Peopled, and even, in a good part of
it, almost uninhabited. There may be some Fifteen thousand Aduars of Arabs in
its Plains, all brave, daring Souls, and impatient of the Yoke: It has cost
this King a great deal of Time to subdue them; neither has he yet been able to
effect that wholly; the Inhabitants of two Mountains still remaining free and
disclaiming his Tyranny, at the same time that they are governed by a Chief,
whom they choose among themselves.

The most considerable Towns in that Kingdom are Illec and Tarudante, both
large and very populous, with respect to the rest of the Country, each having
about Fifty thousand Inhabitants. The King sends no Alcaydes thither, as he
does to the Towns of his other Dominions, and only sends a Captain, to whom
they give the Title of Baschar, who has some Officers under him, to put his
Orders in Execution through the whole Kingdom; but this with moderation. The
Moors are treated here much more gently, or rather much less cruelly than at
Morocco, or at Fess, and only pay the yearly Tribute, without being liable or
constrained to pay any extraordinary Tax or Garams. This milder Usage is an
effect of the King's Politics, lest a severe Treatment should awake their
Inclination to rise against him, which the Situation of the Country does very
much encourage.

That Part of the Kingdom which is inhabited yields a reasonable quantity of
Corn, Pulse, Kitchen-Herbs, Fruit, and Olives: Its Mountains abound in
Copper-Mines, and are also said to have some Gold.

Santa Cruz lies on the Ocean, within the Extent of this Kingdom, and is a Town
of pretty good Trade, either for such Goods as are sent thither from Morocco,
or such as are the Product of the Country, which are also Copper, Beeswax, and
Almonds; and, besides these, very fine Ostridge Feathers.

The Kingdom of Tafilet is of no great extent, having no Town of Note besides
one of its Name, which is fenced only with a Wall, but has a pretty good Castle.

This Kingdom, that lies beyond Mount Atlas, and was formerly known by the Name
of Numidia, is all of it in an ungrateful sandy Tract of Land, between the
Deserts of Zahara and the Province of Dara; It has on the East the Kingdom of
Morocco, from which it is parted by Mount Atlas; and though it yields no Wheat or
other Corn, abounds in Dates; all those that are imported through every Part of
Europe come thence; for, the King of Morocco will not suffer any to be exported
out of other Places. That Fruit is their daily Food, instead of Bread, with
Camel's Flesh; for, the dryness of the Country affords no sustenance to other
Cattle, unless it be a kind of Sheep that wears neither Horns nor Wool, which
yet is said to be always very fat and well-tasted there: The Horses are fine,
and in great number; and wholly feed upon Dates.

Its small extent does not hinder the King from esteeming and treating it is
the most Noble of all these Kingdoms, because among the Moors it passes for the
first that followed their Prophet and his Alcoran; so that its Inhabitants,
that are not very numerous, would think it a dishonor to themselves and their
Law, were they governed by any but the Progeny of that Prophet; which obliges
the King to have always one of his Sons there as their Governor. He who
Commands there at present is called Muley Bensar, and is no less greedy and
absolute in point of Exactions and Garams than his Father's Alcaydes are in
other Parts; this pretended Nobility no excusing the People from it.

That Country produces some Indico, the Trade of which is joined by the
Inhabitants to that of their Dates; they also have a Manufactory of certain
Linen Cloth, stripped with Silk Moresco-fashion, called Hayiks, which being
much worn through all Barbary, are of a quick sale, and a gainful Commodity, to
their no small Relief toward the Payment of their Garams.

The ancient Kings of Tafilet styled themselves also Lords of Dara, a large
Province adjoining and belonging to the Kingdom, and also much the same with it
as to the Soil, Product, Inhabitants, and way of living.

This is what, in few words, may be said, relating to the Extent, Situation,
and Quality of these Kingdoms: If any is not satisfied with this compendious
Information, he may, if he pleases, consult Dapper and Marmol in their
Historical and Geographical Descriptions of Africa. As for me, whose Intent is
only to give an Idea of their present State and Government, I thought it would
be sufficient for my Purpose, to draw this Extract from the Whole, that I might
afterward apply it as the performance of my Orders and Subject required it.

The Moors are generally but indifferent Soldiers, and not very Brave; yet can
manage a Horse and use a Lance with Dexterity, and are strong and
indefatigable; they have Wit but not Politeness, and are Jealous, Lustful,
Liars, Superstitious, Hypocrites, Cheats, Cruel and Faithless. Those that live
along the Coast of Mauritania Tingitana, and in the Kingdom of Fess, are the
least unciviliz'd; and of all the Christians, whose irreconcilable Enemies they
are, being prejudiced with this inveterate hatred by their Law, the French are
those they esteem and fear the most.

I cannot but observe, that were these Countries in any other Hands than those
of these Infidels, who, by reason of their native rustical Temper, and wilful
Ignorance (that makes them confine their Studies to that of the Alcoran)
neglect them, and are incapable of knowing their Value, they might be made a
State equally delicious and flourishing, as well for its Situation, and the
Pleasantness and Salubrity of its Climate, temperate enough every where on this
side Mount Atlas; as, for the Fruitfulness, and other Qualifications of its
hale and hardy Inhabitants, for the quantity, coolness and wholsomness of its
Waters, for the plenty and goodness of the Food it affords for Cattle, Horses,
etc. For the generousness of its Soil, that yields its Fruits almost without
help, and would be wonderful Fertile were Care taken to cultivate it; for the
pleasing and profitable variety of its Woods, Plains, Mounds, small Hills and
Valleys; for the good Taste of its Pulse, Kitchen-Herbs, Fruits, and Wine; and
for its convenient Situation for Trade, and the Transportation of all its Wares.

So that I cannot but grieve, when I think, that so rich a Treasure is, as it
were, buried in the very Center of Sloth, Ignorance, and Inhumanity.

I ought now to give a particular Account of the Manners, Inclinations and
Qualifications of the Prince who is Master of that Empire.

His Name is Muley Ismael, and he takes the Title of Grand Xeriffe, that is,
the First and most Powerful of Mahomet' s Successors; for, as I have said, he
pretends to be descended from that Prophet, by Aly and Fatima, his Son-in-Law
and Daughter; and is prouder of this Parentage than of the long Train of Kings
of his Family: Which sufficiently shows, that his Predecessors, who used also
to style themselves Miramoulins, which signifies Emperors of the Faithful, made
use of a Religious Pretense for their own Establishment.

And now, since I have mentioned this, it may not be amiss to say something of
their Religion. The Alcoran is its Foundation, and the Moors and Arabs, who
explain that Book after a particular way, follow the ridiculous Expositions,
which their Doctor Melish, one of the four Chiefs of Mahomet's Sect has left
them of it, grounding their Faith on certain Fundamental Points, without which,
they give out, it is impossible to be saved.

They hold that there is but One GOD, without any Trinity of Persons; that
JESUS CHRIST was a great Prophet, born of a Virgin whose Name was Mary; that
his Incarnation was such as we believe it, and even foretold her by the
Archangel Gabriel, God's Ambassador; that he was the holiest of Men, and
wrought many Miracles; but that he did not die, as we believe, having been
assumed into Heaven; where he is in Body and Soul, and that when Judas would
have betrayed him to the Jews, one of his Disciples, whom God caused to appear
in his likeness, was crucified in his stead, and that it is this Disciple we
adore.

They also believe that the same Jesus Christ is to return to live forty Years
on Earth, to reunite all Nations under one Belief; that he will be laid in the
Tomb which Mahomet caused to be placed on the Right Hand of his; that those who
professed the Doctrine of Christ till Mahomet's Coming, shall be saved; but
that what we now believe, differs from what he taught (which also the
persecuting Jews kept him from bringing to Perfection) and that therefore those
who will not follow the Precepts of their Prophet, whom they call God's great
Favorite, and the Explainer of his Will, and who was sent by God only to finish
what the other had but begun, are to be damned eternally.

They admit the Books of Moses, the Psalms of David, the Gospel (as Sergius has
expounded it to them) and the Alcoran as Holy Writ.

They believe a Heaven and a Hell, the Resurrection and Predestination; placing
the Eternal Blessings, that are to be the Reward of the Faithful, in a sight of
the Sovereign Being, of his Angels, and of Mahomet; and, besides, in the
Enjoyment of Seventy Virgins, with whom they are continually to be wrapped in
Ecstasies of Delight without impairing, or rather annihilating, their Virginity;
they are also fondly possessed with the Hopes of indulging their Appetites with
all sorts of most delicious Food, and of bathing themselves in Rivers of Milk,
Honey, and Rose Water; nay, they even believe that the very Excrements of the
Body shall evaporate in most grateful Sweats, and that they are to take up
their Lodging in Banquetting-Houses and stately Palaces, built with Pearl and
precious Stone.

They have a Lent or Ramadan, which lasts thirty Days, and keep it so strictly,
that they do not only religiously abstain from eating or drinking the least
thing, from the very dawn to the first appearance of the Stars on the Evening,
but also forbear smoking Tobacco, and smelling any Perfumes; indeed I must
needs own that they make themselves large amends for this abstinence at Night,
passing it generally at that time in all manner of Luxury and Licentiousness.

On the Eve of that Ramadan, they prepare themselves for its observation by
public Rejoycings, that are attended with discharges of Fusils and Muskets,
and with repeated Acclamations of Allah! more like Howlings than joyful Shouts;
every one of them watches that he may be the first who discovers the Moon, and
they fire their Muskets at that Planet as soon as they perceive it; which done,
they meet to say their Prayers, with their Marabot at the head of them, and
kneel, rise, and prostrate themselves on the ground several times, still turned
toward the East. They have three Easters which they keep Holy for seven days
together; however, without abstaining from Buying or Selling, as they do on
Fridays, that are their Lord's Days.

The first Easter is kept on the first day of the Moon that comes after their
Ramadan, and if it happens to fall on a Saturday, which is the Sabbath of the
Jews, those of that Nation in this Empire are obliged to present the King with
a Hen and ten Chickens of Gold, or with the value of them in Money.

On the first Day of that Easter, the King commonly causes all the Prisoners in
the Town where he then is, to be brought before him, and either Absolves them,
or puts them to death, according to their Crimes and the humor he is in. He
put Twenty Criminals to death after this manner on the third Day of this
Easter, which happened to be the fourth after my arrival at Mickeness.

The second Easter, which they call The Great, is twenty Days after that of
Ramadan: They use then to sacrifice to Mahomet as many Sheep as there are Male
Children in each Family, and this in Memory of the Sacrifice which was offered
by Abraham, the Father of Ismael the Patriarch of the Arabian Sarazens, from
whom they believe their Prophet's Mother derived her Original. The King makes a
public Ceremony of it at a Chapel, or as they term it, at a Saint about a
quarter of a League from Mickeness, but with the addition of this superstitious
Circumstance: As soon as the Sheep's Throat has been cut, (for they take great
care not to kill otherwise all the Animals they are to eat, believing they
would not bleed enough another way, which would make them impure and forbidden
Flesh) As soon, I say, as the Sheep's Throat has been cut, a Moor on Horseback
takes it, wraps it up in a Cloth, and gallops away with it full speed to the
Alcassave, which is the King's Palace: Now if when he is got thither, the Sheep
is still alive, they draw a good Omen from it, and there is great rejoicing:
But if it die by the way, then every one goes home very doleful, and there is
an end of the Festival.

The third Easter, which falls always three Moons and two Days after the
second, is kept in honor of Mahomet's Birth; and on its first Day the Moors
eat Hasty-Pudding in remembrance of that which was eaten by that Prophet. They
light great numbers of Lamps and Wax Tapers in the Mosques on the Night before
that Easter, and all their Talbes or Priests sing his Praise without ceasing
till Morning.

They Solemnize St. John Baptist's Day by Bonefires, which they make in their
Gardens, where they burn a great deal of Incense round their Fruit Trees, to
entitle them to the Blessing of Heaven.

They admit of Circumcision, but neither fix the Age of those that are to be
Circumcised, nor the time when.

They all say the Sala, or Prayer (which they also call the Mass) four times a
Day, and once a Night, at certain set hours, which are denoted to them by the
Cries, or to speak more properly, by the Howlings, which those who are
appointed to do that Office, make from the top of those Gemmes, or Mosques;
for, the use of Bells is neither known nor allowed in their Religion.

They very often wash their Heads, Hands and Feet, and pretend to cleanse and
purge themselves from all Sins by that means. Whenever a Man has had private
converse with his Wife, or been guilty of some sin, he is enjoined to wash
every part of his Body, none being excepted, or repeat these words, which are
the most Sacred in their Religion; La illa illenla Mahamet Dara zoulla; which
signify, There is but one God, and Mahomet is his Messenger; for they pretend
that these words have the same efficacy as the Bath.

They never go into their Mosques otherwise than barefoot, and observe the
same Formality when they pay Visits to one another, always leaving their
Baboushes or Shoes, at the Door of the Mosque or House where they go in.

They believe that all the Children that die before they are Fifteen, whether
they be Christians, Jews, or Pagans, go to Heaven; but that if they live longer
without owning Mahomet as God's Favorite, they are eternally undone; however,
they except the Maids, who, having preserved their Virginity, are reserved, as
they pretend, to fill up the number of Seventy, that are to be at the disposal
of every Muslulman in Paradise, it being impossible that so great a number of
their Religion should be found in proportion to the Men.

They say that the Alcoran enjoins them to compel those, by severe usage, to
profess its Doctrine, who do not voluntarily submit to do so.

They have such a hatred for the Name of a Christian, which in their tongue
also signifies a Dog, that they use it as the most common and most reproachful
Term among them, never speaking it without adding, God confound him, or God
burn his Father and Mother: Such Imprecations against the Christians are the
first words their Children are taught to utter; and when any Christians are
seen at Mickeness, they are sure to be exposed to the Curses and Hootings of
the whole Town, and particularly of the young Fry, some of which follow them
merely to bellow out a volley of abusive words, or to throw Stones at them.

They also firmly believe, that those who are killed fighting with Christians,
go straight to Heaven; and that they deserve no less than an infinite Reward
for destroying those Enemies to the Alcoran; nay, that the very Horses which
are killed in such Engagements, are to go to Heaven with them.

They have a very odd Maxim concerning the Truth and performance of their
Words; for, Lying and breaking their Promises, are things of so established a
practice among them, that they rather pass there for Virtues than for Vices:
Insomuch, that one of their Talbs, to whom I once expressed my surprise at this
ill practice, made no scruple to own to me, that this made one of the chief
Distinctions between their Religion and ours; persuaded, they would soon, like
us, be Slaves to a false Belief and Idolatry, were they, like us also, Slaves
to their Words and Promises.

Though they admit a Plurality of Wives, they are allowed to Marry but four, and
on them too they are to settle a Dowry; however, they may make themselves
amends with as many Concubines as they can afford to keep, and may put them all
away when ever they will, paying the former their Dowry, and selling the
latter, who are their Slaves, or turning 'em out of doors, yet keeping their
Children.

They esteem all Idiots and Natural Fools to be Saints, and believe the same of
those who have any knack at Conjuring, whom they think to have the Spirit of
their Prophet; after the death of these they build Chapels over their Graves,
go thither in Pilgrimage, and upon occasion take Sanctuary there, no places of
Refuge being more Sacred and inviolable to secure them from the punishment of
their Crimes, or the anger of their Kings.

They are wholly given up to a thousand other Superstitions no less odd and
ridiculous; as when they except against the Testimony of those among
themselves, whom they can prove addicted to make Water standing, their way
being to do it stooping like Women; but, because an account of all these
whimsical Customs would take up too much time, and perhaps be thought foreign
to my Subject, I will say no more on that Head at this time.

However, I must observe, that their Women do not enter into the Mosques,
because they esteem them incapable of being received into Heaven, as having
been created, they tell you, only for the sake of propagating Mankind; yet they
say their Prayers at home; and, on Fridays, resort to the Burying-places, to
pray and weep over the Graves of their dead Relations; at which time they are
clothed in Blue, which is the Badge of Mourning in their Country, as Black is
in ours.

And here I think I ought not to forget the Grief they show at the Death of
their Friends and Relations; it is generally very great, and, when the Person
was of Note, they commonly hire some Women, who weep plentifully, and make a
very sad moan, beating their Heads and scratching their Faces.

Before the Corpse is buried, it is washed and wrapped in a new Shroud, then
carried in a Bier, followed by a great number of People, who walk very fast,
invoking God and Mahomet aloud.

The Dead are buried out of Town in a Grave which is narrow at the top and wide
at bottom, that it may be more easily filled up, and that the Corpse lying there
more at large, as they think, may be in greater readiness at the Day of
Judgment, and lose no time in seeking its Bones; for which reason also they
forbear burying two Persons in one Grave. Meat is also laid on those Graves;
and Money and Jewels are buried with the Dead, that they may not want in the
next World the conveniences they had in this.

The Jews and Christians are so strictly forbidden going into the Mosques, that
when any of them are seen there, they must absolutely abjure their Religion, or
be burnt without Mercy; and the same Method is observed if they are found to
have too close and particular a Converse with the Mohammedan Women.

This Circumstance is also to be remembered, That the Jews are not allowed at
any time to pass by a Mosque without taking off their Shoes, and are even
obliged to go barefoot in Royal Cities, as Fess, Morocco, Mickeness, etc. on
pain of the Bastonado or Imprisonment; from which they are not freed till they
have paid a great Fine.

I must also abserve, before I have done with the Religion of the Moors, that
their Alcoran forbids 'em to play at any hazardous Games for Money, and that
those who dare break this Law are punishable with the Bastonado, a Fine, or
Imprisonment; so they only play at Chess, Draughts, and a kind of Tictack,
quite different from others; neither do they make any great use of all these,
and I did not perceive by those I frequented, that they are much given to
Gaming. They are not much more addicted to Reading, and it may very justly be
said, That Sleeping, Eating, Drinking, Women, Horses, and Prayers share and
almost wholly engross their time, the remainder of which is generally lingered
out in a tedious and unuseful Sloth; and accordingly they are often seen
sitting on their Heels along the Walls, with long Strings of Beads, which
tumble through their Fingers with a nimbleness equal to the shortness of the
Prayers they say at the dropping of each Bead; for, that Prayer barely consists
in mentioning one of the different Attributes of God; as in saying on one Bead,
God is Great; on another, God is Good; on a third, God is Infinite; on a
fourth, God is Merciful, etc.

I ought not to forget the particular Veneration they have for those who have
been in Pilgrimage to Mecca; they call them Hadgys, or Saints, and are so
Supersitious on their account, that they also esteem their Horses to be holy as
their Masters. They wrap the Animals in Shrowds, and bury them when they die as
they would their greatest Friends and Relations, thinking it a Pleasure and
Duty to visit them often and see them feed.

The King of Morocco had one of these Horses: The first time I was admitted
into his Presence it was led in State just before him; and, besides the
particular Distinction which appeared by the richness of his Saddle and
Harness, his Tail was held up by a Christian Slave, who carried a Pot and a
Cloth to receive his Excrements and wipe him. I was told that the King from
time to time went to kiss that Horse's Tail and Feet.

All the Horses who are thus sanctified, are usually freed from all manner of
Service; and, if the Masters cannot afford to keep 'em, some Pensions are
settled on them for their Subsistence out of the neighboring Mosques. They are
distinguished by the Beads or Relics about their Necks, the latter of which
are nothing but some Writings wrapped up in Silks or Cloth of Gold, containing
the Names of their Prophet and some pretended Saints of their Law. They also
are as so many Sanctuaries for Criminals, like the Towns and Chapels of the
Saints already mentioned.

These Places, which are to be seen in many Parts of the Country, are,
according to their bigness, the dwelling of one or more Morabots or Talbs, the
Priests of the Moors, who may marry, and are very much esteemed there, chiefly
by the Arabs; they are maintained according to the Ability or Devotion of the
Founders, and lead a lazy and luxurious Life, at the Expense of those deluded
Creatures, who esteem themselves happy in being able to bestow large Donations
on them while they live, or bequeath to them when they die. Methinks these
Places, and their Foundations, may justly enough be compared to our Abbeys,
Priories, and Chapels.

Bur resuming the Idea of the King of Morocco's Picture, which I had begun, I
shall observe that he is between forty nine and fifty Years of Age, of a tawny
Complexion, and lean; his Hair is black, but begins to turn gray; he is of a
middle size; his Face oval; his Cheeks hollow, as well as his Eyes, which are
black and sparkling; his Nose is little and hooked; his Chin sharp; his Lips
thick, and his Mouth pretty well proportioned: He Is extreme Covetous and Cruel;
Interest and an excessive love of Money can almost make him do any thing, and
he is so much delighted in spilling Blood with his own Hands, that it is
generally believed he must have put above Twenty thousand Persons to death
himself, during the twenty Years that he has filled the Throne.

I am the rather inclined to believe or confirm this, having my self reckoned
up no less than Forty seven whom he killed during my one and twenty Days stay
at his Court: And, besides, he was not ashamed to appear before me at the last
Audience he gave me by the Gate of his Stables, himself being on Horseback,
with his Cloths and Right-Arm all imbrued with the Blood of two of his Chief
Blacks, whom he had just butchered with a Knife.

Every Nation is amazed to find his Subjects so submissive and Patient under so
excessive and cruel a Tyranny; but they must know, that not to speak of the
general and particular want of Power to oppose it, they so fondly believe that
dying thus by the Hands of a King who is a Xerif, and descended from their
Prophet, they immediately go to Heaven, that the greatest part among them
esteem that a Happiness which a smaller and more judicious Number abominate,
but cannot hinder; and indeed the latter keep at a distance from him as much as
they can, and think themselves as happy in not seeing him, as the mad Herd in
being killed by him.

Notwithstanding this, it is said this Prince is of a pretty good Temper when
his Passion is over; but he is subject to violent Capricio's, that are the more
dangerous; for being always covered with the Cloak of Religion, of which he
affects to appear an exact Observer; and he is so firmly persuaded that his
Subjects think him such, that for that reason, and being full of that
prevention, he assumes a License of doing whatever he pleases.

He only studies to be feared by his Subjects, and cares very little whether
they love him or no; and therefore they generally tremble when they come near
him, and though they approach him out of Duty, never do it out of Good Will; the
rather, because none ought to come into his Presence but by his Order or
Permission, and not without Presents.

He has a great deal of Wit and Courage, is Active, Indefatigable and very
Dexterous at all Martial Sports, as Running with the Lance and Horse-Exercises;
in which Pastimes I must observe, by the way, that all the Moors are
wonderfully expert, and in this do not seem to have in the least degenerated
from what History so much celebrates the ancient People of Granada for in their
Tournaments.

He drinks no Wine because his Religion forbids it; but when he takes Opium, or
drinks a certain Hypocras that he makes himself with Brandy, Cloves* Anniseed,
Cinnamon and Nutmegs, which happens pretty often, woe to him that comes in his
way when the Fumes are got up into his Head. It Is also not very safe to meet
him when he is clothed in a yellow Habit; for it has been long observed that
this Color is a dangerous Omen when he wears it, and almost generally fatal to
some of those who come near him at that time: He had a Vest on of that Color
when he gave me the Audience of Leave all bloody; as I have observed.

He Is very much given to Women, and has near Four hundred in his Alcassave for
his own use, besides about Five hundred others to wait upon these: He has One
hundred and eighteen Male Children now living, besides Daughters, who are not
reckoned, and may be about two hundred: He only takes the Sons from his
Concubines, whom he often changes, and leaves them the Daughters, without
allowing them so much as will keep 'em.

He Is married only to four of all these Women; his Law not allowing him to have
more Wives: The rest are his Concubines and Slaves. He Is wholly governed by one
of these Creatures, who is a Black, and has no manner of Beauty: She Is the
Mother of that Son whom he seems to design for his Successor; and whom he
causes to be called Muley Zeydan.

He affects to appear modest and humble, and always makes God the Author of the
Good and Evil which he does; yet he is very vain and fond of Ostentation.

He is Absolute in his Dominions, and often compares himself to the Emperor of
France, who, he says, is the only Prince that knows how to reign like him, and
make his Will a Law. He often mentions a Letter which he pretends was written
by his Prophet to Heraclius, and adds, that all the Prosperities of the Kings
of France wholly proceed from the Religious Care they have always taken to
preserve it. As for the rest of the Christian Princes, he looks upon them as
depending on their Subjects, and never speaks of 'em but with Contempt.

'Twas in this Sense, that to heighten the great Encomiums he bestowed on the
King, in the first Audience he gave me by the Gate of his Alcassave or Palace,
in a very mean Habit, his Face muffled up in a Snuff-Handkerchief, of a dirty
hue, his Arms and Legs bare, sitting without Matt or Carpet on a Threshold by
two wooden Posts which supported the Porch, some Alcaydes sitting by him
barefoot on the Ground: It was probably in that Sense, I say, that, to make me
sensible of the just difference he puts between the King and the other Princes
of Europe, he told me, That the Emperor of Germany was only the Companion of
his Electors; that the King of Spain was less Master of his Dominions than his
Ministers; that the King of England depends on his Parliament; and that he
looked upon all the rest as having more the appearance of Authority than the
Thing it self.

However, notwithstanding this Absolute and Personal Empire, with the Enjoyment
of which he flatters himself, there are few Princes whose Minds are more easily
to be prejudiced and seduced than his: Insomuch that such of his Alcaydes as
are nearest his Person, know how to bias and lead him as they please;
principally, when the pretense of Religion, Interest, or Vanity can be brought
in, to make him pliable to what suits with their Designs.

This vanity is never better gratified than when some Christian Prince sends
him Ambassadors; then his Joy cannot be expressed, and he always kisses the
Ground when he first spies them, and even in their presence, in token of his
thanks to Heaven for the mighty Blessing. 'Twas thus he behaved himself as soon
as he discovered me on a pretty high Wall not yet finished, where I had been
placed without Seats, Cover or Foot-cloth, that I might be a Spectator by his
order, of a review of 10000 Horse and 2000 Foot, which he made on purpose for
me hard by the Town; who after they had moved some time without order, and with
great Shouts, filed off by that Wall, all of them discharging their Arms in my
Face, to do me, as they said, the greater Honor: It Is true, this is their way
of showing their Respects to each other, and they do the same to their Princes
and Generals.

The King of Morocco makes no Distinction between Ambassadors, but according to
their Qualities and their Station near their Masters. But above all, when they
bring him Rich Presents.

His Predecessors and Himself have so well established the Custom, or, to speak
more properly, the Duty of bringing those Presents, that they have, as it were,
made it a Law to bring them, which their Subjects and all Foreigners who come
to their Court must observe, it being not Lawful to appear there without them.
It Is even an essential Article of their Ceremonies relating to Ambassadors,
always to begin the Reception that is made them by the following Questions, yet
softened with some preliminary Excuse and Civility: Who are ye? Whence come ye?
What Is your Business? What do you bring? And it is according as they answer to
the last of these Questions, that the manner of their Reception and Usage are
regulated.

It Is also with a prospect and desire of procuring such Presents, that this
Prince uses all imaginable means to get Ambassadors sent him, or to engage
other States to receive them; yet, when he either desires or promises
Ambassadors of an Eminent Quality, it is to be believed he does it much less out
of a desire of paying or receiving a particular Respect, than to get large
Presents, always esteeming they ought to be proportionable to their Quality.

Nevertheless, he imagines that his Greatness never appears or evinces it self
better than by lessening them; and for that reason there is no manner of
difficulty that can be raised, or Tricks and Subtilties that can be devised,
but what are improved by his Ministers to succeed in this. They also tried with
all imaginable cunning and stiffness, to make me submit to the Rules which they
think they have established by their violent proceedings with the late
Ambassadors of some other Crowns. But that the King might not be exposed to
resent such an usage, I omitted nothing in that juncture to make 'em sensible
of the difference between his Majesty and all other Princes, and withstood
these assuming Endeavors with so many Reasons, and with so much firmness and
patience, that I had the satisfaction to see, by the Success which even his
Majesty has honored with his Approbation, that I had inspired into them the
just Idea they were to have of whatever relates to the Merit, the Power and the
Glory of his Majesty.

It Is said, that this Prince has taken a solemn Oath never to set free the
Christian Slaves that are under his Power, till, at least, as many of his own
Subjects be exchanged for 'em; and the last Treaties which the Spaniards made
with him of Ten, and since that lately, of Four Moors for One Spaniard, have so
puffed him up with Pride and Presumption on that account, that they have almost
made it impossible for other Nations to Treat with him.

Mickeness is the place where he usually resides; it is a little Inland Town
about 40 Leagues from Sally, 60 from Tetuan, and 12 from Fess. It Is very
populous, having above 60000 Inhabitants, but so ill built and unpleasant in it
self, that it might well pass for a pitiful Country Town, were it not for the
great number of its Inhabitants, its Prince's Presence and his Alcassave that
graces it, and which is almost as large as the Town, and of a Structure far
above what I could have thought it to have been, compared to all the other
Edifices I had seen before in that Country.

That Palace shows it self above the Town, and has many Walls about it that are
very high, very thick, and very white; and consists of a great number of
Pavillions, or small distinct Buildings, besides its two Mosques, whose
Minarets are of a considerable height. As that Building is the first thing that
strikes the Eye when we come near the Town, it gives a very great Idea of it
self; but it is much lessened by a nearer view; for, the whole is built with so
little Art and Regularity, that it would puzzle the most skillful Architect to
find out its true Disposition and Design; and I am even persuaded by what I
could infer from its outside, (for I was not permitted to see it within) that
the King himself, who is the Author and Manager of that Fabric, cannot give an
account of it, and that he has no other design in pulling down and building up,
as he does every day, than to bring under, by hard Labor and Servitude, a
great number of his Subjects whom he employs in that Work; which is also the
usual Employment and Punishment of the Christian Slaves, who are forced to work
there at all times, and without ceasing, becoming Laborers and Masons through
Bastonadoes and Misery, under the load of which they sink the sooner, their
daily Food barely consisting in a very small pittance of very brown, or rather
black Barley Bread, with Water, and lodging only in Matamorres or Subterraneous
places, in which the bare Ground is their only Bed, and they breath a very bad
Air, infected with noisome Smells.

However, amongst this sort of Slavery, which is so cruel and intolerable,
there appears a kind of Humanity, that one would not in the least expect from
that Prince's Barbarity: For, neither Women nor married Men are obliged to
Work; the former on account of their Native weakness, and the latter because
they say, the Charge of a Wife, and the use they ought to make of her, are
sufficient to excuse 'em from being encumbered with additional Drudgeries: But
this kind of Compassion is very much disfigured by his Avarice, which inclines
him to give 'em nothing to subsist.

Those who become Renegades, are also exempted from Working, but they are no
less Slaves; for the King makes 'em keep Guard at his Gates, or sends them to
his Alcaydes in the Provinces, and these employ 'em in things suitable to their
Strength and Capacity. He takes 'em with him into the Field, and, in
Engagements, always places 'em in the Front, where, if they betray but the
least design of giving way, he cuts 'em in pieces.

The Alcassave has about 45 Appartments, each of which has a Fountain in its
Yard: Its chief Gate is very Stately, and has some Pillars whence it is called
the Marble Gate. The only Regular Buildings in that Palace, are the two Mosques
and a Mishuart, or large Yard, adorned within with Pillars and Bas-reliefs of
Marble, without any figures of Animals, but with Ciphers and Arabic
Characters, in which the most considerable of the King's Military Exploits are
related.

The Stables, which they call Rooes, are also very fine, and consist of two
long Galleries all Arched to the right and left, there being from space to
space, in the middle of a kind of paved Way which parts 'em, some little
Pavillions or Summer-Houses, that are very neat, in each of which is a Fountain
and a Watering-place for Horses, that, as every one knows, are extremely fine
in that Country, but none of which the Moors will suffer to be Exported on any
account whatsoever for any Christian Country, out of an erroneous Maxim, which
makes 'em esteem it a wrong done to their Religion to supply us with any, or
with Corn: They have the same Bigotry about Books, which are there the more
curious and scarce, there being now few or no Printing-Houses in those Parts.

The King's Gardens are in the middle of a vast Grove of Olive Trees, and may
be said to be fine; Flowers, Fruits, Kitchen-Herbs, and Trees of all sorts are
to be seen there in every Season of the Year, but, as they lie somewhat far
from the Alcassave, this distance, which makes 'em less convenient, causes 'em
also to seem less pleasant. The Walks are very narrow; there are no
Waterworks, but some Rivulets glide through the Place and serve to Water it. A
Spanish Slave whose Name is Antonio Lopes has the Care of it. This Man seems to
be of a good Extraction, and is kindly used by the King; but the useful and
profitable Service he does him, keeps that Prince from suffering or even
promising him ever to return to his own Country.

There are some goodly Palaces near the King's, which are built by some of the
Alcaydes, to ingratiate themselves with him, though they can hardly expect to
enjoy 'em securely, being made but too sensible by an Experience fatal to some
of their Rank, that they shall not be Masters of 'em any longer than till that
Prince takes a fancy to make 'em his own.

There is an Hospital at Mickeness, which the King of Spain has lately founded
there, for the Comforting and Relieving of Slaves, and which is indeed a very
great help to 'em: It Is capable of receiving a hundred sick Persons. Four
Recollet-Monks and a Physician are constantly kept there, for whose Subsistence
his Catholic Majesty, who caused it to be built, has settled a Fund of Two
thousand Crowns Yearly. Neither the Hospital nor the Religious Men who belong
to it are suffered in the Town, but on account of some Tribute, no more than
are those of Fess, Sally, and Tetuan.

There are in this Town, as in all the rest of Africa, several Schools where
Children are taught to Read, Write, Cipher, and nothing else. When they are
corrected, it is with a very flat wooden Rod, with which they are struck on the
Soles of their Feet. All their Study consists in reading the Alcoran from the
beginning to the end, and when a Boy has gone through his Book, he is finely set
out, and his School-fellows lead him a Horseback through the Town, as it were
in Triumph, and proclaim his Praise.

The Jews inhabit a particular and pretty large Part of the Town; the Place
where they live is no Neater than those where some of their Nation dwell in
other Cities. There may be about Sixteen thousand of 'em in the whole Kingdom,
and their Head chiefly resides at Mickeness; it being his business to assess
'em, and collect the ordinary and extraordinary Garams they are to pay. He who
is in that Station at present is one Abraham Maymaran, who has lost one of his
Eyes, and does not seem over-stock'd with Sense, but is in Favor with the King
on account of the frequent Presents he makes him, and of the Services he does
him on any occasion. It Is also by his Management that this Prince keeps a
Correspondence, both Pecuniary and Political, with other Nations, whether
Friends or Foes. That Jew and his Family live in a very fine House, but all the
rest have very mean Habitations.

Though they are so numerous in these Parts, and so beneficial to the State, they
are not more respected there than in other Places; for they are always pitched
upon for the meanest Employments; nothing but their Food is allowed 'em for the
Work and Drudgeries they are often commanded to do. And they are so often
taxed, reviled, cursed, and bastonado'd, that they may be looked upon as the
common Mark and perpetual Sport of the Avarice and Injustice of the Great, and
the Aversion of all others.

It Is not Lawful for 'em to Defend themselves against the least Child who gives
'em ill Words, or throws Stones at 'em; and they are to be known from the
Moors, who always wear red Caps, by the black Caps and Bernous they are obliged
to wear.

Every where they live apart from the Moors, and the Entrance into the Place
where they dwell is guarded by some Men whom the King appoints for that
purpose, that they may not be disturbed in their Business and Religious
Worship; but they dare not travel through the Country alone, or without some
Moors to protect them; for, the Arabs and Barbarians would certainly cut their
Throats without Mercy.

However, notwithstanding, all these outward Marks of Misery and Scorn, in the
main, they are Richer and in a better Condition than the Moors themselves; the
reason of which is, that they Work and Trade, but the Moors do not; and indeed
the Jews Wives wear most of 'em good Clothes; and, as they do not hide their
Faces like the Moorish Women, they take more Care of their Head-dress and other
Attire.

For my part, having seen none but Jewish Women there, I must own that I have
found several of 'em so agreeable and beautiful, that I don't doubt but the
same Idea may reasonably be formed of the other African Women, whom the
Jealousy of the Men, and the Custom of the Country, oblige to hide themselves
much more than their own Inclination; for, it is certain, that the Reservedness
and Restraint, in which the Moors keep their Wives, serve rather to quicken the
Desire, which they have naturally to run astray, than to stifle it; and that,
as these Women have more Wit and Vivacity than those of Europe, these
Qualifications enable 'em to outdo 'em in all the Arts and Tricks by which
they may gratify their Inclinations.

They are particularly fond of Christians because they are not Circumcised, and
there are no Stratagems but what are used by some of 'em, to entice the Slaves
that live with them, or who are allowed to come where they dwell.

But a certain Ceremony which is performed at their Weddings, does not a little
contribute to the keeping of them in, till that time, unless they act with a
great deal of Caution; for, when the Friends on both sides are agreed, the
Bride, quite covered with a Veil, is carried in Public, Trumpets sounding, and
Hautboys playing, to the Bridegrooms Dwelling, and he is not allowed to uncover
her Face, nor look on any part of her Body, till he has found her to be a Maid;
which done, he pulls off her Veil, and takes off his Drawers, died in the
Action, and throws 'em in the Yard; whereupon the Women, who had brought her
thither, take 'em up singing and dancing for Joy that she is received to be his
Wife: But if he does not find her to be a Virgin, he has her stripped of her
Wedding Clothes, turns her out of Doors without seeing her Face, and sends her
back to her Father, whom the Law permits to strangle her, if he has a mind to
proceed to that severity.

When the Moors Marry, they send for a Cady and a Public Notary; the latter
draws up an Instrument, in which he sets down the Dowry which the Husband
settles on the Wife; for, Parents give nothing to their Daughters; and when a
Husband puts away his Wife he is obliged to give her the promised Dowry, and
cannot marry till four Months after; but when it is the Wife that leaves the
Husband, the Law does not give her any thing.

The fattest and biggest Women are the most admired in those Parts; for which
reason that Sex never put on any stiff-body'd Gowns, or other straight and
close Dresses that they may become such. But this also makes their Breasts lank
and flabby to an odious excess: They all wear Scarves, which they tie about
their Waste, and generally keep their Body very neat, though they always go
bare-leg'd: They use a great deal of Vermilion about their Cheeks and Lips,
blackning their Eyebrows with the Smoke of Galls: They color the Soles of
their Feet and the inside of their Hands with yellow, and their Nails with red,
and set out their Necks, Ears, Arms and Legs with Neck-Laces, Pendents,
Bracelets, and a world of trifling Gugaws, never thinking themselves handsome if
they want any of these borrowed Ornaments.

When they go abroad, they cover themselves with a large white and very thin
Veil, and muffle up the middle of their Faces, that they may not be seen, their
Eyes only uncovered, that they may see their way: They never speak to any Man
they meet, though 'twere their own Husband, who could not then know his own Wife;
for they are all covered alike; but they take off all this when they come into
the Chamber of any of their She-Friends, and are very careful to leave their
Shoes at the Chamber Door, that the Master of the House may not come in there;
for if he did, the Husband of the Visitant would take it very ill.

Though they have but one Husband amongst many, and most of 'em live together,
they are not Jealous of one another.

No Man but their Husband is admitted to see 'em in their Houses; and when some
Friends are invited to a Treat, which seldom happens there, the Man's Wives go
to the top of the House, which is like a Terrass, or into some upper Room, and
stay there till the Guests are gone; which always makes the Entertainment very
short; neither do they stay to talk and divert themselves together, as we do in
Europe.

The manner of eating amongst the Moors, is to sit on the Ground without
Shoes, Master and Servants together, round a large piece of Leather, which is
always very greasy, and serves both for Table and Table-Cloth. Their standing
Dish is some Cooscoosoos, a Paste made with fine Flower, which looks much like
our sugared Anniseed, and has been boiled with some young Pigeons, Fowls, or
Mutton: They cram down this Cooscoosoos by handfuls, and make a kind of little
Pellets of it, which they fling into their Mouths; and throw back into the Dish
(which is narrow at bottom and broad at top, not altogether unlike a Stool-Pan)
what stuck to their Beard or greasy Fists. As for Flesh, when they would take
up a bit, and part it from the whole, as they never put but their Right Hand in
the Dish, every one pulls his piece, as a Pack of Hounds does Carrion, till
they tear it asunder; and all this without speaking a Word during the whole
Meal.

Those who live a little better, after that Dish, which is generally attended
with a Salad, have a Brass-Bason or Earthen-Platter of Meat fricaseed with
Honey and Almonds, or broiled on the Flames, or fried in Oil, and some other
Sweetmeats, after their way, without any Desert; and after they have done
eating, they wipe their Fingers on the Edge of the Dish, or lick 'em with their
Tongue.

They drink nothing but Water, because their Alcoran forbids 'em Wine, though not
Brandy, with which they often get drunk, using all the same Vessel: They love
also very much our Provence Ros-Solis, Ratafia, Cette, and Cinnamon Water, etc.
But Sherbet and Coffee, so used in the Levant, are not known to 'em.

The Stable is the Place which they most commonly choose to eat in; and they
have no other Pleasure, after they have filled their Bellies, than to visit
their Wives or their Horses.

Now that I have spoke of the Moors manner of Eating, I think I may add a Word
of their Dress.

The Men wear a Shirt that is pretty short, with broad Sleeves, that sometimes
hang down, but more frequently are turned up to their Shoulders, chiefly in
Summer; in which Season they go with bare Arms. Under that Shirt they wear
Linnen-Drawers, that reach only to their Knees, and leave their Legs naked to
their Feet: They have Shoes, or rather Slippers, without Heel's, called
Baboushes; the Marabouts or Talbs wear certain Pieces cut on the Edges like a
Flower-deluce, and it is only by that Mark that they are to be known and
distinguished from the rest.

They all wear a Cafetan or Cloth-Vest without Sleeves, of any Color which
they fancy most, and about this Vest a Silk Scarf, in the forepart of which
they put a Sheath with two or three Knives, the Handles of which, as also the
Tip of the Sheath, they always covet to have of some costly Metal, or of some
extraordinary Workmanship: Over this Cafetan, which is only buttoned to the
Girdle, they wear a Hayick, which is a Piece of very fine white Woollen-Stuff,
about five Else long, and one and a half broad, and cover their Head and whole
Body with it, wrapping themselves up in it above and below the Arms, not much
unlike what is to be seen in the Draperies of Antique Figures of the Apostles
and Israelites.

They wear over all this, principally in Winter, a Bernooe, or kind of Stuff or
Cloth Cloak, edged with a Fringe, whence there hangs a kind of a Cowle behind
with a Tuft at the end on it.

When they go into the Country they wear a Straw Hat, but every where else they
have on their Heads, which they always keep shaved, only a red Woollen Cap,
about which sometimes they put some Muslin to make a Turbant, provided it be
not in their King's presence; for, before him none of 'em, of what quality
soever, dare appear otherwise than with a plain Cap on.

None but the Xeriffs, or Mahomet's Posterity, have leave to wear a green Cap;
and as for the Jews, they are obliged to wear none but black; the younger sort
wear none at all, and must go bare till they are Twenty, unless they be
Married, or either they or their Father have been at Mecca, in which cases they
are allowed to wear a Cap when they are Fourteen.

This is the Dress which all the Moors wear, there being no Distinction between
'em but what consists in the Richness of their Cafetans, or the fineness of
their Hayicks: The Alcaydes alone are to be known from the rest by some
Leathern Belts, Embroidered with Gold, which they wear over the Shoulder, and
in 'em a Scimeter; and over this they have a Bernoo of Scarlet, or black Cloth,
without a Cowle; even the King himself does not go otherwise dressed, but
indeed he always has a Coat of Mail under his Shirt, to secure himself from
such secret Attempts as he knows his Cruelty cannot but inspire.

The King's Blacks, who are designed for his Guard, are also dressed in the
like manner, and very decently, and are seldom seen to wear Bernoos, but
generally Silk Stockins, which they very much fancy; they wear Scimeters, and
when they are a Horseback, have always Lances or Fusils.

The Women's Dress is somewhat like the Men's, from which it differs only in the
Sleeves of their Smocks that cover their Arms, and are close to the Wrist, and
in the length of their Drawers that come down to the Calves of their Legs: The
Neck-bands of their Smocks are Plaited, and commonly Embroidered; their Vest is
open before to the Waste; they fasten some large pieces of Muslin to the
Sleeves of these Vests, which would be much like our Women's Engage (...), but
that they hang much lower: At home they wear a very short Petticoat, and when
they go abroad they wrap themselves up in a Hayick, which wholly covers 'em
from the Neck to the Feet; they also hide their Faces, so that nothing is seen
but their Eyes. As for their Head-Dress, it does not much differ from that of
the Spanish Women; for they wear some Roses of Ribbon and two Tresses of Hair,
which they toss back, having nothing on their Heads but a single Veil or
Binder. They wear neither Shoes nor Baboushes, but only some Shaussons of red
or yellow Spanish Leather, without either Soles or Heels.

Before I have done with this Article, I must observe a Circumstance which
seems to me pleasant enough: When the Moors happen to be caught by a shower of
Rain in the Fields, having not their Bernoos, then to save their Clothes from
being wet, they strip themselves stark-naked, making a Bundle of their Hayick,
Vest and Shirt, on which they sit till the Rain be over, and then they put on
their Clothes, which they have kept dry, and proceed on their Journeys.

When I gave an Account of the number of the King's Children, who are so many
and so ill Educated, that it is to be presumed several of 'em will hardly be so
happy as ever to have an Estate or Employment, I said, that this Monarch seemed
to have pitched upon one of 'em for his Successor, whose Mother he fondly dotes
on: His Name is Muley Zeydan, and he may be about one or two and Twenty Years
of Age: He is a Mullatto, pretty well shaped, and seems not so covetous as his
Father, though not less inclined to spill humane Blood: He is much given to
Debauchery, and loves Wine and Brandy extremely, often drinking both to excess;
at which time it is not very safe to keep him company, or be in his way.

He does not lodge in the Alcassave, but dwells in a Sately Palace adjoining,
which the Alcayde Ali Ben Abdalla, whom I shall have occasion to mention
hereafter, had built there for himself, but of which the King has made himself
Master, as he commonly does of whatsoever his Subjects have that he likes, or
thinks to be convenient for him.

This young Prince has already three Wives, and a Daughter of the Alcayde Ali
is intended to be his fourth.

He affects to seem more Familiar and Generous than his Father; and that he may
get the reputation of being such, and be beloved, he does not stick to
disapprove his Conduct when he is A Moorish woman walking in the Town

A Black of the King of Moroccos Guard

A Marabout or Talbe

amongst his Friends and he sees occasion. I have even been assured, that he
spoke his mind somewhat freely, after the King refused to keep his Word, and
disowned his writing about the Peace he had seemed so much to desire should be
concluded with his Majesty.

Most of the King's other Children are brought up with so much neglect, and so
much unlike the Sons of a great Prince, that there are but few mean Actions of
which they are not capable; above all, in what relates to Debauchery and
getting Money: They often go to visit the Jews, to find some strong Drink, or
to pilfer something; for they are as thievish and ravenous as Kites, and don't
in the least come short of the most dexterous Lacedaemonians of old in that
Art; if they meet a Slave they search him, and take whatever he has from him;
for which reason they and their Visits are not less shunned in Private Houses,
than those of Gypsies in a Country Market.

I had a trial of this in a Visit I was plagued with by one of 'em, only some
twelve or thirteen Years old: His only Salute and Complement was to lay his
Hands on whatever seemed worth his Temptation: Neither can I better compare his
coming in and his going out, than to that of a Monkey, who would skip you at
once on some Basket of Fruit he had spied in a Room, and, having laid hold on
what he could catch, would run out as nimbly as he came; however, I came off
with the loss of a pair of Pistols and some Boxes of Sweetmeats: But this
served to teach me to beware of the no less dexterous Hands of his Brothers,
whom I always took care to receive no where but in the Yard, or at the Gate of
the Palace where I was lodged.

As these Children grow in Years the King makes 'em Alcaydes, or Governors of
several Parts of his Dominions: And, after the death of the Father, he who is
the most in Favor, and has the strongest Party, overcomes and kills the rest,
to secure the Empire to himself, then puts his Favorites or his own Children
into their Places. That Son who is with the King at his death, is generally in
a Capacity of enslaving the rest, because he is Master of the Arms, and
sometimes of the Treasure when he can discover it. The present Emperor highly
approves of this Maxim, as the means whereby their Children become Warriors, in
hopes of obtaining the Empire over their Brothers; but this daily occasions War
betwixt 'em, and divides their Dominions with as much Ease as the Conquerors
reunited 'em with Difficulty.

These Children, at nine or ten Years of Age, will mount the highest mettl'd
Horses, ride them full speed without Saddles, Boots, or Spurs, and sit 'em all
the while with the greatest security. It Is the Custom among the Moors to ride
their Horses very young thus without a Saddle, as well for the sake of the
Horses as of the Riders; for there the Horses are backed and wrought after the
first Grass.

I endeavored in vain to inform my self exactly of the Emperor of Morocco's
Revenues; I found it was altogether as impossible to reckon 'em up, as to fix
the Caprice of his Humor in raising the Taxes, and his insatiable greediness
of Gold and Silver: The Tenth of all his Subjects Goods is the most common
Assessment, as well as the Yearly Tax upon all the Jews of six Crowns for every
Male, form fifteen Years old and upwards; but he lays such frequent Impositions
upon them and the rest of his Subjects, or, to use their Expression, such
extraordinary Garams, assessing sometimes one Town and sometimes another,
without any Pretense or Reason but his mere Will, that it is very difficult to
know or fix the whole Product; which, however, is very considerable; though he
has not any Crown Lands.

It Is certain he causes all the Gold and Silver he receives by it, to be melted
down and buried, (for the Taxes are seldom paid but in Quintals or hundred
weights of Gold and Silver) that he kills all those whom he employs about the
laying up of those Treasures, that by these means he may become as much Master
of his own Secret as of his Wealth; for which reason he often causes it to be
melted himself, and hides it without making any one privy to it; and this made
me call this Treasure invisible and unprofitable, when I spoke of it in the
Article of the Town of Morocco.

It is computed he may have thus by him to the value of Fifty Millions of
Livres; which were a fine Treasure, and a rich Mine for an Invader to search,
if he could discover and approach it.

He get's a great deal out of his Alcaydes, to whom he allows the Revenues of
their Governments; but in return, he obliges 'em to make him Yearly Presents at
the Great Easter, which is that when they sacrifice the Lamb; and these often
amount to more than their Revenue: Whence it happens that they are as Absolute
there as the King himself, and exercise their Authority with perfect Tyranny.

It may be said, That these Alcaydes govern all the Kingdom under the Emperor's
Authority; for there is no Parliament, no Court of Justice, no particular
Council, nor Minister: He himself is alone the Author, Expounder, and Sovereign
Judge of his Laws, which, except those of his Prophet, have no other Foundation
or Limits than his Will. Nor have they any weight or effect but through the
extreme Cruelty which he himself is empowered to exercise right or wrong,
against those who may be more properly called the Victims of his Fury or
Cruelty, than of his Justice; which does not deserve that Name, but in respect
of Robbers and Murderers, whom he has undertaken to punish, executing them
himself: And indeed he has proceeded against them with such Care and Success,
that he has cleared the Highways, which were all pestered with 'em before:
this ought to be accounted as one of the most remarkable and most advantageous
things he has done during his Reign; the Care which he has taken being so
great, and his Orders so exactly observed, in causing those who live near the
Places where the Crime is committed to be punished with Death or a Fine, that
at this time a Man may travel through all his Territories with as much Boldness
and Security, as formerly he did with Fear and Danger.

His Authority which appears, and is indeed so Despotic, has nevertheless one
Superior to it, to which it is subordinate, which is the Mufty's and his
Officers, whom the King has not the Power of Deposing, though he has that of
making 'em: He as well as others submits to the Decrees of this Jurisdiction,
and neither can disclaim it, nor withdraw himself from it, if the least of his
Subjects has a mind to cite him before it; but, at the same time, it must be
acknowledged, that a fatal Revenge, which surely would follow, sufficiently
restrains 'em from it; therefore generally that Jurisdiction does not affect
him unless when he consults it, or it thinks fit to make him some Remonstrances
necessary to his Service, and the Good of his Empire.

This Mufty is the proper and supreme Judge of Adulterers, whom commonly he
sentences to death; he is so Absolute in what concerns all particular
Differences that come before him, that his Sentence admits of no Appeal nor
Delay: A Bastonado is always the Primum Mobile that hurries on the execution of
his Decree, and woe to him that summons a richer Man than himself to appear at
his Tribunal, or who is cited thither by such a one; for, the Cadies, who are
in the nature of Sub-Delegates to the Mufty in all the Towns and Villages,
always sell their Suffrages to them who give most; and false Witnesses, who are
never punished there, are so numerous and so cheap in that Country, that no Man
dares trust there to his own Innocence, nor to the Justice of his Cause.

The Alcaydes substitute one Cady in every Town or Village within their
Government, but all under the Authority of the Grand Mufty; and place there
besides two other Officers, who are fixed as the former, but such as they may
depose at Pleasure; in which, these differ from the Cadies, over whom the
Alcaydes have not the same Authority.

The first of these Officers is the Calif, or Deputy Governor, who takes care
of all that relates to the Particulars and Authority of the Government, and
takes cognizance of all the Faults and Complaints of the Moors and of the Jews,
determining their Differences; which ever redounds to the profit of the
Alcayde, because the guilty or wrangling Parties are always either punished or
redressed by the expense of their own Money. The Calif is accountable for this
Fine to his Governor, but neither of 'em have power to condemn any one to
death, at least without an Order from the King. This Officer likewise assesses
the People within the extent of his Province, fixing the ordinary and
extraordinary Taxes or Garams, which are never levied or got in, but by some
Black, whom the King sends on the places for that purpose.

The other Officer is the Amokadem, a sort of Judge, whose business it is to set
a Tax and Price upon Victuals and Fuel, (which are all sold by weight) and to
see that due Order be kept in these Matters. The Duties and Fees which he
claims and receives for every one of these Wares, would make this Post very
gainful, if he alone were to receive the benefit of it; but if the yearly
Presents he is obliged to make to his Alcayde, and sometimes to the King
Himself, do not sweep away all his profit, at least they diminish the the
greatest part of it.

Thus much may be observed of the Government of this Great Kingdom, whose
strength by Sea and Land, and Commerce, now remains to be examined, that we may
perfectly know the State of it.

I have already made it appear, that its strength at Sea is inconsiderable;
what may be said of its Landforces, is, that they might be Formidable, if this
Prince knew how to discipline his Subjects, and had a sufficient quantity of
good Arms for them; but you may judge of them by their real wants in these two
Points, as well as by the King's not keeping any Forces in constant Pay.

Whenever some Expedition is intended, he commands his Alcaydes to raise him
the number of Men he designs shall serve in it; upon which it is agreed amongst
them, what each ought to furnish proportionably to the extent of his
Government, where the Division is made according to the Rolls of those that pay
Taxes: Then they impress and force such married Men to March, as do not
voluntarily List themselves into the Service, or at least they are obliged to
send others in their room: Two Brothers may be taken out of three, but they
must be Married, for the younger and unsettl'd cannot be compelled to go.

These Men so raised, be they Officers, Foot, or Horsemen, are obliged to
Mount, Arm, Equip, and Maintain themselves at their own cost during all the
Campaign; and, as for the most part, they have neither Fire Arms nor Powder,
they march only with Swords, Lances, or Staves.

However, in every Town or Village, a certain number proportionable to the
largeness of the Place, is continually to be in Arms, and ready to March at the
first Command: Those only who are designed for Horse men, have Horses given
'em, which they must keep* and all of this number, be they either Foot-Soldiers
or Horsemen, are free from all Taxes: Thus they may be said to be kept, not at
the King's Charge, but at that of the Place to which they belong.

When they are ready to give Battle, they range their Armies after this manner:
They divide their Horse into two Bodies, and place one on each Wing; The Foot
is in the middle, so that the whole is in the form of a Crescent: They put but
two Ranks of Soldiers when they fight on a Plain; but when they fight between
the Mountains, where they cannot spread themselves, they put more.

Before the Engagement begins they make a great Shout, which is followed with
some short Prayers, to beg of God to give 'em the Victory. Such of the Horse as
always keep near the King's Person, are all Blacks, and wear Fusils and
Scimeters, with Pistols at their Girdles: Those that are more distant, have
partly Lances and partly Muskets; as for the Foot, one part is Armed with
Fusils, and the other with Cross-bows, Slings, Clubs, Half-Pikes, long Darts, and
Cutlasses.

When they are at War among themselves, they go but unwillingly into the Field;
but when with Christians, then every one is eager and proud to go, that they
may gain Indulgencies for the expiation of their Sins; and then their Armies
are very numerous.

All the Arabs and Barbarians, by whose Dwellings the Army passes, are obliged
to provide gratis wherever it encamps, Wheat, Meal, Butter, Oil, Honey, and
Cattle, for its subsistence, and this upon pain of being plundered of all that
they have, and cut in pieces themselves. It Is said, that upon any pressing
occasion that concerns Religion, the King might raise an Army of an Hundred
Thousand Men, half of which should consist of Horse, but not above five and
twenty Thousand of 'em, at most, would be well Armed: It Is thought the King has
for that purpose ten Thousand Muskets in his Armory, which he keeps, as
likewise his Treasure, for that Son, whom he designs for his Successor, that he
may leave him in a capacity of maintaining his Crown against any of his
Brothers or others, that should dispute it with him; for it is certain, as I
have observed before, that he who is Master of the Arms and Money, soon becomes
so of all the Kingdom, which is neither Hereditary nor Elective, but always his
among the Xerifs who is then most in Favor.

There are in the Armory, besides these Muskets, a Hundred and Fifty Pieces of
Brass Cannon, one part of which came out of the Ship The Captain of Spain,
which was lost ten Years since before Ceuta, and the other from the Town of
Larache, which was retaken from the Spaniards.

Though this Prince has no regular Forces, he has nevertheless a standing Guard
of three or four Hundred Blacks, Armed with very heavy Muskets: They are
always very young, and he chooses 'em such, because he will not trust the Guard
of his Person to those of a riper Age, for fear of some Attempt against him:
They are for the most part Children of the Seraglio, and he only provides Food
and Clothes for 'em, but they are better and more neatly Apparelled than the
greatest Lords in that Kingdom.

Besides this Guard, the King has seven or eight Alcaydes, who never approach
him otherwise than barefooted, and without Turbants, but they are allowed to
wear a red Woollen Cap on their Heads; and in these consists all his Court.

There are three sorts of Alcaydes, the chief are the Governors of Provinces,
where they are effectually like so many Viceroys; the other are either
particular Governors of great Towns, or General Officers of his Armies: They
are all of 'em obliged to reside where their Employments require their
attendance, and the King keeps near him only such of 'em as are more
particularly useful to him, and gives their Children leave to act for them.
There is no considerable Officer, either for his House or for the general or
particular administration of his State, besides the Grand Mufti for Affairs of
Religion and Justice, the chief Eunuch for his Wives and Seraglio, and one
chief Treasurer for his Revenues, and the latter's Office too is passive and
burthensom at best, for he never makes any distribution of the Money he
receives, and is immediately obliged to return it to the King, who lays it up
among his unprofitable and subterraneous Hoard, as I have already observed: And
as for what concerns the ordinary Expense of his House and his Wives, or the
occasion of some extraordinary Charges in time of War, this Alcayde must raise
the Fund out of the Revenues of his Government; this Prince never giving any
Salary, Pension, nor Gratuity in Money, to any one whatsoever.

He who at present executes the Office of High Treasurer, is the Alcayde
Abdalla Mussy, Governor of all the Kingdom of Fess; the administration of
which Government he commits to one of his Sons, while he himself continually
keeps at Mickeness. He is near six and Fifty Years Old, little and Lean; his
Eyes are even with his Forehead; he is of a good Aspect enough, and is counted
an Honest Man, and one who keeps his word, which is very rare among the Moors:
He is but meanly descended, for his Father was a Mule-driver: He is well enough
beloved, because he is an Honest Man, and one who does good; but for this very
reason he is no great Favorite.

There is besides another Officer, who is in the nature of Superintendant of
the Buildings, whose Name is Aly ben Jehon: He has the inspection and takes
care of all those that are built by the King at Mickeness, and is so wholly
employed in it, that sometimes he is whole Weeks without seeing his Master; and
he had need be very Rich, to defray the Costs of all the Materials, both for
the inside and outside of those Buildings, which he is obliged to provide. It Is
true indeed that his Government, which contains the whole Country that lies
between Mickeness and Tremecen, is of a great extent, and a very fruitful Soil;
however, I am persuaded, considering the unlimitted Expenses to which this
Office obliges him, that notwitstanding all the good management imaginable, his
bare subsistence is all the advantage he makes of it at the Years end. He is
about eight and Forty Years Old, of a large and comely Presence, though a
Mulatto: He has a quick Eye, a ready Wit, and is of a pretty kind Disposition:
The Slaves that attend him daily, give him the Character of a good humored
Man, and praise him very much; but as he is altogether taken up by his
Business, he does not at all concern himself with Affairs of State.

He that seems to have the greatest share in that, and on whom alone the King
seems to rely in those Matters, is the Alcayde, Mahomet Addo Ben Ottar, who is
to this Prince as his Chief Minister, and has there the same Access and the
same Trust as a Favorite; and indeed, of all them that approach him, he best
knows how to flatter his Passions and humor him in whatever may please him.
Twelve Years since he was Ambassador in England, and whatever his Treatment
may have been there, he might be thought a great Enemy to that Nation, if his
mischievous Inclination did not make him known for such to all others.

As he has no Government, having quitted that of Sally to his Brother, thus to
exempt himself from the Obligation of making Presents to his Emperor, so he is
the less Wealthy; but has the greatest Interest of all the Alcaydes; he is
about five and fifty Years of Age; he has a quick Eye and an ingenious Look;
his Ways and Discourse discover a great deal of Cunning; he is deceitful and
wicked to the highest degree; and pretends to be a Friend to the French,
frequently saying that his Mother was born at Marseilles, when at the same time
he loves nothing but Money, and is pleased with nothing but Mischief; he is
feared but not at all beloved by the Moors, who universally hate his Ministry,
and in private give him all the Curses imaginable; he is likewise very great
with Muley Zeydan the King's Son, and the Partner of all his Pleasures.

The Alcayde Aly Ben Abdalla and he are Rivals, and jealous of each other's
Interest with the King, which causes the management of Affairs to be difficult
there: The Alcayde Aly being always absent, keeps up his Interest only by his
rich Presents, but Mahomet Addo's seems to be better established by his
continual residence at Court, and his Artifices and Method in managing the
King's Temper, to reduce him to a necessity of never parting with him.

This Alcayde Aly Ben Abdalla, of all those who are at distance from Court,
lives with most Grandeur and Authority; he is Viceroy of the Algarbs, and
Governor of the Provence of Riffe, and of all the Maritime Places from
Zaffarine to Sally, that has its particular Governors; for which reason the
King wholly depends on him for what relates to Sea-Affairs; and, as he is very
vain, he calls himself among Strangers Admiral of the Coasts of Africa.
Formerly he resided altogether at Tetuan, but at present his Residence is
commonly at Tangier; he is about fifty Years of Age, and of mean Birth; being a
Fisherman's Son, yet is one of the richest in all this Empire, and the King
receives the greatest Presents every Year from him, the least exceeding the
value of 400000 Livres. That which adds to the Profits of his Government, is
Traffic and the Neighborhood of the Sea, which renders it one of the best,
and give him a great Reputation with his Master: He is very illiterate, and
cannot so much as read, yet has a great deal of Sense, and great Experience in
Affairs, which makes up for all; he is fierce, haughty, full of himself, and
much puffed up with his Fortune and Advancement; he is Violent, humorous and
subject to Passion, in which he spares not his best Friends; nevertheless, when
he is come to himself, he is Gentle, Humane, Tractable, and of a Deportment
altogether Noble and Honorable; he does not hate the Christians, and would
seem as much a Friend to the French as an Enemy to the Spaniards; but it may be
imagined that Policy and Interest have a greater share in his Public
Sentiments than Truth: For it is certain, that the King continually presses him
most earnestly to get Ceuta out of the Hands of the Spaniards, the performance
of which he imposes on him at the Price of his Head; and the more Commerce
there is in the Towns of his Government, the more considerable are his Revenues
and the Presents he is obliged to make: This consequently makes him heartily
wish that his Master were at Peace with those Christian Princes, whom he judges
most Powerful at Sea, and from time to time he attempts effecting it with the
King; but his Interest with that Prince, which he always takes so great a Care
to magnify, must needs be too weak to prevail in spite of the continual
opposition of his Competitor; or perhaps he presumes a little too far on his
Artifices for the Engagement and Success of his Designs; since the King my
Master has lately been informed by the Report I made him of it, that this
Alcayde discovered no less Surprise and Displeasure for having miscarried in
such an Affair, than Resolution and Desire to renew his Attempts to succeed
better in it.

His great Favorite, whose Advice he takes, and on whom he relies for the
execution of all his Affairs, is Mahomet Hadgy Lucas, made by him his
Lieutenant General of the Marine. This Man, whose abode is altogether at
Tetuan, accompanied Mahomet Addo in his Embassy to England, which has a little
more civilized him, or at least makes him less barbarous than the rest; he has
a great deal of Sense, and is well skilled in the management of Business,
speaks good Spanish, is quick, cunning, laborious, violent, a dissembler, a
cheat, and always inclined to do mischief, which makes him abhorred, not only
by the Christians and the Jews, but by all the Moors in general: And, in short,
to draw his Picture more exactly and in fewer Strokes, there is no more to be
said than this Truth, That his Temper, his Manners, his Words, and his Actions,
do not at all belie the common observations on the Judas-colour of his Beard
and Hair: He is not above fifty Years old, but so full of Diseases, the cause
of which he attributes to Poison, which he pretends was given him in some
Melons by the Governor of Ceuta, above a Year since, that it is to be hoped he
will not long hold out against the effect of those deadly Imprecations which
are universally bestowed on him.

Since this Discourse has insensibly engaged me to give the Character and
personal Qualities of such Persons as make any distinct Figure in this State, I
think I ought not to forget a Man whom the Honor of having been Ambassador to
France has made known there, and of whose Quality it is convenient to be
informed, that hereafter this may serve as a Rule to those of his own Character.

It Is Mahomet Themin, who came thither in the Quality of Ambassador in 1681,
and makes no other Figure in his own Country than that of an Amokadem at
Tetuan, that is to say a sort of puny Judge; one of his Brothers is a Broker
there, and the other a Rope-seller; besides, Themin obtained this Office there
but after his return, that he might have the means, after a sort, to maintain
an Honor to which, in Truth, he was never designed; for he should have been
only Secretary to Hadgy Manino Governor of Sally, the true Ambassador; but his
Name was inserted without the King's knowledge in the Credential Letter, which
the Alcayde Omar Addo his Protector and Patron gave 'em; for which reason he
took Care at his return neither to boast of the Honors nor the Presents he had
received in France; the last of which he sold at Marseilles, that none might
know of 'em in his Country, and he might keep the Profits of 'em to himself. No
more durst Hadgy Manino complain, for fear of incurring the Displeasure of the
Alcayde Omar, who at that time ruled every Thing, and of whom the King of
Morocco has rid himself these five Years since for this reason.

But to pass by these particular Subjects of the Emperor of Morocco, and speak
of all those that compose his State, it is to be observed that there are two
sorts of 'em; for some are Blacks, and the rest White-men.

The first, though they are his Slaves, are those he trusts most, and the usual
Executors of his Orders, which they fulfill in such an Imperious and Absolute a
manner, that the most Powerful of the Alcaydes themselves tremble at the sight
of the least of 'em.

When he goes to Battle, he has in his Army always Seven or eight thousand of
'em, as well of Foot as of Horse: These are his best Soldiers, and fight always
near his Person with Firearms, and he gives the Government of Places, or the
Chief Posts in his Army, to those whom he likes best among 'em.

The King of Morocco from time to time gets a Number of these Blacks, whom he
either buys or procures by force or cunning out of their Country, and having
caused 'em to marry, sends 'em, with some Cattle of which he gives them the
Care and Profit, into several uninhabited Places, where he uses 'em like a
Nursery to serve him upon occasion.

The White-men, though they are freeborn and very numerous, being originally
Natives of the Country, yet are not the more regarded or happy for it; and as a
Token of the little Affection and Esteem the King has for them, he commits the
Guard of his Person to the Blacks, to whom he gives so great an Authority over
the White-men, that they exact upon 'em and abuse 'em without control, as they
please, and when they think fit; which has driven the latter to such a Despair
that they are ready to attempt any thing if they had an opportunity and power
answerable to their Intentions.

Indeed most of them are so naturally inclined to revolt, that the knowledge
which this Prince has of it, is none of the least Motive that induces him
always to keep 'em in Fear and Subjection; and his only Interest and Care, for
the preserving his Government in Peace and Splendour, is to prevent and hinder
their Motions within; the situation of his Kingdoms being such, that he has
hardly any thing, or at least very little, to fear of any Attempt from abroad.

This will plainly appear to be true, if we consider that his Territories would
be inaccessible on the side next the Sea, unless in the Places, which, as I
have already observed, are in the Possession of the Spaniards and Portuguese;
but if the Spaniards don't take more Care of Ceuta than they did lately of
Larache, the strong Situation and Fortifications of which, here delineated,
sufficiently evince that the loss of it ought much less to be attributed to the
want of Courage and Bravery of the Officers and Soldiers that Garrisoned it,
than to the want of Provisions and Ammunition, it is much to be feared, they
will suffer it to be taken from 'em in the same manner; which will cause the
greater surprise, since the Moors have neither the Instruments, nor Industry,
nor Engineers, nor Experience necessary for such Expeditions: We cannot say as
much of the Town of Magazan, where the King of Portugal continually takes Care
to keep a strong and good Garrison.

A Draught of the Town and Fortress of Larache, 1688.
A. St. James's Fort. B. St. Anthony's Castle. C. The Castle of our Lady of
Europe. D. The Jews Tower. E. St. John's covered Way. F. Nostro Senor's covered
Way. G. The Bulwork of Diego de Vera. H. The Camp-Gate. Y. The Mole-Gate. I.
The Marine-Gate. K. St. Anthony's False Gate. L. St. Francis's False Gates. M.
St. Francis's Covent. N. The Town-Gate. O. Nostro Senor della Cabeza. P. St.
Anthony. Q. The Hospital. S. The old Huts. T. The new Huts. V. The old
Magazines de vera for Corn. X. The new Magazines de vera for Corn. Z. The
Magazines for Powder. 1. The Governor's House and Garden. 2. The Commissary's
Office. 3. The Serjeant-Major's Lodgings. 4. The new Fountain. 5. St. Michael's
Well. 6. The great Fountain. The River Lucorio or Licus.




The King of Morocco's only Neighbors on the Land-side, are the Negro's on one
hand, and the Algerines on the other; from the first of which he has nothing to
fear, as well because of the great River and the Mountains that separate them,
which would render their Attempts if not ineffectual, at least very difficult,
as for the mutual Advantages which he and they receive from their Union, the
Moors having a considerable Commerce in Guinea, from whence, for Salt,
Iron-Ware, little Looking-Glasses, and other pedling Toys that come from
Venice, they bring back good quantities of Gold-Dust, Elephants-Teeth, and a
great number of Blacks, whose Affection the King gains besides by his kind
Treatment, and the value he sets upon 'em in his own Country, as I have already
observed; so that he looks upon 'em as his own real Subjects.

He is not altogether so Easy on the side of the Algerines, the fear of whose
Valor, and the facility of entering his Country, keeps him daily upon his
Guard; but he has the Policy and good Fortune often to keep 'em off by the
pretext of Religion, making his Talbes and Marabots insinuate to 'em, that both
States should give God and their Prophet an Account one Day of the Blood which
would be spilt by Wars between 'em, contrary to their Laws. In the mean time
nothing but his own Weakness, and some fatal Experiments he has made of their
Valor, as also the Dread he has of the Grand Signior, from whom he might
apprehend some revengeful Invasion on that side, causes him to keep in this
seeming Friendship with them: For it is certain he hates 'em at least as much as
he hates the Christians, to whom also he always compares 'em, by reason of the
difference there is in their Faith; upon which likewise he Treats all the Turks
as Heretics, and if he had the least prospect of getting their Territories,
either by Treachery or by Force, he would not lose the opportunity of doing it.

The Commerce in his Kingdoms is, as it is elsewhere, generally Advantageous to
the Dealers, as well abroad as at home; and this Prince, more mindful of his
Profit than of his People, so well knows how beneficial Trading is to him in
particular, by the Duties which are levied for the Importation and Exportation
of Goods, that whatever his Antipathy and the prepossession of this Religion be
against the Christians, and whatsoever War he has with 'em, it does not hinder
him from tolerating their Trafick, and putting all means in practice that may
conduce to his Gain: Insomuch that there are in his Sea-Port-Towns People of
most Nations at all times, and his Alcaydes know so well by the large Sums
they borrow, and never wholly pay, how to cause those Traders to stay there,
whom hope of Gain has invited thither, and whom the first Endearments and a
show of kind Usage induce to settle in those Parts, that what repentance soever
the Wrongs, Displeasures, and frequent Avarices they are forced to satisfy
there, may bring upon 'em, it is seldom possible for them to get clear, unless
they lose their Debts and leave their Effects, or forego the natural Love of
their Country and of their Liberty for the sake of their Estate.

I have been told, that those who live at Sally are treated more kindly; of
which I very much doubt; but what I have seen practiced during my stay in
regard of those of Tetuan and Tangier, both on the Captains and Owners of Ships
who arrive there, has so strangely furpris'd me, that all the Inference I can
draw thence, is, that both the one and the other must needs have been
misinformed, or they make very great Profits, since they can resolve to expose
themselves there to such an Usage.

The Tenth of all the Merchandises that are imported and exported, is what the
King claims for his Customs, which brings him in a very great Revenue. That
which is collected at Sally does not belong to the Alcaydes, as does what is
levied in the other Governments, which is part of their Subsistence, and for
the re-imbursement of their Charges and the Presents they are obliged to make
to the Prince: And this, perhaps, is the reason which causes the Merchants to
be better used at Sally, as I have observed, because the Governors there do not
make it so much their business to deal with them so strictly; thus forbearing a
severe usage, of which they can reap no benefit, since they are obliged to give
a particular Account to the King of this Product, and pay it in specie at the
Year's end, deducting what they may have disburs'd according to order.

The Advantage which the French find by this Commerce is, That there they put
off such Goods as are of the growth of their Country, and also their
Manufactures turn to a good Account; besides the Merchants carry no Money
thither, and they ever bring back Merchandises of a greater Value than what
they carried over.

The Traffic of Provence consists in Tartar and Paper, the Consumption of
which is great in Barbary, as well as of Red Woollen Caps, fine and course
Languedoc Woollen Cloth; Serges de Nismes, Fustians and Dimities of Montpelier,
and other Places; Combs, Silks, Linen of Lions; Gold-Threads, Brocades,
Damask, Damask-works, Velvet, Cottons, Wadds, and other Commodities from the
Levant, of little Value, but of good Sale in these Countries, and of a better
return.

The Traffic which those of Roan, Saint Malo's, and other Cities of the
Western Ocean, have in this Empire, is almost wholly in Linen Cloth, of which,
it is reckoned, that what is carried over and sold Yearly in that part of
Africa, amounts to above Two Hundred Thousand Livres: The Barter that is made
there of all these Merchandises, is in Wax, Hides, Wool, Ostrich's Feathers,
Copper, Dates, Almonds, Archifoo (a Stone that is used to make Earthen Ware)
and Ducats of Gold, which are beneficial to those of Provence, in their Trade
to the Levant. The Christians and the Jews, as I have already observed, have
all the Trade of the Country, and chiefly that Abroad, which the Moors do not
in the least care to manage.

Sally and Tetuan are the most Trading Ports; Goods being most easily Shipped
off there; Saffy and Santa Cruz drive also a Trade for what comes from Morocco,
Tafilet and Suz, but it is not so considerable.

The City of Fez is, as it were, the general Storehouse of all Barbary, the
best Traders, and the greatest number of Jews, who are there above Five
Thousand; are settled at that place: These Dealers buy all that comes from
Europe and the Levant, and retail it in the Provinces, from whence likewise
they take what they afford to Trade with in the Seaport Towns. The Red Morocco
Leather, known here by the Name of Spanish Leather, is dressed in that City, and
is the finest in all Barbary.

The Trade of England is in Broad Cloth and in Cowries or Negro's Teeth, which
are a kind of small white Shells that go current in Guinea instead of Money.

Holland sends thither Woollen and Linen Cloth, all sorts of Spices, Iron and
Brass Wire, Steel, Benjamin, Storax, Cinaber, little Looking-glasses, Muslins
for the Turbants, and Arms from time to time, with other Ammunition for War.

Italy furnishes 'em with Alum, Gunpowder, and great store of Earthen Toys
made at Venice.

There comes from the Levant, Silks, Cotton, Orpiment, or Auripigmentum,
Quicksilver, Reagal and Opium.

The returns which are sent to those Parts for all these kinds of Merchandises
and Drugs, is nothing more than what I have set down in the Article of France,
in proportion to the quantities that are vended there.

Cadiz is the Interpost to all the Traffic of England and Holland; for, being
near to Both, it facilitates of course a commodious and sure Transportation, by
the means of Portugueze Ships that go thither to take up the Cargo's.

The King of Morocco is so persuaded of the utility of his Commerce, and so
jealous of it, that surely one of the best ways of bringing down his Pride, and
of forcing him to reasonable Terms, were to hinder that of other Nations, or to
disturb it in such a manner as to give 'em a dislike of it: And it is my
opinion besides, that the Trade in the Mediterranean need not absolutely be
continued in that Empire, since the same things might be returned, and put off,
by the way of Algier, which are at Tetuan and Sally; all that can be objected,
is, that those Goods would not turn to so good an Account.

Foreign Money is not current in this Country, except the Spanish Pieces of
Eight, the Value and Price of which are rated according to their Weight, which
is always between Sixty and Seventy Sols or Pence. The Pistoles of Spain and
Italy, and the Louis d' Or's of France, pass there for no more than Ten Livres,
or Ten Livres and Ten Sols; and besides, they are not taken but in a Lump as
Bullion, and by Weight, to be melted down: the Jews only take commonly the
French Silver Crowns there for Sixty five Sols; a great many of these Crowns
were carried out of France to that Country, before the alteration that was made
about those Pieces, there being much to be got by them.

The Coin that goes Current in this Empire is only of three sorts, That of
Gold, called a Ducat, That of Silver a Blanquille, and that of Copper, a
Felouze; the Figure of the Prince is not upon 'em, their Law forbidding it, so
that nothing is Stamped upon them but some Arabic Characters.

The Ducat is worth from Six Livres to Seven Livres Ten Sols of our Money, and
its Price, which is never fixed, rises and falls, according to the several
Occurrences, that is to say, according to the affluence or want of Commerce, or
as the Ships come in more or less frequently.

The Blanquille is the most common Money, and of the most fixed and standing
Price: it is worth two Sols, and Six Deniers, and it is in this kind that
generally all Payments are made.

The Feloux is as one of the French Deniers, but worth a little more; Four and
Twenty of 'em make a Blanquille.

Their way of reckoning is by Ounces or by Meticalles (which is the same thing
in Arabic with a Ducat in French) the Ounce consists of Four Blanquilles, or
Ten Pence of our Money.

The Meticalle or Ducat for the generality is nothing real, but such a manner
of counting as by Francs or Livres in France; its value is fixed at Forty
Blanquilles, or a Hundred Pence French; so that when it is barely said, that a
thing worth so many Meticalles, or so many Ducats; nay, even so many Meticalles
or Ducats of Silver, it is always understood for so many Hundred Sols. It is not
the same thing in Meticalles or Ducats of Gold, for their Species is Real, but
their Value uncertain, as I have already observed.

AUDIENCES Given to Monsieur de St. Olon, AT MICKENESS, BY Muley Ismael,
Emperor of Morocco, In the Year 1693.
The First Audience.
I Was admitted to my first Audience the 11 th. of June, 1693. at 9 in the
Morning, having six days before seen the King of Morocco in the open Field, at
the Head of 10 or 12000 Horse. I was nine days at Mickeness, before I had this
Audience, and during that time was not suffered to make or receive any Visits;
nor even to stir out of my Palace: The Consul and all my Retinue were also
denied the same Liberty, and all this time I had notice sent me early every
Morning to be ready to be Conducted to the King, but was put off every Evening
to the next day.

The Custom of the Country, which, they told me, was, not to let the
Ambassadors see any one till they have had their first Audience, was the
pretense they used to justify that kind of Restraint.

The Alcayde Hamet Addo Riffy, Governor of Larache and Alcassar, was sent me
to be my Introducer, attended with some considerable Moors, and some Blacks of
the King's Guard, who secured us against the Throng of the People, but not
against the Hootings, Curses, and other abusive Language with which they Revile
all Christians: The Character of Ambassador not being able to free a Man from
them.

This Alcayde had a Brother called Omar Addo, who was once the King of
Morocco's Chief Minister and Favorite, but his Merit, Authority, and Credit,
gave that Prince so much Jealousy, that he caused that Alcayde to be killed
five or six Years since.

We all went a foot to the Audience, though the King's Palace was at a
considerable distance from the place where I lived, and the Weather was very
hot; but an Vmbrella was carried over me, which in some manner defended me from
the Heat of the Sun's Rays that is excessive in those Parts.

Twelve French Slaves came after my whole Retinue, and carried the Presents I
was to make to the King of Morocco in my own Name, consisting of very fine
Arms, several Watches of great Value, diverse Pieces of red and blue Cloth, very
rich Gold and Silver Brocades, and two Carpets of La Savonnerie, extraordinary
large, and singularly beautiful.

In this manner we came to the Alcassave, the King's Palace, and went in at a
large and stately Gate, which, from two Pillars that adorn it, is, as I have
said, called the Marble-Gate. We went through a long Passage, where many Blacks
of the King's Guard stood on the Right and Left, and made a Lane for us. On
both sides of that Passage are only some White Walls of a considerable height,
built like all the rest of this Palace, wholly with Lime, Plaster, and Cement
with Water, which beaten together by strength of hand, make a kind of a very
white Matter, as hard as Marble. At last we came to an open Pavillion not yet
finished, that formed four large Portico's, the Front of every Face looking
toward a Walk, like that through which we came, and leading to different
Appartments of this Alcassave.

They made me tarry at the Entrance of that Pavillion, till, as they said, they
had acquainted the King with my being there. It was a full quarter of an hour
before we saw him coming through one of these Walks, which was also lined on each
side with about Two Hundred little Blacks, armed with very large Muskets, who
bowed to the very Ground as he passed by 'em.

He had a very thin Attendance and rid a White Horse, very different as to his
fineness and the richness of his Harness, from that he rid on when I saw him at
the Review. He had a Lance or long Pike in his hand, and was as plainly
dressed as the meanest of his Subjects. He was muffl'd up to the Eyes in a
Coffee-colour'd Handkerchief, that seemed pretty foul, and was no very pleasant
sight.

He alighted as soon as he came to the Portico, and having given his Lance to
one of his Blacks, came and sat down, without any Matt, Carpet, or Foot-Cloth,
on the edge of a large Wooden Post that prop'd it up. His Arms and Legs were
bare, and a Black held a large Fan behind him, as much to cool him, as to keep
off the Flies that swarm in that Country, and are very troublesome. Some
Alcaydes sat on the Ground on his Left, without Shoes or Turbant, and with
nothing on their Heads but a bare red Cap: One of 'em, however, stood on his
Right, but, like the rest, had no Shoes on, and his Head was only covered like
the rest. This Alcayde was Mehemet Ben Addo Otar, who may be said to be his
chief Minister and Favorite.

As soon as the King was set down, as I have said, and I had saluted him, he
began the first to speak to me, and said twice or thrice Tay buon, which
signifies, You are Welcome, an Expression he always uses to denote a kind
Reception to those who come near him: After this he said to me in Arabic, that
I was a good Christian, that he was glad to see me, and would joyfully grant me
whatever I should ask him: To which, after I had put on my Hat, I answered him
in French, with a Complement I prepared, which he patiently heard from the
beginning to the end, though 'twas somewhat long, and it is not his Custom to give
Ear to Discourses of such a length, without interrupting those who make 'em,
and asking them several Questions.

Monsieur de St. OLON's COMPLEMENT TO THE Emperor of Morocco.
Most High, most Excellent, most Potent, and most Invincible Prince, Muley
Ismael, Emperor of Morocco, King of Fess, Tafilet, and Suss. SIR,
THE Amazement and Veneration which your Majesty's Royal Aspect Commands from
those that approach you, would confine me to a silent Admiration, like all
those who are permitted that Happiness, had I not the Honor of appearing
before Your Majesty, sheltered with the Patronage of the Sacred Name of the
most High, most Excellent, most Potent, most Magnificent, most Invincible, and
ever Victorious LEWIS the Great, the most Christian Emperor of France and
Navarre, the Eldest Son of the Church, the Defender of the Faith, the Sanctuary
and Protector of Kings, the Umpire and Great Conqueror of Europe.

It Is this also that gives me a Right of assuring your Majesty, that while the
Emperor, my Master, did me the Honor to make choice of me for his Ambassador
at your Court, he raised my Wishes and my Joy to the highest pitch; since this
would procure me the Glory and Happiness of seeing there a Prince, whom all the
Wonders I have read and heard related of him, made me as ambitious of seeing,
as they filled my Mind with Veneration for his Person.

And indeed, Sir, there is none who does not perfectly know that Muley Ismael
is the most Famous and warlike Prince that ever graced the Throne of Africa,
and that it is your incomparable Exploits which, combining with all the
Qualifications of your Royal Birth, made way for your more speedy Ascent to
that Seat, and Entitled you to fill it with more Authority and Luster.

But though Fame, that has taken care to proclaim 'em, has omitted nothing which
may cause every place to resound with your Applause, I still find a new Subject
of Praise, in what is the occasion of my Embassy here; and that fresh cause of
extolling your Majesty, seems to me so worthy your Greatness of Soul, and the
Attention of your Subjects, that I with Pleasure think my self obliged to let
'em know what it is, and Congratulate 'em about it; that this excellent Action
of your Majesty may not want its due Encomiums.

What else indeed could they have wished for, after so many Battles and
Victories which confirmed your Friends, and subdued your Enemies under your
Conquering Government, than to see its Quietness and Mildness fully settled by
the Marks of Tenderness and fatherly Bounty, which you show 'em in seeking all
means possible, that none of 'em, may remain in Chains or Slavery abroad?

It Is doubtless only to convince 'em that you are no less fond of being justly
thought their Father, than their King, that you have lately shown a desire, and
made some steps to get free such of 'em as are Slaves in France, and procure to
your Subjects a Peace, that is so necessary to 'em, with those of the Emperor
my Master; by this means to re-establish all Security, Plenty, and Tranquillity
in their Commerce: To which his Imperial Majesty being also willing to
contribute, he has commanded me to come hither, and assure you in his Name,
that he has always entertained so much Friendship, and so high an Esteem for
your Majesty, that nothing can be added either to his earnestness to give you
further Testimonies of it, or to the sincerity of his Intentions.

At the same time I presume to promise my self that such uniform Dispositions
will meet with all the Success I can desire, and that the Treaty which I am
ordered to make, to renew the Alliance and Peace, being once concluded, as firm
and solid as is consistent with the common Good and Wishes of both Empires, a
good Correspondence will then be so perfectly reestablish'd that nothing will
ever be able to shake or destroy it.

These, Sir, are the Intentions and Resolutions of the Emperor my Master, of
whose almost incredible Victories and Conquests in his last Campaigns, I do not
doubt but Fame, that is always employed to speak his Majesty's wonderful
Achievements, has sufficiently informed you, and how in spite of the
prodigious numbers of Enemies, since so long a time, combined against the
Power, the Wisdom, the Valor and the Fortune of Lewis the Great, he has always
been so happy as to triumph over them: This is a visible effect of the
Protection of the God of Hosts, and of the Reward he bestows on his Piety: May
Heaven grant, that the Union which I come to renew between your Imperial
Majesty's, may be always favored and upheld by such a Protection, and that you
may both prove for ever the Love, the Delight, and the Safety of your Subjects,
the prop of your Allies, the terror of your Enemies, and the absolute Masters
of the vast Parts of the World in which you Both Reign with so much Glory.

After these so just and zealous Wishes, there remains nothing, Sir, for me to
do, but most humbly to beseech your Majesty to be pleased to accept of these
Presents, how disproportionable soever they may be to my deep Respect, as a
Testimony of my sincere desire to please your Majesty.

My Interpreter afterward read this Complement to the King in the Moorish
Tongue; and this Prince having answered it in such a manner as made us know he
had heard it with Pleasure, added some Excuses for not having been able to see
me before, being then taken up by the Ceremonies of his Easter, and said, that
all the Christian Slaves could witness this.

After this, he proceeded to speak in the King's Praise, and enlarged very much
on his Power, Valor, and Wise Conduct, as also on the great difference which
he puts between the Emperor of France, and all the other Potentates of Europe;
saying, That he knew not one amongst 'em all, besides him, that truly deserved
the Name of Sovereign, and that none but the King knew, like him ( for he
always affects to compare himself to his Most Christian Majesty) how to Reign
by himself, and make himself the absolute Master of the Fate and Will of his
People. Then repeating what he had already said to me at the first Interview,
concerning the Advantages which the Grand-Signior found in the Alliance, which
he had so long maintained with his Majesty, he added, that all these Motives,
joined to the esteem which he had for the rare and great Worth of that first
Monarch of Christendom, had so much excited him to seek also his Friendship,
and made him so impatiently desire it, that besides the Assurances which he had
caused to be given His Majesty of it by Consul Estelle, he had designed to have
sent Ambassadors to desire his Friendship, if my coming had not prevented him.

I answered, that the Emperor, my Master, well informed of his Sentiments, had
dispatched me, with all possible speed, to assure him of his readiness to
comply with his Majesty's Desires, and to renew with him, by a firm and lasting
Peace, the Bonds of a Friendship that would be the more durable, for being
altogether grounded on the esteem which two such great Princes could not but
have for each other, and that, for my part, I esteemed my self most honored
and most happy in being chosen for the effecting so agreeable a Project. He
told me that his Intent was also to make a firm Peace, that he charged the
Alcayde Mehemet Ben Addo Otar, there present, to settle the Conditions of it;
that he was his near Relation, whom he looked upon as his second self; and that
he being the Son of a French Woman, ('it is true indeed, that this Alcayde's
Mother was of Marseilles) I had no reason to doubt but that I should find him
altogether well-dispos'd to make a speedy and wished for end of the Business.

I replied, that I thanked his Majesty for giving me a Minister to treat with,
whose Merit and Praise were sufficiently displayed by the choice which so wise
and knowing a Prince made of his Person, and that provided the Effects were
answerable to these fair Appearances, I did not doubt but all things would be
ended to the satisfaction of both Parties.

He answered, that nothing could contribute more to this, than a speedy and
reciprocal joining of the Arms of the Emperor of France, with his against the
Spaniards, our common Enemies, and that he imagined a Conquest that way to be
not only very easy and very advantageous to the King, but also the surest
means to raise his Majesty's Power and Glory to the highest pitch. After this,
he enlarged with a great deal of warmth, and for near a quarter of an hour,
upon whatever he thought might flatter his Passion and his Designs on that
Subject, and finally concluded, that he did not believe, on the account of the
Alliance he had a mind to contract with his Majesty, that he ever could deny
him the Assistance he wanted for the retaking the Towns which they still hold
in his Country; and that he was sorry he was not more his Neighbor, in a
Juncture that was so pleasing, and might become so useful to him.

To this I said, that when the Treaty which I brought should be concluded and
ratified on both sides, 'twould then be time to make some Overtures to each
other, and explain our selves on the Necessities and Supplies that might then
unanimously be the result of it; that this was all the answer I could give to
this Article at present; and that I could well assure him, that the Emperor my
Master, alike Powerful by Land and Sea, had such formidable and numerous Fleets
in the Mediterranean, and in the Ocean, that they would always make him very
sensible of his Neighborhood, when occasion should require it.

This equivocal Answer not having given him an opportunity to make a Reply, he
ordered the Alcayde Mehemet Addo, who had stood all the while, to take the
King's Letter which I held in my Hands; but, as I had no mind to deliver it,
but into his Master's, I immediately stepped forwards, and ving presented it to
him in a Cloth of Gold Letter-Case, he took it, drew it out, kissed it, laid it
on his Head, to show how much he honored it, and then gave it to this Alcayde.

This done, I presented the Gentlemen who came with me to him, and he received
'em very kindly: Then I desired him that he would be pleased to accept of some
of my Country Rarities, which I made bold to present him with. He looked a long
time on every Particular, and was very much pleased with them, but above all
which the two Carpets which he thought came from India, and which he said he
esteemed the more, when I had answered to what he asked me about 'em, that they
had been made at Paris.

When he had examined every thing one after another, he caused it to be taken
away by his Blacks, and returned me Thanks for 'em; protesting, however, That
he only accepted of 'em, because the Law of his Prophet permitted him not to
refuse what was offered him in token of Respect or Friendship; and, having said
to me that I was a good Christian, and that he was very well pleased with me,
he added, smiling, That the best Proof he could give me of his Satisfaction and
the Esteem he had for me, was by praying God to Convert me, and exhorting me to
become a Mohammedan; to which I answered, also smiling, That though I perfectly
and most certainly knew what to stick to, I nevertheless received this
Testimony of his Good Will with a great deal of Thankfulness.

Upon this he beckoned to the French-Slaves to come near, which they all did,
casting themselves at his Feet with their Bellies on the Ground; then he chose
out four of the youngest, and making signs to them to rise and step aside, told
me he gave 'em me for my Dinner; to which I answered, he could never treat me
with a more acceptable Dish, but that I prayed him to consider that this would
but whet my Appetite. After this he arose, mounted again, and ordered I should
be conducted home. The Alcayde Mehemet ben Addo Otar waited on me back as far
as the Marble-Gate, and came to pay me a Visit from the King immediately after
I had dined.

Toward the Evening I went to see Muley Zeydan, the King's Son, who, after
some Complements on both sides, told me also, presenting me with a French Slave
who was by him, That as a Token of his Gratitude for what I brought him (for I
did not come there empty handed) he gave him me for my Supper; to which I
answered, returning him my Thanks, That having already been made sensible by
the Fame of his Exploits, how well he imitated the King his Father in Valor, I
was much delighted to see and experience, that he could also so well imitate
him in Generosity.

The following Days having been spent in examining our Treaty with the King of
Morocco's Minister, and that Prince being determined to go on an Expedition
which he had designed against some Moors in the Neighborhood of Oran who had
revolted, I was sent for with precipitation at Seven a Clock in the Evening,
without any Notice given me before, to take my Audience of Leave; that Prince
having taken a Resolution to dismiss me but the Day before his departure.

The Audience of Leave.
I Had my Audience of Leave the Nineteenth of June: The Ceremonies at my going
to it were like those of the First, but the Humor and Designs of the King of
Morocco and his Ministers made it quite different, as to the Pleasingness of
the Conversation, and its Conclusion.

I had notice given me as I went that the King was in a very ill humor, and
almost besides himself, having just then dispatched two of his Chief Blacks
with a Knife.

This having given me some opportunity to prepare my self accordingly, in some
manner prevented the Horror and Surprise which the Condition I found him in
might otherwise have raised; and that had doubtless been much greater had not
this warning prevented it.

I was had further into the Palace than the first time, and went as far as the
outside of the Stables, which seemed to me very fine and neatly kept.

That Building consists of several large Arches to the Right and Left, of which
each Horse has his own apart, and is only fastened to a Stake and Fetlocks.
Here are neither Racks nor Mangers; for the Horses eat on the Ground; which
Custom takes place, as I was told, because the Moors themselves eat thus, and
therefore would not allow more Privilege and Convenience to those Animals than
they enjoy themselves.

After I had spent some time in viewing that Place, I saw the King at some
distance, coming to me mounted on a very fine white Horse, in very rich
Harness, having a Gold-Saddle on, and all its Trappings of the same; and the
Poitral set with precious Stones in some places.

He held a Lance in his Hand, of the shape and length of our Pikes, on which he
leaned between whiles. His Face was uncovered, and he was finely dressed; but,
besides a yellow Vest that he had on, (which Color I have already said has
been observed by his Subjects, to have been almost ever fatal to some of 'em,
when worn by him) his right Arm and his Clothes were still all stained with the
Blood of those Wretches whom he had just killed; and indeed his Face and Looks
betrayed a wild and furious Air that represented to the Life the Character of
that Action.

He was only attended with a few Slaves and Blacks, all quaking for fear; for
his Rage had quite scared away every one of his Alcaydes: However, some of 'em
came nearer by degrees during the Audience, which that Prince began himself
with his ordinary Complement of Taybuon; upon which I made him that which
follows.

THE COMPLIMENT AT THE Audience of Leave.
SIR,
I understand that your Majesty is going on some Glorious Expedition; I come to
wish you a happy Success in it, and, according to your Custom, a Victorious
Return. Here the King interrupted me, saying twice or thrice with his Eyes
lifted up to Heaven, Exhallah, Exhallah, which signifies God grant it! God
grant it! After which I went on thus -- I can assure your Majesty I shall carry
the News of it with Pleasure to the Emperor my Master, if I can at the same
time give him an Account, as I hope I shall, of the Performance of what you
writ and caused to be signified to him concerning the Peace, by the Consul of
Sally.

For, as the Words and Writings of Kings ought not to be altered, I should
wrong your Majesty's Glory could I harbor the least suspicion of the Fidelity
of your Offers on this behalf. Your Majesty knows how nearly it concerns your
Honor and Interest, to persuade as well your Subjects as the different Nations
that are at your Court of this Truth. And it is also on these Grounds that I am
willing to believe I ought to attribute your Minister's Silence, (since by your
Order we discoursed together about the Treaty, which I showed him and put into
his Hand) only to the Pleasure which your Majesty was pleased to reserve to
your self, of signifying to me the happy and wished for Conclusion of it, and
principally, concerning the Article about setting free on both sides the Slaves
of the two Nations; about which your Minister would not treat.

However, SIR, I think it my Duty to represent to your Majesty, that a Thing
which you have so publicly desired, and which you can so easily accomplish,
ought to have been sooner decided, and not be put off till so short a time as
seems remaining till your departure: You have shown a Desire of having a Peace;
you have offered or demanded an Ambassador to conclude it, and have appeared so
forward, that you did me the Honor to tell me when I came near you, That you
were ready to have sent one to France on that Account, had not I come as I did.

However, I have been in your Dominions these two Months, and these three Weeks
at your Court; you have received me with Marks of Satisfaction and singular
Kindness: I have presented you my Orders, and though the Commissioner, whom you
appointed to examine 'em, made some very unexpected Objections on things
already settled by your Majesty, I nevertheless, showed him, in three Articles,
which most certainly deserved not to have such Difficulties started, that I had
a mind to conciliate Things with all imaginable Moderation, that the said
Treaty might be concluded with mutual Satisfaction.

Yet since that time he seems to have had a mind to obstruct this business, and
make it impossible, by a new and unheard of Difficulty, which might cause the
World to doubt of your Majesty's having a real Desire for a Peace, and
altogether make it impossible it should last, did your Majesty persist in it. I
have convinced him of it by strong Reasons, which I would again repeat to your
Majesty were I not persuaded you have been informed of it.

Thus, SIR, I have now nothing else to do, but to desire, that before you go
you will be pleased to Approve and Sign this Treaty which I offer you; and I
assure you that I shall leave this Country with Content, if when I hear of the
Continuation and Progress of your wonted Conquests, I can at the same time
acquaint my Master of the Effect and Performance of your Royal Word, which has
procured me the Honor and Pleasure of satisfying the great Idea I had
conceived of your Majesty.

THe King of Morocco's Answers to this Complement, and all the Discourse that
passed in this Audience ran upon some Proposals, so extraordinary, so little
consonant to the Motives he had discovered to procure this Negotiation, and so
contrary to the Letter he had writ to the King about it, which he solemnly
disowned, that I thought that decency obliged me to consult the Reputation of
that Prince, so much as to bury 'em in Silence, rather than expose him too much
to the Public Blame by relating them.

OBSERVATIONS To be made on the Cause of Monsieur de St. OLON's EMBASSY TO
MOROCCO.
THe King of Morocco having disowned the Letter he had sent to his Majesty,
which I have mentioned in several parts of this Relation, that Denial was the
occasion he took not to perform what it contains: Now as this Letter was the
Motive and Grounds of the Resolution the King took to send me to Morocco, I
believe it will not be amiss to insert here a Copy of this Letter, that the
Reader may have a clearer insight into the Undertaking and its Event: I also
imagine it will not be improper to add those Letters which that Prince caused
to be transmitted to me at my departure, both for the King my Master and my
self, and my Answers, that by comparing them together, the World may still
better judge of his Character and Intentions: As also what Measures ought to be
taken concerning his Proposals, Words, and Writings.

THE King of Morocco's LETTER. To the KING.
To the greatest of the Christian Kings and Princes of Europe, The Monarch of
the French Nations, the Master of his Kingdom and Climates, and the Sovereign
Arbiter of the Wills and Actions of his Subjects, Lewis the Fourteenth: The
Salutation of Peace to those that walk in the ways of Truth.
In the Name of God, who is Good, and Merciful, whom we beseech to help us,
there being no Trust nor Power but in his Supreme Greatness.
From the Servant of God, who is most High and Victorious by God's Appointment,
and puts his Trust in him in all his Undertakings, the Miralmumunin or Prince
of the True Believers, who fights in the way of the Lord of this World and of
the other, The Prince of the high Tribe of Hachem, Ismael the Son of Al Xerif
of the House of Hassan.
THis is to let your Majesty know, That a Christian Merchant, Son to your
Consul Estelle, came to our High Court, where he said that he had in his Hands
an Order and Credentials from your Majesty; then produced a Letter, which, as
he pretends, came from you; by which, Authority is given him to conferr with
us, as he shall think most convenient, concerning your Affairs and Intentions,
and even to act in your Behalf at the Court of our High Majesty, whom God
preserve.

We made no doubt but that the Letter and Credentials came from you, but would
have nothing to do with the said Estelle, not thinking it proper to treat with
him about those Affairs; because he is a Merchant, and not one of the great
Lords of your Court, or one of your chief Officers; for it does not belong to
Merchants to treat with Kings, or manage Affairs in which Princes are
concerned: A Merchant may speak about what relates to his Trade; he may also
use his Endeavors to carry News on both sides, and transmit a Paper, or be the
Bearer of a Letter, and do this for both Parties. This he may do, but that is
all a Merchant's Word can be good for, and no more.

Therefore, if your Majesty have really a design to enter upon a Treaty, to the
purpose and with sincerity, you may send us one of the Great Lords of your
Court, on whose Words we may depend and rely, and with whom we may Treat upon
his coming to us with that Design and to that Purpose: Or, if you rather desire
we should send you one of our best Servants and greatest Lords of our High
Court, you may send one of your Ships to convey him from our Country to yours,
and we will send such a one without delay with good Powers and Credentials.

The chief Affairs about which we are to treat with you, is concerning the
Slaves of your Nation who are with us, that an Exchange may be made of one
Christian for one Moor, Man for Man. We only desire of you, those of Sally, and
of the Town adjoining called the Rabat, as also those of Tetuan, of Fess, of
Alcassar, and of Mickeness, who have been taken within these ten Years, some
about six Years, some four Years, and some since that time; for, as to those of
other Towns than such as I have mentioned, or who have been taken above ten
Years since, we do not care to treat about them; therefore, if you think it
fit, send one of your Officers, for whom you have an Esteem, and order him to
bring all the abovementioned Slaves that are in France, and come with them at
the Mouth of one of our Ports, and we shall treat with him in the most
convenient manner possible. We will give him your Salves, and receive our own
of him, Man for Man; so that, God willing, he shall not go back without doing
his Business. As for your sending a Person of Quality, or one of your Ships to
transport our Ambassador, you may use your Discretion in doing either of the
two, which you shall think most convenient.

It Is God that gives Success to our Undertakings, and in whom we ought to put
our Trust: To him alone Praise and Glory are due; and may Peace be given to
those who walk in the ways of Truth.

Written at the end of Rabia, in the Year of the Haegira 1103. that is in the
Month of December 1691.
THE King of Morocco's LETTER TO Monsieur de St. OLON.
To the Ambassador of the Great King of the French, Greeting: And to all that
follow the Inspirations of Truth.
THis is to let you know, That we are troubled that you should leave us without
having done any thing: When you arrived, we were just ready to take the Field
to reduce the Nation called Benjamer, that unjustly used to maintain a Commerce
with the Christians, contrary to our Order. We caused ten thousand Horse to
march toward them, and cut in pieces all that made any resistance, took part
of 'em Prisoners and released the rest. You arrived while were in the midst of
our Preparations for that Expedition; and when you came into our Presence, we
thought it was to propose to us something of Moment, and to acquaint us that
you were ready to join with us against the Spaniards, and take Measures
together how to attack and overcome 'em: In which Case we would have done
whatever you could reasonably have desired: We did even let you know that we
would conclude such a Treaty with you as there is between you and the Grand
Signior, who is our Brother in the Law of the Faithful: And in this Expectation
we rejoiced for your coming, and signified as much as soon as you came before
our High Throne, which God protect. But, as you only came to speak of the
French Slaves, and for nothing else, and that you did not fulfill the Commission
which we had given to the Son of Estelle, the Christian Merchant, which was to
choose and bring us some Coats of Armor, some rich and rare Scimiter, some
precious Jewel out of your Emperor's Treasure, and other Magnificent
Curiosities, such as might be acceptable to us, we have not thought fit to give
you any further Hearing. We wonder you would repose a Confidence in a Christian
Merchant, such as Estelle, who is not to be trusted; and that you should even
bring him hither with you; for, could about two hundred Slaves we have of yours
be worth your Coming? We have not thought fit to grant 'em you, because we are
not like the Algerines, and others of their stamp, with whom you use to treat
of such Matters; but had you brought some rich Presents, or proposed some
Business of Moment, as is that we just mentioned, then we would have hearkened
to you indeed, and even have left our Army to comply with you, and have
exchanged the French Slaves which we have, for such of our Subjects as are in
your Kingdom.

However, our faithful Aly the Son of Abdalla, perceiving that you were come
back from Mickeness without effecting what you intended, has made you stay a
while; and as he is perfectly acquainted with all the Affairs that relate to
the Marine and the Ports committed to his Charge, as also whatever is
convenient for each of them, we have given him our Orders, and whatever he
shall do shall be approved by us; for we were not willing to let you go back
till you had some Reason to be satisfied; and it is to give you an Account of
this that we have now sent you this Letter.

We salute those that walk in the Ways of Truth. Written the tenth Day of
Ziladgeel Haran, 1104. which is the thirteenth of August, 1693.
Monsieur de St. OLON's ANSWER TO THE King of Morocco.
SIR,
I Received yesterday, by the Hand of the Alcayde Aly ben Abdalla, the Letter
which your Majesty did me the Honor to send me, and I have not in the least
been surpised at the Confirmation which it brings of the News which Fame has
already taken Care to publish here, of the Progress of your Majesty's Arms; for
still your Valor must be attended with Victory.

As for what that Letter mentions of the Motives of my Embassy to your Court,
I will do my self the Honor to acquaint your Majesty in few Words, That none
can ever believe there could have been an occasion for it, more important and
more suitable to the State of Grandeur and Glory in which your Majesty is at
present, Than an Alliance, and firm Peace with the Emperor my Master, whose
Power and Virtues, your Majesty so well knows, are at this time become the
Envy, the Terror, and the Admiration of all Europe.

Besides, SIR, you cannot have forgot, that you let the Emperor my Master know,
and writ to him your self by the Consul Estelle, whom you twice caused to go
into France on that Subject, that there was nothing which you desired more
earnestly, than a sincere and solid Agreement about that Peace. You have even
showed your self so forward in this, that you were pleased to tell me publicly
at my first Audience, That, had my Arrival been delayed but some Days, you
would have sent some Ambassadors to his Imperial Majesty, to give him all
imaginable Assurances about it.

Had your Majesty, when you sent the Consul, had those Desires that seem to
have been suggested to you since, it is to be imagined you would have charged
the said Consul to make some Overtures about them to the Emperor my Master; and
according to the Measures and Resolutions which his Imperial Majesty might have
taken about 'em, I should then have had the same Orders and Powers to treat of
'em with your Majesty's own Person as I have been honored with, by the Emperor
my Master, concerning those things about which you writ to him.

But there is some Reason to believe, that your Majesty at that time had been
pleased to follow the no less judicious than zealous Advice of the Alcayde Aly,
who perfectly knows what may be most for your Majesty's Interest, who truly
loves your Person and your Glory, and whom I ought to assure you I have found
here to be the most faithful and most loving of your Subjects. Had your Majesty
consulted no other, you would doubtless have followed, and brought to a happy
End your first Designs, which, besides the Profit and Safety they would have
procured to the Commerce of your Subjects, would also have made you Formidable
to your Enemies.

I hope, SIR, that when you shall seriously have weighed those Counsels, and
imparted your Sentiments to that faithful Alcayde, you will again pursue such
Resolutions as are most consistent with your Interest, and that you will
approve what the Esteem and Respect I have for you oblige me to represent to
your Majesty; assuring you that if I were so happy as to be able to contribute
toward the obtaining for you, of the Emperor my Master, what I know to be so
necessary and advantageous to you, I would endeavor it with all the Zeal you
can desire of him, who is entirely,

SIR, Your Majesty 's Most humble, etc.

THE LETTER Which the King of Morocco Wrote and sent to the King, BY Monsieur
de St. OLON.
To the greatest Prince of the Christistians, the Monarch of the Kingdom of
France, Lewis the Fourteenth. God grant his Peace to those who follow the
Inspirations of Truth.
THis is to let your Majesty know, That as soon as your Servant, the
Ambassador, arrived on the blessed Lands under our Dominion, we had Information
given us of it by our faithful Counselor and Servant the Alcayde Aly, the Son
of Abdalla, who desired us to give him Leave and the necessary Orders to cause
him to be conducted to our Court: This we willingly granted, believing that he
only came to treat of Affairs of the greatest Consequence, such as would be a
means for us to obtain whatever we should desire of you, and for your Majesty
all that you could desire of us.

But after he was come to our High Throne, and we had spoken to him, and asked
him many Questions about this, we found that he had only some Proposals to make
relating to the Slaves, and we did not find that he had the Power which is
requisite to treat with us of other Affairs; so that what he came about, having
not seemed to be of Consequence enough, we did not think fit to treat with him
about it; for it is certain that what was the Subject of his Embassy, might as
well have been done even by the management of a Merchant, whose Degree were
very much inferior to his.

As soon as he withdrew out of our Royal Presence, we left the dispatch of his
Business to our faithful Servant the Alcayde Aly, the Son of Abdalla, on the
score of the general Command and Authority with which he is entrusted by our
sovereign Order in all our Ports, Cities, Towns, and Tribes of our Seacoasts:
We have given him leave to Negotiate with your Ambassador, and he has
sufficient Power and Authority to treat and transact with him about Affairs of
the greatest Consequence, in case this Ambassador have also some full Power
that may be thought as unquestionable and unalterable as is that which we sent
to our Servant, who will treat with him as he shall think best, both now and
hereafter.

The salutation of Peace be given to those who follow the Inspirations of
Truth. Written the tenth Day of the Month Zil Hadge, the last of the Year 1104.
that is the Eighteenth of June, 1693.
THE LETTER Which the Alcayde Aly Ben Abdalla, the King of Morocco's Minister
for the Marine, wrote and sent to the King by Monsieur de St. OLON.
In the Name of God the Merciful, there being no Authority nor Power but from
him, who is the most High and most Mighty. To him whom his Dignity and Power
have raised above all the Princes of his Religion, whom his Valor and desire
of Glory have made dreadful through all the Nations of Christendom, the
Majestic Emperor of France, Lewis the Great, the Fourteenth of the Name. God
give Peace to those who follow the Inspirations of Truth.
I Must acquaint your Majesty, that as soon as your faithful Ambassador de St.
Olon came to us with his Attendants, we had several Conferences with him, and
asked leave of our Victorious Monarch, that he might come from this Place to
his Court; and having obtained it, we procured him the means to arrive at this
Glorious Throne. After his return from the Court of our Master, as we then
resided in the City of Tangier, (which God protect) your Ambassador writ to us,
and let us know, that he had not ended what he desired of the Court of our
Emperor; for which reason we speedily sent again to his Majesty several Letters
with reiterated Instances, to desire him that he would explain his Will in that
Affair: This we did two or three times, and he as often returned Answer,
letting us know that 'twas his Intent to negotiate a Treaty of true Peace in
plain and sincere Terms, concerning some Affairs of the greatest Consequence,
that it might remain sirm and lasting; by the means of which Treaty most
important and considerable Undertakings might be compassed: And, in short, such
a Treaty as is between your Majesty and the People of Constantinople.

But, it seems, this Ambassador is only come about the Slaves; now it is certain
their Number is so inconsiderable, and of so small a consequence, that if he
had demanded 'em gratis of our Mullana (whom God cause to triumph) he would not
have refused 'em on your Majesty's account.

The Emperor my Master did also let me know, that he had not the least thing to
object against the Treaty that relates to the Marine; yet that he does not much
value that Affair, and that there is no need to make a Treaty for a Concern of
so small a consequence.

This is the sum of what the Emperor my Master (to whom God grant Victory!)
answered to the Instances I made on this account: As for our Part, God is our
Witness, that we have acted for your Ambassador, in whatever he desired, as we
would have done for our selves, and perhaps more.

And finally, I have made it my Business to conferr with him seriously and
privately, and we have discoursed together a long while about several Points
which he has perfectly understood, and very deeply imprinted in his Mind; he
will give your Majesty an Account of it, as we have done to him.

The Salutation of Peace be given to those who follow the Inspirations of
Truth. Written the Fifteenth of Zil Hadge, in the Year 1104. that is the
Eighteenth of August, 1693. By the Servant to the Throne, who was raised by the
Grace of God, Aly the Son of Abdalla Hamamo, whom God protect!

The LETTER which the Alcayde Aly Ben Abdalla, writ to Monsieur de
Pontchartrain.
God grant that this Letter may come to the Hands of the Grand Vizier
Pontchartrain, Chief Minister of State to the greatest Monarch of Christendom!
The Salutation of Peace be given to him who follows the ways of Truth!
In the Name of God the Merciful, there being no Power nor Strength but from
Him, who is the most High, and the most Mighty.
WE received your Letter, and understood the Contents of what you writ to us.
You desired us to take care of the Ambassador De St. Olon; you must know, that
as soon as he came to us, and Landed at the place where we were, we gave an
Account of it to the King our ever Victorious Master, and having asked his
leave for him, he permitted us to let him come to him, imagining he was come
with a large and full Power from you; but when he was arrived at the Royal
Court, and His Majesty had inquired of him, he found that he had no Power to
enter into a Negotiation, but concerning the Slaves; for which reason he could
not have a further Conference with His said Majesty, for want of sufficient
Power for that purpose.

Since he came back from Court, I writ two or three Letters to our Emperor
concerning that Affair, and he returned me this Answer; That he had already
told me he gave me full Power to make what Agreement I should think fit with
the Ambassador; provided I did find he had full Power to treat of some Affairs
of great Moment, that would be a means to fulfill whatever can be desired of
you; but not to come to any Terms if he had not such a Power.

Now the Emperor, our ever Victorious Master, has writ to yours, and fully
informed him of this Affair. We our selves also have had some private
Conferences with your Ambassador De St. Olon; in which we have opened our mind
to him, letting him know what we desired, and fully acquainted him with every
thing.

When he arrives at your Court, and shall have given you an Account of these
things, be pleased to write to us, to let us know your Thoughts about it, and
we will return you an Answer to whatever you shall desire, continuing to hold a
Correspondence by Letters about whatever may redound to the common Good of both
Empires: And may Salvation be given to him who keeps in the ways of Truth.

Written the Fifteenth of Zil Hadge, in the Year 1104. that is the Eighteenth
of August, 1693. By the Servant to the Royal Throne, Aly the Son of Abdalla
Hamamo, whom God Protect!

OTHER OBSERVATIONS To be made.
A Colonel of Spanish Horse, who was a Slave at Mickeness, Treated with the
King of Morocco about his Freedom, which he was to have for a very rich Sword
which had been formerly taken from a King of the Moors, and which Muley Ismael
had a great desire to get out of Spain where 'twas kept: This Officer did not
only cause it to be got and presented to this King, not doubting but he might
rely on his Word, but gave him also with it a valuable Rarity; hoping by this
means to be the sooner and more genteely Redeemed.

At first he thought he had not been mistaken in his Measures; for the King of
Morocco took the Sword and Present with such Testimonies of Joy and
Satisfaction, as besides his Freedom that had been promised him, got him that
of his Servant, about which they had not agreed; he also gave him a Letter, by
which he gave Orders to the Alcayde Aly Ben Abdalla, Governor of Tetuan, to
let him go out without the least Molestation; but a private Order to detain
them having been sent away before the Letter, the poor Officer soon found
himself deprived of his Hopes, and of the return he had reason to expect for
his Present.

His Complaints and Petitions were as unsuccessful as his Bargain with the
King, and procured him no other Answer from the Alcayde, but that the King his
Master had forgot, when he released him, that he had had taken a solemn Oath
never to set free any Men of his County, but by an exchange of Ten Moors for
one Spaniard; so that he was not to expect his Freedom but on those Terms.

In vain he pleaded, that he had made an Agreement with the King; that he had
given him a Sword accordingly, with a Present besides, and showed the Letter
for his Pasport. All these Expostulations were as ineffectual as they were
Just; so that after many Contestations and Delays, this Officer, who was also a
Man of Quality, could not get away 'till he had got Eleven Moors, whom he had
still the Power to procure out of Spain, and of whom he gave Ten for himself,
and One for his Man; nay, they reckoned it a special favor that they let his
Servant come off so cheap.

This is a late and very remarkable Example, that shows us how far we may
depend on the Words and Promises of this Princes and his Alcaydes.

Here is another of the same kind.

A Moor, whose Name is Hadge Achmet, of the Kingdom of Morocco, having been
taken and carried into France, after he had been a Slave Eight and Twenty Years
in the Galleys, found means to Redeem himself by an Exchange that was to be
made of him for one Venelle of Provence, who was also a Slave at Mickeness:
This, according to an Agreement with the King of Morocco, who gave his Word of
it to Venelle; which he confirmed in Writing to Achmet, promising, that as soon
as this Moor should arrive in Barbary, the French Man should be immediately
sent back into his own Country.

The Agreement being thus concluded and performed, on the part of Venelle's
Relations, Hadgy Achmet is set free, gets to Mickeness, casts himself at his
King's Feet, gives him thanks for his Liberty, and begs of him That of the
French Slave, which was to be the Exchange and the Price of it.

The Prince tells him he is a Dog, that he cheated him, that he can get Ten
Thousand Crowns for Venelle, that he does not intend to release him, and that
for his part, since he is free, he has no more to ask or to do, but to go home
about his Business.

The Moor wondering at this refusal, and being moved with a sentiment of Honor
(so-much the more to be esteemed in him, as it is uncommon amongst those of his
Nation) complains of this Infidelity, tells the King of his Royal Word and
Writing, and entreats and presses him, either to perform it, or give him leave
to go back to Marseilles. The King denies his Writing, and refuses to grant
Achmet's Request, commands him to hold his Tongue, and be gone home, not
without Threats of severe usage, and even of Death it self, if he persists to
trouble him.

However, things have remained thus 5 Years, yet this honest Moor has not
stirred from Mickeness, where yet he has not means to subsist, and complains
aloud of the wrong the King has done him; neither does he lose any opportunity
to present him self to the King, and make his Complaints, protesting to all his
Alcaydes, with a Roman Firmness and Courage, that he will rather suffer himself
to be cut to pieces, than leave the Court without obtaining either Venelle's
Liberty, or leave to Surrender himself to Venelle's Relations at Marseilles,
and fall again into the Slavery from which he was only freed with that Proviso.

This Achmet is a Man of good Sense, and was every day with me at Mickeness, to
press me to speak on his behalf, that the King might consent to this, or
Release Venelle; assuring me that he would rather dye a Thousand times, than
suffer such an Injustice: He followed me wherever I went, and even when I had
an Audience; so that he has often given me no less occasion to admire his
Constancy and Honesty, than to wonder at the King of Morocco's Patience toward
him; the more, since that Prince's Humor inclines him to kill his Subjects
with so little reason.

So unjust a Proceeding has yet more fully convinced me, that there is little
or no reason to rely on that King's Promises whether Verbal or in Writing.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE OF THE CHIEF MATTERS Contained in this BOOK.
A.
ADuars, flying Villages of Arabs, Page 19 Adulterers punished with Death, 105
Alcasar, a City, 29 Alcassave, the Emperor's Palace, described, 72 Alcaydes, or
Governors, rule all under the Emperor, 103 Aly Ben Abdalla, Chief for the
Marine, 120 Amokadem, a puny Judge, who rates the Wares, 107 Arabs in Sus,
still a free People, 31 Arms kept in the Emperor's Armory, 113 Audiences given
to Monsieur de St. Olon, 146
B.
Battles of the Moors, and their way of coming to an Engagement, 111 Black of
the Emperor's Guard, tho alone, collects the Tributes, and punishes
Delinquents, 20 Blacks of the Guard extreme Young, and neatly Dressed, 113
Blacks, though Slaves, better used than the White-Men, 128 Bounds of the Empire
of Morocco, 10 Buildings, the chief Overseer of them, 116 Burial of the Moors,
53
C.
Cadies, Judges easily bribed, 97 Califs, or Deputy Governors, 107 Ceuta a
Spanish Garrison on the Mediterranean, 11 Children of the Emperor above 300
still living, 97 Very ill brought up, and Thievish, ib. Complement made by
Monsieur de St. Olon to the Emperor, 153 Concubines of the Emperor 400, 63
Consul at Tetuan and Sally insulted by the Moors, 27 Corn, Books, and Horses
not to be exported for Christendom 76
D.
Dara, a large River, 10 Dara, a great Province, 35 Dress of the Moors, 89
Dromedaries that travel above Sixty Leagues a day, 24 Dutch Trade with Morocco,
141
E.
Easters, Three of them kept by the Moors, 44 Eating of the Moors, 87
Ambassadors, how received, 67 England's Trade with Morocco, 140 Eunuch, the
Chief of them has the care of the Seraglio, 115
F.
Fess, a Kingdom, what Goods it affords, 21 Its Bounds, ibid. Its chief Towns,
26 Fess, a very large and populous City, 25 Fools and Conjurers thought Saints,
51 Foot-Post in Morocco cheap and quick, 23
G.
Games of Hazard forbidden, 55 Gardens of the Emperor, 77 Gayland his Wars with
Muley-Zeydan, etc, 28 Golden Balls on the chief Mosque at Morocco, said to be
enchanted, taken away by that Emperor, 16 By whom they were set up, 17
H.
Hasty-Pudding eaten as a Ceremony, 46 Highways left unrepair'd, 22 Cleared
from Robbers by the Emperor; and those near whom a Robbery is committed, Fined,
or punished with Death, 103 Horses killed in Fight by Christians are to go to
Heaven, 50 Horses Sanctified, and buried in State, 57 Horses Backed after the
first Grass, 100 Hospitals at Tetuan and Sally, 13
I.
Jewels buried with the Dead, 54 Jews, when to give a Hen and Ten Chickens of
Gold to the Emperor, 44 Must go barefoot by Mosques and in Royal Cities, 55
Assess'd by Abraham Maymaran their Chief, 79 Live apart from the Moors, 81
Taxed high and frequently, 101 Italy's Trade with Morocco, 141
L.
Landforces, 108 Larache, a Town taken from the Spaniards, 111 and 131 Lent of
the Moors, 43 Letter sent to the French King by Muley Ismael, by the hands of
Consul Estelle, 182 Letter sent to him by the hands of Monsieur de St. Olon,
197 Letter kissed and laid over the Head as a mark of Respect, 167 Letter sent
to the Ambassador by that Emperor, 187 Letter sent in Answer to that, 192
Letter writ by Ali Ben Adalla to the French King, 201 Another to Monsieur de
Pontcharrain, 206
M.
Mahomet Ben Addo Ottar, formerly Ambassador in England, now the Emperor's
Chief Minister and Favorite, 118 Mahomet Ben Hadgy Lucas, Deputy to Aly Ben
Abdalla, 121 Mahomet Themin formerly Ambassador in France, 125 Mamora, a Town
taken from the Spaniards in Barbary, 11 Married Men forced to go to the Wars at
their own Charge, 109 Married Slaves of either Sex excused from Working, 74
Mazagan, a Portuguesse Garrison in barbary, 18 Meat and Money laid over Graves
54 Melila, a Spanish Garrison in Fess, 11 Mickeness or Mackeness, the Emperor's
Seat, a little ill built populous Town, 26 and 72 Money that is current in
Morocco, 143 Moors driven out of Spain, 12 Moors shooting at the Moon, 43 Moors
purged from all Sins by washing, 48 Moors, their Character, 36 If killed by
their Emperor, go to Heaven immediately, 61 Moors dextrous at Martial Sports,
62 Moors riding full speed without Sadle, etc. and at nine Years old, 100 Moors
subject to revolt, 129 Morabites a sort of Hermits, 4 Morocco, a Kingdom, its
chief Towns, 18 What Commodities it yields, ib. Morocco, a large decaying City,
15 Mufty, his Authority superior to the Emperors, 104 Muly Archid, King of
Tafilet, how become Emperor of Morocco, 2 Muley Hamet his Nephew, subdud by his
Uncle the present Emperor 9 Muley Ismael, now reigning, his Character and Power
59 Compares himself to Lewis XIV. 65 Governed by an ugly black Wife of his, 64
Muley Zeydan, one of his Sons, his Character, 95
N.
Naval Forces of Morocco, 4 How maintained, ibid Neighbors bordering on the
Empire of Morocco, 133
O.
Observations on the Subject of this Embassy, 179 Observations about the
Emperors breach of Promise, 210 Omen rediculously taken by the Death of a
Sheep, 45
P.
Paradise of the Moors, 42 Pavilions of the Palace, 72 Penon de los Velez, a
Spanish Garrison in Fess, 30 Pot and Cloth, carried by a Christian Slave, to
receive and wipe off the Dung of a Sanctified Horse, 57 Prayers of the Moors,
56 Presents made by Monsieur de St. Olon to the Emperor, 149 and 165 Priests of
the Moors, Talbs and Morabots, 58 Prisoners acquitted or punished by the
Emperor himself at Easter, 44
R.
Rain, what the Moors do to save their Clothes from it. 95 Revenue of the
Emperor, 100 buried by him privately, 101 Religion of the Moors, 40 Renegados
very indisserently used, 75
S.
Saffy, a Sea-Port-Town in Morocco, 18 Sally described, 28 Santa Cruz, a Town
of good Trade in Suss, 32 Schoolboys led in Triumph when they have read their
Book throughout, 79 Schools, Ibid Sebou, a large River, and its fine Bridge, 22
Slaves, their bad Fare, Food, Drink, Lodging, hard Labor, and worse Usage, 73
Stable, the place where the Moors commonly choose to eat, 88 Storks, great
Numbers of them about Alcasar, 30 Suss, a Kingdom, its Bounds, Towns, and
Product, 31
T.
Tafilet, a Kingdom, its Bounds and Product, 33 Tangier, left by the English,
31 Tetuan, a good open Town of great Trade, 11 Its Inhabitants Originally
Andalusians, 12 Theza, a fortified Town, 26 Trade in the Empire of Morocco,
133, 135, etc. Traveling of the Arabs with their Wives and Children in Wicker
Conveniences, 20 Testimony of those who make Water standing, excepted against,
52 Treasurer of the Emperor, 45 and 116
V.
Virgins, each Moor to enjoy 70 in Heaven, 40 and 48
W.
Weddings, and Ceremony to try the Bride's Virginity, 83 Weepers hired at
Funerals, 53 Witnesses, false ones Cheap in Morocco, 106 Women not to go to
Heaven, 53 those of Africa handsome, 82 Fond of Christians, because they are
not circumcised, 83 and 93 Their Dress, 85 Most admired when biggest and
fattest, ibid Never seen by the Guests, 87
X.
Xeriffs, Mahomet's Offspring, 39

