THE PARLIAMENTS DETERMINATION, Concerning The Levies of Horse, Arms, and
Moneys, which is now raised for this present Design.

Also a remarkable Passage concerning the Earl of NEW CASTLE WITH The
substance of the LETTER sent from Sir JOHN HOTHAM to Mr. PYM.

whereunto is added, A true Declaration for the silencing all false Reports
concerning Sir JOHN HOTHAMS Letter sent to Mr. PYM, for the sending of 300 Men
to Hull for to strengthen the said Town. Ordered that this be forthwith
Printed. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

July, 4. LONDON, Printed by T. P. for N. O. 1641.

The Parliaments Determination, for the Leavies of Horse, Arms, and Money for
this present Design.
SO far has the Malignant Party prevailed with his Majesty, by their
deluding and fair seeming Stratagems by their most wicked and pernicious
Councels, that it is more then to be feared his Majesty gives way to the
raising of Arms against the Parliament, to which end there has been both
Foreign, and Domesticke preparation for the raising of Men, and Monyes, which
the High court of Parliament taking into consideration, thought it convenient
to hinder such a fatal mischief, by a timely prevention, to which end they
propounded several propositions touching the brining in of Horse, Plate, and
Money, for the raising of Arms to secure the Parliament, (on the happy
continuance of which) depends the safety, and Peaceable inioyment of the
Gospel, and sweet fruition of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the
increase of his Majesty's Honor, and happy continuance of his Majesty's
Reign, the firm and peaceable inioyment of his Regal Dignity, and Royal
Authority, established to his Royal Majesty, and his successive Posterity for
ever, the Liberty, and Propriety of the Subject, the security of Lives and
estates, the maintenance of the Laws by which we are governed, and the blessed
freedom of our Christian Profession) and finding that the Malignant Party by
their calumnious reports, and seditious words, began to slander such their
proceedings, casting aspersions on their unblemished Actions, giving out that
their propositions for the bringing in of Plate, and Money, is to promote a
war against the King; therefore they, being desirous to give the world
satisfaction, and to clear all doubts, they have thought it necessary to
declare to the world their real intentions and determinations concerning this
Design, as follows.

The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, do declare, that the Design
of those Propositions, is as was formerly declared to maintain the Protestant
Religion, the Kings Authority, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the
Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and privileges of Parliament, against any
force which shall oppose them.

Likewise the Lords and Commons do really appeal to all His Majesty's loving
Subjects, desiring them to judge whether they have not just cause to fear, and
fearing to prevent Intestine War, and such uncivil discord as homebred
Broiles produces to a Kingdom, the effect of which is Rapine, Murder, Spoil
unto King and People, these are the Fruits of seditious dissension, and this we
must expect, should the Romish Faction (which God forbid) get the upper hand,
could they but obtain their desires, and their yet promising hopes gain their
wished effects, the unbounded Ocean of their viprous Envy, would like a
swelling Torrent overflow the bounded limmits, and in a Deluge of revenge and
Blood, drown both the King and People, for though they cover all their
Stratagems under a pretense of standing for the King, yet we have just cause to
fear the event, and with our utmost endeavors labor to prevent, such the
malignant practizes of Our, and the Kingdoms Enemies,

The House of Commons having received a report, concerning the Earl of
Newcastle, that the said Earl has put in about 500. Men in Garrison, and that
the said Earl is about to raise a Troop of Horse, and beats the Drum for
Volunteers, the Trained Bands refuse to come in, four pieces of Ordnance is
gone toward South Sheeles, Tinmouth, and there are 300. men in work making a
Sconce, to command all Ships, that come in or go out, the Town is in greater
perplexity then they were the last year, Ship-masters refuse to go in, least
their Ships be Staid.

Many other reports daily come to the House, of slanders cast upon several
Members of Parliament, especially against Mr. Pym, concerning Letters sent from
Sir John Hotham, the contents whereof are here specified.

First, he desired present supplies of Moneys for the payment of the Garrison,
who were very orderly, and observant to his commands.

Secondly, he desired that three Hundred Pounds might be designed him, for the
making of new Fortifications, and in a private Letter to Mr. Pym, desired a
supply of 300. Soldiers more, in case of any sudden attempt upon the Town,
which he privately intimated, not to be publicly insisted upon (as by a
mistake it was) but to make what use thereof for the advantage of the Service
of Parliament, as he should think sit, he being confident of the Towns
obedience to the King and Parliament, except a few inconsiderable Persons, for
whose invectives against the Parliament some of them are in restraint.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, that this be
printed and published. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

