A DISCOURSE OF Ecclesiastical Polity: WHEREIN The Authority of the Civil
Magistrate over the Consciences of Subjects in Matters of External Religion is
Asserted.

The Mischiefs and Inconveniences OF Toleration are Represented, And all
Pretenses Pleaded in Behalf of Liberty of Conscience are fully Answered.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn at the Bell in St Paul's Churchyard, 1671.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Cannot Imagine any thing, that our Dissenting Zealots will be able to object
against this Ensuing Treatise, unless perhaps in some Places the Vehemence and
Severity of its Style; for cavil I know they must: and if they can raise no
Tolerable Exceptions against the Reasonableness of the Discourse it self, it
shall suffice to pick quarrels with Words and Phrases. But I will assure thee,
the Author is a Person of such a tame and softly humor, and so cold a
Complexion, that he thinks himself scarce capable of hot and passionate
Impressions: and therefore if he has sometimes twisted Invectives with his
Arguments, it proceeded not from Temper but from Choice; and if there be any
Tart and Vpbraiding Expressions, they were not the Dictates of Anger or
Passion, but of the Just and Pious Resentments of his Mind. And I appeal to any
Man, who knows upon what sober Grounds and Principles the Reformation of the
Church of England stands; and how that its Forms and Institutions are not only
countenanced by the best and purest times of Christianity, but established by
the Fundamental Laws of the Land; whether he can so perfectly Charm and
Stupifie his Passions, as not to be chafed into some heat and briskness? when
he seriously considers, that this Church so rightly constituted, and so duly
authorized should be so savagely worried by a Wild and Fanatique Rabble; that
this Church so soberly modelled, so warrantably reformed, and so handsomely
settled, should have been so perpetually beleaguered, and be yet not out of all
danger of being rifled, if not utterly demolisht by Folly and Ignorance; that
the public Peace and Settlement of a Nation should be so woefully discomposed
upon such slender and frivolous Pretenses, and that, after they have been so
often and so shamefully baffled; that both Church and State should be so
lamentably embroiled by the Pride and Insolence of a few peevish ignorant and
malepert Preachers; And lastly, that these Brainsick People, if not prevented
by some speedy and effectual Remedy, may in a little time grow to that Power
and Confidence, as to be able (to use their own Language) to Vide Continuation
of the Friendly Debate, page 120* etc.
shut the Heavens that they shall not rain, i. e. to restrain the Highest
Powers of Church and State from their wonted Influence; and to have Power over
the Waters to turn them into Blood, i. e. to turn the still People of a State
or Nation into War and Blood: or, to speak in our own plain English, to tie the
Hands of Authority, to instigate the people of God to Rebellion, and once more
involve the Kingdom in Blood and Confusion. Let the Reader consider all this,
as thoroughly and seriously as I have done, and then be a Stoic if he can.

But besides this, let any man, that is acquainted with the Wisdom and Sobriety
of True Religion, tell me, how it is possible not to be provoked to scorn and
indignation against such proud, ignorant, and supercilious Hypocrites; who
though they utterly defeat all the main Designs of Religion, yet boast
themselves its only Friends and Patrons; signalize their Party by distinctive
Titles and Characters of Godliness, and brand all others, howsoever Pious and
Peaceable, with bad Names, and worse Suspicions? who I say, that loves and
adores the Spirit of true Religion, can forbear to be sharp and severe to such
thick and fulsom abuses? In that there is not any thing can so much expose or
traduce true Piety, as this sort of Hypocrisy; because whilst Folly and
Phantastry appears in the Vizour of Holiness, it makes that seem as ridiculous
as it self. And hence the greatest Friends of true Goodness have always been
the severest Satyrists upon False Godliness; and our Blessed Savior scarce
seemed more concerned to plant and propagate Christianity, than to explode the
Pharisaick Hypocrisy, i. e. Religious Pride and Insolence.

I know but one single Instance, in which Zeal, or a high Indignation is just
and warrantable; and that is when it vents it self against the Arrogance of
haughty, peevish, and sullen Religionists, that under higher pretenses to
Godliness supplant all Principles of Civility and good Nature; that strip
Religion of its outside to make it a covering for Spite and Malice; that adorn
their peevishness with the Mask of Piety, and shroud their Ill Nature under the
demure pretenses of Godly Zeal; And stroke and applaud themselves as the only
Darlings and Favorites of Heaven, and with a scornful pride disdain all the
Residue of Mankind, as a Rout of worthless and unregenerate Reprobates. Thus
the only hot fit of Zeal we find our Savior in, was kindled by an Indignation
against the Pride and Insolence of the Jews, when he whipped the Buyers and
Sellers out of the outward Court of the Temple: For though they bore a blind
and superstitious Reverence toward that part of it, that was peculiar to their
own Worship, yet as for the outward Court, the place where the Gentiles and
Proselytes worshiped, that was so unclean and unhallowed, that they thought it
could not be profaned, by being turned into an Exchange of Usury. Now this
Insolent Contempt of the Gentiles, and impudent conceit of their own holiness,
provoked the mild Spirit of our Blessed Savior to such an height of Impatience
and Indignation as made him with a seeming fury and transport of passion whip
the Tradesmen thence, and overthrow the Tables. So hateful is all proud, testy,
and factious Zeal to a loving and Divine Temper of mind. And indeed what can we
imagine more odious or mischievous than a spirit of Pride, Peevishness, and
Animosity adopted into the Service of God? This divides Religion into Factions
and Parties, engenders a sullen and unsociable Niceness toward all that herd
not with themselves, breeds nothing but rancour, malice and envy, and every
thing that is destructive of the Common Peace and Amity of Mankind. And when
People Separate and Rendevouz themselves into distinct Sects and Parties, they
always confine all their kind Influences to their own Faction, and look with a
scornful and malignant Aspect upon all the rest of Mankind, become Enemies and
Outlaws to Humane Society, and shatter in pieces that natural Peace and common
Love, that preserves the Welfare and Tranquillity of Humane Nature. Their minds
(like the savage Americans) are as contracted as their Herds, and all that are
not within the Fold of their Church, are without the Sphere of their Charity:
this is entirely swallowed up within their own combination, and it is no part of
their duty to commiserate or supply the Wants of the Unregenerate. As the Poet
describes the Jewish Bigots, Non monstrare vias, eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere Verpos.
They would not so much as direct the way to any but a circumcised Brother, nor
bestow a Cup of cold Water upon a thirsty Samaritan. The Elect are confined to
their own Party, and all besides are the Wicked and Reprobate of the Earth,
hated of God, and unfit to be beloved by his People. And this possesses their
minds with a holy Inhumanity; and then, if the Saints ever get into Power, no
Tyrant so cruel and butcherly; and they have the same esteem of the Wicked as
of Insects or Vermin, and use them accordingly: But when they are out of Power,
they are then forced to support their Malice with Slanders and Calumnies and
proud Comparisons: when they meet and gossip together, How do they congratulate
each other, that they are not as this or that Formalist? and the greatest part
of their Idle Tattle is usually spent either in Censuring or Pitying, or
Slandering some of their Neighbors, as poor carnal and unconverted Wretches.
And when they deign to converse with the Unregenerate and Men of the World, i.
e. all out of their own Rowt, they make them keep their distance; and the
Language of their Deportment is that of their Predecessors in the Prophet
Isaiah: stand by thy self, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. In
brief, whoever is proud and conceited upon the score of Religion, naturally
falls into the most savage insolence and baseness of Nature, and is utterly
incapable of being either good Subject, or good Neighbor.

Now to lash these morose and churlish Zealots with smart and twinging Satyrs,
is so far from being a criminal passion, that it is a zeal of Meekness and
Charity, and a prosecution of the grand and diffusive duty of humanity, and
proceeds only from an earnest desire to maintain the common Love and Amity of
Mankind. And though good manners oblige us to treat all other sorts of People
with gentle and civil Language; yet when we have to do with the Scribes and
Pharisees, we must point our Reproofs with sharp Invectives, we must discover
them to themselves to humble them; we must lance their Tumor, and take out the
Core of their proud Flesh before we can cure them; Anodynes and softer
Medicines make no Impressions upon them, to treat them smoothly does but feed
the humor; soft and tender Words do but tempt their disdain, and sooth up
their Vanity; they think you flatter and fawn upon them, if you speak them
fair, your Civility they will interpret Respect, and a forced Esteem of their
Godliness. They know that you and the rest of the World hate the people of God,
and would use them basely and inhumanely; but that the greatness of their Piety
gives check to your Malice, and, in spite of all your outrageous Passion
against them, extorts a more gentle usage, if not a secret Love and Veneration.
But beside, that soft Reproofs do but cocker their presumption, they would
suffer true Goodness to be run down by the violence of Ignorance and Zeal. And
to think to argue rude and boystrous Zealots out of their folly merely by the
strength of calm and sober Reason, is as likely a matter as to endeavor by
fair words to persuade the Northern Wind into a Southern Point. If you will
ever silence them, you must be as vehement as they: nothing but Zeal can
encounter Zeal. And he that will oppose the Pharisees, must do it with their
Eagerness, though not their Malice. Clamor and Confidence make stronger
Impressions upon the common people, than strength of Reason; and the Rabble
ever runs to that Party, that raises the biggest noise. And therefore seeing we
are not so ill-bred, as to oppose Clamor to Clamor; we must supply our want
of Noise and Throat (as our Savior did in his Invectives against the
Pharisees) by Sharpness and Severity. And though there is but little ground to
hope that the keenest Reasons should be able to pierce their thick and
inveterate prejudices; yet however the sharper Edge they have, the deeper they
will stick in the minds of those, whose Concern and Interest it is to punish
and correct them. For I am not so vain as to design, or expect their own
Conviction: as good attempt the Removal of Mountains, as of some men's Scruples.
And I remember the Italian proverb, Chi lava la Testa d'al Asino perde il
Sapone. And therefore I never proposed to my self any other aim in this
following Discourse, than by representing the palpable inconsistency of
Fanatic Tempers and Principles with the Welfare and security of Government, to
awaken Authority to beware of its worst and most dangerous Enemies, and to
force them to that Modesty and Obedience by severity of Laws, to which all the
strength of Reason in the world can never persuade them.

When I first resolved upon this Undertaking, the Main Design in my Thoughts,
was to represent to the World the lamentable Folly and Silliness of these men's
Religion, and to show what pitiful and incompetent Guides of their Actions
their own Consciences are; and that to leave them to the Government of their
own Persuasions, is only to deliver them up to be abused by all manner of Vices
and Follies; and that when they have debaucht their minds with Pride,
Ignorance, Self-love, Ambition, Peevishness, Malice, Envy, Surliness, and
Superstition, etc. they then bestow the Authority and Sacredness of Conscience
upon their most violent, boisterous, and ungovernable passions: In brief, that
their Consciences are seized on by such morose and surly Principles, as make
them, the rudest and most barbarous people in the World; and that in comparison
of them, the most insolent of the Pharisees were Gentlemen, and the most savage
of the Americans Philosophers. But in this Design I found my self happily
prevented by a late Learned and ingenious Discourse, The Friendly Debate, that
has unravel'd all their affected Phrases with so much perspicuity of Wit,
discovered the Feebleness of their beloved Notions, with so much Clearness of
Reason, demonstrated the Wildness of their Practices by so many pregnant and
undeniable Testimonies, exposed the palpable unwarrantableness of their Schism,
the shameful Prevarication of their Pretenses, and utter inconsistency of their
Principles with Public Peace and Settlement; and in brief, so evidently
convicted the Leaders in the faction of such inexcusable Knavery, and their
followers of such a dull and stubborn simplicity; that it is impossible any
thing should hold out against so much force of Reason and Demonstration, but
invincible Impudence and Obstinacy: And when men insconce themselves in their
own Wills, they are there Impregnable. Wilfulness is enchanted Armor, upon
which the sharpest Steel makes no Impression; and they are secure from the
Power of conviction, that are unalterably resolved never to be convinced.
Otherwise nothing could be more apparent to any man (that has but a competent
knowledge of the Nature of the things there debated) that never any Cause in
the world was more shamefully baffled and triumphed over, than this of
Schismatical Nonconformity. And though it has gaul'd them into an implacable
rage and indignation (for that as Solomon observes, is the humor of some sorts
of men, to rage and be confident, when they are convinced) yet in spite of
Affronts and Provocations, it has found them a tame and patient People, that
can generously endure to see themselves so smartly pelted for their Folly and
Villainy, and never so much as snarl, or attempt to fasten upon those Weapons,
that have so sorely bruised them; and as for those little Cattle that have been
so hardy as to nibble at a Reply, they have only put us in mind of the old
Fable of the Serpent and the File, and have proved nothing but the strength of
their Folly, and weakness of their Teeth; and all of them may wear their Fangs
to the Roots, before they make any Impression upon the Body of the Discourse.

The main and most popular Objection, I could ever meet with against it, is its
form and method, viz. its being written in way of Dialogue; in which way of
writing (they say) a witty man may make any thing look as uncouth and
ridiculous as he pleases. And this is true, in absurd and inartificial
Dialogues; but when they are skilfully contrived (as this is) there is no way
of arguing more smart and convictive: For the Design of such Composures is to
represent the Authors own thoughts upon occasion of something affirmed or
intimated by the Counter-party; and therefore if his own Discourse be rational
and concluding, there is nothing more required to that of the other Party, than
that his talk be agreeable to the pretenses of those men he Personates: So
that, if the Authors own Arguments and Opinions (that are the Substance of the
Treatise) be unreproveable, it is not material how wise his Adversaries
Discourse is, so it be not false. Neither would he require them to defend and
justify every thing that is said in the Person of the Nonconformist (for many
things are collateral, and only designed to set off his Reasonings with a
comical humor and pleasantness) but only to reply to the Scope and Substance
of his Book by justifying their own Notions that he has confuted, and by
confuting those that he has asserted. Which unless they show themselves able to
perform, they must acknowledge he has perfectly shamed their Folly, and unmaskt
their Hypocrisy.

But besides, this being but a general Exception, must by the Laws of Reasoning
pass not only for a precarious but a false Cavil, till it is proved by some
particular Instances, and neither needs, nor admits of any other Reply, than
barely to challenge them to alledg any thing of moment in their own behalf
about the particular matters there debated, that he has not sufficiently
represented: If in any thing considerable he has been disingenuous, let them
point it out; but if they cannot, let them not think to satisfy the World, by
objecting what they confess they cannot prove, because they do not. It Is true
indeed, the speeches of the Nonconformist are not so large and copious as his
Adversaries, because his part consists mainly in hinting Doubts and Objections,
which must of necessity be in all forms of Arguing much shorter than their just
and satisfactory Replies; especially when they are not barely answered, but
confuted too: And therefore considering the difference of the parts of the
Dialogue, he has as clearly represented their sense as his own; and if all he
says for them were composed into one continued Speech, it would be no easy
matter to discern it from one of their own Discourses.

But the thing that really grieves them, is, that in this method he has stopped
all their Subterfuges, as he proceeds, by preventing their shifting of Phrases,
and hiding themselves in a maze of Words; For, whereas it is their usual
Artifice to tire out the Wise, and amuse the Simple, by rolling up and down in
canting and ambiguous Expressions, he has been at the pains to serret them from
Phrase to Phrase, and never left his pursuit till they were left quite naked
and defenseless, and without one crany whereby to make an escape: In so much,
that they can never be able to return any tolerable Answers to one part of his
Treatise, that are not already prevented in another.

But that which chiefly tempts less discerning People to suspect some
partiality, is, that the Discourse of the Nonconformist looks all along so
simply; though for that they ought to consider, that it is no wonder if
Nonsense runs so lamely, when Truth and Reason tread so close upon its heels;
and the babble of a Fool never appears so fulsom, as when he discourses with a
Philosopher; it is the smartness and perspicuity of the Reply, that makes their
folly so transparent: Remove the Conformist, and then the other talks at as
wise a rate, as any of their own Writers.

But I beg the Readers pardon, for having so much tired his patience with
satisfying the Cavils and Impertinences of these People; when I am so well
assured that they are incapable either of being ashamed or argued out of their
Follies. It Is one thing to Baffle, and another to Convince them. And where they
want stores of Reason to encounter an Adversary, they never want Magazines of
Reproaches: And therefore I shall only advise that excellent Person, the Author
of the Debate, to be careful how he lays aside his Vizour; for if ever they
discover him, let him look to be pelted to purpose with Slanders, and blasting
Reports: and though he be a Person of the Clearest and most unspotted
Innocence, that is no fence against the foulest Aspersions; but if they ever
find out the place of his Residence, let him assure himself, they will quickly
find the next Dunghill to it, how clean soever he sweeps his own Door.

As for my own part I am hardened enough to be proof against the poison of Asps,
the Stings of Vipers, and the Tongues of -- and rest satisfied in this, that
they can never abuse me more than they are pleased to abuse themselves; it
being the most solemn strain of their Devotion to vilify themselves with large
Confessions of the hainousest and most aggravated Sins: they will freely
acknowledge their offenses against all the Commandments, and that with the
foulest and most enhancing Circumstances they can rake together, and confess
their Injustice, Uncleanness, and Extortion, and all the Publican and Harlot
Sins in the world: And in all their Confessions they stick not to charge
themselves with such large Catalogues of Sin, and to amass together such an
heap of Impieties, as would make up the compleatest Character of Lewdness and
Villainy. And if their Consciences do really Arraign them of all those Crimes,
whereof they so familiarly endite themselves, there are no such guilty and
unpardonable Wretches as they. So that their Confessions are either true, or
false: if false, then they fool and trifle with the Almighty; if true, then I
could easily tell them the fittest place to say their Prayers in. But however
it is pity to abridge them the liberty all men have, to abuse themselves: but if
they will extend this their Privilege so far, as to attaint other men's
Reputations, I shall only admonish them as a Friend beforehand, that there is
somebody in the world that will not fail to requite their slanders, and false
aspersions, with their own true Character. And so I take my leave of them, to
address my self to those for whom this Discourse was intended. And though I
dare not be so saucy as to teach my Superiors, how to Govern the Kingdom, out
of Ezekiel, or the Revelations; yet I will presume to put up this single
Petition, in order to the security of our Public Peace and Settlement.

That whatsoever Freedom they may think good to Indulge to Religion, they would
not suffer Irreligion to share in the Favor, nor permit Atheism to appear
openly (as it begins to do) under the Protection of Liberty of Conscience. I am
not so utterly unacquainted with the Experience of former Ages, as to be
over-apt to complain of the degeneracy of our own: the World I know has ever
had its Vicissitudes, and Periods of Virtue and Wickedness: and all
Commonwealths have advanced themselves to their Power and Grandeur by Sobriety
and Wisdom, and a tender Regard of Religion; and from thence have declined
again by Softness and Effeminacy, by Sacrilege and Profaneness, and a proud
Contempt of God and his Worship. This is the Circle of Humane Affairs, and on
these constant Turns depend the Periods and certain Fates of Empires. So that
though Atheism reigns and prevails more in the present age, than in some that
went immediately before it; yet there have been seasons, when it was mounted up
to a greater height of Power and Reputation, than it is yet advanced to: but
then those have always been black and fatal Times, and have certainly brought
on Changes and Dissolutions of States. For the Principles of Irreligion unjoynt
the Sinews and blow up the very Foundations of Government: This turns all sense
of Loyalty into Folly; this sets men at Liberty from all the effectual
Obligations to Obedience, and makes Rebellion as virtuous, when ever it either
is, or is thought as advantageous.

And therefore it imports Authority to nip this wanton humor in the Bud, and
to crush it whilst it is young and tender; for as yet it has found but slender
entertainment with wise and sober Persons, and is only propagated among little
and unlearned People: discreet men that have not more Religion, have yet at
least more wit and manners: The only Zelots in the Cause are the young
Nurslings, and small Infantry of the Wits, the wild and hair-brained Youths of
the Town. A sort of Creatures that study nothing but Sloth and Idleness, that
design nothing but Folly and Extravagance, that aspire to no higher
Accomplishments than fine Phrases, terse Oaths, and gay Plumes, that pretend to
no other stock of Learning, but a few shavings of Wit gathered out of Plays and
Comedies; and these they abuse too, and labor to pervert their chaste
Expressions to Obscene and Irreligious Purposes; and Johnson and Fletcher are
profaned, as well as the Holy Scriptures. They measure the Wit of their
Discourse by its Profaneness and Ribaldry; and nothing sets it off so
handsomely as neat and fashionable Oaths: and the only thing that makes them
appear more Witty then other Folk, is their daring to be more wicked: Their
Jests are remarkable for nothing but their Presumption, and the picquancy of
their Conceit lies in their Boldness. Men laugh not so much at the Wit, as the
Sawciness of their Discourse; and because they dare vent such things, as a
discreet or civil man would scorn to say, though he were an Atheist. But these
shallow fools are proud and ambitious to gain a Name and Reputation for
Debauchery, they slander themselves with false Impieties, and usurp the
Wickedness they were never guilty of, only to get a Renown in Villainy.

It Is these Apes of Wit, and Pedants of Gentility that would make Atheism the
fashion forsooth, and Profaneness the Character of a Gentleman; that think it
a piece of Gallantry to scoff at Religion, droll upon God and make sport with
his Laws; that account it an Argument of Judgment and Ingenuity, to be above
the Follies of Conscience: and a height of Courage and Magnanimity, at all
adventure to brave and defy Heaven, and out-dare the Almighty; and the noblest
part of a gentile Behavior, to counterfeit an Haughty and Supercilious Disdain
of Religious Sneeks; and to beg all men that are respective to their
Consciences, for soft and cowardly Fools, that are scared with Fantastic and
Invisible Powers, and easily abused with Tricks, and Juglings, and Public
Tales. Now certainly, these Fantastic Changelings must needs be wonderfully
qualified, to judge of the most serious and most difficult Enquiries in the
world. Are they not likely (think you) to search into the deepest Foundations
of Religion, to weigh and examine all the Arguments for the Being of God, and
Immortality of the Soul; to enquire into the Grounds of the Christian Faith,
and to take an account of the Truth and Credibility of the Scriptures? And,
when they have so utterly emasculated their Understandings with Softness and
Luxury, are not they prodigiously able to examine what Agrees or Quarrels with
the Dictates of Pure and Impartial Reason? Are they not likely to determine
what is truly Great and Generous, that never heard of any other Maxims of
Philosophy, but what they have picked up at Plays, out of the stiff Disputes of
Love and Honor? And are they not likely to give a wonderful Account of the
Record of Ancient Times (without which they are utterly unable to judge of the
Truth or Falsehood of any Religion) that were never acquainted with any History,
unless perhaps that of the Follies, and Amors of the French Court? And yet how
briskly do these giddy Youths determine these, and a thousand other Difficult
Theories, that they never had Learning or Patience enough to understand, much
less to make an exact and satisfying search into their Truth and Evidence?

Alas young men! you are too rash and forward, your confidence swells above
your Understandings: It Is not for you to pretend to Atheism, it is too great a
Privilege for Boys and Novices. It Is sawsiness for you to be Profane, and to
censure Religion Impudence and ill Manners: and whatsoever Rational Pleas
Atheism may admit of, it is not for such as you to pretend to Wit and Learning
enough to understand them. And therefore take heed of exposing your Vanity and
Weakness; and, if you will not be Wise, yet at least be Modest: Be advised, not
to set up before your time, and better to furnish your Understandings, before
you vent your wit. Consider, what a fulsome thing it is, that when the most
Learned and Inquisitive of the Philosophers could never raise Atheism above the
certainty of a Grand Perhaps: and therefore denied not, but only doubted, the
Truth of Religion: For none of them could ever be so utterly forsaken of his
Reason, as to attempt to demonstrate there could be no God; but only by showing
how, to solve the Phenomenon of Nature and Providence without him, that
possibly there might be none: and therefore they were never so absurd, as to
affront the worship of the Deity; but thought themselves as effectually obliged
in Prudence to the duties of Virtue and Religion by the possibility, as by the
certainty of things. Now I say, when these men of Parts and Learning were so
Modest and Diffident in their singular persuasions; what an unhandsome thing is
it for such empty Fops as you, with so bold and frontless a Confidence, to
defy the Almighty, to deride the wisdom of his Laws, to cavil at his Sacred
Oracles, and to give the Lie to the Universal Sense of Mankind; and all this at
all adventure?

And yet, methinks, it is pretty to hear one of these little Mushrome Wits,
Charge Religion with Credulity and easiness of Belief; and talk confidently,
that it is want of Judgment and Enquiry that betrays Fools and Ignorant People
to be scared with the tales and threatenings of Ambitious Priests: though it be
so utterly impossible that any men should be more chargeable with Credulity,
than themselves; and no man's Faith is capable of being more implicit, than
their Unbelief; nor can the most illiterate Peasant take up his Countries
Religion upon more slender Grounds and Motives, than they do their Infidelity:
their being equally Ignorant forces them to be equally Credulous. For, not to
repeat any of the forementioned particulars, with what a greedy confidence do
they swallow down the Principles of the Malmsbury Philosophy, without any
chewing, or consideration? How hussingly will they assert, that the Notion of
an Immaterial Substance implies a Contradiction, for no other reason, than
because it does? That men have no Faculties but of Sense and Imagination; that
Understanding is Reaction, and Reason a Train of Phantasmes; that the Will is a
Corporeal Motion, that its determinations are Fatal and Mechanical, and
necessitated by the Impressions of External and Irresistible Causes; that its
Liberty of choice is as absurd and insignificant Nonsense, as a round
Quadrangle; that Religion is the belief of Tales publicly allowed; that Power
is Right, and justifies all Actions whatsoever, whether good or bad; that there
is nothing just, or unjust in it self; that all Right and Wrong is the Result
of Humane Contracts; and that the Laws of Nature are nothing but Maxims and
Principles of self-interest! How boldly do they take up with these and other
resembling Principles of Baseness and Irreligion, upon the bare Authority and
proofless Assertions of one proud and haughty Philosopher? How much severe
Study and Contemplation is required to a Competent Knowledge of these things?
And yet with what a stiff and peremptory Confidence are they determined by
these men, that cannot pretend to any other knowledge, (and it is a very candid
presumption to allow them so much) than of the Laws of a Play, or Poem? In
brief, these empty Spunges suck in Opinions, for their agreeableness with their
debauched and licentious Practices, without ever considering their Truth and
Evidence; for alas! they never troubled their heads with such Enquiries: And
therefore, whatever they pretend, it is not their Reasons, but their Lusts and
Vices, that cavil at the Principles of Religion; and they except against it,
not because it contradicts their understandings, (for that they never
considered) but their Appetites: it is their Sins and sensual Inclinations, that
prejudice and bar up their minds against it: and though they were convinced of
its Truth, they would however be Infidels still, in spite of all the Reason
and Demonstration in the world. Their Irreligion is an after-game of their
Debauchery, they are forced to it in their own Defense. Their wickedness has
made Infidelity their Interest, and Atheism their Refuge; and then they cannot,
will not believe, for no other Reason, but only because they dare not.

But that I may not pursue their Ignorance too unmercifully, I will venture,
before I conclude, to commend their skill: For I cannot but acknowledge them
guilty of one little piece of Art and Sophistry, viz. That being Conscious to
themselves, that no tolerable exceptions can be raised against the Principles
of True Goodness, they affect to reproach it with forged and disingenuous
Aspersions, and wittingly disparage its native Beauty and Loveliness, by
representing it in false and uncouth Disguises. For, whereas there is nothing
more noble and generous, more cheerful and sprightly, more courteous and
affable, more free and ingenuous, more sober and rational, than the Spirit and
Genius of true Religion; these witty Gentlemen are pleased to paint it out in
sad and melancholy shapes, with poor and wretched Features, with sour and
anxious Looks, as an enemy to all Mirth and Cheerfulness, and a thing that
delights in nothing but Sighs, and Groans, and discolored Faces: They dress it
up in all the Follies and Deformities of Superstition; and then, when they have
made it ridiculous, they make themselves sport with it: And thus by
representing it as a humor unworthy the entertainment of a generous mind, that
justifies their contempt of so weak a Passion, and makes a sumptuous Apology
for the gallantry of Atheism and Profaneness. And indeed, if Religion were as
mean and absurd, as these men would make it, and others have made it, let it
not only excuse but abet their practices; let it be the mark of an high and
gallant Spirit, to be an Atheist; let it be Gentility to despise, and Wit to
droll upon Religion; let all Devotion be esteemed the Child of Folly and
Weakness; let it be an Argument of Wisdom, to be profane and vicious, and let
Virtue become a name of the greatest Reproach and Infamy. But alas! when it is
so demonstratively evident, that true Piety (though it were an Imposture) is
our greatest wisdom and perfection; that it both adorns, and advances Humane
Nature; that it is so highly advantageous to the peace and happiness of the
World; that it carries in it all that is amiable and lovely, all that is
cheerful and ingenuous, all that is useful and profitable; and that it is
whatever can advance either our Content, or Interest, or Reputation: When all
this is so amply evident, What can be more unpardonably base and disingenuous,
than for these men, in spite of all Remonstrances, still to upbraid it with
the Villainies of Hypocrisy, and blast its Credit with the Absurdities of
Superstition, which is the greatest folly in the world, for no other reason,
than because it debauches what is the greatest Wisdom? And therefore they would
do well to understand a little better what Religion means, before they take
upon them to disgrace and defame it; and let them not discover their lamentable
rawness and ignorance, by laughing at its folly and meanness, till they can
first prove a base and selfish spirit to be more noble and generous, than an
universal Love and Charity; Pride and Luxury to be more amiable than Sweetness
and Ingenuity; Revenge and Impatience more honorable than Discretion and
Civility; Excess and Debauchery more healthful than Temperance and Sobriety: to
be enslaved to their Lusts and Passions more manly, than to live by the Rules
of Reason and Prudence; Malice and Injustice to be more graceful and becoming a
gentile Behavior, than Kindness and Benignity; and the horrors of an amazed
Spirit to be fuller of Pleasure and Felicity, than that Peace and Calmness of
Mind that springs from the Reflections of an exact Conscience. Till all this,
and much more is made good, that is, till all the Maxims of Folly and Wisdom
are changed, let them be Civil, and Modest, and not scorn too confidently. And
though all this could be done, yet, as for their parts they will be so far from
ever performing it, that they will never be at the pains of attempting it; and
if they should, it is (God knows) too great a work for their little
understandings. And therefore I appeal to all the wise and sober world, Whether
they that would make Religion ridiculous, are not infinitely so themselves?
Whether to consute it with Raillery and Bold Jests, be not as void of Wit as
Reason? And whether all the Folly and Madness in the World can equal this of
these scoffing Atheists?

And thus having scourged their Ignorance and Presumption with severity enough,
I shall forbear either to expose them for their Pedantry, or to lash them for
their rudeness and ill manners: though what can be more pedantick, than to be
so big with every little Conceit, as to be in labor to vent it in every
Company? And a pert Schoolboy is scarce more troublesome with a petty
Criticism against Mr. Lilly, than these truantly Youths are with any singular
Exception, that they have picked up against the Holy Scriptures. They cannot
meet with a person of any Reputation for Learning, but they must be pecking at
him with their Objections; and if he slight their impertinent Pratings (as all
discreet men do) then the next time they meet their Dear Hearts, with what
triumphant shrugs do they boast their success against the man in Black, and so
laugh and drink themselves into Confidence and Folly! And then, as for their
want of manners, what deportment can be more course and clownish than to affect
to be offensive to all discreet men, and to delight to loath and nauseate all
Civil Company with the filthiness of their Discourse? A behavior more irkesom
to a Gentleman of any Breeding and Civility, than the Buffoonry of Hostlers and
Porters. They can scarce meet with a Clergyman, but they must be pelting him
with Oaths, or Ribaldry, or Atheistical Drollery; i. e. they study to annoy him
with such Discourse, as he is obliged (though he were inwardly as great a
Villain as themselves) to detest by his Place and Profession: a piece of
Breeding much like his, that would have refused to entertain a Vestal with any
other Discourse, than by describing the Rites of Priapus, or the lascivious
Arts of Cleopatra.

And so I leave them to the Correction of the Public Rods: and it is high time
that Authority check, and chastise the Wantonness of this Boyish humor. For
the Infection spreads and grows fashionable, and creeps out of Cities into
Villages. To Impeach Religion is become the first exercise of Wit, in which
young Gentlemen are to be Disciplined; and Atheism is the only knowledge and
accomplishment they gain by a gentile Education; and they have nothing to make
them fancy themselves more witty and refined People, than illiterate Peasants
and Mechanics, but a readiness and pregnancy to rally upon Religion: and he is
a raw Youth, and smells rank of his Grandame and his Catechism, that cannot
resolve all the Articles of his Faith into the Cheats and Impostures of
Priests. And thus they live here till they have sinned, or fooled away all
sense of Honor and Conscience; and so return home useless, and unserviceable
to their Country; and if they turn Sots, they may prove less dangerous: but if
not, they are prepared for any designs of Mischief and Public Disturbance. For
at the same time they shake hands with Religion, they bid adieu to Loyalty; in
that whilst they own no ties of Conscience, they know no honesty but advantage;
and Interest is the only endearment of their Duty to their Prince: and
therefore, whenever this happens to run counter to their Loyalty, it is then
the strongest and most effectual inducement to any attempts of Treason, and
Rebellion. And thus they may prove good Subjects, as Rogues and Outlaws are,
who will be honest when it is their Interest; but when it is not, then any thing
is their Duty, that contributes to their Security. And with these men in all
Civil Wars and Dissentions of State, the strongest side has always the justest
Cause; and if Rebels prove successful against their Lawful Prince, they gain
their Assistance. And to these Principles we must ascribe the unhappy success
of the late Rebellion: the silly and well meaning Zealots were only abused by
sly and crafty Incendiaries for the compassing of their own ambitious ends, and
by their Councils only was the Cause managed, advanced, and finished; till they
raised their own Fortunes upon the Ruins of the Royal Interest, and
established themselves in the Royal Power and Dignity. And though the men and
their Designs are perished, yet their Principles thrive and propagate; and it is
strange, yet easy to observe, how the contempt of Religion works men into a
dislike of Monarchy; and I scarce ever met with any zealous Common-wealths-man,
whom I could not easily discover to have more of the Atheist than the
Politician; in brief, all men of this Persuasion are so far from being inclined
to love their Prince, that they are engaged by their very Principles to hate
the Usurper: For, take away the Divine Institution of Government, and the
Obligations of Conscience to Obedience, and then all Government is Usurpation,
and all sense of Obedience Folly: and Princes have no other Right to their
Crowns, but what is founded upon Force and Violence; their Empire was first
gained by Wars, Butcheries, and Massacres; their Diadems hang upon their
Swords; and their Thrones stand deep in Humane Blood; and all Kingdoms are
nothing but Societies of Slaves and Tyrants; and if any Subject can set himself
free from his Sovereigns Oppression, he is the braver man; and when he can win
his Crown, he deserves to wear it. And there is no man that laughs at the Folly
of Religion, who is not angry at the Superstition of Government. And therefore
I leave it to Authority to consider, how much it concerns them to restrain the
Insolence of this wanton Humor; and to punish those, who make it their
business to propagate Irreligious Principles, as the worst and most dangerous
Enemies to the State.

But my Scorn and Indignation against the presumptuous lavishness of these
redoubted Wight swells this Preface to too large and tedious a length; and
therefore, I shall only crave leave to premise this one caution for the
advantage of the ensuing Treatise, and so have done; viz. That in the
management of this Debate, I have been careful to confine my discourse to the
weightiest and most material Considerations, and have industriously waved all
matters of an inferior and subordinate Importance. For to what purpose is it
to examine every little Exception, and every gay and plausible Appearance; when
the Enquiry is so clearly determinable, by Arguments of the greatest Evidence
and Concernment? And therefore I have only represented the inconsistency of
Liberty of Conscience, with the first and Fundamental Laws of Government. In
which if I have spoken Reason, I have, without any more ado, carried the cause;
if I have not, I am content to lose my labor. For there are no Considerations
of equal Evidence and Importance with those that relate to the Peace and
Settlement of Societies: So that, if those I have urged prove ineffectual, all
others, drawn from less considerable Topics, would have been impertinent; and
so far from strengthening my discourse, that they would rather have abated of
its demonstrative Truth and Evidence: for being in their own natures not
capable of such enforcing and convictive Proofs, to mix them with clearer and
more certain Reasonings, were only to allay their strength, and dilute their
perspicuity.

And for this Reason have I purposely omitted the Examination of that Argument,
that so strongly possesses the warm and busy brains of some undertaking men,
viz. that Liberty of Conscience would be mightily conducive to the advancement
of Trade. For whether it be so, or so, it matters not, after it is proved to be
apparently destructive of the Peace of Kingdoms. And though perhaps it might be
no difficult task to prove the vanity of their Conceit, yet, after this
performance, it would be at least a trifling and frivolous undertaking; because
no man can be so utterly forsaken of all Reason and Discretion, as to think of
promoting Traffic by any ways that are destructive of the Ends and Interest of
Government. And therefore, if I have sufficiently proved, that Liberty of
Conscience is so; it is but an idle speculation after that to enquire, what
service it would do to the advancement of Trade: because it is already proved
inconsistent with a greater Good, than all the advantages of Commerce can
amount to. So that granting these Projecting People all they can demand, and
supposing their Design as serviceable to the benefits of Trade, as they
pretend; yet, what can be more shamefully imprudent, than to put the Kingdom
upon so great an hazard for so small an advantage? Certainly Public Peace and
Settlement (that is the first and Fundamental end of all Societies) is to be
valued above any advantages of Wealth and Trading: and therefore, if Liberty of
Conscience as naturally tends to the disturbance of Government, as it can to
the advancement of Trade (if any thing may be supposed to contribute to the
Wealth of a Nation that tends to the dissolution of its Peace) so vast a
mischief must infinitely outweigh this, and a thousand other lesser
advantages: For there is nothing in the world of value enough to balance
against Peace, but Peace it self.

And therefore I confess I cannot but smile when I observe how some, that would
be thought wonderfully grave and solemn Statesmen, labor with mighty Projects
of setting up this and that Manufacture, in their several respective Towns and
Corporations; and how eagerly they pursue these petty Attempts beyond the great
Affairs of a more Public and Universal Concernment; and how wisely they
neglect the Settlement of a whole Nation, for the benefit of a Village or
Borough. If indeed the Affairs of the Kingdom were in a fixed and established
condition, these Attempts might then have been seasonable; and the enriching of
particular places would be an Accession to the Wealth and Power of the whole
Kingdom. But whilst we are distracted among our selves, with such a strange
variety of Iealousies and Animosities; whilst the Public Peace and Settlement
is so unluckily defeated by Quarrels and Mutinies of Religion; and whilst the
Consciences of men are acted by such peevish and ungovernable Principles; to
erect and encourage Trading Combinations, is only to build so many nests of
Faction and Sedition, and to enable these giddy and humoursom People to create
public Disturbances. For it is notorious, that there is not any sort of People
so inclinable to Seditious Practices as the Trading part of a Nation; and their
Pride and Arrogance naturally increases with the improvement of their stock.
And, if we reflect upon our late miserable Distractions, it is easy to observe,
how the Quarrel was chiefly hatched in the Shops of Tradesmen, and cherished by
the Zeal of Prentice-boys, and City-gossips. And hence it is, that the Fanatic
Party appears so vastly numerous and considerable, above and beyond their real
number, partly because these bold and giddy People live in greater Societies of
men, and so are more observable; whereas in Country Towns and Villages their
account is inconsiderable, and arises not (to speak within compass) above the
proportion of one to twenty; and partly because in those places where these
Vermin naturally breed and swarm, they are always most talkative, and
clamorous, and full of Buzze: and therefore, though their party be much the
least, and the meanest Interest; yet whilst their number is conjectured by
their noise, they make a greater Appearance, than twice as many sober and
peaceable men. Riots and Tumults are much more remarkable, than Societies of
quiet and composed People; and a rout of unlucky Boys and Girls raise a greater
noise (especially when they wrangle among themselves) than all the Parish
beside. But whether they are more or less considerable, it is a very odd and
preposterous piece of Policy, to design the enriching of this sort of People,
whilst their heads are distempered with Religious Lunacies: for it only puts
weapons into the hands of Madmen, wherewith they may assault their Governors.
Their Fundamental Principles incline them to perverse and restless
Dispositions, that never are, nor will be, satisfied with any established frame
of things: And if the Affairs of Religion are not exactly modeled to their own
nice and peremptory Conceptions, that is ground enough to overturn the present
Settlement, and to new model the Church by a more through Reformation. Now
whilst men are under the power of this proud and peevish humor, wealth does
but only pamper and encourage their Presumption, and tempt them to a greater
boldness and insolence against Authority. And if their Seditious Preachers do
but blow the Trumpet to Reformation (i. e. to have every thing altered they
dislike) how easily may they fire these heady people into tumults and outrages?
How eagerly will they flow into their Party in spite of all the Power and
Opposition of their Governors? And how prodigally will they empty their Bags,
and bring in even their Bodkins and Thimbles, and Spoons to carry on the Cause?
He is a very silly man, and understands nothing of the Follies, Passions, and
Inclinations of Humane Nature, who fees not that there is no Creature so
ungovernable, as a Wealthy Fanatic.

And therefore let not men flatter themselves with idle hopes of Settlement,
any other way, than by suppressing all these dissentions, and reducing the
minds of men to an Agreement and Unity in Religious Worship. For it is just as
impossible to keep different Factions of Religion quiet and peaceable, as it is
to make the common people wise men and Philosophers. If indeed we could suppose
them sober and discreet, it were then no great danger to leave them to their
Liberty; but upon the same supposition we may as well let them loose from all
the Laws of Government and Policy: because if every private man had wit and
honesty enough to govern himself and his own Actions, there would be no need of
Public Laws and Governors. And yet upon this impossible Presumption stand all
the Pretenses for Liberty of Conscience, That, if men were permitted it, they
would use it wisely and peaceably; than which it is hard to suppose a greater
Impossibility. For the Conscience of the multitude is the same thing with their
Wisdom and Discretion: and therefore, it is as natural for them to fall into the
snare of an abused and vicious Conscience, as it is to be rash and foolish: For
an erroneous Conscience is but one sort of Folly, that relates to the Judgment
of their moral Actions; in which they are as ignorant, and as likely to mistake
as in any other Affairs of Humane Life. There is no Observation in the world
established upon a more certain and universal Experience, than that the
generality of mankind are not so obnoxious to any sort of Follies and Vices, as
to wild and unreasonable conceits of Religion; and that, when their heads are
possessed with them, there are no principles so pregnant with mischief and
disturbance as they. And if Princes would but consider, how liable mankind are
to abuse themselves with serious and conscientious Villainies, they would
quickly see it to be absolutely necessary to the Peace and Happiness of their
Kingdoms, that there be set up a more severe Government over men's Consciences
and Religious persuasions, than over their Vices and Immoralities. For, of all
Villains the wellmeaning Zealot is the most dangerous: Such men have no checks
of Conscience, nor fears of miscarriage to damp their Industry, but their
Godliness makes them bold and furious; and, however their Attempts succeed,
they are sure of the Rewards of Saints and Martyrs. And what so glorious as to
lose their lives in the Cause of God? These men are ever prepared for any
mischief, if they have but a few active and crafty Knaves to manage and set
them on: (and there is never want of such in any Commonwealth.) And there
needs no other motive to engage their Zeal in any Seditious Attempt, than to
instill into their minds the Necessity of a through Reformation; and then you may
carry them wheresoever you please, and they will never boggle at any Mischief,
Outrage, or Rebellion to advance the Cause. And therefore, it concerns the
Civil Magistrate to beware of this sort of People above all others, as a party,
that is always ready formed for any Public Disturbance. One would think, the
world were not now to be taught, that there is nothing so difficult to be
managed as Godly Zeal, or to be appeased as Religious Dissentions: People ever
did, and ever will pursue such Quarrels with their utmost rage and fury; and
therefore let us be content to govern the world as it ever has been, and ever
must be governed; and not be so fond as to trouble our heads with contriving
ways of Settling a Nation, whilst it is unsettled by Religion. Agreement in this
is the first, if not the only foundation of Peace: and therefore, let that be
first established upon firm and lasting Principles; (which it easily may by
severe Laws faithfully executed, but otherwise never can.) But till it is done,
it is just as wise and safe for a Prince to enrich his Subjects with Trade and
Commerce, as it is to load weak and unfinished Foundations with great and
weighty Superstructures. to conclude, all Arguments are to be considered in
their proper place, and order: and it is but an unskilful, and inartificial way
of discoursing, to argue from less weighty and considerable matters against the
first and Fundamental reasons of things; and yet of this preposterous Method
are those men guilty, who talk of the Interests of Trade in opposition to the
Interests of Government: And therefore for a fuller Answer to this, and all
other the like pretenses, I shall now refer the Reader to my Book; where I
think I have proved enough to satisfy any man of an ordinary understanding,
That Indulgence and Toleration is the most absolute sort of Anarchy, and that
Princes may with less hazard give Liberty to men's Vices and Debaucheries, than
to their Consciences. As for my Method, it is plain and familiar, and suited to
every man's Capacity; I have reduced the state of the Controversy to a few
easy and obvious Propositions; under these I have couched all the particular
matters concerned in our present Debates, and by Analogy to their
Reasonableness have cleared off all Difficulties and Objections; and have been
careful all along to prove the absolute Necessity of what I assert from the
most important ends and designs of Government, compared with the Natural
Passions and Inclinations of Mankind. And whoever offers to talk of these
Affairs without special regard both to the Nature of Government, and to the
Nature of Man, may amuse himself with the fine Dreams and Hypotheses of a warm
brain; but shall be certain to miss the necessary Rules of Life, and the most
useful measures of practicable Policy; that are suited only to the Humors and
Passions of men, and designed only to prevent their Follies, and bridle their
Enormities. And therefore the main Notion I have pursued has been to make out,
how dangerous a thing Liberty of Conscience is, considering the Tempers, and
Tendencies of Humane Nature, to the most necessary ends and designs of
Government. A vein of which Reasoning I have been careful to run through all
parts and Branches of my Discourse, it being vastly the most considerable, if
not the only thing to be attended to in this Enquiry. And as I have kept close
to my main Question, so have I cautiously avoided all other collateral and
unnecessary Disputes; and have not confined my self to any Hypothesis, nor
determined any Controversy, in which it was not immediately concerned; but
have expressed my Reasonings in so general terms, as that they might be equally
forcible upon the minds of all men, of howsoever different Persuasions in all
other matters.

And now I have no other Favor, or Civility, to request of the Reader, than
that he would suspend his Judgment, till he have seriously perused, and weighed
all parts of the following Treatise: But, if he shall pass Sentence upon any
part, before he has considered the whole, he will in all probability put
himself to the pains of raising those Objections, I have already answered to
his hand; and perhaps the next thing he condemns may be his own Rashness.

CHAP. I.
A more General Account of the Necessity of an Ecclesiastical Power, or
Sovereignty over Conscience in matters of Religion.
The Contents.
THe Competition between the Power of Princes, and the Consciences of Subjects,
represented. The mischiefs that unavoidably follow upon the Exemption of
Conscience from the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Power. The absolute necessity
of its being subject in affairs of Religion to the Governors of the
Commonwealth. This proved at large, because Religion has the strongest
influence upon the Peace of Kingdoms, and the Interests of Government. Religion
is so far from being exempted from the Restraints of Laws and Penalties, that
nothing more requires them. It Is more easy to govern men's Vices than their
Consciences, because all men are bold and confident in their Persuasions. The
remiss Government of Conscience has ever been the most fatal miscarriage in all
Commonwealths. Impunity of Offenders against Ecclesiastical Laws, the worst
sort of Toleration. The Mischiefs that ensue upon the permitting men the
Liberty of their Consciences are endless. Fanaticism a boundless Folly. Affairs
of Religion as they must be subject to the Supreme Civil Power, so to none
other. The Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions issue from the same Necessity
of Nature, and are founded upon the same Reason of things. A brief account of
the Original of Civil Power. The Original of Ecclesiastical Power the same. In
the first Ages of the World, the Kingly Power and Priestly Function were always
vested in the same persons, and why. When they were separated in the Jewish
State, the Supremacy was annexed to the Civil Power. And so continued until,
and after our Saviors Birth. No need of his giving Princes any new Commission
to exercise that power, that was antecedently vested in them by so
unquestionable a Right. And therefore the Scripture rather supposes than
asserts it. The argument against penal Laws in Religion from the practice of
our Savior and his Apostles, answered and confuted. The Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Princes not derived from any grant of our Saviors, but from
the natural and antecedent Rights of all Sovereign Power. Christ and his
Apostles could not use any coercive Jurisdiction, because they acted in the
capacity of Subjects. Their threatenings of Eternity carry in them as much
compulsion upon Conscience, as secular punishments. The power of the Church
purely spiritual. In the first Ages of the Christian Church God supplied its
want of Civil Jurisdiction by immediate and miraculous Inflictions from Heaven.
Diseases of the Body the usual consequences of Excommunication. And this had
the same effect as temporal Punishments. All this largely proved out of the
writings of St. Paul. When the Emperors became Christian, the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was reannext to the Civil Power. And so continued till the
Usurpation of the Bishops of Rome. How since the Reformation the Ecclesiastical
Power of Princes has been invaded by some pragmatical Divines. Their Confidence
has scared Princes out of their Natural Rights. Of the clause of Exception
annexed to the Jejunium Cecilianum. How the Puritans used it to countenance all
their unruly and seditious Practices. A Conclusion drawn from all the Premises
for the absolute Necessity of the Ecclesiastical Power of Princes.

1. NOtwithstanding that Conscience is the best, if not the only security of
Government, yet has Government never been controlled or disturbed so much by
any thing as Conscience. This has ever rivaled Princes in their Supremacy, and
pretends to as uncontrollable an Authority over all the Actions and Affairs of
humane life, as the most absolute and unlimited Power durst ever challenge. Are
Governors Gods Vicegerents? so is this. Have they a power of deciding all
Controversies? so has this. Can they prescribe Rules of Virtue and Goodness to
their Subjects? so may this. Can they punish all their Criminal Actions? so can
this. And are they subject and accountable to God alone? so is this, that owns
no superior but the Lord of Consciences. And of the two Conscience seems to be
the greater Sovereign, and to govern the larger Empire. For whereas the Power
of Princes is restrained to the outward actions of men, this extends its
Dominion to their inward thoughts: Its throne is seated in their minds, and it
exercises all that Authority over their secret and hidden sentiments, that
Princes claim over their public and visible practices. And upon this account
is it set up upon all occasions to grapple with the Scepters and Swords of
Princes, and countermand any Laws, they think good to prescribe; and whenever
Subjects have a mind to control or disobey their Decrees, this is immediately
pressed and engaged to their Party, and does not only dictate, but vouches all
their Remonstrances. Do Subjects rebel against their Sovereign? it is Conscience
that takes up Arms. Do they murder Kings? it is under the conduct of Conscience.
Do they separate from the Communion of the Church? it is Conscience that is the
Schismatic. Do they tie themselves by one Oath to contradict and evacuate
another? it is Conscience that imposes it. Every thing any man has a mind to, is
his Conscience; and Murder, Treason, and Rebellion plead its Authority. The
Annals and Histories of all times and places are too sad a Witness, that this
great and sacred thing has ever been abused, either through the Folly of some,
or Hypocrisy of others, to patronize the most desperate Mischiefs, and
Villainies, that were ever acted.

2. Here then we see is a Competition between the Prerogative of the Prince,
and that of Conscience, i. e. every private man's own judgment and persuasion of
things: The judgment of the Magistrate inclines him to Command, that of the
Subject to Disobey; and the Dictates of his Conscience countermand the Decrees
of his Prince. Now is there not likely to be untoward doings, when two Supreme
Powers thus clash and contradict each other? For what power would be left to
Princes, if every private man's persuasion (for that is his Conscience) may give
check to their Commands? Most men's minds or Consciences are weak, silly, and
ignorant things, acted by fond and absurd principles, and imposed upon by their
vices and their passions; so that were they entirely left to their own conduct,
in what mischiefs and confusions must they involve all Societies? Let Authority
command what it please, they would do what they list. And what is this but a
state of perfect Anarchy, in which every man does what is good in his own eyes?
And therefore whilst men contend for the Sovereign Empire of their Consciences,
and invest it with the Royal supremacy, by making it subject and accountable to
none but God alone, they do in effect but usurp their Prince's Crown, defy his
Authority, and acknowledge no Governor but themselves. For seeing that
Conscience is nothing but the judgment and opinion of their own Actions, if
this be exempt from the Commands of Governors, and if men not only may, but
always ought to comply with their own Dictates, when they oppose their Decrees,
it is easy to determine whether themselves or their Governors be vested with
the Supreme Authority. In brief, every single person is subject to two Supreme
Powers, the Laws of his Prince, and the Dictates of his Conscience, i. e. to
his own and his Princes Opinion: and therefore if the Supreme Power of the
Prince must give place to that of his Conscience, it ceases upon that score to
be Supreme; because there is a Superior Authority that can countermand all its
Laws and Constitutions. What then is to be done in this case? Who shall
arbitrate between these two mighty rival Powers, and so justly assign the true
bounds of their respective Dominions; that Princes may never entrench upon the
rights of Conscience, nor Conscience lay waste the rights of Princes, but both
may act within their proper spheres without invading each others Territories?
For whenever their Powers happen to interfere, the quarrel quickly proceeds to
all the mischiefs and confusions of War. For there is not any thing so tender,
or so unruly as Conscience: if Authority curb it too severely, it grows wild
and furious, and impatient of all restraints; if it permit it an unbridled
liberty, it soon runs it self into all the mischiefs and enormities in the
world. And therefore it must be managed with equal tenderness and severity: and
as it must be guided by wise and sober Laws, else it grows giddy and
exorbitant; so must it not be provoked to resistance by Tyranny and Oppression:
for if it once put the Sword into Subjects hands, it proves of all Rebels the
most fatal and implacable, and is the best Commander of a Rebellious Army in
the world. We see then that it is a matter of equal difficulty and importance to
avoid all the mischiefs and calamities that naturally follow upon the
Contentions of these two Supreme Powers. It Is difficult to bring them to terms
of Accommodation, because neither of them will own any Superior that may
umpire their Controversy; and yet that this should be done is absolutely
necessary to the Peace, Settlement, and Tranquillity of all Commonwealths.

3. And therefore it is the design of this Discourse by a fair and impartial
Debate to compose all their Differences, adjust all their quarrels and
contentions, and settle things upon their true and proper foundations. Which I
think may be effectually enough performed by these two considerations.

1. By proving it to be absolutely necessary to the Peace and Government of the
World, that the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth should be vested with
a Power to govern and conduct the Consciences of Subjects in Affairs of
Religion.

2. By showing this to be so certain and undoubted a truth, that it is and must
be acknowledged by its fiercest Adversaries; and that those who would deprive
the supreme Civil Power of its Authority in reference to the Conduct of the
worship of God, are forced to allow it in other more material parts of
Religion; though they are both liable to the same inconveniences and
objections. And this will oblige me to state the true extent of the Magistrates
power over Conscience in reference to Divine Worship, by showing it to be the
very same with his Power over Conscience in matters of Morality, and all other
Affairs of Religion. Under one of which two Considerations I shall have
occasion to state the most material Questions, and to answer the most
considerable Objections, that occur in this Controversy. And I do not question
but things may be made out with that demonstrative evidence, and settled upon
such safe and moderate principles, as may abundantly satisfy every man's
Conscience, how nice and curious soever, provided it be not debauched with
vice, and wicked principles;. but if it be, then it is easy to make it appear
both the Magistrates Duty and Interest to punish such vicious and diseased
Conscience as much as all other immorality.

4. First then it is absolutely necessary to the Peace and Tranquillity of the
Commonwealth, which, though it be the prime and most important end of
Government, can never be sufficiently secured, unless Religion be subject to
the Authority of the Supreme Power, in that it has the strongest influence upon
humane Affairs; and therefore if the Sovereign Power cannot order and manage
it, it would be but a very incompetent Instrument of public happiness, would
want the better half of it self, and be utterly weak and ineffectual for the
ends of Government. For it is certain, nothing more governs the minds of men
than the apprehensions of Religion: this leads or drives them any way. And as
true Piety secures the public weal by taming and civilizing the passions of
men, and inuring them to a mild, gentle and governable spirit: So superstition
and wrong notions of God and his Worship, are the most powerful engines to
overturn its settlement. And therefore unless Princes have Power to bind their
Subjects to that Religion that they apprehend most advantageous to public
Peace and Tranquillity, and restrain those Religious mistakes that tend to its
subversion; they are no better than Statues and Images of Authority, and want
that part of their Power that is most necessary to a right discharge of their
Government. For what if the minds of men happen to be tainted with such furious
and boisterous Conceptions of Religion, as incline them to stubborness and
Sedition, and make them unmanageable to the Laws of Government; shall not a
Prince be allowed to give check to such unruly and dangerous Persuasions? If he
may, then it is clear that he is endued with a power to conduct Religion, and
that must be subject to his Dominion, as well as all other Affairs of State.
But if he may not, then is he obliged in some cases tamely to permit his
Subjects to ruin and overturn the Commonwealth. For if their wild and
capricious humors are not severely bridled by the strictest Laws and
Penalties, they soon grow headstrong and unruly, become always troublesome, and
often fatal to Princes. The minds of the multitude are of a fierce and eager
temper, apt to be driven without bounds and measures, whithersoever their
Persuasions hurry them: and when they have overheated their unsettled heads
with religious rage and fury, they grow wild, talkative and ungovernable; and
in their mad and raving fits of zeal break all the restraints of Government,
and forget all the laws of order and sobriety. Religion sanctifies all their
passions: anger, malice, and bitterness are holy fervors in the Cause of God.
This cancels and dispenses with all the obligations of sobriety: And what has
prudence to do with Religion? this is too hot and eager to be tied up to its
flat and dull formalities. Zeal for the Glory of God will both excuse and
justify any Enormity. There can be no Faction or Rebellion in carrying on the
Interests of the Godly Party, and the great work of a thorough Reformation must
not be trusted to the care of carnal and lukewarm Politicians. And by these and
the like pretenses do they easily destroy the reverence of all things Sacred
and Civil, to propagate any wild Propositions; are armed with Religion, and led
on by the Spirit of God to disturb the Public Peace, kill Kings, and overthrow
Kingdoms. And this has ever been the bane and reproach of Religion in all times
and places: and there is scarce a Nation in the world that has not felt the
miseries and confusions of an Holy War: and the Annals of all Ages are full of
sad Stories to this purpose.

5. And therefore to exempt Religion and the Consciences of men from the
Authority of the Supreme Power is but to expose the peace of Kingdoms to every
wild and Fanatic Pretender, who may, when ever he pleases, under pretenses of
Reformation thwart and unsettle Government without control; seeing no one can
have any power to restrain the persuasions of his Conscience. And Religion will
be so far from being at liberty from the Authority of the Civil Power, that
nothing in the world will be found to require more of its care and Influence,
because there is not any other Vice to which the vulgar sort of men are more
prone, than to Superstition or debauched conceptions concerning God and his
Worship, nor any that more inclines them to an unruly and seditious temper. It
inflames their crazy heads with a Furious and Sectarian Zeal, and adopts their
rankest and most untoward passions into the Duties of Religion. And when
passion becomes Holy, then it can never be exorbitant; but the more furious and
ungovernable it is, so much the more vehement is their zeal for the Glory of
God; and they that are most peevish and refractory, are upon that account the
most godly. And then all passion and stubbornness in Religious Quarrels must be
christened Zeal, all Zeal must be sacred, and nothing that is sacred can be
excessive. And now when men act furiously upon these mistakes (as all that are
possessed with them must) what can the issue be but eternal Miseries and
Confusions? Every Opinion must make a Sect, and every Sect a Faction, and every
Faction, when it is able, a War, and every War is the Cause of God, and the
Cause of God can never be prosecuted with too much violence. And then all
sobriety is lukewarmness, to be obedient to Government carnal Compliance, and
not to proceed to Rebellion for carrying on the great work of a thorough
Reformation, is to want Zeal for the Glory of God. And thus are their Vices
sanctified by their Consciences, malice, folly, and madness are ever the
prevailing ingredients of their superstitious Zeal, and Religion only obliges
them to be more sturdy and impudent against the Laws of Government; and they
are now encouraged to cherish those passions in spite of Authority, from which
the severity of Laws might effectually have restrained them, were it not for
the cross obligations of an untoward Conscience.

6. And for this reason is it, that it is found so nice and difficult a thing to
govern men in their persuasions about Religion, beyond all the other affairs
and transactions of humane life; because erroneous Consciences are bold and
confident enough to outface Authority: whereas persons of debauched and
scandalous lives, being condemned by their own Consciences as well as the
public Laws, can have nothing to bear them up against the will of their
Superiors, and restraints of Government. But when men's minds are possessed with
such unhappy Principles of Religion as are more destructive of the Peace and
Order of civil Society than open lewdness and debauchery, and when the Virtues
of the Godly are more pregnant with villainy and mischief than the Vices of the
wicked, and when their Consciences are satisfied in their mischievous and
ungovernable persuasions, and when they seriously believe that they approve
themselves to God by being refractory and irreclamable in their Fanatic Zeal,
then how easy is it to defy Authority, and trample upon all its threatenings
and penalities? And those Laws, that would awe a profane and irreligious
Person at least into an outward compliance, shall but exasperate a boisterous
Conscience into a more vehement and seditious disobedience. Now when it is so
difficult for Magistrates either to remove these Religious Vices, or to bridle
their unruliness, they must needs find it an incomparably harder task to
restrain the extravagancies of Zeal, than of Lewdness and Debauchery. And
therefore seeing the multitude is so inclinable to these mistakes of Religion,
and seeing, when they are infected with them, they grow so turbulent and
unruly, I leave it to Governors themselves to judge, whether it does not
concern them with as much vigilance and severity either to prevent their rise
or suppress their growth, as to punish any the foulest crimes of Immorality?
And if they would but seriously consider into what exorbitances peevish and
untoward principles about Religion naturally improve themselves, they could not
but perceive it to be as much their concernment to punish them with the
severest inflictions, as any whatsoever Principles of Rebellion in the State.

7. And this certainly has ever been one of the most fatal miscarriages of all
Governors, in that they have not been aware of this fierce and implacable
enemy; but have gone about to govern unruly Consciences by more easy and
remiss Laws, than those that are only able to suppress scandalous and confessed
villainies, and have thought them sufficiently restrained by threatening
punishments, without inflicting them. And indeed in most Kingdoms (so little
have Princes understood their own Interests in reference to Religion)
Ecclesiastical Laws have been set up only for Scar-crows, being established
rather for show and Form sake, than with any design of giving them life, by
putting them into Execution; and if any were so hardy as not to be scared into
obedience by the severity of their threatenings, they have been emboldned to
disobedience by the remisness of their execution, till they have not only played
with the Law it self as a senseless trifle, but have scorned the weakness of the
Power that set it up. For there is nothing more certain in experience, than
that Impunity gives not only warranty but encouragement to Disobedience; and by
habituating men to control the Edicts of Authority, teaches them by degrees to
despise it. And this is the main reason why Ecclesiastical Laws have generally
proved such ineffectual instruments of Uniformity, because they have either
been weakened through want of execution, or in a manner cancelled by the
oppositions of Civil Constitutions. For when Laws are bound under severe
penalties, and when the Persons, who are to take cognizance of the Crime, have
not Power enough to punish it, or are perpetually checked and controlled by a
stronger Power, no wonder if the Laws be affronted and despised; and if,
instead of bringing men's minds to compliance and subjection, they exasperate
them into open contumacy. Restraint provokes their stubbornness, and yet
redresses not the mischief. And therefore it were better to grant an
uncontrolled Liberty by declaring for it, than, after having declared against
it, to grant it by silence and impunity. The Prohibition disobliges Dissenters,
and that is one evil; and the impunity allows them Toleration, and that is a
greater: and where Governors permit, what their Laws forbid, there the
Commonwealth must at once lose all the advantages of restraint, and suffers
all the inconveniences of Liberty. So that as they would expect Peace and
Settlement, they must be sure at first to bind on their Ecclesiastical Laws
with the streightest knot, and afterward to keep them in force and countenance
by the severest Execution; in that wild and Fanatic Consciences are too
headstrong to be curbed with an ordinary severity; and therefore their
restraints must be proportioned to their unruliness: and they must be managed
with so much a greater care and strictness, than all other principles of
public disturbance, by how much they are more dangerous and unruly.

8. For if Conscience be ever able to break down the restraints of Government,
and all men have License to follow their own persuasions, the mischief is
infinite, and the folly endless; and they seldom cease to wander from folly to
folly, till they have run themselves into all the whimsies and enormities, that
can debauch Religion, or annoy the public Peace. The giddy Multitude are of a
restless and straggling humor; and yet withalso ignorant and injudicious, that
there is nothing so strange and uncouth, which they will not take up with Zeal
and Confidence: Insomuch that there never yet was any Commonwealth, that gave
a real liberty to men's Imaginations, that was not suddenly overrun with
numberless divisions, and subdivisions of Sects: as was notorious in the late
Confusions, when Liberty of Conscience was laid as the Foundation of
Settlement. How was Sect built upon Sect, and Church upon Church, till they
were advanced to such a height of Folly, that the Usurpers themselves could
find no other way to work their subversion, and put an end to their
extravagancies, but by overturning their own Foundations, and checking their
growth by Laws and Penalties? The humor of Fanaticising is a boundless folly,
it knows no restraints; and if it be not kept down by the severity of
Governors, it grows and increases without end, or limit, and never ceases to
swell it self, till it has broke down all the banks and restraints of
Government. Thus when the Disciplinarians had in pursuit of their own peevish
and unreasonable Principles divided from the Church of England, others upon a
farther improvement of the same principles subdivided from them; every new
opinion was enough to found a new Church, and Sect was spawned out of Sect,
till there were almost as many Churches as Families: For when they were once
parted from the order and sobriety of the Church they lived in, nothing could
set bounds to their wild and violent Imaginations.

9. Schismatics always run themselves into the same excess in the Church as
Rebels and Seditious Persons do in the State, who out of a hatred to Tyranny
are restless till they have dissolved the Commonwealth into Anarchy and
Confusion; and, because some Kingly Governments have proved Tyrannical, will
allow no free States but under Republics. As was notorious in all the
Apologies for the late Usurpers, who took it for granted in general, That all
Government under a single Person was slavish and oppressive without respect to
its particular Constitutions; and that the very name of a Commonwealth was a
sufficient preservation of the Peoples Liberties, notwithstanding that those
who managed it were never so Imperious and Arbitrary in the exercise of their
Power. And in the same manner our Church Dissenters, out of abhorrency to the
Papal Tyranny and Usurpation upon men's understandings, never think the liberty
of their Consciences sufficiently secured, till they have shaken off all
subjection to Humane Authority: and because the Church of Rome by her
unreasonable Impositions has invaded the Fundamental Liberties of mankind, they
presently conclude all restraints upon licentious Practices and Persuasions
about Religion under the hated name of Popery. And some Theological Empericks
have so possessed the peoples heads with this fond conceit, that they will see
no middle way between spiritual Tyranny, and spiritual Anarchy, and so brand
all restraint of Government in Affairs of Religion as if it were Antichristian,
and never think themselves far enough from Rome, till they are wandered as far
as Munster. Whereas the Church of England in her first Reformation was not so
wild as to abolish all Ecclesiastical Authority, but only removed it from those
who had unjustly usurped it to its proper seat, and restrained it within its
due bounds and limits: And because the Church of Rome had clogged Christianity
with too many garish and burdensome Ceremonies, they did not immediately strip
her naked of all modest and decent Ornaments out of an over-hot opposition to
their too flanting Pomp and Vanity, but only clothed her in such a Dress, as
became the Gravity and Sobriety of Religion. And this is the Wisdom and
Moderation of our Church to preserve us sober between two such unreasonable
Extremes.

10. But not to run too hastily into particular disputes, it is enough at
present to have proved in general the absolute necessity that Affairs of
Religion should be subject to Government; and then if they be exempt from the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Power, I shall demand, Whether they are subject to
any other Power, or to none at all? If the former, then the Supreme Power is
not Supreme, but is subject to a Superior in all matters of Religion, or
rather (what is equally absurd) there would be two Supreme Powers in every
Commonwealth; for it the Princes Jurisdiction be limited to Civil Affairs, and
the concerns of Religion be subject to another Government, then may Subjects be
obliged to (what is impossible) contradictory Commands: and at the same time
the Civil Magistrate requires him to defend his Country against an Invasion,
the Ecclesiastical Governor may command him to abandon its defense, for the
carrying on an Holy War in the Holy Land, in order to the recovery of our
Savior's Sepulcher from the Possession of the Turks and Saracens. But seeing
no man can be subject to contradictory obligations, it is by consequence utterly
impossible he should be subject to two Supreme Powers.

If the latter, then the former Argument returns; and as to one half of the
concerns of the Commonwealth there must be a perfect Anarchy, and no
Government at all. And there is no Provision to be made against all those
public mischiefs and disturbances that may arise from Errors and Enormities in
Religion; the Commonwealth must for ever be exposed to the follies of
Enthusiasts, and villainies of Impostors; and any man, that can but pretend
Conscience, may whenever he pleases endeavor its Ruin: So that if Princes
should forego their sovereignty over men's Consciences in matters of Religion,
they leave themselves less Power than is absolutely necessary to the Peace and
Defense of the Commonwealths they govern. In brief, the Supreme Government of
every Commonwealth, wherever it is lodged, must of necessity be universal,
absolute, and uncontrollable, in all Afairs whatsoever, that concern the
Interests of mankind, and the ends of Government: For if it be limited, it may
be controlled: but it is a thick and palpable Contradiction to call such a Power
Supreme, in that whatever controuls it must as to that case be its Superior.
And therefore Affairs of Religion being so strongly influential upon Affairs of
State, and having so great a power either to advance or hinder the public
felicity of the Commonwealth, they must be as uncontroulably subject to the
Supreme Power as all other Civil Concerns; because otherwise it will not have
Authority enough to secure the Public Interest of the Society, to attain the
necessary and most important ends of its Institution.

11. Now from these Premises we may observe, That all Supreme Power; both in
Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs, issues from the same Original, and is founded
upon the same Reason of things; namely the indispensable necessity of Society
to the preservation of Humane Nature, and of Government to the preservation of
Humane Society: a Supreme Power being absolutely necessary to the decision of
all those Quarrels and Controversies, that are naturally consequent upon the
Passions, Appetites, and Follies of men, there being no other way of ending
their Differences but by the Decrees of a final and unappealable Judicature.
For if every man were to be his own Judge, men's Determinations would be as
contradictory as their Judgments, and their Judgments as their Humors or
Interests; and so must their Dissentions of necessity be endless: And therefore
to avoid these and all other Inconveniences that would naturally follow upon a
state of War, it was necessary there should be one Supreme and Public
Judgment, to whose Determinations the private Judgment of every single person
should be obliged to submit it self. And hence the Wisdom of Providence,
knowing to what passions and irregularities mankind is obnoxious, never
suffered them to live without the restraints of Government; but in the
beginning of things so ordered affairs, that no man could be born into the
world without being subject to some Superior: every father being by nature
vested with a right to govern his children. And the first governments in the
world were established purely upon the natural Rights of paternal Authority,
which afterward grew up to a Kingly Power by the increase of posterity; and he
that was at first but Father of a Family, in process of time, as that
multiplied, became Father of a City, or Province: and hence it came to pass
that in the first Ages of the World, Monarchy was its only Government,
necessarily arising out of the Constitution of humane Nature, it being so
natural for Families to enlarge themselves into Cities by uniting into a body
according to their several Kindreds, whence by consequence the Supreme Head of
those Families must become Prince and Governor of a larger and more diffused
Society. And therefore Cedrenus makes Adam the first Monarch in the World,
(...). And thus afterward in the division of the Earth among the Posterity of
Noah, the heads of Families became Kings and Monarchs of the Nations of which
they were Founders, from whence were propagated the several Kingdoms of the
first and elder times; as appears not only from the Mosaic History, but also
from all other the best and most ancient Records of the first Ages of the
World: But as for Commonwealths, they are comparatively of a very late
discovery, being first contrived among the Grecians, whose Democracies and
Optimacies were made out of the Ruins of Monarchick Government; which was but
suitable to the proud, factious, and capricious humor of that Nation, where
scarce any one could pretend to a little skill in Poetry or Wrestling (their
two greatest accomplishments) but he must immediately be an Undertaker for new
modelling the Commonwealth; which doubtless was one of the main causes of
their perpetual Confusions, and frequent Charges in Government.

12. Having thus firmly founded all Civil Government upon Paternal Authority, I
may now proceed to show, That all Ecclesiastical Power bottoms upon the same
Foundation: For as in the first Ages of the world, the Fathers of Families were
vested with a Kingly Power over their own Posterity; so also were they with the
Priestly Office, executing all the Holy Functions of Priesthood in their own
Persons, as appears from the unanimous testimony of Histories both Sacred and
Profane. Thus we find all the Ancient Patriarchs Priests to their own
Families; which Office descended together with the Royal Dignity to the
firstborn of each Family. And this custom of investing the Sovereign Power
with the Supreme Priesthood, was (as diverse Authors both Ancient and Modern
observe) universally practiced over all Kingdoms of the world for well nigh
2500 years, without any one president to the contrary.

In that among all Societies of men there is as great a necessity of public
Worship, as of public Justice; the power whereof, because it must be seated
somewhere, can properly belong to him alone, in whom the Supreme Power resides;
in that he alone having authority to assign to every subject his proper
function, and among others this of the Priesthood; the exercise whereof as he
has power to transfer to another, so may he, if he please, reserve it to
himself. And therefore this the wisdom of the elder Ages always practiced, in
order to the better security of their Government; as well knowing the tendency
of Superstition, and false notions of the divine worship, to Tumults and
Seditions; and therefore, to prevent the disturbances that might spring from
Factions in Religion, they were sollicitous to keep its management in their own
immediate disposal. And though in the Jewish Commonwealth, the Priestly Office
was upon reasons peculiar to that State separated by a divine positive command
from the Kingly Power; yet the Power and Jurisdiction of the Priest remained
still subject to the Sovereign Prince, their King always exercising a Supremacy
over all persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical: Nothing can be more
unquestionable than the precedents of David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Iehu,
Iehosaphat, Josiah, etc. who exercised as full a Legislative Power in Affairs
of Religion, as in Affairs of State. They alone restrained and punished
whatever tended to the subversion of the Public and established Religion; they
suppressed Innovations, reformed Corruptions, ordered the Decencies and
Solemnities of public Worship, instituted new Laws and Ceremonies, and
conducted all the concerns of Religion by their own Power and Authority. Now
there is nothing that can be pretended against the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
of Christian Magistrates, that might not with as great a show of Reason have
been urged against these Jewish Kings.

13. And thus were the Affairs of Religion in all Nations governed by the
Supreme Power till our blessed Savior's birth, who came into the world to
establish new Laws of Religion, and not to set up any new Models of Polity. He
came not to unsettle the Foundations of Government, or to diminish the natural
Rights of Princes, and settle the conduct of humane affairs upon new
Principles, but left the Government of the world in the same condition he found
it: All his Discourses were directed to private persons, and such whose duty it
was to Obey, and not Command; and therefore though we find him every where
highly solicitous to press men to Obedience in general, (and perhaps it would
be no easy task to find out any Professors of the Art of Policy, either
ancient or modern, that have carried the Doctrine of Obedience so high as the
Sermons of our Savior, and the Writings of his Apostles) yet no where he takes
upon him to settle, much less to limit the Prerogatives of Princes; and
therefore the Government of Religion, being vested in them by an antecedent and
natural Right, must without all controversy belong to them, till it is
derogated from them by some Superior Authority: so that unless our Savior had
expressly disrobed the Royal Power of its Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nothing
else can alienate it from their Prerogative. And therefore it is no wonder if he
left no Commands to the Civil Magistrate for the right Government of Religion;
for to what purpose should he give them a new Commission to exercise that
Power, that was already so firmly established in the world by the unalterable
dictates of Natural Reason, and Universal Practice, and Consent of Nations: it
being so clearly inseparable from the Supreme Power in every Commonwealth,
that it loses both its Supremacy, and its usefulness, unless it be universal
and unlimited? In that the end of all Government is to secure the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Public; and therefore it must have Power to manage and
order every thing that is serviceable to that end. So that it being so clearly
evident from the experience of mankind, and from the nature of the thing it
self, that nothing has a stronger influence upon the public Interests of a
Nation, than the well or ill management of Religion; its conduct must needs be
as certain and inseparable a Right of the Supreme Power in every Commonwealth,
as the Legislative Authority it self; without which it is utterly impossible
there should be any Government at all. And therefore the Scripture seems rather
to suppose than assert the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Princes. What else
means that Promise, That Kings shall be nursing Fathers to the Church of God,
unless by their Power they may cherish and defend the true Religion, and
protect it from being destroyed by Heretics and Seducers? What does the
Scripture mean when it styles our Savior King of Kings, and makes Princes his
Vicegerents here on earth? What means the Apostle, when he says, Kings are
appointed to this end, That under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life,
not only in all honesty, but in all godliness too? Where we see, that the
propagation of Godliness is as much the Duty of Governors, as the preservation
of Justice; neither of which can a Prince (as such) effectually promote, but by
the proper effects of his Power, Laws and Penalties.

Besides all which, all the Power of the Commonwealth our Savior lived in,
was fallen into such men's hands, that would be so far from concerning
themselves in the defense, protection, and propagation of Christianity, that he
knew they would exert the utmost of their force to suppress and destroy it. Now
to what purpose should he entrust them with a Commission to govern his Church,
when he knew they would labor its utter ruin and destruction? And hence was
there no other peaceable method to propagate the Christian Faith in the world,
but by the patience and sufferings of its Professors: and therefore our
Savior, to secure his Religion from the reproach of being Factious and
Seditious against the State, was sollicitous above all things to arm them with
Meekness and Patience; and to this purpose he gave them glorious promises to
encourage their submission to their unhappy Fate, and severe Injunctions to
secure their Obedience to all the Commands of lawful Superiors, except when
they run directly cross to the Interest of the Gospel; which as the posture of
Affairs then stood, was incomparably the most effectual, as well as most
innocent way of its propagation.

14. And therefore it is but an idle and impertinent Plea that some men make for
Liberty of Conscience, when they would restrain the Magistrates Power so, as to
make use of no other means than what our Savior and his Apostles used to
convince and convert men: An Argument that much resembles that, which they urge
with so much popular noise and confidence against that little Grandeur and
Authority that is left to the Governors of our Church; because forsooth the
Apostles, by reason of the unhappy juncture of Affairs in their times, lived in
a mean and persecuted condition; and therefore what was their Calamity, these
men would make our Duty: but it were to be wished they would pursue their
Argument to all the purposes for which it may as rationally serve: and so they
must sell their Lands, and bring the money and lay it at the Bishops Feet; they
must pass away all their Proprieties, and have all things in common, and part
them to all men as every man has need, because the Primitive Christians did so.
At so prodigious a rate of impertinency do men talk, when their Passions
dictate their Discourses; and to so fine a pass would the Affairs of
Christendom be brought by this trifling pretense of reducing the state of the
Church to its Primitive Practice in all accidents and circumstances of things.

But yet I suppose these men themselves would scarce imitate the practice of
our Savior and his Apostles in this particular; for if the Scribes and
Pharisees were now in being, I hope they would not allow them the liberty
openly to blaspheme the Name of Jesus, and to persecute all that would not
believe him an Impostor; which though they did familiarly in his own time, yet
he never went about to restrain their Blasphemies by Laws and Punishments: and
therefore I only demand, Whether the Civil Magistrate may make penal Laws
against Swearing and Blasphemy, and such other Irreligious Debaucheries? If he
may, why then they are matters that as directly and immediately relate to
Religion, as any Rites and Ceremonies of Worship whatsoever; and for the
Government of which they are as utterly to seek for any Precedent of our
Savior and his Apostles. Nay more, if this Argument were of any force, it
would equally deprive the Magistrate of any Power to compel his Subjects to
obedience to any of the moral Precepts of the Gospel by secular Laws and
Punishments; because our Savior and his Apostles never did it: especially when
all matters of Morality do as really belong to our spiritual concerns, as any
thing that relates immediately to Divine Worship, and Affairs of mere Religion;
and therefore if the Civil Magistrate may not compel his Subjects to a right
way of Worship with the Civil Sword, because this is of a spiritual concernment
(as is pretended:) upon the same ground, neither may he make use of the same
force to compel men to Duties of Morality, because they also equally relate to
their spiritual Interests: Besides, the Magistrates Authority in both is
founded upon the same Principle, viz. The absolute necessity of their due
Management in order to the Peace and Preservation of the Commonwealth. We
derive not therefore his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from any grant of our
Saviors, but from an antecedent right wherewith all Sovereign Power was endued
before ever he was born into the world; forasmuch as the same Providence, that
entrusted Princes with the Government of Humane Affairs, must of necessity have
vested them in at least as much Power, as was absolutely necessary to the
nature and ends of Government.

15. But further yet, all the ways our Savior has appointed in the Gospel for
the advancement and propagation of Religion, were prescribed to Subjects, and
not to Governors; and this indeed is certain, that no private person can have
any power to compel men to any part of the Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline of
the Gospel; for if he had, he would upon that very account cease to be a
Private person, and be vested with a Civil Power. But that no Magistrate may do
this, will remain to be proved, till they can produce some express prohibition
of our Savior to restrain him: and till that be done, it is but a strange rate
of arguing, when they would prove that Magistrates may not use any coercive
Power to promote the Interests of Religion, because this is forbidden to their
Subjects; especially when it is to be considered, that Christ and his Apostles
acted themselves in the capacity of Subjects to the Commonwealth they lived
in, and so could neither use themselves, nor impart to others any coercive
Power for the advancement, and propagation of their Doctrine; but were confined
to such prudent and peaceable Methods, as were lawful for persons in their
condition to make use of, i. e. humble Entreaties, and Persuasions. Our Savior
never took any part of the Civil Power upon himself, and upon that score could
not make penal and coercive Laws; the power of Coertion being so certainly
inseparable from the Supreme Civil Power: But though he backed not his
Commandments with temporal punishments, because his Kingdom was not of this
world; yet he enforced them with the threatenings of Eternity, which carry with
them more compulsion upon men's Consciences than any Civil Sanctions can: For
the only reason why Punishments are annexed to Laws, is because they are strong
Motives to Obedience; and therefore when our Savor tied his Laws upon mankind
under Eternal Penalties, he used as much force to drive us to obedience, as if
he had abetted them with temporal Inflictions: So that the only reason why he
bound not the Precepts of the Gospel upon our Consciences by any secular
Compulsories, was not because Compulsion was an improper way to put his Laws in
execution, for then he had never established them with more enforcing
sanctions; but only because himself was not invested with any secular Power,
and so could not use those methods of Government, that are proper to its
Jurisdiction.

16. And therefore the Power, wherewith Christ entrusted the Governors of his
Church in the Apostolical Age, was purely spiritual; they had no Authority to
inflict temporal Punishments, or to force men to submit to their Canons, Laws
and Penalties; they only declared the Laws of God, and denounced the
threatenings annexed to them, having no Coercive Power to inflict the Judgments
they declared, and leaving the event of their Censures to the Divine
Jurisdiction. Though alas! all this was too weak to attain the ends of
Discipline (viz. to reclaim the offending Person, and by example of his Censure
to awe others into Obedience) and could have but little influence upon the most
stubborn and notorious Offenders. For to what purpose should they drive one
from the Communion of the Church, that has already renounced it? To what
purpose should they deny him the Instruments and Ministries of Religion, that
cares not for them? To what purpose should they turn him out of their Society,
that has already prevented them by forsaking it? How should offenders be
reclaimed, by being condemned to what they choose? How should they be scared by
threatenings, that they neither fear nor believe? And if they will turn
Apostates, how can they be awed back into their Faith by being told they are
so? And therefore because of the weakness of this spiritual Government to
attain the ends of Discipline, and because that the Governors of the Church
being subject to those of the Commonwealth, they were not capable of any
coercive Power; it is wonderfully remarkable how God himself was pleased to
supply their want of Civil Jurisdiction by his own immediate Providence, and in
a miraculous manner to inflict the Judgments they denounced; that if their
Censures could not affright refractory Offenders into Obedience, his Dreadful
execution of them might. For it is notoriously evident from the best Records of
the Primitive and Apostolical Ages, that the Divine Providence was pleased to
abet the Censures of the Church by immediate and Miraculous inflictions from
Heaven. In those times torments and diseases of the Body were the usual
consequents of Excommunication; and this was as effectual to awe men into
subjection to the Ecclesiastical Government, as if it had been endued with
coercive Jurisdiction. For this consists only in a power of inflicting temporal
punishments; and therefore when the Anathema's of the Church were attended with
such Inflictions, Criminals must have as much reason to dread the Rod of the
Apostles, as the Sword of the Civil Magistrate, in that it carried with it a
power of inflicting temporal Penalties, either of Death, as on Ananias and
Sapphira, or of Diseases, as on Elymas the Sorcerer. And this is that (...)
wherewith St. Paul so often threatens to lash the factious Corinthians into a
more quiet and peaceable temper. Thus 1 Cor. 4. 21. What will ye? shall I come
unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness? i. e. Consider
with your selves, that seeing I have determined to visit the Church of Corinth,
whether when I come you had rather I should chastise you with the Apostolical
Rod by exercising my Power of inflicting punishments, and by consigning the
refractory to those sharp and grievous Diseases that are wont immediately to
follow Apostolical Censures; or whether I should come with a more gentle and
merciful design without being forced by your stubborness upon a necessity of
using this severity among you? As you behave your selves, so may you expect to
find me at my coming. And thus again, 2 Cor. 10. 6. He threatens them with his
being in a readiness (if he should come among them) to revenge all their
disobedience: And upon this account he immediately professes himself not
ashamed to boast of his Power and Authority in the Church. And in the 13.
Chapter of the same Epistle, he again shakes the same Rod over them,
threatening, that if their refractoriness force him to strike them with some
Judgment, that it should be a sharp and severe one: If I come again I will not
spare, since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me. These extraordinary
inflictions were signs and evidences of his Apostleship. And he would make them
know, that he was Commissioned by Christ to teach and govern their Church, by
making them to feel the sad effects of his Miraculous Power, if nothing else
would satisfy them about the right of his Authority. And to the same purpose
is the same Apostles command to the same Church concerning the incestuous
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. 5. that they should deliver him to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, i. e. that they should denounce the sentence of
Excommunication against him, which would amount to no smaller a Punishment,
than his being resigned up to the power and possession of some evil spirit,
(...), Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. Hom. 15. to be tormented with Ulcers, or some
other bodily Diseases and Inflictions, which was then the usual consequent of
Excommunication. The end of all which is, as immediately follows, The
destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus, i. e. that being humbled and brought to a due sense of his Sin by the
sadness of his Condition, and the heavy strokes of this cruel Executioner of
the Divine Justice, this might be a means of working him to Repentance and
Reformation. And to the same end did the same Apostle deliver Hymeneus and
Alexander unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme; that being vexed
and tormented by some evil spirit, this might take down their proud and haughty
stomachs, and make them cease to traduce and disparage his Apostolical
Authority, when they had smarted so severely for contradicting it. And thus was
the Divine Providence pleased in the first Ages of the Church, when it wanted
the assistance of the Civil Magistrate, to supply that defect by his own
Almighty Power: so necessary is a coercive Jurisdiction to the due Government
and Discipline of the Church, that God himself was fain to bestow it on the
Apostles in a miraculous manner. And thus was the Primitive Discipline
maintained by Miracles of severity, as long as it wanted the Sword of the Civil
Power. But when Christianity had once prevailed and triumphed over all the
oppositions of Pagan Superstition, and had gained the Empire of the world into
its own possession, and was become the Imperial Religion, then began its
Government to re-settle where nature had placed it, and the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was annexed to the Civil Power: For as soon as the Emperors
thought themselves concerned to look to its Government, and Protection, and
were willing to abet the Spiritual Power of the Clergy with their Secular
Authority; then began the Divine Providence to withdraw the miraculous Power of
the Church (in the same manner as he did by degrees all the other extraordinary
Gifts of the Apostolical Age, as their necessity ceased) as being now as well
supplied by the natural and ordinary Power of the Prince. So that though the
Exercise of the Ministerial Function still continued in the Persons, that were
thereunto Originally Commissioned by our Savior, the Exercise of its Authority
and Jurisdiction was restored to the Imperial Diadem; and the Bishops became
then (as they are now) Ministers of State as well as Religion, and challenged
not any Secular Power, but what they derived from the Prince: who, supposing
them best able to understand and manage the Interests of Religion, granted them
Commissions for the Government of the Church under himself, and vested them
with as much Coercive Power, as was necessary for the Execution of their Office
and Jurisdiction: In the same manner as Judges are deputed by the Supreme
Authority of every Commonwealth to govern the Affairs of Justice, and to
inflict the Penalties of the Law upon Delinquents: So that Bishops neither
have, nor ever had any Temporal Authority, but only as they are the Kings
Ecclesiastical Judges, appointed by him to govern Affairs of Religion, as Civil
or Secular Judges are to govern Affairs of Justice.

17. And now that the Government of all the Affairs of the Church devolved upon
the Royal Authority as soon as it became Christian, is undeniably evident, from
all the Laws and Records of the Empire: Socr. l. 5. Praes.
(...): From the time that the Emperors became Christian, the Disposal and
Government of Church Affairs depended entirely on their Authority: Constantine
was no sooner settled in his Imperial Throne, but he took the settlement of all
Ecclesiastical matters into his own Cognizance: He called Synods and Councils,
in order to the Peace and Government of the Church, he ratified their Canons
into Laws, he prohibited the Conventicles of the Donatists, and demolished
their Meeting Houses, he made Edicts concerning Festivals, the Rites of
Sepulture, the Immunities of Churches, the Authority of Bishops, the
Privileges of the Clergy, and diverse other things appertaining to the outward
Polity of the Church. In the exercise of which Jurisdiction he was carefully
followed by all his Successors: which cannot but be known to every man that is
not as utterly ignorant of the Civil Law, as he in the Comedy who supposed
Corpus Iuris Civilis to be a Dutchman. The Code, the Authenticks, the French
Capitulars are full of Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions. The first Book of
the Code treats of nothing but Religion, and the Rites and Ceremonies of
Public Worship, the Privileges of Ecclesiastical Men and Things, the distinct
Offices and Functions of the several degrees in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and the Power and Jurisdiction of Bishops both in Civil and Religious Affairs,
and infinite other things that immediately concern the Interests of Religion.
And then as for the Authenticks, Ecclesiastical Laws are every where scattered
up and down through the whole Volume; which being divided into nine Collations,
has not above one (viz. the fourth) that has not diverse Laws relating to Church
Affairs. And as for the Capitulars of Charles the Great, together with the
Additions of Lewis the Godly, his Son and Successor, they contain little else
but Ecclesiastical Constitutions; as may be seen in Lindembrogius his
Collection of Ancient Laws, together with diverse other Laws of Theodorick, and
other Gothish Kings.

18. And next to the Divine Providence, we owe the Settlement and Preservation
of Christian Religion in the World to the Conduct of Christian Princes. For by
the time of Constantine the Primitive Spirit and Genius of Christianity was
wearing out of fashion, and the Meekness and Humility of its first Professors
began to give place to a furious and tumultuary Zeal; and no sooner did the
heats of Persecution begin to abate, but the Church was presently shattered
into swarms of Factions by the violent Passions and Animosities of its Members
about bare Speculations or useless Practices: And of all the quarrels that ever
disturbed the World, there were never any perhaps so excuseless or so irregular
as those of Christendom; of which it is hard to determine, whether they were
commenced with more folly and indiscretion, or pursued with more passion and
frowardness. The rage and fierceness of Christians had kindled such a Fire in
the Church, that it must unavoidably have been consumed by its own Combustions,
had not the Christian Emperors employed all their Power to suppress the Fury
of the Flames. And though in spite of all their Prudence and Industry,
Christianity was sadly impaired by its own Tumults and Seditions; yet had it
not been for the care of Christian Princes, it had in all humane probability
been utterly destroyed; and the Flames that had once caught its
Superstructures, must without remedy have burnt up its very Foundations. And if
we look into the Records and Histories of the first Christian Emperors, we
shall find that the most dangerous Disturbances that threatened the State, had
their beginnings in the Church; and that the Empire was more shaken by the
intestine Commotions that arose from Religion, than by Foreign Wars and
Invasions. And upon this account is it, that we find them so highly concerned
to reconcile all the Discords, and allay all the Heats about Religion, by
silencing needless and unprofitable Controversies, determining certain and
necessary Truths, prescribing decent Rites and Ceremonies of Public Worship,
and all other wise and prudent Expedients to bring the minds and practices of
men to Sobriety and Moderation.

19. And by this means was the outward Polity of the Church tolerably well
established, and the Affairs of Religion competently well grounded (though
better or worse, according to the wisdom and vigilance of the several
Emperors) till the Bishops of Rome usurped one half of the Imperial Power, and
annexed the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Supremacy to their own See. For
taking advantage of the Distractions occasioned partly by the Incursions of the
Northern Nations on the West, partly by the Invasions of the Turkish Power on
the East, but mainly by the Division of the Empire it self, they gained either
by force or fraud the whole Dominion of Religion to themselves, and by
pretending to the Spirit of Infallibility, usurped an absolute and
uncontrollable Empire over the Faiths and Consciences of mankind. And whilst
they at first pretended no other Title to their Sovereignty but what they
derived from Religion, they were constrained to scrue up their Power to an
unmeasurable Tyranny, thereby to secure themselves in those Insolences and
Indignities wherewith they perpetually affronted the Princes of Christendom:
And knowing the Freeborn Reason of men would never tamely brook to be enslaved
to so ignoble a Tyranny, they proclaimed it a Traitor or (what is the same) a
Heretic to the Catholic Faith, and by their loud noises and menaces frighted
it out of Christendom. In which design they at length advanced so far, till
Rome Christian became little less fond and superstitious than Rome Heathen; and
Christianity it self was almost debauched to the lowest guise of Paganism, and
Europe, the Seat of the most refined and politest part of mankind, was involved
in a more than African Ignorance and Barbarity. And thus did they easily usher
in the grand departure and Apostasy from Religion by the falling away from
Reason, and founded the Roman Faith as well as Empire upon the Ruins of Humane
Liberty.

20. In which sad posture continued the Affairs of Christendom till the
Reformation: which though it has wrought wonderful Alterations in the Christian
World, yet has it not been able to resettle Princes in their full and natural
Rights, in reference to the Concerns of Religion. For although the Supremacy of
the Civil Power in Religious matters be expressly asserted in all the Public
Confessions of the Reformed Churches, but especially in that of the Church of
England; which is not content barely to affirm it, but denounces the Sentence
of Excommunication against all that deny it: Yet by reason of the exorbitant
Power that some pert and pragmatical Divines have gained over the minds of the
People, this great Article has found little or no entertainment in their
Practices: there starting up a race of proud and imperious men about the
beginning of the Reformation, who, not regarding the Princes Power, took upon
themselves to frame precise Hypotheses of Orthodoxy, and to set up their own
Pedantick Systems and Institutions for the Standards of Divine Truth; and
wanting, what the other had, the Authority of Prescription, they pretended to
the Spirit of God: and this pretense not only excused, but justified any wild
Theorems they could not prove by sober Reason; and those that would be awed
with it, they embraced for Orthodox, and those that would not, they branded for
Heretics: by which little device they decoyed the silly and ignorant rabble
into their own party. The effect of all which has been nothing but a Brutish
and Fanatic Ignorance, making men to talk of little else but Raptures and
Ecstasies, and filling the World with a buzze and noise of the Divine Spirit;
whereby they are only impregnably possessed with their own wild and extravagant
Fancies, become saucy and impudent for Religion, confound Order, and despise
Government, and will be guided by nothing but the whimsies and humors of an
unaccountable Conscience.

21. And hence it comes to pass, that most Protestant Princes have been
frighted (not to say Hectored) out of the Exercise of their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by the Clamours of giddy and distempered Zealots; Superstition and
Enthusiasm have out-fac'd the Laws, and put Government out of Countenance by
the boldness of their Pretensions. Confident men have talked so lowdly of the
Inviolable Sacredness and Authority of their Consciences, that Governors, not
thoroughly instructed in the nature and extent of their Power, so lately
restored to them, have been almost scared from intermedling with any thing,
that could upon this score plead its Privilege and Exemption from their
Commands. And how peremptory soever some of them have been in asserting the
Rights of their Supreme Power in Civil Affairs, they have been forced to seem
modest and diffident in the exercise of their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and
dare scarce own their Legislative Power in Religious Affairs, only to comply
with the saucy pretenses of ungovernable and Tumultuary Zeal. One notorious
Instance whereof in our own Nation, is the Iejunium Cecilianum, the Wednesday
Fast, that was enjoined with this clause of Exception, That if any person
should affirm it to be imposed with an Intention to bind the Conscience, he
should be punished like the spreaders of false News. Which is plainly to them
that understand it, (as a late Learned Prelate of our own observes) a direct
Artifice to evacuate the whole Law: for (as he excellently argues) all Humane
Power being derived from God, and bound upon our Consciences by his Power, not
by Man, he that says it shall not bind the Conscience, says it shall be no Law;
it shall have no Authority from God, and then it has none at all; and if it be
not tied upon the Conscience, then to break it is no Sin, and then to keep it
is no Duty. So that a Law without such an intention is a Contradiction; it is a
Law which binds only if we please, and we may obey when we have a mind to it;
and to so much we are tied before the Constitution. But then if by such a
Declaration it was meant, That to keep such Fasting-days was no part of a
direct Commandment from God, that is, God had not required them by himself
immediately, and so it was (abstracting from that Law) no Duty Evangelical, it
had been below the wisdom of the Contrivers of it; for no man pretends it, no
man says it, no man thinks it: and they might as well have declared, That the
Law was none of the Ten Commandments. The matter indeed of this Law was not of
any great moment, but the Declaration annexed to it proved of a fatal and
mischievous consequence; for when once the unruly Consciences of the Puritans
were got loose from the restraints of Authority, nothing could give check to
their giddy and furious Zeal, but they soon broke out into the most impudent
Affronts and Indignities against the Laws, and ran themselves into all manner
of disloyal Outrages against the State. As is notoriously evident in the
Writings and Practices of Cartwright, Goodman, Whittingham, Gilby, Whitehead,
Travers, and other leading Rabbis of the Holy Faction; whose Treatises are
stuffed with as railing, spightful, and malicious Speeches both against their
Prince, the Clergy, the Lords of the Council, the Judges, the Magistrates, and
the Laws, as were ever publicly vented by the worst of Traitors in any Society
in the world. And as for the method of their Polity, it was plainly no more
than this, first to reproach the Church with infamous and Abusive Dialogues,
and then to Libel the State with bitter and Scurrilous Pamphlets, to possess
men's minds with dislikes and jealousies about Public Affairs, whisper about
reproachful and slanderous Reports, inveigle the people with a thousand little
and malicious Stories, enter into secret Leagues and Confederacies, foment
Discontents and Seditions, and in every straight and exigence of State threaten
and beleaguer Authority: In fine, the scope of all their Sermons and Discourses
was to persuade their Party, that if Princes refuse to reform Religion, it is
lawful for the People with Direction of their Godly Ministers, (i. e.
themselves) to do it, and that by violent and forcible courses. And whither
this Principle in process of time led them, the Story is too long, too sad, and
too well known to be here repeated: it is sufficient, that it improved it self
into the greatest Villainies, and concluded in the blackest Tragedy that was
ever acted upon this Island.

22. Well then, to sum up the result of this Discourse, it is evident, we see,
both from Reason and Experience, what a powerful influence Religion has upon
the peace and quiet of Kingdoms; that nothing so effectually secures the
public Peace, or so easily works its disturbance and ruin, as its well or ill
Administration; and therefore that there is an absolute necessity that there be
some Supreme Power in every Commonwealth to take care of its due Conduct and
Settlement; that this must be the Civil Magistrate, whose Office it is to
secure the public Peace, which because he cannot sufficiently provide for,
unless he have the Power and Conduct of Religion; its Government must of
necessity be seated in him and none else. So that those persons, who would
exempt Conscience and all Religious Matters from the Princes Power, must make
him either a Tyrant or an impotent Prince; for if he take upon him to tie Laws
of Religion upon their Consciences, then according to their Principles, he
usurps an unlawful Dominion, violates the Fundamental Rights and Privileges of
Mankind, and invades the Throne and Authority of God himself: But if he confess
that he cannot, then does he clearly pass away the bigest Security of his
Government, and lay himself open to all the Plots and Villainies that can put on
the Mask of Religion. And therefore should any Prince through unhappy
miscarriages in the State be brought into such streights and exigences of
Affairs, as that he cannot restrain the headstrong Inclinations of his
Subjects, without the hazard of raising such Commotions and Disturbances, as
perhaps he can never be able to allay, and so should be forced in spite of
himself to indulge them their Liberty in their Fancies and Persuasions about
Religion; yet unless he will divest himself of a more material and more
necessary part of his Authority, than if he should grant away his Power of the
Militia, or his Prerogative of ratifying all Civil Laws; unless, I say, he will
thus hazard his Crown, and make himself too weak for Government by renouncing
the best part of his Supremacy, he must lay an Obligation upon all Persons, to
whom he grants this their Religious freedom, to profess that it is matter of
mere favor and indulgence; and that he has as much Power to govern all the
public Affairs of Religion, as any other matters that are either conducive, or
prejudicial to the public Peace and Quiet of the Commonwealth. And if they be
brought to this Declaration, they will but confess themselves (to say no worse)
Turbulent and Seditious persons, by acknowledging, That they refuse their
Obedience to those Laws, which the Supreme Authority has just Power to impose.

CHAP. II.
A more Particular Account of the Nature and Necessity of a Sovereign Power in
Affairs of Religion.
The Contents.
THE Parallel between matters relating to Religious Worship, and the Duties of
Morality. Moral Virtues the most material Parts of Religion. This proved, (1.)
from the Nature of Morality, and the Design of Religion: (2.) By a particular
Induction of all the Duties of Mankind. A Scheme of Religion, reducing all its
Branches either to the Virtues or Instruments of Morality. Of the Villainy of
those men's Religion, that are wont to distinguish between Grace and Virtue.
They exchange the substance of true Goodness for mere Metaphors and Allegories.
Metaphors the only cause of our present Schism; and the only ground of the
different Subdivisions among the Schismatics themselves. The Vnaccountableness
of Men's Conceits, That when the main Ends and Designs of Religion are
undoubtedly subject to the Supreme Power, they should be so eager to exempt its
Means and Circumstances from the same Authority. The Civil Magistrate may
determine new Instances of Virtue; how much more new Circumstances of Worship?
As he may enjoin any thing in Morality, that contradicts not the ends of
Morality; so may be in Religious Worship, if he oppose not its design. He may
command any thing in the Worship of God, that does not tend to debauch Men's
practices, or their conceptions of the Deity. All the subordinate Duties both
of Morality and Religious Worship, are equally subject to the Determinations of
Humane Authority.

1. HAving in the former Chapter sufficiently made out my first Proposition,
viz. That it is absolutely necessary to the Peace and Government of the World,
that the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth should be vested with a
Power to govern the Consciences of Subjects in Affairs of Religion; I now
proceed to the proof of the second thing proposed, viz. That those who would
deprive the Supreme Civil Power of its Authority in reference to the Conduct of
the Worship of God, are forced to allow it in other more material parts of
Religion, though they are both liable to the same Inconveniences and
Objections: Where I shall have a fair opportunity to state the true extent of
the Magistrates Power over Conscience in reference to Divine Worship, by
showing it to be the same with his Power over Conscience in matters of
Morality, and all other Affairs of Religion. And here it strikes me with wonder
and amazement to consider, That men should be so shy of granting the Supreme
Magistrate a Power over their Consciences in the Rituals and External
Circumstances of Religious Worship, and yet be so free of forcing it upon him
in the Essential Duties of Morality; which are at least as great and material
Parts of Religion, as pleasing to God, and as indispensably necessary to
Salvation, as any way of Worship in the World. The Precepts of the Moral Law
are both perfective of our own Natures, and conducive to the Happiness of
others; and the Practice of Virtue consists in living suitably to the Dictates
of Reason and Nature. And this is the substance and main Design of all the Laws
of Religion, to oblige Mankind to behave themselves in all their actions as
becomes Creatures endued with Reason and Understanding, and in ways suitable to
Rational Beings, to prepare and qualify themselves for the state of Glory and
Immortality. And as this is the proper End of all Religion, That Mankind might
live happily here, and happily hereafter; so to this end nothing contributes
more than the practice of all Moral Virtues, which will effectually preserve
the Peace and Happiness of Humane Societies, and advance the Mind of Man to a
nearer approach to the Perfection of the Divine Nature; every particular Virtue
being therefore such, because it is a Resemblance and Imitation of some of the
Divine Attributes. So that Moral Virtue having the strongest and most necessary
influence upon the End of all Religion, viz. Man's Happiness; it is not only its
most material and useful Part, but the ultimate End of all its other Duties:
And all true Religion can consist in nothing else but either the Practice of
Virtue it self, or the use of those Means and Instruments that contribute to it.

2. And this, beside the Rational Account of the thing it self, appears with an
undeniable evidence from the best of Demonstrations, i. e. an Induction of all
Particulars. The whole Duty of Man refers either to his Creator, or his
Neighbor, or himself: All that concerns the two last is confessedly of a Moral
Nature; and all that concerns the first, consists either in Praising of God, or
Praying to him: The former is a Branch of the Virtue of Gratitude, and is
nothing but a thankful and humble temper of mind, arising from a sense of Gods
Greatness in himself, and his Goodness to us: so that this part of Devotion
issues from the same virtuous quality, that is the Principle of all other
Resentments and Expressions of Gratitude; only those Acts of it that are
terminated on God as their Object, are styled Religious: and therefore
Gratitude and Devotion are not diverse Things, but only different Names of the
same Thing; Devotion being nothing else but the Virtue of Gratitude toward
God. The latter, viz. Prayer is either put up in our own or other men's behalfs:
If for others, it is an Act of that Virtue we call Kindness or Charity: If for
our selves, the things we pray for (unless they be the Comforts and Enjoyments
of this life) are some or other virtuous Qualities: and therefore the proper
and direct use of Prayer is to be instrumental to the Virtues of Morality: So
that all Duties of Devotion (excepting only our returns of Gratitude) are not
Essential parts of Religion, but are only in order to it, as they tend to the
Practice of Virtue and moral Goodness; and their Goodness is derived upon them
from the moral Virtues to which they contribute; and in the same proportion
they are conducive to the ends of Virtue, they are to be valued among the
Ministeries of Religion. All Religion then (I mean the Practical Part) is
either Virtue it self, or some of its Instruments; and the whole Duty of man
consists in being Virtuous; and all that is enjoined him beside, is in order to
it. And what else do we find enforced and recommended in our Savior's Sermons,
beside heights of Morality? What does St. Paul discourse of to Felix but moral
matters, Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come? And what is it
that men set up against Morality, but a few figurative Expressions of it self,
that without it are utterly insignificant? It Is not enough (say they) to be
completely Virtuous, unless we have Grace too: But when we have set aside all
manner of Virtue, let them tell me what remains to be called Grace, and give me
any Notion of it distinct from all Morality, that consists in the right order
and government of our Actions in all our Relations, and so comprehends all our
Duty: and therefore if Grace be not included in it, it is but a Phantasm, and an
Imaginary thing. So that if we strip those Definitions that some men of late
have bestowed upon it, of Metaphors and Allegories, it will plainly signify
nothing but a virtuous temper of mind; and all that the Scripture intends by
the Graces of the Spirit, are only Virtuous Qualities of the Soul, that are
therefore styled Graces, because they were derived purely from Gods free Grace
and Goodness, in that in the first Ages of Christianity he was pleased, out of
his infinite concern for its Propagation, in a miraculous manner to inspire its
Converts with all sorts of Virtue. Wherefore the Apostle St. Paul, when he
compiles a complete Catologue of the Fruits of the Spirit, reckons up only
Moral Virtues, Gal. 5. 22. Love, Joy or Cheerfulness, Peaceableness, Patience,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faithfulness, Meekness, and Temperance; and elsewhere,
Titus 2. 11. the same Apostle plainly makes the Grace of God to consist in
gratitude toward God, Temperance toward our selves, and Justice toward our
Neighbors. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all
Men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Where the whole Duty of
Man is comprehended in living Godlily, which is the Virtue of humble Gratitude
toward God: Soberly, which contains the Virtues of Temperance, Chastity,
Modesty, and all others that consist in the dominion of Reason over our sensual
Appetites: Righteously, which implies all the Virtues of Justice and Charity,
as Affability, Courtesy, Meekness, Candor, and Ingenuity.

3. So destructive of all true and real Goodness is the very Religion of those
Men that are wont to set Grace at odds with Virtue, and are so far from making
them the same, that they make them inconsistent; and though a man be exact in
all the Duties of Moral Goodness, yet if he be a Graceless Person (i. e. void
of I know not what Imaginary Godliness) he is but in a cleaner way to Hell, and
his Conversion is more hopeless than the vilest and most notorious Sinners; and
the Morally Righteous Man is at a greater distance from Grace than the Profane,
and better be lewd and debauched, than live an honest and virtuous life, if you
are not of the Godly Party. Bona Opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem, says Flaccus
Illiricus. Moral Goodness is the greatest Let to Conversion; and the prophanest
wretches make better Saints than your Moral Formalists. And by this means they
have brought into fashion a Godliness without Religion, Zeal without Humanity,
and Grace without good Nature, or good Manners; have found out in lieu of Moral
Virtue, a Spiritual Divinity, that is made up of nothing else but certain
Trains and Schemes of Effeminate Follies and illiterate Enthusiasms; and
instead of a sober Devotion, a more spiritual and intimate way of Communion
with God, that in truth consists in little else but meeting together in private
to prate Phrases, make Faces, and rail at Carnal Reason (i. e. in their sense
all sober and sincere use of our Understandings in spiritual Matters) whereby
they have effectually turned all Religion into unaccountable Fancies and
Enthusiasms, dressed it up with pompous and empty Schemes of Speech, and so
embrace a few gaudy Metaphors and Allegories, instead of the substance of true
and real Righteousness. And herein lies the most material difference between
the sober Christians of the Church of England, and our modern Sectaries, That
we express the Precepts and Duties of the Gospel in plain and intelligible
Terms, whilst they trifle them away by childish Metaphors and Allegories, and
will not talk of Religion but in barbarous and uncouth Similitudes; and (what
is more) the different Subdivisions among the Sects themselves are not so much
distinguished by any real diversity of Opinions, as by variety of Phrases and
Forms of Speech, that are the peculiar Shibboleths of each Tribe. One party
affect to lard their Discourses with clownish and slovenly Similitudes; another
delights to roll in wanton and lascivious Allegories; and a third is best
pleased with odd, unusual, unitelligible, and sometimes blasphemous
Expressions. And whoever among them can invent any new Language, presently sets
up for a man of new Discoveries; and he that lights upon the prettiest
Nonsense, is thought by the ignorant Rabble to unfold new Gospel-Mysteries. And
thus is the Nation shattered into infinite Factions, with senseless and
fantastic Phrases; and the most fatal miscarriage of them all lies in abusing
Scripture-Expressions, not only without but in contradiction to their sense. So
that had we but an Act of Parliament to abridge Preachers the use of fulsom and
luscious Metaphors, it might perhaps be an effectual Cure of all our present
Distempers. Let not the Reader smile at the odness of the Proposal: For were
men obliged to speak Sense as well as Truth, all the swelling Mysteries of
Fanaticism would immediately sink into flat and empty Nonsense; and they would
be ashamed of such jejune and ridiculous Stuff as their admired and most
profound Notions would appear to be, when they, want the Varnish of fine
Metaphors and glittering Allusions. In brief, were this a proper place to
unravel all their affected Phrases and Forms of Speech, which they have learned
like Parrots to prate by Rote, without having any Notion of the Things they
signify, it would be no unpleasant Task to demonstrate, That by them they
either mean nothing at all, or some Part or Instrument of Moral Virtue. So that
all Religion must of necessity be resolved into Enthusiasm or Morality. The
former is mere Imposture, and therefore all that is true must be reduced to the
latter; and whatever besides appertains to it, must be subservient to the Ends
of Virtue: such are Prayer, Hearing Sermons, and all manner of Religious
Ordinances, that have directly no other place in Religion, than as they are
instrumental to a virtuous life.

4. It Is certain then, That the Duties of Morality are the most weighty and
material concerns of Religion; and it is as certain, That the Civil Magistrate
has Power to bind Laws concerning them upon the Consciences of Subjects: So
that every man's Conscience is and must be subject to the Commands of lawful
Superiors in the most important matters of Religion. And therefore is it not
strange, that when the main Ends and designs of all Religion are avowedly
subject to the Supreme Power, that yet men should be so impatient to exempt its
means and subordinate Instruments from the same Authority? What reason can the
Wit of man assign to restrain it from one, that will not much more restrain it
from both? Is not the right practice of Moral Duties as necessary a part of
Religion, as any outward Form of Worship in the World? Are not wrong Notions of
the Divine Worship as destructive of the Peace and settlement of
Commonwealths, as the most vicious and licentious Debaucheries? Are not the
rude multitude more inclined to disturb Government by Superstition than by
Licentiousness? And is there not vastly greater danger of the Magistrates
erring in matters of Morality, than in Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, in that
those are the main, essential, and ultimate Duties of Religion; whereas these
are at highest but their Instruments, and can challenge no other place in
Religion, than as they are subservient to the purposes of Morality? Nay, is it
not still more unaccountable, that the Supreme Magistrate may not be permitted
to determine the Circumstances and Appendages of the subordinate Ministeries to
Moral Virtue, and yet should be allowed (in all Commonwealths) to determine
the particular Acts and Instances of these Virtues themselves? For Example,
Justice is a prime and natural Virtue, and yet its particular Cases depend upon
humane Laws, that determine the bounds of Meum and Tuum: The Divine Law
restrains Titius from invading Caius's Right and Propriety; but what that is,
and when it is invaded, only the Laws of the Society they live in can
determine. And there are some Cases that are Acts of Injustice in England, that
are not so in Italy; otherwise all Places must be governed by the same Laws,
and what is a Law to one Nation must be so to all the World. Whereas it is
undeniably evident, That neither the Law of God nor of Nature determine the
particular Instances of most Virtues, but for the most part leave that to the
Constitutions of National Laws. They in general forbid Theft, Incest, Murder,
and Adultery; but what these Crimes are, they determine not in all Cases, but
is in most particulars to be explained by the Civil Constitutions; and
whatsoever the Law of the Land reckons among these Crimes, that the Law of God
and of Nature forbids.

And now is it not strangely humoursome to say, That Magistrates are instrusted
with so great a Power over men's Conscience in these great and weighty Designs
of Religion, and yet should not be trusted to govern the indifferent, or at
least less material Circumstances of those things that can pretend to no other
Goodness, than as they are Means serviceable to Moral Purposes? That they
should have Power to make that a Particular of the Divine Law, that God has not
made so; and yet not be able to determine the use of an indifferent
Circumstance, because (forsooth) God has not determined it? In a word, That
they should be fully empowered to declare new Instances of Virtue and Vice, and
to introduce new Duties in the most important parts of Religion, and yet should
not have Authority enough to declare the Use and decency of a few Circumstances
in its subservient and less material Concerns.

5. The whole State of Affairs is briefly this; Man is sent into the World to
live happily here, and prepare himself for happiness hereafter; this is
attained by the practice of Moral Virtues and Pious Devotions; and wherein
these mainly consist, Almighty Goodness has declared by the Laws of Nature and
Revelation: but because in both there are changeable Cases and Circumstances of
things, therefore has God appointed his Trustees and Officials here on Earth to
Act and Determine in both, according to all Accidents and Emergencies of
Affairs, to assign new Particulars of the Divine Law, to declare new Bounds of
right and wrong, which the Law of God neither does nor can limit; because of
necessity they must in a great measure depend upon the Customs and
Constitutions of every Commonwealth. And in the same manner are the
Circumstances and outward Expressions of Divine Worship, because they are
variable according to the Accidents of Time and Place, entrusted (with less
danger of Error) with the same Authority. And what Ceremonies this appoints
(unless they are apparently repugnant to their Prime end) become Religious
Rites; as what particular Actions it constitutes in any Species of Virtue,
become new Instances of that Virtue, unless they apparently contradict its
Nature and Tendency.

Now the two Primary Designs of all Religion, are either to express our
honorable Opinion of the Deity, or to advance the Interests of Virtue and
Moral Goodness; so that no Rites or Ceremonies can be esteemed unlawful in the
Worship of God, unless they tend to debauch men either in their Practices, or
their Conceptions of the Deity: And it is upon one or both of these Accounts
that any Rites and Forms of Worship become criminally superstitious; and such
were the Lupercalia, the Eleusinian Mysteries, the Feasts of Bacchus, Flora,
and Venus, because they were but so many Festivals of Lust and Debauchery; and
such were the Salvage and Bloody Sacrifices to Saturn, Bellona, Moloch,
Baal-Peor, and all other (...) of the Ancient Paganism; because they supposed
the Divine Being to take pleasure in the Miseries and Tortures of its
Creatures: And such is all Idolatry, in that it either gives right Worship to a
wrong Object, or wrong Worship to a right one, or at least represents an
infinite Majesty by Images and Resemblances of finite things, and so reflects
disparagement upon some of the Divine Attributes by fastening dishonorable
Weaknesses and Imperfections upon the Divine Nature. As for these, and the like
Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, no Humane Power can command them, because they
are directly contradictory to the Ends of Religion; but as for all others that
are not so, any lawful Authority may as well enjoin them, as it may adopt any
Actions whatsoever into the Duties of Morality, that are not contrary to the
Ends of Morality.

6. But a little farther to illustrate this, we may observe, That in matters
both of Moral Virtue and Divine Worship there are some Rules of Good and Evil
that are of an Eternal and Unchangeable Obligation, and these can never be
prejudiced or altered by any Humane Power; because the Reason of their
Obligation arises from a necessity and constitution of Nature, and therefore
must be as Perpetual as that: But then there are other Rules of Duty that are
alterable according to the various Accidents, Changes, and Conditions of Humane
Life, and depend chiefly upon Contracts, and Positive Laws of Kingdoms; these
suffer Variety, because their Matter and their Reason does so. Thus in the
matter of Murder there are some Instances of an unalterable Nature, and others
that are changeable according to the various Provisions of Positive Laws and
Constitutions. To take away the life of an innocent Person is forbidden by such
an indispensable Law of Nature, that no Humane Power can any way directly or
indirectly make it become lawful, in that no Positive Laws can so alter the
Constitution of Nature, as to make this Instance of Villainy cease to be
mischievous to Mankind; and therefore it is Capital in all Nations of the World.
But then there are other particular Cases of this Crime, that depend upon
Positive Laws, and so by consequence are liable to change according to the
different Constitutions of the Commonwealths men live in. Thus though in
England it is Murder for an injured Husband to kill an Adulteress taken in the
Act of Uncleanness, because it is forbidden by the Laws of this Kingdom, yet in
Spain and among the old Romans it was not, because their Laws permitted it; and
if the Magistrate himself may punish the Crime with Death, he may appoint whom
he pleases to be his Executioner. And the Case is the same in reference to
Divine Worship, in which there are some things of an absolute and indispensable
Necessity, and others of a Transient and changeable Obligation: Thus it is
absolutely necessary every Rational Creature should make returns of Gratitude
to its Creator, from which no Humane Power can restrain it; but then for the
outward Expressions and Significations of this Duty, they are for the most part
Good or Evil according to the Customs and Constitutions of different Nations,
unless in the two forementioned Cases, that they either countenance Vice, or
disgrace the Deity. But as for all other Rituals, Ceremonies, Postures, and
manners of performing the outward Expressions of Devotion, that are not
chargeable with one or both of these, nothing can hinder their being capable of
being adopted into the Ministeries of Divine Service, or exempt them from being
subject to the Determinations of Humane Power. And thus the Parallel holds in
all Cases between the Secondary and Emergent Laws of Morality, and the
Subordinate and Instrumental Rules of Worship; they both equally pass an
Obligation upon all men, to whom they are prescribed, unless they directly
contradict the ends of their Institution.

And now from this more general Consideration of the Agreement between matters
of mere Worship and other Duties of Morality in reference to the Power of the
Civil Magistrate, we may proceed by some more particular accounts to discover,
how his Dominion over both is of equal extent, and restrained within the same
bounds and measures; and that in what cases soever he may exercise Jurisdiction
over Conscience in matters of Morality, in all the same he may exercise the
same Power in Concerns of Religious Worship; and on the contrary, in what cases
his Power over matters of Religion is restrained, in all the same is it limited
as to things of a Moral Nature: Whence it must appear with a clear and
irresistible Evidence, That men's right to Liberty of Conscience is the same in
both to all Cases, Niceties, and Circumstances of things, and that they may as
rationally challenge a freedom from the Laws of Justice as from those of
Religion, and that to grant it in either is equally destructive of all Order
and Government, and equally tends to reduce all Societies, to Anarchy and
Confusion.

CHAP. III.
A more Particular State of the Controversy, concerning the Inward Actions of
the Mind, or Matters of mere Conscience.
The Contents.
MAnkind have a Liberty of Conscience over all their Actions, whether Moral or
strictly Religious, as far as it concerns their Judgments, but not their
Practices. Of the Nature of Christian Liberty. It relates to our Thoughts, and
not to our Actions. It may be preserved inviolable under outward Restraints.
Christian Liberty consists properly in the Restoration of the Mind of Man to
its Natural privilege from the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law. The substantial
part of Religious Worship is internal, and out of the reach of the Civil
Magistrate. External Worship is no part of Religion. It is and must be left
undetermined by the Law of God. Sacrifices the most ancient Expressions of
Outward Worship were purely of Humane Institution. Though their being expiatory
depended upon a positive Law of God, yet their most proper and original Use,
viz. To express the Significations of a Grateful Mind, depended on the Wills of
Men. Of their first Original among the Heathens. The Reason why God prescribed
the particular Rites and Ceremonies of outward Worship to the Jews. Under the
Christian Dispensation he has left the disposal of outward Worship to the power
and discretion of the Church. The Impertinency of men's Clamours against
Significant Ceremonies, when it is the only use of Ceremonies to be significant.
The Signification of all Ceremonies equally Arbitrary. The Signification of
Ceremonies is of the same Nature with that of Words. And men may as well be
offended at the one as the other.

1. FIrst then, Let all matters of mere Conscience, whether purely Moral or
Religious, be subject to Conscience merely, i. e. Let men think of things
according to their own persuasions, and assert the Freedom of their Judgments
against all the Powers of the Earth. This is the Prerogative of the Mind of Man
within its own Dominion; its Kingdom is intellectual, and seated in the
thoughts, not Actions of Men; and therefore no Humane Power does, or can
prescribe to any man's Opinions and secret Thoughts, but men will think as they
please in spite of all their Decrees, and the Understanding will remain free
when every thing else is bound. And this Sovereignty of Conscience is no
entrenchment upon that of Princes: because it is concerned only in such matters
as are of a quite different Nature from their Affairs, and gives no restraint
to their commanding Power over the Actions of men; for mere Opinion, whilst
such, has no Influence upon the Good or Evil of Humane Society, that is the
proper object of Government; and therefore as long as our Thoughts are secret,
and locked up within our own Breasts, they are out of the reach of all Humane
Power. But as for matters that are not confined within the Territories of mere
Conscience, but come forth into outward Action, and appear in the Societies of
men, there is no remedy but they must be subject to the Cognizance of Humane
Laws, and come within the Verge of Humane Power; because by these Societies
subsist, and humane Affairs are transacted. And therefore it concerns those,
whose Office it is to secure the peace and tranquillity of mankind, to govern
and manage them in order to the Public Good. So that it is but a vain and
frivolous pretense, when men plead with so much noise and clamor for the
Sacred and Inviolable Rights of Conscience, and apparently invade or infringe
the Magistrates Power, by submitting its Commands to the Authority of every
Subjects Conscience; because the Commands of Lawful Authority are so far from
invading its proper Liberty, that they cannot reach it, in that it is seated in
that part of Man, of whose Transactions the Civil Power can take no Cognizance.
All Humane Authority and Jurisdiction extends no farther than men's outward
Actions, these are the proper Object of all their Laws: Whereas Liberty of
Conscience is Internal and Invisible, and confined to the minds and Judgments
(...) men; and whilst Conscience acts within its proper Sphere, that Civil
Power is so far from doing it violence, that it never can. But when this great
and imperious Faculty passes beyond its own peculiar Bounds, and would invade
the Magistrates Authority by exercising an unaccountable Dominion within his
Territories, or by venting such Wild Opinions among his Subjects, as he
apprehends to tend to the disturbance of the Public Peace, then does it
concern him to give check to its proceedings as much as to all other Invasions;
for the care of the Public Good being his Duty, as well as Interest, it cannot
but be in his Power to restrain or permit Actions, as they are conducible to
that End. Mankind therefore have the same Natural Right to Liberty of
Conscience in matters of Religious Worship, as in Affairs of Justice and
Honesty, i. e. a Liberty of Judgment, but not of practice; they have an
inviolable freedom to examine the Goodness of all Laws Moral and
Ecclesiastical, and to judge of them by their suitableness to the natural
Reasons of Good and Evil: but as for the Practice and all outward Actions
either of Virtue or Devotion, they are equally governable by the Laws and
Constitutions of Commonwealths; and men may with the same pretenses of Reason
challenge an Exemption from all Humane Laws in Matters of common Honesty upon
the score of the Freedom of their Consciences, as they plead a liberty from all
Authority in Duties of Religious Worship upon the same account; because they
have a freedom of Judgment in both, but of Practice in neither.

2. And upon the reasonableness of this Principle is founded the Duty (or
rather Privilege) of Christian Liberty, viz. To assert the Freedom of the Mind
of Man, as far as it is not inconsistent with the Government of the World, in
that a sincere and impartial use of our own Understandings, is the first and
Fundamental Duty of Humane Nature. Hence it is, that the Divine Providence is
so highly solicitous not to have it farther restrained than needs must; and
therefore in all matters of pure Speculation it leaves the mind of Man entirely
free to judge of the Truth and Falsehood of things, and will not suffer it to be
usurped upon by any Authority whatsoever: And whatsoever Opinion any man
entertains of things of this Nature, he injures no man by it, and therefore no
man can have any reason to commence any Quarrel with him for it; Every man here
judges for himself, and not for others, and matters of mere Opinion having no
reference to the Public, there is no need of any Public Judgment to determine
them. But as for those Actions that are capable of having any Influence upon
the Public Good or ill of Mankind, though they are liable to the
Determinations of the Public Laws, yet the Law of God will not suffer them to
be determined farther than is requisite to the Ends of Government: And in those
very things in which it has granted the Civil Magistrate a Power over the
Practices of men, it permits them not to exercise any Authority over their
Judgments, but leaves them utterly free to judge of them as far as they are
Objects of mere Opinion, and relate not to the Common Interest of mankind. And
hence, though the Commands of our Lawful Superiors may change Indifferent
things into Necessary Duties, yet they cannot restrain the Liberty of our Minds
from judging things thus determined to remain in their own Nature Indifferent:
and the Reason of our Obligation to do them is not fetched from any Antecedent
Necessity in themselves, but from the Supervening Commands of Authority, to
which Obedience in all things Lawful is a Necessary Duty. So that Christian
Liberty, or the Inward Freedom of our Judgments may be preserved inviolable
under the Restraints of the Civil Magistrate, which are Outward, and concern
only the Actions, not Judgments of men; because the Outward Determination to
one Particular rather than another does not abrogate the Inward Indifferency of
the thing it self; and the Duty of our Acting according to the Laws arises not
from any Opinion of the Necessity of the thing it self, but either from some
Emergent and Changeable Circumstances of Order and Decency, or from a sense of
the Absolute Indispensableness of the Duty of Obedience. Therefore the whole
Affair of Christian Liberty relates only to our Inward Judgment of things; and
provided this be kept inviolate, it matters not (as to that Concern) what
Restraints are laid upon our Cutward Actions. In that though the Gospel has
freed our Consciences from the Power of things, yet it has not from that of
Government; we are free from the matter, but not from the Authority of Humane
Laws; and as long as we obey the Determinations of our Superiors with an
Opinion of the Indifferency of the things themselves, we retain the Power of
our Christian Liberty, and are still free as to the matter of the Law, though
not as to the Duty of Obedience.

3. Neither is this Prerogative of our Christian Liberty so much any new Favor
granted in the Gospel, as the Restoration of the mind of Man to its Natural
Privilege, by Exempting us from the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, whereby things
in themselves indifferent were tied upon the Conscience with as indispensable
an Obligation, as the Rules of Essential Goodness and Equity, during the whole
Period of the Mosaic Dispensation; which being Cancelled by the Gospel, those
Indifferent things, that had been made necessary by a Divine positive Command,
returned to their own Nature, to be used or omitted only as occasion should
direct. And upon this Account was it that St. Paul, though he were so earnest
an Assertor of his Christian Liberty against the Doctrine of the Necessity of
Jewish Ceremonies, never scrupled to use them, when ever he thought it
serviceable to the Interests of Christianity; as is apparent in his
Circumcision of Timothy, to which he would never have condescended out of
Observation of the Mosaic Law, and yet did not in the least scruple to do it
for other Purposes as Prudence and Discretion should direct him. And though in
his Discourses of Christian Liberty he Instances only in Circumcision, Meats
and Drinks, and other Ceremonial Ordinances, which were then the Particulars
most in Dispute between the Christians and the Jews; yet by the clearest
Analogy of Reason the Case is the same as to the Judicial Law, and all other
things commanded by Moses, that were not either Rules of Eternal Goodness, or
expressly established in the Gospel: This being its clearest and most important
Design, to reprieve Mankind from all the burdensome and Arbitrary Impositions
of Moses, that were scarce capable of any other Goodness than their being
Instances of Obedience; and to restore us to such a Religion, as was most
suitable to the perfection of Humane Nature; and to tie no other Laws upon us,
than such whose Natural and Intrinsic Goodness should carry with them their
own Eternal Obligation. And therefore whatsoever our Superiors impose upon us,
whether in Matters of Religious Worship, or any other Duties of Morality, it
neither is, nor can be any entrenchment upon our Christian Liberty, provided it
be not imposed with an Opinion of the Antecedent Necessity of the thing it self.

4. Now the Design of what I have discoursed upon this Article of Christian
Liberty, is not barely to show the manifest Impertinency of all those little
Objections men force from it against the Civil Magistrates Jurisdiction over
the outward Concerns of Religion; whereas this relates entirely to things of a
quite different Nature, and is only concerned in the inward Actions of the
Mind: but withal my purpose is mainly, by exempting all internal Acts of the
Soul from the Empire of Humane Laws, to show that Religion, properly so called,
is of all Virtues the least Obnoxious to the abuse of Government, in that the
whole substance of Religious Worship is transacted within the Mind of Man, and
dwells in our Hearts and Thoughts beyond the reach of Princes; the Soul is its
proper Seat and Temple, and there Men may worship their God as they please,
without offending their Prince. For the Essence of Religious Worship consists
in nothing else but a grateful sense and temper of Mind toward the Divine
Goodness, and so can reside in those Faculties only that are capable of being
affected with Gratitude and Veneration: And as for all that concerns External
Worship, it is no part of Religion it self, but only an Instrument to express
the Inward Veneration of the Mind by some Outward Action or Posture of the
Body. Upon which account it is that the Divine Wisdom has so little concerned
it self to prescribe any particular Forms of Divine Service; for though the
Christian Laws command us by some exterior Signs to express our Interior
Piety, yet they have no where set down any particular Expressions of Worship
and Adoration. And indeed the Exterior Significations of Honor being so
changeable according to the variety of Customs and Places, there could be no
particular Forms or Fashions prescribed: for so some would have been obliged to
signify their Honorable Sentiments of God by Marks of Scorn and Dishonor;
because those Fashions and Postures which in some Places are Indications of
Respect, are to others Signs of Contempt. So mad and Seditious is the Humor of
those Men, who brand all those Forms of Divine Service, that are not expressly
enjoined in the Holy Volume, with the odious Titles of Superstition and
Will Worship; and so in one Sentence condemn all the Churches in the World,
seeing there is not any one that has not Peculiar Rites and Customs of its own,
that were never prescribed nor practiced by our Savior or his Apostles. And in
all Ages of the World God has left the management of his Outward Worship to the
Discretion of Men, unless when to determine some particular Forms has been
useful to some other purposes.

5. The Ancientest and most Universally practiced way of expressing Divine
Worship and Adoration, was by Offering of Sacrifices; those First Ages of the
World conceiving it a proper and natural way of acknowledging their entire
Dependence upon, and Gratitude toward God, by publicly presenting him with a
portion of the Best and most Precious things they had: and God was well-pleased
with them, not because he at all delighted in the Blood of Bulls and Goats, but
because they were the Pledges, and Significations of a Grateful Mind. And yet
this outward Expression of Divine Worship, notwithstanding its Universality and
Antiquity, was only made choice of by good men as a fit way of intimating the
pious and grateful Resentments of their Minds, and cannot in the least pretend
to owe its Original to any Divine Institution, seeing there appears not any
shadow of a Command for it; and to say it was Commanded, though it is no where
Recorded, is to take the Liberty of saying any thing without Proof or Evidence.
That indeed Sacrifices became Expiatory, and that the Life of a Beast should be
accepted to redeem the Life of a Man, depended purely upon Positive
Institution, Lev. 17. 11. For the life of the Flesh is in the Blood, and I have
given it to you upon the Altar to make an Atonement for your Souls; for it is
the Blood that makes an Atonement for the Soul. Now it was a Matter of Mere
Grace and Favor in God to exchange the Blood of a Beast for the Blood of a
Man, which was really Forfeited for every Transgression of that Law, that was
Established upon no less Sanction than the Threatening of Death. In which
Commutation of the Forfeiture was an equal mixture of the Divine Mercy and
Severity, hereby he at once signified his Hatred to Sin, and his Compassion to
Sinners; in that though he might have remitted the Offense without exacting the
Penalty, yet to show his implacable Hatred against Sin, and withal the more to
affright men from its Commission, he would never remit its Guilt without some
sort of recompense and Expiation. But setting aside this Positive Institution
of Sacrifices and Consumptive Oblations, their Prime and Natural Use was only
to express the Significations of a Grateful Mind, as sufficiently appears not
only in the Religion of the Ancient Jews, but Heathens too. Among whom the
First and Earliest Footsteps of the Worship of God appear in their Harvest
Sacrifices and Oblations, when they presented the Deity with a Parcel of their
Annual Returns in acknowledgment of his Bounty and Providence: Crying
Harvest-in was their most Solemn, and most Ancient Festival, Arist. Nicomach.
l. 8. c. 11. (...). The Ancient Sacrifices and Festival Meeting appear to have
been at first Instituted upon the Ingathering of their Fruits, such were the
Offering of their First Fruits: which was a decent and suitable way of
acknowledging their Homage and Gratitude to their Supreme Lord; and had they
not been directed to a wrong Deity (as probably they were to the Sun) they
might have been no less pleasing to the Almighty, than Cornelius's Alms and
Devotions: because God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works Righeousness, is accepted with him.

6. In the Mosaic Dispensation indeed God took special care to prescribe the
particular Rites and Ceremonies of his Worship, not so much by reason of the
Necessity of the thing it self, as because of the Sottishness and Stupidity of
that Age; in that all the Religions in the World were lamentably degenerated
into the most sordid and Idolatrous Superstition, and the Jewish Nation were
sottishly addicted to the absurd Customs of their Neighbors; and therefore the
Divine Wisdom enjoined them the most contrary Usages, as a Fence to keep them
from passing over to the Religion of the Gentiles. But when Mankind was grown
up to a riper Understanding, and could discern that Religion was something else
beside Customs and Ceremonies; then did God Cancel the Old Discipline of the
Law, and by the Ministry of Jesus Christ established a more Manly and Rational
Dispensation; In which as he has been more solicitous to acquaint us with the
Main and Fundamental Affairs of Religion, so has he scarce at all concerned
himself in Exterior Rites and Significations (having Instituted only two, viz.
The two Sacraments that are distinguished from all other Ceremonies, by their
being Federal and peculiarly significative of the Covenant between God and Man,
sealed by the First, renewed and confirmed by the Second) but as for all other
Rites and Ceremonies of External Service, he has left their entire Disposal to
the Power and Discretion of the Church it self, knowing that as long as Men had
Wit and Reason enough to manage the Civil Affairs of Commonwealths, they could
not want Prudence to Judge what Circumstances were conducive to Order and
Decency in Public Worship. And if we take a Survey of all the Forms of Divine
Service practiced in the Christian Church, there is not any of them can so much
as pretend to be appointed in the Word of God, but depend on the Authority of
the Civil Power in the same manner as all Customs and Laws of Civil Government
do. And therefore to quarrel with those Forms of Public Worship, that are
established by Authority, only because they are Humane Institutions, is at once
notorious Schism and Rebellion: For where a Religion is Established by the
Laws, whoever openly refuses Obedience, plainly rebels against the Government,
Rebellion being properly nothing else but an open denial of Obedience to the
Civil Power. Nor can Men of this Principle live Peaceably in any Church in
Christendom, in that there is not a Church in the World, that has not peculiar
Rites and Customs and Laws of Government and Discipline.

7. But of this I shall have occasion to account elsewhere, and shall rather
choose to observe here, from what I have discoursed of the Use and Nature of
Outward Worship, the Prodigious Impertinency of that clamor some men have for
so many years kept up against the Institution of Significant Ceremonies; when
it is the only Use of Ceremonies, as well as all other outward Expressions of
Religion, to be significant: In that all Worship is only an Outward Sign of
Inward Honor, and is indifferently performed either by Words or Actions; for
respect may as well be signified by Deeds, and Postures, and Visible
Solemnities as by Solemn Expressions: Thus to approach the Divine Majesty with
such Gestures as are wont to betoken Reverence and Humility, is as proper a
Piece of Worship, as to Celebrate his Greatness by Solemn Praises: And to offer
Sacrifices and Oblations, was among the Ancients the same sort of Worship as to
return Thanksgivings, they being both equally outward Signs of Inward Love and
Gratitude. And therefore there can be no more Exception against the
Signification of Ceremonies than of Words, seeing this is the proper Office of
both in the Worship of God.

And as all Forms, and Ceremonies, and Outward Actions of External Worship are
in a manner equally Significant, so are they equally Arbitrary; only some
happen to be more Universally Practiced, and others to be Confined to some
particular Times and Places: Kneeling, lying Prostrate, being Bareheaded,
Lifting up the Hands or Eyes, are not more naturally Significant of Worship and
Adoration than putting off the Shoes, bowing the Head, or bending the Body; and
if some are more generally used than others, that proceeds not from their
Natural Significancy, but from Custom and Casual Prescriptions: and to Bow the
Body, when we mention the Name of Jesus, is as much a natural signification of
Honor to his Person, as Kneeling, or being Bare-headed, or lifting up the
Hands or Eyes, when we offer up our Prayers to him. But if all Outward Actions
become to betoken Honor by Institution, then whatsoever Outward Signs are
appointed by the Commonwealth, unless they are Customary Marks of Contempt,
and so carry in them some Antecedent Indecency, are proper Signs of Worship;
for if Actions are made Significant by Agreement, those are most so whose
signification is ratified by Public Consent.

8. So that all the Magistrates Power of instituting Significant Ceremonies,
amounts to no more than a Power of Determining what shall or shall not be
Visible Signs of Honor, and this certainly can be no more Usurpation upon the
Consciences of men, than if the Sovereign Authority should take upon it self
(as some Princes have done) to define the Signification of Words. For as Words
do not naturally denote those things which they are used to represent, but have
their Import Stamped upon them by consent and Institution, and and may, if Men
would agree to it among themselves, be made Marks of Things quite contrary to
what they now signify: So the same Gestures and Actions are indifferently
capable of signifying either Honor or Contumely; and therefore that they may
have a certain and settled meaning, it is necessary their Signification should be
Determined: and unless this be done either by some Positive Command, or Public
Consent, or some other way, there can be no such thing as Public Worship in
the World, in that its proper End and Usefulness is to express Men's Agreement
in giving Honor to the Divine Majesty: and therefore unless the Signs by which
this Honor is signified be Public and Uniform, it is not Public Worship,
because there is no Public Signification of Honor. So far is it from being
unlawful for Governors to define Significant Ceremonies in Divine Worship,
that it is rather Necessary; in that unless they were defined, it would cease
to be Public Worship: And when different men worship God by different Actions,
according to their different Fancies, it is not Public, but Private Worship; in
that they are not Public, but Private Signs of Honor. So that Uniformity in
the Outward Actions of Religious Worship is of the same Use, as certainty in
the Signification of Words, because otherwise they were no Public Expressions
of Honor. And therefore, to sum up the whole Result of this Discourse: If all
Internal Actions of the Soul are beyond the Jurisdiction of Humane Power, if by
them the substance of Religious Worship be performed, if all Outward Forms of
Worship have no other Use, than only to be Instruments to express Inward
Religion, and if the Signification of Actions be of the same Nature with that
of Words; then when the Civil Magistrate takes upon him to determine any
particular Forms of Outward Worship, it is, after all that hideous and
ridiculous Noise that is raised against it, of no worse Consequence, than if he
should go about to define the Signification of all Words used in the Worship of
God.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Nature of all Actions Intrinsecally Evil, and their Exemption from the
Authority of Humane Laws, against Mr. Hobs; with a full confutation of his
whole Hypothesis of Government.
The Contents.
NO Magistrate can Command Actions Internally Evil. The Reason hereof is, not
because Men are in any thing free from the Supreme Authority in Earth, but
because they are subject to a Superior in Heaven. To take off all Obligations
antecedent to Humane Laws, is utterly to destroy all Government. Mr. Hobs his
Hypothesis concerning the Nature and Original of Government proposed. Its
Absurdity demonstrated from its Inconsistency with the Natural Constitution of
Things. The Principles of Government are to be Adapted, not to an Imaginary,
but to the Real State of Nature. This Hypothesis apparently denies either the
Being of God, or the Goodness and Wisdom of Providence. It irrecoverably
destroys the Safety of all Societies of Mankind in the World. It leaves us in
as miserable Condition under the State of Government, as we were in his
supposed Natural State of War. It Enervates all its own Laws of Nature, by
Founding the Reason of their Obligation upon mere Self-Interest. Which false
and absurd Principle being removed, all that is Base, or peculiar in the whole
Hypothesis, is utterly Cashiered.

1. WHen any thing that is Apparently and Intrinsecally Evil is the Matter of
an Humane Law, whether it be of a Civil or Ecclesiastical Concern, here God is
to be obeyed rather than Man: No Circumstances can alter the Rules of Prime and
Essential Rectitude, their goodness is Eternal and Unchangeable. And therefore
in all such Actions Disobedience to Humane Laws is so far from being a Sin,
that it becomes an indispensable Duty. Where the good or evil of an Action is
determined by the Law of Nature, no Positive Humane Law can take off its
Morality; because it is in it self repugnant to the principles of right Reason,
and by consequence as unchangeable as that. And therefore if the Supreme
Magistrate should make a Law not to believe the Being of God or Providence, the
Truth of the Gospel, the Immortality of the Soul; that Law can no more bind,
than if a Prince should command a man to murder his Father, or to ravish his
Mother; because the Obligatory Power of all such Laws is antecedently rescinded
by a stronger and more Indispensable Obligation. And thus has every Man a
natural right to be Virtuous, and no Authority whatsoever can deny him the
liberty of acting Virtuously without being guilty of the foulest Tyranny and
Injustice: Not so much because Subjects are in any thing free from the
Authority of the Supreme Power on Earth, as because they are subject to a
Superior in Heaven; and they are only then excused from the duty of obedience
to their Sovereign, when they cannot give it without Rebellion against God. So
that it is not originally any right of their own, that exempts them from a
subjection to the Sovereign Power in all things; but it is purely Gods right of
governing his own Creatures, that Magistrates then invade, when they make
Edicts to violate or control his Laws.

And those who would take off from the Consciences of men all obligations
antecedent to those of humane Laws, instead of making the Power of Princes
supreme, absolute, and uncontrollable, they utterly enervate all their
Authority, and set their Subjects at perfect liberty from all their Commands.
For if we once remove all the antecedent obligations of Conscience and
Religion, men will be no further bound to submit to their Laws, than only as
themselves shall see convenient; and if they are under no other restraint, it
will be their wisdom to rebel as often as it is their Interest. In that the Laws
of Superiors passing no Obligation upon the Consciences of Subjects, they
neither are, nor can be under any stronger Engagements to Subjection, than to
preserve themselves from the Penalties and Inflictions of the Law; and so by
consequence may despise its Obligation, whenever they can hope to escape its
punishment. Now, how must this weaken the Power, and supplant the Thrones of
Princes, if every Subject may despise their Laws, or invade their Sovereignty,
whenever he can hope to build his own Fortune upon their Ruins? How would it
expose their Scepters to the continual Attempts of Rebels and Usurpers, when
every one, that has strength enough to wrest it out of his Princes hands, has
Right and Title enough to hold it? What security could Princes have of their
Subjects Loyalty, that will own their Power, as long as it shall be their
interest; and when it ceases to be so, call it Tyranny? How shall they ever be
secured by any Promises, Oaths, and Covenants of Allegiance, that have no other
band but self-security, or hope of Exemption from the Penalties of the Law?
Will not the most sacred Bonds and Compacts leave them in as insecure a
condition as they found them in? In that Self-advantage would have kept their
Subjects loyal and obedient without Oaths, and nothing else will do it with
them; and therefore they can add no new Obligations to that of Interest: For if
to perform their Covenants be advantageous, they are bound to perform them by
the Laws of prudence and discretion without the Oath as much as with it; if
disadvantageous, no Oath can oblige them, in that Interest and
Self-preservation is the only enforcement of all their Covenants: and therefore
when that Tie happens to cease, their Obligation becomes Null and Void, and
they may observe them if they please, and if they please break them.

2. But the vanity and groundlesness of this opinion will more fully appear, by
discovering the lamentable Foundation, on which it stands; and that is a late
wild Hypothesis concerning the Nature and Original of Government, which is
briefly this: That the natural condition of Mankind is a State and Posture of
War of every man against every man, in that all men being born in a condition
of equality, they have all an equal right to all things; and because all cannot
enjoy all, hence every man becomes an Enemy to every man: in which State of
Hostility there is no way for any man to secure himself so reasonable as
Anticipation, that is, by Force or Wiles to master the persons of all men he
can, till he see no other Power great enough to endanger himself; so that there
is no remedy but that in the State of Nature all men must be obliged to seek
and contrive, in order to their own security, one another Destruction. But
because in this Condition Mankind must for ever groan under all the miseries
and calamities of War, therefore they have wisely chosen by mutual consent to
enter into Contracts and Covenants of mutual trust, in which every man has, in
order to his own Security, been content to relinquish his natural and unlimited
right to every thing; and hereby they enter into a state of Peace and
Government, in which every man engages by solemn Oath and Covenant to submit
himself to the Public Laws in order to his own private safety. So that,
according to this Hypothesis, there are no Rules of Right or Wrong antecedent
to the Laws of the Commonwealth, but all men are at absolute liberty to do as
they please; and how cruel soever they may be to one another, they can never be
injurious, there being nothing just or unjust but what is made so by the Laws
of the Society, to which all its Members covenant to submit when they enter
into it.

This Hypothesis, as odd as it is, is become the Standard of our Modern
Politics; by which men, that pretend to understand the real Laws of Wisdom and
Subtlety, must square their Actions; and therefore is swallowed down, with as
much greediness as an Article of Faith, by the Wild and Giddy People of the
Age. And of the reality of it none can doubt but Fops and raw-brain'd Fellows,
that understand nothing of the World, or the Complexion of Humane Nature. Now
it is but labor in vain to go about to confute the Fantastic Theory of
things, only by demonstrating the Groundlesness of the Conceit; it being the
fashion and humor of those men I have to do with, to embrace any Hypothesis
how precarious soever, if it do but serve the purposes of Baseness and
Irreligion: and therefore I shall not content my self with barely proving the
weakness of its Foundation, but shall confute and shame it too, by showing it
to be palpably false, absurd, and mischievous from these ensuing Considerations.

3. First then the Hypothesis, which he lays as the Basis of all his Discourse,
is infinitely false and absurd: For what can be more incongruous, than to
proceed upon the supposal of such a state of Nature as never was, nor ever
shall be; and is so far from being suitable to the natural frame of things, that
it is absolutely inconsistent with it? And though Philosophers are so civil
among themselves (with how much reason I now determine not) as to allow one
another the Liberty, when they frame Theories and Hypotheses of things, to
suppose some precarious Principles; yet are they never so fond as to grant such
Fundamental Suppositions, as are apparently false and incongruous, and
repugnant to the Real State of things: or if any will take upon them that
unwarrantable liberty of Invention, yet however it would be monstrously
impertinent to lay down their own lamentable Fictions, as the fundamental
Reasons of the Truth, and reality of things. And yet with this gross and
inexcusable absurdity is this Hypothesis most notoriously chargeable. For when
it has once supposed (without ever attempting to prove it) that the State of
Nature is a State of War, and that by Nature all men have a right to all
things, and come into the World without any Obligations to mutual Justice and
Honesty, it from thence concludes: That in a bare State of Nature there can be
no right and wrong; That what mischiefs soever men may do to each other, they
can do no injuries; That the first Reason and Foundation of all Natural Right
is Self-preservation, and that in pursuance of this Principle men enter into
Societies, bind themselves to an observance of the Laws of Justice and natural
Equity by mutual Bonds and Covenants, and think themselves engaged to observe
them only in order to self-interest. So that if we remove this (...), this
fundamental Falsehood, that the state of Nature is a state of War and Anarchy,
all the subsequent Propositions will immediately appear to be as Groundless, as
they are Unreasonable; and there will not remain the least shadow of Reason to
believe private Interest, the only Reason of right and wrong, or the first and
fundamental Law of Nature; and this Authors City will appear to stand upon no
firmer Foundation than a Fable and a Falsehood; and his Hypothesis so grossly
absurd and incongruous, as would be highly blameable in the contrivance of a
Dramatick Plot.

But if, instead of conforming the Principles of Justice and Government to this
false and imaginary state of the World, we take a serious view of the true and
real posture of the Nature of things; the dictates of Reason that must
naturally result from thence, will be as contrary to some of those this Author
has assigned, as the Natural State of things is to this imaginary one: Namely,
that there was a first Cause of Humane Kind, and that this First Cause is a
Being endued with Goodness and Equity; and therefore that when he made Mankind,
he designed their Welfare and felicity; and by consequence created them in such
a condition, in which they might acquire it. All men therefore having by the
Divine Appointment a common Right and Title to Happiness, which cannot be
obtained without Society, nor Society subsist without mutual Aids of Love and
Friendship, because we are not self-sufficient, but stand in need of mutual
assistances; from hence it follows, That as every man is obliged to act for his
own good, so also to aim at the common good of Mankind, because without this
the natural Right that every individual man has to happiness, cannot possibly
be obtained; so that there will plainly arise from the Constitution of Humane
Nature an Essential Justice, that demands of every man Offices of love and
kindness to others as well as to himself; in that without this that Common
welfare and happiness, which Nature, or rather that Divine Providence that made
it, designed for all and every individual of Mankind, must become utterly
unattainable. And hence the sole Fountain of all the Mischiefs and Miseries in
the World is excess of unreasonable self-love, and neglect of all other
interests but our own; and all such, as separate their own Concerns from the
Common Interest, are the professed Enemies of Mankind: and therefore it is the
only aim of all the just Laws and wise Philosophy in the world, to assign
reasonable allowances between Self-love and Society. And if all men would be
just, and impartial between themselves and the Public, i. e. all others, there
would be no use of Laws nor Judges, this being the only Office of Public
Justice, to balance every man's private interest.

Well then, because there is an absolute necessity that the Government of the
World must be suited to, and established upon the Natural Condition of Humane
Nature; hence it is, that it is made as natural to the Being, as it is necessary
to the preservation of Mankind; and that as we cannot subsist, so neither can
we be born out of Society, he that made us, having made this our natural
Condition, that we could not possibly come into the World but under a state of
Government, all Children being actually as soon as born under the Power and
Authority of their Parents: and therefore as Mankind cannot continue without
Propagation, so neither can Propagation without Government; and to be a Subject
is as natural upon being born, as to be a Man. Now it is certain, that that only
can be accounted the State of Nature that was made and designed by the Author
of Nature (for if it be not suitable to that Order and Condition of things,
that he has established, it is preternatural.) And therefore seeing he did not
create Multitudes of men together out of each others Power, and in a State of
War and Hostility, but begun the Race of Humane Kind in a Single Person, by
whom the Community of Men was to be Propagated, that must be the State of
Nature in which it was at first founded, and by which it is still continued:
But if men will feign such an imaginary State of Nature as is utterly
contradictory to the Real, and then, upon such an unnatural Frame of Affairs,
establish our natural Rights; it is no wonder if they prove contrary to our
Common Interests, seeing they are suited to a contrary State of things.

4. Secondly, No man can seriously embrace this Hypothesis, that does not
firmly believe either (1.) That there never was any Author of Humane Nature,
but that a multitude of men happened by chance to arise like Mushromes out of the
Earth altogether, who out of diffidence and jealousy one of another for want
of acquaintance shunned Society, and withdrew like all other Beasts of Prey into
Dens and secret retirements, where they lived poor and solitary as Bats and
Owls, and subsisted like Vermin by robbing and filching from one another; till
finding this way of living lamentably unsafe and uneasy, every man being
always upon the guard against every man, and in continual fear and danger from
the whole Community, they grew weary of this forlorn and comfortless way of
living; and thence some that were more wise, or more cowardly than others, when
they chanced to meet in their wild rangings after Prey, instead of belabouring
one another with Snagsticks, and beating out each others brains, made signs of
Parley, and so began to treat of Terms of mutual Peace and Assistance, and so
by degrees to win others into their Party, till they hearded together in small
Rendezvouses, like the little Commonwealths of the savage Americans, which in
process of time grew up into larger Societies, from whence at length came the
different Nations and Governments of the World. But if this fortuitous Original
of humane Nature be too absurd and ridiculous to be asserted, then (2.) It must
be supposed, that there was a first Author and Creator of Mankind: and if there
were, then whoever believes this Hypothesis, must withal believe that he
contrived things so ill, that unless his Creatures had by chance been more
provident than himself, they must of necessity have perished as soon as they
were made; and therefore that the Well-being of the World is to be entirely
attributed to man's Wit, and not to Gods Providence, who sent his Creatures into
it in such a condition as should oblige them to seek their own mutual ruin and
destruction; so that had they continued in that state of War he left them in,
they must have lived and died like Gladiators, and have unavoidably perished at
one time or other by one another Swords; and therefore that Mankind owe the
comfort of their lives not at all to their Creator, but entirely to themselves;
forasmuch as the very Laws of Nature, whereby, according to this Hypothesis,
the World is preserved, were not established by the Divine Providence; but are
only so many Rules of Art, being, as all other Maxims of Prudence and Policy
are, Inventions of humane Wit, and suppose man not in the natural state and
posture of War, in which God left him, but in a preternatural one of his own
contriving. But certainly the Deity that made us, if we suppose him good, made
us not to be miserable; for so we must unavoidably have been in a perpetual
state of War: and therefore to suppose he both made and left us in that
condition, is directly to deny our Creators goodness. And then if we suppose
him wise, we cannot imagine he would frame a Creation to destroy it self;
unless we can believe his only design was to sport himself in the folly and
madness of his Creatures, by beholding them by all the ways of force and fraud
to conspire their own mutual destruction: and therefore if the Creation of man
were a product of the Divine Wisdom or Goodness, his natural State must have
been a condition of Peace, and not such a State of War that should naturally
tend to his misery, ruin, and utter destruction.

5. (3.) This Hypothesis irrecoverably destroys the safety of all Societies of
Mankind in the World: for if personal safety and private interest be the only
Foundation of all the Laws of Nature or Principles of Equity, i. e. If men
endeavor Peace, and enter into Contracts of mutual Trust, if they invade not
the Proprieties of others, if they think themselves obliged to promote the good
of the Society, if they submit themselves to the Laws of the Commonwealth, if
they practice Justice, Equity, Mercy, and all other Virtues, if they refrain
from Cruelty, Pride, Revenge, and all other Vices, only to secure their own
personal safety and interest; then whenever this Obligation ceases, all the
Ties to Justice and Equity, that derive all their Force and Reason from it,
must also cease; and when any single Person can hope to advance his own private
Interest by the ruin of the Public, it will be lawful for him to effect it;
and War, Rebellion, and injuries will be at least as innocent as Faith,
Justice, and Obedience; because these are good only in order to private
Interest, and therefore when those chance to be as conducive to it, they will
then be as just and lawful. So that this single Principle does as effectually
work the subversion of all Government, as if men were taught the most professed
Principles of Rebellion, as, that all Government is Tyranny and Usurpation;
that his Majesty's possession of the Crown is his best Title; that whoever has
wit or strength enough to wrest his Scepter from him, has right to hold it. For
as men of these and the like persuasions will never act them, but when
opportunity invites; and will be obedient to any Government, till they can
destroy it: So will those other rebel, as soon as they think it their Interest.
For when ever they can hope to mend their Fortunes by Rebellion, the same
obligation, that restrained them from it, does now as forcibly invite them to
it, that is self-interest, i. e. they cannot but think Rebellion lawful, as often
as they think it safe. And there are no Villains so mad or foolish as to
attempt it upon other grounds. So that, though this Author has assigned us some
not unuseful Laws of Nature, yet has he effectually enervated their force and
usefulness, by resolving the reason of their obligation into self-interest; and
so laying the Fundamental Principles of all Injustice, as the only Foundation
of all the Rules of Justice: For as it is the Nature and Office of Justice to
maintain the Common Right of all, and to secure my Neighbors happiness as well
as my own; so the formal obliquity of all Injustice lies in pursuing of a
private Interest without regard to the Common good of all and every member of
the Society. And therefore if private Interest be the only reason and
enforcement of the Laws of Nature, men will have no other Motive to obey their
Constitutions, than what will as strongly oblige to break them; i. e. if men
are just and honest for no other reason than because it is their Interest, then
when it is their Interest, they may (and if they are wise will) be unjust and
dishonest. And so men that own the Laws of (...) this Principle may be
Villains, (...) of all their restraints; and the most lewd and profligate
Wretches will, as well as they, be just or unjust, as it serves their turns.
For this Principle, that engages men to be honest only as long as they must,
will as effectually oblige them to be Rogues as soon as they can.

6. So that according to this Hypothesis, Mankind is left in as ill a condition
after they have by Pacts and Covenants united into Societies, and a State of
Peace, as they were in their natural State of War. For all Covenants of mutual
Trust are (according to its own Rules) in the State of Nature invalid; because
under that men are under no obligations of Justice and Honesty to one another,
and have no other measure of their actions but their interest; and therefore as
that might invite them in some circumstances to enter into Bonds and Contracts,
so it may in others to break them. So that in the State of Government all their
Promises, Oaths, and Contracts will prove as ineffectual as in the State of
Nature: Partly, because the force of all Contracts, made in the State of
Government, arises from the validity of the first Compact, that was made in
the State of Nature; that is, in that state in which it could have no validity;
partly, Because they have no other tie but that of self-interest, and so can
lay no other obligation upon us to observe them, than they might have done
before. And therefore if Mankind be once supposed in this natural state of War,
they can never be delivered from it; and after they have entered into Covenants
of Peace, they would remain as much as before in a posture of War, and be
subject to all the same dangers and miseries, that would have annoyed them if
they had continued in their natural state. For if Justice and fidelity be not
supposed to be the Law and Duty of our Natures, no Covenants are of power
enough to bring us under any obligation to them.

Now, having thus clearly blown up the foundations of this Hypothesis, 'twere
but labor in vain to make particular enquiries into all the flaws and follies
of its Superstructures, seeing they must of necessity stand and fall together;
for if its subsequent Propositions be coherently deduced from these Fundamental
Principles, all the evidence and certainty they can pretend to, depends on
them; and therefore the Premises being once convicted of falsehood, all
pretenses to truth in the conclusions must necessarily vanish. And if any of
them happen to be true and rational, it is not by virtue of these, but other
Principles. Thus though the Laws of Nature, he assigns, may be useful to the
ends of Government and Happiness of Mankind; yet, because upon those grounds,
on which he assigns them, they would be no Laws, that alone is sufficient
evidence of the error and vanity of his whole Hypothesis; seeing how good
soever they may be in themselves, yet upon the Principles, and in the Method,
in which he proposes them, they are of no force. In that self-interest being
the only reason of their obligation, the Interests of Civil Society come
thereby to be no better secured with, than without them: because if they were
not in force by virtue of any Compact, all men would choose to act according to
them, when they thought it advantageous; and when they have the utmost force
his Principles can give them, no man would think they obliged him, when ever he
apprehended them disadvantageous. So that this malignant Principle of mere
self-interest running through the whole Systeme, and twisting it self with
every branch of his Morality, it does not only eat out, and enervate its native
life and vigor, but withal envenoms their natural truth and soundness with its
own malignity. Which Principle being removed, and that influence it has on
other parts of this Hypothesis being prevented, and withal the Foundation on
which it stands ruined, viz. his absurd and imaginary State of Nature, we have
perhaps cashiered all that is either base or peculiar in it, and restored the
true accounts of natural Justice and right Reason, viz. That all men have a
natural Right to Happiness from the very design of their creation, that this
cannot be acquired without mutual aids and friendships; and therefore right
reason dictates, that every man should have some concern for his Neighbor, as
well as himself: because this is made necessary to the welfare of the World by
the natural state of things, and by this mutual exchange of love and kindness
men support one another in the comforts of humane life.

CHAP. V.
A Confutation of the Consequences that some men draw from Mr. Hobs's
Principles in behalf of Liberty of Conscience.
The Contents.
HOw a belief of the Imposture of all Religions is become the most powerful and
fashionable Argument for the Toleration of all. Though Religion were a Cheat,
yet because the World cannot be Governed without it; they are the most
mischievous Enemies to Government that tell the World it is so. Religion is
useful or dangerous in a State, as the temper of mind it breeds is peaceable or
turbulent. The dread of Invisible Powers is not of it self sufficient to awe
people into subjection, but tends more probably to Tumults and Seditions. This
largely proved by the ungovernableness of the Principles and Tempers of some
Sects. Fanaticism is as natural to the Common people, as folly and ignorance;
and yet is more mischievous to Government, than Vice and Debauchery. How the
Fanatics of all Nations and Religions agree in the same Principles of
Sedition. To permit different Sects of Religion in a Commonwealth, is only to
keep up so many incurable pretenses and occasions of public disturbance. The
corrupt passions and humors of men make Toleration infinitely unsafe.
Toleration only cried up by oppressed Parties, because it gives them opportunity
to overturn the settled frame of things. Every man that desires indulgence is
engaged by his Principles to endeavor Changes and Alterations. A bare
indulgence of men in any Religion, different from the established way of
Worship, does but exasperate them against the State.

1. AND now the Reason, why I have thus far pursued this Principle, is, because
it is become the most powerful Patron of the Fanatic Interest; and a Belief of
the indifferency, or rather Imposture of all Religion, is now made the most
effectual (not to say most fashionable) Argument for Liberty of Conscience. For
when men have once swallowed this Principle, That Mankind is free from all
obligations antecedent to the Laws of the Commonwealth, and that the Will of
the Sovereign Power is the only measure of Good and Evil; they proceed suitably
to its Consequences, to believe, That no Religion can obtain the force of a
Law, till it is established for such by Supreme Authority; that the Holy
Scriptures were not Laws to any man, till they were enjoined by the Christian
Magistrate; that no man is under any obligation to assent to their Truth,
unless the Governors of the Commonwealth require it; and that setting aside
their Commands, it is no sin to believe our Blessed Savior a villainous and lewd
Impostor; and that, if the Sovereign Power would declare the Alcoran to be
Canonical Scripture, it would be as much the Word of God as the four Gospels.
Leviath. p. 3. c. 33. For if Sovereigns in their own Dominions are the sole
Legislators, then those Books only are Canonical, that is Law, in every Nation,
which are established for such by the Sovereign Authority. So that all
Religions are in reality nothing but Cheats and Impostures, and at best but so
many Tales of Imaginary and Invisible Powers, Publicly allowed and encouraged,
to awe the Common People to Obedience. Leviath. p. 1. c. 12. Who are betrayed
into it by these four Follies, A false Opinion of Ghosts and immaterial
Substances, that neither are, nor ever can be; Ignorance of Second Causes,
Devotion toward what men groundlesly fear; And mistaking things Casual for
Divine Prognostics. In brief, all Religion is nothing but a Cheat of Policy,
and was at first invented by the Founders and Legislators of Commonwealths,
and by them obtruded upon the credulous Rabble for the Ends of Government. And
therefore, though Princes may wisely make use of the Fables of Religion to
serve their own turns upon the silly Multitude, yet it is below their Wisdom to
be seriously concerned themselves for such Fooleries; so that, provided their
subjects will befool themselves with any one Imposture, it is not material which
they single out; in that all Religions equally oblige to the belief of
Invisible Powers, which is all that is requisite to the Designs of Policy. And
as long as a Prince can keep up any apprehensions of Religion in the minds of
his Subjects, it is no Policy to disoblige and exasperate any of them, by
interessing his Power for one Party more than another, and by forcing all other
Sects against their own Inclinations to conform their Belief to the Persuasions
of one Faction; but rather to endear them all to himself, by indulging them
their Liberty in their different Follies: and so he may with more ease secure
his Government by abusing all, and yet disobliging none.

2. In answer to this Objection, it is not material to my present Purpose
largely to examine and refute these Wild and extravagant Pretenses, by
asserting the Truth and Divine Authority of Religion, and giving a rational
account of the Grounds and Principles, on which it stands: only let me observe
that this Discourse lies under no less prejudice than this, That if any of the
Principles of Religion be true, then is all these men's Policy false: But waving
this too great advantage, I shall content my self only to discover of what
noisome and pernicious consequence such Principles are to the Commonwealth,
though it were granted that all Religion were nothing but Imposture. And this I
shall do (without reminding the Reader how I have already prevented this
Objection in the first part of the Discourse, when I showed what good or bad
Influence upon the State men's persuasions about Religion have) by these four
ensuing Considerations.

First, Then methinks his Majesty is bound to con these men thanks for
endeavoring to render the truth of Religion suspected, and to possess men's
minds with apprehensions of its being false; whereby they effectually rob him
of the best security of his Crown, and strongest inducements of obedience to
his Laws. There being for certain nothing so absolutely necessary to the
reverence of Government, the peace of Societies, and common Interests of
mankind, as a sense of Conscience and Religion: This is the strongest Bond of
Laws, and only support of Government; without it the most absolute and
unlimited Powers in the World must be for ever miserably weak and precarious,
and lie always at the mercy of every Subjects passion and private Interest. For
when the obligations of Conscience and Religion are cashiered, men can have no
higher inducements to Loyalty and Obedience, than the considerations of their
own private Interest and security; and then wherever these happen to fail, and
Interest and advantage invite to disobedience, men may do as they please: And
when they have power to shake off Authority, they have right too; and a
prosperous Usurper shall have as fair a Title to his Crown as the most lawful
Prince; all Government will be founded upon force and violence, and Kings
nothing but terrible men with long Swords. But when the ties of Conscience are
superinduced upon those of Secular Interest, this extends the Power of Princes
to the hearts of their Subjects, and secures them as much from the very
thoughts, as attempts of Treason. For nothing so strongly influences the minds
of men, or so authoritatively commands their passions and inclinations, as
Religion; forasmuch as no fears are (not only to the considerate part of
Mankind, but to the ruder sort) so vehement as those of Hell, nor hopes so
active as those of Heaven: and therefore the Commands of Religion being backed
with such mighty sanctions, they must needs have infinitely more force to awe
or allure the minds of men to a compliance, than any Secular Interests. Whereas
those men that think themselves above the Follies of Conscience, and either
believe or regard not the evils threatened hereafter (an attainment to which
these our modern Politicians do not blush to pretend, though it be but an odd
piece of Policy openly to own and proclaim it) must make their present
Interest the Rule and measure of all their actions; and can have no other
obligation to obey their lawful Superiors in what they command, than they have
to disobey them, viz. their own security and self-preservation. Whereas if
these men lived under the restraints of Conscience, and the serious
apprehensions of Religion, and believed the Laws of their Prince to be bound
upon them by the Laws of God, and that under the threatenings of everlasting
misery; their Loyalty would be tied upon them by all that men can either hope
or fear, and they would have all the engagements to obedience that the serious
reflections upon a happy or miserable Eternity could lay upon them. But if the
Principles of Government have so essential a dependence upon those of Religion,
if nothing be powerful enough to secure obedience but the hopes and fears of
another life, if all humane Laws have their main force and efficacy from the
apprehensions of Religion, if Oaths, Promises, and Covenants, and whatsoever
else whereby Civil Societies are upheld, are made firm by nothing but the bonds
of Religion; then let Authority judge, how much it is beholden to those men,
who labor to bring it into Public Disreputation, and to possess their
Subjects with an opinion of its falsehood: whereby they not only set them loose
from their Authority, but enrage them against it, by persuading them they are
governed by Cheats and Impostures, and that the Magistrate builds his Dominion
upon their folly and simplicity, there being nothing more hateful to Mankind
than to be imposed upon: So that though Religion were a Cheat, they are
apparently the greatest Enemies to Government, that tell the World it is so.

3. But secondly, Nothing more concerns the Interest of the Civil Magistrate,
than to take care, what particular Doctrines of Religion are taught within his
Dominions; because some are peculiarly advantageous to the ends of Government,
and others as naturally tending to its disturbance: Some incline the minds of
men to candor, moderation, and ingenuity, and work them to a gentle and
peaceable temper, by teaching humility, charity, meekness, and obedience: Now
it is the Interest of Princes to cherish and propagate such Doctrines among
their Subjects, that will make them not only quiet, but useful in the
Commonwealth. But others there are that infect the minds of men with pride,
peevishness, malice, spite, and envy; that incline them to delight in
detracting from Princes, and speaking reproachfully of Government, and breed in
them such restless and seditious tempers, that it is next to an impossibility
for any Prince to please or oblige them. Now, as for such perverse and arrogant
Sects of men, it certainly concers Governors to suppress them as so many Routs
of Traitors and Rebels.

Religion then is either useful or dangerous in a Commonwealth, as the temper
of mind it breeds is peaceable or turbulent: and as there is nothing more
serviceable to the Interests of Government, so there is nothing more
mischievous: and therefore nothing more concerns Princes, than to take care
what Doctrines are taught within their Dominions. For seeing Religion has, and
will have the strongest influence upon the minds of men; when that renders them
averse and troublesome to Government, it is that all the Power nor Policy in the
World can keep them peaceable, till such persuasions are rooted out of their
minds by severity of Laws and Penalties. And, as long as men think themselves
obliged, upon pain of damnation, to Disobedience and Sedition, not any Secular
threatenings and inflictions are of force enough to bridle the Exorbitances of
Conscience. There is not any vice so incident to the Common People as
Superstition, nor any so mischievous. It Is infinitely evident from the
Histories and Records of all Ages and Nations, that there is nothing so vicious
or absurd but may pass for Religion, and (what is worse) the more wild and
giddy Conceits of Religion are ever sucked in by the multitude with the greatest
passion and eagerness; and there is no one thing in the World so difficult, as
to bring the Common People to true Notions of God and his Worship; insomuch
that it is no Paradox to affirm, That Religion (i. e. what is mistaken for it)
has been one of the greatest Principles of mischief and wickedness in the
World. And if so, then certainly nothing requires so much care and prudence in
the Civil Magistrate, as its due conduct and management. So that the dread of
Invisible Powers is of it self no more serviceable to awe the people into
subjection, then to drive them into Tumults and Confusions; and if it chance to
be accompanied (as it easily may) with tumultuous and seditious persuasions,
it is an invincible obligation to Villainy and Rebellion. And therefore it must
needs above all things concern Princes, to look to the Doctrines and Articles
of men's Belief; seeing it is so great odds that they prove of dangerous
consequence to the public Peace: and in that case, the apprehensions of a
Deity, and a World to come, makes their danger almost irresistible.

Sect. 4. There are some Sects whose Principles, and some persons whose tempers
will not suffer them to live peaceable in any Commonwealth. For what if some
men believe, That if Princes refuse to reform Religion themselves, it is lawful
for their Godly Subjects to do it, and that by violence and force of Arms? What
if they believe, That Princes are but Executioners of the Decrees of the
Presbytery; and that in case of disobedience to their Spiritual Governors,
they may be Excommunicated, and by consequence Deposed? What if they believe,
That Dominion is founded in Grace; and therefore that all wicked Kings forfeit
their Crowns, and that it is in the power of the People of God to bestow them
where they please? And what if others believe, That to puruse their success in
villainy and Rebellion is to follow Providence; and that when the Event of War
has delivered up Kings into their Power, then not to depose or murder them,
were to slight the Guidance of Gods Providential Dispensations? Are not these,
and the like innocent Propositions (think you) mightily conducive to the peace
and settlement of Commonwealths? Such Articles of Faith as these cannot but
make brave and obedient Subjects, and he must needs be a glorious and powerful
Prince, where such conceits are the main ingredients of his Subjects Religion.
Let any man show me, what Doctrines could have been more unluckily contrived to
disturb Government than these. And if men would study on purpose to frame and
model a Rebellious Faith, these must have been their Fundamental Articles: and
yet it is sufficiently known where they have been both believed and practiced.
But further, Is there not a sort of Melancholy Religionists in the World, whose
very Genious inclines them to Quarrels and Exceptions against the State, and
management of Public Affairs? There is nothing so malepart as a Splenetick
Religion; the inward discontent and uneasiness of men's own minds maintains it
self upon the faults and miscarriages of others: and we may observe, how this
humor is ever venting it self in sighs and complaints for the badness of the
times (i. e. in effect of the Government) and in telling and aggravating little
stories, that may reflect upon the wisdom and ability of their Superiors. It Is
impossible to please their fretful and anxious minds; the very delights and
recreations of the Court shall stir their envy, and the vanities of the great
Ones grieve and wound their tender Souls. However Princes behave themselves,
they can never win upon the affections of these people; their very prosperity
shall disoblige them, and they are ready upon all occasions to bring them to
Account for their misdemeanors: And if any of the Grandees happen to be
discontented, they have here a Party ready formed for the purpose, to revenge
their injury, and bring evil Counselors, that seduce the King, to Justice. And
it is not impossible but there may be a sort of proud and haughty men among us
(not over-well affected to Monarchick Government) who, though they scorn, yet
patronize this humor, as a check to the insolence and presumption of Princes.
Again, Are there not some whole Sects of men, all whose Religion is made up of
nothing but passion, rancour, and bitterness? All whose Devotion is little
better than a male-contentedness, their Piety than a sanctified fury, and their
zeal than a proud and spightful malice; and who, by the Genius of their
Principles, are brought infinitely and irrecoverably under the power of their
passions; (...). Now, nothing imports Governors so much as to manage men's
passions; in that it is these, rather than our appetites, that disturb the
World. A person that is debaucht and intemperate is indeed useless to the
Commonwealth, but he that is turbulent and passionate is dangerous. But then
when passion is fired with religious zeal, nothing can temper its outrageous
and Fanatic heats; but it works the minds of men into rancour and bitterness,
and drives them into all manner of savage and inhumane practices. Princes have
never found any thing so restive and ungovernable, as Sectarian Madness; no
malice so spightful and implacable, as the zeal of a Godly Party; nor any rage
so fierce and merciless, as sanctified Barbarism. All the ancient Tyranny has
in some places been outdone by a thorough-godly Reformation: zeal for the Glory
of God has often turned whole Nations into Shambles, filled the World with
continual Butcheries and Massacres, and fleshed it self with slaughters of
Myriads of Mankind. And when men think their passions warranted by their
Religion, how is it possible it should be otherwise? For this obliges them by
their greatest hopes and fears to act them to the highest: and it is easy to
imagine what calm and peaceable things those men must be, who think it their
duty to enforce and enrage their passions with the obligations of Conscience.
And yet alas! How few are they, who have wisdom enough to keep their zeal clean
from these sour and crabbed mixtures? The generality of men are scarce
sensible of their spiritual wickednesses; and it is observable, That in all
Ages, and all Religions of the world, few people have taken notice of them
beside their Wise men and Philosophers. And even among the Professors of
Christianity it self, notwithstanding that our Religion has made such special
provisions against all Excesses of Passion, and established Love, Charity,
Moderation, Patience, Candor, and Ingenuity, as its Prime, and Fundamental
Duties; yet the Spirit of meekness and humility soon decayed, with its
Primitive and Apostolical Professors; and within a few Centuries of years the
Church was overrun with some Sects of men, much of the same temper with some
of our Modern Saints. So that even in true and innocent persuasions it is
necessary to assuage the distempers and indiscretions of a forward zeal: The
giddy multitude judge weakly, fancy strongly, and act passionately; and, unless
restrained by wary and sober Laws, will drive on so furiously in a good cause,
till they run their Religion into Folly and Faction, and themselves into
tumults and riotous proceedings. What Socrates once said of Virtue, That when
it is not conducted by prudence, it is but Pedantry, and a fantastic thing,
is much more true of Religion; which, when it wants the guidance and ornament
of this Virtue, may be folly, or madness, or any thing rather than it self. In
brief, Fanaticism is both the greatest, and the easiest vice that is incident
to Religion; it is a Weed that thrives in all Soils, and there is the same
Fanatic Spirit, that mixes it self with all the Religions in the World. And
it is as natural to the Common People, as the proud, or ignorant, or perverse,
or factious, or stubborn, or eager, or passionate: for when ever any of these
vices or follies are twisted with men's apprehensions of Religion, they
naturally work, and ferment their minds into a boisterous and tumultuary zeal.
And yet how infinitely difficult it is to cure the Common Heard of these vices,
the Experience of all Ages is too great a demonstration: so that there is
nothing so apparently necessary, or difficult, as to govern the vulgar Rout in
their conceptions of Religion; seeing it is so natural for them both to mix and
heigthen, yes, and sanctify their passions with their Consciences. And from
hence it is, that though the Fanatics in all Nations may disagree in the
objects and matters of their Superstition, according to the different Customs
of their Country, and variety of their Educations; yet as for their tendency to
disturbance and Sedition in the State, it is in all places the same to all
intents and purposes: And those unquiet Sects, that have often disturbed, and
sometimes subverted whole Kingdoms in Africa, if they had happened to have been
born in Europe, would have done the same here; where though their Religion
might have been different, yet would their Genius have been the same, as rising
from the same Conjunction of Conscience and Passion. And therefore it cannot
but be a wonder to any man, that is acquainted with the Experience of former
Ages, to see Governors, after so many warnings, so insensible of this
mischief: and however they may think themselves unconcerned to restrain the
opinions of any dissenting Sect, as being perhaps but foolish and
inconsiderable in themselves; yet nothing can more highly concern them than to
provide against their inclinations, as being generally of a sad and dangerous
consequence to the State. And this at present may suffice to evince, How much
it concerns Authority to look to the particular Principles and Inclinations of
every Sect; and to prove, That the mere Belief of Invisible Powers, is so far
from being Religion enough to awe men to obedience; that unless it be tempered
with a due sense of virtue, and managed with special prudence and discretion,
it rather tends to make the rude multitude more headstrong and ungovernable.

Sect. 5. Thirdly, To permit different Sects of Religion in a Commonwealth, is
only to keep up so many pretenses and occasions for public Disturbance; the
Factions of Religion are ever the most seditious, and the less material their
difference, the more implacable their hatred: as the Turks think it more
acceptable to God, to kill one Persian than seventy Christians. No hinge so
vehemently alienates men's affections, as variety of judgment in matters of
Religion; here they cannot disagree, but they must quarrel too: and when
Religion divides men's minds, no other Common Interest can unite them; and where
zeal dissolves friendship, the ties of Nature are not strong enough to
reconcile it. Every Faction is at open defiance with every Faction, they are
always in a state and posture of War, and engaged in a mortal and
irreconcilable hatred against each other. When ever men part Communion, every
Party must of necessity esteem the other impious and Heretical; in that they
never divide but with pretenses, that they could not agree without being guilty
of some sin or other, as Blasphemy, or Idolatry, or Superstition, or Heresy,
or the like: For all agree in this Principle, That peace ought always to be
preserved, where it can without offending God, and offering violence to
Conscience: and therefore they cannot but look upon one another, as lying under
the Divine Wrath and Displeasure, and consequently, in a damnable condition:
and then are both Parties engaged, as they love God, and the Souls of men, to
labor one another ruin. And when the Party is formed, and men are listed into
it by chance and Education, the distinguishing Opinion of the Party is to them
the most material and fundamental Article of their Belief; and so they must
account of all that either disowne or deny it, as of Heathens, Infidels, and
Enemies to the Faith. Besides that, all men are naturally more zealous about
the Principles in which they differ, than about those in which they agree.
Opposition whets and sharpens their zeal, because it endangers the truths they
contend for; whereas those that are not opposed are secure and out of hazard of
being stifled by the adverse Party, that is concerned equally with themselves
for their preservation. And hence we see, by daily Experience, that men, who
are tame and cool enough in the Fundamentals of Religion, are yet utterly
impatient about their own unlearned and impertinent Wranglings, and lay a
greater stress upon the Speculations of their own Sect, than upon the Duties of
an absolute and indispensable necessity; only because those are contradicted by
their Adversaries, and these are not. Well then, seeing all dissenting Parties
are possessed with a furious and passionate zeal to promote their own
persuasions, and seeing they are persuaded that their zeal is in God's Cause,
and against the Enemies of God's Truths; How vain is it to expect Peace and
Settlement in a Commonwealth, where their Religion keeps men in a state of
War, where zeal is armed against zeal, and Conscience encounters Conscience,
where the Glory of God and the Salvation of Souls lies at stake, and where
Curse ye Meroz is the Word of both Parties? So that whatsoever projects
fansiful men may propose to themselves, if we consider the passions of humane
Nature, as long as Differences and Competitions in Religion are kept up, it
will be impossible to keep down mutual hatreds, jealousies, and animosities;
and so many divided Churches as there are in a State, there will ever be so
many different Armies, who, though they are not always in actual fighting, are
always in a disposition to it.

Beside, where there are divided Interests of Religion in the same Kingdom, how
shall the Prince behave himself toward them? If he go about to balance them
against one another, this is the ready way to forfeit his Interest in them all;
and whilst he seems concerned for no Party, no Party will be really concerned
for him, every one having so much esteem for it self, as to think it ought to
enjoy more of his favor and countenance than any other. And withal it is an
infinite trouble and difficulty to poise them so equally, but that one Party
shall grow more strong and numerous than the rest; and then there is no
appeasing their zeal, till it has destroyed and swallowed up all the weaker
Interests. But suppose he be able to manage them so prudently, as always to
keep the balance equal; he does thereby but keep up so many Parties, that are
ready formed to join with any emergent Quarrels of State: and whenever the
Grandees fall out, it is but heading one of these, and there is an Army. And let
men but reflect upon all the late Civil Wars, and Rebellions of Christendom,
and then tell me, which way they could either have been commenced or continued,
had it not been for different Factions of Religion.

If he side with one Party, and by his favor mount it above the rest, that not
only discontents, but combines all the other dissenting Factions into an united
opposition against his own: and it becomes their common Interest, to work and
contrive its ruin; its prosperity does but exasperate the competition of all
its Rivals into rage and indignation: and as success makes it self more secure
in its settlement, so it makes them more restless and industrious to overturn
it. No Party can ever be quiet or content as long as it is under any other, but
will ever be heaving and struggling, to dismount the Power that keeps it down:
and therefore we find that all Dissenters from the established frame of things
are always assaulting it with open violence, or undermining it by secret
practices, and will hazard the State, and all, to free themselves from
oppression; and oppressed they are, as long as they are the weaker Party. And
therefore we never find this way of Toleration put in practice under any
Government, but where other Exigences of State required and kept up a standing
Army; and by this means it is not so difficult to prevent the Broils and
Contentions of Zeal: but this is only a more violent way of governing men's
Consciences, and instead of restraining them by Laws and Penalties, it does the
same thing with Forts and Cittadels: So that unless we are willing to put our
selves to the expense and hazard of keeping up standing Forces, indulgence to
dissenting Zealots does but expose the State to the perpetual squabbles and
Wars of Religion. And we may as well suppose all men to be wise and honest, and
upon that account cancel all the Laws of Justice and Civil Government, as
imagine, where there are divided Factions in Religion, that men will be
temperate and peaceable in the enjoyment of their own conceits, and not disturb
the public Peace to promote and establish them; when it is so well known from
the experience of all Ages, that nothing has ever been a more effectual Engine
to work popular Commotions, than Changes and Reformations in Religion.

Sect. 6. So that though the State think it self unconcerned to restrain men's
Persuasions and Opinions, yet methinks they should be a little concerned to
prevent the Tumults and Disturbances that naturally arise from their
propagation. And could it be secured, That if all men were indulged their
liberty, they would use it modestly, and be satisfied with their own freedom,
then (I confess) Toleration of all Opinions would not be of so fatal and
dangerous consequence; as if all men were as wise and honest as Socrates, they
might, as well as he, be their own Law, and left entirely to their own Liberty,
as to all the entercourses and transactions of Humane life. But alas! this is
made infinitely impossible, from the corrupt Passions and Humors of Men: All
Sects ever were, and ever will be, fierce and unruly to enlarge their own
Interests, invading or supplanting whatever opposes their increase, and will
all certainly conspire the Ruin of that Party that prevails and triumphs over
the rest; every Faction ever apprehending it its due to be Supreme: and there
will ever be a necessity of Reformation, as long as all Factions are not
uppermost; and it will be crime enough in any one Party, to be superior to
another. So that if all our dissenting Sectaries were allowed their entire
liberty, nothing can be expected (especially from people of their complexion)
but that they should all plot together against the present Establishment of the
Church; every Combination being fully persuaded of its worthlesness in
comparison to it self: for unless they had apprehended their own way more
excellent, they had never divided from ours. Beside that it is a fundamental
Principle that runs through all their Sects, That they are bound under pain of
Eternal Damnation to labor their utmost to establish the Worship of God in in
its greatest Purity and Perfection; and withal apprehending that way now
established by Law defective and superstitious, they cannot but be bound in
Conscience to endeavor its utter ruin and subversion; which Design when they
have once compassed, they entertaining the same Opinion of each other as they
do of us, they will turn their Weapons upon themselves, and with as much Zeal
contrive each others destruction as they did ours: and the result of all will
be, That the Commonwealth will be eternally torn with intestine Quarrels and
Commotions, till it grow so wise again as to suppress all Parties but one; that
is, till it return to that wisdom and Prudence from whence it parted by
Toleration.

And therefore nothing can be more vulgarly observable, than that though all
Parties, whilst under the Power of a more prevailing interest, have cried up
Toleration, as the most effectual instrument to shake and dissettle the present
frame of things; yet have they no sooner effected their Design, than they have
immediately put in to scramble for the Supremacy themselves; which if they once
obtain, they have ever used with as much rigor and severity upon all
Dissenters, as they ever felt themselves. So that this Principle of Liberty of
Conscience much resembles that of community of Goods; for as those men cry up
equality of Estates, as a most reasonable piece of Justice, that have but a
small share themselves; yet whenever their Pretense succeeds, and they have
advanced their own Fortunes, and served their own turns, they are the first
that shall then cry it down, and oppress their inferiors with more cruelty
than ever themselves felt whilst in a lower Station; so do those whose private
persuasions happen to cross the public Laws, easily pretend to Liberty of
Conscience. One must yield; and because their stubborn Zeal scorns to bend to
the Commands of Authority, these must be forced to give place to that: So that
when Conscience and Authority happen to encounter, all the Dispute is, Which
shall have most force in Public Laws, whether my own or my Princes opinion?
But how plausibly soever this Notion may be pleaded by men out of Power, it is
ever laid aside as soon as ever they come into it; and the greatest pretenders
to it when oppressed, are always the greatest Zealots against it, as soon as it
has mounted themselves into Power, as well knowing it to be the most effectual
Engine to overturn any settled Frame of things.

In brief, It Is Reformation men would have, and not Indulgence; which they only
seek to gain ground for the working of their Mines, and planting of their
Engines, to subvert the established state of things. For if we demand,
wherefore they would be born with in their Dissentions from our way of Worship?
They answer, Because they cannot conform to it in Conscience, i. e. because
they apprehend it sinful; for otherwise they must think themselves guilty of
the most intolerable Schism and Rebellion, to create Factions and Divisions in
a Commonwealth, when they may avoid it without any violence to their
Consciences: But if they apprehend our way of Worship upon any account sinful,
then are they plainly obliged in Conscience to root it out, as displeasing to
Almighty God, and in its stead to plant and establish their own. And now if
this be the Issue of this Principle, let Magistrates consider how fatal and
hazardous alterations in Religion have ever been to the Commonwealth. They
cannot pluck a Pin out of the Church, but the State immediately shakes and
totters; and if they will allow their Subjects the liberty of changing and
innovating in Religion (as it is apparent from the Premises they must, if they
allow them their pretenses to liberty of Conscience) they do but give them
advantages for Eternal Popular Commotions and Disturbances.

Sect. 7. Fourthly, A bare Indulgence of Men in the free exercise of any
Religion, different from the public profession, can lay no obligation upon the
Party. Perhaps when the rigor of a Law, under which they have smarted a while,
is at first relaxed, this indeed they may at present take for a kindness,
because it is really a favor in comparison to their former Condition; and
therefore as long as the memory of that remains fresh upon their minds, it may
possibly affect them with some grateful Resentments. But alas! these affections
quickly vanish, and then what before was Favor, is now become Justice; and
their Prince did but restore them to their just and lawful rights, when he took
off his Tyrannical Laws and Impositions from the Consciences of his best
Subjects. While those unjust Laws were in force, he oppressed and persecuted
the People of God; and therefore when he cancels them, all the kindness he is
guilty of, is only to repent of his Tyranny and Persecution, which is no
favor, and by consequence no Obligation. And (what is more considerable) all
the dissenting Parties he permits, and does not countenance, he disobliges. Is
this all the kindness (say they) he can afford the Godly, not to persecute them
by Law and force to their utter ruin? Are we beholden to him barely for
suffering us to live in our native Soil, and enjoy only our fundamental
Privileges? Is this all the reward and encouragement we deserve? Are not we
the praying and serious People of the Nation, for whose sakes only the Lord is
pleased to stay among us? And were it not for us, would he not perfectly
forsake and abandon it? And is this all our requital, to be thus slighted, and
thus despised, only for our zeal to God, and serviceableness to the Public, by
that power and interest we have in him, to keep him among us; whilst vain and
useless persons are countenanced and encouraged with all places of Office and
Employment? These are the natural results of the minds of men, who think
themselves scorned and disrespected, especially when flushed with any conceit
and high opinion of their own Godliness. And it is an eternal Truth, That for
the godly Party not to be uppermost, is and ever will be Persecution. For
nothing more certain, than that all men entertain the best opinion of their own
Party, otherwise they had never enrolled themselves in it: and therefore if the
State value them not at as high a rate as they do themselves, they are scorned
and injured, because they have not that favor and countenance they deserve.
And so unless they have Public encouragement, as well as indulgence, they have
reason to be discontented, because they have not their due. And if the Prince
do not espouse their Party, he undervalues, and consequently disgusts them; and
if he join himself to any other (as there is a necessity of his owning some
Profession) he does not only disoblige, but alienate their Affections, by
embracing an Interest they both hate and scorn. For, wherever there is
difference of Religion, there is opposition too; because men would never divide
from one another, but upon grounds of real dislike; and therefore they are
always contrary in those Differences that distinguish their Parties. And this
cannot but be a mighty endearment of their Prince to them, when he neglects and
discountenances his best Subjects, only because they are the godly Party (for
so every Party is to it self) to join himself to their professed and
irreconcilable Enemies. And they will be wonderfully forward to assist a
Patron of Idolatry and Superstition, or an Enemy to the power of godliness (for
these are the softest words that different Sects can afford one another.) And
withal I might add, That they must needs be much in love with him, when they
have reason to believe, that they lie perpetually under his displeasure, and
that he looks upon them as little better than Enemies. So that if a Prince
permit different Parties and interests of Religion in his Dominions, however he
carries himself toward them, he shall have at least all Parties discontented
but one: for if himself be of any, he displeases all but that; if of none, he
displeases all: And Zealous and Religious People of all sorts must needs be
wonderfully in love with an Atheist; and there is no remedy, but he must at
least be thought so, if he be not of any distinct and visible profession.

CHAP. VI.
Of things Indifferent, and of the Power of the Civil Magistrate in Things
undetermined by the Word of God.
The Contents.
THe Mystery of Puritanism lies in this Assertion, That nothing ought to be
established in the Worship of God, but what is expressly commanded in the Word
of God. The Wildness, Novelty, and unreasonableness of this Principle. It makes
mere Obedience to lawful Authority sinful. It takes away all possibility of
Settlement in any Church or Nation. It is the main pretense of all pious
Villainies. It cancels all Humane Laws; and makes most of the Divine Laws
useless and impracticable. It obliges men to be seditious in all Churches in
the World, in that there is no Church that has not some Customs and Vsages
peculiar to it self. All that pretend this Principle do and must act contrary
to it. The exorbitancy of this Principle makes all yielding and condescension
to the men that plead it unsafe and impolitick. Wherein the perfection and
sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures consists. Of the Vanity of their
Distinction, who tell us, That the Civil Magistrate is to see the Laws of
Christ executed, but to make none of his own. The dangerous consequents of
their way of arguing, who would prove, That God ought to have determined all
Circumstances of his own Worship. It Is scarce possible to determine all
Circumstances of any outward action, they are so many and so various. The
Magistrate has no way to make men of this persuasion comply with his will, but
by forbidding what he would have done. The Puritans upbraided with Mr. Hooker's
Book of Ecclesiastical Polity, and challenged to answer it. Their Outcries
against Popery, Will Worship, Superstition, adding to the Law of God, etc.
retorted upon themselves. The main Objection against the Magistrates power in
Religion proposed, viz. That it is possible that he may impose things sinful and
superstitious. This Objection lies as strongly against all manner of
Government. Our inquiry is after the best way of settling things, not that
possibly might be, but that really is. Though Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may
be abused, yet it is then less mischievous than Liberty of Conscience. The
Reason of the necessity of subjection to the worst of Governors, because
Tyranny is less mischievous than Rebellion or Anarchy. The Author of the Book
entitled, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, confuted. That it may, and often does so
happen, that it is necessary to punish men for such persuasions into which they
have innocently abused themselves. Actions are punishable by Humane Laws, not
for their sinfulness, but for their ill Consequence to the Public. This
applied to the Case of a well-meaning Conscience.

Sect. 1. ALL things, as well Sacred as Civil, that are not already determined
as to their Morality, i. e. that are not made necessary Duties by being
commanded, or sinful Actions by being forbidden either by the Law of Nature, or
positive Law of God, may be lawfully determined either way by the Supreme
Authority; and the Conscience of every subject is tied to yield Obedience to
all such Determinations. This Assertion I lay down to oppose the first and the
last and the great Pretense of Nonconformity, and wherein (as one observes)
the very Mystery of Puritanism consists, viz. That nothing ought to be
established in the Worship of God, but what is authorized by some Precept or
Example in the Word of God; that is the complete and adequate Rule of Worship:
and therefore, Christian Magistrates are only to see that executed that Christ
has appointed in Religion, but to bring in nothing of their own; they are tied
up neither to add nor diminish, neither in the matter nor manner: So that
whatever they injoin in Divine Worship, if it be not expressly warranted by a
Divine Command, how innocent soever it may be in it self, it presently upon
that account loses not only its Liberty but its Lawfulness; it being as
requisite to Christian practice, that things indifferent should still be kept
indifferent, as things necessary be held necessary. This very Principle is the
only Fountain and Foundation of all Puritanism, from which it was at first
derived, and into which it is at last resolved. A pretense so strangely wild
and humorsom, that it is to me an equal wonder, either that they should be so
absurd as seriously to believe it; or, if they do not, that they should be so
impudent, as thus long and thus confidently to pretend it, when it has not the
least shadow of Foundation either from Reason or from Scripture; and was scarce
ever so much as thought of, till some men having made an unreasonable
Separation from the Church of England, were forced to justify themselves by as
unreasonable Pretenses. For, what can be more incredible, than that things that
were before lawful and innocent, should become sinful upon no other score than
their being commanded, i. e. that mere obedience to lawful Authority should
make innocent actions criminal? For the matter of the Law is supposed of it
self indifferent; and therefore if obedience to the Law be unlawful, it can be
so for no other reason than because it is Obedience. So that if Christian
Liberty be so awkard a thing (as these men make it) it is nothing else but
Christian Rebellion, it is a Duty that binds men to disobedience, and forbids
things under that formality, because Authority commands them. Now what a
reproach to the Gospel is this, that it should be made the only Plea for
Sedition? What a scandal to Religion, that tenderness of Conscience should be
made the only Principle of Disobedience; and that nothing should so much
incline men to be refractory to Authority, as their being conscientious? What a
perverse folly is it to imagine, That nothing but opposition to Government can
secure our liberty? And what a cross-grained thing is it, to restrain things
only because they are matters of liberty; and first to forbid Princes to
command them because they are lawful, and then Subjects to do them only because
they are commanded. But to expose the absurdity of this Principle by some more
particular considerations.

2. First, The follies and mischiefs that issue from it, are so infinite, that
there can be no settled Frame of things in the World, that it will not overturn:
and if it be admitted to all intents and purposes, there can never be an end of
disturbances, and alterations in the Church; in that there never was, nor ever
can be any Form of Worship in the World, that is to all circumstances
prescribed in the World of God: and therefore if this Exception be thought
sufficient to destroy one, there is no remedy but it may, as occasion requires,
serve as well to cashier all; and by consequence take away all possibility of
settlement. Thus when upon this Principle, the Disciplinarians separated from
the Church of England, the Independents upon the same ground separated from
them, the Anabaptists from the Independents, the Familists from the
Anabaptists, and the Quakers from the Familists, and every Faction divided, and
subdivided among themselves into innumerable Sects, and Undersects; and as long
as men act up to it, there is no remedy, but Innovations must be endless. If it
be urged against Lord-Bishops, it is as severe against Lay-Presbyters; if
against Music in Churches, then farewell singing of Psalms in Rhyme; if against
the Cross, why not against sprinkling in Baptism? and if against Cathedral
Churches, then down go all Steeple Houses: If against one thing, then against
every thing; and there is nothing in the exterior parts of Religion, but the
two Sacraments, that can possibly escape its impeachment. All the pious
Villainies, that have ever disturbed the Christian World, have sheltered
themselves in this grand Maxim, that Jesus Christ is the only Lawmakers to his
Church; and whoever takes upon himself to prescribe any thing in Religion,
invades his Kingly Office. The Gnostics of old so abused this pretense to
justify any seditious and licentious practices, that they made Heathen Princes
look upon Christianity as an Enemy to Government; and the Fanatics of late
have so vexed and embroiled Christendom with the same Principle, that Christian
Princes themselves begin to be of the same persuasion. It Is become the only
Patron and Pretext of Sedition: and when any Subjects have a mind to set
themselves free from the Laws of their Prince, they can never want this
pretense to warrant their disobedience. Seeing there is no Nation in the World
that has not diverse Laws, that are not recorded by the four Evangelists; and
therefore if all humane Institutions entrench upon our Saviors Kingly
Prerogative, they are, and ever must be, provided with matters of quarrel to
disturb Government, and justify Rebellion.

3. Secondly, Nay further this fond pretense, if made use of to all the ends,
for which it might as wisely serve, would cancel all humane Laws, and make most
of the divine Laws useless; which have only described the general Lines of
Duty, but left their particular determinations to the Wisdom of humane Laws.
Now the Laws of God cannot be put in practice, but in particular Cases and
Circumstances, these cannot be determined but by the Laws of man; therefore if
he can command nothing, but what is already prescribed to us in the Word of
God, he can have no power to see the Divine Laws put in Execution. For where
are described all the Rules of Justice and Honesty? Where are determined all
doubts and questions of Conscience? Where are decided all Controversies of
Right and Wrong? Where are recorded all the Laws of Government and Policy? Why
therefore should humane Authority be allowed to interpose in these great
affairs, and yet be denied it in the Customs of Churches and Rules of Decency?
There is no possible reason to be assigned but their own humor and fond
opinion, they are resolved to believe it, and that is Argument enough, for it is
unanswerable. How comes this Proposition to be now limited to matters of mere
Religion, but only because this serves their turn; for otherwise, Why are not
the Holy Scriptures as perfect a Rule of Civil, as of Ecclesiastical Policy?
Why should they not be as complete a System of Ethics, as they are a Canon of
Worship? Why do not these men require from the Scriptures express Commands for
every Action they do in common life? How dare they take any Physic, but what
is prescribed in the Word of God? How dare they commence a Suit at Law, without
Warranty from Scripture? How dare they do any natural action, without
particular advice and direction of Holy Writ?

4. Thirdly, But as foolish as this Opinion is, its mischief equals its folly;
for it is impossible but that these Sons of strife and singularity must have
been troublesome and seditious in all Churches and Commonwealths. Had they
lived under the Jewish Church, why then, Where has Moses commanded the Feast of
Purim, the Feast of the Dedication, the Fasts of the fourth, the fifth, the
seventh, and the tenth months: What Warrant for the building of Synagogues? and
what Command for that significant Ceremony of wearing sackcloth and ashes, in
token of Humiliation? If in the primitive Ages of Christianity, why then, where
did our Savior appoint the Love Feasts? Where has he instituted the Kiss of
Charity? Where has he commanded the observations of Lent and Easter? Where the
Lord's Day Sabbath? and, where all their other Commemorative Festivals? Vide
Tertull. de Corona, c. 3.

Will they retreat to the Lutheran Churches, they will there meet with not only
all the same, but many more Antichristian and superstitious Ceremonies to
offend their tender Consciences, and will find themselves subject to the same
Discipline and Government, saving that their Superintendents want the
Antichristian Honors and Revenues of the English Bishops, partly through the
poverty of the Country, partly through the injury of Sacrilege, but mainly
because the Church Revenues are in the possession of Romish Bishops? Will they
to France, there, notwithstanding the unsettled state of the Protestants of that
Nation, through want of the assistance of the Civil Power, they shall meet with
their Liturgies, and established Forms of Prayer, and Change of Apparel for
Divine Service, as well as at home? If they will to Geneva, there Mr. Calvin's
Common Prayer Book is as much imposed, as the Liturgy of the Church of England;
there they are enjoined the use of Wafer-Cakes, the Custom of Godfathers, and
Godmothers, bidding of Prayer, proper Psalms not only for days, but for hours
of the day, with diverse other Rites and Ceremonies, that are no where recorded
in the Word of God. In a word, What Church in the World can affirm these were
the only Customs of the Apostolical Age, and that the Primitive Church never
used more or less than these? So that these men of scruple, that renounce
Communion with the Church of England, must do the same with all Churches in the
World; in that there is not any one Church in Christendom, whose Laws and
Customs are not apparently liable either to the same, or as great exceptions.
Now Magistrates must needs be obligd to deal wonderful gently with such tender
Consciences as these, that are acted by such nice and unhappy Principles, as
must force them to be troublesome and unpeaceable in any Commonwealth in the
World. Nay, what is more notorious than all this, these men have all along, in
pursuit of this Principle, run directly counter to their own practices and
persuasions. For, not to puzzle them to discover in which of the Gospels is
enjoined the form of Public Penance in the Kirk of Scotland, or to find out
the Stool of Repentance either among the works of Bezaleel, or the Furniture of
the Temple; We read indeed of Beesoms, and Flesh-forks, and Pots, and Shovels,
and Candlesticks, but not one syllable of Joynt-stools. Let them tell me, What
Precept or Example they have in the Holy Scriptures for singing Psalms in
Meeter? Where has our Savior or his Apostles enjoined a Directory for public
Worship? And that which themselves imposed, What Divine Authority can it
challenge, beside that of an Ordinance of Lords and Commons? What Precept in
the Word of God can they produce for the significant Form of swearing (by
laying their hand upon the Bible) which yet they never scrupled? What Scripture
Command have they for the three significant Ceremonies of the solemn League and
Covenant, viz. That the whole Congregation should take it (1.) Uncovered, (2.)
Standing, (3.) with their right hand lift up bare. Now, What a prodigious piece
of impudence was this, that when they had not only written so many Books with
so much vehemence against three innocent Ceremonies of the Church, only because
they were significant, but had also involved the Nation in a civil War (in a
great measure) for their removal, and had armed themselves and their Party
against their Sovereign with this Holy League of Rebellion, that even then they
should impose three others, so grossly and so apparently liable to all their own
Objections? What clearer evidence can we possibly have, That it is not
Conscience, but humor and peevishness that dictates their scruples? And, What
instance have we, in any Nation of the World, of any Schism and Faction so
unreasonably begun and continued? The Rebellion of Corah indeed may resemble,
but nothing can equal it.

And from hence we may discover, how vain a thing it is to make Proposals and
Condescensions to such unreasonable men, when it is so impossible to satisfy
all their demands; and suppose we should yield and deliver up to their zeal,
those harmless Ceremonies, they have so long worried with so much fury and
impatience; it would only cherish them in their restless and ungovernable
persuasions: For whilst their peevish tempers are acted by this exorbitant
Principle, the Affairs of Religion can never be so settled, as to take away all
occasions and pretenses of Quarrel; in that there never can be any
Circumstances of Religious Worship, against which this Principle may not as
rationally be urged (and it is impossible to perform Religious Worship without
some Circumstance or other: and if all men make not use of it against all
particulars, it is because they are humoursom as well as seditious, and so allow
one thing upon the same Principle they disavow another: For certainly otherwise
it were impossible, that any men should, when they pray, refuse to wear a
Surplice; and yet when they swear, (which is but another sort of Divine
Worship) never scruple to kiss the Gospel. So that whoever seriously imbibes
this persuasion, and upon that account withdraws himself from the Communion of
the Church, he understands not the consequences of his Opinion; if it does not
lead him down to the lowest folly of Quakerism, which after diverse gradual
exorbitances of other less extravagant Sects, was but the last and utmost
improvement of this Principle. And therefore, whilst men are possessed with
such a restless and untoward persuasion, What can be more apparently vain, than
to talk of Accommodations, or to hope for any possibility of quiet and
setlement, till Authority shall see it necessary (as it will first or last) to
scourge them into better manners, and wiser opinions? So that we see the weight
of the Controversy lies not so much in the particular matters in debate, as in
the Principles upon which it is managed; and for this very reason, though we are
not so fond as to believe the Constitutions of the Church unalterable, yet we
deem it apparently absurd, to forego any of her established Ceremonies out of
compliance with these men's unreasonable demands: which as it would be coarsly
impolitick upon diverse other accounts, so mainly by yielding up her Laws, and
by consequence submitting her Authority to such Principles as must be eternal
and invincible hindrances of Peace and Setlement. This, let them consider whom
it most concerns.

5. Fourthly, As for their Principle of the perfection and sufficiency of the
Holy Scriptures, it is undeniably certain as to the fundamental Truths, and
substantial Duties of Christian Religion; but when this Rule, that is suited
only to things necessary, is as confidently applied to things accessory, it
lays in the minds of men impregnable Principles of Folly and Superstition: For
confounding them in their different apprehensions between the substantial
Duties, and external Circumstances of Religion; and making them of equal value
and necessity, it makes the doing, or not doing of a thing, necessary to
procure the Divine acceptance, which God himself has not made so; and places a
Religion in things that are not religious, and possesses the minds of men with
false and groundless fears of God: wherein consists the very Essence and
Formality of Superstition. Whereas were they duly instructed in the great
difference between things absolutely necessary, and things merely decent, and
circumstantial; this would not only preserve them in the right Notions of good
and evil, but also keep up the Purity of Religion, Decency of Worship, and due
Reverence of Authority. And therefore when these men would punctually tie up
the Magistrate to add nothing to the Worship of God, but what is enjoined in
the Word of God, if their meaning be of new Articles of Belief, it is
notoriously impertinent; because to this no Civil Magistrate pretends; But if
their meaning be, that the Magistrate has no Authority to determine the
particular circumstances of Religion, that are left undetermined by the Divine
Law, it is then indeed to the purpose, but as notoriously false; in that we are
certainly bound to obey him in all things lawful, and every thing is so, that
is not made unlawful by some prohibition; for things become evil not upon the
score of their being not commanded, but upon that of their being forbidden; and
what the Scripture forbids not, it allows; and what it allows, is not unlawful;
and what is not unlawful, may lawfully be done: and therefore it must needs be
our Duty to conform to all circumstances of Worship, that are determined by
lawful Authority, if they are not antecedently forbidden by the Law of God,
though they are not commanded. Things that are not determined remain
indifferent; what is indifferent is lawful, and what is lawful the Magistrate
may lawfully command; and if it be sinful to obey him in these things, it is so
to obey him at all; for all things are either lawful or unlawful: it is a sin to
obey him in things unlawful, and if it be so in things lawful too, then is all
obedience sinful.

6. Fifthly, When they tell us, That the Civil Magistrate is indeed to see to
the execution of the Laws of Christ, but to make none of his own: it is a
distinction without a difference; for if he may provide for the execution of
the Laws of Religion, then may he make Laws that they shall be executed; this
being the most proper and effectual means to promote their execution: so that
nothing can be more vain than to deny the Civil Magistrate a power of making
Laws in Religion, and yet to allow him an Authority to see the Laws of Religion
executed; because that is so apparently employed in this, in that whoever has a
power to see that Laws be executed, cannot be without a power to command their
execution: Especially if we consider the particular Nature of the Laws of
Christ, that they have only determined the substance and Morality of religious
Worship, and therefore must needs have left the ordering of its circumstances
to the power and wisdom of lawful Authority; and whatever they determine about
them, is but in order to the execution of the Laws of God; in that whatever
they enjoin cannot be put in practice, without being clothed with some
particular circumstances, and reduced to some particular Cases. Thus when the
Holy Apostle sets us down a general Rule, that all things be done in order and
decency, without determining what the things are that are conducive to it, the
determination of this Rule when it is reduced to practice, must be entirely left
to the Government of the Church, that must judge what things are decent and
orderly; and what Laws it establishes in order to it, though they are but
further pursuances of the Apostolical Precept, yet are they new and distinct
Commands by themselves, and enjoin something, that the Scripture no where
commands. So that the Divine Laws being general, and general Laws not being to
be put in Execution, but in particular Cases and Instances, he that has
Authority to look to the Execution of these general Laws, must withal be vested
with a Power to determine with what particular Instances, Cases, and
Circumstances they shall be put in Practice and Execution.

And here when they tell us, that it cannot stand with the Love and Wisdom of
God, not to take order himself for all things that immediately concern his own
Worship and Kingdom; and that if Jesus Christ has not determined all particular
Rites and Circumstances of Religion, he has discharged his office with less
wisdom and fidelity than Moses; who ordered every thing appertaining to the
Worship of God, even as far as the Pins and Nails of the Tabernacle, with
diverse others the like idle and impertinent reasonings: One would think that
men who argue at this rate, had already at least discovered in the Holy
Scriptures a complete Form of Religious Worship, as to all particular Rites and
Ceremonies of an eternal, universal, and unchangeable obligation; and therefore
till they can believe this themselves, and prove it to others, instead of
returning solemn Answers to such baffled and intolerable Impertinencies, I
shall only advise them, to consider the unlucky consequents of their way of
arguing, when instead of producing a particular Form of Public Worship,
prescribed by God himself, they with their wonted modesty prove he ought to
have done it; and that unless he has done it, he has been defective in his Care
and Providence over his Church: For what can the Issue of this be, but that God
is chargeable with want of Wisdom or Goodness, or with some other Defect, even
by certain and infallible Experience? For, if he has not determined every
particular Circumstance of Worship, then he must stand charged with all the
absurdities, they object against their being left undetermined; and therefore
if no such prescribed form can be produced, (as it is infinitely certain none
ever can) then let them consider, what follows* So unhappy a thing is it, when
men will needs be disputing against Experience; whose Evidence is so powerful
and forcible upon the minds of men, that Demonstration it self is not strong
enough to cope with it: How much less the weak and puny Arguments, wherewith
these men assault it?

Sect. 7. Sixthly, There is no particular Action but what is capable of a
strange and unaccountable variety of Circumstances, nor any part of outward
Worship but may be done after a thousand different Modes and Fashions; in that
as every action is clothed with natural and emergent Circumstances, so is every
Circumstance with its Circumstances, every one of which may be modified in
sundry ways and manners. And therefore, in this infinite variety of things, the
Laws of God prescribe only the general Lines of Duty, and rarely descend to
their particular Determinations, but leave them to be determined by Prudence
and Discretion, by Choice, and Custom, by Laws, and Prescriptions, and by all
those ways by which Humane Affairs are governed and transacted. Thus for
example, The Divine Law has made Charity a standing and eternal Duty, but has
left its particular way of expression undetermined, and uncommanded: and it is
indifferent whether it be done by building of Colleges, or Churches, or
Hospitals; by repairing of Bridges, or Rivers, or Highways; by redeeming of
Slaves and Prisoners; by hospitality to the Poor, or Provision for Orphans; or
by any other way of Public or Private Bounty: and when a man's own thoughts
have determined his own choice to one or more of these Particulars, even that
is vested with a strange number of Accidents and Circumstances, which must of
necessity be left entirely to the conduct of his own Reason and Discretion. And
the case is the same, as in all other Duties of Moral Virtue; so in that of
religious gratitude, or Divine Worship, this Duty it self is of a natural and
essential necessity; but yet may and must be performed with an unconceivable
variety of Dresses, Customs and ways of Expression, that are left utterly free
and undetermined in Scripture: any of which may be decently used, provided they
do not make debasing representations of God, wherein consists the proper folly
of Idolatry and Superstition. And all the advantages of Order and Solemnity,
wherewith Religion may be prudently adorned, are not only lawful, but decent,
although they are not warranted by any Precept in the Word of God; that neither
has, nor indeed can determine all particular Modes and Circumstances of
Worship, they are so various, and so changeable. And men may, with as much
reason, search the holy Records for the Methods of Legal Proceedings in our
Common Law Courts, as for particular Rubricks and Prescriptions of all outward
Forms and Circumstances of Public Worship: So that what these men demand is so
unreasonable, that, considering the nature of things, it is impossible.

Sect. 8. And this may suffice to demonstrate the unparalled follies and
mischiefs of this Principle. Which being all I intend at present, I suppose it
needless to engage in any further Scholastic Disputes, about the nature of
indifferent Actions, and some other less material Controversies that depend
upon this; partly because this Principle on which alone they stand, being
removed, they become utterly groundless, and so by its Confutation are
sufficiently confuted; and partly because all this has been so often, so fully,
and so infinitely performed already. And of all the Controversies that have
ever been started in the world, it will be hard to find any that have been more
fairly pursued and satisfactorily decided, than this of the Church of England,
against its Puritan Adversaries; that has all along been nothing else but a
Dispute between Rational Learning, and Unreasonable Zeal. And it has been no
less an unhappiness, than it was a Condescension in the Defenders of our
Church; that they have been forced to waste their time and their parts, in
baffling the idle Cavils of a few hotheaded and Brainsick People. And there
is scarce a greater Instance of the unreasonableness of Mankind, than these
men's Folly, in persisting so obstinately in their old and pitiful Clamours,
after they have been so convincingly answered, and so demonstratively confuted.
And indeed how is it possible to satisfy such unreasonable men, when their
greatest Exception against the Constitutions of the Church has ever been no
other than, That they were the Churches Constitutions? Insomuch, that if
Authority should think good out of compliance with their cross Demands, to
command what they now think necessary, that must then, according to their
Principles, become unlawful: because (forsooth) where they take away the
liberty of an Action, they destroy its lawfulness. Now what possibly could have
betrayed men into so absurd a Persuasion, but a stubborn Resolution to be
refractory to all Authority, and to be subject to nothing but their own
insolent Humors? And as long as they lie under the power of this Persuasion,
that they are obliged in Conscience to act contrary to whatever their
Superiors command them in the Worship of God, the Magistrate has no other way
left to decoy them into Obedience, but by forbidding what he would have them
do, and commanding what he would have them forbear; and then if he will accept
to be obeyed by disobedience, he shall find them (good men) the most obedient
Subjects in the world.

Sect. 9. But to return to what I was saying, instead of troubling my self with
any further Confutation of so baffled a Cause, I shall rather choose to do it
more briefly, and yet perhaps more effectually, by uybraiding them with their
shameful Overthrows, and daring them but to look those Enemies in the face,
that have so lamentably cowed them by so many absolute Triumphs and Victories:
And, not to mention diverse other Learned and Excellent Persons, I shall only
single out that famous Champion of our Church, Mr. Hooker; upon him let them
try their Courage (though by so safe a Challenge I do but give proof of my own
Cowardice.) How long has his incomparable Book of Ecclesiastical Polity bid
shameful defiance to the whole Party, and yet never found any so hardy as to
venture upon an Encounter? Now this Author being confessedly a Person of so
much Learning, Candor, Judgment, and Ingenuity, and withal so highly prized,
and insisted upon by the regular and obedient Sons of the Church, that they
have in a manner cast the issue of the whole Cause upon his performance: What
is the Reason he was never vouchsafed so much as the attempt of a just Reply?
It Is apparent enough both by their Writings, and their Actions, that they have
not wanted Zeal; and therefore that he has escaped so long free from all
contradiction, it is not for want of good will, but ability; not because they
would not, but because they were convinced they could not confute him. So that
the Book it self is as full and demonstrative a Confutation of their Cause, as
the matters contained in it; i. e. it is Unanswerable, (and I know nothing can
do it more effectually, unless perhaps a Reply to it) and shall live an eternal
shame and reproach to their Cause, when that is dead; and would probably have
been buried in utter forgetfulness, were it not for this Trophy of success
against them: And therefore, until they can at least pretend to have returned
some satisfactory Answer to that Discourse, they prove nothing but their own
impudence; whilst they continually pelt us with their Pamphlets, and such
little Exceptions, that have been so long since so shamefully and
demonstratively baffled.

Sect. 10. And whereas they are wont, in order to the making their Principles
look more plausibly, to stuff their Discourses with frequent and tragical
Declamations against Popery, Will Worship, Superstition, etc. I cannot persuade
my self, it is worth the labor to wipe off such idle reproaches, by solemnly
discoursing these matters; both because this has been so frequently and fully
performed already, and because, though these outcries have been made use of to
affright silly People; yet few, if any of their Ringleaders are still so fond
either to own this Charge against us, or to plead it in their own
Justification. Only I cannot but observe of all these and the like Pretenses,
that we need not any stronger Arguments against themselves, than their own
Objections against us. For if in this Case there be any Superstition, it is they
that are guilty of it: For this Vice consists not so much in the nature of
things, as in the apprehensions of men, when their minds are possessed with
weak and unworthy conceits of God. Now he that conforms to the received Customs
and Ceremonies of a Church, does it not so much upon the account of any
intrinsic value of the things themselves, as out of a sense of the necessity
of Order, and of the Duty of Obedience: whereas he that scrupulously refuses to
Use and Practice them, takes a wrong estimate of the Divine Wisdom and
Goodness, and imagines that God judges his Creatures by nice and pettish Laws,
and lays a greater stress upon a doubtful or indifferent Ceremony, than upon
the great Duty of Obedience, and the peace and tranquillity of the Church. So
that the Principles upon which we proceed, are no other, than, That, as the
Divine Law has prescribed the Substantial Duties of Religion; so it has left
its Modes and Circumstances undetermined: but because every action must be done
some way or other, and be vested with some Circumstances or other; and because
the generality of men are not so apt to be abused with fantastic and
ridiculous conceits in any thing, as in matters of Religion; therefore we think
it necessary, for the prevention of all the follies and indecencies, that
ignorance and superstitious Zeal would introduce into the Worship of God, That
the Public Laws should determine some Circumstances of Order and Decency;
which have at least this Advantage, that they provide against the mischiefs of
Disorder and Confusion: and therefore we place no antecedent necessity in any
of the particular Rites and Ceremonies of our Church, but only think it highly
convenient, if not absolutely necessary, that some be prescribed; that there is
an handsomness and beauty in these that are prescribed: and therefore, because
it is necessary that some be determined, and because these are, rather than
diverse others, already settled, we think they have an indispensable necessity
superinduced upon them, consequent to the determinations of Authority. No man
affirms, That we cannot serve God acceptably without a Surplice; but yet,
because it is but requisite that Public Worship should be performed with beauty
and solemnity; and because the use of this Vestment is but handsome and
beautiful, and prevents slovenliness and indecency, it is but agreeable that it
should be enjoined, as any other decent Habit might have been: and when this is
singled out by Authority, it then becomes consequentially necessary: Whereas
those, who forbid things indifferent as sinful, and lay obligations upon men's
Consciences, to abstain from what is innocent, and make that necessary not to
be done, which God has left at liberty, and made lawful to be done; usurp upon
men's Consciences, by imposing Fetters on them, where God has left them free,
and become guilty of the most palpable piece of Superstition, by teaching their
own Prohibitions for Doctrines; and so making it a necessary Duty, and part of
Divine Worship, to abstain from what God has no where forbidden; and making it
a mortal and damnable Sin, to do what is innocent; and supposing that God will,
or at least justly may, inflict eternal Torments upon men, for making their
Addresses to him, rather in a cleanly White Vestment, than in a Tailors Cloak,
or perhaps in Mechanical Querpo.

Sect. II. And then as for their outcry against Will Worship, it is the very
same with that against Superstition; for it is one sort of it, and is criminal
no farther than it is superstitious. Now when they exclaim against Superstition,
they mean only that part of it that consists in Will Worship, and when against
Will Worship, it is only as it is a Branch of Superstition: So that these two
impertinent Clamours signify but the same thing under different Denominations,
and so amount but to one. But however this is it is certain, that Will Worship
consists in nothing else than in men's making their own fancies and inventions
necessary parts of Religion, whereby they make that requisite to procure the
Divine acceptance, that God has no where required; and it is the same thing
whether this be done by Injunctions or Prohibitions: and they that affirm the
doing or not doing of an Action which God has no where either commanded or
forbidden to be necessary Duties, are equally guilty of this Crime: And
therefore if these men make it necessary to forbear what God has no where
forbidden, they teach their own fancies for Doctrines, and impose something as
a part of the service of God, on their own, and other men's Consciences, that
the Law of God has not imposed; and withal so unworthily mis-represent the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, as to labor to make the world believe, That God
has such an abhorrency to a thing so innocent as a White Garment, That, to
worship him in it, is sufficient to bring us under his everlasting Wrath and
Displeasure; for every thing that is sinful, is as well in their, as our,
esteem mortal and damnable.

But then, as for our own parts, they cannot be more apparently guilty of this
piece of folly, then we are clear and innocent from its very suspicion; because
all Rituals, and Ceremonies, and Postures, and manners of performing the
outward Expressions of Devotion, are not in their own nature capable of being
parts of Religion; and therefore unless we used and imposed them as such, it is
lamentably precarious to charge the determination of them with Will Worship;
because that consists in making those things Parts of Religion, that God has
not made so. So that when the Church expressly declares against this use of
them, and only injoins them as mere Circumstances of Religious Worship, it is
apparent that it cannot by imposing them, make any additions to the Worship of
God, but only provides, That what God has required, be performed in a decent
and orderly manner.

Sect. 12. And then as for Christian Liberty, Why should we suffer them so far
to invade ours, as to renounce those things as criminal, which we believe to be
innocent? And if things indifferent when enjoined lose not only their liberty,
but their lawfulness; then why not when forbidden, and that by an incompetent
Authority? when our Superiors impose Rules of Decency, and Law of Discipline,
they do not infringe our Christian Liberty; because they do not abolish the
indifferency of things themselves, wherein alone it consists: and though they
become thereby necessary Duties, it is not from the nature and necessity of the
thing it self, but from the Obligations of Obedience, or some emergent Reasons
of Order and Decency: whereas nothing can be more plain, than that these men do
not only abridge our Liberty, but also lay insolent confinements upon the
Supreme Power, by making things indifferent so absolutely unlawful, that they
will not allow the just Commands of lawful Authority sufficient to make them
cease to be sinful. How often, and how plainly have they been told, that, when
Authority injoins things left indifferent, and undetermined by the Word of God,
it is so far from incroaching upon our Christian Liberty, that it rather
confirms it? In that this supposes that the things themselves may, or may not
be either done or enjoined, according to the dictates of Prudence and
Discretion; but when they are once determined by public Laws, though the
matter of the Law be indifferent, yet Obedience to it is not. Whereas when they
will not permit their Governors to injoin these things, and if they do, will
not obey their injunctions, do they not apparently entrench upon our Liberty,
by making what Christ has left indifferent, necessary; and, under pretenses of
asserting their Christian Liberty, take upon them to confine the rights of
Authority? But to all this, as evident as it is, nothing can make them attend;
but they still deafly proceed in their old Clamours: which is too clear an
Argument, that it is not Reason that dictates their Exceptions, but humor,
prejudice, and peevishness.

Sect. 13. And then as for their Declamations against adding to the Law of God,
to be short, I appeal to the Reason of all mankind, whether any men in the
World are more notoriously guilty of unwarrantable Additions than these, who
forbid those things as sinful, and consequently under pain of Damnation, which
the Law of God has no where forbidden? What is it to teach the Commandments of
men for Doctrines, but to teach those things to be the Law of God that are not
so? And, What can more charge the Divine Law of Imperfection, than to teach
that a man may perform all that it has commanded, and yet perish for not doing
something, that it has not commanded? And so do they, who make it necessary not
to do something that God has left indifferent. Whereas nothing can be more
Unreasonable than to tax the Church of making Additions to the Law of God,
because all her Laws are imposed, not as Laws of God, but as Laws of men, and
so are not more liable to this Charge than Iustinian's Institutes, and
Littleton's Tenures.

And then in the last place, as for their noise against Popery, (a term, that,
as well as some other angry words, signifies any thing that some men dislike) I
shall say no more, than, that we have most reason to raise this outcry, when
they take upon themselves (as well as the old Gentleman at Rome) to control
the Laws of the Secular Powers. And what do they, but set up a Pope in every
man's Conscience, whilst they vest it with a Power of countermanding the Decrees
of Princes? These things cannot but appear with an undeniable evidence to any
man, that is not invincibly either ignorant, or wilful, or both: and therefore
it is time they should, at least for shame, if they will not for Conscience,
cease to disturb the Church with Clamor, and Exceptions so miserably
impertinent, that I blush for having thus far pursued them with a serious
Confutation. And therefore leaving them and their impertinencies together, (for
I despair of ever seeing these old and dear Acquaintances parted) I shall now
address my self to clear off one more material and more plausible Objection,
and so conclude this particular. And it is this.

Sect. 14. It Is possible, the Magistrate may be deceived in his Determinations,
and establish a Worship that is in its own nature sinful and superstitious; in
which case (if what I contend for be true) all his Subjects must either be
Rebels, or Idolaters: if they obey, they sin against God; if they disobey, they
sin against their Sovereign. This is the last Issue of all that is objected in
this Controversy, and the only Argument that gives gloss and color to all
their other trifling pretenses: And yet it is no more than what may be as fairly
objected against all Government of Moral and Political Affairs; for there it is
as possible, that the Supreme Power may be mistaken in its Judgment of good and
evil; and yet no man will deny the Civil Power of Princes, because they are
fallible, and may perhaps abuse it. And yet in this alone lies all the strength
of this Objection against their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, because forsooth,
it is possible they may err, and manage it to evil purposes. But whatever force
it carries in it, it rather strikes at the Divine Providence, than my
Assertion, and charges that of being defective in making sufficient Provisions
for the due Government of mankind, in that it has not set over us infallible
Judges and Governors: For unless all Magistrates be guided by an unerring
Spirit, it is possible they may act against the ends of their Institution; and
if this be a sufficient Objection against their Authority, it must of necessity
overthrow the Power of all fallible Judicatures, and make Governors as
incompetent Judges in matters of Morality and Controversies of right and wrong,
as in Articles of Faith and Religion. And therefore our Enquiry is, to find out
the best way of settling the world, that the state of things is capable of: If
indeed mankind were infallible, this Controversy were at an end; but seeing
that all men are liable to Errors and Mistakes, and seeing there is an absolute
necessity of a Supreme Power in all Public Affairs, our Question (I say) is,
What is the most prudent, and expedient way of settling them; not that possibly
might be, but that really is? And this (as I have already sufficiently proved)
is, to devolve their management on the Supreme Civil Power; which though it may
be imperfect and liable to Errors and Mistakes, yet it is the least so, and is a
much better way to attain Public Peace and Tranquillity, than if they were
entirely left to the ignorance and folly of every private man, which must of
necessity be pregnant with all manner of Mischiefs and Confusions. So that this
method, I have assigned, being comparatively the best way of Government of all
Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Affairs, is not to be rejected, because it is
liable to some inconveniences; but rather to be embraced above all others,
because it is liable to incomparably the fewest. And if it so happen, that some
private persons suffer wrong from this method of proceeding, yet this private
injury has an ample Compensation from the Public benefit that arises from it;
and when it so falls out that either the whole Society, or one individual must
suffer, it is easy to determine, that better one honest man perish, than a
million. The inconveniences of a bad Government are inconsiderable, in
comparison to Anarchy and Confusion; and the evils, that fall upon particular
men from its unskilful or irregular Administration, are vastly too little to
weigh against the necessity of its institution.

Sect. 15. And upon this Principle stands the necessity of subjection and
obedience to all Authority, in that, though its ill management may happen to
bring many and great inconveniences upon the Public; yet they cannot equal the
mischiefs of that Confusion which must necessarily arise, if Subjects are
warranted to disobey, or resist Government, whenever they shall apprehend it is
ill administered. Perhaps never any Government was so good, as to be administered
with exact Justice and Equity, nor any Governor so wise, as not to be
chargeable with faults and miscarriages; and therefore if upon every quarrel
every wise or honest man can pick against the Laws of the Commonwealth, he may
lawfully withdraw his obedience, What can follow but a certain and unavoidable
dissolution of Government, when every man will be commanded by nothing, but his
own Persuasions, that is himself? And upon this account it is that the Law of
God has tied upon us such an absolute and indispensable subjection to
Authority, which though it may be mischievous, yet it is less so than
disobedience: and the world must be governed, as it can be, by Men, and not as
it might be, by Angels. The management indeed of Humane Affairs is generally
bad enough, but it is as well as can probably be expected, if we consider the
weaknesses and imperfections of humane Nature: and therefore we must bear it as
well as we can: because if we go about to alter any present Setlement, we must
almost of necessity make it worse: And all the effects of such attempts have
seldom ended in any thing else but perpetual Confusions, till things have at
length resetled in the same, or as bad, (if not a worse) condition than they
were in before. The miseries of Tyranny are less, than those of Anarchy; and
therefore it is better to submit to the unreasonable Impositions of Nero, or
Caligula, than to hazard the dissolution of the State, and consequently all the
Calamities of War and Confusion, by denying our subjection to Tyrants. And
there never was any lawful Magistrate so bad, whose Laws and Government were
not more conducive to the preservation of the Common Good, than his Oppression
was to subvert it: and it is wisely eligible to suffer a less Evil, rather than
lose a greater good. It Is a known, and a wise saying of Tacitus; Bonos
Principes voto expetere debemus, qualescunque pati; and quomodo sterilitatem,
aut nimios imbres, and caetera Naturae mala, sic luxum and avaritiam
dominantium tolerare.

And this, in one word, is not only a satisfactory Answer, but an ample
Confutation of that Pestilent Book, (Vindiciae contra Tyrannos) the scope
whereof is, only to invite Subjects to rebel against Tyrannical Government, by
representing the evils of Tyranny: which though they were as great, as he
supposes them to be; yet they are abundantly less than those that follow upon
Rebellion, as himself and his Party were sufficiently taught by the Event. And
for one Commonwealth, he can instance in, that has gained by Rebellion; it is
easy to produce an hundred that it has hazarded, if not utterly ruined. And
therefore this Author (not to mention Mariana, and Buchanan, and others) has
performed nothing in behalf of his Cause, by displaying the miseries of a
Tyrannical Power, unless he had withal evinced them to be more calamitous than
those of War and Confusion. There is nothing in this World, that depends upon
the freedom of man's will, can be so securely established, as not to be liable
to sad inconveniences; and therefore that Constitution of Affairs is most
eligible, that is liable to the fewest. And upon this score, I say, it is that
the Divine Law has so severely enjoined us to submit to the worst of
Governors; because notwithstanding that Tyranny is an oppressing burden of
Humane life, yet it is less intolerable than a state of War and Confusion.

Sect. 16. But to speak more expressly to the particular matter in debate, It Is
necessary the world must be governed; governed it cannot be without Religion,
and Religion, as harmless and peaceable as it is in it self, yet when mixed with
the Follies and Passions of men, it does not usually inspire them with overmuch
gentleness and goodness of Nature; and therefore it is necessary that it submit
to the same Authority, that commands over all the other affections of the mind
of man. And we may as well suppose all men just and honest, and upon that
account cancel all the Laws of Equity, as suppose them wise and sober in their
Religious Conceits, and upon that score take off all restraints from the
excesses and enormities of Zeal. It Is therefore as necessary to the
preservation of Public Peace, that men should be governed in matters of
Religion, as in all other common Affairs of Humane life. And as for all the
inconveniences that may follow from it, they are no other, than what belong to
all manner of Government, and such as are, and must be, unavoidable as long as
mankind is endued with liberty of Will; for so long he cannot be entrusted with
any Power, how good soever, that he may not abuse. And therefore for men to go
about to abrogate the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate,
because he may abuse it to evil and irreligious ends, by establishing Idolatry,
instead of the true Worship of God; (in which case it is pity that good men
should be exposed to ruin, only for preserving a good Conscience) It Is just as
reasonable as if they should cashier all manner of Government, and set men free
from all Oaths and Obligations of Allegiance; because it is possible some
Usurper may gain the Supreme Power, and then force his Subjects to abjure all
their former Oaths to their lawful Sovereign; and it is pity that men of the
gallantest, and most honest Principles, should be fined, decimated, hanged,
banished, and Murdered only for their loyalty to their Prince. And thus will
the Parallel run equal in all Cases between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Authority of the Supreme Powers: both may be, and often are lamentably abused;
and therefore if that be reason enough to abolish one, it is so to abolish both:
so that the whole result of all amounts only to this Enquiry, Whether it would
not be a politic course to take away all Government, because all Government
may be abused?

Sect. 17. Though this be a sufficient reply to the Objection, yet it will not
be altogether impertinent or unnecessary to abet it with this one consideration
more. That it may, and often does so happen, that it is necessary to punish men
for such Persuasions into which they have perhaps innocently abused themselves:
for it is easily possible for well-meaning People through ignorance and
inadvertency to be betrayed into such unhappy Errors, as may tend to the
Public Disturbance, which though it be not so much their Crime as Infelicity,
yet is there no remedy but it must expose them to the Correction of the Public
Rods and Axes. Magistrates are to take care of the Commonwealth, and not of
every particular man's concerns: And the end of all their Laws is to provide for
the welfare of the Public, that is their Charge, and that they must secure;
and if any harmless and well-meaning man make himself obnoxious to the
Penalties of the Law, that is a misfortune they cannot prevent, and therefore
must deal with him, as they do with all other Offenders; that is, pity, and
punish him. Private interest must yield to Public Good, and therefore, when
they cannot stand together, and there is no remedy but one must suffer, it is
better certainly that one, or a few, should perish than the whole Community.
Neither is it possible that any Laws should be so warily contrived, but that
some innocent Persons may sometimes fall under their Penalties; yet, because
it is more beneficial to the Public Welfare, that now and then a guiltless
person should suffer, than that all the guilty should escape; in that the
former injures but one, the latter all: Therefore is it necessary to govern all
Societies by Laws, and Penalties, without regard to the ill fortune that may
befall a few single persons, which can hardly be avoided whilst the Laws are in
force: and yet it is necessary that either the same, or some other in their
stead be established, that will be liable to the same inconvenience. Besides,
it is not unworthy Observation, that it is not so properly the end of Government
to punish Enormities, as to prevent Disturbances; and when they bring
Malefactors to Justice (as we term it) they do not so much inflict a Punishment
upon the Crime, (for that belongs peculiarly to the cognizance of another
Tribunal) as provide for the welfare of the Commonwealth, by cutting off such
Persons as are Pests and Enemies to it, and by the example of their Punishment
deter others from the like Practices. And therefore there are some sins, of
which Governors take not so much notice, that are more heinous in themselves,
and in the sight of God, than others that they punish with Capital Inflictions;
because they are not in their own nature so destructive of the ends of
Government, and the good of Public Societies. So that actions being punishable
by Humane Laws, not according to the nature of the Crime, but of their ill
consequence to the Public, when any thing that is otherwise even innocent, is
in this regard injurious, it as much concerns Authority to give it check by
severity of Laws and Punishments, as any the foulest Immoralities. Temporal
Punishments then are inflicted upon such persons that are turbulent against
prescribed Rules of Public Worship, upon the same account, as they are against
those that offend against all other Public Edicts of Government: they are both
equally intended, to secure the Public Peace and Interest of the Society; and
when either of them are violated, they equally tend to its disturbance: and
therefore as men's actings against the Civil Laws of a Commonwealth are
obnoxious to the Judgment of its Governors, for the same reason are all their
Offenses against its Ecclesiastical Laws liable to the censure of the same
Authority. So that the matter debated, in its last result, is not so much a
question of Religion, as of Policy; not so much of what is necessary to faith,
as to the quiet and preservation of a Commonwealth; and it is possible a man
may be a good Christian, and yet his Opinion be intolerable, upon the score of
its being inconsistent with the Preservation of the Public Peace, and the
necessary ends of Government. For it is easily imaginable how an honest and
well-meaning man may, through mere ignorance, fall into such Errors, which
though God will pardon, yet Governors must punish: His integrity may expiate
the Crime, but cannot prevent the Mischief of his Error. Nay so easy is it
for men to deserve to be punished for their Consciences, that there is no
Nation in the world, in which (were Government rightly understood and duly
managed) mistakes and abuses of Religion would not supply the Galleys with
vastly greater numbers than Villainy.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Nature and Obligations of Scandal, and of the Absurdity of Pretending
it, against the Commands of Lawful Authority.
The Contents.
THE Leaders of the Separation being ashamed of the silliness of the Principle,
with which they abuse the People, think to shelter themselves, by flying to the
pretense of Scandal. Scandal is any thing that occasions the sin of another,
and is not in it self determinately Good or Evil. All Scandal is equally taken,
but not equally Criminal. Men are to govern themselves, in this Affair, by
their own prudence and discretion. Of St. Paul's contrary behavior toward the
Jews, and Gentiles, to avoid their contrary Scandal. The reason of the seeming
Contradiction, in this point, between his Epistles to the Romans, and
Galatians. The proper obligations of Scandal are extended only to indifferent
things. The Cases, in which it is concerned, are not capable of being
determined by settled Laws and Constitutions. How scandalously these men
prevaricate with the World in their pretense of Scandal, that may excuse their
refusal of Conformity, but gives no account of their Separation. Of their
scrupling to renounce the Covenant, this is no reason to drive them from Divine
Service into Conventicles. How shamefully these men juggle with the World, and
impose upon their Followers. If they would but persuade their Proselytes to be
of their own minds, it would end all our differences. They first lead the
people into the Scandal, and then make this the formal reason why they must
follow them. If the peoples scruples are groundless, then to comply with them,
is to keep them in a sinful disobedience. A further account of their shameful
prevarication. The ridiculousness of the peoples pretending it concerning
themselves, that they are scandalized. By their avoiding private Offenses, they
run into public Scandals. They scandalize their own weak Brethren most of all,
by complying with them. Old and inveterate Scandals are not to be complied
with, but opposed: and such are those of the Non-Conformists. The Commands of
Authority and the Obligations of Obedience infinitely outweigh, and utterly
evacuate all the pretenses of Scandal.

Sect. 1.THough the former Principle, viz. that no man may with a safe
conscience do any thing in the Worship of God, that is not warranted by some
Precept or Precedent in the Word of God, be riveted into the peoples minds, as
the first and fundamental Principle of the Puritan Separation; yet their
Leaders seem to be ashamed of their own folly: and being driven from this, and
all their other little holds and shelters, they have at length thought it the
safest and the wisest course to fly to the pretense of Scandal. This is their
Fort Royal, in which they have at last secured and entrenched themselves. As
for their own parts (they tell us) they are not so fond as to believe, That the
Ceremonies of the Church of England are so superstitious, and Antichristian,
and that themselves might lawfully use them, were it not that there are great
numbers of sincere, but weak Christians that apprehend them to be sinful; and
for this reason they dare not conform to our Ceremonial Constitutions, for fear
of ensnaring and scandalizing weak Consciences; which is, in the Apostles
account of it, no less than spiritual murder. And whatever is due to
Authority, the Souls of men are too high a Tribute. None can be more ready,
than themselves, to submit to all lawful Commands; but here they desire to be
excused, when they cannot obey but at the price of Souls. It Is a dreadful Doom,
that our Savior has denounced against those, who offend any of his little
ones, i. e. Babes and Weaklings in Christianity: And therefore, though they
would not stick to hazard their own lives in obedience to Authority, yet
nothing can oblige them to be so cruel, and so uncharitable, as to destroy any
for whom Christ died; which is certainly done by casting snares and scandals
before their weak Brethren. This is the last refuge of the Leaders of the
Separation, and therefore I cannot but think my self obliged to examine its
strength and reasonableness; and I doubt not, but to make it appear as vain and
frivolous, as all their other Cavils, and shuffling Pretenses.

Sect. 2. Scandal then is a word of a large and ambiguous signification, and
the thing it imports is not determinately either good or evil, but is sometimes
innocent, and sometimes criminal, according to the different nature of those
things from whence it arises, or of those circumstances wherewith it is
attended; for in the full and proper extent of the word, it is any thing
(whether good, or evil, or indifferent) that occasions the fall or sin of
another. Now if the matter of the Scandal, or that which occasions another
sin, be in it self good and virtuous, this casual event is not sufficient to
reflect any charge or disparagement upon it; and therefore it is in Scripture
frequently attributed to the best of things, to the Cross of Christ, to Christ
himself, and to the Grace of God. If it be a thing in it self criminal, though
it be chiefly blameable upon its own account, yet this usually aggravates and
enhances the original guilt of the action. But lastly, if it be a thing
indifferent, and a matter of Christian liberty, then is it either faultless, or
chargeable, according to its different Cases and Circumstances, as Christian
prudence and discretion shall determine, so various and contingent a thing not
being capable to be governed by any fixed and settled measures. Some are
scandalized out of weakness, and some out of peevishness; some before due
information of their mistake, and some after it; some because they do not, and
some because they will not understand. All which, with infinite other
Circumstances, men ought to consider in the exercise of their Christian
liberty, and suitably to guide themselves by the same Rules of Wisdom and
Charity, that determine them in all the other affairs of humane life. For the
action it self is only the remote occasion, and not the immediate cause of the
scandal; in that, being in its own nature indifferent, and by consequence
innocent, it cannot be directly and from it self productive of any criminal
effect: and therefore, its being abused and perverted to purposes and
opportunities of sin, is purely accidental. And the proper and immediate cause
of every man's falling, is something within himself: It Is either folly, or
malice, or ignorance, or wilfulness, too little understanding, or too much
passion, that betray some men into sin by occasion of other men's actions. So
that the Schools distinction of scandal into passive or that which is taken,
and active or that which is given, is apparently false and impertinent, and is
the main thing that has perplexed and intricated all discourses of this
Article: Because Scandal, properly so called, is never given, but when it is
taken; as being only an occasion of offense taken by one manfrom the actions of
another. Now if his taking offense, where it was not given, proceeds from
weakness and ignorance, then is his case pitiable, and a good-natured man will
out of tenderness and charity forbear such things, as he seizes on to abuse to
his own destruction: For all the obligations of Scandal proceed purely from
that extraordinary height of Charity and tenderness of good Nature, that is so
signally recommended in the Gospel; which will oblige us to forbear any action
that we may lawfully omit, when we know it will prove an occasion of sin and
mischief to some well-meaning, but less knowing Christians. But if it proceed
from humor, or pride, or wilfulness, or any other vicious Principle, then is
the man to be treated as a peevish and stubborn person; and no man is bound to
part with his own freedom, because his Neighbor is froward and humorous: and
if he be resolved to fall, there is no reason I should forego the use of my
liberty, because he is resolved to make that his stumbling block. So that we
see all Scandal is equally taken, but not equally criminal: in that, some take
it only because they are weak, and some because they are peevish; according to
which different cases we are to behave our selves, with a different demeanor
in this affair.

3. And for this we have variety of Examples in the practice of the Apostles,
whose actions were liable to the opposite Scandals of Jews and Gentiles. If
they complied with the Jews in their rigorous Observation of the Mosaic Rites,
this was a Scandal to the Gentiles, by leading them into a false and
mischievous opinion of their necessity: If they did not comply, then that
proved a Scandal to those Jews, that were not as yet fully instructed in the
right nature, and extent of their Christian liberty, and the dissolution of the
Mosaic Law; and so would be tempted to fall back from that Religion, that
inclined men to a scorn and contempt of the Law of Moses. Now between these two
extremes they were forced to walk with great prudence and wariness, inclining
sometimes to one, and sometimes to the other; as they apprehended most
beneficial to the ends and Interests of Christianity. Thus though St. Paul
condescended to the Circumcision of Timothy, to humor and gratify the Jews,
who could not be so suddenly wrought off from the prejudices, and strong
impressions of their Education, and therefore were for a time indulged to the
practice of their ancient Rites and Customs; Yet, when he was among the
Gentiles, he would not be persuaded to yield so far to the Jewish obstinacy, as
to suffer the Circumcision of Titus, but opposed it with his utmost zeal and
vehemence; because this would in probability have frustrated the success of all
his labor in propagating the Gospel among foreign Nations; if he who had before
so vehemently asserted their Christian liberty, and instructed them in their
freedom from the Mosaic Law, and particularly, from this Ceremony, should now
seem inconsistent with himself, by acting directly contrary to his former
Doctrine, and bringing men into a subjection to the Law of Moses, after himself
had so often declared its being reversed and superannuated. For what else could
be probably expected, than that his Gentile Proselytes being discouraged,
partly by his prevarication, and partly by the weight of that Noke, to which
they foresaw, or at least suspected, they must submit, should be strongly
tempted to an utter Apostasy? And therefore, wisely weighing with himself, that
the scandal was less dangerous in angring the Jews, than in hazarding the
Gentiles, he chose rather to leave them to their own peevishness, than to
hazard the revolt of these, Gal. 2. 4, 5.

4. And this is the true reason (as some learned men have observed) of this
great Apostles different deportment, in this particular, toward the Churches
of Rome and Galatia; because in the Roman Church there lived no small number of
natural Jews, who, when they were first converted to Christianity, were not so
well instructed in the abrogation of the Mosaic Law. The Method, whereby the
Apostles invited them at first to embrace the Christian Faith, was barely to
convince them of its Evidence and Divine Authority; without taking any notice,
whether their old Religion were thereby abrogated, or continued: For had they
at the first attempt dealt roundly with them in that particular, that had been
so far from winning their assent, that it had been absolutely the most
effectual way to affright them from the Gospel. And from hence it came to pass,
that there were dispersed among them so many Judaizing Christians, who, though
they were sufficiently instructed in the positive Articles of the Christian
Faith; yet not being so thoroughly informed as to the superannuating of those
legal observances, they were as firmly wedded to them, as if they had still
continued in the Jewish Religion: Therefore does the Apostle advise, That these
weak and uninstructed Converts should be tenderly treated; and exhorts the more
knowing Christians, for a while, to comply with their weakness and simplicity;
till time, and better information should wear off their old prejudices, and at
length bring them to a better understanding of their own liberty.

But then, as for the Galatians, when they happened to fall into the same error,
he thought not fit to treat them with the same tenderness and Civility: But
rather chides and lashes them out of their childish folly; because (as St.
Chrysostom observes) at their first Conversion they had been competently
instructed in the extent of their Christian liberty, and had already disclaimed
all their Jewish persuasions; and therefore, for them to relapse into the
Errors of Judaism, could not proceed from weakness, and want of instruction,
but from lightness and giddiness of mind: a vanity that deserved to be
upbraided with as much briskness and vehemence of Satyr, as St. Paul has used
in that Epistle. And upon this account arose the Quarrel between him and St.
Peter, in that St. Peter had not carried himself so prudently in the use of his
Christian liberty, as he might have done; their Controversy was not about an
Article of Faith, or a prescribed Duty of Religion, but purely about an
occasional and changeable matter of prudence. But to pass by this, and diverse
other particular cases, to the same purpose, in the Writings of St. Paul, whose
practice in this affair is the best Comment upon his Doctrine: the result of
what I have discoursed from him evidently amounts to these two consequences,
(1.) That the proper obligations of Scandal are extended only to matters of an
indifferent and arbitrary Nature. Those things that are absolutely necessary,
we are bound to do, whether they offend any man or no; and those that are
absolutely unlawful, we are bound to forbear, upon the score of stronger
obligations than those of Scandal: and therefore its proper Scene must lie in
things that are not determinately good or evil. (2.) That the cases, in which
it is concerned, are not capable of being determined by any unalterable Laws
and Constitutions; and that we have no other Rules for the Government of our
actions in reference to it, but those of common prudence and discretion. And
now, from this more general account may we proceed, with more clearness and
security, to some more close and particular considerations, that immediately
relate to this affair, as it is pleaded by some men in justification of their
present Schism.

5. First, And here in the first place let me desire them, to consider how
manifestly and scandalously they prevaricate with the World, in their
management of this Apology, in that the Pretense is too narrow a Covering for
their Practices. For however it may serve to excuse their refusal of Conformity
in the Exercise of their Public and Ministerial Function, which they must
renounce, though to the ruin of their Families, to please the Brethren; yet
how will this account for all the other disorders and irregularities of their
separations? What has this to do with their private Meetings and Conventicles,
against the Commands of public Authority? They plead it only to justify
themselves in laying down their Ministry, and not to keep them from being
present at our Assemblies in a private capacity: (as they sometimes are.) Why
therefore should they keep up such an apparent Separation, by gathering people
into distinct Meetings of their own, when they might without any criminal
Scandal to their Brethren, or violence to their own Consciences, be constant at
our Congregations? When themselves were (or at least thought they were) in
power, they did not think so slightly of unnecessary Separations, but provided
against their very appearances and possibilities: Why therefore should they now
make so light of exposing the Church to all the distempers that naturally
follow, upon making Parties and Divisions? If there were nothing but Scandal in
the case, they would live quietly and conformably in a private condition,
though this might possibly restrain them from doing so in a public Office. And
one would think that such nice and tender-natur'd people, that will undo
themselves to please their Neighbors, should be wonderfully tender of giving
needless offense to their Governors.

And, whatever other pretenses they make to excuse their Nonconformity,
nothing can justify their Separation, but the unlawfulness of being present at
our Congregations. For what, if they scruple to renounce the Covenant; is this
any reason, why they should gather people into Conventicles, keep their private
Meetings in time of public Service, affront the Laws and Constitutions of the
Commonwealth, and encourage their Followers in a downright Schism and
Separation? It would be a pretty way of arguing, to hear one of them plead: I
cannot renounce the Covenant, therefore I must keep a Conventicle; and yet this
is their method of acting. And therefore they can never clear themselves of
some odd suspicions, unless they would frankly and openly declare their opinion
of our Service: If they think it unlawful, then let them own, and profess, and
plead it; if lawful, then let them justify themselves, in that, when lawful
Authority requires them, and the people, to keep up a just and lawful Communion
with the Church, yet they should notwithstanding keep up so wide a Schism, by
gathering people out of public Congregations into private Meetings. And could
their credulous Disciples be but made sensible, how coarsly they are imposed
upon by their Leaders, and how lamentably they juggle and dissemble with the
World, they would then more abhor them for their Hypocrisy, than they now
admire them for their Saint-like and demure pretenses. For if they would
persuade them to do what themselves would not scruple in their Circumstances,
(i. e. to be of their own mind) this Schism would quickly be ended, and the
Church settled. The only reason (say most of them) why they forsook their
Ministry was, That they durst not abjure the Covenant; dispense with them for
this, and they are Conformists. But if that be the only thing they scruple,
then, Why are they not regular and conformable in all other Particulars,
against which they can pretend no such Exceptions? And what does renouncing the
Covenant concern the people? And therefore how shall that excuse, or justify
them in their Separation? This thing has no relation to the Divine Service, and
therefore, however it may restrain men from something else, it is no motive to
drive them from that. Now what can be more apparent, than that these men are
resolved to comply with, and encourage, the people in a wicked and rebellious
Schism (for so it must be, if it be groundless and unwarrantable) by herding
them into Conventicles for their own private ends, and that in spite of
Authority? Whereas had they any true sense of Conscience and ingenuity, they
would labor to dispossess the people of their mistakes, and to reconcile them
to a fair and candid opinion of the Church, when she requires nothing of them,
but what they themselves are convinced in Conscience, is lawful and innocent.
For, if they valued the Peace of the Church, the Commands of Authority, and the
setlement of the Nation before their own selfish ends, instead of keeping up
Divisions (as it is evident they do by their Conventicles) they would be as
zealous, as he that is most so, to remove the grounds of Schism and Faction,
and to reunite their Party to the Church, by persuading them to an orderly and
peaceable Conformity. Which if it be innocent (as themselves believe it is) it
must, in the present Circumstances of Affairs, be necessary; if it be any man's
Duty to be peaceable in the Church, and obedient to lawful Authority.

Sect. 6. Secondly, How came the people to be scandalized? by whom were they
betrayed, and affrighted into their mistakes? Who buzzed their scruples, and
jealousies into their heads? And, Who taught them to call our Ceremonies,
Popish, Superstitious, and Antichristian? What other inducement have they to
dislike the Churches Constitutions, but merely the example of their Leaders?
Their practice is the only Foundation of the peoples opinion; and when their
flocks straggle from our Churches, it is only to follow their Pastors: They
first lead the people into an Error, and then this must be an Apology for
themselves to follow them. And thus, whilst they dance in a Circle, it is no
wonder, if at the same time, their Preachers follow their people, and the
people follow their Preachers. And therefore if the Godly Ministers, who dare
not conform for fear of scandalizing the weak Brethren, would but venture to do
it, the weak Brethren would cease to be scandalized. So that these men first
lay the stumbling block in the peoples way, and then, because it scares silly
and timorous Souls, this serves for a pretense to startle, and be astonished at
it themselves, and withal to increase the childish fears of the multitude by
their own seeming and counterfeit horror. Now with what a shameless Brow do
these men prevaricate with public Authority? They have deceived the people
into a public Error, and then will not undeceive them for fear of their
displeasure: And when they have possessed their minds with unworthy scruples,
and jealousies against the commands of their Superiors, then must this weakness
of the people be made the Formal Excuse of their own disobedience. And by this
Artifice they prostitute the Reverence of all Government to the fortuitous
humor and peevishness of their own Disciples; and so by making the public Laws
submit to the pleasure of those whom they govern, they put it in their own
power to enact, or repeal them as they please; and no Law shall have any force
to bind the Subject without their approbation: Because it is in their own power,
when they please, to work prejudices, in the people against it; and therefore,
if their being offended be sufficient to take off their obligation, it is, or
it is not a Law, only as themselves shall think good. And thus they first govern
the Common people, and then sooth and flatter their pride, by inveigling them
into a conceit, that they are governed by them, and by this stratagem they
govern all.

But however, from whomsoever these good people learned their idle and
imaginary scruples, the offense they have taken against the Customs and
Prescriptions of the Church, is either just and reasonable, or it is not: If
the former, then they have rational grounds for their dislike and separation;
and if they have, then these men that think themselves bound to comply with
them, even against the commands of Authority, ought to plead those Reasons, and
not merely Scandal, to justify their disobedience; because they must carry in
them an obligation antecedent to that of Scandal; in that they are supposed
sufficient to warrant and patronize it; and therefore it is not that, but the
grounds, on which their dislike is founded, that are to be pleaded in their
defense and justification. But if the latter, then is their dislike groundless,
and unreasonable: And if so, it is easy to determine that they ought rather to
undeceive them, by discovering their mistake, than to encourage them in their
sinful disobedience, (for so it must be, if it be groundless) by compliance
with them. And by this means they will fairly discharge themselves from all
danger of any criminal offense. For however scandal groundlesly taken (and so
it is always, because there is never any reason to be offended at an
indifferent thing) may possibly lay a restraint upon my liberty, till I have
informed the person of his Error, and disavowed those ill consequences he would
draw from my example; and when I have so done, I have prevented the danger of
Scandal, which always supposes error, weakness, or mistake of Conscience; and
therefore when the Error is discovered, and the weakness removed, so is the
scandal too: And if he shall still pretend to be scandalized, it is not because
he is weak, but peevish; and if after this I comply with them, and that against
the commands of my lawful Superiors, I shall disobey Authority, only, because
my Neighbor is unreasonable, i. e. for no reason at all. And this further
discovers, how shamelesly these men shuffle and prevaricate with the world; in
that when most of them have declared, in their private Discourses, that they
are not so fond as to imagine our Ceremonies unlawful, or Antichristian, and
when their Grandees and Representatives have professed to public Authority in
Solemn Conferences, that they scruple not these things upon their own account,
but only for fear of giving offense to some well-meaning people that were
unhappily possessed with some odd and groundless jealousies against them. For
if so, Then why are not these good people, that follow them, better informed?
Why do they not instruct them in the truth, and disabuse them out of their
false and absurd conceits? Why do they connive at their pride and presumption?
Or at least, Why do they not more smartly reprove them, for their rashness to
censure the actions of their Neighbors, to condemn, and revile the Wisdom of
their Superiors, and to scorn the Knowledge of their Spiritual Instructors? Why
do they not chide them out of their malepart, peevish, and impatient
confidence, and, by convincing them at least of the possibility of their being
deceived, reduce them to a more humble and governable temper? Why do they not
teach them in plain terms that the established way of Worship is lawful, and
innocent, and therefore that they ought not to forsake it, to the disturbance
of the Church, and contempt of Authority? If they would but make it part of
their business to undeceive the people, how easily would all their straggling
Followers return into the Communion of the Church? But they dare not let them
know their Errors, lest they should forfeit both their Party, and their
Reputation: And therefore, instead of that, they rather confirm them in their
mistakes, and in their own defense, are forced to persuade them, that they
ought to be scandalized. Insomuch, that it is not unusual to hear the foolish
people pretend it concerning themselves, and to tell you that your action is a
Scandal to them: By which they mean, either that it leads them into sin, or
that it makes them angry. If the former, that is a ridiculous contradiction;
for if they know how the snare and temptation is laid, then they know how to
escape it; my action does not force them into the sin, but only invites them to
it, through their own mistake and folly: And therefore if they have discovered,
by what mistake they are likely to be betrayed, they know how to provide
against the danger: For, if they know their duty in the case, how can they
plead Scandal, when that supposes ignorance? And however I behave my self, they
know what they have to do themselves: If they do not, How can they say of
themselves, that they are scandalized; when by so saying they confess they are
not? For that implies a knowledge how to do their duty, and avoid the danger.
If the latter, i. e. that they are angry, then all their meaning is, that I
must part with my liberty, and disobey my Superiors to please them; that their
saucy humor must give me Law; that I must be their Slave, because they are
proud, and insolent; and that they must gain a power over me, because they are
forward to censure mine actions.

7. Thirdly, We encounter Scandal with Scandal, and let the guilt of all be
discharged upon that side that occasions the most and the greatest offenses:
Now all the mischief they can pretend to ensue, in the present constitution of
affairs, upon their compliance with Authority, reaches no farther than the weak
Brethren of their own Party; whereas by their refractory disobedience they give
offense not only to them, but to all, both to the Jew, and to the Gentile, and
to the Church of God. And, not to insist upon the advantages they give to
Atheism and Popery, let me only mind them, that if the accidental offense of
the Judgments of some well-meaning, but less knowing Christians, of a private
capacity, pass a sufficient obligation upon Conscience, to restrain it from any
practice in it self lawful; of how much more force must that scandal be, that
is given to public Authority, by denying obedience to its lawful commands, and
by consequence infringing its just power in things not forbidden by any divine
Law? Now if the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England were in
themselves apparently evil, then their repugnancy to the Law of God were
sufficient Objection both against their practice, and their imposition; and
their scandal to weak and ignorant Christians were of small force, in
comparison to their intrinsic, and unalterable unlawfulness: But, because this
is not pretended in our present case, What a shameful scandal and reproach to
Religion is it, to neglect the necessary duty of Obedience, and subjection to
lawful Authority, under pretense of compliance with the weak and groundless
scruples of some private men? It Is certainly past dispute, that the reasonable
offense of some weaker Brethren cannot so strongly oblige our Consciences, as
the indispensable command of obeying our lawful Superiors. And it is a shame to
demand, Whether the Judgment of a lawful Magistrate have not more force and
power over Conscience, than the Judgment of every private Christian: If not,
then may the Laws of Authority be cancelled, and controlled by the folly and
ignorance of those that are subject to them; for mere scandal arises only from
the folly and ignorance of the persons offended. For if there be any just and
wise occasion of dislike, the action becomes primarily unlawful, not because
it is scandalous, but because it is antecedently evil; whereas mere and proper
scandal is only concerned in things in themselves indifferent: So that in this
case all the difficulty is, Whether is the greater scandal, to do an
indifferent thing, when a private Christian dislikes it; or not to do it, when
public Authority enjoins it? And certainly it can be no Controversy, Whether
it be a fouler reproach to Religion, to disobey a Christian Magistrate in a
thing lawful and indifferent, than to offend a private Christian. And I may
safely appeal to the Judgment of all wise and sober men, Whether the
intolerable waywardness of some nice and squeamish Consciences to the commands
of just Authority, be not a fouler and more notorious scandal to Religion, than
a modest and humble compliance with them, though in things not so apparently
useful and necessary?

And then, as for their own weak Brethren, of whom they seem so exceedingly
tender, they can no way more scandalize them, than by complying with them: By
which they are tempted and betrayed into the greatest and most mischievous
enormities; for thereby they encourage their folly, feed and cherish their
ungrounded fancies, confirm them in a false opinion of the unlawfulness of
their Superiors commands, and so lead them directly into the sins of
unwarrantable Schism and Disobedience. How many feeble and deluded Souls are
enticed, by the reputation of their example, to violate the commands of
Authority, and that, when themselves are not convinced of their unlawfulness,
and so entangle themselves in a complicated sin, by disobeying their lawful
Superiors, and that with a doubtful and unsatisfied Conscience? They cannot be
ignorant, that the greatest part of their zealous Disciples are offended at the
Laws and Constitutions of the Church, for no other reason, than because they
see their godly Ministers to slight them; and therefore, unless their example
be sufficient to rescind the lawful Commands of their Governors, they give them
the most criminal Scandal, by inviting them to the most criminal disobedience.
So that all circumstances fairly considered, the avoiding of offenses will
prove the most effectual inducement to Conformity: For this would take away the
very Grounds and Foundations of Scandal, remove all our differences, prevent
much trouble and more sin, cure all our Schisms, Quarrels, and Divisions,
banish our mutual Jealousies, Censures, and Animosities, and establish the
Nation in a firm and lasting Peace. In brief, the only cause of all our
troubles and disturbances, is, the inflexible perverseness of about an hundred
proud, ignorant, and seditious Preachers; against whom, if the severity of the
Laws were particularly levelled, How easy would it be in some competent time
to reduce the people to a quiet and peaceable temper, and to make all our
present Schisms (that may otherwise prove eternal) expire with, or before, the
present Age? The want, or neglect, of which method, is the only thing, that has
given them so much strength, and so long a continuance.

8. Fourthly, No man is bound to take notice of, or give place to old and
inveterate scandals, but rather ought, in defense of his Christian liberty, to
oppose them with a public defiance, and to shame those that pretend them out
of their confidence. For the only ground of compliance and condescension in
these Cases, is tenderness and compassion to some men's infirmities; and as long
as I have reason to think this the only cause of their being scandalized, so
long am I bound by charity and good nature to condescend to their weaknesses,
and no longer: For after they have had a competent time and means of better
information, I have reason enough to presume, that it is not ignorance, that is
the gound of their taking offense, but pride or peevishness, or something
worse. So that all that is to be done in this case, is to disabuse the weak by
rectifying his judgment, removing his scruples, declaring the innocence of my
action, clearing it of all sinister suspicions, and protesting against all
those abuses, he would put upon the lawful use of my Christian liberty: And
when I have so done, I have cleared my self from all his ill-natured jealousies
and surmises, and discharged all the offices and obligations of Charity. And
if, after all this, my offended Neighbor shall still persevere in his perverse
mis-interpretation of my actions, and pretend, that they still gaul and ensnare
his tender Conscience; the man is peevish and refractory, and only makes use of
this precarious pretense, to justify his uncharitable censures of my innocent
liberty; and then am I so far from being under any obligation to comply with
the peevishness and insolence of his humor, that I am strongly bound to thwart
and oppose it. For otherwise I should but betray my Christian liberty to the
Tyranny of his wilful and imperious ignorance, and give superstitious folly the
advantage and Authority of Prescription. For if that prevail in the practice of
the World, and I must yield and condescend to it, because it is stubborn, and
obstinate, it must, in process of time, gain the reputation of being the custom
and received opinion of the Church; and when it can plead that, then it becomes
necessary: Inveterate Errors are ever sacred and venerable, and what
prescription warrants, it always imposes: Custom ever did, and ever will rule
and preside in the practices of men, because it is popular; and being ever
attended with a numerous train of Followers, it grows proud and confident, and
is not ashamed to upbraid free reason with singularity and Innovation. So that
all I could gain, by an absolute resignation of my own liberty to another man's
folly, would be only to give him a plausible pretense to claim a right of
command and dominion over me, and to make my self subject to his humor by my
own civility. And thus, though the Jews were in the beginning of Christianity
for a time permitted the Rites and Customs of their Nation; yet afterward when
the Nature of the Christian Religion was, or might be, better understood, the
Church did not think it owed them so much civility: And if the Primitive
Christians had not given check to their stubborn persuasions, they had given
them Authority; and, by too long a compliance, would have vouched and abetted
their Errors, and adopted Judaism into Christianity; and Circumcision not only
might, but of necessity must have been conveyed down to us from age to age, by
as firm and uninterrupted a Tradition as Baptism.

And this shows us, how way-ward and unreasonable those men are, who still
persevere to object Scandal against the Churches Constitutions, after she has
so often protested against this Exception by so many solemn Declarations. When
at first it was pretended, it might perhaps for a while excuse, or alleviate
their disobedience; but after Authority has so sufficiently satisfied their
scruples, and removed their suspicions, and so amply cleared the innocence of
its own intentions, if men will still continue jealous and quarrelsom, they may
thank themselves if they smart for their own presumption and folly. And Princes
have no reason to abridge themselves in the exercise of their lawful Power,
only, because some of their Subjects will not learn to be modest and ingenuous.
And if his Majesty should think good to condescend so far to these men's
peevishness, as to reverse his Laws against them out of compliance with them,
this would but feed and cherish their insolence, and only encourage them to
proceed (if that be possible) to more unreasonable demands; for upon the same
reason they insist upon these, they may, when they are granted them, go on to
make new remonstrances, i. e. upon no reason at all. And beside, this would but
give the countenance of Authority to their scruples and superstitious
pretenses, and leave the Church of England under all those Calumnies to
Posterity, with which themselves or their followers labor to charge it, and
oblige future Ages to admire and celebrate these peevish and seditious persons
as the Founders of a more godly and through Reformation. Not to mention how much
Princes have ever gained by their concessions to the demands of Fanatic
Zealots, they may easily embolden, but hardly satisfy them; and if they yield
up but one Jewel of their Imperial Diadem to their importunity, it is not usual
for them to rest, till they have gained Crown and all, and perhaps the head
that wears it too; for there is no end of the madness of unreasonable men. How
happy would the world be, if wise men were but wise enough to be instructed by
the Mistress of Fools? But every Age lives as much at all adventure as if it
were the first, without any regard to the warnings and experiences of all
former Ages.

Sect. 9. Fifthly, The Commands of Authority, and the Obligations of Obedience,
infinitely outweigh, and utterly evacuate all the pretenses of scandal. For the
matters wherein scandal is concerned are only things indifferent; but nothing
that is not antecedently sinful remains so, after the commands of lawful
Authority are superinduced upon it; these change things indifferent, as to
their Nature, into necessary Duties, as to their Use; and therefore place them
beyond the reach of the obligations of scandal, that may in many cases extend
to the restraint of our Liberty, but never to the prejudice and hinderance of
our Duty; so that no Obedience, how offensive soever, unless it be upon some
other account faulty, is capable of being made Criminal upon the score of
scandal; the obligations whereof are but accidental and occasional, whereas
those of Obedience are of a prime, absolute, and eternal necessity. Princes are
Gods Deputies, and Lieutenants here on earth, he vests them with their power,
and by his own Law binds us to obey theirs; and though their Decrees pass no
direct Obligation upon the Consciences of men, yet the Divine laws directly and
immediately bind their Consciences to obey them; and God has annexed the same
Penalties to Disobedience to their Laws, as to his own: So that obedience to
all the lawful Commands of our Superiors is one part of our Duty to God,
because our obligation to it is tied upon us by his own immediate Command: and
therefore if the duty of avoiding scandal, that is of Compliance with my
neighbors weakness, be sufficient to excuse that of Obedience to Authority,
it is so too to take off the immediate Obligations of God himself: So that when
these two, the public commands of a lawful Superior, and the private Offense
of an honest Neighbor countermand each other, if the latter prevail, then may
it forbid what God has made a necessary Duty, and oblige us to disobey him out
of Compliance with the folly and ignorance of men. How few are there of the
Divine Laws more severe and peremptory, than those that command Obedience to
Authority? And therefore if we may decline this duty only to avoid scandal, Why
not any? Why not all? This then is our Duty, and must be done; and as for all
its casual and equivocal events, no man's Conscience is concerned to provide
against them. And if other men will be offended because I do my Duty, that is
their fault and not mine; and better be the occasion of another man's sin, than
the Author of mine own. No man's folly or ignorance can cancel my obligations to
God, or God's Vicegerent; and in all cases where there is any competition
between scandal and a Command of God, or any other lawful Authority, there is
no other difficulty to be resolved, than, whether I shall disobey God, or
displease my foolish Neighbor? And it is (one would think) past all dispute,
that when any thing is positively determined as a matter of Duty, the
obligations to Obedience in that particular are not, for that very reason, left
to any man's Choice and Prudence (as all matters of Scandal are) but it must
become in all Cases and Circumstances whatsoever, a Duty of a precise absolute,
and indispensable Necessity, And certainly God had made but odd provision for
the Government of the World, if he should allow one Subject, for the pleasure
of another, to derogate from the Authority of lawful Superiors, and permit
them the liberty to disobey the Commands of Governors, rather than displease
one another: for this must unavoidably end in an utter dissolution of all
Government, and devolve the Supremacy entirely upon every private man, that
either has or can pretend to have a weak and a tender Conscience. For if
scandal to weak and tender Consciences be of sufficient force to rescind the
obligatory Power of the Commands of Authority, then whoever either has, or can
pretend to a weak Conscience, gains thereby an absolute Sovereignty over all
his Superiors, and vests himself with a power to dispense with or evacuate
their Commands. So that in the issue of all, this pretense puts it in the power
of any peevish or malevolent person to cancel all the Decrees of Princes, and
make his own humor the Rule of all their Polity and Laws of Government, and
become Superior to his own Superiors only by being ignorant or peevish. How is
it possible to make Authority more cheap and contemptible (if men would study
to weaken and disgrace it) than by making its Commands of less force, than the
folly or perverseness of every arrogant Mechanic? And what can be more
destructive of all manner of Government than to make all the Rules of Order and
Discipline less sacred, than the whimsies of every fantastic Zealot? In
brief, the peace and quiet of honest men is likely to be mighty well secured,
when disobedience shall be thought the product of a more exact and tender
Conscience; When to pick quarrels with the Laws, and make scruple of obeying
them shall be made the specific Character of the Godly Party; and when giddy
and humorous Zeal shall not only excuse, but hallow Disobedience; when every
one, that has pride enough to fancy himself a Child of God, shall have License
to despise Authority and do as he list. What an irresistible temptation is this
to proud and zealous Enthusiasts, to affect being troublesome to Government,
and disobedient to all the Laws of Discipline, when it shall pass for the
result of a more extraordinary tenderness of Conscience? What encouragement
could men have to obey their Superiors, when to dispute and dislike their Laws
shall be thought to proceed from a greater holiness and a more exact integrity?
And what a resistless inducement is this to all proud and fantastic Zealots
to remonstrate to the Wisdom of Authority, if thereby they may gain the Renown
and Glory of a more conspicuous godliness? If men would but consider the
natural Consequences of this, and the like Pretenses, they could not but see
how fatally and unavoidably they lead to Anarchy, and an utter dissolution of
all Government. Which mischief (as is notoriously apparent from the Premises)
all the World can never prevent, if the scandal of Private men may ever
dispense with the Obligation of Public Laws.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Pretense of a Tender and unsatisfied Conscience; the Absurdity of
Pleading it in Opposition to the Commands of Public Authority.
The Contents.
THis pretense is but an after-game of Conscience. It Is a certain and
unavoidable dissolution of Government. It Is a superannuated Pretense, and is
become its own Confutation. Old Scruples proceed not from Tenderness, but
Stubborness of Conscience. This particularly shown in their scruple of kneeling
at the Communion. They affect their Scruples out of Pride and Vainglory.
Tenderness of Conscience is so far from being the reason of Disobedience, that
it lays upon us the strongest Obligations to Obedience. A Tender Conscience is
ever of a yielding and pliable temper. When it is otherwise, it is nothing but
humor or insolence, and is usually hardy enough not to scruple the greatest
Villainies. The Commands of Public Authority abrogate all doubts and scruples,
and determine all irresolution of Conscience. The matter of all scruples is too
small to weigh against the Sin and Mischief of Disobedience. The Apostles
Apology, viz. We ought to obey God rather than men, holds only in matters of
great and apparent Duty, but not in doubtful and disputable Cases. Nothing more
easy than to raise scruples. No Law can escape them, this particularly shown
in our own Laws. When two Obligations interfere, the greater always cancels the
less. Hence it is impossible for any man to be reduced into a necessity of
Sinning. Obedience to Public Authority is one of the greatest and most
indispensable Duties of Mankind, because most necessary to their well-being. To
act against our own scruples, out of obedience to Authority, is an eminent
instance of virtue. In cases of a Public Concern, men are to be governed not
by their own private, but by the public Judgment. In these matters the
Commands of Public Authority are the Supreme Rules of Conscience. There is a
vast difference between Liberty and Authority of Conscience. The Puritans
tenderness of Conscience is one of the rankest sort of Heresies. Wherefore it is
absolutely necessary for Authority to command things indifferent. The
Conclusion of all.

Sect. 1. THE last refuge for Godly Disobedience is the pretense of a poubtful,
scrupulous, and unsatisfied conscience; for (say they) though we cannot
positively condemn the Ceremonial Constitutions of the Church, as things in
themselves unlawful, yet unlawful they are to us, whose Consciences are not
sufficiently satisfied concerning them; because whatsoever is done with a
doubting Conscience, i. e. without Faith, or a full persuasion of mind, is done
against it: according to that clear and unquestionable Maxim of St. Paul,
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

But this precarious pretense, as well as that of scandal, is but an after-game
of Conscience; they first resolved to quarrel our Constitutions, and then it is
an easy matter to want satisfaction about them; and when men's Arguments depend
upon their Wills, it is in their own power only to repeal them, and all the
Reason in the world can never cure willful and artificial Scruples. However, if
the obligation of Laws must yield to that of a weak and tender Conscience, how
impregnably is every man, that has a mind to disobey, armed against all the
Commands of his Superiors? No Authority shall be able to govern him, farther
than himself pleases, and if he dislike the Law, he is sufficiently excused
from all obligations to Obedience; and no Laws shall ever be able to oblige any
man, that either has, or can pretend to a weak Conscience: for seeing no man
can discern the reality of men's pretensions, it is all one to the Concernments
of Government, whether the tenderness of Conscience, that men plead to excuse
their disobedience, be serious or counterfeit: For, whether it be so, or so,
it is directly contrary to all the ends and interests of Government. And if it
be admitted for a sufficient excuse to disobey, it is an effectual and incurable
dissolution of all the force of Laws, and makes them obligatory then only when
every man pleases; and he that will may obey, and he that will not may choose;
seeing it is so easy for any man, that has no inclination to the Law, to claim
the inviolable Privilege of a tender Conscience: So that to make Proviso's for
tender Consciences, is to abate the whole Law; seeing it gives every man
liberty to exempt himself, and if he dislike the Law, he is under no Obligation
to obey it. But suppose this pretense to be serious without design or disguise,
is it fit the Laws of the Commonwealth should ask leave of every Ignorant, and
Well-meaning man, whether they shall be Laws or no? A weak Conscience is the
product of a weak Understanding; and he is a very subtle man, that can find the
difference between a tender Head, and a tender Conscience: and therefore if
Princes must consult their Subjects Consciences in all their Laws, this would
make all the Wisdom of Government submit to the power of folly and ignorance.
And when any person pleads weakness or tenderness of Conscience against the
obligation of any Law, his meaning is, that he is not of the same Judgment and
Opinion with his Governors; and it is wise, and handsome, and becoming the
Grandeur or Authority in all its Laws, to comply with the learned apprehensions
of every honest and illiterate Peasant; who if he be not satisfied in their
determinations, may cancel their obligations as to himself, and if they offer
to force this honest man to submission, they invade the sacred and inviolable
liberty of a tender Conscience. So full of Anarchy are all these men's
pretenses. And therefore Governors must look to the Public, and let tender
Consciences look to themselves. Laws must be of an unyielding and inflexible
temper, and not such soft and easy things, as to bend to every man's humor,
that they ought to command. And unless Government be managed by some settled
Principles, it must for ever remain weak and unfixed: Princes must not be
diffident in their Rules, and Maxims of Policy; but as they must set down some
to themselves, so they must act up roundly to them. For all Changes of the
Public Laws and Methods of Policy sadly weaken, if they do not utterly
unsettle the Commonwealth; in that Prescription is, at least in the practice
of the World, the greatest strength and security of Government: it is indeed the
Fountain of Authority, and the thing that vests Princes with their
Prerogatives; and no Power, what right or title soever it may plead, can ever
be firmly established, till it can plead the Warrant and Authority of
Prescription: And therefore if Princes will be resolute (and if they will
Govern, so they must be) they may easily make the most stubborn Consciences
bend to their Commands; but if they will not, they must submit themselves, and
their Power, to all the follies and passions of their Subjects. For there are
no conceits so extravagant, or so pernicious, that may not pass for Principles
of Conscience. In brief, there is nothing so ungovernable as a tender
Conscience, or so restive and inflexible as folly or wickedness, when hardened
with Religion: and therefore instead of being complied with, they must be
restrained with a more peremptory and unyielding rigor, than naked and
unsanctified Villainy; else will they quickly discover themselves to be pregnant
with greater and more fatal dangers.

Sect. 2. This stale pretense comes now too late, and is so ancient, that it is
long since superannuated: old Doubts and scruples are like old scandals worn
out of date by time and experience: They are the natural products of ignorance,
weakness is their Parent, and folly their Nurse; and if they improve not into
Confidence, they never survive their Infancy, but of themselves vanish and
dissolve into nothing: And therefore this pretense having outlived it self, is
become its own Answer and Confutation: Because men ought not, nay, they cannot
remain so long under Uncertainties; and it is impossible but they should before
this time be competently determined, as to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
the things themselves: For if in so long a time they have not been able to
discover that sinfulness in them they suspected, that is sufficient evidence of
their being Innocent; because their scruples have occasioned them to be so
thoroughly sifted and examined: And if after all that hot and vehement
contention, that has been raised about them, it appears not yet wherein they
are criminal and chargeable, (for if it does, then the doubt ceases, and the
certainty, not the suspicion of sin is to be objected) that is presumption
enough for any modest and sober man to conclude their innocence; and still to
retain the scruple, is folly and peevishness, and then the Conscience is not
doubtful, but obstinate and peremptory: The man is resolved to cherish his
scruple, and persist in his folly; and if he will not be satisfied, it is not
because he is weak and timorous, but because he is stubborn and dis-ingenuous.
And then he pretends Conscience only to vouch his humor, and his insolence, i.
e. he is a villain and an hypocrite; and is so far from deserving pity,
especially from Authority, that no offenders can more need or provoke their
severity; in that, such men resolve to tire out their Governors by their
inflexible stubbornness, and to affront their Laws with trifles and
contemptuous Exceptions.

At the first setlement of a Church or new Religion, then indeed men's old
follies, prejudices, and weaknesses, ought to be charitably considered; and
they are not to be forced into new Customs and Usages, by too much rigor and
severity; but ought to be gently and tenderly treated, till time and better
information may wear off their scruples, and little exceptions. And this was
the case of the Jews in the first Ages of Christianity, who were at first
indulged in their weak and trifling conceits; because then they might
reasonably be presumed to arise from a pitiable ignorance and dissetlement of
Conscience: But as soon as the Abrogation of the Mosaic Institution was fully
declared and acknowledged in the Church, they were brought under the common
yoke of Discipline, and were not permitted to plead their Doubts and Scruples
against public Laws and Constitutions. And this too is our present case, men
labor to support an old Schism by outworn scruples and jealousies, and will
persevere in their doubts, because they are resolved never to be satisfied; for
otherwise it were impossible, that after so much time, and so much
satisfaction, they could still remain unresolved. And if whole Armies of Reason
have not been sufficient to chase away all their little and imaginary fears:
Yet methinks so long time, and so much experience might be sufficient to
convince them, that they are but shadows, and illusions of their own melancholy
Fancies; for had they been real and substantial things, it is impossible they
should ever have escaped the discovery of so long and so severe a scrutiny.
But, if nor time, nor reason can disabuse them, it is not their ignorance, but
their obstinacy that is invincible. Thus v. g. when to kneel at the Communion,
is in it self an handsome and decent action, in that this Sacrament is the most
solemn piece of gratitude, or worship in the Christian Religion, and a peculiar
acknowledgment of our vast and unspeakable obligations to our Redeemer; and
therefore to be performed with the profoundest Reverence and Humility: And when
these men themselves are not only ready to observe, but also to enjoin the same
posture in their ordinary Prayers, and other less solemn expressions of
Devotion; and when the power of the Church has actually determined and required
this reverent posture, to stamp a peculiar sacredness and solemnity upon this
Duty, no man can possibly now scruple its practice without affected contempt,
and wilful disobedience; because they cannot but be convinced (unless they are
resolved against it) of the vanity and dis-ingenuity of their old pretense:
Namely, lest they should be interpreted to give religious Worship to the
Elements, and by lying prostrate before the Bread and Wine, they should become
guilty of Idolatry, in giving Divine Worship to a senseless piece of matter. For
when they plead this excuse for their disobedience, they cannot but be
conscious to themselves, that by it they do not only despise, but slander and
reproach the Laws, that they outface and traduce Authority, and would force
their Governors to believe and confess that they favor what they expressly
abhor; seeing the very same Law that enjoins this Ceremony, provides so
expressly against this abuse, and declares so industriously, That it is so far
from designing any reverence to the Creatures themselves, that it abhors it;
but only requires it, as it is used in all other Religious addresses to Heaven.
And, if notwithstanding all this, men will dread it as a piece of Idolatry,
because (forsooth) it has been, or may be abused to that purpose, I say no
more, than that if such thin and frivolous scruples may outweigh the Laws, and
evacuate our obligations to obedience, there are none in the World that are not
as apparently liable to as dis-ingenuous surmises; and they may as rationally
forbear looking up toward Heaven in their prayers, lest they should worship
the Clouds, or the Sun, Moon, and Stars. But the truth of it is, some men study
for impertinent scruples, to ensnare themselves, and labor to raise great
doubts from little reasons, and cannot be satisfied, because they will not;
they have enslaved themselves to their follies, and boared their ears to their
scruples, and are resolved to grow old in a voluntary bondage to trifles and
fooleries. Now it is necessary for people of this humor to streighten the
Laws, till they have made them too severe and rigorous to be obeyed, to draw
their knot, till it becomes troublesome and uneasy; to put them upon the Wrack,
and stretch them beyond, or beside their own intention by rare and
extraordinary cases, by harsh and unkind Interpretations, and by far-fetched
and disingenuous suspicions; and, under the shelter of such precarious
pretenses as no Law can possibly avoid, they refuse the Liberty that is given
them to obey the Laws, only that they may take the License to disobey them. In
brief, the main Mystery of all this niceness (though themselves have not wit
enough to observe its first causes) is, for the most part, nothing but a little
pride and vainglory: It is a glorious thing to suffer for a tender Conscience,
and therefore it is easy and natural for some people to affect some little
scruples against the Commands of Authority, thereby to make themselves
obnoxious to some little Penalties; and then what godly men are they that are
so ready to be punished for a good Conscience? How do such men hug and nurse
their dear scruple? All the reason, and all the persuasion in the World shall
never be able to wrest it from them. It is their Ephod and their Teraphim, the
only mark of their Godliness, and symbol of their Religion; and if you rob them
of that, you take away their gods: And what have they more?

Sect. 3. If my Conscience be really weak and tender, What can become it more
than humble obedience and submission to Authority? Weakness of Conscience
always proceeds in some measure from want of wit; and therefore to make this
the pretense of disobedience, is in effect to say, I will control the wisdom
of my Superiors, because I have little or none my self. Certainly, where
persons have any serious sense of their own ignorance, they can scarce have a
stronger obligation to obedience: And they can never be so confident in any
action, as when they obey; because then they have the Public Wisdom to warrant
them, and their own Folly to excuse them: That is, they follow the best guide
men are capable of, in their Circumstances. And a Subject that is Conscious of
his own weakness, when he resigns up himself to the Wisdom of his Superiors,
in matters doubtful and disputable, is in effect governed by the best and
safest Dictates of his own Conscience; which, unless it be hardened with pride
and insolence, cannot but persuade him, that he ought to presume them more
competent Judges of the fitness and expediency of Public Laws, whose work and
office it is to understand them, than himself, who is wholly ignorant of the
management and transaction of Public Affairs. This is the most common
Principle of humane life, and all men practice by it in all their concerns, but
those of Religion. And that is the reason it has ever been debauched with so
many follies and frenzies, because silly people will not submit their
Consciences to any thing but their own giddy Imaginations: Whereas, if they
would but condescend to the same Rules of Government in matters of Religion, as
they do in all their other affairs, obedience to Authority might be secured
without any violence to Conscience; seeing no Conscience, that is acted by wise
and sober persuasions, will ever be stiff in doubtful and uncertain Cases,
against the determinations of the Public Wisdom: Because such men being
sensible how unable they are to govern themselves, they know they can never act
more safely, than when they are governed by their Superiors: And being they
cannot pretend to trust confidently enough to their own conduct, how can they
proceed upon wiser and more reasonable grounds, than by committing themselves
to the Public Wisdom? In which, though possibly they might be misguided, yet
they may secure themselves, that, God who values integrity more than subtilty,
will pardon their weakness, and reward their meekness and humility. But for a
man to plead weakness of Conscience for disobedience to Government, is just as
if a Child in Minority should reject the advice of his Guardians, because he
has not wit enough to know, when he is well advised; or as if a Fool should
refuse to be governed, because he has not reason enough to discern when he is
well managed; or as if a Blind Man should not trust to the conduct of a Guide,
because he is not able to judge when he is misled.

Humility and Condescension are the most proper duties of weakness and
ignorance, and meekness, and simplicity the only ornaments of a tender
Conscience: And one would think that men, whose confidence exceeds not their
wit, should be strangely wary of censuring the wisdom of Authority. And
therefore it is but a very odd pretense to weakness of Conscience, when it
appears in nothing but being too strong for Government; and that man that
pretends to it, does not seriously believe himself, if he presumes he is wise
enough to govern his Governors: And so does every one, that thinks the
persuasions of his own mind of sufficient force to cancel the obligations of
their commands. It is an handsome piece of modesty for one, who pretends to
weakness of Conscience, when his Prince requires his obedience to give him
counsel, to advise him how to govern the Kingdom, to blame and correct the
Laws, and to tell him how this and the other might be mended. And, What can be
more fulsom, than to see men, under pretenses of great strictness and severity
of Conscience, to cherish stubbornness and vanity, and to endure neither Laws
nor Superiors, because they are proud enough to think themselves more Holy
than their Neighbors? What a malapert and insolent piece of pride is it, for
every Prating Gossip and illiterate Mechanic (that can mark themselves with
some distinctive names and Characters of Godliness) to scoff and jibe at the
wisdom of public Authority, to affront the Laws and Constitutions of a Church,
to pity and disdain the lamentable ignorance of Learned Men, and to Libel all
sorts of people that are not of their own Rendez-vous (especially their
Superiors) with slanders and idle stories? What strange effects are these of a
diffident and timorous Conscience? A Conscience that knows it self to be acted
by certain and infallible Principles, how could it be more headstrong and
confident? And therefore, if we compare these men's practices with their
pretenses, What can be more evident, than that it is not Tenderness of
Conscience that emboldens them to fall out with all the World, but pride, and
vanity, and insolence? For nothing else could possibly drive them on with so
peremptory a sail, against so strong and so united a torrent. For a Conscience,
that is only weak and tender, is of a yielding and pliable temper, it is soft
and innocent modest, and teachable, apt to comply with the Commands of its
Superiors, and easily capable of all impressions tending to Peace and Charity;
but when it is stubborn and confident in its own apprehensions, then it is not
tender, but hardy and humoursom: And, as queasie as it is in reference to its
Superiors Commands, it is usually strong enough to digest Rebellion and
Villainy; and whilst it rises against a poor innocent Ceremony, it is scarce
ever stirred with Schism, Faction, and Cruelty. Now to permit these men their
liberty, who mistake insolence for tenderness of Conscience, (than which
nothing more easy, or more natural for people, that are both proud and simple)
is to suffer ignorance to ride in Triumph, because it is proud and confident;
and to indulge zealous Idiots in their folly, because they threaten Authority,
to be peevish and scrupulous to their Laws, and to infest their Government with
a sullen and cross-grained Godliness (an Artifice not much unlike the tricks of
some froward Children) and therefore such untoward and humoursom Saints must be
lashed out of their sullenness (as Children are) into compliance and better
manners; otherwise they will be an eternal annoyance to all Government, with
the childish and whining pretenses of a weak and crasie Conscience. In brief, I
appeal to all mankind (that have but any tolerable conception of the nature and
design of Religion) Whether it be not much more becoming the temper of a
Christian Spirit, to comply with the commands of their Superiors, that are not
apparently sinful, in order to the Peace and Setlement of the Church, than to
disturb its quiet by a stubborn and peremptory adherence to our own Doubts and
Scruples? For, What is there in Christianity of greater importance, than the
virtues of meekness, peaceableness, and humility? And in what can these great
duties more discover themselves, than in the offices and civilities of humble
Obedience; that contains in it all that is most amiable, and most useful in the
Christian Religion? It Is modesty, it is meekness, it is humility, it is love, it is
peacebleness, it is ingenuity; It Is a duty so pregnant with Virtue in it self,
and of such absolute necessity to the happiness of mankind, That there is
scarce anything can come in competition with it, whose obligation it will not
at the first appearance utterly cancel and evacuate, (as I shall more fully
demonstrate in the ensuing Propositions.) In the mean while we see, what is to
be done in the case of tender Consciences: If they are acted by calm and
peaceable Principles, they will not desire liberty; if they are not, they will
not deserve it. For, if they are humble and modest, they will choose to submit
to the will of their Superiors, rather than, by thwarting them, do what in
themselves lies to discompose the public Peace. And therefore if they will
rather venture to embroil the Commonwealth, and contradict Authority, than
forego their own peremptory Determinations, and make their Superiors comply and
bend to their confidence; it is because they are criminally bold and imperious
in their own conceits, and are of a temper too stubborn, insolent, and
presumptuous to be endured in any Society of men.

Sect. 4. Doubts and Scruples are so far from being sufficient Warranty of
disobedience, that they are outweighed by the Obligations of the Law: For if I
doubt concerning the injustice of my action, I must also of necessity doubt of
the injustice of my disobedience; and unless I am absolutely certain that the
Law is evil, I am sure disobedience to it is: And therefore I am always as
forcibly bound to obey a scrupled Law, for fear of the sin of disobedience, as
to disobey it, for fear it commands an essential evil: So that a doubting
Conscience must always at least as much fright us from disobeying, as from
obeying any Humane Law. Though indeed, if we would speak properly, the commands
of Authority perfectly determine, and evacuate all doubtfulness and
irresolution of Conscience: For, if it before hung in suspense concerning the
lawfulness of the action, and unresolved, Whether it were good or evil, as not
having competent reason to incline to one side rather than to the other; yet
when Authority casts its commands into the Scale (if in some men's Consciences
they weigh any thing) they cannot but add weight more than enough to determine
the Judgment, and incline the Balance. For if the Reasons on both sides were
equal before, than thet side that gains this accession has most reason now. So
that Laws do not force us to obey them with a doubting Conscience, but remove
our doubts at the same time they require our obedience; because they destroy
the equal probability of the two opinions, and determine the Conscience to a
confidence of acting, by directing it to follow the safest and most probable
persuasion: In that no practice or opinion, that is capable of doubt or
uncertainty, can be of equal importance with the prime Duties of obedience and
humility; and the matter of all doubts and scruples is ever of too small and
inconsiderable a consequence to be laid in the Balance against the great and
weighty mischiefs of disobedience. If indeed the commands of Authority enjoined
any thing absolutely and apparently evil, and against the great and unalterable
Rules of truth and goodness, in such exigents Da veniam Imperator would be a
fair and civil excuse: But matters of a less importance will not pay the
charges of a persecution, it is not worth the while to suffer for little
things; and that man has but the just reward of his own folly, that would
suffer Martyrdom in the cause of an indifferent Ceremony, or for the truth of a
Metaphysical Notion. And the suggestion of Optatus to the Donatists, who were
so forward to cast away their lives in defense of their little Schism, was
smart and severe. Lib. 3.
Nulli dictum est, nega Deum; nulli dictum est, incende Testamentum; nulli
dictum est, aut thus pone, aut Basilicas dirue. Istae enim res solent Martyria
generare. Matters, wherein the Being of Religion, and the Truth of
Christianity, were directly concerned, were worth the dying for, and would quit
the costs of Martyrdom; but no indifferent Rites or Ceremonies were of value
enough to pay for the lives of men: And the Zealots of the Pars Donati, who
were so ambitious to suffer Imprisonment, Confiscation of Goods, Banishment,
and Death it self, out of a pertinacious resolution against some established
customs and usages of the Church, could never be rewarded in any other Heaven,
but the Paradise of Fools. Things that are essentially evil, no change or
variety of Circumstances can make good; and therefore no commands of any
Superior can ever warrant or legitimate their practice: But then these are
always matters of the greatest and most weighty importance, and of an apparent
and palpable obliquity, such as Blasphemy, Murder, Injustice, Cruelty,
Ingratitude, etc. that are so clearly and intrinsically evil, that no end, how
good or great soever, can ever carry with it goodness enough to abate or
evacuate their Malice. But as for all matters, that are not so apparently good
or evil, but are capable of doubt and uncertainty, their Morality is of so
small importance, that it can never stand in competition with the obligations
and conveniences of the great Duty of obedience. And thus when the Apostles
were forbidden by the Jewish Sanhedrim to Preach the Name of Jesus, Acts 5. 29.
they desired to be excused, upon no other account but of an express command
from God himself, in a matter of great importance, and apparent necessity. Our
Blessed Savior coming into the World with a Commission from its Supreme
Governor to make Laws, and the Holy Apostles having an infallible assurance of
his Divine Authority from his great, manifest, and undeniable Miracles (the
most certain and unquestionable credentials that Heaven can send to the Sons of
Men) they could not but lie under an indispensable obligation to give assent to
his Message, and obedience to his Commands; and that out of duty to the Supreme
Governor of the Universe; from whose unquestionable Laws, no other Authority
can ever derogate, because it is all of an inferior nature. But to apply this
Rule, which the Apostles never made use of, but in a case of certain, absolute,
and notorious injustice, to matters of a small, doubtful, and uncertain nature,
is absolutely inconsistent with the quiet of Government, and infinitely distant
from the intention of the Apostles. Their Plea was in a case of great, evident,
and unquestionable necessity: But what warrant is that for my disobedience,
when I only fear, or fancy the Law to be unjust? Which, if it were so, is not
of moment enough to weigh against the mischiefs and enormities, that follow
upon disobedience: And therefore in all doubtful and less considerable cases,
that side, on which obedience stands, must ever carry it; and no man that is
either wise or good, will ever trouble his Governors, with nice and curious
disputes; the Authority of the Law stifles all scruples, and trifling
objections. And thus where there was no apparent repugnancy to the Law of God,
we find none more compliant and conformable in all other things than the
Apostles, freely using any Customs of the Synagogue or Jewish Church, that were
not expressly cancelled by some Divine Prohibition.

But further, this their Apology is as forcible a Plea in concerns of Civil
Justice and common honesty, as in Matters of Religion; it holds equally in
both, in cases of a certain and essential injustice, and fails equally in both,
in doubtful and less material cases; and was as fairly urged by that famous
Lawyer Papinian, who upon this account, when the Emperor commanded him to
defend and justify the lawfulness of Parricide, chose rather to die, than to
Patronize so monstrous a villainy: Here the wickedness was great and palpable.
But in matters more doubtful and less material, where the case is nice and
curious, and not capable of any great Interest, or great reason, there
Obedience outweighs and evacuates all Doubts, Jealousies, and suspicions: And
what wise or honest man will offend, or provoke his Superiors upon thin
pretenses, and for little regards? And if every man, that can raise doubts and
scruples, and nice Exceptions against a Law, shall therefore set himself free
from its obligation; then farewell all Peace, and all Government. For what more
easy to any man, that understands the Fundamental Grounds and Reasons of Moral
Equity, than to pick more material quarrels against the Civil Laws of any
Commonwealth, than our Adversaries can pretend to against our Ecclesiastical
Constitutions? And now, shall a Philosopher be excused from obedience to the
Laws of his Country, because he thinks himself able to make exceptions to their
Prudence and Convenience, and to prove them not so useful to the Public, nor
so agreeable to the Fundamental Rules of natural Justice and Equity, as himself
could have contrived? What if I am really persuaded, that I can raise much more
considerable objections against Littletons Tenures, than ever these men have,
or shall be able to produce against our Ceremonial Constitutions? Though it be
easy to be mistaken in my conceit, yet whether I am, or am not, it is all one,
if I am confident. And now it would be mightily conducive to the interests of
Justice and Public Peace for me, and all others of my Fond Persuasion in this
particular, to make Remonstrances to the Laws of the Land, to Petition the King
and Parliament; to leave us, at the liberty of our own Conscience and
Discretion, to follow the best Light, God has given us, for the setlement of
our own estates; because we think we can do it more exactly according to the
Laws of Natural Justice, than if we are tied up to the positive Laws of the
Land. Thus that groundless and arbitrary maxim of the Law, That inheritances
may lineally descend, but not lineally ascend, whereby the Father is made
incapable of being immediate Heir to the Son, would be thought by a Philosopher
prejudicial to one of the most equal and most ingenuous Laws of Nature, viz.
The gratitude of Children to Parents; which this Law seems in a great measure
to hinder, by alienating those things from them, whereby we are best able to
express it. What if I have been happy in a loving and tender Father, that has
been strangely solicitous to leave me furnished with all the comforts and
conveniences of life, that declined not to forego any share of his own ease and
happiness to procure mine, that has spent the greatest part of his care and
industry to bless me, according to the proportion of his abilities, with a good
fortune, and a good education; and has, perhaps out of an over-tender
solicitude for my welfare, reduced himself to great streights and exigences:
How monstrous and unnatural must the contrivance of this Law appear to me,
that, when the bounty of Providence has blessed me with a fortune answerable to
the good old Man's desires and endeavors, if I should happen to be cut off
before him by an untimely death, all that, whereby I am able to recompense his
Fatherly tenderness, should in the common and ordinary course of Law be
conveyed from him to another person; the stream of whose affections was
confined to another Channel, and who, being much concerned for his own Family,
could in all probability be but little concerned for me? What an unnatural and
unjust Law is this that designs, as far as it can, to cut off the streams of
our natural Affections, and disposes of our possessions contrary to the very
first tendencies, and obligations of Nature? So easy a thing is it to talk
little Plausibilities against any Laws, whose obligation is positive, and not
of a prime and absolute necessity: And yet downright Rebellion it would be, if
I, or any man else, should refuse subjection to these and the like Laws, upon
these, and the like pretenses. And thus, we see, is the case all the way equal
between Laws Civil, and Laws Ecclesiastical. In all matters greatly and
notoriously wicked, the nature of the action out-weighs the duty of Obedience;
but in all cases less certain and less material, the duty of Obedience
out-weighs the nature of the action. And this may suffice to show, from the
Subject Matters of all doubts and scruples, That they are not of consideration
great enough to be opposed to the commands of Authority. And this leads me from
the matter of a scrupulous Conscience, to consider its Authority: And therefore,

Sect. 5. As the objects of a scrupulous Conscience are of too mean importance,
to weigh against the mischiefs of Disobedience; so are its obligations too
weak, to prevail against the commands of Public Authority. For when two
contradictory obligations happen to encounter, the greater ever cancels the
less; because if all good be eligible, then so are all the degrees of goodness
too: And therefore to that side on which the greater good stands, our duty must
ever incline; otherwise we despise all those degrees of goodness, it contains
in it above the other. For in all the Rules of Goodness there is great
inequality and variety of degrees, some are prescribed for their own native
excellency and usefulness, and others purely for their subserviency to these:
Now when a greater and a lesser virtue happen to clash, as it frequently falls
out in the transaction of Humane Affairs, there the less always gives place to
the greater, because it is good only in order to it; and therefore where its
subordination ceases, there its goodness ceases, and by consequence its
obligation. For no subordinate or instrumental dutys are absolutely commanded or
commended, but become good or evil by their Accidental Relations; their
goodness is not intrinsic, but depends upon the goodness of their end, and
their being directed to a good end, (if they are not intrinsically evil) makes
them virtuous; because their Morality is entirely relative and changeable, and
so alters its colors of good and evil, by its several aspects and postures to
various and different ends: And therefore they never carry any Obligation in
them, when they interfere with higher and more useful Duties. And hence it
comes to pass, that it is absolutely impossible for any man to be reduced into
a necessity of sinning; because, though two inferior and subordinate Duties
may sometimes happen to be inconsistent with each other or with some duty of an
absolute and unalterable goodness; yet the nature of things is so handsomely
contrived, that it is utterly impossible that things should ever happen so
crosly, as to make two essential and indispensable Duties stand at mutual
opposite on: And therefore no man can ever be forced to act against one, out of
compliance with the other: And if there be any contrariety between a natural
and instrumental Duty, there the case is plain, that the greater evacuates the
less; if between two instrumental Duties, it can scarce so fall out, but that
some emergent circumstances shall make one of them the more necessary; but if
they are both equally eligible, there is no difficulty; and a man may do as he
pleases. It is indeed possible for any man, by his own voluntary choice to
entangle himself in this sad perplexity; but there is no culpable Error that is
unavoidable, and every sinfully erroneous Conscience is voluntary and vincible:
And if men will not part with their sinful Errors, it is not because they
cannot, but because they will not avoid them. And if they resolve to abuse
themselves, no wonder, if their sin be unavoidable; but then the necessity is
the effect of their own choice: And so all sin is inevitable, when the
peremptory determination of the will, has made it necessary. But as for the
nature of all the Laws of Goodness in themselves, they are so wisely contrived,
that it is absolutely impossible any circumstances should ever fall out so
awkardly, as to make one sin the only way to escape another, or a necessary
passage to a necessary Duty. Now to apply this general Rule of Conscience to
our particular case, there is not any Precept in the Gospel set down in more
positive and unlimited expressions, or urged with more vehement motives and
persuasions, than obedience to Government; because there are but few, if any,
Duties of a weightier and more important necessity than this: And for this
reason is it, that God has injoined it with such an absolute and unrestrained
severity, thereby to intimate that nothing can restrain the universality of its
obligatory power, but evident and unquestionable disobedience to himself. The
duty of Obedience is the original and Fundamental Law of Humane Societies, and
the only advantage that distinguishes Government from Anarchy. This takes away
all dissentions, by reducing every man's private will and judgment to the
determination of Public Authority: Whereas, without it, every single person is
his own Governor, and no man else has any power or command over his actions,
i. e. He is out of the state of Government, and Society. And for this reason is
obedience, and condescension to the wisdom of Public Authority, one of the
most absolute and indispensable duties of mankind, as being so indispensably
necessary to the peace and preservation of Humane Societies. Now a Conscience,
that will not stand to the Decrees and Determinations of its Governors,
subverts the very Foundations of all Civil Society, that subsists upon no other
principle, but men's submitting their own judgments to the decisions of
Authority, in order to the public peace and setlement; without which there
must of necessity be eternal disorders and confusions. And therefore, where the
Dictates of a private Conscience happen to thwart the determinations of the
public Laws, they, in that case, lose their binding power; because, if in that
case they should oblige, it would unavoidably involve all Societies in
perpetual tumults and disorders. Whereas the main end of all Divine, as well as
Humane Laws, is the prosperity and preservation of Humane Society: So that
where any thing tends to the dissolution of Government, and undermining of
Humane happiness, though in other circumstances it were virtuous, yet in this
it becomes criminal, as destroying a thing of greater goodness than it self.
And hence, though a doubtful and scrupulous Conscience should oblige in all
other cases, yet, when its commands run counter to the commands of Authority,
there its obligatory power immediately ceases; because to act against it, is
useful to vastly more noble and excellent purposes, than to comply with it: In
that every man that thwarts and disobeys the Laws of the Commonwealth, does
his part to disturb its Public Peace, that is maintained by nothing else but
obedience and submission to its Laws. Now this is manifestly a bigger mischief
and inconvenience, than the foregoing of any doubts and scruples can amount to:
And therefore, unless Authority impose upon me something that carries with it
more evil and mischief, than there is convenience in the peace and happiness of
the whole Society, I am indispensably bound to yield obedience to his commands:
And though I scrupulously fear lest the Magistrates injunctions should be
superstitious, yet, because I am not sure they are so, and because a little
irregularity in the external expressions of Divine Worship carries with it less
mischief and enormity, than the disturbance of the Peace of Kingdoms, I am
absolutely obliged to lay aside my doubt, rather than disobey the Law; because
to preserve it, naturally tends to vast mischiefs and confusion; whereas the
inconvenience of my acting against it, is but doubtful; and though it were
certain, yet it is small and comparatively inconsiderable. And therefore to act
against the inclinations of our own doubts and scruples, is so far from being
criminal, that it is an eminent instance of Virtue, and implies in it, besides
its subserviency to the welfare of mankind, the great duties of Modesty,
Peaceableness, and Humility. And as for, what some are forward enough to
object, that this is, To do evil, that good may come of it; it is a vain and
frivolous exception, and prevented in what I have already discoursed; in that
that Rule is concerned only in things absolutely and essentially evil, whose
nature no case can alter, no circumstance can extenuate, and no end can
sanctify: But things that are only subserviently good or evil, derive all
their Virtue from the greater Virtue they wait upon; and therefore where a
meaner, or an instrumental duty stands in competition with an essential Virtue,
its contrariety destroys its goodness; and instead of being less virtuous,
becomes altogether sinful; for though it have abstractedly some degrees of
goodness, yet when it chances to oppose any duty, that has more, and more
excellent degrees, it becomes evil and unreasonable, by as many degrees as that
excels it. And one would think this case should be past dispute, as to the
matters of our present Controversy, that are of so vast a distance and
disproportion; forasmuch as obedience is a virtue of so absolute necessity, and
so diffusive usefulness; whereas the goodness of those little things, they
oppose to it, is so small, that it is confessedly scarce discernable; and their
Consciences, as nice and curious as they are, not able to determine positively,
whether they are good or evil: And therefore, what a prodigious madness is it,
to weigh such trifling and contemptible things against the vast mischiefs and
inconveniences of disobedience? The voice of the public Laws cannot but drown
the uncertain whispers of a tender Conscience; all its scruples are hushed and
silenced by the commands of Authority: It dares not whimper, when that forbids;
and the nod of a Prince aws it into silence and submission. But if they dare to
murmur, and their proud stomachs will swell against the rebukes of their
Superiors, then there is no remedy but the rod and correction: They must be
chastised out of their peevishness, and lashed into obedience. In a word,
though Religion so highly consults the interests of Commonwealths, and is the
greatest instrument of the peace and happiness of Kingdoms; yet so monstrously
has it been abused by the folly of some, and wickedness of others, that nothing
in the world has been the mother of more mischief to Government. The main cause
of which has been men's not observing the due scale and subordination of duties,
and that, in case of competition, the greater always destroys the less: For
hence have they opposed the Laws, and by consequence the peace of the Society,
for an Opinion, or a Ceremony, or a subordinate instrumental duty; whereas, had
they soberly considered the important necessity of their obedience, they would
scarce have found any duty of moment enough to weigh against it. For seeing
almost all virtues are injoined us in order to the felicity of man, and seeing
there is nothing more conducive to it, than that which tends to the Public
weal and good of all; and seeing this is the design, and natural tendency of
the Public Laws, and our obedience to them; that had need be hugely,
certainly, and absolutely evil, that cancels their obligation, and dispences
with our obedience; and not a Form, or a Ceremony, or an outward expression, or
any other instrumental part of Religion. But some menthink it better to be
disputative than peaceable; and that there is more godliness in being captious
and talkative, than in being humble and obedient: It is a pleasure to them to
be troublesome to Authority, they beat about, and search into every little
corner, for doubts and exceptions against their commands: And how do they
triumph, when they can but start a scruple? They labor to stumble at Atoms, to
boggle at straws and shadows; and cherish their scruples till they become as
big as they are unreasonable, and lay so much stress upon them, as to make them
outweigh the greatest and most weighty things of the Law. And it is
prodigiously strange (and yet as common too) to consider how most men, who
pretend (and that perhaps sincerely) to great tenderness of Conscience, and
scruple postures and innocent ceremonies, are so hardy as to digest the most
wicked and most mischievous villainies: They can dispense with spightfulness,
malice, disobedience, schism, and disturbance of the Public Peace, and all, to
nourish a weak and an impotent scruple; and in pursuit of any little conceit,
they will run themselves into the greatest and most palpable enormities; and
will cherish it, till it weighs down the peace of Kingdoms, and Fundamental
Principles of common honesty. Find me a man that is obstinately scrupulous, and
I will show you one that is incurably seditious; and whoever will prefer his
scruples before the great duties of obedience, peace, quietness, and humility,
cannot avoid being often betrayed into tumults and seditions. But if we will
resolve to be tender of our obedience to the great, undoubted, and unalterable
commands of the Gospel; that will defend our Consciences against the vexation
of scruples, and little inadvertencies, protect the public from all the
disturbances of a peevish and wayward godliness, and secure our acceptance with
God, without being so punctual and exact in the Offerings of Mint and Cummin.

Sect. 6. In cases and disputes of a public concern, private men are not
properly sui Iuris, they have no power over their own actions, they are not to
be directed by their own judgments, or determined by their own wills; but by
the commands and determinations of the Public Conscience. And if there be any
sin in the command, he that imposed it, shall answer for it; and not I, whose
whole Duty it is to obey: The commands of Authority will warrant my obedience,
my obedience will hallow, or at least excuse my action, and so secure me from
sin, if not from error; because I follow the best guide, and most probable
direction I am capable of: And though I may mistake, my integrity shall
preserve my innocence. And in all doubtful and disputable cases it is better to
err with Authority, than be in the right against it; not only, because the
danger of a little error (and so it is, if it be disputable) is out-weighed by
the importance of the great duty of obedience, that is more serviceable to the
main ends of Religion, than a more nice and exact way of acting in opposition
to Government; but also, because they are to be supposed the fittest Judges of
what tends to the Public Good, whose business it is to understand Public
Affairs: And therefore in all such matters, their commands are the supreme Rule
of Conscience, as being more competent Judges of Public Concerns, than men's
own private persuasions; and so must have a Superior Authority over them, and
bind them to yield and submit to their determinations. And, if we take away
this Condescension of our Private Consciences to Public Authority, we
immediately dissolve all Government; for in case of dissension, unless we
submit our persuasions to their commands, their commands must submit to our
persuasions. And then, let any man tell me, Wherein consists the power of
Princes, when it may be controlled by every Subjects opinion? and what can
follow, but perfect disorder and confusion, when every man will be governed by
nothing but his own conceits? And if Subjects may be allowed to dispute the
prudence and convenience of all Laws, Government would be but a weak and
helpless thing, and Princes would command at the will and pleasure of their
Subjects. And, therefore people are never curious in their exceptions against
any Public Laws, unless in matters of Religion; and, in that case they study
for Reasons to disobey, because it gratifies their pride and vanity, to seem
more knowing than their Governors in that part of wisdom, that they think most
valuable. Self-conceit and Spiritual Pride are strange Temptations to
Disobedience; and, were there not something of this in it, men would find out
other commands more liable to their exceptions. For how seldom is it, that any
Wars are commenced upon just and warrantable grounds? And yet, how few are
they, that take upon them to judge their lawfulness? All men here think their
Princes command a sufficient warrant to serve him, and satisfy themselves in
this, that, in case the cause prove to be unjust, the fault liesentirely upon
him that commands, and not at all on him who has nothing to do but obey. And if
it were otherwise, that no Subject were bound to take up Arms till himself had
approved the justness of the cause, Commonwealths must be bravely secured, and
their safety must lie at the mercy of every humorsome and pragmatical Fellow.
And yet to this piece of arrogance do men tempt themselves, when they affect to
be thought more godly than their Neighbors. It is a gallant thing to understand
Religion better than their Superiors, and to pity their ignorance in the great
Mysteries of the Gospel, and by seeming to compassionate their weakness, to
despise their Authority. But if Princes will suffer themselves to be controlled
by the pride and insolence of these contentious Zealots, they do but tempt them
to slight both their persons, and their Government; and if they will endure to
be checked in their Laws Spiritual, and Government of the Church, by every
Systematical Theologue, (and most, not to say the best, of our Adversaries are
little better) they may as well bear, to see themselves affronted in their Laws
Civil, and Government of the State by every Village-Attorney, and Solicitor.

Well then, all men that are in a state of Government are bound, in all matters
doubtful and disputable, to submit the dictates of Private Conscience to the
determinations of Public Authority. Nor does this oblige any man to act
against the dictates of his own Conscience, but only, by altering the case,
alters his persuasions, i.e. though every man, considered absolutely, and by
himself, be bound to follow his own private judgment; yet when he is considered
as the member of a Society, then must be governed, then he must of necessity be
bound to submit his own private thoughts to public determinations. And it is
the dictate of every man's Conscience, that is not turbulent and seditious, that
it ought in all things that are not of a great and apparent necessity, whatever
its own private judgment of them is, to acquiesce in the determinations of its
Governors, in order to public peace and unity. For unless this be done, there
can be nothing but eternal disorders and confusions in the Church; in that it
is utterly impossible that all men should have the same apprehensions of
things, and (considering the tempers and passions of mankind) as impossible,
that they should not pursue their differences and controversies with too much
heat and vehemence: And therefore unless whatever their own judgments and
apprehensions be, they are bound in all such cases to acquiesce in the
decisions and determinations of the Governors of the Church, or Commonwealth,
in order to its peace and setlement, there can be no possible way of avoiding
endless squabbles and confusions. And unless this be a fundamental Rule and
dictate of every man's Conscience, that as he is bound in all doubtful cases to
follow the (...), or the best result of his own private persuasions, where he
neither has, nor is obliged to have, any other guide or rule of his actions; so
he is bound to forego them all (provided his plain and necessary duty be
secured) out of obedience to Authority, and in order to the due Government of
the Society; there never can be any peace or setlement in any Church or
Commonwealth in the world. And every Conscience that is not thus persuaded, is
upon that account to be reckoned as seditious and unpeaceable, and so to be
treated accordingly.

Sect. 7. He that with an implicit Faith and confidence, resigns up his own
Reason to any Superior on earth in all things, is a Fool; and he is as great a
Fool, (to say no worse) that will do it in nothing: For as all men are
immediately subject to God alone, in matters of indispensable duty, (that are
not at all concerned in our present dispute) so are they, in all other things,
to condescend to the Decrees and determinations of their lawful Superiors.
Neither is this, to put men upon that supreme Folly of renouncing the use and
guidance of their own Reasons out of obedience to any man's infallibility. For
by Reason we mean nothing but, the mind of man making use of the wisest and
most prudential methods, to guide it self in all its actions; and therefore it
is not confined to any sort of Maxims and Principles in Philosophy, but it
extends it self to any knowledge that may be gained by Prudence, Experience,
and Observation. And hence right Reason, when it is employed about the actions
of men, is nothing else but Prudence and Discretion: Now the Reason of any wise
and sober man will tell him, that it is most Prudent, Discreet, and Reasonable,
to forego his own private persuasions in things doubtful and disputable, out of
obedience to his lawful Superiors; because, without this the World can never
be governed. And supposing men's judgments and understandings to be never so
much above the Jurisdiction of all Humane Authority, and that no man can be
bound to submit his Reason to any thing but the Commands of God; yet every man
ows at least so much civility to the will of his Prince, and the peace of his
Country, as to bring himself to a compliance and submission to the Public
Judgment, rather than to disturb the Public Peace, for the gratification of
his own Fancy and Opinion. Which is no enslaving of his Reason to any man's
usurpation over his Faith and Conscience, but only a bringing it to a modest
compliance, in order to the common interests of Humane Society: And if it be
not a duty of subjection, yet it is one of peaceableness; and if it be not
grounded upon our obligations to the Authority it self, yet it is most clearly
derived from an higher Obligation, that all men are under, to advance the
welfare of mankind, and more particularly of that Society they live in, that is
antecedent to those of Government, which is instituted only in order to the
common good: And therefore, though our duty in such cases could not be deduced
from our obligation to any humane Authority, yet it clearly arises from that
duty of Charity we owe to our Fellow Creatures. And though we are not to submit
our Understandings to any Humane Power, yet we are to the first and Fundamental
Laws of Charity: which being one of the greatest duties of mankind, it is but
reasonable to forego all more private and inferior obligations, when they stand
in competition with it. And thus St. Paul, notwithstanding he declaimed with so
much vehemence against the observation of the Judaical Rites and Ceremonies,
never scrupled to use them, as often as it was serviceable to the advancement of
the Christian Religion, and by consequence the good of mankind. And all I would
persuade men to, is only that they would do as much out of duty, as St. Paul
did out of civility; that as he complied with the apprehensions of the Jews,
retaining his own private judgment to himself, for the greater advantage of
Religion; so they would, whatever their own persuasions are of some things not
clearly and absolutely sinful, comply with the determinations of their
Governors, when it is conducive to the nobler ends of Public Peace and
Tranquillity: A thing in it self so good and so necessary, that there are very
few actions, that it will not render virtuous, whatever they are in themselves,
whenever they happen to be useful and instrumental to its attainment. And
therefore in all matters (that are no indispensable duties of Religion) he,
that acts cross to the commands of Authority, has no sense either of the great
ends of Order and Government, or great duties of Humanity, Modest,
Peaceableness, Meekness, and Civility, i. e. He is a proud and factious person;
and has no other motive so to do, but the pleasure of being peevish and
disobedient.

In fine, there is a vast difference between Liberty, and Authority of
Conscience; the former consists in the Freedom of a man's own judgment, and of
this no Magistrate can deprive us, in that he cannot tie up any man's
understanding from judging of things as himself pleases: But as for the
latter, that consists in the power over men's outward actions, and this, as far
as it concerns all public affairs, every man does, and of necessity must pass
away to the Rulers of that Society he lives in: Because (though I have said it
often enough already, yet too often I cannot say it, in that it is the main Key
of the Controversy, and yet but little, if at all regarded by our Adversaries)
the very nature of Government consists in nothing else but a power of command
over men's actions; and therefore unless all men grant it away to their
Governors, they live not under Government, but in a state of Anarchy: Every
man will be Prince and Monarch to himself, and as free from all commands, as if
he lived out of all Society; seeing only himself shall have any real Dominion
over his own actions, and his Governors shall not have power to command him
any thing, but what himself first thinks fit to do: And I hope I need not to
prove, that this is a plain dissolution of all Government. So that when men
will be the absolute Masters of their own actions, it is not the freedom of
Conscience, but its power and sovereignty, for which they contend; they will
endure none to rule over them but themselves, and force Princes to submit their
Laws to their saucy and imperious humor: And it is this they mean by their
pretense to a tender Conscience, i. e. A Conscience that scruples to be subject
to Government, that will in spite of all Public Laws be entirely at its own
Liberty, that will not submit it self to any Rule but its own private
persuasions, that affects to be nice and squeamish against all the commands of
its Superiors, and loves to censure them upon the lightest and most slender
presumptions, and that will not yield up any thing of its own fantastic
humor to its Princes will, or the Churches Peace, i. e. in effect, the
tenderness of their Consciences (for which, forsooth, they must be born with)
consists in nothing else but their being the greatest and most Notorious
Heretics. For the rankest sort of Heresy is nothing but the product of a
peevish and contentious Spirit; and an Heretic is one that delights in
Quarrels and Factions; whence Erasmus renders S. Paul's (...) Sectarum Author, a
man that loves to be the Leader of a Party: It is peevishness and obstinacy of
will that turns small Errors into great Heresies. Pride and Passion, and
whatsoever can make an opinion vicious, are its Fundamental Ingredients, and
give it its essential Formality. This vice lies not so much in the Opinions, as
in the tempers of men, it is a stubborn and refractory disposition of mind, or
a peremptoriness in a man's own conceptions; and therefore it is by Saint Paul
reckoned among the Fruits of the Flesh, as being a kind of brutish peevishness,
that is directly opposed to that lenity and yieldingness of mind, that is one
of the choicest Fruits of the Spirit; whence he advises not to confute, but to
admonish such an one, i. e. That is quarrelsome and boisterous for every
trifle, and every fancy, because through Pride and Perverseness he is incapable
of instruction; and therefore can only be advised, and not disputed into
Sobriety. Or (to use the phrase of Saint Paul) he is (...), a fellow that is
troublesome and contentious, especially about the external Rites and Usages of
the Church. And such a malapert Nonconformist he supposes disputing in the
Church of Corinth, that their Women ought, contrary to their received Custom,
to be uncovered at Divine Service: But he takes him up with this short and
peremptory answer, If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God, i. e. In things neither morally good nor evil (as
few external Rites are) the practice of the Church is the warrant of their
lawfulness, and reason of their decency; and that is satisfaction enough to any
sober and peaceable mind: And he that shall refractorily persist to control
it, must be treated as a disturber of the Peace, i. e. pitied and punished, as
are all other turbulent and seditious Persons. When men's Consciences are so
squeamish or so humorsome, as that they will rise against the Customs and
Injunctions of the Church they live in, she must scourge them into order, and
chastise them, not so much for their fond persuasion, as for their troublesome
peevishness. And this use of the Churches Rods and Censures, is so absolutely
necessary, that it is the only effectual way to preserve her from Factions and
Contentions; not only because upon this sort of men softer methods can make no
impressions, but also because, if we remove the limits and boundaries of
Discipline, there will be no end of the follies and frenzies of brainsick
People: And when they are once let loose, who then can set bounds to the
wildnesses of Godly Madness? For this we have too clear a proof in the frantic
practices of our Modern Sectaries, who, when they had inflamed their little
Zeal against the Ceremonial Constitutions of our Church, ran themselves into
all manner of wild and extravagant gestures: They measured the simplicity of
Christ's Worship by its opposition to all the Rules of Decency; all Institutions
of Order were unwarrantable Inventions and Traditions of Men; all Custom was
Superstition, and all Discipline was Popish and Antichristian. Novelty, how
uncouth and fantastic soever, was their only Rule of Decency; and every Sect
distinguished it self from all others, by some affected and newfangled
singularity.

And from hence it is, that it is so absolutely necessary, that Governors
injoin matters of no great moment, and consequence in themselves, thereby to
avoid the evils that would naturally attend upon their being not injoined; so
that, when they are determined, though perhaps they are not of any great use to
the Commonwealth in themselves, yet they have at least this considerable
usefulness, as to prevent many great mischiefs, that would probably follow from
their being not determined: And therefore the goodness of all such Laws is to
be valued, not so much by the nature of the things that the Law commands, as by
the mischiefs and evil effects, that it prevents or redresses. And thus the
main decency of Order and Uniformity in Divine Worship lies not so properly in
the positive use of the Rites themselves, as in the prevention of all the
indecencies of Confusion; which could never be avoided, if there were not some
peculiar Rites positively determined. So that the Law we see may be absolutely
necessary, when the thing it commands is but merely indifferent; because some
things necessary cannot be obtained, but by some things indifferent: As in our
present case, there is an absolute necessity there should be Order and Decency
in Public Worship, but Order and Decency there cannot be without the
determination of some indifferent and particular Circumstances; because, if
every man were left to his own fancy and humor, there could be no remedy
against eternal Follies and Confusions: So that it is in general necessary that
some circumstances be determined, though perhaps no one particular circumstance
can be necessary; yet when any one is singled out by Authority, it gains as
absolute a necessity, as if it were so antecedently; because though the thing
it self be indifferent, yet the Order and Decency of Public Worship is not:
Which yet can never be provided for, but by determining either this or some
other Ceremony as perfectly indifferent and arbitrary. And now upon the result
of these particulars, I leave it first to Public Authority to consider,
whether it be not a wonderfully wise piece of good nature, to be tender and
indulgent to these poor tender Consciences? And then. I leave it to all the
World to judge, Whether ever any Church or Nation in the World has been so
woefully disturbed upon such slender and frivolous pretenses as ours?

And thus have I at length finished what I designed and undertook, i. e. I have
proved the absolute necessity of governing men's Consciences and Persuasions in
Matters of Religion, and the unavoidable dangers of tolerating, or keeping up
Religious Differences; have shown, that there is not the least possibility of
settling a Nation, but by Uniformity in Religious Worship; that Religion may,
and must be governed by the same Rules, as all other Affairs and Transactions
of Humane life; and that nothing can do it but severe Laws, nor they neither,
unless severely executed. And so I submit it to the consideration of Public
Authority, and am but little doubtful of the Approbation of all that are
friends to Peace and Government. But whatever the event may prove to others, it
is not a little satisfaction that I reap to my self, in reflecting upon that
Candor and Integrity, I have used through the whole Discourse: In that, as I
have freely and impartially represented the most serious result of mine own
thoughts; so withal have I been not a little solicitous, not to baulk any thing
material in the Controversy; have encountered all their most weighty and
considerable Objections, have prevented all manner of escapes and subterfuges,
and have not waved any thing, because it was too hard to be answered; though
some things I have, because too easy. And upon review of the whole, I have
confidence (perhaps it may be boldness) enough to challenge the Reader, if he
will but be as ingenuous as he ought, to be as severe as he will; and in
defiance to all Enemies of Peace and Government, of what Name or Sect soever,
to conclude all in the words of Pilate to the turbulent Jews, What I have
written, I have written.

FINIS.

