Prophecys Concerning the Return of POPERY INTO ENGLAND, SCOTLAND AND IRELAND.
BY

Archbishop Usher, Mr. Herbert, Dr. D. Pareus, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Seldom, Mr.
Baxter, Dr. M. Luther, Archbishop Grindal, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Gauden, Mr.
Hooker, Dr. Sutcliffe.
LONDON, Printed for A. Bancks, MDCLXXXII.

Prophecies Concerning the Return of Popery into England, Scotland and Ireland.
JAmes Usher late Lord Archbishop of Armagh Primate of Ireland, being asked by
a Gentleman of his acquaintance what his thoughts were of a very great
Persecution, which should fall upon the Church of God in these Narions of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which he had spoken with great confidence
many years before, when we were in the highest and fullest state of outward
peace and Settlement. The Gentleman asked him whether he did believe those sad
times to be past, or that they were yet to come, to which he answered, that
they were yet to come, and that he did as confidently expect it, as ever he had
done, adding, that this said Persecution would fall upon all the Protestants
Churches of Europe. The other replied, that he did hope it might have been past
as to these Nations of our, since he thought, that though we, who are the
People thereof, have been punished much less than our sins have deserved, and
that our late Wars had made far less Devastations, than War commonly brings
upon those Countries where it pleases God in Judgment to suffer it: yet we
must needs accknowledge that many great Houses had been Burnt, Ruined and left
without Inhabitants, many great Families Impoverished and undone, and many
thousand Lives also had been lost in that bloody War, and that Ireland and
Scotland, as well as England, had drunk very deep of the Cup of God's Anger,
even to the overthrow of the Government, and the utter desolation almost of a
very great part of those Countries.

But this holy man turning to him, and fixing his eye upon Him, with that
Serious and Irefull Look, which he usually had when he spoke God's Words and
not his own, and when the power of God seemed to be upon, and to constrain him
to speak, which the Gentleman could easily discern much to differ from the
Countenance, wherewith he usually spoke to him, He said thus.

Fool not your self with such hopes, for I tell you, all you have yet seen,
has been but the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the
Protestant Churches of Christ, who will er'e long fall under a sharper
Persecution than ever it has been upon them, and therefore said he, Look you
be not found in the outward Court, but a worshiper in the Temple before the
Altar, for Christ will measure all those that profess his name, and call
themselves his People; and the outward worshipers he will leave out, to be
trodden down by the Gentiles. The outward Court (says he) is the formal
Christian whose Religion lies in performing the outside without showing any
inward life and duties of Christianity, Power of faith and love, uniting them
to Christ, and these God will leave to be trodden own, and Swept away by the
Gentiles; but the worshipers within the Temple and before the Altar, are those
who do indeed worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose souls are made his
Temples, and he is honored and adored in the most Inward thoughts of their
Hearts, and they Sacrifice their lusts and vile affections, yea, and their own
wills to him, and these God will hide in the hollow of his hand, and under the
shadow of his Wings; and this shall be one great difference between this last,
and all the other proceeding Persecutions; for in the former, the most Eminent
and Spiritual Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and were
most violently fallen upon, but in this last Persecution, these shall be
preserved by God as a seed to partake of that glory which shall Immediately
follow and come upon the Church, as soon as ever this storm shall be over. For
as it shall be the Sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them
all; and shall only take away the gross Hypocrites and formal Professors, but
the true Spiritual Believers shall be Preserved till the Calamity be overpast.

The Gentleman then asked him by what means or Instruments this great Trial
should be brought on. He answered, by the Papists; the other replied, that it
seemed to him very Improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now
little Countenanced, and but few in these Nations, and that the Hearts of
People were more Set against them than ever since the Reformation. He answered
again, That it would be by the hand, of Papists, and in the way of sudden
Massacre, and that he the then Pope would be the chief Instrument of it. He
then added, that the Papists were in his own opinion the Gentiles spoken of in
the 11th of the Revelation to whom the outward Court shall be left, that they
might Tread it under Foot: They having received the Gentiles worship in their
Adoring Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many
Mediators; and this (said he) the Papists are now designing among themselves,
and therefore be sure you be ready.

Mr. George Herbert.
REligion stands on tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand.
When height of Malice, and Prodigious Lusts,
Impudence sinning, Witchcrafts, and distrusts,
(The marks of future bane) shall fill our Cup
Unto the Brim, and make our Measure up:
When (...) shall swallow Tiber, and the Thames.
By letting in them both, pollutes her Streams:
When Italy of us shall have her will,
And all her Calender of sins fulfill?
Whereby one may foretell, what sins next Year.
Shall both in France and England Domineer.
Then shall Religion to America fle.
They have their times of Gospel, even as We.
Mr. David Pareus Professor of Divinity in Heidelberg
THere shall arise a King out of the Nation of the most Illustrious Lilie,
having a long forehead, high Brows, great Eyes, and an Eagles nose: He shall
gather a great Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his Kingdom: and slay all
that fly and hide themselves in Mountains and Caves from his face: For
righteousness shall be Joined unto him, as the Bridegroom to the Bride: with
them he shall wage War even unto to the fourtieth Year, bringing into
Subjection the Islanders, Spaniards, and Italians: Rome and Florence, he shall
destroy and burn with fire, so as Salt may be sowed on that Land. The greatest
Clergyeman who have invaded Peter's Seat, he shall put to Death: and in the same
Year obtain a double Crown at last going over Sea with a great Army, he shall
enter Greece, and be named King of the Greeks, the Turks and Barbarians he
shall subdue, making an Edict, that every one shall die the Death that
worshipeth not the Crucified one, and none shall be found able to resist him,
because an holy arm from the Lord shall always be with him. And he shall
possess the Dominion of the Earth, these things being done, he shall be called
the rest of Holy Christians, etc.

Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs.
BAbylon must down, and yet the Kings lament her fall, Who then must Pull her
Down but the People? Not that the People can raise a War merely for Religion,
but God will so order things, That the Papists Shall by their Malice be put
upon such Plots and Entreprizes, that shall make Themselves Liable to the
Justice of the Law, so that King's shall have no Legal Power to resure them
from it, but inferior Magistrates assisted by the People shall in a Just way
fall upon them, even then when the Kings of the Earth, and their Merchants
shall lament them. Hence Revelation 19. 6. The Hallelujah that is begun upon
the Lord God Omnipotent Reigning, is begun by the People. I hear the voice of
many Waters, etc. Saying, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns. Now
the Scripture frequently sets forth the People by Waters, as Revelation 17. 15.
The Waters which Thou saw were People. We read Canticles 5. 11. Where the
Glory of Christ is set forth, it begins at the Head, but Cant 7. 1. Where the
Glory of the Church is set forth, it begins at the Feet; How beautiful are thy
Feet! Surely the Right Knowledge of these Liberties God has given his People,
will much help forward the Great things God has to do in this Latter Age.

Mr. Seldom.
MIrum quidem, etc. It is a wounderfull thing that Azuarrus 400 years ago
should say that indeed about the year 1500 the Catholic Religion should fall
much in luster, extent and authority (If I translate his words aright) only I
must confess the pride, vanity, and security of the Catholic Clergy seem to
make way to it: yet (which is more strange) the same Religion shall cover it is
self toward the years 1700, only I must needs say that I think the late
divisions arising no doubt from Roman Insinuations, seem to threaten the Late
Reformation; weakening the Interest of Religion on the one hand, and opening
advantages to the adversaries of it on the other; while the Jewish way was one
and entire within it self, it was secure from foreign attempts upon its being
or purity; as soon as it was crumbled into those minute parts and factions of
Esseans, Pharisees, Sadducess, Herodians, Zelots, etc. It yielded to the
adversary, and at last was resolved to nothing: But that I think there is a
providence in all ages remarkable, which does at once bear testimony to, and
secure Religion, I shall much fear that our most excellent Religion, so
miserably confounded by its distracted followers, would one day give place to
the two grand mischiefs of the world Popery and Profaneness; against which
there are no other remedies below the merciful assistance of heaven, than
found Doctrine settled, severe discipline established, a decent and holy Worship
secured, and a grand establishment enjoined, which may fence in truth and
virtue, and keep out error and sin; whereby the Orthodox and the good part of
the Nation may be known and encouraged, as the Heterodox may be discovered and
awed.

Mr. Baxter.
WHen the motion was first made, for the publishing of these Papers, it seemed
to me to be as the casting of water into the Sea; so great is the Number of the
Learned Writings of Protestant Divines against the Papists (which will never be
well answered) that the most elaborate addition may seem superfluous; much more
these hasty Disputations prepared but for an exercise which is the Recreation
of a few Country-Ministers at a monthly meeting, when they ease themselves of
their ordinary work. But upon further consideration, I saw it was, The casting
of water upon a threatening fire, which the Sea it self does but restrain. It Is
more Engines than a few that are openly or secretly at work at this time to
captivate these Nations again to the Roman Pope. When so many hundreds, if not
thousands are night and day contriving our seduction, (under the name of
reconciling us to the Church;) if no body counter-work them what may they not
do. Its not enough that we have had Defenders, and that their Books are yet in
the World. Old Writings are laid by, though much stronger than any new ones:
But new ones are sooner taken up and read? The Papists have of late been very
plentiful, and yet very sparing in their Writings Plentiful of such as run
among the simple injudicious people in secret, so that the Countries swarm with
them; But sparing of such as may provoke any Learned man to a Confutation: That
so, they may in time dis-used us from those Studies, and so disable the
Ministry therein, and catch us when we are secure through a seeming peace, and
fall upon us when we have lost our strength. And I am much afraid that the
generality of our people (perhaps of the best) are already so much disused from
these studies, as to be much unacquainted with the Nature of Popery, and much
more to seek for a preservative against it, and a through confutation of them.
So that if Papists were once but as fully set out among us in their own
likeness, as they are under the names of Quakers and other Sects, what work
would you see in many places? I doubt many would follow their pernicious ways,
and fall like Sheep of a common rot, or People in a raging pestilence,
especially if they had but the countenance of the times: Not through their
strength, but because our people are naked, and unmeet for a defense.

The work that now they are upon, is, 1. By Divisions, and reviling the
Ministers, to loosen the people from their Guides; that they may be as a
Masterless dog that will follow anybody that will whistle to him.

2. To take down the Ministers maintenance and encouragements, that they may be
disabled so vigorously to resist them.

3. To hinder their union, that they may abate their strength, and find them
work against each other.

4 To procure a Liberty of seducing all they can under the name of Liberties of
Conscience, that so they may have as fair a game for it as we: and ignorance
and the common corruption of nature (especially so heightened by a custom in
sin) does befriend the Devil's cause much more than God's; or else hows comes
it to pass that the Godly are so few, and Error, Idolatry and Impiety does so
abound in all the Earth!

5. To break the common people into as many Sects and Parties as they can, that
they may not only employ them against one another, but also may hence fetch
matter of reproach against our profession in the eyes of the World.

6. To plead under the name of Seekers against the certainty of all Religion;
that men may be brought to think that they must be either of the Popish
profession or of none.

And indeed when all Sects have done their worst it is but two, that we are in
any great danger of (And of those I think we are in more danger, than the most
are aware of) and that is, 1. Papists: who plead not as other parties, only by
the tongue, but by exciting Princes and States against us, and disputing with
the Faggot or Hatchet in their hands: And if we have not Arguments that will
confute a Navy, an Army, or a Powder Plot, we can do no good against them.

2. Profaneness, animated by Apostate Infidels: This is the Religion that men
are born in. And men that naturally are so indeared to their lusts, that they
would not have the Scripture to be true, will easily hearken to him that tells
them it is false.

Yea so much does Popery befriend men in a vicious course, that some are apt to
join those together, thinking at the heart that Christianity is but a Fable:
but yet for fear it should prove true, they will be Papists, that they may have
that easy remedy for a reserve.

If God will preserve us but from these two dangers, Popery and Profaneness
animated by infidelity, it will go well with England.

1. Either Scripture is true or not true: If not, Popery is not true, which
pleads its warant from it (and some of them argue, as if they purposed to
disprove the Scripture and to imitate Sampson, in pulling down the house on
their heads and ours, in revenge for the dishonor they have suffered by the
Scripture.) If it be true (as nothing more true) then Popery is not true, which
palpably contradicts it, as in the points of Latin service, and denying the
Cup in the Lords Supper, and many other is most evident.

3. Either the judgment of the Ancient Doctors is sound or not: If not, then
the Church of Rome is unsound, that is sworn to expound the Scripture only
according to their consent: If it be sound, then the Church of Rome is unsound,
that arrogate a Universal Government and Infallibility, and build upon a
foundation, that was never allowed by the Ancient Doctors (as in the third
Disp. I have fully proved) and which most Christians in the World do still
reject.

4. Either Reason it self is to be renounced or not: If it be, then none can be
Papists but mad men. If not, then Popery must be renounced, which foundeth our
very faith upon impossibilities, and teaches men of necessity to believe in
the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, before they believe in Christ, with many the
like, which are afterward laid open.

5. Either our five Senses, and the judgment made upon them, is certain and
infallible or not. If not, then the Church of Rome, both Pope and Council are
fallible, and not at all to be trusted: For when all their Tradition is by
hearing or reading, they are uncertain whether ever they heard or read any such
thing; and we must all be uncertain whether they speak or write it: And then we
must not only subscribe to Fransc. Sanches. Quod nihil scitur, but also say
that Nihil certo creditur. But if sense be certain and Infallible; then the
Church of Rome, even Pope and Council are not only Fallible; but certainly
false deceivers and deceived. For the Pope and his Council tell the Church that
it is not Bread and Wine which they take, eat and drink in the Eucharist. But
the senses of all sound men do tell them that it is. I see that its Bread and
Wine, I smell it, I feel it, I taste it; and some what I hear, to further my
assurance: And yet if Popery be not false, its no such matter. One would think
the dullest Reader, might be quickly here resolved whether Popery be true or
false. Look on the consecrated Bread and Wine, touch it, smell it, taste it,
and if thou can but be sure that it is indeed Bread and Wine, thou may be
as sure that Popery is a delusion. And if thou can but be sure, that it is
not Bread and Wine, yet thou may be sure that the Pope or his Council, nor
any of his Doctors are not to be believed. For if other men's senses be
deceitful, theirs and thine are so too.

Reader, Adhere to God, and the Righteousness of Christ, and the Teachings of
the Holy Ghost, by the Scriptures, and a faithfully Ministry, in the Communion
of the Saints, and as a member of the Catholic Church, which arising at
Jerusalem, is dispersed over the World, containing all that are Christians;
renounce not right Reason, or thy senses; and live according to the light which
is vouchsafed thee; and then thou shall be safe from Popery, and all other
pernicious damning Errors.

Mr. Luther.
NOn Citius, etc. No sooner have we reformed, but those arise among us who
speak perverse things, and destroy that in a week, which we had been some years
setting up; whose hand is this, is it not the adversaries? who sows these
Tares, but the Enemy? who finding he cannot prevail openly, undermines us
secretly; who seeing he cannot succeed against us barefaced, attempts us under
the vizard of a deluded people: God of his mercy put a stop to those delusions,
which if they proceed will ingulf us again in Popery: These cry down the
Ministers of the Gospel, the Papists can do no more; they do the Papists work
for them, alas, alas! etc.

Archbishop Grindal.
TWo great dangers I really fear, Atheism and Popery; both me thinks, I see
arising out of our needless divisions and differences, fomented and cherished,
I fear by Satan the enemy of mankind, and the Pope, the enemy of Christendom,
that Antichrist, the mystery of whose iniquity yet works among us, but that
she lets who also did let, and will let, by her power and authority given
her of God, for God, until (which God avert, though their enemies endeavor)
she be taken out of the way. -- By these differences the enemies of our
Religion ^gain this, That nothing can be established by Law in the Protestant
Religion, whose every part is opposed by one or other of her own professors; so
that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have their opportunity
to urge their way, which is attended with Order and Government, and our
Religion continued thus distracted and divided, some vile wretches lay hold of
the Arguments on one side to confute the other, and so hope at last to destroy
all: In quae reservamur tempora?

Bishop Jewel.
NOw let us behold the present state of our country. These words of Christ our
Savior were never more true, than we find them now in these our days. The
harvest is great, and the labourors very few, the poor people sieth forsaken,
and left as it were sheep without a guide: the afflicted in conscience have no
man to quiet them: they grow wild and savage, as it were a people that had no
God: they are commanded to change their religion, and for lack of instruction,
they know not whither to turn them: they know not, neither what they leave nor
what they should receive.

Some other defy, and spit at the holy Gospel of our Savior Christ, and
refuse the covenant of everlasting life. Some other for lack of knowledge
follow after willful and blind masters, and become Arrians or Pelagians, and
thus they blaspheme the Son of God. Some others give themselves over to their
own affections, and, as he says, rejoice and triumph in their filthiness,
without fear of God, without conscience of sin, and so tread down the blood of
the Testament under feet: and this do they for lack of teaching, because they
have not learned men and preachers to show them what they should do.

O, says our Savior Christ, the good shepherd and bishop of our souls, my
harvest is beaten down and lost, and there is none that will go abroad and save
it. My people run headlong to their own destruction, not of Malice but of very
simplicity, only because they are not taught, because they know not my father
nor me. Also, it is not my fathers will that any of them should be lost.

But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are fathers, and
have children for whom you are careful. Although your selves have a zeal and
care for the house of God: yet will you breed them up, keep them at School,
until four and twenty years old to your charges, that in the end they may live
in glorious poverty? that they may live poorly and naked like the Prophets and
Apostles? Our posterity shall rue, that ever such fathers went before them: And
Chronicles shall report this contempt of learning among the punishments, and
murrains, and other plagues of God. They shall leave it written in what time
and under whose reign this was done. Or if we grow so barbarous that we
consider not this, or be not able to draw it into Chronicle, yet fortain
Nations will not spare to write this, and publish it to our everlasting
reproach and shame.

In the mean time, what may be ghessed of their meaning, which thus ravin and
spoil the house of God, which decay the provision thereof, and so basely esteem
the Ministers of the Gospel? they cannot say to God, The zeal of thy house has
eaten me up. Howsoever in other things they do well, howsoever they seem to
rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and preservation of
the Lords Anointed: yet needs must it be, that by these means foreign power,
of which this Realm by the mercy of God is happily delivered, shall again be
brought in upon us. Such things shall be done unto us, as we be for suffered:
the truth of God shall be taken away, the holy Scriptures burnt and consumed in
fire. A mavelous darkness and calamity must needs ensue. For, if the tempest
be so dark in the sea, that the load-star lose her light, and the needle tail
to give token of the North Pole, no marvel though the ship lose her course, and
be swallowed in the sands.

The Gospel, of Christ is the fountain of light, and of knowledge. It cannot be
maintained by ignorance and darkness. These be the props of their kingdom which
take away the Scriptures, which hold the people in blindness, which fly the
light, which have their common prayers, minister the Sacraments, marry, bury
their dead in a strange tongue, that the people may understand nothing: which
make a famme of hearing the word of God: which stop up the springs of the water
of life: which take away the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and neither enter
in themselves, nor suffer them that would enter: which say ignorance is the
mother of devotion, and the Church is then in best order, and the people most
devout, when they are hood-winckt and blinded, and see nothing.

These are not fit instruments wherewith we may overcome the adversaries. This
is not the sword of the spirit, these are not the spiritual weapons, which cast
down holds, and every high thing that is exalted against the kingdom of God.
When man that would keep out his enemy, will pull down his holds? what Captain
that means to give a forcible assault upon the enemy, will discourage his
fighting soldiers, but our Soldiers are out of courage, our Castles are
falling: therefore that which we tear will fall upon us.

Bishop Gauden.
THese, and such like, are the uncouth expressions used to usher it, under the
names of Liberty, Curiosity, sublimity, nothing but Ignorance, Idleness,
Atheism, Barbarity, Irreligion, and utter confusion in this Church: or at
best, (as I shall afterward more fully demonstrate) they are but van-courriers,
or agitators for Romish superstitions and Papalusurpations; the end of all this
gibberish is, Venient Romani.

Put all these fine fancies and affected phrases together, with all those
strange phantasms in Religion, which of late have haunted this Church, like so
many unquiet vermin, or unclean spirits; truly they spell nothing but, first,
popular extravagances, which are the embasings and embrovlings of all true and
reformed Religion; next they portend Popish interests and policies prevailing
against this Church and state, whose future advantages are cunningly, but
notably, wrapped up in these plebeian furies, and fondnesses, as grocery wares
are in brown paper. Be confident, the spirit of Rome (which is very vigilant
and and active (does then move most potently upon the face of our English
waters, when there is to be seen nothing but a sea of confusion, a mere Chaos
of the Christian and Reformed Religion.

Which feared deluge, (and by wise men forseen) devastation of the Reformed
Religion (once wisely established, honorably maintained, and mightily
prospered in the Church of England) is already much spread and prevalent among
many people, under the plea and color of I know not what liberty, to own any
or no Minster, any or no Religion, any, none, or many Churches in England. The
visible decays and debasings of the true and Reformed Religion in England, as
to piery, equity, unity and charity, as to the authority of its Ministry and
solemnity of its Ministrations, are so palpable, both in the outward peace and
profession, also in the inward warmth and persuasion, that it is high time for
all sober and wise men, that love God, Religion, and their Country, mightily to
importune the mercies of God, that breathing upon us with a spirit of meekness
and wisdom, truth and love, humility and honesty, he would (at length) assuage
that deluge of contempt and confusion, the troubled and bitter waters of wrath
and contention, which have overwhelmed the highest mountains of this Church;
over-topping by their salt waves and aspersions, the gravest, wisest, most
learned and religious, both Preachers and Professors, of the Reformed Religion
in this Church and Nation.

Which licentious insolences have made all sober Christians so sick, weary and
ashamed of them, that they cannot but be infinitely grieved to see and foresee
the low ebb, to which the Reformed Religion in its purity and power, must in
time fall in England, while the pristine dignity and authority of the
Evangelical Ministry is so invaded baffled and depised; while the authentic
derivation, and Catholic succession of that holy power, is so interrupted,
innovated, divided, destroyed; while the reverence of primitive customs and
examples is so slighted, abated, by Popish innovators; while the cords of
Christian harmony and Church-policy are so loosened and ravelled on every side;
while the just honor and encouragements of learning and learned men are so
much damped and exhausted; while the Ecclesiastic Glory of his Nation, which
was the chiefest (in being and owning it self as a true and Reformed Church of
Christ) is so much eclipsed, to the great reproach of this present age, and the
infinite hazard of posterity; which will hardly ever recover the honor, order,
beauty and unity of Christian and Reformed Religion, formerly enjoyed in this
Church and Nation, when once the Jewels of it, the learned, ordained, orderly
and authoritative Ministers of the Gospel, with all their Ministry and
Ministrations, Come to be either trampled under feet by Schismatical fury, or
invaded and usurped by vulgar insolency; which in time will rake them all up,
and bury them in the dunghill of Romish superstitions and Papal usurpations.

From the Deformities, Divisions, and Degenerations of Religion, also the
Falsifications, Usurpations and Devastations, which of later years have been
made by the violent sort of Anabaptists and other furious Sectaries, against
the Unity and Authority, the Sanctity and Majesty of the Church of England,
destroying its Primitive Order and Apostolic Government, its Catholic
Succession, its holy Ordination, its happy and most successful Ministry, to the
great neglect and contempt of all holy ministrations and duties of Religion; I
cannot but further intimate to your piety and prudence (O my honored
Contrymen) that which is most notorious, and no less dangerous, both in
religious and civil respects, namely, the great Advantag^s, Applauses and
Increases, which the Roman, or Papal party daily gain against the Reformed
Religion, as it was once wisely, honorably, and happily established, professed
and maintained here in England: which is now looked upon by the more subtle,
superstitious and malicious sort of Papists, as deformed, divided, dissolved,
desolated; so conclamat for dead, that they fail not with scorn to boast that
in England we have now no Church, no Pastors, no Bishops, no Presbyters, no
true Ministry, no holy Ministrations, no Order, no Unity, no Authority, no
Reverence, as to things Divine or Ecclesiastic. Insomuch that we must in this
sad posture, not only despair of ever getting ground against the Romanists, by
converting any of them from the errors of their way to the true Reformed
Religion; but we must daily expect to lose ground to the Popish party and their
Proselytes: there being no banks or piles now sufficient to keep the Sea of
Rome from overflowing or undermining us, in order to advance their restless
interests; which have been, and still are, mightily promoted, not by the
reverend Bishops and the other Episcopal Clergy (who are men of Learning,
Piety, Prudence, and Martyrlike constancy) as some men with more Heat than Wit,
more Spite than Truth, have in their mechanic and vulgar Oratory of late
miserably and falsely declaimed; but by those who have most done the Popes work,
while they have seemed most furiously to fly in the Popes face as popularly
zealous against Popery, and yet at the same time by a strange giddiness,
headiness, and madness, they have risen up against that Mother Church which
bare them, and those Fathers in it, who heretofore mightily defended them and
theirs from the talons and gripes of that Roman Eagle: and this not with
childish scufflings or light skirmishings, to which manner of sight the
illiterate weakness and rudeness of our new Masters and Champions has reduced
those Controversies? but with such a Panoply or complete Armor of proof, such
sharp Weapons, such ponderous Engines, such rare dexterity of well-man-aged
Powers, raised from all Learning, both Divine and Humane, that the high places
and defenses of Rome were not able to stand before them heretofore, when they
were battered by our Jewels, our Lakes, our Davenants, our Whites, our Halls,
our Mortons, our Andrews, and the late invincible Usher, who deserved to be
Primate, not only of Ireland, but of all the Protestant Forces in the world.
All these were Bishops, Worthies of the first three, seconded in their ranks by
able and orderly Presbyters, as Whitakers, Perkins, Reynolds, Whites,
Crakenthorps, Sutcliffs, and innumerable others, while our Regiments were
orderly, our Marchings comely, and our Forces both united and encouraged.

Whereas, now there is no doubt but the merciless mowing down and scattering of
the Clergy of England, like Hay, with the withering and decay of Government,
Regularity and Order in this Church, these have infinitely contributed to the
Papal harvest, and Romish agitations; the gleamings of whose Emissaries will
soon amount to more than the sheaves of any the most zealous and reformed
Ministers in England. By the Papal interest and advantages, I do not mean the
Roman Clergies preaching or propagting those truths of Christians, Doctrine,
and D^ties, which (for the main) they profess in common with us and all
Christian Churches, if any of them be thus piously industrious, I neither
quarrel at them, nor envy their successes, but rather I should rejoice in them
with Saint Paul; because however Christ crucified is preached, by some whom
common people will either more reverence or sooner believe (than they generally
do the decayed, despised, and divided Ministers of England) who seem to have
(many of them) so small abilities, and carrying so little show or pretense of
any good authority for their work Ministerial; nor can they be potent or
esteemed abroad, who are so impotent and disesteemed at home.

But I mean that Papal Monarchy, or Ecclesiastical Tyranny, by which the
Church, of rather the Court of Rome, (by such sinister Arts and unjust
Policies, as were shamefully used and discovered in the Tridentine conventicle)
seeks to usurp and continue an imperial power over all Churches and Bishops, as
if there had been but one Apostle, or one Apostolic Church planted in the
world; also to corrupt and abuse that ancient Purity, Simplicity, and Liberty
of Religion, which was preserved among Primitive Churches and their coordinate
Bishops: Further, without fear of God or reverence of man, opposing some Divine
Truths and undoubted institutions of Christ also imposing such erroneous
Doctrines and superstitious Opinions upon all Christians, to be believed, and
accordingly practiced, as become not the severity and sanctity of true
Religion, adding to that holy foundation (which was indeed first laid by the
great Apostles and continued happily for many hundred years by the successive
Bishops of Rome) those after-superstructures, not of ceremonies only, which
are tolerable (many of them like feathers, making but little weight in
Religion) but of corrupt Doctrines and superstitious Duties, as seem (at best)
impertinent to true Piety; but some of them are erroneous, s^crilegious,
pernicious. In somethings they are boldly adding to, or detracting from the
Doctrine and Institutions of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ: in other things
they impose for sacred and necessary, such opinions and customs, which are but
the rust and dross, the disease and deformity of Christian Religion,
contracted in the long ignorance, darkness, and almost barbarity of times,
which God winked at: but now they appear highly and justly scandalous, yea,
intolerable to more judicious and less credulous Christians, who are very
sensible, not only of that offense, which many Papal Injunctions and
Observations give to themselves, as Christians, but also to the very Heathens,
to Jews, and to Mahometans, who cannot teconcile in any Reason or Religion the
Idolatrous use of Images and Hoasts among Papists, to which they must submit,
if they will be in communion with them, or converted to be Christians; nor yet
those Tridentine Terrors and Anathemas of eternal damnation, which are
thundered by them against all those who will not, against God's express Words,
own as Truth, and submit to as necessary, those opinions and practices among
Papists, which seem either impious or impertinent, as to true Faith and a good
Conscience.

Against all which burdens (too heavy for any wise and generous Christians to
bear, when once duly informed of the weight and danger of them, and duly
reformed from them) as the great Wisdom, Piety, and Order of the Church of
England in its sacred Ministry and holy Ministratious, was heretofore the
greatest bar and bulwark in all the Christian world: so the disadvantge of
the Reformed Religion are now so palpable, and the danger of the people of this
Nation, as so obvious in their returning to that Egypt and Babylon again, which
is not the Church of Rome, but its disease and opression; that I know not in
ordinary providence any means can be used, or is left, to stop the daily
prevalencies of Popery, and the great Apostasy of England to the Romish
superstition and subjection in aftertimes, unless God stir up such Wisdom,
Zeal and Care in those that have honest hearts, joined with public power and
influence, not so much to fleece and depress Popish Recusants by pecuniary
exactions (which is to set Religion to sale, and to make merchandise of men's
errors, rather than fairly to persuade and win them by the proper and
persuasive engines of true Religion;) but (rather) duly to restore and speedily
assert the Honor, Order, Succession, Unity, Authority and Majesty of this
Reformed Church and its Catholic Ministry: from which when the Papists see our
selves to be such profound Revolters, with what face can we expect they should
ever come into our Reformation which they now behold with joyful and disdainful
eyes, so mangled, so deformed, so massacred by our owns hands? How can we with
Justice, Honor, or Humanity, inflict severe penalties upon Papists, as refusing
to conform to our Church and Religion, when they protest, with so much truth,
to our faces, they cannot see any Church, any Religion among us, as uniform,
public, authentic, constant? What (they say) formerly had the goodliest
figure and fairest presence of a Christian Church, and the best Reformed of
any, is now deformed, ruined, demolished; nothing but scattered rafters and
pieces of that ship-wrackt vessel now appear floating up and down in a restless
and foaming sea of faction, opposition and confusion, between Bishops,
Ministers and People: some are Episcopal, others Presbyterian, a third sort
Independent: all are disparate or opposite in Discipline, some are Heterodox in
Doctrine: the Anabaptists rise against all, and the Quakers so are above all.

To which of all these, with many other Sects, shall an honest-hearted Papist
apply himself, to be safe and settled in Religion? If to the poor and depressed
remains of Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy, who yet adhere to the Church
England; alas, they are weak and exhausted, contemned by many, pitied some, but
asserted by few or none, according to their true merit in former ages, or their
present Worth, Courage, Constancy and Patience in this. If the Romanists go to
the Presbyterian party, which like small shoots spring out so thick in England,
upon the cutting down of Episcopacy, to which they all formerly submitted;
these, besides their Levity, Parity, and In constancy, as to their former
Stations, Opinions, and Oaths, seem so unseasonably insolent, and magisterially
domineering, before they had got a full and just dominion, that all sober men
think them rather popular, plebeian and impertinent in their heats, transport
and passions, than so modest, wise, and grave, as becomes those who will
undertake to wrest Government out of the hands of their superiors and betters
every way, and to impose a novelty of untried and undesired Discipline upon
such a great and stout Nation as England is; which disdaining the insolency of
Popes, and offended at the indiscretion of some Bishops, will hardly ever bear
the pertnesse of petty Presbyters, who cannot want Vanity, Impudence and
Arrogance, when they fancy themselves in a supremacy of Power above people,
Parliaments and Princes: for they affect no less, as Christ's due and theirs
too. If the tossed Romanists run to the spruce and self-conceited Independents
for shelter, because these fine new Masters seem to have patents for Christian
Liberty, and urge a Magna Charta from Christ, to be accountable to none in
matters of Religion, but their own little Congregation, Church, or Body, in
which, as in an Ecclesiastic Corporation or free Borough of Religion, they may
hang and draw, exercise high and low Justice upon men's souls as they list in
their little Conventicles; yet here the poor Papist finds so much of a rude and
exotic novelty, such a gross show of Schism, such variety, such an
inconsistency, such a plebeian petulancy, such pitiful and ridiculous
affections, and arrogating of Church Power in some of the plebs, and such
contempt of it in others, that he cannot think it is other than some pieces of
Joseph's bloody coat, or some torn limbs of his body. Compared to what
Splendor, Order, Strength, Beauty, Unity, Decency, and Majesty in Doctrine and
Discipline, in Faith and holy Duties, was formerly to be observed, even to the
envy and admiration of sober Papists, in the Church of England; how much more
in the Ancient and Catholic Churches grand combinations, from which these
petty fractions and crumblings of Christians seem most abhorrent and dissonant?

This goodly Cedar, then, of the Church of England being thus broken and hewn
down, and nothing like it, or comparable to it, planted in its room, but such
Shrubs and Mushromes as grow of themselves out of the rankness of the earth
(vulgar humors and passions) under whose shade any Egyptian Vermin, Frogs, or
unclean Birds may hide themselves; no wonder if the Papists triumph in their
sufferings and constancies if they despise all our Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptistick, and fanatic Novelties; if they rejoice in that vengeance which
they conclude God has made upon our Schisms, Errors, Obstinacies, and
Persecutions against them, by our mutual confusions.

Hence must daily and necessarily follow secret inclinations, and accessions to
the Roman party, by all those who are not well grounded in the Reformed
Religion, or not much prejudiced against the Popish Errors, or are indifferent
for any Religion which is most easy or pleasing. These at length will wrap to
the Roman party, as the most specious of any: so that unless there be a speedy
restoration of the honor of the Church of England, I see not how it is
possible to prevent that fatal relapse, either to Romish superstition and
slavery, or else to a dreadful persecution, which will in time necessarily
follow those dissipations and destructions of this Reformed Church, its
Minstry, Government and Religion, which some men have already too much, and
still do, beyond measure, so industriously promote, to the excessive joy and
gratifying of the Popish party and designs, which are not only invasive upon
the honor and freedom of this Nation, but highly scandalous to our Reformed
Profession, and dangerous to our consciences, especially as we yet stand
convinced of the Errors, Superstitions and Sacriledges of the Romish Religion
since it lapsed from the Primitive Institutions of Christ, the patterns of the
Apostles, the ancient Communion of Christian Churches, and the fraternal
Co-ordination of Bishops, who were always united in orderly, happy, and
harmonious Aristocracies, rather than subordinate to any one Monarchical
Supremacy, as to Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction: however they had such
regulation and primacy of order, by Patriarchs and Metropolitans among Bishops
and the representers of several Churches, as become wise men, that were
numerous when they met in great Councils or Church Assemblies.

Nor do these wilely Romanists exercise their malice against this Reformed
Church, only with their own strength and dexterity, but they have other
oblique Policies and sinister Practices by which they set on work the hot heads
and pragmatick hands of all other Sects, who pretend the greatest Antipathies
to popery, and yet most promote its interests by their Factions and fanatic
Practices, by their heedlesse and, hedlesse their boundless and endless
Agitations, which blast all true Reformation, and bring nothing but Division
and Confusion.

For among these there are a sort of people who affect Supremacy in Church and
state too, a spiritual and temporal Dominion, no less than does the Pope of
Rome: there among them many petty Popes, who would fain be the great and only
Dictators of Religion, whose opinionative pride and projects are as yet of a
less volume and blinder print, but they every day mediate and agitate new
Editions of their power, and larger additions to their parties and designs;
being as infallible in their own conceits, as imperious in their spirits, and
magisterial in their censures, as the proudest Popes of Rome; not doubting to
condemn and excommunicate any private Christians and Ministers, yea whole
Christian Churches, yea and the best Reformed in the world (such as England
was), if they be not just of their form and fashion, or if they will not
patiently submit to their multiform and deformed Reformations, by which they
daily withdraw true Reformation to such a small thread, that losing its
strength and integrity, it must needs snap in pieces and become useless: the
strange fires of blind, popular, preposterous and sacrilegious Zeal so
over-boyling true Religion and sober Reformation, till they are utterly
confounded and quenched with such fordid and shameful deformities, as must
needs follow their Divisions, Distractions and Despiciencies, as to all
Church Order, Christian unity and Ministerial authority. Thus many heady and
giddy Professors have been so eager to come out of Babylon, that they are
almost run out of their wits, and far beyond the bounds of good consciences; so
jealous of Superstition, that they are Panders for Confusion; so scared with
the name of Rome, that they are afraid of all right Reason and sober Religion;
so fearful of being over-righteous by following vain traditions of men, that
they fear not to be over-wicked, by over-throwing the good foundations of
Order, Honor, Peace and Charity, which Christ and his Apostles have laid in
his Church: fierce enemites indeed against the Idolatry of Antichrist, but fast
friends to Belial and Mammon, to Schism and Sacrilege; which having no
fellowship with God and Christ, must needs belong to the party of Antichrist,
which contains a circle of Errors, while Christ is the center of Truth: And we
know that parts diametrically opposite to each other may (yet) make up the same
circumferences and be at equal distance from the center; so may Practices and
Opinions which seem most cross against each other, yet at Herod and Pilate,
alike conspire against Christ and true Religion, like vicious extremes, which
are contrary to each other, and yet uncorrespondent with that virtue from which
they are divided.

But the end or effect following their actions, (though possibly not some of
their intentions) will be this, to prepare by these various windings, confused
circulations and distorted wrestings of the Reformed Religion, the way for
Roman factors, Papal interests and Jesuitick designs, whose learned abilities,
orderly industry, and indefatigable activity is such, that by that time the old
stock of Reverend, orderly and authoritative Bishops and Presbyters, (the
truest and most unquestionable Ministers of the Church of Christ) are worn out
in England, and the reformed Religion is reduced with its titular and extenuate
Ministers to a mere medly, or popular Chaos of confusions, (the most of sober
people being either sick, or shamed, or weary of their home bred disorders, and
unremedied diseases in Religion). By this time (I say) the Romish agitators
will not only devour all these petty parties, and feeble factions of
Reformers, with as much ease as the Stork did the Frogs; but they will (in
time) utterly destroy the remains of the defamed Doctrine and deformed
Religion, which your fore fathers owned, and to the death professed, as most
true and well reformed, with great Honor, Holiness, and Happiness, which yet
the ignorance and insolence, the Illiterateness, and Rusticity, the Barrenesse
and Barbarity of novel Sects have already rendered poor and despicable, much to
be pitied and deplored both at home and abroad.

I must ever so far own my reason, as to profess that I look upon the Defamers
Dividers and Destroyers of the Church of England, (whatever they are or seem)
to be no other than the perdues or forelorn hope of Popery, which by lighter
skirmishes open advantages to the Popes main Battaglio; the Vancourriers, or
Harbingers, sent and excited (in great part) from the Pragmatick Policies of
Rome, whose grand interest since the Reformation has been, not more to advance
the House of Austria and preserve the Papacy, than to regain the Church of
England to the Romish slavery.

Certainly these petty parties, who scarce know what they drive at, and are
full of varieties in their Fancies, Forms and Factions, these cannot produce so
constant a current and so strong a tide, as is always urging against the Church
of England and the honor of the Reformed Religion; but they are driven on by a
subtle and secret, yet potent impulse, as waves of the sea, not only dashing
and breaking upon each other, but (all of them) battering the Honor and
Stability of the Church of England, as the great rampart or bank which stands
in the way of the Sea of Rome, mightily opposing and hindering heretofore both
fanatic Confusions, Papal Usurpations, and Romish Superstions; whose
advantages now are evidently prepared and carried on by those, that under the
name of Reformation will most effectually at last overthrow it.

For after these petty spirits, who have been and are the great Dividers,
Despisers and Destroyers of the reformed Church of England, have a few years
longer played their mad pranks in this sometime so flourishing and fruitful
vineyard of the Lord, (pulling up the hedge of Ecclesiastical Canons, and Civil
Sanctions, throwing down the wall of Ancient Discipline and Catholic
Government, breaking in pieces the wine press of holy Ordination and
Ministerial Authority and Succession, pulling up both root and branch of holy
Plants and regular Planters;) what (I beseech you) can hinder these subtle
Foxes and wild Boars of Romish Power and Policy, to enter in, and not only
secretly, but openly (as occasion shall serve) to destroy all the remaining
stock of the true Protestants and Professors of the Reformed Religion; who at
first soberly protesting against Popish Errors and Deformities, afterward
praying (in vain) for a joint and just Reformation, did (at last) reform
themselves, after the rule of God's Word, interpreted by the Catholic Practice
of purest Antiquity.

What (without a miracle) can hinder the Papal prevalency in England, when once
sound Doctrine is shaken, corrupted, despised; when Scriptures are wrested by
every private interpreter; when the ancient Creeds and Symbols, the Lords
Prayers and Ten Comandments, all wholesome forms of sound Doctrine and Devotion,
the Articles and Liturgy of such a Church, together with the first famous
Councils, all are slighted, vilified despited and abhorred by such Englishmen
as pretend to be great Reformers; when neither pristine Respect nor Support,
Credit nor Countenance, Maintenance nor Reverence shall be left either to the
Reformed Religion or the Ministry of it? without which they will heardly be
carried on beyond the fate of Pharaohs Chariots, when their wheels were taken
off, which is to be overwhelmed and drowned in the Romish red Sea, which will
certainly overflow all, when once England is become not only a dunghill and
Tophet of Heretical filth and Schismatical fire, but an Aceldama, or field of
blood, by mutual Animosities and civil Dissentions, arising from the variations
and confusions of Religions.

All which, as the Roman Eagle now fore-sees, and so follows the camp of
Sectaries (as Vultures and Birds of prey are wont to do Armies) so no man, not
blinded with private passions and present interest, is so simple, as not to
know that it will in time terribly seize upon the blind, dying, or dead carkase
of this Church and Nation; whose expiration will be very visible, when the
Purity, Order and Unity of Religion, the Respect, Support and Authority of the
Ministry is vanished and banished out of England, by the neglect of some, the
Malice, Madness and Ingratitude of others, your most unhappy Contrymen:
Then shall the Israel of England return to the Egypt of Rome; then shall the
beauty of our Sion be captive to the bondage of Babylon's either Superstition
or Persecution; from both which I beseech God to deliver us.

As an Omen of the future fate, how many person of fair Estates, others of good
parts and hopeful Learning, are already shrewdly warped and inclined to the
Church of Rome, and either actually reconciled, or in a great readiness to
embrace that Communion (which excommunicates all Greek and Latin Churches,
Eastern, Western and African Christians, which will not submit to its Dominion
and Superstition) chiefly moved thereto, because they know not what to make of
or expect from the Religion and Reformation of the Church of England; which
they see so many zealous to reproach and ruin, so few concerned to relieve,
restore, or pity?

As for the return of you (my noble Contrymen) and your Posterity to the
Roman Subjection and Superstition. I doubt not but many of you, most of you,
all of you, that are persons of judicious and conscientious Piety, do heartily
deprecate it, and would seriously avoid it to the best of your skill and power,
as indeed you have great cause, both in Prudence and Conscience, in Piety and
Policy: yet I believe none of you can flatter your selves, that the next
Century shall defend the Reformed Religion in England from Romish Pretensions,
Persuasions and Prevalencies, as the last has done, while the Dignity, Order
and Authority of the Ministry, the Government of excellent Bishops, the Majesty
and Unity of this Reformed Church and its Religion, were all maintained by the
unanimous vote, consent and Power of all Estates.

Nay, the Dilemma and distressed choice of Religion is now reduced to this,
that many peaceable and well-minded Christians, having been so long harressed,
bitten and worried with novell Factions and pretended Reformations, would
rather choose that there Posterity (if they may but have the excuse of ignorance
in the main controversies, to plead for Gods mercy in their joining to that
Communion which has so strong a relish of Egyptian Leeks and Onions, of
Idolatry and Superstition, besides unchristian Arrogance and intolerable
Ambition; that their Posterity, (I say) shall return to the Roman party, which
has something among them settled, orderly and uniform, becoming Religion, than
to have them ever turning and tortured upon Ixion's wheel, catching in vain at
fanciful Reformations, as Tantalus at the deceitful waters, rolling with
infinite pains and hazard the Reformed Religion, like Sisyphus his Stone,
sometimes asserting it by Law and Power, otherwhile exposing it to popular
Liberty and Looseness; than to have them tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, with the Faedities, Blasphemies, Animosities, Anarchies, Dangers* and
confusions, attending fanatic Fancies and quotidian Reformations, which like
botches or boiles from surfeited and unwholesome bodies, do daily break out
among those Christians, who have made no rule of Religion but their own
humors, and no bounds of their Reformations but their own Interests; the first
makes them ridiculous, the second pernicious to all sober Christians.

Whereas the Roman Church, however tainted with rank Errors and dangerous
Corruptions in Doctrine and Manners (which forbid us under our present
convictions to have in those things any visible sacred communion with them,
though we have a great charity and pity for them; Charity in what they still
retain good; Pity, in what they have erred from the Rule and Example of Christ
and his Catholic Church;) yet it cannot be denied, without a brutish blindness
and injurious slander (which only serves to gratify the gross Antipathies of
the gaping vulgar) that the Church of Rome, among its Tares and Cockle, its
Weeds and Thorns has many wholesome Herbs, and holy Plants growing; much more
of Reason and Religion, of good Learning and sober Industry, of Order and
Polity, of Morality and Constancy, of Christian Candor and Civility, of common
Honesty and Humanity, becoming grave men and Christians, by which to invite
after-Ages and your Posterity to adhere to it and them, rather than to be
everlastingly exposed to the profane bablings, endless janglings, miserable
manglings, childing confusions, Atheistical indifferencies and sacrilegious
furies of some later spirits, which are equally greedy and giddy, making both a
play and a prey of Religion, who have nothing in them comparable to the Papal
party, to deserve your or your Posteritie's admiration or imitation, but rather
their greatest caution and prevention: For you will find what not I only, but
sad experience of others may tell you, that the sythes and pitch-forks of these
petty Sects and Plebeian Factions will be as sharp and heavy as the Papists
Swords and Faggots heretofore were, both to your religious and civil Happiness.

Rigid be not for Episcopacy,
Nor too much earnest for Presbytery;
No Faction espouse, what e're it be,
For by that means may enter POPERY.
Mr. Hooker.
WIth our contentions their irreligious humor also is much strengthened;
nothing pleases them better than these manifold oppositions about the matter
of Religion, as well for that they have the more opportunity to learn on one
side, how the other may be oppugned, and so weaken the credit of all unto
themselves; as also because by their hot pursuit of lower Controversies amongst
men professing Religion, and agreeing in the principal foundations thereof,
time will cause Alteration to grow: For which purpose when they see occasion
they stick not sometimes in other men's persons, yea sometimes without any
vizard at all, directly to try, what the most religious are able to say in
defense of the highest points, whereupon all Religion dependteh. Now for the
most part it so falls out touching things that are generally received, that
although in themselves they be most certain, yet because men presume them
granted of all, we are hardly able to bring such proof of their certainty, as
may satisfy gainsayers, when suddenly, and besides expectation they require
the same at our hands, which unpreparation and unreadiness, when they find in
us, they turn it to the soothing up of themselves in that accursed fancy,
whereby they would fain believe that the hearty devotion of such as indeed fear
God, is nothing else but a kind of harm less Error, bred and confirmed in them
by the flight of wiser men.

Dr. Sutcliffe.
HAud vanus timor, etc. Its no vain fear which some wise men have entertained
upon their experience of affairs, that these unhappy Questions about
indifferent things managed by the subtle Jesuits, thereby to disturb the
peace and settlement of our Church, until at last they enjoy their long
expected opportunity to set up themselves, and restore the exploded Tyranny and
Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

FINIS.

