ERRATA.
PAge 68. l. 11. r. luent, p. 141. l. 31. Solemanum, r. Salmurum, Rothingue, r.
Rothomag. p. 142. l. 20. Trovomala.

The REMAINDER, or SECOND PART of A GOSPEL PLEA (Interwoven with a RATIONAL and
LEGAL) FOR THE LAWFULNESS and CONTINUANCE Of the Ancient Settled MAINTENANCE and
TITHES Of the Ministers of the Gospel: WHEREIN The DIVINE RIGHT OF OUR
MINISTERS TITHES is further asserted: The Magistrates Inforcement of the DUE
PAYMENT OF THEM BY COERCIVE PENAL LAWS, when subtracted or detained,
vindicated: That they are no REAL BURDEN, or GRIEVANCE to the People; the
abolishing them no Ease, Benefit to Farmers, Tenants or Poor-People; but a
Prejudice rather; and a gain to None but Rich Landlords, cleared: That the
present Opposition against them, proceeds not from any true Grounds of
Conscience, or Real Inconveniences in Tithes themselves, but only from base
Covetousness, carnal Policy, want of Christian Love, Charity to, and professed
Enmity against the Ministers of the Gospel; Yea, from a JESUITICAL and
ANABAPTISTICAL DESIGN to subvert, ruin our Church, Ministry, Religion; and
bring a Perpetual Infamy on our Nation, and the Reformed Religion here
professed. By William Prynne of Swainswick Esquire; a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

1 Cor. 9 14. Even so has THE LORD ORDAINED, that those who preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. Cyprian, de unitate Ecclesiae. Domos tunc and Fundos
venundabant, thesauros sibi in Coelo reponentes: at nunc de Patrimonio nec
Decimas damus; and cum Vendere jubeat Dominus, Emimus potius and augemus.
Petrus Blesensis, Epist: 82. Per Prophetam praecepit Dominus Decimas inferri in
horreum suum; vos ab ejus horreo jubet is auferri, etc. Quid interest Equos
rapiatis an Decimas? Nisi quia Decima res spiritualis est, and ideo enormius
SACRILEGIVM in Decimis committitur quam in Equis, Cum Dominus praecipit Decimas
solvi, quis contra ejus praeceptum potuit dispensare? London Printed by T.
Child and L. Parry for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at the Adam and Eve
in Little Britain, 1659.

THE REMAINDER OR SECOND PART OF A GOSPEL PLEA, FOR THE Lawfullness and
Continuance of the ancient settled Maintenance and TITHES of the Ministers of
the GOSPEL.
KIng David a holy Zealot Acts 13. 22
after Gods own heart, who fulfilled all his will, records this to Posterity in
sacred Writ, as the most transplendent Character of his own real Saintship, in
a Divine Appeal to God himself, Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of THINE HOUSE has eaten
me up. And when our Savior Christ, Matthew. 1. 6. c. 9. 27. c. 15. 22. c. 22.
42, 43, 45. Romans 1. 3. Rev 22. 16.
the Son of David according to the flesh, out of an enflamed zeal against the
Sacrilegious Profanation of Gods Temple in Jerusalem, made a scourge of small
Cords, wherewith he drove all that sold Sheep and Oxen, with their Cattle, out
of the Temple; powered out the Changers Money, overthrew their Tables, and said
unto those that sold Doves, Take these things hence, Make not my Fathers House
an House of Merchandise: His Disciples upon this occasion remembered and applied
this very Scripture to him, The zeal of thine House has eaten me up, John 2.
15, 16, 17. But the preposterous zeal of many Iesuited Anabaptistical qua* king
pretended Saints, Soldiers, Zealots in our degenerated days, is diametrically
contrary to this of David, and our Savior Christ, even to devour and eat up
Gods House it self, with all his faithful Ministers remaining Tithes,
Rectories, Glebes, Maintenance at one meal, which of late years, and now again
they have prosecuted with such eager Appetites and hungry Stomachs, that they
make it their very prime, main, only Business, endeavoring to effect it, with
such See John Cannes Epistle, before his second voice (nor) from (but against)
the Temple, and many late Petitions against Tithes, from Kent, Somersetshire,
Wiltshite, and other places.
Post-hast, as might anticipate all new printed Pleas for their just defense,
and fore-judge most Ministers, Patrons, Peoples Rights, throughout our Nation,
(even out of Term in a long Vacation, as in August 1653. and now again) without
any Legal Summons, Process, Trial by their Peers before competent lawful
Judges, meet to decide such a universal Right, Title, public Interest, which
more or less concerns every particular County, City, Parish, Minister, Patron,
Person throughout the Realm; and therefore ought not to be drawn into Question,
much less Decision, without their General consent, desire, petition, and a
full deliberate hearing of all Parties interessed before a full Legal
Parliamentary Tribunal, duly elected, entrusted by all the People, according to
3 E. 1. c. 5. (See Cook ibidem) 7 H. 4. c. 14. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 1 H. 6 c. 7. 10 H.
6. c. 2. 23 H. 6. c. 11. 32 H. 6. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 16. 27 H 8. c. 26. 35 H. 8.
c. 11. Cook 4 Instit. c. 1.
our Laws; This being an undoubted principle of Nature, Law, Equity, common
Justice, and Reason, 2 Samuel 16. 18, c. 19. cl. 33 E. 1. m. 4. dors. 43. Brook
Parliament, 101, Customs 6. and 32. Grotius De Jute Belli, and Pacis, l. 2. c.
15. sect. 3. c. 6 sect. 1 to 7. c. 13. sect. 14. 33 H. 8. c. 17.
Quod tangit omnes, ab omnibus debet approbari: Et Populi minor pars, Populum
non obligit. This their preproperous speed, and preposterous proceeding,
necessitated my Stationer (at the importunity of some Ministers in September
1653.) to thrust out and publish to the World, an imperfect Piece, and
beginning only of my Gospel-Plea, for the Lawfulness and Continuance of the
Ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes of the Ministers of the Gospel, without
this Remaining part, (then sent up together with it) or any Errata to it, or
Notice given to the Reader if its incompleatnesse, some few days before the
great Debate of our New Legifers (September. 1653.) concerning the future
standing or downfall of Tithes; which would have been finished, and quite past
before the whole could possibly be printed; and so have rendered the entire
Plea less seasonable, serviceable, beneficial to our Church and Ministers,
than the publishing of a Fragment of it in that nick of time proved to them,
through Gods blessing on it. This unexpected sudden publication thereof upon
that inevitable occasion, as it caused an Omission of some part of the second
Chapter in confirmation of the second Proposition, touching the Divine Right of
Ministers Tithes, and of the 3. ensuing Chapters: So it has necessitated me to
publish this Subsequent Appendix to that Chapter by way of Supplement, as a
necessary Introduction to the Remaining Part, here printed with it, for the
Readers better satisfaction in this public Controversy, and stopping the
clamorous Mouths of all Gainsayers. Which had been published, soon after the
former, in the year 1653. had not my former Stationers long Infirmity,
Sickness, Death, retarded its progress at the Press, and enforced me to seek
out another Midwife to bring it into the world, at this instant time, I hope
not as an Abortive, out of Season, the former Opposites to our Ministers and
their Tithes, being ever since and now again as Malicious against them as ever,
waiting only for a fresh opportunity to suppress them, ever since their then
sudden defeat in this their Impious Sacrilegious Design, when almost ripened
to accomplishment in their Hopes and Votes, unexpectedly dashed in a moment.
There being since this their disappointment, a new disguised Antichristian sect
of Quakers (introduced by Jesuits and Franciscan friars, as I have In my
Quakers Unmasked, 1655. and New dscovery of Romish. Emissaries 1656.
elsewhere evidenced) sprung up amongst us, more virulently opposite to our
Ministers and their Maintenance by TITHES, than any other, which they not only
decry in all their Pamphlets, but totally substract and detain from them with
such wilful obstinacy, that many of them choose rather to lie in prison, upon
mean Process, or Executions, than set out or pay their TITHES, or appear to
Actions brought for their recovery; and now combine with the Anabaptists, and
other sectaries in fresh Petitions and Prosecutions both against TITHES, and
Ministers, endeavoring their total and final Extirpation, by the power of their
Confederates, in the Army and Westminster Juncto, suddenly called in again, and
owned by them as a Parliament (after their former six years seclusion) to See
my true and perfect Narrative, p. 14. 20. 41. 49. 60, 61, 62, 63.
accomplish this their design, and root our Law and Gospel, Lawyers and
Ministers together, as their fresh From Somersetshire Wilshire and other places.
Petitions, Addresses to them for that purpose clearly demonstrate, beyond
contradiction. Which occasioned this publication, after so long a suspension
thereof.

An Appendix to the Second Chapter, further clearing the Divine Right of
Ministers Tithes.
THe Divine Right of Ministers Maintenance by TITHES, asserted in the former
Printed Part of my Gospel-Plea, etc. for the Lawfulness and continuance of the
ancient settled Maintenance and TITHES of the Ministers of the Gospel, may be
thus further evinced, demonstrated, confirmed.

1. It is the Opinion of Learned De Republica Hebraeorum l. 3. c. 3.
Petrus Cunaeus, and Of the Incarnation of the Word. Part. 1. Branch. 2. chapter 1.
in his Works in folio. London. 1636. p. 80^. ^0* 81^.
Dr. Griffith Williams (his transcriber) That Melchisedec, Priest of the most
high God, to whom Abraham (the father of the Faithful) GAVE TITHES OF ALL, Genesis
14. 20. Hebr. 7. 1. to 15. was in truth none other, but Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, then personally meeting him in the form of a man, which he then
assumed; though not that very body or flesh begotten and born of the Virgin
Mary, which he long after took upon him when he was incarnate and conversed
upon Earth. That Abraham then gave him TITHES OF ALL, as perceiving under that
visible form an invisible Deity and everlasting Priesthood to subsist, to whom
Tithes (originally) are only due and eternally due; because he is and continues
for ever an everlasting Priest. That our Saviors own words, John. 8. 58.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, (as well with the eyes of his
body, by this special apparition of Christ then meeting and blessing him, as a
Priest of the most high God, at that time, as with the eye of his faith) and
was glad: do warrant this their opinion, That Melchisedec was no other than
Jesus Christ himself: which they sortify with 7. strong, unanswerable Arguments
in the opinions of many; from whence (if granted) it will inevitably follow;
That TITHES are more truly and properly Evangelical, than Ceremonial or
Judaical, because thus originally given and paid to Christ himself, (the Ephesians.
^^ 22, ^3. c. 4. 5. 15, 16. c. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18 c. ^. 10. 19. Hebr. ^. 1. to
15. Psalm. 110. 1. 4. Isa. 9. 6, 7. Rev. 1. 5, 6.
everlasting Head, King, High Priest of the Church) by Abraham Romans 4. 1. to
24. Mat. 3. 9. Luke. 16. 22* 24, 30. Acts. ^. 2. Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 6. to
the end.
the Common Head and Father of all the Faithful (as well Gentiles as Jews)
out of the prevision of his Incarnation, in reference to his Everlasting
Priesthood, as an honorary Portion, Tribute, Salary, See Dr. Sclaters Ministers
Portion^ p. 18. to 40.
of right belonging and annexed to his Priesthood: Hebr. 7. 1. to 15. Genesis 14.
18, 19, 20. which Priestly office was See Hebr. c. 5. to c. 11. ^ John 2. 1, 2.
Ps* 110. 4. Dr. Jones, and others on the Hebrews; Dr. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. 4.
principally to be executed, completed upon Earth, and in Heaven, by Christ's
subsequent Incarnation, Passion, Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross,
Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, and perpetual Intercession at Gods right
hand for all his elect, both as God and Man; especially in relation to the
Gentiles, Acts 9. 15. c. 11. 1 to 19. c. 13. 46, 47, 48* c. 15. 7. to ^0* c.
21. 19. c. 28* 28. Romans 1. 1^. c. 11. 11, 12, 13. 25. c. 15. 9. to 19, c. 16.
4. Ephesians. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 1. 2^. 2 Timothy 4. 17* compared with Mar. 10 4. Luke.
2. 3^* Isay. 54. 3. c. 60. 3. to 17. c. 61. 6. 9. c. 62. 2. c. 66. 12. 19, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12* 13.
not generally called, converted to the faith, till after his Incarnation and
Ascension. Therefore by necessary consequence, all Christians and believing
Gentiles under the Gospel, have altogether, if not far greater, yet at
leastwise as great, as strong a reason, ground, obligation, enforcement,
cheerfully, thankfully, conscientiously, to render TITHES of all they have to
Christ (for the use of his Ministers instruction, edification of his Church,
and completing of his body) since his Incarnation and investiture in his
everlasting Priesthood for their eternal welfare; as Abraham or the Israelites
had, to render him (or the Levitical Priests who typified him and attended on
his service) so long before his Incarnation, and Priesthood fully completed in
all its parts and Offices: Jesus Christ being THE SAME YESTERDAY AND TO DAY,
AND FOR EVER; Hebr. 13. 8. and as much (if not far more in some respects) a
Priest of the most high God, to all believing Gentiles, Christians since his
Incarnation, Passion, Ascension, as he was to Abraham and the Jews before them;
God since his Resurrection, sending him to bless us in turning every of us
from our Iniquities, as well as them. Acts. 3. 25, 26. compared with Acts 10.
42, 45, 47. chapter 11. 1. to 20. Wherefore those ingrate, avaritious,
unconscionable Christians of this degenerous age, who obstinately, or
maliclously refuse to render unto Christ their only High Priest 1 Cor. 5. 17.
Ephesians. 5* 2. Hebr. 5* to chapter 11. 1 John 2. 1, 2.
who sacrificed himself to God, and shed his most precious blood for them on
the Cross to redeem their Souls from everlasting Damnation, and purchase an
eternal Crown of glory for them in Heaven, where he continually makes
intercession for them, executing his Priestly Office for their Salvation) the
tithes of all their increase, as a just Appurtenance to his everlasting
Priesthood; condemning them as The Kentish Petition, John Cannes Voice, M^.
Speed and many late Quakers railing Pamphlets.
Jewish, Antichristian, unfit, or too much for him as the High Priest and
Prophet of his Church to enjoy, or for the faithful Ministers of the Gospel in
his Name or Right to receive, who 2 Cor. 12. 15. Acts 6. 3, to 7. 1 Timothy 4. 13,
15, 16. Heb. 13, 17. 1 Cor. 1. 23. c. 2. 2. Gal. 3. 1.
spend all their studies, labors, lives in Christ's service, in the
Declaration, Publication, Application, of the benefits of Christ's Priesthood,
Passion, Gospel to them, and others, for the eternal salvation of their souls,
are certainly none of the spiritual Sons or seed of faithful Abraham, who gave
him Tithes of all; and do either repute Christ's everlasting Priesthood, a mere
Fable; or set a far lower rate upon it, the Ministry of the Gospel and their
own most precious Souls, than they do upon their detained Tithes: and so can
expect little benefit from Christ's Person or Priesthood, which they so much
undervalue, and sacrilegiously defraud of so ancient a duty.

2ly. There is one Notable considerable circumstance of time in Abraham's
payment of Tithes of all to Christ, the true Melchisedec, not formerly observed
or pressed by any I have seen; which (in my opinion) unanswerably proves, that
this President of his most principally respected, related to the believing
Gentiles and Christians, under the Gospel, and as strongly obliges them (his
true spiritual seed) to the due payment of Tithes to Christ and his Ministers,
now, as ever it did the Jews, his natural Posterity, to pay Tithes to their
Priests and Levites under the Law, if not more firmly: Namely, that he thus
paid Tithes to Christ, some good space before Circumcision instituted, whiles
he was yet uncircumcised; as is most evident by comparing, Genesis 14. 18, 19, 20.
with Genesis 17. 1, 10, to 15. Now as the Apostle thus firmly and Evangelically
argues from this very circumstance of time, in the point of Abraham's
justification by Faith, whiles he was yet uncircumcised, as presidential,
exemplary, obligatory to all believing Gentiles, and spiritual Sons of Abraham
under the Gospel, who are not circumcised, as well as to the natural believing
children of Abraham under the Law, who were circumcised. Romans 4. 9, to 13.
Comes this blessedness then, upon the Circumcision only, or upon the
Uncircumcision also? for we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness. How was it then reckoned, when he was in Circumcision, or in
Uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision? And he received
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, which he had yet being
Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of them that beliebe (under the
Gospel) though they be not Circumcised, that Righteousness might be imputed unto
them also. And the Father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the
Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of the Faith of our Father
Abraham, which he had yet being uncircumcised. So I, by parity of Reason, from
this very Text, compared with the same Apostles relation, of Abraham's paying
Tithes of all to Melchisedec, Hebr. 7. 1, to 15. and the inferences thence
formerly insisted on, may as firmly, as convincingly conclude, That his payment
of Tithes to Christ the true Melchisedec, not after his Circumcision, but
whiles yet uncircumcised, and before Circumcision instituted; and that, as the
Common-Father, Head of all the justified, faithful, believing uncircumcised
Gentiles before the Law, and under the Gospel, (as well as of the circumcised
believing Jews) walking in the steps of his Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised; does as strongly oblige all believing Gentiles and Christians,
though uncircumcised, to pay Tithes of all to Christ and his Ministers under
the Gospel, as it did his believing circumcised Posterity to render the^ to
Christ himself originally, and his Priests and Levites secondarily under the
Law; if not much more; since Abraham paid them to Christ before he was
circumcised, Genesis 14. 17, 18, 19. John 8. 58. Heb. 7. 1, to 15. compared with
John 8. 39, 40.
as a fruit and evidence of his Faith, which then he had during his
uncircumcision, and a standing President for all Believers to imitate.

3ly. From this famous President of Abraham's paying Tithes of all to
Melchisedec, Saint Ambrose, Sermo 34. In feria post primam Dominicam
Quadragesimae. Gregory Nazianzen, Oration 5. Contra Judaeos. Chrysostom, Hom.
35. in Genes. Isiodor Hispalensis, in Glossa ordinaria Super Genesis 16. Rabanus
Maurus, l. 2. c. 16. in Genesin. Anastatius Abbas, contra Judaeos. Elias
Cretensis, in Orat. 5 Walafridus Strabo, De Rebus Ecclesiasticis, c. 27.
Stephanus Tornacensis, Epist. 171. with other Ancients, conclude, Tithes to be
due to Ministers of the Gospel by Divine Right: whom the Sea Gratian Cause. 16.
qu. 7. and Surius, Binius, Crab, Merlin, in their Councils.
Councils of Mentz, Anno 813, 846, 887. Concilium Aquense, Anno 837. cap. 18.
with the Council of London, under Archbishop Hubert, Anno Dom. 1200. (recorded
by Roger de Hoveden) Annalium pars posterior, p. 806, 808. thus second. Decimas
DEO and Sacerdotibus Dei Dandas, Abraham factis, Jacobus promissis insinuat;
deinde Lex Statuit, et omnes Doctores sancti commemorant: et auctoritas veteris
et novi Testamenti, necnon and sanctorum Patrum Statuta declarant. Decreeing
thereupon, Decimas de omnibus quae per annum renovantur, etc. Praestare Deo
omnino non negligatur, Quas Deus sibi dari constituit: quia timendum est, ut
quisquis Deo debitum suum abstrahit, ne forte Deus per peccatum suum auferat ei
necessaria sua, etc. From his example, seconded with Divine Precepts, Hermoldus
Hist, Sla^o. rum, l. 1. c 92. Edit. Franc. 1581. p. 76.
Gerold Bishop of Oldenburg, about An. Dom. 1100. writ thus to the Holzati and
Inhabitants of the Deserts of Wagira, (then newly converted to the Christian
Faith, and beginning to build Churches, for Gods public worship) that they
should likewise pay Tithes to their Ministers, without which all the rest of
their Devotion would be nothing worth. Dei enim Praeceptum est, Decimas ex
omnibus dabis mihi, ut been sit tibi, and longo vivas tempore: cui obedierunt
Patriarchae, Abraham scilicet Isaac and Jacob, and omnes qui secundum fidem
facti sunt filii Abrahae, per quod laudem etiam, and praemia aeterna consecuti
sunt. Apostoli quoque et Apostolici viri exore Dei hoc ipsum mandaverunt. and
sub Anathematis vinculo posteris servandum tradiderunt. Cum ergo Dei
omnipotentis proculdubio hoc constat esse Pra ceptum, and sanctorum Patrum sit
Aucioritate firmatum, nobis id incumbit negotii, ut quod vestrae saluti deest,
nostro in vobis opere per Deigratiam suppleatur. Monemus ergo and obsecramus
omnes vos in domino, etc. ut decimas, prout Deus instituit, and Apostolica
banno firmavit autoritas, ad ampliandum dei cultum Ecclesiae detis: Ne si Deo
quae ipsi debentur substraxeritis, and substantiam simul and animam in
interitum mittatis aeternam; Valete. Upon reading which Letter the rude people
cried out and raged, just as the Anabaptists do now. His auditis tumultuosa
gens infremuit, dixeruntque se huic conditioni servili nunquam collum
submissuros, per quam omne pene Christicolarum genus Pontificum pressurae
subjaceat, etc. whereupon Henry the first Duke of Holzatia commanding them, as
they would obtain his favor, Ut solverent Episcopo Decimas cum omni
integritate, sicut faciunt in terra Polaborum and Obotritorum: Ad hoc
Praeceptum Holzati obstinatis animis dixerunt, Nunquam se datucos Decimas, quas
patres sui non dedissent; malle se potius succenfis aedibus propriis egredi
terram, quam tantae servitutis jugum subire; Praeterea Pontificem cum Comite
and omni advenarum genere quod Decimarum solvit legitima, interficere
cogitabant, and terra inflammata, transfugere in terram Danorum. Neither
obeying the Presidents of Abraham and the Patriarchs, nor the Laws of God, the
Apostles, or their Prince, in paying their Tithes to their Bishop and Pastor,
as they ought; whose practice our Anabaptists and Quakers now obstinately
pursue. What strong convincing Arguments, to prove the divine, moral, perpetual
right of Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel, learned Protestant Divines (to
omit Papists) have deduced from this Original direct President of Abraham's
Tith-paying, those who desire further satisfaction herein, may read at leisure,
in Mr. Calvin, Junius, Hemingius, and others on Hebr. 7. Zepperus, Legum
Mosaicarum Explanatio, l. 4. c. 40. Dr. George Carlton his Tithes due by a
Divine Right, Richard Montague his Diatribae on the first part of Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes, cap. 1. Stephen Nettles his Answer to the first part of the
History of Tithes, Dr. Robert Tillesley his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens
History of Tithes, Dr. Edward Reynolds his explication on Psalm 110. 2, 4. Mr
Francis Roberts his Revenue of the Gospel is Tithes, etc. Cambridge 1619.
Richard Ebur^ his Maintenance of the Ministry, London, 1603. The truth of
Tithes discovered by R. G. London 1618. Dr. John Prideaux Oration 5. de Decimis,
Anno 1620. p. 90. Sir James Semple his Sacrilege sacredly handled, London 1619.
John Swan his Red Debitum, London 1640. p. 181, to 240. Tithes are due Jure
Divino, and Dr. William Sclater his Question of Tithes revived, or Ministers
Portion, London 1623. (an acute piece) wherein all evasions and cavils to elude
the force of this example, are sufficiently answered.

4ly. From this example of Abraham's, seconded with the Israelites practice,
History of Tithes, p. 34.
Mr. Seldom conjectures, or rather from the Law of Nature written by God
himself in men's hearts (as Hugo de Sancto victore, de Sacramentis, l. 2. part
9. c. 10. and l. 1. part 12. c. 4. Mr. Mountague in his Diatribae, chapter 3. Dr.
Tillesly in his Animadversions, p. 34, 35. and others determine;) the old
Heathen Grecians, Romans, Carthaginians, Arabians, with other Pagan Nations,
[as the Sea Purchase Pilgrimage, Edit. a. p. 304, 616, 621, 630. Joan. Leo
Africae descript. l. 3.
Mohammedan, Turks, Moors, and other Infidels since] by an ancient constant
custom and usual practice, generally received amongst them, dedicated and paid
Tithes to their Idol-Gods and Priests, of the increase of all their substance,
merchandise, gains; and more particularly of all their spoils and plunders
gained in the Wars; wherein they were very careful and devout. Which Mr.
Seldom in his History of Tithes, chapter 3. and Review thereof, and Richard
Mountague, in his Diatribae, chapter 3. evince at large, by many Presidents,
Testimonies, Passages out of Herodotus, Demosthenes, Xenophon, Thucidides,
Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Plutarch, Pausanias, Aristotle, Aristophanes,
Suidas, Callimachus, Cassius, Trogus, Macrobius, Plautus, Festus, Justin,
Pliny, Servius, Cicero, Tertullian, Arnobius, Jac. Gruterus, with others; and
that they paid no other determinate part else we read of, but a Tenth only, to
their Gods and Priests. Now from whence (write Hugo, Tillesly, and Mountague)
should this custom and practice proceed, but only from the Law of Nature? Ad
quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti fuerunt, sed imbuti, and that by God
himself.

Amongst these Presidents of Pagans, there are 7. of special note, which I
shall here remember, to shame the Tith-Oppugners of our Age, who would be
reputed the most precious Christians, though their Actions prove them worse
than Infidels.

The first is, that of the old Pagan Romans, Arnobius adversus Gentes, l. 7.
Cato de Re Rustica, c. 152. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 457, 458.
Mountagues Diatribae, chapter 3.
who esteemed all their Corn and Wine (sent them annually by the bounty of God)
so sacred, that (by a constant custom and law used amongst them) they might
not lawfully eat, drink, sell, meddle with, or dispose of any part thereof
after their harvest and vintage, till they had first sacrificed and tythed the
first fruits and tenths thereof to their Gods; who (as they supposed) gave them
the whole crop; such was their Piety and Gratitude.

The second is, that of the ancient Pliny Not, Hist. l. 12. c. 15. Seldens
History of Tithes, p. 33, 34. Mountagues Diatribae, p. 551, 552.
Heathen Arabians, who by the Law and Custom of their Country, were bound to
carry all their Frankincense (the chief commodity of their Country) every year
to Sabota, ( the chief City of Arabia Felix) and there to offer the Tenth
thereof to their God SABIS, which his Priests received. Neither might they make
sale of any part thereof, till the Owner there paid the Tenthes by Measure, not
by weight. These very Pagans holding all to be Gods, (the supreme Landlord who
gave it them) till by paying him the Tenth for a quotient, they redeemed the
rest for their own common use.

The third is that of the Dionysius Hallicarn: Antiqu. Romans l. 1. Seldens
Review, p. 459.
Pelasgi in Vmbria, who being oppressed with a great dearth and scarcity of all
things, conceived it proceeded from their neglect of paying Tithes to their
Gods. Whereupon they vowed the Tithe of all their increase to Jupiter, Apollo,
and the Cabiri. After which Vow they receiving a plentiful crop of all things,
paid the tenth of all their increase to their Idol-Gods. And being admonished
by Apolloes Oracle, that their Vow was not performed, till they had sacrificed
the Tenth of their Children, as well as of all their other increase, they
thereupon sacrificed the Tenth of them to the Idols likewise. Such conscience
made they of all their Vows and Tithes.

The fourth is that of the Carthaginians (thus recorded by Bibliotheca Hist. l.
5. Justin. l. 18. Mountagues Diatribae, p. 448, 449.
Diodorus Siculus, a Pagan Historian) very remarkable. The Carthaginians being
descended from Tyrus, were accustomed in former times to send unto Tyrus the
Tenth of all their Revenues and increase any ways renewing, issuing, or growing,
for Hercules (the Idol-God there worshipped:) But in process of time becoming
very wealthy, and having exceeding great incomes, they sent very seldom their
Tithe unto Tyrus, and that but small and refuse, in neglect and dis-regard of
the Deity. Hereupon many disasters in war, crosses in Affairs of State, with
great losses and streights befell them; especially by Agathocles the Sicilian.
Upon which, coming home to themselves, and repenting of their irreligion, they
betook themselves to all manner of Supplication and Devotion, conceiving these
losses and disasters were sent unto them of God. And for so much as they
supposed Hercules especially to be angry with them, who was chiefly worshipped
at Tyrus, from whence they were originally extracted, they sent exceeding great
gifts and rich presents thither to him, and all the Gods that were worshipped
at Tyrus, and brought unto them the tenth of all their increase, as formerly
they accustomed.

The fifth is that of See his Orations against them: and Mountagues Diatribae,
p. 576, 577.
Demosthenes (that eminent Pagan Greek Orator) who is very bitter against
Androsion and Timocrates, for bearing with some sacrilegious Defrauders of the
Gods in their Dues; and much more for defrauding of themselves, and
sacrilegiously robbing Minerva of her Tenths, and the other Gods of their
Fifteenths. And he specially observes, (let our Soldiers remember it) That
those who purloyned and robbed the Gods of their Tenths and chiefest of their
spoils of War, came to naught, being destroyed by themselves at last and
undone.

The sixth is that of Xenophon (that Noble Heathen Philosopher and General) and
his Soldiers, thus recorded at large to Posterity by his own pen, worthy our
observation. [c] Xenophon de expedit. Cyri, lib. 5. p. 349. 350, 351. Richard
Mountague his Diatribae, c. 3. p. 500, 501.
Xenophon, after his memorable retreat with ten thousand men out of upper Asia,
where they had gained great spoils from the Enemy, arriving safely at
Cerasunt, mustred 8600 men, the rest being lost, partly by the incursions of
the enemies, partly by the snows, and partly by sickness, here they divided the
money they had gained from the enemies: (...), etc. Atque etiam Decumam, quam
Apolloni and Ephesiae Dianae exemerant, ita Duces distribuunt, ut quilibet
ipsorum hisce diis aliquam partem ejus adservaret; One part of this Tenth
separated to these two Deities was delivered to Neon. That part which Xenophon
collected for Apollo, he laid up as consecrated in the Treasury of the
Athenians at Delphos. But that which was dedicated to Diana he left with
Megabyzus the Churchwarden of Diana, upon this condition (being about to fight
with Agesilaus at Coronea,) That if he escaped safe out of the Battle he should
restore the sacred money to him: but if he received any disaster therein, that
then Megabyzus himself should dedicate it to Diana, confecto donario, quod Deae
gratissimu^ fore arbitraretur. Afterward Xenophon being in exile at Scilunte,
built for Olympia, Megab. coming thither to behold Olympia, restored the money
to Xenophon: who receiving it, bought therewith a field (having woods and
Mountains in it, stored with trees, swine, goats, sheep, wildbeasts, and
Horses,) for the Goddess in that place, which was showed unto him by the Oracle
of Apollo; he likewise built a Temple, and an Altar, out of that sacred money:
A^ post id temporis, semper consecratis fructuu^ agri decumis, Sacrum Deae
faciebat. And after that time he sacrificed to the Goddess, for eder
consecrating the Tenths of the field to her service. Near the Temple there was
a garden set with all sorts of Fruit Trees good to eat. Before the Temple were
pillars erected with this Inscription on them, Fundus Dianae Sacer. Hoc qui
poss^ssor fruitur, quotannis Consecrato Decumam; de reliquo Fanum sartum tectum
conservato. Si quis non fecerit, Dea vindex est^. In which memorable History
we have six things considerable: 1. Tithes of spoils consecrated by the Heathen
Grecian Generals, Captains and Soldiers, to Apollo and Diana, as Xenophon,
Hist. Grae^* l. ^. p. 493.
Agis after the end of the wars between the Elei and the Lacedaemonians, going
to Delphos offered a TENTH (of the spoils) to Apollo. And Agesilaus took the
fruits of his Enemies fields, ut intra biennium Decumam Delphico Deo
consecraret C. Talentis ampliorem: as the same Oration de Ag^silao Rege* p. 657.
Xenophon records. 2ly. Lands purchased with the spoils, and appropriated,
consecrated for ever to the worship and service of Diana. 3ly. A Temple, and
Altar built with part of the spoils, for her worship and honor. 4ly. Tithes
annually consecrated and to be paid for ever to this Temple, by Xenophon and
the possessors of these lands, out of the profits, venison and game thereof,
for the maintenance of her worship and Feastivals; as the former words, and
this passage farther evidenceth: Earum feriarum, and municipes, and finitimi,
tam viri, quam faeminae participes erant: and sumministrat eis Dea, qui agitant
convivia, farinas cum panibus, vino, pecunia, bellariis. 5ly. Repairs of this
Temple from time to time, out of the residue of the profits of these Lands.
6ly. An imprecation of divine revenge, upon the Neglecters, or refusers of the
due payment of these annual Tithes to Diana, and of the residue of the profits,
toward the reparation of her Temple.

The seventh is the memorable domestic President of Cedwalla, one of our
West Saxon Kings; who though a Pagan and great Plunderer, even before he became
a Christian, or was baptized, was so pious, that he gave the Tenth of all his
Spoils of War and Plunders unto God, about the year of our Lord, 686. Which
DeGestis Regum Anglorum, l. 1. c. 2. p. 14.
William of Malmesbury thus records. Arduum memoratu est, quantum etiam ante
Baptismum inserviret; ut omnes manubias, quas jure praedatorio in usus suos
transcripserat, Deo decimaret. In quo etsi approbamus affectum (in paying
Tithes) improbamus exemplum, in regard of his plundering. Yea, our Ecclesiast.
Hist. Gentis Anglorum, l. 4. c. 16.
venerable Beda records; that such was his transcendent liberality and bounty
to Gods Church and Ministers, that after his Conquest of the Isle of Weight, he
gave to Walfred and his Clerks for the Lords use, the fourth part of the Island
(to wit, 300 Plowlands of 1200.) and the fourth part of the Spoil thereof, in
performance of his Vow made before his regeneration in Christ, that if he
conquered the Isle, Quartam ejus partem simul et praedae Deo daret.

Let John Can, with all the several irreligious Sects, and Sacrilegious
Regiments of our present Tith-Oppugners, Detainers, Substracters, seriously
consider these Pagan Presidents, to inform their Judgments, and reform their
practices, lest they rise up in judgment against them here to their temporal,
and hereafter to their eternal condemnation. And if after due meditation on
them, their Consciences shall not secretly check, censure, condemn them, for
substracting their Tithes from God himself, and his faithful Ministers, as
well as some of these Pagans Consciences did them, for detaining their Tithes
from their Idol-Gods and Priests, against the Law of Natures dictate engraven
in their hearts; but still pretend Conscience against the due payment of them,
and that out of their Gains or Spoils of War, as well as their other increase;
they have just cause to fear, and others to suspect, that their Consciences are
most desperately cauterized, and the Law of Nature more dangerously obliterated
out of their hearts, than out of these Idolatrous Pagans.

5ly. Agobardus, who flourished Anno 830. lib. de Dispensation^, etc. Rei
Ecclesiasticae contra Sacrilegos, p. 266. Hugo de Sancto victore Erud. Theol.
de Sacramentis, l. 1. part 12. c. 4. lib. 2. part. 9. c. 10. part. 10. c. 5.
and Annot. Eluc. in Genes c. 4. Petrus Commestor, Hist. Scholast. in Genes. c.
26 Petrus Blesensis, Epist. 82. Gerold, Bishop of Oldenburge, in his Epistle to
the Inhabitants of Wagria; Helmoldus, Hist. Sclavorum, p. 92. positively
affirm; and since them Sir James Semple, in his Sacrilege sacredly handled,
Stephen Nettles, in his Answer to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldom, and Mr.
Richard Mountague in his Diatribae, p. 211. to 250. largely argue and a^^ert;
"That from the beginning of Mankind, Tithes were instituted and appoint* to be
paid, by God, who instructed Adam himself; and he his two Sons Kain and Abel;
and they their Posterity, to pay Tithes and First Fruits to God, of all their
Increase. That the First Fruits Abel offered unto God, were no other but his
Tithes, or the Tenth of his Flocks increase. That the sin of Cain, causing God
to reject his Offering, was this, That he offered to God the worst, and less
than the Tenth of the Fruits of the Ground; giving him not the full proportion
of the TENTH and best of his Increase, as Abel did": which they ground on, Genesis
4. 7. (thus translated by the Septuagint, whom Philo the Jew, and the Greek
Fathers generally follow:) If thou offer Rightly, and DIVIDE NOT UPRIGHTLY (in
giving me my TENTH) thou have sinned; hold thy peace; and on Hebr. 11. 4. by
Faith Abel offered unto God (...) (which the Vulgar Latin renders, Plurimam
Hostiam; other Translators, Vberius Sacrificium; and the English, A better or
more excellent Sacrifice; (and that for quantity, as well as quality,) than
Kain: This I thought ^it to mention, as a probable conjecture, not an
infallible verity: To back this opinion, Robert Grosted our learned Bishop of
Lincoln, in his Book, De Cessatione Legalium, (written about the year 12 ^^.)
p. 95, 96. determines, Lex naturalis exigit, ut Benefactori, de Bonis ^uae
gratis dederit, gratis rependatur honor and veneratio, unde and Decimarum
oblatio de Lege est naturali: quia de bonis acceptis cum debeatur lege naturali
repensio honoris, minus quam pars minima, id e^^ Decima, (quia ultra Denarium
numerus non est) rependi non potest. Master Mountague, in his Diatribae,
Chapter 3. page 245, 246, 247, etc. Doctor Sclater, Dr. Tille^ly, and others
observe, That God only wise, being 1 Cor. 14. ^^, 40.
a God of Order, not of Confusion, doing all things in order, number, and due
proportion, has amongst all other Numbers, specially fixed upon a TENTH. And
thereupon the Ancients heretofore, both Natural, Legal, Pagan, and Christian,
(led by a natural and divine instinct thereunto) have ever principally insisted
on a TENTH in all their divine sacred Rites, Mysteries, Dues, reserved by, or
rendered of them to their Gods; and in all their public civil Taxes, Tributes,
Customs, Duties, imposed by, or paid to their Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
Supreme Magistrates. Hence God says expressly, All Tithes are the Lords, Levit.
27. 30, etc. And how his? Not by Couetesie or Tolleration, not by Purchase or
Stipulation, not by Compensation or Annexation, not by Benevolence or men's free
Donation; but by original Right of Creation, in pro^ucing every thing in its
kind; and of absolute Sovereign Dominion (expressed in the word Psalm. 24. 1.
Psalm. 89. 11. Psalm. 97. 5. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12, 15, 16.
LORDS) as a universal Rent service or acknowledgement, reserved by God
himself, the Supreme Landlord of all the Earth, from Adam and all his
Posterity to the end of the world, Psalm 115. 16 Genesis 2. 15, 16, 17. c. 3. 17.
when he gave them the Earth to inhabit and manure, as mere Tenants at will
under him. He that is Exodus 3. 14.
I AM himself: Qui cepit nunquam, desinet numquam: being vitae and essentiae
interminabilis, tota simul and perfecta possessio, in aeterno su^ consummato,
EVER POSSESSED TITHES (as well as the seventh day, which he says, is, Exodus
20. 10. Levit. 23 ^^*
HIS SABBATH) SINCE THEY HAD BEING, which are indeed his ab aeterno suo
inch^ato. In this Tithes were Gods, not only at the time when he first
challenged them by an express written Law and Reservation, Levit. 27. 30, 31,
32, etc. but long before; even when Abraham paid them: and before that, ever
since the time of the Creation, that God made any thing tithable to increase
out of the earth for the use of m^n. The time never was that Tithes were not
Gods, nor shall ever be that they shall cease to be his, and his Priests and
Ministers in and by him, by his special Donation and Institution (not man's) for
the constant support of his continual public worship* and that by a Divine
Right; God in those things which are direct points of Piety and necessary
appurtenances for his solemn worship, (such as are Tithes for his Prie^^^ and
Ministers competent standing maintenance in all A^^^, places, and weekly times
for his worship) never leaving men free to their own wi^ls, inventions, or
arbitrary pleasures (no more than Landlords their Tenants, or Kings their
Subjects) but confining them to a certainty himself by his word, as well as he
does it in all parts and duties of his worship. That Abraham knew this Divine
Right of God to Tithes, when he paid Tithes of all to Melchisede^, not
arbitrarily, but of due right, by virtue of some Divine Precept, (else See
Doctor Sclaters Ministers Portion, p. 23, etc.
Melchisede^ had been inferior to Levi who received Tithes from his Brethren,
by a Divine Law and Command, Hebr. 7. 4, 5, 6, etc.) he receiving this Precept
of paying Tithes by Tradition from Heber, who learned it of S^m, who was so
taught of his Father N^ah: he by succession RECEIVING IT FROM ADAM; who as he
was wrought and fashioned by God, so was he herein taught and instruct^d by
God. And therefore not only amongst the Sons of God, such as called rightly
upon the name of the Lord, but even amongst the Giants of the Daughters of M^n,
worshipping invented God^ by themselves, and dedicatin^ their TITHES unto them
(as the Premises evide^c^) THERE NEVER WAS NUMBER THAT DID INTRUDE UPON THE
TENTH, MUCH LESS SHOULDER IT OUT OF DOORS. This Number of T^^ (writes Philo
the learned Jew) that most sacred W^^^^^ M^ses has not a little commended,
because the best Duties of Man are by him cou^hed under that number, as God TEN
COMMANDMENTS, Vows, Prayers, First Fruits, perpetual Offerings, pardoning
Debts, and reducing all things unto their First estate, every Fiftieth year of
Jubilee, (made up of Tenths) the Fur niture of the Tabernacle, with a thousand
such like in the old Testament (besides other things of like nature expressed
under this Number of TEN in the Luke 17. 1^, 17. c. 19. 13, 16, 17. Mat. 25. 1.
^. Rev. 2. 10 c 5. 11. c 13. 1. c. 17. 3, 1^, 16. Mat. 18. 24. 1 Cor. 4. 15.
Heb. 7. ^, ^.
New) by which we may know, that TEN IS THE NVMBER OF PERFECTION (as ^ivers
style it) and has near affinity with God in sacred things. That from Gods own
Original Reservation of TENTHS to himself and his Ministers, this number became
sacred and universal afterward in all public civil Taxes, Dues, reserved to
Kings and Supreme Magistrates. For the Firstborn and chief of the Family, from
Adam, till the Levitical Priesthood instituted, being for the most part King as
well as Priest thereof, (as Melchisedec who received Tithes of Abraham was,
Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7. 1, 2.) when these two Offices came afterward to be
centred and settled in two distinct persons, thereupon the ancient TENTHS
(reserved by God, and assigned to his Priests and Ministers in perpetuity, for
their subsistence and maintenance of his public worship, from the Creation to
the end of the world, by a Divine Law, which no humane powers could repeal)
both amongst Gods own people, and most Heathens Nations; were appropriated to,
and received only by the Priests and Ministers, though divested of the Royal
dignity; and a NEW TENTH, by way of Tribute, Tax, Custom, or Subsidy
(amounting commonly to the Tenth part of the peoples tithed increase and
estates, in all Kingdoms and Republiks) was by Common consent imposed on and
reserved, received by Emperors, Kings Princes, and Supreme Magistrates from the
people, for their support, defraying the charges of the Government, and their
peoples necessary defense upon all occasions. Hence Tributes, Taxes, Customs
and public impositions, were usually called TENTHS (as well as Ministers
Tithes) both amongst Gods own people, 1 Samuel 8. 15, 17. (amounting To the tenth
of their estates and increase; as also amongst the ancient Romans, Grecians,
and most other Pagan Nations of old, (as Mr. Mountague proves at large in his
Diatribae, c. 3. by sundry Authors) as they were anciently and at this day so
styled, both Purcha^ Pilgrimage, p. 304. 616. 621. 630. The writers of these
several Nations, Realms and Republikes, printed in 16.
amongst the Turks, Moors, Spaniards, Germans, Italians, French, Danes, Swedes,
Poles, Scots, Irish, and most other Pagan and Christian Nations at this day;
especially in England, as you may read at large in Rastals Abridgments of
Statutes, Title Taxes and Tenthes; Brooks Abridgement, and Ashes Tables, Title
Quinzime, Disme, Tax and Talla^e, and our Parliament Records. And from this
number of Ten their Officers as well of State as Religion, were usually styled,
Decemviri, Decuriones, Decumani, Decani, Decadarchae, Decatutae, Decatologi,
Decatorii, and the like; our Names of Offices of Deans, Tithingmen, Collectors
of Tenths, etc. proceeding from the self-same Number; Sacred every way even
amongst Pagan Nations, both in their Duties of Piety and Policy, by constant
tradition, they knew not why nor wherefore, and likewise amongst Gods people,
upon the premised grounds. Hence Doctor Tillesley thus concludes in his Epistle
to King James, before his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History. Surely the
Number Tenth or Tithe is Sacred and very Mystical, and communicated only to
consecrated or Sacred persons That are Gods Vicars upon earth; that is, Kings
and Priests: Decima Regis et Decima Sacerdotis; who both stand in Gods place,
and receive this Portion as Gods upon earth. From all which premises, Mr.
Mountague, Dr. Carlton, Dr. Tillesley, Dr. Sclater and others conclude (and let
our Army Officers, New Legisers, and all Tithe-oppugners consider it) That the
Ministers of the Gospel now, as well as Gods Priests heretofore, have an
eternal Right to Ecclesiastical Tithes, by Gods own unalterable Institution;
and none else any Right at all unto them but they; From which Right no man, nor
all men can deprive or debar them; by any pretended Right, Prescription, M^dus
Decimandi, Custom, Usage, Law, Statute or appointment of any other maintenance
in lieu thereof, as more just, equal and convenient.

6. Tithes being originally due and paid to Jesus Christ himself, Romans ^^^*
God over all blessed for ever; yea specially, reserved by, appropriated,
consecrated to our Lord God, as his peculiar Holy Portion, Tribute, Rent,
Right, Inheritance, Homage, from the sons of men, for the constant
maintenance of his public Worship, and support of his Priests and Ministers
attending thereon, to the end of the world. Lev. ^7. 30, 32. Numb. 18. 24, 26,
28, 29. Mal 3. 8, 9. Heb 7 2, to 10. 1 Cor. 9. 4, to 15. and thereupon being
usually styled, both by Origin, Hom in Number. c 18. Ambrose, Sermon. 5. Fer. 2 and
Augustine, Sermon. 219. Jerome, in Mal. 3.
Fathers, Ma^iscon: 2. Can. 5. Moguntiense. An. 813. and 846. and 847. Council.
Lateran. c. 54. Ticmense sub Leone 4. Londinense: 2. ^oan: in Gratian. Su^ius,
Hoveden.
Councils, Extravag. de Decimis. c. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Popes Decretals, See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Bochellus,
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 8. Dr. Tillesleys Animadversions, p. 4. to 30.
Princes Edicts and Christian Writers in all Ages, Dominica substantia, Res
Dominicae, Dei census, Dei debitum, etc. Non ab hominibus, sed ab ipso Deo
institut^: qua^ Deus in Signum universalis Dominii Sibi reddi praecepit, suas
esse Decimas asseverans, etc. The constant payment of them to Ministers under
the Gospel, is not only warranted, commanded by the equity and words of the 1,
2, 4, 5, and 8. Commandments of the Decalogue, (therefore far from being a Sin
against the 2d. Commandment, as In his voice.
John Can most absurdly and impudently asserts; as if Gods Precepts were
repugnant to each other:) but likewise expressly, positively, eternally,
prescribed by our Savior Christ himself, in this peremptory Gospel-Precept,
recorded by three Evangelists, Matthew. 22. 21. Mar. 12. 17. Luke 20. 25. RENDER
therefore to CAESAR the things that are CAESAR'S; and UNTO GOD THE THINGS THAT
ARE GODS. Thus seconded by the Apostle Paul, Romans 13. 7, 8. RENDER THEREFORE TO
ALL THEIR DUES, etc. Tithes (as the premises evidence beyond contradiction)
have Gods own Image, Impresse, Superscription, as visibly, as legibly engraven
on them by himself, as any Tribute-money then showed our Savior, had Caesar's,
by the Mint-Masters* yea, they were Gods own ancient, standing, constant, known
Tribute, at that very season when Christ uttered this precept, and some
thousands of years before, specially reserved by, and duly rendered unto God
and his Priests, by all Gods faithful people, many hundred years before we
read of any Tributemony paid to Caesar, or any other King or Prince. Upon which
ground, as they were then, (by this direct Gospel-Commandement of Christ
himself) enjoined to be as constantly, duly, truly paid to God and his
Ministers, as any Tribute, Tax or Customs are unto Caesar, or other
Higher-Powers whatsoever: So they have since our Saviors days (except only in
times of greatest persecution under Pagan* Emperors, during which some Tithes
were rendered to God* Ministers in some places, or things of greater value, as
I shall prove anon) been still continued and universally paid to God in his
Ministers, in all or most Christian Churches, Realms, Republics, from the
first public imbracement of the Gospel amongst them, to this present, and more
especially in this our Realm, as Mr. John Seldom in his History of Tithes,
Doctor Tillesley, Tyndarus, Rebuffus, with others prove at large; and the
Author of Respublica, sive Status Regni Poloniae (Lugduni Bat. 1627. p. 177.)
thus attest, for the Church and Clergy of Poland, Habent etiam Decimam omnium
segitum, Publico Principum ac totius Poloniae consensu Iam inde ab initio
susceptae Religionis Christianae attributas, and aliis quibusdam Pensionibus
cumulatas. Habent and luculentos fundos, Praedia, Pagos, Oppida, arces, and
territoria; partim priscorum ibidem Principum and Regum; partim privatorum
munificentia adjectas (as they likewise had in See Spelmanni Council: Antiqu.
Eccles. Brit. Dr. Usher De Rerum Britanicarum Primordiis.
ours, and other Christian Realms) yet he afterward subjoynes and complains,
as we may justly do, Nunc passim in alienas Donationes ac Decimas invaditur,
long majore avariciae rapacitatisque infamia, quam egestatis relevatione.
Therefore Gods and our Ministers Tithes, being by our Lord Jesus Christ's own
Gospel precept thus positively commanded to be constantly and duly rendered
unto them, as well as tribute unto Caesar; no conscientious Loyal Christians,
but professed Atheists, Antiscripturists, Rebels unto God and Christ, can
justly, or by any pretext of Conscience, refuse the due, constant payment of
them, no more than of lawful Tributes and Taxes legally imposed on them by
common consent (u) in (v) See 25 E. 1. c. 5. 34 E. 1. c. 1. Cooks 2. Instit. p.
529, 532, 533, etc. and the Petition of Right 3. Ca^.
free and lawful Parliaments; nor any Caesar's, Kings, Princes, Magistrates, or
Supreme Powers, deny, defraud or deprive them of their Tithes and Dues, upon
any pretext, without impairing, impeaching, subverting their own Rights and
Titles to those civil Tenths, Tributes, which they challenge and receive from
the people as their due, by this very Precept of our Savior, which couples
Gods Dues and his Ministers together with their own; the inviolable
preservation whereof, is the best and readiest means to secure their own Tenths
and civil Dues. Whereas these Princes, Potentates* Powers, Grandees, Legifers,
who are so sacrilegiouslie injurious as to invade, impair, diminish, substract
or abolish, Gods and his Ministers Tithes, Duties, or divert them to pay their
Soldiers, or any other public or private use, will thereby but undermine
their own interests, and teach the people how to defraud, substract, deny their
own ancient Civil Tenths, Customs, Duties, Taxes, Rents. and New Impositions,
Excises of all sorts, by way of retaliation; most of the Anabaptistical and
levelling present Petitioners against Tithes and Glebes, petitioning,
declaiming likewise against all Customs, Imposts, Taxes old or new, as See
Lucas Os^ander, ^^chi^id. Contr. cum Anabaptistis. Harmony of Confessions,
Sect. 19. of the Civil Magistrate. My Swo^d of Christian Magistracy supperted.
intolerable Grievances and hindrances to sree Trade; and many of them
asserting, all civil Supreme Powers and Magistrates whatsoever, as
antichristian and unlaw fall, as Tithes and Ministers are in their false
account.

Lastly, all Opposites to our Ministers Tithes do, and must of necessity
acknowledge (from the Scriptures insisted on in the first Proposition, and
Reasons there alleged) That some competent Maintenance, Salary, Recompense,
Reward, or other (arbitrary as they hold, certain and settled as we assert)
belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel by a divine, moral, natural Right,
Justice, and Equity; as all grant a Sabbath (and Government) in general to be
of divine Authority, Institution, and morally due to God. Now the whole Church
of God from the creation to this present, (though under various dispensations
in the times of the Patriarchs, Law and Gospel) being but John 10. 16. c. 11.
51, 52. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. c. 2. 13. to the end, c. 4. 4 to 17. c. ^. 23, to 3^.
John. 17. 20. to 25. Cant. 6. 9. Ezech. 37. 16, to 24. Romans 12. 4, 5. Ephesians. 1.
10. 1 Cor. 10. 17. c. 12. 12, 13. Col. 3. 15. Hebr. 12. 22, 23. I say 66. 18,
to 24.
^ne entire Corporation or spiritual Body-Politique, whereof Jesus Christ
himself is the only head, King, Lord, Lawgiver, High Priest, Chief Pastor,
Minister, Advocate, Savior, Foundation, Cornerstone; and the successive
Priests, Ministers and Members thereof from the beginning to the end of the
World, serving, worshipping, adoring, only one and the self-same true, Mal. 3.
6. Iam. 1. 17. Hebr. 7. 24. c. 13. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 15, 16. Psalm. 2^. 26, 27.
immutable, invisible, eternal Lord God, according to his prescribed will and
word: and Jesus Christ himself (the only High priest of this Church for ever)
receiving, and God his Father prescribing Tithes for the Maintenance of his
Priests and Levites, both before and under the Law; and no ways abolishing,
but ratifying them in and by the Gospel, as I have already proved: There
neither is, nor can be any other particular kind of competent, sitting,
standing, settled Maintenance, Reward or Recompense for all the Ministers of the
Gospel evinced, demonstrated out of Gods word, which may be truly reputed
moral, natural, divine, universal, perpetual and unarbitrary; nor any other
duly rendered from all Christians in all Ages, places, Romans 14. 23.
in Faith Conscience, and sincere obedience toward God, as such a maintenance,
but this of Tithes alon^, independent on the lusts and wills of men: It being
that which the Patriarchs, no doubt by Gods prescription being paid in Faith)
both vowed and paid to God before the Law; which God himself afterward
specially reserved, prescribed, and all his people duly rendered under the Law;
annexing many promised blessings to the true payment, denouncing many threats,
curses to the sacrilegious Substraction or detaining of them; that which Christ
himself and his Apostles most specially pointed at, commended, ratified in the
Gospel; that which all Christian Kings, States, Magistrates, Churches,
Christians under the Gospel in all Ages, places have generally fixed upon,
approved, asserted, prescribed, ^^tified, a^ not only sacred and divine but as
such a most ^^^t, w^^e, equal, excellent, incomparable way of maintanance
(invented by the most wise God) which cannot be matched, much l^sse amended,
exceeded by all the policy, wit, o^ wisdom of men: being a most certain,
standing, unva^i^ble, convenient Allowance in all Ages, places, seasons,
alterations, how ever things rise or fall, continuing unalterable like the
weekly Sabbath) as to the porportion or qu^^apa^^, in all vicissitudes of
war, peace, plenty, scarcity, famine; and causing all Ministers to
sympathize, fare, share alike with their people every where, be the times and
seasons good or bad, wet or dry, plentiful or barren; and giving them a
competent share in Gal. (...) 12. (...)
all their Temporal Blessings, without such toil or labor as might interrupt
them in their Ministry, Studyes, and furnishing them with a tenth part of every
tythable Thing their respective Parishes yield for the food, clothing, support
of themselves, Families, Cattle, or vendibles of somekind or other, sufficient
to buy what else they want. This way of Maintenance therefore so sacred,
divine, ancient, moral, universal, convenient, equal, unalterable, and so long
continuance in Gods Church in all Revolutions, may not, must not, cannot be
either totally abrogated, subtracted, detained, diminished, nor changed into
any other new fangled pretended more equal, just, certain, convenient, less
troublesome Stipendiary, Salary, by any pragmatical, Jesuitical,
Anabaptistical, Atheistical Politicians, Statists Powers or Legislators
whatsoever, without the highest Antichristian Pride, Presumption, Insolency,
and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.
Exaltation of themselves above and against God himself, whose special sacred
Institution, portion, rent, inheritance, right, and due they are; particularly
(both by name and kind) reserved, prescribed by, appropriated, devoted to
himself, by his own command; which all Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates,
Powers, Generals, Armies, Nations in the world have no Power or Jurisdiction to
repeal, disobey, change, alter; no more than Tenants their Landlords ancient
Quitrents, Services, Tenures, or Subjects, Servants, their Kings or Masters
Laws, Orders, Mandates, yea no more than they can change Gods weekly Sabbath
into another different proportion of time, or any other sacred Institution,
into a new superstitious humane Invention, as learned Ke^kerman, in his System.
Polit. l. 1. c. 21. Polanus in Ezech. 48. v. 14. Dr. Carlton, and Dr. Scalter,
in their Treatises of Tithes, assert and prove at large.

This divine Right of Tithes even under the Gospel, which I have pleaded for,
has been constantly asserted in all Ages, since the Apostles times till now,
by Fathers, Councils, the Laws, Edicts of Christian Emperors, Kings,
Parliaments, Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Historians, Lawyers, Popish,
Protestant Divines of all sorts and Nations. Dr. Richard Tillesly in his
Animadversions upon Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, printed London 1619. p. 3,
to 30, has colected a Catalogue of no less than 72. such Authorities (in a
Chronological method) before the year of our Lord 1215. as have asserted their
Ius Divinum, in all Ages before that; whereof Irenaeus (flourishing in the year
of Christ 180.) is the first, and the Constitutions of Fredericus the second,
the last, where those who please may peruse them. Mr. Seldens laborious History
of Tithes, and Review, especially chapter 5. 6, 7, 8, 9. supplies us with many more
Authorities of this kind, in succeeding times, especially with our own
Domestique Laws and Councils, to whom I refer the impartial Reader, and to Dr.
Tillesly, Dr. Sclater, Mr. Mountague, Mr. Nettles, and Sir James Semple their
Animadversions on and Answers to his History: If any desire further
satisfaction in this point, let them peruse Andr. Hispanus, De Decimis
Tractatus. Petrus Rebuffus, and Tyndarus De Decimis, printed Colo. 1590 Gaspar
Boethius, De Deciman Tutori Hispanico JURE praestanda: Grav. 1565. Ignatius
Laserte and Molina, De Decimis Venditionis, and Permutationis. Joan. Giffordus,
Moderata Dissertatio de Ratione alendi Ministros Evangelicos: Hanov. 1619.
Gulielmus Redoanus, De Rebus Ecclesiae non aliendis: Ven. 1589. and De Spoliis
Ecclesiae Romae. 1585. Alexander Stiaticus, Repet. in Extrav. Ambitiosae: De
Rebus Ecclesiae non aliendis. Alph. Villagus, De Rebus Ecclesiae non rite
alienatis, recupe^andis: Bon. 1606. (a Treatise of hard digestion in these
sacrilegious times:) Sir Henry Spelman, De non temerandis Ecclesiis: Dr. John
Prideaux, Orat. 5. De Decimis: Dr. Edward Reynolds, Explanation on Psalm. 110.
v. 4. Gul. Zepperus, Legum Mosaicarum Explanatio, l. 4. c. 40. And learned Hugo
Grotius, who thus concludes in his Book De jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 1.
^ect. 17. p. 9. (deservedly magnisied by all Scholars, Lawyers, Politicians,
Soldiers, and therefore I close with it, to stop all their mouths at once.) I
exvetus de Sabbato, and altera De Decimis, monstrant Christianos obligari, nec
minus Septima temporis part ad cultum divinum; Nec minus fructuum Decima in
alimentum eorum qui in sacris Rebus occupantur, au^ simil^s pios usus seponant.
Resolving the tenth part of men's increase at least, and no smaller proportion,
to be See Sclaters Ministers Porportion, p. 224, 225, 226, where he proves this
by their parallel.
as justly, morally, perpetually due to God and his Ministers under the Gospel
from all Christians, as the weekly Sabbath, and seventh part of their time, and
no less, is due still by them to God and his public worship.

Thus much for the divine Right of our Ministers to their Tithes, omitted in
the former part, but here supplied, for the Readers fuller satisfaction in
these Sacrilegious times, which so violently and impiously decry it without
Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, Authority, out of malice and design. The
succeeding Chapters more concern their Legal, Rational Right and Equity
depending on their Divine.

CHAPT. III.
HAving dispatched the two principal Propositions of greatest concernment,
(wherein I have been larger than I at first intended) to satisfy all men's
Consciences, and stop the mouths of all Gainsayers, I now proceed to the third
Proposition.

That if Tithes and other maintenance by Glebes, Oblations, Pensions, formerly
settled on our Ministers, be either wilfully withheld, or subtracted from them
by the people, in part or in whole, the Civil Magistrates may and ought by
coercive Laws, Penalties to enforce the payment of them in due form and time,
both by the Law of God, and Rules of Justice, without any Injury or Oppression
to the people.

This Proposition necessarily follows from the former two: for if there be a
just, competent, comfortable Maintenance due to all lawful painful Preachers,
and Ministers of the Gospel, even by divine Right, institution, express
Precepts, both of the Gospel and Law of God; and that as a just Debt, hire,
wages, salary, right, not as a mere voluntary Gift, Alms, Benevolence; and the
settled maintenance of our Ministers by Tithes, Glebes, Oblations, Pensions, and
other Duties, be such* as I have already demonstrated: then the Civil
Magistrates may and ought by coercive Laws and Penalties to enforce the payment
of them in due form and time (as our very Officers by such means enforce their
Soldiers, Parents their Children and Servants, Schoolmasters their Scholars,
yea our Troopers their very Horses, held in with Bits and Bridles when unruly,
and quickened with Spurs when lazy: and Shepherds their very Sheep, with their
Dogs and hooks, when there is cause, to do their duties, and reform their
Errors) without the least guilt or color of Injury or Oppression to the
wilful, obstinate, or negligent detainers of them; and that by the self-same
Laws, rules of Justice, Reason, Conscience, as all Tith-Opponents yet grant,
they may enforce obstinate or negligent Tenants, Creditors, Masters, Public or
private Accomptants, Trespassers, Disseisors, and the like, to pay their just
Rents and Services to their Landlords, their due Debts to their Creditors,
their contracted wages to their hired Laborers or menial Servants, their
audited Arrears to the public Treasury, or others to whom they are indebted
upon Account, their ascertained damages to such as they have injured, and to
restore the Goods or Lands unjustly taken or detained, to those they have
plundered or disse^sed of them, yea as justly as they may by any coercive Laws
and means enforce and constrain any obstinate Perso^^ o^ Merchants, to pay all
Tenths, Fifteens, Subsidies, Ayd^ Cu^toms. Tonnage, Poundage, for defense of
the Real^ ^y and or sea when publicly and legally granted in and by a full,
free, and lawful Parliament, duly summoned and elected by the people,
according to the (...) R. 2. ^^at. 2. c. 4 12 R. 2 c. ^^. ^ H 4. c. 14. 11 H.
4. c. ^. 1 H. 5 c. 1. 6 H. 6. c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. ^. c. 2. 23 H ^. c 11.
32 H ^. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 10. 27 H. 8. c. 26. ^5 H ^. c. 11. ^7 ^^^. The (...)
for Triennial Parliaments, Cooks ^ Instit. p. 168, ^^^. and 4 Instit. p. 1. 45,
46, 47, 48, 49.
manifold Laws and Statutes enacted for that purpose: the want of which
indubital Ingredients only, how fatal they have been to Parliaments in former
Ages, to make them and all their Acts, Judgments, Orders, Ordinances, mere
Nullities, and what a prejudice they have been to the People and Republic too,
those who please may read at leisure in the Statutes of 39 H. 6. c. 1. and Rot.
parl. n. 3. 17. c. 7. And the Act for repealing the Parliament of 21 R. 2. in
the Parliament o^ 1 H. 4. c. 3. The reason of which Repeal, is thus recorded by
Mr. Oliver Saint John in his Declaration in Parliament against the Shipmony
Judges, Anno 1640. (printed by the Commons command) p. 33. That Parliament of
21 R. ^. of Revocation, was held by force, as is declared in the Parliament
Roll of 1 H. 4. n. 21, 22. That it was held Viris armatis, et Sagitariis
immensis. The Knights of Parliaments were not elected by the Commons Prout mos
^xegit, Sed per Regiam voluntatem: And so the Lords Rex omnes Dominos Sibi
adhaerentes summonare fecit. Whereupon Nu. 48. These judgments of Revocation
(and that of the whole Parliaments proceedings too) are declared to be Erronea,
Iniqua, et omni juri et rationi repugna^tia, Erroneous, wicked, and contrary to
all Right and Reason: So Mr* Saint John, Numb. 37. This was one grand Article
of Impeachment of King Richard the 2 ^. for which he was then deposed from his
Government by a forced Resignation. Heu licet quod eo Statuto and Consuetudine
Regni sui, in Convocatione ^uju^libe^ Parliamenti sui, populus suus in singulis
Comitatilus Regni DEBEA^ ESSE L^BER ad eligend: and depu^a^d: Milites pro
hujusmodi Comitatibus, ad interesse^d. Parliamento, and ad exponend. eorum
gravamin^, and ad prosequend. pro remediis superinde, pr^u^ eis videba^ur
expe^ire; Tamen praefa^us Rex ut in Parliamentis suis ut liberius consequi
valeat suae temerariae voluntatis effectare dir^xit mandata sua frequentius
Vice^omi^ibas suis ut certas Personas per ipsum Regem nominatas ut Milites
Comitatus venire faciat ad Parliamenta sua: Quos quidem Milites eidem Regi
faventes indulgere poterat prout frequenter fecit quandoque per minas varias et
terrores, quandoque per munera ad consentiend. illis quae Regno praejudicialia
fuerant et Populo quamplumum onerosa, et specialiter ad concedendum eidem Regi
Subsidium ad certos Annos suum Populum nimium opprimendo. Which I leave to John
Can to English for those who understand not Latin, or our Laws, and would
strip our learned Ministers of their Tithes and settled maintenance by color of
an extraordinary call (as he terms it) to such an extraordinary Sacrilegious
work as this.

Quest. But what ground is there in Scripture (may some demand) for compelling
People to pay their Tithes and other Duties to their Ministers?

Answ I answer 1. We have the President, Law, and Commandment of Godly
Hezekiah, recorded in the 2 ^hron. 31. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. with the good effect it
wrought, already recited. 2ly. The Examples of zealous Nehemiah, and the
Religious Nobles and People under him; who entered into a solemn Covenant,
curse, oath, and made Ordinances to charge themselves yearly with the third
part of a Shekle for the service of the House of God: and that they would bring
in all their First Fruits and Offerings, and the Tithes of their ground unto
the Levites, that the same Levites might have their Tithes in all the Cities of
their Tillage, Neh. 9. 38 c. 10. 1. throughout, specially v. 29, 32, 37, 38,
39. chapter 12. 44, 45. which when afterward neglected, by the people, Nehemiah
contended with the Rulers (for their negligence in not enforcing the people to
pay them) whereupon this effect ensued, Then brought all Judah the Tithes of
the Corn, and the new Wine, and the Oil unto the Treasurers, etc. And Nehemiah
was so far from deeming this Injustice or Oppression, as some now maliciously
term it; that he prays, Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not
out my good Deeds, that I have done for the House of my God, and for the
offices thereof, Neh. 13. 10, to 15. From which President Nicholas Hemingius (a
far better Divine and Scholar than John Can and all his Associates against
Tithes) thus resolves in his Commentary on 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1^, 1^. Therefore the
Godly are to be admonished. That by Divine Right they owe Stipends unto the
Ministers of the Church. But that nothing may be here neglected to the damage
of the Ministry, This care belongs to the Superious. For if Kings be nursing
Fathers to the Church (as Isaiah admonishe^b) Possunt et debent jure divino
ministris Ecclesiae stipendia ordinare, they may and ought by Divine Right (or
Gods Law) to ordain Stipends to the Ministers of the Church, by the example of
the most godly King Hez^chiah, 2 Chronicles. 31. That they may wholly addict
themselves to the Law of God. And if the people detain these Salaries, and
settled Dues from them, they may enforce them by Fines, penalties, and Actions
to pay them.

3ly. If these Examples prevail not, we have the President of a zealous Heathen
Prince (who shall rise up in judgment against many pretended Magistrates,
resusing to assist complaining Ministers to recover their just Tith^s and Dues
from their refractory ingrate people) to wit, King ^^taxerxes, who making a
Decree for furnishing Ezra the Priest with whatsoever he should require for the
maintenance of Gods worship and House, Ezra 7. ^1, etc. concludes it thus; v.
26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King
(which confirm our Ministers Tithes and Dues) Let Judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or unto Banishment, or to
Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. And lest any should deem this a
Tyrannical, Oppressing Edict, Ezra himself subjoyns in the very next words, v.
27. Blessed be the Lord of our Fathers, who has put such a thing as this is in
the Kings heart. Which Law if now put into due execution, would send Can and
most of his Confederates here packing back again to Amsterdam, or some Gibbet,
or Prison, and strip them of the Goods they have got by the wars and troubles
of the time.

4ly. We have King Darius his Decree for repairing Gods House, and furnishing
the Priests there with all necessaries they required, which thus concluces with
a most severe penalty against the wilful Disobeyers of it, Ezra 6. 11. Also I
have made a Decree, That whosoever shall alter this word, Let Timber be pulled
down from his House, and being set up, Let him be hanged thereon, and his House
be made a Dunghill for this. How many n^w (...) should we now have throughout
England, and how many new purchased Houses by those who had no^e of late, would
be made Dungheaps, if this rigid Law were now put in ^^e? Which may stop the
clamorous months of such who cry out against Laws and Ordinances for Tithes,
prescribing more moderate penalties.

Object. But all this is but Old Testament will many now object: what can you
allege for your Propositions ^^^^f out of the Gospel?

Answ. To stop their mouths, I answer,

1. That the Gospel expressly commands all living under it, To render to all
their Dues: Therefore to Ministers (to whom I have proved Tithes and other
settled maintenance to be a just Due and Debt) to owe nothing to any Man, Romans
13. 7, 8. Therefore not to Ministers. But what if bold, atheistical, obstinate
or covetous Wretches will not pay these Dues to their Ministers, does the
Gospel allow Magistrates and higher Powers to compel them to it? Yes, in the
very antecedent words, v. 4, 5. If t^ou do that which is evil, (as the
defrauding, denying, detaining of the Ministers, as well as the Magistrates, or
any others Due Debts and Salaries, is a doing of evil, prohibited by the
forecited words, and many other Texts elsewhere insisted on) be afraid, for ^e
bears not the Sword in vain; (as he should do, might he compel none by it to
their duties) For he is the Minister of God, even a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil: Wherefore ye must needs be subject (in yielding to
their commanding Laws and Ordinances for Tithes and Ministers Dues, as well as
others, edged with coercive Penalties) not only for wrath (that is, for fear of
the Penalties which else fall upon you for your disobedience, exasperate the
Higher Powers and Civil Magistrate to execute wrath upon you) but even for
conscience sake; which should more prevail with men than wrath and Penalties;
though our Tithe-detainers now are grown so atheistically impudent, as to
allege conscience for not rendering them, and robbing God himself of them, Mal.
3. ^^ as well as his Ministers.

2ly. The Holy Ghost by the Apostle Peter thus seconds his former precept, by
Paul, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors: who have made
many Laws and Ordinances for payment of our Ministers Tithes and Duties. Yea,
but say our sturdy armed, and unarmed Tithedetainers now; What if we will not
do it, as we are resolved, notwithstanding all such Laws and Ordinances? What?
Are you resolved to disobey and contemn Gods Gospel, Laws and Ordinances as
well as Man's? Where is your Religion, your Saintship you so much boast of? Will
you 1 Cor. 10. 12.
provoke the Lord himself to wrath, are you stronger than he? I presume, not:
Therefore the Apostle subjoins, That these Kings and Governors are sent by him
for the Punishment of Evil doers: And such are all those who detain the
Ministers established Dues, who are not only Thieves and Robbers of God in the
Old Testaments language, Mal. 3 8. but committers of Sacrilege, Romans 2. 20.
Thou that abb^rrest Idols (as many Tithe-oppugners pretend they do) Do thou
commit Sacrilege and Church Robbery? Acts 19. 37. in the New Testaments and
mere Heathens Dialect; who fall under the just punishment of Kings and
Governors, whom God will bear out in the just punishment of such evil doers,
or elle punish them himself in a more severe manner, if the Armed sons of 2 Samuel 3. 39.
Zerviah be too hard for David, and ^^^b. 10. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who even under
the Gospel is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. and has proved so to many
Tithe-oppugners very lately, both in consuming their Houses and personal
Estate, as well by real fire, as by inflicting Spiritual judgments on their
souls.

3ly. Our Saviors own words recorded in the Gospel, are direct in point. Luke
12. 57, 58, 59. Mat. 5. 25. And why, even of your selves judge ye not what is
right? (in paying your just Dues and Debts to all you owe them without suit or
coercion, as the next words literally import:) When thou go with thine
adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the way give diligence that thou
may be delivered from him, lest he bale thee to the judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer cast thee into prison Verily I say
unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing; or very last mite. Here is a Gospel resolution of our
Savior in two Evangelists, ratified with a verily I say unto thee; That all
those who will not pay their Ministers Tithes and Dues, as well as other men's
Debts, may be lawfully brought and haled perforce before the Magistrate, and by
the Magistrate and Judge, condemned in double Damages, ^ast into Prison, and
not suffered to come out thence, till he have paid the utmost farthing, not
only of his detained Tithes and Dues, but of his fine, forfeiture, and costs of
suit, prescribed by our Laws. And let all our Swordmen and other oppugners of
our coercive Laws against detainers of Ministers Tithes and Dues, give our
Savior himself the Title of a Tyrant, and Oppressor, a Liar, if they dare, and
that such proceedings are not sufferable under the Gospel.

4ly. There is nothing so free and voluntary in the world, that I know, as
Alms and Charity to poor distressed Saints and Christians; Yet the Gospel
accounts this a due Debt; and all able to give them, Debtors, Romans 15 27. And
if any refuse to render them, out of their Hard-heartedness, and want of
Charity; the Christian Magistrates under the Gospel may, not only rate and
assesse them according to their Estates toward the Poors relief; (as they do
in all Christian Republics and Realms) but by Distresses, sale of Goods and
other coercive ways compel them to render them; and that both by the Common
law of England, and the Statutes of 22 H. 8. c. 12. 27 H. 8. c. 25. 1 Edw. 6.
c. 3. 5 E. 6 c 2. 7 E. 6. c. 11. 1 Phil. and Mar. c. 6. 5 Eliz. c. 3. 14 Eliz.
c. 3. 18 Eliz c. 3. 22 Eliz. c. 11. 23 Eliz. c. 3. 3 1 Eliz. c. 10. 35 Eliz. c.
7. 43 Eliz. c. 2. as Dalton and other Justices of Peace, Tit. Poor, Maimed
Soldiers. Therefore admit Tithes mere Alms (as some would have them) yet when
and where detained, they may be as justly levied and recovered by coercive Laws
and Statutes as Alms to the Poor, and those who condemn coercive Laws for
Tithes as unbeseeming the Gospel, must Tax and Repeal all Laws for the Poor,
and for Maimed Soldiers too, as such; which I presume they will not do.

5ly. I suppose neither Can himself (who receives pay as a Chaplain to the
Army out of public Contributions from the people, not from voluntary
contributions of the Soldiers) and all other Officers and Swordmen oppugning
the coercive Maintenance of our Ministers by Tithes or otherwise, will maintain
even unto death; that the People (even against their wills and Consciences too)
may be enforced to pay Monthly Taxes and Excises (amounting to twenty times
more each year than all the Ministers Tithes in England) by coercive Orders and
Ordinances, (though not made in a full, free, or old English Parliament, nor
warranted by so many indisputable Acts of Parliament as Ministers Tithes and
Dues) and levied by Imprisonments, Distresses, Forfeitures, armed violence, and
free quartering of Soldiers on the people, (though adjudged High Treason in
Straffords Case in full Parliament, for which he lost his Head;) our Ministers
therefore being real Spiritual Soldiers of Jesus Christ, even by the Gospels
Resolution; and not to go a warfare at any time on their own free cost, but
upon the Peoples pay and wages, as due to them, as any Soldiers (which I have
formerly proved) they must by the self same reason acknowledge the levying and
enforcing of the payment of their less Burdensome, and more legal, necessary
Tithes for the defense and preservation of the very Gospel, Religion, Gods
Glory and Man's Salvation once a year, by penalties, forfeitures, imprisonments,
or distresses when obstinately detained: or else disclaim their own coercive
Contribution; first, to maintain unchristian bloody wars between Christians of
the same Religion, in firm unity, and amity with us, which are not so
necessary, or commendable amongst Christians, who should Romans 12. 18.
live peaceably with all men (not make a last Trade of war) Cor. 13. 11. 2 Gal.
5. 13. Ephesians. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 3. 2.
Love as Brethren, 1 John 3. 16.
Lay down their Lives one for another, Yea Matthew. 5. 44. Romans 12. 20.
love and pray for their Enemies (not murder or destroy them) and Isay 2. 4.
Micha. 4. 3.
beat all their Swords into Plowshares and their spears into Pruning Hooks, not
lifting up Sword Nation against Nation (as now they do to the peril of the
Gospel, reproach and slander) and learn war no more) as is the Spiritual
warfare of our Ministers against the World, Flesh, Sin, Devil, and all Errors,
Blasphemies, Corruptions, for the eternal Salvation (not Destruction) of men's
Souls and Bodies too.

6ly. We find it long since prophesied in the Old Testament, in relation to the
calling to the Gentiles by and under the Gospel, Isay 49. 23. That the KINGS of
the Gentiles should become Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens Nursing-Mothers to
the Church, Isay 60. 9, 10. Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships
of Tarshish first, to bring my Sons from far, their Silver and their Gold with
them: And the Sons of Strangers shall build up the walls, and their Kings shall
minister unto thee, Psalm. 72. 10, 11. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles
shall bring Presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer Gifts, yea all
Kings shall down before him (and then) all Nations shall serve him. Thus
seconded in the New Testament, Rev 21. 24. where it is prophesied of the
Heavenly Jerusalem (the Church of Christ) the Kings of the Earth do bring their
Glory unto it. Which Prophecies concerning Kings, and likewise Kings of Isles
in particular (and no other sorts of Governors, which is observable) have been
most eminently verified of the Kings and Queens of this Isle and Realm of
Britain, beyond all the Kings, Queens, Regions, Isles and Kingdoms in the world
besides, to the eternal Honor of that late rejected, abjured form of Kingly
Government (derived from Gods own form of Psalm 47. 1, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Kingly Government over the whole world, and of Psalm. 2. 6. Ps. 48. 2. Rev. 15.
3. John 1. 44. Zech. 9. 9.
Christ's Royal Government over his Church both Militant and Triumphant) and of
this our Isle: where God blessed our Church and Kingdom, 1. with three such
worthy Heathen Kings in Succession, Capgrave in vita Iosephi, Will. Malmesbury
De Antiqu* Glastoniensis Ecclesiae, Spelman. Council. Epist. Dedicatoria, and p.
1. to 12. Dr. Usher Ecclesiae Brit. Antiquitates* c. 1. Godwin, Matthew Parker,
Speed, and sundry others.
Arviragus, Marius, and Coylus) who though they embraced not the Christian
Faith here preached soon after our Saviors Ascension by James the Son of
Ze^edee, Simon Zelotes, Peter, Paul, Aristobulus, and Philips twelve Disciples,
whereof Joseph of Aramathaea (who honorably interred our Savior) was chief,
yet they courteously entertained them, permitted them freely to preach the
Gospel to their people, gave public entertainment to the persecuted Christians
resorting hither as to a safe and peaceable Sanctuary, when they were forcibly
expelled out of all other Kingdoms and Countries throughout the world, and
Roman Empire, by bloody Persecutors, bestewed Lands and a comfortable
Maintenance on the Preachers of the Gospel at Glastonbury, where they built the
first Christian Church in the world; and were the first Kings and Kingdoms in
the world who gave public Reception, Protection, Countenance, Maintenance to
the Preachers and Professers of the Gospel; as not only our own Historians, but
two foreign Writers, namely Polydore Virgil: Hist. Angl. l. 2. and Cardinal
Baronius himself. Annal. Tom. 1. An. 95. n. 5. with Spondanus in his Epitome of
him, records. 2ly. With the first Christian King we read of, publicly
baptized, professing and establishing the Christian Faith, builded, endowed
Churches and Ministers with Glebes and other Maintenance; to wit our famous
King Lucius, who about the year 187. (as Antiqu. Ecclesiae, Brit. Fox Acts and
Monuments, Spelman. Council. p 1^* etc. Dr. Usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 4, 5,
6.
Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, the History of Rochester and others
record) Possessiones et Territoria Ecclestis et viris Ecclesiasticis abundanter
conferens Chartis and c Ad An. 187. Roger Wendever ad An. 184. Dr. Usher Eccles
Brit. Antiqu. p 125, 126, 1078. Galfridus Monmuniensis, l. 5. c. 1. Edit.
Hidelberg.
Munimentis omnia communivit: Ecclesias vero cum suis Coemiteriis ita
constituit esse Liberas, ut quicunque Malefactor ad illa confugeret, illaesus
ab omnibus remaneret: (a good Policy at that time to draw Pagans to frequent
the Church, and hear the word, to convert them both from their Paganism and
evil Lives;) He not only giving all the Lands and Possessions belonging to the
Pagan Temples and Priests to the Churches and Ministers of the Christians; Se^
quia majorem honorem illis impendere debuerat, augmentavit illas amplioribus
agris et mansis, omnique liberate sublimavit, as Galfridus Monmuniensis, and
Gervasius Tilburiensis affirm: Here was a true Nursing Father indeed to Gods
Church and Ministers.

3ly. With the first Christian Queen we read of in all the world, to wit, Queen
Helena, Matthew. Westminster. Graftons Holin^^^ed, Fox and Speed.
Daughter and Heir to King ^oel, and Mother to Constantine the Great, who was a
careful Nursing Mother, and Bountiful Benefactor to the Church and Ministers
of Christ, as Eusebius in the life of Constantine, Ambrose Orati^ in Obitum
Theodosii, Baronius in his Annals, and Speed in his History of Great Britain,
p. 156. record. Whence she was styled in ancient Inscriptions, Venerabilis ET
PIISSIMA AUGUSTA; both for her extraordinary Piety, and her converting of
Constantius her Husband to the love and protection of the Christian Religion,
and the Professors of it, who by her means creeping out of the Dens and Caves
where in they were hid, began to exercise their Devotions publicly, and TO
REEDIFIE THE OLD RUINATE CHURCHES (which Dioclesian the persecuting Emperor
had levelled to the very ground in all places,) and TO ERECT NEW; Matthew. Westminster.
An. 307. Dr. Usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 8. Speeds History p. 156, etc.
Baronius, An. 306. n. 16.
She herself at her own cost, erecting a Stately Church over our Saviors
Sepulcher at Jerusalem, famous till this very day.

4ly. With the first Christian Emperor in the world, even that famous
Constantine the Great, born and elected Emperor in this Island, educated in
the Christian Faith by his pious Mother, the best, the Greatest Nursing Father
the Church of God ever yet enjoyed in the world.

Eusebius, Eutropius, Zonaras, Grimston, Speed, and others in his Life, Fox
Acts and Monuments, vol. 1.
For first, He destroyed the two Grand Persecutors of the Christian Religion,
Maxentius and Licinius, with their Adherents, and demolished all the Idol-Gods
and Monuments of Idolatry throughout his Dominions.

2ly. He reduced all the exiled Christians driven out of their Countries into
desolate Islands, Caves, Dens, Deserts, restored them their lost Possessions,
established Christian Magistrates throughout his Empire, encouraged, protected
the Christians in all places, in the public Profession of their Religion, and
suppressed the Heresies and Schisms that sprung up amongst them, by Councils
and public Edicts.

3ly. He caused all the Churches in this Isle and elsewhere, which by the
Decrees of Dioclesian were levelled in all a Euschius de vita Constantini,
Gildas, Matthew. Westminster. An. 318, to 351. Speeds History, p. 159, 161. Spelman.
Council. p. 45, Dr. usher Eccles. Brit. Antiqu. c. 8. throughout.
places to the very ground (which some Atheistial Anabaptists, and Jesuitical
Incendiaries even in these pretended glorious times of Piety and Reformation
endeavor to do again) to be re-edified, and new ones to be founded throughout
his Dominions; himself erecting most Magnificent Temples to Gods honor, (as
King David did out of holy zeal, and love to God, not Popish superstition, as
some now censure it, 2 Chronicles. 22 5. c. 29. 1, 2, 3.) both in Rome it self,
Jerusalem, Hostia, Neapolis, Hirapolis, Constantinople, and other Cities,
endowing them with ample possessions, and all other Churches with convenient
Glebes, Mansions and Revenues.

4ly. He encouraged, protected, advanced Godly Ministers, Learning and
Religion, by settling a competent maintenance on them, both for their livelihood
and encouragement, most preferring, esteeming, rewarding the best deserving of
them. And by this means so laid the soundation of the Christians security, and
the Churches maintenance, that the same has stood under the Protection of
Christian Kings and Princes ever since. And albeit many Caesar's his Successors,
have often attempted to shake it by their Authorities, and the sharp
Instruments of Heretics have dangerously undermined it, yet has it born out
the storms of all their boisterous assayes, and stood in the sirength that this
Emperor first laid it, (as Speed and others observe.) And for these blessed
fruits of this prime Nursing Father of Gods Church, he had then, and ever
after, these most Glorious Titles conferred on him by the Christians, and
Ecclesiastical Writers, Most Blessed Emperor, most Pious, Sacred, Divine; Most
happy Redeemer and Restorer of Romes City, and the whole World from Paganism,
Tyranny, Persecution, and founder of the Churches Peace. Which those shall
never enjoy, who labor to demolish and extirpate what h^ thus founded and
established.

5ly. God has blessed our Church and Isle (as Io. Capgrave in his Prologue,
Sir Hen. Spelman in his Epist. Dedicatory to his Councils, and the Author of
Fasciculus Temporum record) with more Kings and Queens, who for their
extraordinary Piety, incredible Zeal, liberal Alms, manifold works of Mercy,
incomparable Humility and contempt of the World, their munificent, magnificent
and admirable Bounty to the Ministers and Saints of God, and in building,
adorning, endowing Churches with Tithes and Glebes, and some of them for
suffering Martyrdom for defense of Religion by Pagan Invaders, were justly
Reputed and Kalendred in the Church of God, for Saints (though infected with
some superstititions of those blinder times, which the age wherein they lived
may excuse, and their other virtues overbalance and delete,) than any other
Isle, Region or Kingdom throughout the world, how Great or Populous soever.
There being no less than Twelve of our ancient Saxon Kings Crowned with
Martyrdom by Infidels; and Ten of them Canonized for Saints for their
transcendent Holiness; and no less than thirty Kings and Queens within 200
years space, who laying down the Height of their worldly Power, Crowns and
Glory, that they might gain beaven by force, betook themselves to a devout,
retired religious Life, (according to the devotion of those times) in some
private Monasteries (for the most part builded and endowed by themselves) or
else went as Pilgrims to Rome, then reputed famous for Her Piety. Besides
multitudes of the Royal Progeny who followed their examples both in their
Piety, Charity and Bounty to the Church. And amongst others of our ancient
Kings, King E^helwolfe gave not only the Tenth out of all his goods and
Chattels, but likewise of all the Lands and Houses of his whole Realm to the
Church. His Son, incomparable Asser and others in his life. Spelman in his
Epistle Ded. to his Councils.
King Alfred (founder, or at least Cambdens Britannia, Oxfordshire.
Restorer and Enlarger of our famous University of Oxford) though he was for
the most part taken up with Wars and Military affairs by reason of the Danes
invasions, fighting no less than 52. set battles with them (for the most part
with glorious success) yet out of an Ardent zeal to God, in emulation of
Zacheus, he gave no less than half of his annual Rents (and spoils of war
besides) in pious uses; to wit, for relieving the poor both at home and abroad,
for maintaining, rewarding Scholars, Ministers, building schools of Learning,
maintaining professors of diverse Arts and Sciences in them, especially in
Oxford, and devoted no less than the third part of his time (to wit, eight
hours every natural day) to his sacred studies and devotions; Besides the time
he spent in his Military employments, Civil Government, and enacting Laws of
most excellent use by advise of the wisest men, which have continued ever
since. So as Asser Menevensis, (in Egercituesse) in his life, Spelman and
others give this Brief Character and Encomium of his Excellencies, O Stuporem
omnium aetatum Aluredum! cujus dum Religionem intuemur, nunquam exiisse
videatur Monasterio: Dum Bella and Militiam, nullibi versatus fuisse unquam
nisi in Castris: dum Scripta ejus and Lucubrationes, vitam trans^isse in
Academia: and dum Regni Populique sui administrationem, nihilo unquam
studuisse, nisi in Foro and Senatu, Justitiae promovendae, Legibusque bonis
Sanciendis. Of which good Laws of his (extracted out of the Old and New
Testament for most part) Spelmanni Council. p 360*
this for the due payment of Tithes and Oblations to Ministers was one, cap.
38. DECIMAS Primigenia and adulta tua DEO DATO. O that all those Military
victorious Commanders who boast of like victories as he obtained, would imitate
him in these his Virtues, Bounty, Liberalitic, both to our Universities,
Scholars, Ministers, and promulging Edicts for the due payment of their
detained Tithes and Dues! and then they should be Chronicled for SAINTS INDEED,
as well as the forenamed Kings, of which there was not one in three in former
Ages (as Sir Henry Spelman observes) WHO DID NOT ADORN, AUGMENT and ENRICH THE
CHURCH IN SOME THINGS, even during their very wars, instead of making a mere
prey and spoil of her (as some late SAINTS have done) to maintain the wars
and enrich themselves. In which Sacrilegious Rapines, if any shall persevere to
the utter ruin of the remaining Glebes, Tithes, Maintenance of all our
Ministers and Churches too (the prime Honor of our Nation, Cambden^ Brit. and
Heylins Microcosm, p. 458.
ECCLESIA, Faemina, Lana) as some have designed, and would engage them to do,
to render our Religion, Nation, and those who shall give their Votes thereto
for ever execrable; Let them take heed, that instead of inducing the Ministers
and godly people really fearing God, throughout our three Nations, to forget
Monarchy, and be in love with their New Military Government, they do not
necessitate them, and most others too thereby, (by comparing their Irreligious
Church* Robberies, and Sacrilegious Rapines against the very Laws even of War
and Conquest it self in an Enemies Country, and detestable to very Heathens, as
de Ju^^ Bell* ^^, l. ^. c. 1^. ^ect. 5, 6, 7. ^^ Annotata.
Grotius proves at large) to love and honor Kings and Monarchs more than ever,
as the only Nursing-Fathers to Gods Ministers, Church, People, under the
Gospel; and to esteem others not coming in by the Door into the Sheep^^ld, but
climbing up by Storm some other way, to be but Thieves and Robbers; who come
not but to Steal, Kill, and to Destroy, whatever the Bounty, Piety, and
M^nisicence of these and other our Kings, have built and settled on the Clergy
for Gods Honor, and maintenance of his worship, and thereby engage them so to
act, speak, and peremptorily resolve, as all the Israelites and Godly Levites,
Priests, People, twice did in a like case, 2 Chronicles. 11* 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and
1 Samuel ^. 3, 5, 19, 20.

If any here object, these Kings and Queens were more Popish, Superstitious,
than really Religious; Admit they were ^n some things, (as too much doting upon
Monkery, not Monarchy, or worldly wealth or Power, which some condemn in
others, when most guilty of and applauding it in themselves) yet their very
Bounty and profuse munificent Building Monasteries and Nunneries, (whereof
Capgrave in Prologo ad vitas Sanctorum, Spelmanni Council. in Epist. D^d. and p.
^33.
King Edgar alone built no less than 47. endowed them with large Revenues, and
intended to make them up 50. had he lived,) besides what they bestowed in
building, adorning, endowing, maintaining all Cathedral and Parish Churches and
Chapels, for the support and honor of their superstitious Religion, should
eternally shame all those pretended Saints, who will be at no cost at all to
maintain and propagate what they now call the True Religion and the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, but instead thereof, will by mere Force and Rapine
against all Rules of Law, Justice, Piety, Equity, and war it self, plunder (if
they can) the remaining Materials and Fabrics of our Churches, which those
Kings or their Successors, and other ancient Benefactors built for Gods Honor,
and the small surviving Lands, Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Pensions, Dues, which
our Ministers yet enjoy, by their sole Bounty, Piety, Gift, Laws, without any
real charge, injury, oppression, or obligation to any Mortals now surviving
them. But to take off the stain of Popery wholly from our Kings, which was no
disparagement to their commendable Charity and Bounty; Consider in the sixth
place, that God has honored us with the first Christian King in the Universe
Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. in the life of C^a^mer, Fox, Speed, Hall, Grimston in ^
8. and Statut. Rastal Manas. se^as, Rome.
Henry the 8th. who durst not only question, but by Public Laws and Statutes
abolish and renounce the Popish usurped Antichristian Power, and with it all
Popish Shavelings, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Nuns, and many Popish Doctrines,
Ceremonies; and restored the People to the use of the Holy Scriptures in their
own Native Language: Whose example encouraged other Kings, Princes, Churches to
do the like. Who though he seized upon Abbey Lands, as given to mere
Superstitious Persons, Orders, Uses, repugnant to Gods word, and the Popes mere
Creatures, and Supporters; yet he continued the Lands, Glebes, Mr. Cambdens
Britania, Spelman and others.
Tithes, and Maintenance of the Bishops and other Ministers, and augmented i^
and our Universities Revenues also out of the Abbeys Spoils, which yet could
not exempt him from the public censure of some Protestants, for selling or
rteaining most of their Lands and Impropriations for his own use, which (say
they) he should have rather converted to other lawful sacred uses, according
to the will of the first Donors. And Mr. Pilgrimage, (...). 133.
Purchase writes, That the Monks unrighteous coveting, and the Popes
appropriating of the Tithes of some Thousands of our best Benefices unto Abbeys
and Monasteries, and robbing the Ministers of them to whom only they were given
by God himself, and the first Donors for their Maintenance, to the great
prejudice both of the Ministers and People, was one principal cause, that by a
Divine Judgment and Providence (beyond all men's expectation) the Pope and they
were both suppressed together on a sudden, even by him who not long before had
justified his usurped Supremacy against Luther, and for which he had received
this ominous Title from the Pope DEFENDER OF THE FAITH God grant our New
Defenders of the Faith, do not as ill ^^ quite those Persons, Powers, who first
commissioned them, with their Arms to defend our Faith, Church, Religion,
against Jesuits, Papists, and their Confederates in the Field, as King Henry
did the Pope after this new Mo^^o. 7ly. That ou^ God blessed, honored us with
the first Fox Acts and Monuments, and others in his Life, and the Statutes in
his Reign.
incomparable Protestant King in the world, (no Papist, but a REAL SAINT,
beyond any of his years in this or former Ages) even young KING EDWARD THE
SIXTH: the first King I read of, who by public Laws and Statutes suppressed,
banished all Popish Pictures, Ceremonies, Superstitious Monuments, Practices,
Abuses throughout his Dominions, and established the true worship, Service,
Sacraments, Ministers and Ministry, and Gospel of Christ throughout his
Dominions: for which all Ages shall call him blessed: no ways embesselling, or
diminishing the Churches Glebes, Tithes or Revenues, and enacting a New
excellent Law 2 E. 6. c. 13.
for Tithes recovery when detained. But God taking him suddenly from hence to a
better Kingdom, and his Successor Queen Mary, defacing, deforming his blessed
Reformation, and restoring both the Pope and Popery again, almost to its former
height, except in point of Monkery, which the defacing of the Monasteries
prevented, 8ly. God then blessed our Church and Kingdom with an unparalled
Protestant Princess, Queen Speed, How, Baker, Cambden in her life, and the
printed Statutes in her reign: Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. in the life of Matthew
Parker, Godwins Catalogue of Bishops in her time.
Elizabeth, a Nursing Mother to the Church, who demolished the whole Body of
Popery, with the Popes revived usurpations again by public Acts; established
the reformed Religion again in greater beauty and purity than at first;
banishing all Jesuits and Seminary Priests as Traitors, restored the exiled
Ministers of the Gospel suffering for Religion, rewarding them with the rechest
Bishoprics and Church-Preferments, and planting a faithful, painful,
preaching Ministry by degrees in most dark corners of her Dominions, endowed
them with a settled competent maintenance, which our subsequent Protestant Kings
continued to them and their Successors without diminution. All which
considered, we of this Isle may with much thankfulness to God, and honor to
our Princes, without flattery averr before all the world, That the forecited
Prophecies of Kings being Nursing. Fathers, and Queens Nursing-Mothers to the
Church (and specially Kings and Queens of this Isle) have been more really
accomplished in the Kings and Queens of this our Island, than in the Kings and
Queens of any other Isle, Kingdom, or Nation whatsoever throughout the world,
and God grant that those who shall succeed them in any other New modelled-form
of Government may not prove such Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers to our Churches
and Ministers, as to demolish the one, and strip the other quite naked of all
that former Livelihood, and remaining small Revenues, which they yet enjoy by
our Princes Grants, Gists, Charters, Laws and Favors only; and thereby give
all Godly Ministers, and people too in our Nation, just cause to cry out with
wringed hands, weeping eyes, and bleeding hearts, in the Prophets words, Hosea
10. 3, 4. For now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not the
Lord, What then should a King do to us? (or amongst us,) They have spoken
words, Swearing falsely in making a Covenant: Thus Judgment springs up as
Hemlock (one of the deadliest Poisons to destroy men) in the fields. Or else to
speak in Solomon's language, to the same effect, Prove. 28. 2. For the
transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof (as our Land had never so
many Transgressions and Princes too as now,) But by a Man of Understanding and
Knowledge (and where is such a one to be found, to Ezech. 22, 30.
stand up in a Gap?) the state thereof shall be prolonged: Now the Lord raise
up such a Man, or Men; lest God say to our Nation and all Grandees in Power, as
he did once to the profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day was come, Ezech.
21. 25, 26, 27. Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown; this shall not be
the same: Exalt him that is Low, and abase him that is High: I will overturn,
overturn, overturn, (Church, State, Laws,) and it shall be no more, until he
come whose Right it is, and I will give it him.

To prevent these treble, fatal over-turnings, with the wiping and turning of
our Jerusalem UPSIDE DOWN like a Dish (a certain Forerunner of a Churches,
Nations ruin, 2 Kings 21. 13. Psalm. 146. 9.)

I shall now in the last place present the whole Nation with a brief Catalogue
of those manifold Laws, Statutes, which our Kings have successively made in
their Great Councils and Parliaments, almost from the very first establishment
of Religion in our Island, for the due payment of Ministers Tithes by coercive.
Means, Forfeitures, Penalties, in case of wilful detaining, or neglect in
paying all or any part of them at the times appointed; which those who please,
may M. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 8.
peruse in C^ronicon Johannis Brompton, Mr. Lambards Archai^n, Sir Henry
Spelmans Councils, Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, John Bridges his Defense of
the Government of the Church of England, Book 16. p. 1350. Our Statutes at
large, and Mr. Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title Tithes; which Laws being
well known to most learned men, are therefore needless fully to transcribe.
The first of them is the forecited Law, Decree of the Council of Calcuth, under
King Oswald and O^^a, An. 787. of famous King Alfred, Anno 787. of King Alfred
and Gutburn the Dane, cap. 9. De Decimis Deo Debi^u, about the year 890. of
King Edward the elder and Gutburn: Anno 905. (or 906. as some) Cap. 6. (in some
c. 9.) DE DECIMIS ET CENSU ECCLISLE RETENTIS: of King Aethelstan; made in the
famous Council of Gratelean: An, 928. cap. 1. DE DECIMIS REDDENDIS, tam ex
Animalibus quam de fructibus terrae; which this King himself duly paid, and
then enjoined all his great Officers and People duly to render: of King Edmond:
An. 944. c. 2. concluding, Qui non solverit, ANATHEMA ESTO. Of famous King
Edgar, Anno 967. c. 3. DE DECIMIS, and Canon 54. of the Kings and Presbyters of
Northumberlana, made a little after that time: Lex 51. of King Aet^elred, An.
1012. c. 1, and 4. of King Knute the Dane, An. 1032. c. 8. (but 15. in some
Copies) De Decimis reddendis, etc. 11, and 17. and a Statute law against
obstinate Detainers of Tithes, there styled JURA ET DEBITIONES DIVINAE: of King
Edward the Confessor, about the year 1060. confirmed verbatim by William the
Conqueror, in the fourth year of his Reign, c. 8, 9. (forecited) To which may
be added the Great Charters of King Henry the first, and King John recorded in
Hist. Anglia Tigu^^, 158^. p. 52, 53, 246, 247, etc.
Matthew Paris, ratified by King Henry the 3d. in his Magna Charta, c. 11. made
in the 9th. year of his Reign, See ^ir Edward Cooks Preface to his 2. Instit.
on Magna Charta.
confirmed by above 37 Acts of Parliament since, in many successive
Parliaments. That the Church of England shall be free (now in greater Bondage
than ever) and shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable, (never
so much violated, diminished as now, notwithstanding all Oaths, Laws,
Covenants, Declarations, Protestations lately, and all See Matthew. (...), Hist.
Angl. p 421, 505, 506, 621, 624. 838, 839. The Statutes at large, An. 25 ^. 1.
after Confirmatio Cha^^^um.
ancient Solemn Curses and Excommunications annually made against the
Infringers thereof, 13 E. 1. 17 E. 3. and 14. 2 H. 4. c. 4. Enacting the
Cistertian Monks to pay Tithes to Ministers and Evangelists notwithstanding any
Bulls of Exemption from the Pope, which the King and Parliament declared to be
void, and that the Prom^vers or Executors of any such Bulls shall be attainted
in a Praemunire. It appears by the Parliament Roll of 2 H. 4. nu. 40. This Act
was made upon the Petition of all the Commons; which, because not extant in
print, pertinent to the present business of Tithes, and unknown to most, I
shall here transcribe at large.

May it please our most gracious Lord the King, to consider, That whereas time
out of mind the Religions men of the Order of the Cistercians, of your Realm of
England, have paid all manner of Tithes of their lands, tenements, possessions,
let to farm, or manured and occupied by other persons besides themselves, and
of manner of things tithable being and growing upon the same lands, tenements
and possessions, in the same manner as your other Lieges of the said Realm; Yet
so it is, that of late the said Religious have purchased a Bull from our Holy
Father the Pope, by the which our said Holy Father has granted to the said
Religious, That they shall pay no Tithes of their Lands. Tenements.
Possessions, Woods, Eattel, or any thing whatsoever, although they are or shall
be leased or farmed, notwithstanding any Title of Prescription or Right
acquired, or which hereafter may be had or acquired to the contrary. The which
Pursuit and Grant is apparently against the Laws and Customs of your Realm, by
reason that diverse Compositions real, and Indentures are made between many of
the said Religioius, and others your Lieges of the prise of such Tithes, and
also by reason that in diverse Parishes, the Tithes demanded by the said
Religious by color of the said Bull, exceed the fourth part of the value of
the Benefices, within whose limits and bounds they are; and so if the said Bull
should be executed ( much more the late Petions against all Tithes and coercive
Maintenance for Ministers c^ndescended to) as well your dreadful Majesty, ^s
your Lieges Patrons of the said Benefices, shall receive great losses in their
Advowsons of the said Benefices, and the Conusance which in this behalf
appertains, and in all times has belonged to your Regality, shall be discussed
in Court Christian, against the said Laws and Customs: besides (pray mark the
prevailing reason) the Troubles N. B.
and Commotions which may arise among your people by the motion and execution
of such Novelties within your Realm. That hereupon by assent of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament, you would be pleased to ordain, that if the
said religious, or any other, put or shall put the said Bull in execution,
shall be put out of your Protection, by due Process made in this behalf; and
their goods forfeited to You, lost, and that as a work of Charity. Which
Petition being read and considered, was answered in the words following. It is
accorded by the King and Lords in Parliament, That the Order of the Cistertians
shall be in the state they were before the time of the Bull purchased,
comprised in this Petition, and that as well those of the said Order, as all
others Religious and Secular of what estate or condition soever they be, who
shall put the said Bull in execution, or shall hereafter take advantage in any
manner of any such Bulls already purchased, or to be purchased, shall have
Process made against them and either of them by sommoning them within a month
by a Writ of Praemunire Facias. And if they make default or shall be attainted,
that they shallbe put out of the Kings Protection, and incur the peines and
forfeitures comprised in the Statute of Provisors, made in the 13. year of King
Richard. And moreover, for to eschew many probable mischiefs, likely to arise
in time to come, that our said Lord the King shall send to our Holy Father the
Pope, for to repeal and annal the said Bulls purchased, and to abstain to make
any such Grant hereafter. To which Answer the Commons well agreed, and that it
should be made into a Statute.

From which memorable Record, I shall desire John Can, and all his ignorant
deluded Disciples, who cry out against Tithes, and the payment of them as
Popish, to observe,

1. That all the Commons of England in this Parliament, even in times of
Popery, together with the King and Lords, resolve the quite contrary: That the
exemption of any order of men from payment of their due and accustomed Tithes
is Popish, and that the Pope was the first and only man, who presumed by his
Bulls to exempt men from payment of due and accustomed Tithes to their
Ministers.

2ly. That Popish Friars of the Cistercian Order (not Godly Saints abhorring
Monkerie and Popery) were the first men who sued for, procured and executed
such Exemptions from the Pope; (and that merely out of Covetousness, against
the express word and Law of God, as our John Salisbury de Nugis Curialium, l.
7. c. 21. and our Archdeacon of Bathe Epist. 82. ^^ Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. p. 966. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 12. pars. 2. p. 7 667, 67.
Petrus Blesensis observe, who tax them for it.) And therefore the petitioning,
writing, endeavoring to procure a like exemption from the payment of ancient
and accustomed Tithes to our Ministers, must be Popish and Monkish likewise,
infused into our New lighted Saints by some Popish Monks and Jesuits disguised
under the notion of New-lights, Seekers, Anabaptists, etc.

3ly. That they declare this Bull, though granted by their Holy-Father the Pope
(whose Authority and esteem was then very great) to be against the Laws and
Customs of the Realm; and thereupon repeal, null it for the present, and
provide against the grant of any such Bulls for Non-payment of Tithes for the
future, and make the Procurers and Executioners of them subject to a
Praemunire: Such a transcendent Crime and Grievance did they then adjudge it,
to seek or procure the least exemption from payment of Tithes from any earthly
Powers, yea from their very Holy Father the Pope himself, then in his highest
Power.

4ly. That they resolve, the exemption from Tithes though amounting but to a
fourth part in every Parish, would prove a great prejudice to the King and all
other Patrons in their Advowsons; to the Lessors and Farmers of Tithes, to the
incumbents and people; and that the moving of such Novelties might occasion
great Troubles and Commotions within the Realm. And will not then the
abolishing of all Tithes in every Parish, to the prejudice of the Patrons,
Ministers, (yea and people too, as I shall prove anon) the scandal of most
godly men, undoing of thousands of families, and confounding all Parishes, and
order in them, now much more do it, in these dangerous generally discontented
times, instead of settling Unity, Amity, Peace, and propagating the Gospel, as
some pretend? Let those whom it most concerns consider it at their leisure,
lest they repent too late.

The next printed Statute for the payment of Tithes, is 27 H. 8. c. 20. which
in the preface gives this true Character of, and fixes this brand of infamy
upon Tithe detainers, Forasmuch as many evil disposed Persons (such are they
justly branded for by this Act of Parliament) have attempted to withhold their
Tenths, as well predial, as personal, and have also contemned and disobeyed the
Decrees of Ecclesiastical Courts of this Realm, etc. Therefore it enacts, the
Civil Magistrate and Justices shall imprison such till they pay their Tithes.
After which follows a special Statute for payment of Tithes in London, 27 H.
8. c. 21. confirmed, enlarged by a Statute and Decree too, 37 H. 8 c. 7. thus
prefaced, as if purposely penned for these times; Whereas diverse and many
persons inhabiting in sundry Counties, and Places of this Realm, and other the
Kings Dominions, not regarding their duties to Almighty God, or to the King our
Sovereign Lord, but in some years past more contemptuously and commonly
Presuming to infringe the good and wholesome Laws of this Realm and Gracious
Commandments of our said Sovereign Lord, than in times past have been seen or
known: have not let to substract and withdraw the lawful and accustomed
Tithes of Corn, Hay, Pasturage and other sort of Tithes and Oblations commonly
due, etc. After which it provides a remedy by coercive means against the
detainers, refusers of Ministers Tithes.

The last and fullest Statute for payment of Tithes of all sorts, and setting
one Predial Tithes, truly, justly, and without fraud or guile, as has of right
been yielded and paid, made* not by Papists, but our most religious first
Protestant Parliament, and King upon the beginning of Reformation, and when
Popery was ejected, is, 2 E. 6. c. 13. entitled, AN ACT FOR THE TRUE PAYMENT
OF TITHES, under pain of forfeiting the treble value, etc. recoverable by an
ACTION OF DEBT, etc. at the Common law. What judgments have been given upon
these Statutes in our Kings Courts from time to time, you may read in Brook,
Fitzherbert, and the Year-books in Ashes Tables, Title DISMES; and in Sir
Edward Cooks 2 Institutes, p. 639, to 662. To these I might subjoyn the late
Ordinances of the last Parliament of 17 Caroli, concerning Tithes and
Augmentations of Ministers Livings, like to end not only in the Diminution, but
total Annihilation and Substraction both of their Augmentations, ancient
Glebes, Tithes, Dues. The Constitutions of our Clergy in their Convocations
under our Kings, recorded in Lindwood, John de Aton, Willielmus de Burgo, and
others, prescribing the due payment of Tithes under pain of Excommunication,
and other Ecclesiastical censures; as likewise the Resolution of our Judges
concerning the Right of Tithes, and Cooks a Report. The Bishop of Winchesters
case.
that no Layman by our Laws can prescribe to be exempled from payment of
Tithes, or lay any original claim unto them: with the Laws of foreign Kingdoms,
as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, for the due payment of Tithes; whereof you may
find store in Fredericus Lindebrogus: Codex Legum Antiquarum, p. 674, 675, 703,
etc. Capitularia Caroli Magni and Ludovici; in Brochellus, Decret. Ecclesiae
Gallicanae, l. 6. tit. 8. De Decimis: in Binius, Surius, and others in their
Collections of Councils: But for brevity sake I shall cite only the
Constitution of the Emperor Frederick for the payment of Tithes in the Kingdom
of Sicilia, which is short and very pertinent, Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex
Legum Antiqu p. 703.
Constitutionum Sicularum, l. 1. tit. 7. Lex 1. which runs thus,

Quamo caeteris terrae Principibus munifica dextra Salvatoris in Temporalibus
Nos praefecit, tanto saltem Iuris naturalis instinctu ad antedicta strictius
obligamur; cum etiam veritate dicente, cui amplius creditur, amplius exigatur.
Quod in nostrae mentis intrinseca meditatione solicita revolventes, and illud
etiam attendentes, Quod divino Decimarum, quarum Debitum ex utriusque
Testamenti Tabulis confirmatur, (Let all Tith-Oppugners observe it,) tan^i in
Ecclesia Dei petidatior redditur, quan^o Decimalis obligatio de bonis hominum,
A DAMNO REPUTATUR: Officialibus nostris universis and singulis praesentis
Legis* auctoritato Mandamus, ut DECIMAS INTEGRAS, prout Regis Gulielmi tempore,
praedecessoris nostri, vel ab Antecessoribus Officialibus and Bavilis exolutae
fuerint, locorum Praelatis exolvere, absque omni difficultate procurent. Nos
enim, qui favente Domino inter homines sumus in praeeminenti culmine
constituti, quantum sine injuria Regalium possumus tollerare ECCLESIARUM JURA,
and praesertim earum quae in Regno consistunt, Quas sub Protectione nostra
accepimus, et habemus, in nullo diminuere volumus, sed augere. Subjectis etiam
nostris indicimus ut Decimas quas de bladis et donis suis Antecessores eorum
praedicti Regis Gulielni tempore praestituerunt, vener abilibus locis, Quibus
Decimae istae debentur cum integritate persolvant.

To which I shall only add, That Rerum Vngaricatum Scriptores Bonfinius, and
Nicholas Isthuansis in vita sancti Stephani. Sancti Stephani Regis Decretum
secundum, c. 52. Status Regni Hungariae, p. 19^.
Stephen King of Hungaria, under whom that Kingdom was first totally converted
to the Christian Faith, as he built and endowed many magnificent Churches for
Gods worship at his own cost, so he enacted this good Law for the payment of
Tithes, That he who refused to pay his Tithes should forfeit the 9. parts to
the Minister, and he who should steal the Tithes should be reputed a Thief. Si
cui Deus December dederit in Anno, DECIMAM DEO DET. Et si quis Decimam suam
abscondit NOVEM SOLVAT. Et si quis DECIMATIONEM Episcopo separatam furatus
suerit, DIJUDICETUR UT FUR; ac hujusmodi compositio tota pertineat ad
Episcopum. And. c. 1. De Statu Ecclesiastico, and veneratione Domus Dei: He
enacted this good Law against the Invasion and Alienation of the Churches
possessions (about the year of Christ 1000.) Quisquis fastu superbiae elatus,
Domum Dei ducit contemptibilem, and possessiones Deo consecratas, atque ad
honorem Dei sub Regia immunitatis defensione constitutas, inhoneste tractarit,
vel infringere praesumpserit, Quasi invasor et violator Domus Dei
excommunicetur. Decet enim, ut indignationem ipsius Dom. Regis sentiat, cujus
benevolentiae contemptor, and constitutionis praevaricator existit: Nihilominus
tamen Rex suae concessionis immunitatem, ab hominibus ditioni suae subjectis
illaesam conservari praecipiat, assensum vero non praebeat improvide
affirmantibus, non debere esse res Dominic^s, id est, Domino Dominantium
traditas; Itaque sub defensione Regis sit, et sicuti suae propriae haereditati,
magisque advertat. Quia quanto Deus excellentior est hominibus, tanto
praestantior est Divina causa mortalium possessione. Quocirca decipitur,
quisquis plus in propriis quam in Dominicis rebus gloriatur: Quarum Defensor et
Custos divinitatis Constitutiones diligenti cura non solum eas servare, sed
etiam multiplicare debet. Si quis igitur insanus importunitate illa quae
diximus praestantior a quam sua defendere oportet and augmentare. Si quis
igitur insanus importunitate improbitateque sua, Regem a recto proposito
pervertere tentaverit, nullisque remediis mitigari posse visus fuerit, licet
obsequiis aliquibus and transitoriis sit necessarius, abscindendus ab eo
projiciendusque est, juxta illud Evangelium, Si pes, manus aut occulus tuus
scandilizat^te, erue eum and projice abs^te.

Since then Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes in Foreign parts, and our own
Kings and Parliaments in and by all the forecited Laws and Statutes yet in
force, have established Tithes and other Duties on our Clergy and Ministers of
the Gospel, and thus publicly branded the negligent or wilful detainers,
sustractors of this just Debt and Duty (prescribed by our Laws, with Warrant
from the Old and New Testament) for evil disposed persons, not regarding their
duty to Almighty God (which therefore none who claim their Power from, or for
God, should now regard or countenance in the least degree) enforcing them by
actions at Law, Imprisonment, payment of treble Damages, excommunications, and
the like coercive ways to render to them Tithes at last to their loss; Why
Christian Magistrates should not still enforce the obstinate detainers of
Ministers Tithes, and defrauders of them in their just Dues, and merited
rewards for their Ministry, as has been formerly practiced in all ages and
places too; Let all Anti-tithers (who would be Lawless, as well as Titheless
and Godless) resolve me when they can: and if they deem themselves above all
humane Laws and Penalties (so long as they wear their swords by their sides)
for defrauding our Ministers of their lawful Tithes and Dues, let them then
chew the cudd upon this Evangelical Precept, backed with the strongest coercive
power both in Heaven and Earth, 1 These. 4. 6. Let no man go beyond, or defraud
his brother (much less then his Minister) in any thing (therefore not in Tithes
due by Divine and humane Right) mark the reason: Because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such things, as we have forewarned and testified. And what
vengeance God will take of such who defraud their Brethen and Ministers of
their debts, and necessitate them to sue them at the Law, to recover their
Rights: he* resolves, in the 1 Cor. 6, 7, to 11. Now therefore there is utterly
a fault among you, because you go to Law (to wit before Heathen Judges, or
without just cause) one with another, (the greatest if not only fault being in
the Defrauder and Detainer) why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not
rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay why do you wrong and defraud,
and that your Brethren? and which is more, ^* Cor. 6. 8.
rob your Ministers; yea, but what harm or punishment will follow on it? Mark
it, O all ye Saint-seeming Hypocrites, who are guilty of it! Know ye not, That
the unrighteous (who thus wrong and defraud their Brethren and Ministers, which
is worse) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither
Thieves, nor covetous (and such are all those who rob and defraud their
Ministers of their Tithes and Duties) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: no
more than Fornicators, Idolaters, etc. with whom they are here coupled. Let all
those then who are guilty of this damning sin, which disinherits them of Gods
Kingdom, now seriously repent and reform it, with all such, who have abetted or
confederated with them herein, that so I may add with the Apostle in the next
words, And such were some (nay all) of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

And now to cloze up this Chapter, I shall desire all Anti-Tithers who have
already in their heady Resolutions, resolved to abolish, not only all our
Ministers Tithes, and ancient Dues established by the Lord himself in the Old
and New Testament, with all the forecited Laws, Statutes, Ordinances for the
true and due payment of them, but all other coercive maintenance for their
future subsistence if not their very Rectories, Glebes, and Fabrics of our
Churches (devoted for a prey by diverse) sadly and seriously to consider these
ensuing particulars.

1. That herein, they shall show themselves, not only worse by thousands of
Degrees than our forementioned Kings and Queens, who built and endowed our
Churches with Glebes, Tithes, and a liberal Maintenance; and worse than the
most of all their Ancestors; Protestants or Papists, who have hitherto
continued, confirmed, established them by successive Laws; but even worse than
the worst of Turks and Insidels; who always heretofore, and at this very day,
have and do allow their Mohammedan and Pagan Idolatrous Priests in all places, a
liberal, competent settled Salarie, and erect magnificent Temples to Mahomet and
their Idols, exceeding most of our fairest Christian Churches both for beauty
and number, as you may read at large in ^ee page 56; 58, 59, 65, 68, 75, 79,
83, 84, 85, 89, 90, 241, 243, 268, 297, 298, 584.
Pulchas Pilgrimage, Alexander ab Alexandro, Hospinian De Origin Templorum,
and others. And to give you one instance for all, There are no less than 700
Moschees or Saracinical Temples in Fesse, ( a Mohammedan City in Barbary) the
chief whereof is Carven, being a full mile and an half in compass. It has 31
Gates, great and high: the Roof is 150 yards long, and 80 broad: the Steeple
very high: the Ornaments rich and stately: Round about it are diverse Porches,
containing 40 yards in length, and 30. in breadth: About the Walls are Pulpits
of diverse sorts, wherein the Masters and Priests of their Law, read to the
People such things as they think pertain to their Salvation: The Revenue of
this Temple alone, Anno 1526. was no less than 200. Ducats a day, of old
rents. The chief Church in Morocco is bigger, though not altogether so fair as
that of Fesse, and has a Tower so high, that the Hills of Azafi being 120.
miles distance may be seen from thence, (as Joan. Leo. Geographical Description
of Africa, l. 3.
Leo Pilgrimage, l. 6. c. 10. p. 614.
Purchase, and Microcosm, p. 710. 711. 712.
Heylin write) These Temples and others are adorned with marble Pillars, and
curious Mosaicks, carved works of all sorts: Their Priests and Readers of the
Law have a liberal Stipen^, with Books and lands likewise allowed them, and are
had in very high estimation and Reverence, both with their Kings, Magistrates,
People; the Califfs there receiving likewise the tenth Measure of Corn yearly
from the People: Besides which Tenths they have many Colleges and Schools of
Learning very Majestically built and richly endowed. Those therefore who
pretend themselves Saints of the highest New form, and yet would deface the
beautiful Churches our pious Ancestors erected for Gods worship, and strip our
Ministers naked of all Glebes, Tithes, settled Maintenance, so as they shall not
be able to live comfortably, and provide for their Families, have in truth
denied the Faith, and are worse than these Turks and Infidels, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

2ly. That hereby they shall make both our Religion and Nation to stink in the
Nostrils of all foreign Protestant Churches, Papists, Turks, Infidels; who by
the very light of Nature have condemned Sacrilege and Church Robbers: Acts 19.
37. Give extraordinary advantage to Jesuits, Papists and other Atheistical
Seducers, to reduce the People either to Popery or mere Atheism: Give all the
Enemies of God and our Religion occasion both to rejoice and blaspheme; and
extraordinarily scandalize and grieve the hearts of all true Godly Ministers,
and Protestants really affected to our Religion, throughout our three Nations.

3ly. That they will herein exceed all our late suppressed Prelates and their
High Commission Courts in Tyranny, Cruelty, Injustice, by undoing all or most
of our Godly Ministers and their Families at one fatal blow; instead of
relieving them in their present Necessities under which many of them sadly
groan, by depriving them of their Livelihood, without any legal Conviction of
the least crime, but only that they are Ministers of the Gospel, and receive
Tithes; and thereby draw upon their Heads, not only the cries and clamours of
these oppressed ones here, with all the formentioned Curses and judgments
denounced against Tith. Detainers, but also that sad irrevocable sentence of
Condemnation before Christ's Tribunal at the last day, Matthew. 25. 41. Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels;
for I was hungry and ye gave me no Meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no Drink,
I was (not) a Stranger, (but your Minister) and ye took me not in, (but cast me
and mine out of those Rectories and Benefices your Ancestors gave and settled on
me,) naked, and ye clothed me not, nay stripped me naked of all my clothing
and Livelihood, and would neither relieve, nor maintain me your selves, nor
permit others to do it, in an ancient legal way; And then what can you answer,
or to whom can you resort for protection, from this inevitable just Charge and
Doom of Damnation for all eternity?

4ly. Consider seriously the exemplarie punishment executed upon Ananias and
Saphyra, Acts 5. 1, etc. with that fearful judgment of retaliation denounced
against all plundering Enemies of the Church of Christ, Isay 33. 1. Woe unto
thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and
they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou ceasest to spoil, thou shall
be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall
deal treacherously with thee: Seconded by Obadiah 15. As thou have done it
shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head. And if
any fondly conceit, (as many do) that the Swords and Power of an Army shall
bear them out against the Lord of Hosts himself: let them consider that of
Psalm. 33. 16. There is no King saved by the multitude of an Host, (themselves
have seen it by late experience) neither is any mighty man delivered by great
strength. Jeroboam the Idolatrous Usurper had an Army of no less than eight
hundred thousand chosen men, to make good his usurped Title against Abijah
David's right Heir, yet when he had cast out the Priests of the Lord from their
Suburbs and Possessions, and made him Priests for his Calves of the lowest of
the people; he was vanquished by a far smaller Army, and no less than five
hundred thousand of his forces slain in one days battle, and the Lord soon
after smote him that be dyed, 2 Chronicles. 13 Ore^, Zeba, and Salmunna the Princes
and Generals of the Midianites, when they entered into the Land of Israel to
destroy it, had an Army like unto Grasshoppers for multitude, and they and their
Camels were without number, Judges 6. 5, 6. Yet when they said, Let us take to
our selves the Houses of God in possession, they were totally routed by Gideon*
and his 300. men having only Trumpets and Lamps: and perished at Endor, and
became as dung for the earth, Judge. 7. and 8. Psalm. 83. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Senacherib invaded Judah with a victorious and numerous Army, above treble the
Number to any Army in our days; Yet when he trusted to the strength of his
Army, and bid defiance to the God of Heaven (as those do now who oppugn and
spoil his Ministers of their inheritance) God sent his avenging Angel, which
cut off all the mighty men of valor, and the Leaders, and the Captains and one
hundred fourscore and five thousand of his soldiers in one night, and when
they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpse: so he
returned with shame of face into his own land, and when he was come into the
house of his God, his own Sons that came out of his own bowels, slew him
there with the sword. 2 Kings 19. 35, 36, 37. 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. The two proud
surly Captains with the fifty armed troopers at their heels, who came in a
violent manner but to fetch down Elijah the man of God from an hill to King
Ahaziah, were destroyed with fire from Heaven, and the third Captain only
saved, who fell on his knees before him, and besought him for his own and his
fifties lives, and used him like a man of God, without any rudeness or plunder,
2 Kings 1. 9, 10, etc. To lesson all soldiers and Captains now, to reverence
Gods Ministers, and Ps. 105. 14, 15.
do his Prophets no harm in their Persons, Callings or Estates: Else he who
rebuked Kings, and miraculously slew those Captains and their Troopers for
their sakes, will avenge their quarrel now as well as in former ages. And if
former victories and successes have and do puff them so far up with pride or
security, as to think they may now reduce our Ministers like Conquered vassals
to such poverty, as to enforce and make them eat the very crumbs under their
Tables, instead of feeding at their own; let them remember that one memorable
President (wherewith I have quelled many usurping soldiers) of the greatest
Conqueror and Abuser of Kings, I ever yet read off in the world, and Gods
retaliation upon him for his Tyranny and inhumanity after the Conquest of no
less then 70. Kings (and who now living has conquered the tenth part of that
number?) thus recorded to all Posterity, Judge. 1. 5, 6, 7. And Iudab fought
against Adonibezeck, in Bezeck, and they slew the Canaanites and Perazites. And
Adonibezeck fled, and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his
Thumbs and great Toes. And Adonibezeck said, threescore and ten Kings, having
their thumbs and great toes cut off, have gathered their meat under my Table:
As I have done, so God has requited me; and they brought him to Jerusalem and
there he died. It is very dangerous for any Conquerers to make ill Presidents
of Tyranny or Rapine, because they have power in their hands to do it. Mark
what a Woe and judgment God denounces against such, Mich. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4 Woe to
them that devise iniquity upon their beds, when the morning is come they
practice it, Because it is in the power of their hand. And they covet fields,
and they take them by violence, and houses, and take them away: So they oppress
a man and his house, even a man and his heritage (Nay Ministers now and their
Heritage, as well as other men's) But mark what follows immediately. Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from
whence they shall not remove their necks, neither shall they be hauty, for this
time is evil. In that day shall one take up a Parable against you, and lament
with a doleful lamentation, and say, we be utterly spoiled; He has changed
the portion of my people as some now would change our Ministers) How has he
removed it from me? turning away He has divided our fields, therefore he shall
have none that shall cast by lot in the Congregation of the Lord. It is most
perilous for any by mere Arbitrary Votes, will and violence to seiz on, change,
divide any other men's lands, houses, inheritances, especially Gods Ministers;
it will prove as bad as a cup of poison to them, they shall vomit them up again
with a vengeance; And though their excellency mount up to the Heavens and their
Head unto the Clouds; yet their triumphing shall be but short, and their joy
but for a moment: They shall perish for ever as their own dung: They which have
seen them shall say, Where are they? They shall fly away as a dream and shall
not be found: The eyes which saw them shall see them no more, neither shall
their place any more behold them, (mark the reason) because they have oppressed
and violently taken away an House which they builded not. Job 20. 4. ^o 20. How
much more the Houses, Glebes, Tithes of God and his Ministers? Let this sad
consideration then, persuade all turbulent, greedy, sacrilegious spirits to
follow Dr. Gamaliels advice, (which many of them have much pressed for a
public Toleration of all Religions, though now they would As appears by their
late Petitions, and John Cannes Voice.
extirpate all Ministers and their Tithes root and branch) recorded Acts 5. 48,
49. Refrain from these Men (and their Tithes too) and let them alone; for if
they (and their tithes) be of God (as I have proved them) ye cannot overthrow
them, lest happily ye be found to be fighters against God.

5ly. Let every of the chiefest now in Power, remember those many reiterated
solemn Declarations, Protestations, Votes and Ordinances they have formerly
made for the due payment and preservation of our Ministers Tithes and
Augmentation of their incompetent Livings out of the Bishops and Delinquents
Impropriations, and Deans and Chapters Lands; (for the most part other ways
disposed notwithstanding) And what an high violation of public Faith, Trust,
Promises, Solemn Engagements, and an eternal Infamy and Dishonor it will
procure to their Persons, Memories (in after Annals) and Posterities, if all
these should now conclude in a general armed Depredation, Abolition,
Dissolution or Substraction of all their old Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Dues,
instead of new settled Augmentations out of other dissipated Church Revenues
formerly Voted for them.

6ly. Let all Changers and Innovators of our Fundamental Laws and Ministers
Maintenance, consider what prohibitions, Comminations and Judgments God has
proclaimed against, and inflicted upon such innovators and changers in his
Word. Eccles. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. There is an evil which I have seen under the
Sun, As an error which proceeds from the Ruler: folly is set in great
Dignity, and the Rich in low Place; I have seen Servants upon Horses, and
Princes walking as Servants on the earth (but mark the issue) He that diggeth a
pit shall fall into it: and who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him:
who so removes st^nes shall be hurt thereby, and he that cleaves Wood shall
be endangered thereby. The meaning of which Parabolical expressions is thus
more clearly explained, Prove. 24 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King, and meddle not with those who are given to change, for their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? That is, of the
Changers and their Adherents joining with them, by the revenging Justice both
of God and the King. My deceased Brother Burtons Sermons on this Text, Nov. 5.
1636. are worth all our Innovators reading. For which Sermons he and I jointly
suffered in the Star Chamber through our Innovating all-ruling Prelates malice,
for discovering, oppugning those several Changes and Innovations they had made
in the Ceremonies, Doctrine of our Church, and High Commission arbitrary
proceedings, contrary to our Laws. Little did those Prelates think in that time
of their domineering Power and Greatness, that these changes of theirs, and
unrighteous censures upon us for discovering and opposing them, would have so
soon proved the very causes of their unexpected sudden calamity and ruin,
according to this Text and censured Sermons; and of their High Commission and
Starchamber Court too, wherein they prosecuted us; yet they really found they
did so. What proved the calamity, and ruin of Strafford, Canterbury, and the
old Council Table, but their unrighteous exorbitan^ Innovations and New
Projects against our Laws, and old forms of Parliamentary Proceedings? What
brought sudden unexpected calamity and ruin on the late King and Parliament
too, (even by those who were raised, commissioned, engaged by Oaths,
Protestations, and Solemn Covenants to defend and preserve them) but Gods
Justice for some exorbitant Changes, and Fundamental, violent, illegal
Innovations, whereof both were guilty? especially in the Militia; whereof the
Houses endeavoring totally to divest the King, without admitting him any share
therein (which Exact Collection, p. 59. etc.
bred the first fresh quarrel between them) as their only security and the
Kings too: And now God has made that very Militia the ruin of them both, and
to assume both the Regal and Parliamental, Military and Civil Supreme Authority
and Government of the Nation and united Kingdoms too, wholly to themselves, and
to dash in pieces that n^w minted Mock Parliament Power and Government
themselves at first created; for those many notorious injurious Changes,
Oppressions, Innovations of all sorts whereof they were deeply guilty: And what
other fatal Changes God may yet suddenly effect to the Calamity and Ruin of
those who have been Chief Instruments in all these Changes, if they ring THE
CHANGES still, till they (a) have turned ^ I say 29. 16.
all things upside down, as the Potter does his clay, and our very Ministers
settled maintenance, with all Fundamental laws for the establishment of their
and all others just Rights and Liberties, I leave to their own saddest
Meditations, these Gospel Texts of Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. and c. 12. 20, 21. (which I
hope neither will nor can offend any Professors of the Gospel) Therefore thou
art inexcusable O man whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things.
But we know that the judgment of God is according to truth against them who
commit such things: And think thou this O man, that judge them who do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Be not
High-minded but fear: For if God spared not the Natural Branches take heed lest
he also spare not thee, being a Wild Olive Tree. And when they have meditated
on these Texts, I shall further importune all such of them who like the little
Horn in Daniel 7. 24, 25, 26. that should be diverse from the FIRST, and subdue
THREE KINGS; and being elevated with that success, should speak great words
against the most High, and wear out his Saints, and think to change Times and
Laws, advisedly to consider what there next follows That though the Laws and
Times should be given into his hand, yet it will be until a time and times and
the dividing of times. And the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away
his Dominion to consume and destroy it unto the end. And then our Ministers
need not fear their Ministry, Tithes, Glebes, nor the People their Just Rights
and Liberties, which otherwise are like to be lost, subverted, destroyed in the
long, bloody, costly Contests and Wars for their Defense and Preservation.

Now lest any should pretend matter of Conscience or Reason against the
Christian Magistrates enforcing of Tithes true payment, by coercive Means and
Laws, in these Tith-detaining sacrilegious times; or for the speedy Repeal of
all our forespecified Laws and Ordinances yet in force to compel all Detainers
of them to pay them duly under the several penalties therein prescribed; I shall
endeavor to give a full satisfactory Answer to all Arguments and Cavils of
moment usually made against them, which are reducible to these four Heads.

Object. First, That there is no express Precept in the Gospel, nor any such
penal Laws, enforcing the payment of Tithes to be found in the Primitive and
purest times for 500. years after Christ; Therefore they are unlawful,
oppressive, un-evangelical, tyrannical, antichristian; as Can terms them, in
his thundering empty voice.

Answ. To this I answer, first, That there is no express Precept or President
in the New Testament, for any strange High Courts of Justice, Martial, or other
Courts of that Nature, for any Articles of War or penal Laws to put Soldiers
or any others to death, or inflict punishments for any New High-Treasons, or
Offenses whatsoever. No Precept nor President that John Can (a late
Excise-man as diverse report) can produce for the imposing or levying of any
Excise, Impositions, Taxes, Customs, Crown-Rents, Tonnage, Poundage,
Contributions, by any Distresses, Forseitnres, Imprisonments, sale of Goods,
billetting of Soldiers on the People, and armed violence now used by
Soldiers, Excisemen, Collectors and other Publicans sitting at the Receipt of
Custom, (whereof I hear John Can is one, perhaps to Excise the Alehouses and
Cannes there used for names-sake) all puny to and less warrantable by Gods Law
and Gospel, than our Ministers Tithes. The Objectors therefore must find
express Gospel-Texts for all and every of these public Duties, and the present
ways of levying and enforcing them, or else disclaim them, or their Objection
against Tithes.

2ly. I have produced express Gospel-Texts warranting in the general coercive
Laws, Suits, Actions to recover Ministers Tithes, as well as any other just,
legal, public or private Dues, Debts, Rents, Lands, Possessions whatsoever.
Therefore the Objectors must either disclaim their Objection, or renounce all
penal Laws, Suits, and coercive Means whatsoever to levy or recover any other
civil Rights, Debts or Duties whatsoever, and introduce a lawless Anarchy and
Confusion amongst us, for every one to cheat, defraud, rob, oppress, disseise,
spoil, defame, wound, murder one another, without any penalty or redress,
except only by Club-law, instead of a peaceable, just and righteous Government.

3ly. The reason why there were no coercive Laws for the payment of Tithes or
Ministers dues in the Primitive Church for above 500 years was this, because
Christians then were so zealous, ready, forwards to render them with an
overplus, and to sell their very Houses, Lands, Possessions, Estates, and lay
them down at the Apostles and Ministers feet to maintain them, and relieve
their poor Christian Brethren, witness Act* 2. 44, 45. c 4. 34, 35, 37. c. 5.
1, 2. 2 Cor. 11. 9. Phil. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18. Romans 15* 26 and that memorable
place, 2 Cor. 8. ^, to 5. where Paul records of the first Churches and Converts
in Macedonia, how that in a great Trial of Affliction (in times of heavy
persecution their deep Poverty abounded to the riches of their Liberality, for
to their power (I hear them record) yea and beyond their power they were
willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would receive the
Gift, and take upon us the Fellowship of the Ministering to the Saints, etc. The
Matthew. 22. 23, 24. Luke 11. 42. c. 18. 12.
New Testament records, the exceeding readiness of the Pharisees to pay Tithes
of all they did possess, and of the smallest Seeds and Garden-Herbs of all
kinds, to their Priests or Levites; which Christ himself approved, commended,
with a these things ought ye not to have left undone; And (...). Mr. Seldens
Review, p. 453.
Philo a learned Jew, who lived under Claudius, in the Apostles days, records
as an Eyewitness on his own knowledge, That the Jews were so forward in paying
their First Fruits and other Dues to their Priests, That they prevented the
Officers demanding them, paid them before they were due by Law, as if they had
rather received a benefit, than rendered any, both Sexes of their own
readiness, bringing them in with such courtesi^ and thanks giving, as is beyond
all expression (they are his very words:) And were they then less forwards
think you, to render due Maintenance, (if not Tithes and First Fruits,) to the
Apostles when they turned Christians? Surely no, for the forecited Texts in the
Acts declare, they were far more bountiful than before, both to the Apostles
and poor Saints, selling all they had to support them. The like zeal (even in
the heat of persecution, under bloody Pagan Persecutors) continued in all the
Primitive Christians next after the Apostles, who though persecuted, driven
into Corners, imprisoned, banished, and spoiled of their Goods, Lands, by
plundering Officers, Sequestrators, Soldiers, as Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 26. l.
6. c. 41, 42. l. 7. c. 12. Fox Acts and Monuments. vol. 1.
Eusebius, and others record, yet every one of them out of his deep Poverty
contributed every Month, or when he would or could some small stipend for the
maintenance of the Ministers and Poor (when they had no Lands to pay Tithes out
of) of his own accord without any coercion: witness Apologet. c. 39.
Tertullian (who flourished but 200. years after Christ) Modicum u^^squisque
stipem Menstrua die, vel cum velit, et si modo volit, and si modo possit
apponit, nam nemo compellitur, (there was no need when they were so free of
their own accord) sed sponte con^ert. Haec quasi deposita pietatis sunt. And
though their Monthly stipends in regard of their great Poverty were thus termed
small comparatively to what they were before the Persecution, yet indeed they
were very large, considered in themselves, as by the same Authors following
words in this Apology, c. 42. appears, Plus nostra misericordia insumit
vicatim, quam vestra Religio templatim: they bestowing more in a Liberal free
way of Christian Charity in every Village toward their Ministers and Poor,
than the wealthy Pagan Romans did in their Temples and Sacrifices for the
Maintenance of their Paganism. In the 9th. general Persecution of the
Christians about 273 years after Christ, or before, The Ambrose Office. l. 1.
c. 41. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 92, 9^*
Governor of Rome told Saint Lawrence the Martyr (Archdeacon to Pope Xistus
the 2d. and Treasurer of the Christians Oblations for the Ministers Maintenance
and Poors relief) that the common Report then was, how the Christians did
frequently cell their Lands, and dis^nherit their Children (like those in the
Acts) to enrich the Ministers, and relieve the Poor, bringing thousands of
Sestertii at a time to St. Lawrence, out of the sale of their Lands, so as
their Treasury was so great that he thought to seize on it for a prey: Which
their bountiful Liberality Pr. Step^* Him. 2.
Prudentius thus poetically expresses,

Offerre fundis venditis
Sistertiorum Millia,
Addicta Avorum praedia
Faedis sub auctionibus*
Successor exhaeres gemit
Sanctis egens Parentibus,
Et summa pietasli creditur
Nudare dulces beros.
What need then any Law to compel the Christians to pay Tithes or Ministers
dues, when in the heat of Persecution, they were so bountiful to them and the
Poor as thus voluntarily to contribute their whole Estates for their support?
Whose President if the Cavillers against our present penal Laws, Ordinances for
Tithes would imitate, no Minister nor other voluntary Tith-payers would oppose
their repeal. And though in these Primitive times of Persecution, the
Christians being spoiled of their Lands and Possessions, could not pay Tithes
in kind in most places, but were necessitated to such voluntary Contributions
as these, yet without all peradventure they held the payment of Tithes to
Ministers in kind, a Divine Moral Duty, and in some places, and at some times
(when and where they could) did voluntarily pay Tithes as a Duty for their
Maintenance without any coercive Laws or Canons, upon the bare demand or
exhortation of their Ministers, by virtue of Gods own Divine Laws, as is
undeniable by Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 34. who records, That the Christians in his
time (being but 180. years after Christ) did not give less to their Ministers
than the Jews did to their Priests by the Law of Moses, who received the
consecrated TITHES of their people, but more, Designing omnia quae sunt
ipsorum, all they had to the Lords use, Hilariter ac liberaliter ea quae non
sunt min^ra: Giving cheerfully and freely those things which were not less
than Tithes, as having greater hope than they. And further confirmed by Origin,
Homil. 11 in Numeros: Saint Cyprian, lib. 1. Epist. 9. De unitate Ecclesiae,
the words of Saint Augustine, Hom. 48. Majores nostri ideo copiis abundabant,
quia Deo Decimas dabant; And the second Council of Mascin, An. 586. Can. 5.
Leges Divinae Consulentes Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro
Haereditaria portione omni populo prae^eperunt, Decimas fructuum suorum locis
sacris praestare, ut nullo labor impediti per res illegitimas possint vacare
Ministeriis, Quas leges Christianorum Congeries legis temporibus custodivit
iutemerata. Which prove a long continued Custom and Practice of paying Tithes
to Ministers as a Divine Right and Duty, used amongst Christians long before
St. Augustins days and this ancient Council. And no sooner were the times of
Persecution part, but the Divine Right of Tithes was asserted, pressed, and the
due payment of them inculcated by St. Hilary, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Eusebius, Cassian, Cyril of Jerusalem, Isiodore
Pelusiota, and Caesarius Arelatensis, all flourishing within 500. years after
Christ, as Dr. Tillesly proves at large; And the people during that space
paying their Tithes freely, without any compulsion in all places, there needed
neither Laws nor Canons to enforce their payment: whence Operum, p. 278.
Agobardus writes thus (about the year of our Lord 820. when Laws and Canons
began to be made for their payment) of the precedent times: Nulla compulit
necessitas fervente ubique religiosadevotione, and amore illustrandi Ecclesiae
ultro aestuante. That there was no need of Canons or Laws to compel the payment
of Tithes, whiles servent religious Devotion, and love of illustrating Churches
every where abounded. But in succeeding degenerating times, when (according to
Christ's prediction) the Matthew. 24. 12.
love and zeal of many Christians to God, Religion, and Ministers began to grow
lukewarm, and colder than before, so as they began to detain their Tithes and
Ministers dues, then presently Christian Kings and Bishops in Ecclesiastical
and Temporal Synods and Councils, began generally in all places, to make Laws
and Canons for the due payment of them; declaring in them only the Divine
Right, Laws and Precepts of God to the People both in the Old and New
Testament, as a sufficient obligation (seconded by their bare Canons and
Edicts) without any coercion or penalty to oblige them to their due payment.
The first unquestionable Canon for the payment of Tithes I find extant, is that
of the second Council of Mascin forecited, An. 586. cap. 5. The first Law
extent made by any General Council or Parliament for the payment of Tithes, is
that of the Council of Calcuth in England, under Offa and Alfred. An. 786:
declaring their Divine Right, and enjoining their payment without any Penalty;
After which Charles the Emperor, about the year of our Lord 813. by Canons
made in sundry Councils, and in his Capitulars or Laws, enjoined the payment of
Tithes, under pain of being enforced to render them by distress, upon
complaint, and some small penalties. Since which time many Laws and Canons were
made in our own and foreign Realms till our present times, for the due payment
of Tithes under sundry penalties, which because collected by Sir Henry Spelman
in his Councils, Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes, Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. l. 6. Tit. 8. De Decimis, Fridericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiquarum,
Surius, Binius, Crab, Lindwood in their Collections of Councils, and sundry
others; I have therefore only given the Reader a brief Catalogue of the
principal Civil laws both at home and abroad, for the due payment of them;
reciting more at large but what others for the most part have omitted, and are
not vulgarly known, giving only brief hints upon some of the rest in my third
Chapter. Whither I refer the Reader for further satisfaction in this Objection;
and shall conclude of penal Laws as Seneca does of Fates: Fata volentes ducunt,
Nolentes trabunt: those who will not willingly pay their Tiths must and ought
to be compelled thereunto by penal Statutes:

The second Objection is, That the payment of Tithes is against Object. 2.
many men's Judgments and Consciences: Therefore it is both Unchristian,
Tyrannical, and Unjust, to enforce them thereunto.

I answer, 1. That the payment of Tithes being not only Answ.
warranted but commanded in and by the Old and New Testament, and the constant
practice of Christians in all Ages, Churches, there neither is, nor can be the
le^^t pretense of Conscience, for the non-payment of them. Therefore this
pretext of Conscience is in truth naught else, but most desperate
Vnconsci^nableness, Malice, Obstinacy, Peevishness, Covetousness, Impiety, or
secret Atheism, worthy to be reformed by the severest Laws and penalties.

2ly. All that Conscience can pretend against their payment as Tithes, is only
this Anabaptistical Devise, and loud Lie of Can and others; That the payment
of a precise Tenth part of men's increase to their Ministers is Jewish or
Antichristian, and so unlawful: both which I have unanswerably refelled.
Therefore this can be no ground or Conscience for any to detain them. But if
any scrupulous Consciences be not satisfied in this point, let them either pay
their Ministers the Moitie or 9. parts, or the 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9* part of their
annual increase, neither of which is Jewish or Antichristian; or else let them
sell all their old or new purchased Lands, Houses, Possessions, Goods they
have, and bestow them on the Ministers and Poor, as the forecited Primitive
Christians did, whom they pretend to imitate, and then they may satisfy both
their Consciences and Ministers too, without the least difference, coercion,
suit or penalty of our Laws.

3ly. Many of these very Objectors, pretending Conscience, as Soldiers or
Sequestrators, have made no Conscience to enforce thousands of Parishioners of
late years throughout the Nation to pay their Ministers Tithes to themselves
for pretended Arrears or sequestered Goods, and exacted Monthly contributions
out of Ministers Tithes to pay the Army, without any scruple of Conscience,
levying them by distress and armed violence, when detained. If then they can
enforce others thus to pay Tithes to themselves, and those to whom they were
never due by any known Law of God or Man: With what Conscience can they detain
them from our Ministers, to whom they are due by all divine and human laws, or
condemn the enforced payment of them from themselves, who have so violently
extorted them from others?

4ly. If any Ministers or others plead the payment of our late heavy monthly
Taxes, Excises, Impositions, Shipmony, far exceeding the old, to be against
their Conscience, as being imposed by no lawful Parliamental Authority,
repugnant to all our Laws, Statutes, Liberties, Privileges, Protestations,
Covenants, Records, Votes of Parliament, employed to shed Seas of innocent
precious Christian blood, to maintain unchristian bloody wars against our late
Protestant Brethren in Covenant and Amity, they know not upon what lawful
Quarrel, to support an arbitrary Army Government, Power to domineer over them,
to subvert our old Fundamental laws, Parliaments, Covernours, Liberties, Peace,
Elections, Trials, the Great Charters of England, foment Here^ies, Sects,
Schisms, and carry on the Plots of the Pope, Jesuits, Spaniard, French, to
ruin our Realms, Church, Religion, and pay many disguised Jesuits and Popish
Priests secretly lurking in all places under the Mask of listed Soldiers (as
most wise men conceive) to perpetuate our wars, destroy our Ministers and
Nation by endless wars and Taxes. All these, with other such weighty grounds of
Conscience, Law, Prudence, (which See my Legal Vindication against illegal
Taxes, and Humble Remonstrance against Shipmony.
some have insisted on and pleaded) can no ways exempt them from violent
Distresses, Quarterings, Penalties, Forfeitures, Levies, by armed Soldiers,
who regard these Pleas of Conscience no more than Common High-way-men who take
men's Purses by force, and deem all public Enemies, who dare plead Law or
Conscience in this case; though the Plea be true and undeniable even in their
own Judgments and Consciences, as some of them will acknowledge to those they
thus oppress. Why then should they or any others esteem this mere pretense of
Conscience only against Penal Laws for Tithes, enforced in a less rigorous
manner, which they may with as much reason and Justice allege against the
payment of their just Debts, Land Lords Rents, and all other dues from them to
God or Men?

The 3d. Objection is, That Tithes are pure Alms; Therefore Object. 3.
not to be enforced by any Law. For which the Opinions of John Wickliff, Husse,
Thorp, are produced by the Anabaptists, and Erasmus urged by some, but without
sufficient ground.

I have answered this Objection elsewhere, and shall here Answ.
only declare, whence, I conceive, this Error (that Tithes are mere Alms)
originally proceeded, to rectify mistakes of the meaning of some ancient
Authors, and clear two Texts of Scripture which some Scholars and ignorant
People misapprehend.

First, I conceive this Error sprang originally from the misunderstanding of
that Text of Deutr. 14. 28, 29. At the end of three years thou shall bring
forth all the Tith of thine increase THE SAME YEAR, and shall lay it up within
thy Gates. And the Levite (because he has no place, no Inheritance with thee)
and the Stranger, and the Fatherless and the Widow, which are within thy Gates
shall come, and shall eat (thereof) and be satisfied; That the Lord may bless
thee in all the work of thine hands which thou do; compared with Deutr. 26.
12, 13, 14. When thou have made an end of tithing all the Tithes of thin^
Increase, the third year, which is the year of Tithing, and have given unto the
Levite, the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow, that they may eat within thy
Gates, and be filled; Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have
brought away the hallowed Thing out of mine House, and also have given them
unto the Levite, and unto the Stranger, to the Fatherless and to the Widow;
according to all thy Commandments which thou have commanded me; I have not
transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them; I have not eaten
thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any
uncleaness, nor given ought thereof for the Dead, but have hearkened unto the
voice of the Lord my God, and done according all thou have commanded me: To
which that of Amos may be referred. From which Texts some have conceived, That
the Israelites paid Tithes only every third year. 2ly. That they paid them then
not to the Levites only, but to the Stranger, Fatherless, Widows and Poor
amongst them, who had a right and share in them as well as the Levites. 3ly.
That these Texts use the phrase not of paying Tithes, as a Debt or Duty, but of
GIVING them as an Alms; and seeing they are given thus to the Stranger,
Fatherless, Widow at Alms; therefore to the Levites likewise, here coupled with
them. This doubtless was the true ground that Tithes were reputed mere Alms by
some* and not a Divine Right peculiar to Ministers.

To disperse these Mists of Error. First take notice, That neither these, nor
any other Texts in Scripture style Tithes Alms, much less pure Alms, which
men may give or retain at their pleasures. 2ly. That they expressly resolve
the contrary that they are no Alms at all in the objected sense, but a most
certain positive commanded Debt and Duty, no ways arbitrarie in the least
degree. For 1. By express positive Laws and Commandments of God often repeated,
all the particulars of this Duty are defined. 1. The Quota pars or quantity:
All the Tithe of thine Increase the same year. 2ly. The time of it: every third
year, which is the year of Tithing, at the end of three years. 3ly. The place
of Stowage: Thou shall lay it up within thy gates. 4ly. The persons who must
receive it: The Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, Widow. 5ly. The place of their
receiving it: Within thy gates. 6ly. The manner of receiing it: They shall come
and eat thereof and be filled. Secondly, which is most considerable, the Owners
and Tithe-payers had no disposing power over it for their own uses upon any
occasion or necessity. For, 1. They must bring all of it out of their Houses
as an hallowed thing. 2ly. They must make a solemn Protestation before the
Lord, that they had given it all to the Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, Widow,
and that not of their own free voluntary bounty, but as a bounden debt and
duty, according to all Gods Commandments which he had commanded them. 2ly.
That they had neither wilfully transgressed, nor negligentlie forgotten his
Commandments herein. 3. That they had neither eaten thereof in their mourning
(in times of want and distress) neither had they taken away ought thereof for
any unclean use, etc. but have hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God,
and done according to all that he commanded them: The reason of which
Protestation was, because God committed the custody and dispencing of these
three years Tithes to the Owners themselves, who might be apt to purloin and
pervert part of them to their own private uses. I appeal now to all men's
consciences, whether these very Texts do not unanswerably prove Tithes to be no
Alms or arbitrary Benevolence at all, but a most precise, positive, certain
Debt and Duty, most punctually limited in each particular? and whether that we
now usually call Alms to the Poor, be not a Debt and Duty, as Romans 15. 27. with
other Texts resolve it, not a mere Freewill Gift, which we may neglect or
dispense with as we please.

Having cleared the Text as to Alms, I shall next vindicate them from the other
mistakes concerning the time of Tithing, and Persons receiving Tithes. For
which end we must know, that the Jews had four sorts of Tithes, as the
Scriptures and Hierom. super Ezech. l. 14. ad cap. 44. Josephus Antiqu. Jud. l.
4. c. 8. Chrysostom Hom. 4. in Ephesians. Sermon. 103. Sir James Semple Sacrilege
Sacredly handled. Joseph Scaliger Diat^. de Decimis. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, and Review, c. 2. Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 7. Richard Mountague
Diatribae on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. a. and Dr. Tillesley and Mr.
Nettles Ibidem. Dr. Sclaters Ministers portion, p. 17.
Marglnal Authors prove, besides their First fruits, amounting to any
proportion from the 40th. to the 60th. pars amongst the Pharisees who exceeded
others in bounty,

1. Such Tithes as every of the Laity in ^^^^y Tribe of Israel, who had any
comings in, or increase at all, paid unto the Levites, out of their Annual
increase that was eatable or useful for them, as a sacred inheritance,
possession and reward for their service at the Tabernacle; being the full Tenth
part of their increase, after the first fruits deducted: which Tithes they
received in kind at their respective Cities and places of abode: and if any
Tithe-payer would redeem or compound for them, he was to add a fifth part more
than they were valued at; because the Levites should not be cheated by any
undervalues, and those who redeemed them did it only for their own advantage
for the most part, not the Levites; and then they should pay for it. These are
the Tithes prescribed Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32, 33. Numb. 18. 20, to 32. Which the
Levites and their Households were to eat in every place, where they resided, as
their peculiar Portion and Inheritance; Wherein the Stranger, Fatherless and
Widow had no share, neither were they brought up to Jerusalem, nor put into any
common Treasury; and paid constantly every year. And these are the Tithes
which our Ministers now challenge and receive by a Divine Right, as their
standing inheritance, and the Churches Patrimony: and the Tithes intended Heb.
7. 2, 5, 8, 9.

2ly. Such Tithes as the Levites paid to all the Priests, as most affirm: Or to
the High Priest only (as Lyra, Tostatus, and some other Popish Authors assert,
to justify the Popes Right to Tenths, which he challenges and receives for
the rest of the Popish Clergy in all places) for their better maintenance and
support besides their First Fruits, fees of Sacrifices, Oblations and other
Duties, being the full tenth part of the Tithes they receive from the people
(due to the whole body of the Tribe of Levi) Numb. 18. 20. to 31.

3ly. A second Tenth, which the Lay Israelites were obliged by God, to pay
every year out of their nine parts remaining after separation of the first
Tenth here mentioned; and this was likewise of all their annual increase of
Corn, Wine, Oil, Cattle, Sheep, Honey, and things eatable; This Tithe was by
Gods special appointment to be carried up to the place which God should choose,
and to Jerusalem in kind, by the places that were near; and the full value
thereof in money by places more remote. Which Tithes and money were designed
for the maintenance of their public solemn standing Feasts every year, wherein
the Owners, Priests, Levites and all the people feasted together before the
Lord. The residue was laid up in Storehouses, Treasuries and Chambers together
with the First Fruits and Offerings for the maintenance of the Priests and
Levites dwelling in Jerusalem, having no abiding elsewhere in the Country, and
for those who came up thither in their Courses and served in and about the
Temple; of which some selected Priests and Levites who were faithful had the
Oversight and Distribution; not any Lay Treasurers, Officers or Sequestrators
who would be singering all our Ministers Tithes now, and reduce them to a
public Treasury, to fill their private purses with them. These are the Tithes
commanded, specified, and principally intended: Deuteronomy. 12. 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 17,
18, 19. c. 14. 22, to 28. 2 Chronicles. 31. 6, to 16. Neh. 10. 37, 38, 39. c. 12.
44. c. 13. 9, to 14. Mal. 3. 10. Which Tithes were abolished with the Jewish
Feasts and Temple: Yet the shadow and footsteps of them continued many years
after in the primitive Christians Love Feasts, as Mr. Mountague proves at large.

4ly. The fourth sort of Tithes which the lay Israelites paid, was that for the
Levite, Stranger, Fatherless and Widow, payable only every third year out of
all that years increase; after the separation of the forementioned Tithes for
the Levites, Priests and Annual feasts; which the Owners kept in their own
barns, and were to be eaten by the Levite, Stranger, Fatherless, and Widow,
within their gates and houses, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. c. 26. 11, to 17.

Now in allusion to the last kind of Tithes, St. Ambrose Sermon in die
Ascentionis, St. Jerome in Mal. 3. St. Augustine, Sermo: 219. De Tempore, and
ad Fratces in Eremo, Sermon. 64. Caesarius Arelatensis, De Eleemosyna, Hom. 2.
Eutropius in the Life of St. Steven, c. 17, 18. The Exhortation written about
An. 700. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 10. Agilardus Contra insulsam vulgi
opinionem de Grandine, etc. p. 155. Ivo Carnotensis, Epist. 102. The Synod of
York under Hubert, An. 1194 and some others, press the payment of Tithes to
Ministers, and giving Alms, or some part of their goods to the poor, jointly
together; and some few of them stil^ Tithes, Tributa refectorium Animarum: The
Tribute (not Alms) of the poor souls; and tell us of Tithes which God himself
has commanded to be given to the poor. But this they intend not, of the first
sort of Tithes due to the Ministers of God; but of a Tenth of their remaining
Annual increase after the Ministers Tithes first paid; as most of them expressly
declare. viz. Hierom. on Mal. Saltem Judaeorum imitemur exordia, ut pauperibus
partem demus ex toto: and Sacerdotibus and Levitis Honorem debitum et decimus
referamus, De sua particula (not the Ministers) Pauperibus ministrare; And the
English Synod of Calchuth, An. 786. with Capitularia Caroli Magni, l. 6. c. 29.
most distinctly; Decimas ex omnibus fructibus and pecoribus terrae annis
singulis ad Ecclesias reddant Et De novem partibus que remanserint eleemosynas
facient. So as there is nothing in Scripture or Antiquity rightly understood to
prove Tithes to be pure Alms, as some have erroniously fancied.

The second ground of this Opinion, that Tithes were Free and pure Alms, was
the frequent Grants, Donations and Consecrations of Tithes and Portions of
Tithes by several Lords of Manors and Lands by special Charters yet extant,
recited in Mr. P. 299, 304, 306, 312, 314* 315, 316, 317, 331, 333, 336, 337,
341, 345, 346, 371. and elsewhere. Dr. Tillesley his Animadversions on Mr.
Seldom, c. 11, 12, 13. Littleton, chap. 6. Frankalmoign and Cooks Institutes
thereon: Petrus Damianus, l. 2. Epist. 14. Vt copiosiora in pauperes alimenta
per^iciant, dantur* in Monasteriis and Eremitis DECIMAE Quorumcumque
proventuum, etc.
Seldens History of Tithes between the year of our Lord 1060. and 1250. (in the
darkest times of Popish Superstition) to Abbeys, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and
Religious Houses in eleemosynam pauperum; in liberam puram et perpetuam
eleemosynam; to be distributed by these Monks, or their Almoners to the use of
the Poor Pilgrims, Strangers, Widows, and Orphans, in general, at their
discretion, or particularly of such and such Parishes; and they supposing the
Monks to be most charitable to distribute them to the Poor; most of which
Grants or all were made by the consents of the Bishops of the Diocese and
confirmed by them, and many of them with the Assents of the Patrons and
Encumbents of the Churches. And sometimes whole Churches with their Tithes were
thus granted and impropriated to Monasteries and Monks, In jure perpetual
Frankalmoigne, to the starving of the peoples Souls, to pray for their Patrons
when deceased, and seed the Bodies of the Poor without their Souls; whence all
or most of our Appropriations and Impropriations really sprang, to the great
prejudice of Ministers maintenance, and Parishioners Souls. Upon this ground
See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, c. 7. sect. 4. p. 165, 166, etc,
many Monks and Mendicant Friars who were no part of the ordained Ministry,
(just like our vagrant Anabaptistical and unordained Sectarian Predicants now)
to rob the Ministers and most Priests of all their Tithes, engross them into
their own hands and disposal to enrich themselves and their Monasteries, every
where cried up tithes to be Pure Alms, which every man might bestow where he
pleased, and that themselves (having renounced the world, and vowed Poverty)
were fitter to receive and dispense them than the Secular Parish Priests; and
made this Doctrine a very gainful Trade, whereby they got most of the best
Benefices of England, and a Innocent 3. Epist. Decret. l. 1. p. 203. l. 2. p.
410. Extrav. Tit. De Decimis, c. 3. Ex multis.
great part of the Tithes into their own Possession, to the great prejudice of
the Church. And not content herewith, the Premonstratenses and other Orders
procured a Bull from Pope Innocent the 3d. about the year 1^10. to exempt all
their Lands which themselves manured, and all their Meadows, Woods, Fish Ponds,
from paying any Tithes at all to Parish Priests or others; That they might
bestow them in Alms, or on the poor of their Monasteries, as they had requested
them from the Pope; as the words of the Bull attest: After which they invented
other Bulls (condemned in our Parliament by a special Act) to exempt their
Tenants likewise from paying Tithes, under the same pretext. And this is the
true ground and original of that Monkish opinion, That Tithes were pure Alms,
and that men might give them to whom they pleased: Which grant of thithes to
Monasteries, Monks, and exemptions of their Lands from paying them, upon
pretext of giving them in Alms, to the great prejudice of the Ministers (
perdenda Basilica sine plebibus, Plebes sine Sacerdotibus, Sacerdotes sine
reverentia, and sine Christo denique Christiani, Bernard Epist. 240.) was
severely censured and sharply declaimed against by St. Bernard and Hugo
Partimacensis, Epist. ad Abbatum and Conventum Nantire Monasterii after Ivo his
Epistles, p. 245. (a most excellent Epistle against this practice) The Council
of Vienna, An. 1340. Joannis Sarisburiencis, De Nugi^ Curialium, l. 7. c. 21.
Petrus Blesensis, Epist. 82. Petrus Clamianensis, Epist. l. 1. Epist. 33. And
the Monkish Assertors of this Doctrine, that Tithes were pure Alms, and
disposable to whom the people would; were by Ad Extr. Ti de Parach. c. ult. Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes, p. 166, 168.
Pope Innocent the 4th. styled and censured in these terms, I sti Novi
Magistrique dicent and praedicant contra Novum et Vetus Testamentum: yea
Richard Archbishop of Armaugh complained much against these greedy
unconscionable Monks in his Defensorium Curatorum, for possessing the people
with this opinion, That the command of Tithes was not moral, but only
ceremonial, and not to be performed by constraint of Consciences to the
Ministers and Curates, and that what Lands or Goods soever were given by any of
the four orders of Mendicants ought to be exempted from paying Tithes to
Ministers in point of Conscience; which he refutes; from these Monks John
Wickliff, Walter Brute, and William Thorp (living in that blind Age) took up
their opinion: That Tithes were pure Alms, and that the people might give them
to whom they please, if they were Godly Preachers; and their Parish Priest,
lazy, proud, and wicked, which opinion of Wickliff was refuted by Doctrinal.
Fidei Tom. 1. l. 2. Artic. 3. c. 64, 65.
Thomas Waldensis as erroneous, and condemned in the Council of Constance. This
I have the longer insisted on, to show how Can and the rest of our
Anabaptistical Tithe-Oppugners, revive only these old greedy Monks, Friars
Tenants and practices for their own private ends and lucre; to wrest our
Ministers Tithes from them into their own hands or disposing, and exempt their
own Lands and Estates from paying Tithes, that so we may have Churches without
people, People without Ministers, Ministers without due reverence, and finally
Christians without Christ; as Epist. 240.
Bernard writes they then had by this Monkish Sacrilegious Doctrine and
practice.

The fourth Objection (much insisted on as I hear) against Object* 4.
our coercive Laws and Ordinances for Ministers Tithes, is this common Mistake,
That the payment of Tithes to Ministers as a Parochial Right and Due, was first
settled by the Popish Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the 3d. An. 1215.
before which every man might freely give his Tithes, to what Persons or
Churches he pleased; Therefore it is most unjust, unreasonable to deprive men
of this liberty, and enforce them to pay Tithes to their Ministers now by such
Laws and Ordinances.

I answer, That this is a most gross Mistake of some ignorant 7 E. 3. f. 5. 44
E. 3. f. 5. 10 H. 7. f. 18. 7. 6 Dyer 84. 8. Cook 2 Report, f. 44. b. c Voice,
p. 13. d Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 751.
Lawyers, and John (c Can; For in the Canons of this Council, there is not
one syllable tending to this purpose, as I noted above 20. years since out of
Binius and Surius in the Margin of Sir Edward Cooks 2. Reports, fol. 446. where
it is asserted; which error he expressly retracts in his 2d. Institutes on Magna
Charta, f. 641. The words of the Council, Can. 56. Plerique (sicut excipimus
Regulares, and Clerici Seculares interdum) dum Domos locant vel Feuda concedunt
in Presudicium Parochialium Ecclestarum. pactum adjiciunt; ut Conductores and
Feudatorii Decimas eis solvant, and apud eosdem elegant Supremam: Cum autem id
ex avariti^ radice procedat, pactum hujusmodi penitus reprobamus: Statuentes,
ut quicquid fuerit ratione hujusmodi pacti praeceptum, Ecclestae Parochiali
reddatur.

By which Constitution it is apparent, First, that Parish Priests and Churches,
had a just Parochial Right to the Parishioners Tithes within their Precincts
before this Council, else they would not have awarded restitution to them of
the Tithes received; and that they had so ordered and decreed it by sundry
Councils and Civil laws some hundreds of years before, is apparent by the 2.
Council of Cavailon under Charles the Great, An. 813. Can. 19. Synodus
Ticimensis under Lewis the 2d. An. 855. The Council of Mentz under the Emperor
Arnulph, An. 894. Can. 3. The Council of Fliburg, An. 895. Can. 14. The Decree
of Pope Leo the 4th. (attributed to Gelasius by some) about the year 850. The
Council of Worms and Mentz (about that time or before) cited by Gratian, Cause.
16. qu. 1. The Council of Claremont under Pope Urban, An. 1095. (these abroad)
and at home in England, The Ecclesiastical Laws of King Edgar, An. 967. c. 1,
2. The Council of Eauham under King Edgar, An. 1010. and his Laws near that
time, c. 14. and the Council of London under Archbishop Hubert, An. 1200. (15
years before this of Lateran.) All which enjoin the people to pay their Tithes
to their own Mother-Churches where they heard divine Service, and received the
Sacraments, and not to other Churches or Chapels at their pleasures, unless by
consent of the Mother-Churches. Hence Peirus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bath,
about the year 1170. (45. years before the Council of Lateran) in his 62.
Epistle writes thus to the Praemonstraticatian Monks, who procured an Exemption
from paying Tithes out of their Lands, That their Lands were obnoxious to
Tithes, before they became theirs, and were paid hitherto, not with respect of
Persons, sed ratione Territorii: but by reason of the Territory and Parish
Precincts. And Pope Innocent the 3d. his Decree dated from Lateran, An. 1200.
(mistaken for the Council of Lateran) cited in Cooks 2 Instit. p. 641. was but
in confirmation of these precedent Authorities.

2ly. The abuses complained against and reformed by this Council, was not the
lay Parishioners giving away of their Tithes from their own Ministers and
Parish-Churches at their pleasures (not a word of this) but a New minted
practice of most covetous Monks, Religious Houses, and some secular Clerks, to
rob the Parish-Churches and Ministers of all the Tithes of the lands held of
them, by compelling their Tenants and Lessees by special covenants in their
Leases and Bonds, to pay their Tithes arising out of their Lands, only to
themselves and their Monasteries: not to their Parish Churches as formerly;
which the Pope and this great General Council resolve, to proceed merely from
the root of Covetousness, (let Can and his Comrades observe it, who pretend
Conscience to be the ground) whereupon they condemn, reform, this practice,
null the Covenants, Bonds, Deformations, and decreed Restitution of all profits
by these Frauds to the Parish-Churches. And was not this a just, righteous and
conscionable Decree, rather than an Antichristian and Papal, as Can
Magisterially censures it?

3ly. Admit the Parochial Right of Tithes first settled in and by this Council
(which is false) yet being a right established at 438. years since, confirmed
by constant use, Custom, Practice even since allowed by the Common law of
England, ratified by the Great Charter of England, chapter 1. with sundry other See
Rastals Abridgement, Title Tithes, and the Ordinances for Tithes. Lindwood,
provinc. Constit. l. 3. Tit. De Decimis. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 8.
S^atutes, Acts of Parliament, Canons of our Councils and Convocations; and
approved by all our Parliaments ever since, as most just, expedient, necessary:
Yea settled on our Parish Churches by See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 320,
322, 338, 346, 350.
original Grants of our Ancestors for them, their Heirs and Assigns for ever,
with general warranties against all men, with special Execrations and
Anathemaes denounced against all such who should detain or substract them from
God and the Church, to whom they consecrated them for every; and that as sacred
Tribute reserved, commanded by God himself, in the Old and New Testament as a
badge of his Vniserval Dominion over them and their Possessions, held of him as
Supreme Landlord; as the Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 828. Lindwood,
Provinc. Constit. l. 3. Tit. De Decimis.
Council of London under Archbishop Hubert, in the 2d. year of King John, with
another Council under Archbishop Replain, 3 E. 3. The Council under Archbishop
Stratford with others resolve. There neither is nor can be the least pretext of
Justice, Reason, Prudence, Law or Conscience for any Grandees in present Power,
by force or fraud, to Null, Repeal, Al^er this Ancient Right and unquestionable
Title of our Ministers to them now; and set every man loose to pay no Tithes at
all, or to dispose of them how and to whom they will at their pleasure, to
destroy our Churches, Ministers, Parishes, and breed nothing but Quarrels and
Confusions in every place and Parish at this present, when all had now need to
1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
study to be quiet, and to do their own Business; and not to disturb all our
Ministers and others Rights without any lawful call from God or the Nation.
Which unparalleld incroachment on our Ministers and Parish-Churches Rights, if
once admitted, countenanced, all the people in the Nation by better right and
reason may pull down all the Fences and Enclosures of Fields, Forests, or
Commons made since this Council; deny, substract all Customs, Impositions,
Duties, Rents, Payments public or private imposed on, or reserved from them
since that time by public Laws, or special Contracts, and pay all their Rents,
Customs, and Tenure-Service^, to whom and when they please; which our Grandy
late Army-Purchasors of Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters
Lands, with other Opposers of Tithes may do well to consider for their own
Advantage and Security, their Titles to them being very puny, crazy,
disputable, in comparison of our Ministers to their Tithes.

Now whereas Hist. Angl. p. 4.
Thomas Walsingham, Randal Higden a Monk of Chester in his Polichronicon, and
Henry Abbot of Leycester write; that the general Council of Lions in France)
under Pope Gregory the tenth, An. 1274. Decreed; (what others ignorantly
attribute to the Council of Lateran aforesaid, An. 1215.) V^ nulli homini
deinceps licea^ decimas suas ad libitum, ut antea, liceat assignare, sed
matrici ecclesiae omnes decimas persolverent: Which seems to imply, that before
this Council every man might give his Tithes from the Mother Church to whom he
pleased, notwithstanding the Council of Lateran and Innocents Decrees.

I answer, 1. That there was no such Canon made in this Council, as these
ignorant Monks mistake, which is undeniable by the Acts and Canons of this
Council, printed at large in Binius, Surius, and other Collectors of Councils;
but only one Canon, against Clergy-mens alienation of the Revenues of the
Church; and another against the Usurpation of the Churches Revenues by Patrons
in time of their vacancy: which have no affinity with that they mention; which
if true, then that which Can and others object, that the Council of Later an
made this Inhibition, and took away this Liberty of disposing Tithes at
pleasure from the Parishioners, is false, as I have proved it.

Secondly, That from this mistake of these Monks it was (as Mr. History of
Tithes, chapter 7. p. 147, 148.
Seldom probably conjectures) that William Thorp ignorantly affirmed, that one
Pope Gregory the tenth first ordained new Tithes first to be given to Priests
now in the new Law. John Can to manifest his great Ignorance both in History
and Chronology, in his Second Voice from the Temple, p. 13, 14. Writes thus.
Before the Council of Lateran, which was under Innocent the third, any man
might have paid his Tithes to any Ecelesiastical person he pleased; but by that
Council it was decreed, That Tithes should be paid to the Parochial Priest:
(which I have proved a gross Forgerie) and then he adds, William Thorp says,
That Pope Gregory the tenth, was the first, that ordained Tithes to be paid to
Priests, in the year 1211. Fox, p. 494. Wherein, 1. He mis-recites Thorps
words, who speaks not of Tithes in general, but only of New Tithes: not
anciently paid by the Jews, nor prescribed to them by God. And is this square
dealing? 2ly. He subjoyns the time (which Thorp and Master Fox do not,)
referring this Decree of Gregory the tenth, to the year 1211. which was four
years before the Council of Lateran, by his own Confession and falls within the
Popedom of ^nnocent the third, and is no less than 63. years before the Council
of Lions under Gregory the Xth. and his Papacy; there being no less than seven
Popes intervening between this Innocent and Gregory, as Platina, Onuphrius, in
their Histories of Popes lives, and Binius, Spondanus, Oxenetius, Matthew
Westminster, the Centuries of Magdenburg, Mr. Fox himself and Heylin affirm.
And most certain it is, that neither this Pope Gregory, nor the Council of
Lions under him, nor of Lateran under Innocent, made any such Decrees
concerning Tithes, as Can here boldly asserts; and with these two Forgeries,
he most impudently concludes, The payment of Tithes is Popish, nothing more
certain, (when as nothing is more false or fabulous) and so within the 2d.
Article of the Covenant of the two Nations (nothing more untrue, both in the
intentions and explanations of the Makers and Takers of that Covenant, as their
several Ordinances for Tithes both before and after it demonstrate) which many
have sworn (not he nor his Confederates, or else perjured with a Witness, if
they have done it, in every clause thereof) to endeavor the extirpation of
Superstition and all kind of Popery, (therefore of all Monkish, Popish
Substractions of, and exemptions from payment of Tithes to their Parochial
Ministers fore-recited, invented, granted by Popes, and real Popery) And
therefore as it is a case of Conscience (for those who have taken the Covenant
to pay Tithes, not for any man whatsoever, especially Covenanters to retain
them) so men ought to be careful either how they press it, or practice it. So
this Father of Lies and Forgeries concludes against all Truth and Conscience,
and dares aver to those he styles, (let himself determine QUO JURE) The Supreme
Authority of the Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to
engage them sacrilegiously to rob all our Ministers both of their Rectories,
Tithes, Ministry at once; to starve and famish (they are his own uncharitable
Anabaptistical words, p. 1, 2.) These Antichristian Idols, which if they
neglect speedily to do, he more than intimates (in his Epistle to them, and let
them and all others observe it) the Lord (you may guess whom he means) shall
lay them aside, as despised broken Idols and Vessels in whom his Soul has no
pleasure: like those who sat there before them: just John of Leydens Doctrine
and practice.

It is storied of Sacrilegious Philip of Macedon (by Hist. l. 16, 17. Dr. Usher
Annals Eccles. Veteris Testam p. 516, 525.
Polybius and others) In aras et templa sae viit, ipsos etiam Lapides
infringens, ne destructas aedes posthac restitui possint, and that to raise
moneys to pay his all-devouring Army; and of Dicaearc^us (his Atheistical
General, as impious as his Sovereign) that returning victoriously from Sea, he
built two Altars, one to Impiety, the other to Iniquity, and sacrificed to them
as to Gods. Certainly Voice from the Temple, Epist. Ded. and p. 23. If they
were razed to the Ground IT WOULD DO WELL.
John Can, who would have all our Churches razed to the ground, and not a
stone of them left upon a stone unthrown down, that they might never be built
again, (the true Voice of a Son of Edom and Psalm. 137. 7, 8.
Babylon) and all our Ministers Rectories, Tithes, Food and Maintenance,
whereby they are fed and kept alive, taken away by the Magistrates, (and that
to maintain the Army and Soldiers, as some design) would be a very fit
Chaplain for such a Sacrilegious King and General; and a fit Priest or Minister
for these two infernal Deities of Impiety and Iniquity, the only Gods, which
too many pretended Saints and Anabaptists really serve, worship in their
practice. But let Can with all his impious, unrighteous, seduced Disciples,
Patrons, remember that Blessing which dying Moses, that man of God, (a better
President, General for Christians to follow, than these Pagan Atheists)
bestowed on the tribe of Levi ( As is evident by comparing it with I say 56. 6,
7, 8. c. 61. 1, to 11. c. 66. 18, to 24. Jer. 33. 15, to the end.
extending to all true Ministers of the Gospel now) with his bitter imprecation
against all who invaded their Substance, Function, or rise up against their
Office, recorded thus for their shame and terror, Deuter. 33. 1, 8, 9, 10, 11.
This is the Blessing wherewith Moses the MAN OF GOD blessed the Children of
Israel before his death. And of Levi he said, Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be
with thy holy one: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy Covenant. They
shall ( or let them) teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law: They shall
put Incense before thee, and whole burnt Sacrifice upon thine Altar. Bless O
Lord his Substance, and accept the Work of his ^ands: Smite through the Loins
of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not
again. Which I shall recommend to John Can for his next Text, when he
preaches before his Fraternity of Anabaptistical Tithe-Oppugners, and
Church-Robbers; to all injurious Substracters of their Ministers Tithes, and
professed Enemies to their Calling. And so much for the third Proposition.

CHAP. IV.
I Now march to the 4th. Proposition, That our Ministers Proposition 4.
Tithes are really no Burden, Grievance or Oppression to the People; but a
just ancient charge, debt, annuity or duty, as well as their Landlords rents,
or Merchants poundage. That the abolishing of them, will be no real Ease, Gain,
or advantage to Farmers, Lessees, and the poorer sort of People (as is falsely
pretended) but only to rich Landlords and Landed-men, and a loss and detriment
to all others.

There have been diverse clamorous Petitions of late against Tithes, subscribed
by many poor People, Laborers, Servants, Apprentises, who never were capable
in their Estates to pay any (not by the Nobility, Gentry, and Freeholders of
the Nation, or the generality of those whose Estates are most charged with
them, who repute them no Burden nor Grievance, and desire their continuance) as
if they were the very Bonds of Wickedness, the heavy Burdens and Yoke, which
God himself The Kentish Petition against Tithes, John Can, Voice from the
Temple, and others. b Mal. 3. 8, 9.
by an extraordinary Call, has called forth some in present Power speedily to
loose, undo and break, Isay 58. 6, 7. to which they allude, and much insist on,
when as it is most clear, That this perverted Text was never once intended of
Tithes, which God himself imposed on his people, as a just reserved Rent and
Tribute due unto himself and his Ministers, and adjudgeth it plain ( b) ROBBING
OF GOD to substract, much more then to abolish, and those who press the
abolishing of Tithes from this Text, may with much more color urge it against
all Landlords Rents, Annuities, Tonnage, Poundage, the ancient Customs of Wool,
Woolfels, Leather, Tin, Lead, which they and their Ancestors by their Tenures
and our known Laws have paid time out of mind: and press those in power to
expunge these Texts out of the very Gospel, as Apochryphal and burdensome, Mat.
22. ^1. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto God the things
that are Gods (a clear Gospel-Text for the payment of Tithes, which are Gods
own Tribute and Portion, Levit. 27. 30, 32. Mal. 3. 8, 9) and Romans 13. 7 Render
therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, etc. against both which they directly Petition, as the premises
demonstrate. This calumny and wresting of Scripture being removed, I shall thus
make good the first Branch of the Proposition.

I have already manifested by undeniable Antiquities, Laws, Records, That
Tithes were freely given to and settled on our Church and Ministers, by our
pious Kings Munificence, Charters, Laws, with the general applause and consent
of all the Nobility and People, upon the very first setlement of Religion in
this Island, many hundred years before we read of any public Taxes for Defense
of the Realm, or maintenance of the Wars by Land or Sea, the first whereof
was Matthew Westminster. and ^lorentius Wigorniensis. An. 983. Sec my Humble
Remonstrance against shipmoney p. 19, 20, 21.
Dane-gelt (first imposed by common consent of the Lords in Parliament, An.
983.) or before the antientest yet continued Cust^me on Wool Woolfels and Skins
exported, first granted by Parliament in 3 E. 1. Anno Dom. 1276. at least 500.
years after the first extant grant, Law and setlement of Tithes in perpetuity,
as a Divine Duty, Rent and Service for the necessary maintenance of Gods
Ministers and public Worship. This most ancient, annual Rent, Charge or
Tribute unto God, has inviolably continued in all public Changes and
Revolutions of Church and State; Bri^ons, Saxons, Danes, Normans, English,
Papists, Protestants, Conquerors, Invadors, Right Heirs, and Lawful
Purchasers, Intruders, Disseisers, Less^es of all sorts, whether Public
Persons or Private, maintaining, consirming, rendering their Tithes
successively, as a Divine and Sacred Quit-Rent due to God, wherewith they came
charged into the world, till they departed out of it; laying down this for a
Principle of Divinity, Law, Equity; Spelman. Council. 610.
That God alone bath given to every Man the Lands and all he holds and
possesses, whereby he gains his food and living; and therefore out of the Land
and Trade, whereby every one gets necessary supply for his body, he ought to
contribute a Tenth and Tribute toward the Service of God, and Salvation of his
Soul, much better than his Body; as Augustine in his 229. Sermon. Tom. 10. and
the Ancient Saxon Canons of an uncertain time and Author resolve. There was no
Purchaser, Heir, Inheritor, Farmer, Tenant, or Lessee of Lands in our whole
Nation, that paid Tithes out of it, since Tithes first settled in this Kingdom;
but he inherited, purchased, took and held his Lands charged with Tithes;
Whence our Cooks ad. Report, The Bishop of winchesters case. Summa Angelica.
Tit. Decima.
Law Books resolve, That no Layman can by the very Common Law of England,
allege any Custom or Prescription, for not paying Tithes; but only a Modus
Decimandi in recompense of his Tithes; which he may in some cases plead,
because grounded on some ancient Contract and a valuable consideration in Lieu
of Tithes. Moreover, as all Men took their Purchases, Farms, Leases or
Inheritances, by Descent thus charged; so this charge was universally known to
all Purchasers, Lesees, and the full annual value of the Predial Tithes they
pay out of their Lands, or Leases, abated them in their Purchases, Rents,
Fines, by the Venders and Lessers, of purpose to defray the public necessary
annual Charge; which if the Lands had been Tithe-Free, had been proportionably
raised, to the common value of the Tithes, in the Purchase* Moneys, Fines, or
Rents; and will be so by every Seller of Lands, and Landlord, when ever Tithes
be suppressed. This being a clear undeniable Truth, which every rational man
must subscribe to; it is certain, no person this day living, complaining or not
complaining against Tithes, can in Verity, Equity, Justice, Reason, repute or
call them, either an unjust or oppressing Yoke, Bond, Burden (as many
Ignoramusses do, without sense or reason) nor any burden or charge at all to
him, since he had, or rather has the full annual value of them allowed him in
his Purchase, Fine, or Rent, by him that sold or leased his Lands unto him. And
although it be true, that in such Tithes as the Earth does not naturally
produce without labor (as it does Grass, Wood, Fruits,) viz. Corn, Hops,
Saffron, Woad, and the like, the Minister enjoyes the Tenth of the Husbandmans
increase, seed, labor and costs in tillage and improvement (the great
Objection against Tithes as an Heavy Burden, and Oppression) yet all this
pretended great cost and charge (except only in Cases of Improvements) was
altogether, or for the most part allowed and defalked in the Purchase, Rent, or
Fine; which if Tithe-free would have For which there is suffient Allowance
given in case of mere Heath and Baren grounds by the Stat. or 2 E. 6. c. 13.
been, (and when made Tithe-free, will be) raised to the full value of the
Tithes, even one years purchase more in ten sales, and 28. Rent more in every
pound each year upon Lease^, as all understanding men knowing what belongs to
Purchases, Sales of Lands or Leases must acknowledge. And that Farmer,
Purchaser, or Improver of Lands, who deems not his faithful Ministers Prayers,
Preaching, Pains, and Gods blessing on his Seed, Crop, Estate, Soul, Family,
See Augustine, Sermon. 219. Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11.
promised and entayled to the true payment of Tithes, and are only procured by
his Ministers prayers, without which his seed, crop, and all his estate would
be blasted with a Curse, and amount not to a tenth part, of what he now enjoys
by Gods promise and blessing by paying Tithes, and his Ministers prayers;
deserves not the name of a rational man, much less of a Christian; and can
expect nothing but Gods curse upon all he sowes, plants, enjoyes, instead of a
blessed Crop or Harvest. All which considered, I appeal to any Christian, or
rational man's Conscience, whether Tithes be any such heavy, oppressing,
intolerable, discouraging Yoke, Bondage, Burden, Oppression as some now
declaim them, which Gods chiefest Saints before the Law voluntarily rendered
without murmuring, and cheerfully vowed, paid unto God without a Law, and his
ancient people rendered without murmuring (though double to our Tithes now) by
an express Law, during all the Levitical Priesthood, and all our* own
Ancestors, as well Protestants as Papists, have for so many hundred of years
cheerfully rendered without dispute, and all now living came charged with into
the world, and were thus allowed the value of them in their Purchases, Fines,
and Leases. And whether all Tithe-payers have not far more cause to Petition
against all Old and New Rent-Services, Rent Charges, Annuities, Quit-Rents,
Statutes, Debts, wherewith they were charged by their Ancestors Grants or
Contracts, and of all the ancient Customs for Merchandise for defense of the
Seas of Realm, as intolerable oppressing Burdens, Yoaks, Grievances (as the
Levellers and Anabaptists in some l^^e printed papers style all Customs,
Tonnage, Poundage, Impositions whatsoever, as well as Tithes, our Excises, or
monthly Taxes, of new illegal formation, as well as Imposition) than thus to
murmur, complain, Petition against their predial Tithes, our Ministers chiefest
Livelihood, except in Cities which have no Tillage, Woods, or Meadows? And so
much briefly for proof, That Tithes are no real Grievance, Burden, Oppression,
to Gods people; especially since orignally granted and commanded by God
himself, whose Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. and whose heaviest
Yoke is easy, and Burden light, Matthew. 11. 30. And those New-Saints, who shall
think otherwise of this Divine Commandment, Yoke, and Burden of Tithes, under
the Gospel, give the Gospel it self and Christ the lie herein.

For the 2d. Branch, That the abolishing of Tithes will be no real Ease, Gain,
or Advantage to Farmors, Lessees, and the poorer sort of People, liable to pay
Tithes (other poor being not concerned in the Controversy, whose poverty it
self exexempts them from this surmised Grievance) but a Gain and Benefit, only
to rich Landlords and Landed-men, is apparent by the premises. For no sooner
shall Tithes be abrogated, but every Landlord will raise the full annual value
of them in his annual Rents, or Fines, and exact more for them from his poor
Tenants, Farmers, Lessees, than they might have compounded for with their
Ministers: and where then is their expected Gain, or Ease, wherewith they are
deluded by Impostors? As for the rich Landlords, they complain not of Tithes as
a Burden, and need no exemption from them: and as all predial Tithes now really
issue out of their Inheritances charged with them in perpetuity, who therefore
abate, allow the full value of them to their Farmers and Tenants in their Fees
and Rents, by way of Defalcation, they being in truth the greatest and most
considerable Tithe-payers, not the poor Farmers, or under Tenants: So their
Inheritances only will be much improved, augmented by Tithes abolishing at
least one part in ten; whiles the poor Ministers and Families shall be starved,
and the Tenants then more racked by the Landlords than by the Ministers now.
And this is the Godly goodly Ease this Saintlike Project will effect, if put
into execution, by which none will be real Gainers, in their Temporal Estate,
but those who have Inheritances; and all losers in their Spiritual Estate, by
the loss or great discouragements of their Ministers, Hebr. 13. 17. This will
appear by the practice of some greedy Landlords of old, thus recited,
condemned in this Decree of the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the 3d
Anno 1215. In aliquibus Regionibus, etc. (I will English it, that our Country
Farmers may the better understand it,) In some Countries there are a stupid (or
mungrel) sort of people who living according to their Custom, although they
have the name of Christians (I doubt Can will say they were Anabaptists, and
his godly Predecessors) some Lords of Farms (or Lands) let them out to these
men to manure ( ut Decimis defraudentes Ecclesias, majores inde redditus
assequantur) That by defrauding the Church of Tithes, they may gain the greater
Rents from their Tenants (equivalent no doubt to their Tithes, where then is
the tenants gain by any hoped exemptions from Tithes?) Being willing therefore
to provide remedy for these prejudices, for the Indemnity of Churches, we
ordain that the Landlords themselves shall commit their Farms to be leased to
and tilled by such Persons, and in such sort, That without contradiction they
may pay Tithes to Churches with Integrity (or their entire Tithes without any
Deduction:) and if there shall be need, let them be thereto compelled by
Ecclesiastical censure, for these Tithes are necessarily to be paid, which are
due by Divine law, or approved by the Custom of the place (though not within
the Letter of the Divine law, is the Councils meaning, not any Modus decimandi
of ought within Gods law, against which no Custom can or must prescribe) Let
all Countrymen learn from hence, what they will get by abolishing Tithes, if
voted quite down. Nay let them consider well, whether the real designs now on
foot, prosecuted by some Army- Officers and Soldiers, be not to vote down
Tithes, just as they did the Crown lands (formerly Cottoni ^osthuma, p. 174,
179. The Acts of Resumption, 6 H. 3. 5, 9. 10 E. 2. 1. 2 R 2. 6. 6 H. 4 1. 2 H.
5. 28, 29. 33 H. 6. 2. 1 H. 7 4, ^. 12 ^. 4.
reputed sacred, and incapable of any sale, because the common standing
Inheritance of the whole Realm to defray all ordinary public expenses in times
of peace and war, to ease them of all Subsidies and Taxes whatsoever, except
one in three or four years upon extraordinary occasions, granted in full
Parliament for their safety) even to vote them only from the Ministers, and get
them into their own hands, to help pay themselves and the Army, under pretext
to ease the People in their Taxes; and yet continue their Taxes still upon them
in the same extreme (or an higher) proportion as heretofore, though they take
their Tithes to boot, without easing them one farthing in their Contributions,
as in case of the Kings, Princes, Bishops, Deans and Chapters lands. Surely
these Officers and Soldiers who pretend so much liberty and ease to the people
in words, and still so oppress them in deeds, as not to ease them one penny in
their former unsupportable Taxes, Excises (which their Ancestors never knew nor
paid) under which they have for some years groaned, though all Ireland be now
reduced, England in peace within it self, and Scotland under Contribution, and
take upon them to impose such illegal Taxes now without any Parliament by their
own Super-Regal Authority, transcending all Presidents of our Kings and their
Councils out of Parliament, can never be presumed to tender their Ease and Gain
so much, as to permit them or their Landlords, to put up into their own
private Purses so great and constant an Annual Revenue as their Tithes amount
to, unto which they have neither legal Right nor Title, but will appropriate it
to themselves (as they have done Church-Land and Crown-Land too) for their
future pay, or past Arrears; and some of them have confessed so much. And which
then think you will prove the better Tithe Lords, Ministers or Soldiers?

For the third Branch: That the abolishing of Tithes, will be a loss and
detriment to all others, excepting Landlords, and Landed men; I shall thus
demonstrate. 1. It will be so to all our Ministers and their families, Tithes
being their principal livelihood. 2ly. To all such Colleges, Hospitals,
Corporations, Schools, all or part of whose Revenues depend on appropriated
Tithes and Rectories, and to all their Farmers and Families. 3ly. To all
impropriators and their Lessees, which are very many; there being by Britan. p.
161, 162. Purchase Pilgrimage, p. 133.
Mr. Cambdens and others Computation, 9284. Parishes in England, whereof 3845.
(of the best value, for the most part) are impropriated or appropriated. And
the abrogation of Tithes without giving competent recompense to all
Impropriators, as well body Politics as natural and their Lessees, (which how
it can be done now Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands devoted and voted once for
their satisfaction, are sold to pay the Soldiers, I cannot yet discern) will
ruin many Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, with other Corporations, and thousands
of families depending on them. 4ly. All Tenants and Farmers will be losers by
it, in their estates, as well as souls; For then the Landlords will raise the
full improved value of their abolished Tithes in their Fines and Rents; and if
they have a godly able Minister to instruct them for their Salvation, and
spiritual Weal, they must hire and pay him out of their own private purses
only, while their Landlords or others purse up their Tithes whereon now their
Ministers live without further charge unto them; and which is more chargable,
they must pay their Ministers share of Taxes and other public Payments to boot
out of their own purses and estates, which now are defrayed wholly by Ministers
themselves: And so instead of hoped Ease, by Abolishing Tithes, they shall but
draw a causless perpetual Charge on themselves and their Posterities, as our
New Projectors have done, by the sale of all the Crown Lands and Revenues to
themselves, and their Friends and Soldiers at easy rates, to enrich
themselves, which should have defrayed all public Ordinary Charges as they
ever have done, which now must be raised out of the peoples private purses
only, whiles these New Statesmen and Soldiers purse up and enjoy the public
Revenues which should defray them; and Tax the impoverished Nation at what
extraordinary uncessant Rates they please, and then dispose of them as their
pleasures, when levied to themselves and their Creatures; the only way to make
our Taxes both Easeless and Endless, to the peoples utter ruin, and their own
extraordinary enriching by their spoils. 5ly. The poor people in every Parish
will lose the charitable relief they receive from their Ministers, who in many
places were and still are a grest relief to the poor and impotent by their
liberal Charity and 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Hospitality; now much decayed by heavy and endless Taxes, and unconscionable
Substractions of their Tithes, by Sectaries, Soldiers and lawless Covetous
Earthwormes. 6ly. I must truly inform and tell all such Farmers, Tenants and
other deluded Countrymen, who think to gain much ease and profit, by the
abolishing of Tithes for the future, they shall soon repent of, and be doubly
burdened hereafter to the uttermost improved value of them in the augmentation
of their Taxes to the Soldiers, who will be harder new Iron Landlords,
Tithelords to them, than their Ministers now are. This was St. Sermo. 219. Tom.
10.
Augustines observation long ago, recorded by Causa 16. qu. 7.
Gratian, Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. T^^ 3. c. 19. ^^^
Bochellus with many others, and made good by many practical Experiments in
former and latter ages: His words are these. Our Ancestors did therefore abound
with plenty of all things, Because they gave Tithes to God, and rendered Tribute
to Caesar. Modo autem quia decesserit Devotio Dei, accessit Indictio Fisci.
Nolumus partire cum Deo Decimas, modo tollitur totum. Hoc tollit fiscus quod
non accepit Christus. That is, But now because our devotion to God (in paying
Tithes) is departed, the Sequestration of the Exchequer is come, (both on
Tithes and Lands) We would not pay our Tithes unto God, now the whole is taken
away (in Taxes and Sequestrations) The Exchequer sweeps away that which Christ
does not receive. And how many have found this true in our days, by
Sequestrators and Swordmen, who have sequestr^d all the Profits of their Lands,
as well as their Tithes, and the Ministers Tithes and Glebes to boot? He adds.
This is a most just Custom, that if thou will not give God his Tenth, thou
shall be reduced to a Tenth of thy Estate, Et dabis impio militi, quod non vis
dare Deo et sacerdoti; and thou shall be forced to give that to a wicked
Soldier, which thou will not give to God and thy Pious Minister. This the
whole Synod. of Lingon in France, Anno 1404. declared for, and observed as a
truth in those days. And Angelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica Tit. Decima
sect. 20. in his time. Petrus Blesensis, Arch Deacon of Bath (who flourished
about the year of our Lord 1160.) writes thus to the Cistertian Monks, who had
then procured from the Pope, a Bull of Exemption from paying Tithes out of the
Lands and Possessions of their Order, Epist. 82. ad Cistercienses. You know
that Covetousness is the root of all Evil: yet it is said, and we relate it
with tears, that this Mother of Transgression, this Mistress of Ambition, this
Captain (or Ringleader) of Iniquity, this Wagoner of Mischief, this Cu^^broat
of Virtues, this Original of Sedition, this Sink of Scandals, has dared to
break in even to your Congregation; the Vo^es and Tongues of all men would be
loosened into the commendation of your Sanctity, if you did not forcibly snatch
away that which is another; If you did not take away Tithes from Clergymen.
This is a Convectio (or Rapine) little enough, but that which does not a little
dishonest your life. By the Testimony of the Scriptures, they are the Tributes
of needy Souls. And what is this injurious Immunity that you should be exempted
from the payment of Tithes to which the Lands were subject, before they were
yours, and which are hitherto rendered to Churches, not out of respect of
Persons, but by consent of the Territory (mark now the just punishment upon
them, for this their Covetousness and exemption from Tithe-paying) Milites
Galliarum sibi jus Decimarum usurpant. etc. The Soldiers of France usurp to
themselves the Right of Tithes, and have no regard of your Privileges: Eas a
vobis potenter extorquent: They extort them from you by the Power of the Sword.
Adversus eos debetis insurgere, non adversus Clericos, aut Ecclesiasticos
Clericos. You ought to rise up against them, but not against Clergy men, Or the
Churches of Clergymen. Laurentius Bochellus recites and inserts it into his
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l 6. Tit. 8. c. 19. p. 966. printed An. 1609. From which
Authorities, I must tell all Country Farmers and others, now busling to exempt
themselves by the power of the Soldiers from paying their ancient due settled
Tithes to their Ministers, that they shall at last but only change the hand,
and be enforced to pay Tithes with a Witness to the Soldiers, even by
obtaining their desires. Whiles I was a late close Prisoner in Pendennys Castle
in Cornwall under Soldiers (I never yet knew why) I heard some Officers there
(who had purchased Crown Lands in Cornwall, not for Money, but Arrears of pay)
amongst other their New Projects often times peremptorily saying, We will have
all Tithes put down; Whereupon I told them, they should have done well to have
added Saint James his advise to their peremptory words and wills; which he much
censures; by saying, as they ought to do: If the Lord will, we will do this or
that, James 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. Which I thought they durst or could not subjoyn
to their former words, because it was both against the will and command of God,
that Ministers Tithes should be put down, especially by Soldiers, who received
far above the tenth part of them in Monthly Taxes for their pay; and from whose
practice of receiving constant pay for their Military service, the Apostle
proves the lawfulness of Ministers Tithes and Salaries under the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9. 7. After which discoursing merrily with them, I told them, I conceived the
true reason, why they and other Officers formerly for Tithes and Ministers,
were now so eager against both, was, because most of them had lately purchased
so much Crown, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands charged with Tithes, that now
out of mere covetousness they would pull down Tithes, to hook them into their
own Purses from the Ministers, and though they were never purchased by them in
their particulars to improve their over cheap Purchases, to the highest
Advantage; and because others should not blame them for it, they turned
Preachers themselves, that they might claim some seeming Right to their own and
others Tithes, and save the charges of a Minister. At which they gave a silent
blushing Smile, without a Reply. Not long after, about the beginning of January
last there came a Petition ready drawn to the Castle, from the General Council
of the Army Officers, sitting at St. James's (as the Soldiers themselves
informed me) directed to those, who then were styled, The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, and Supreme Authority of the Nation: though those who
sent it knew the contrary, the Supreme Power lay in others hands; The effect of
which Petition was, For the total Abolition of Tithes of all sorts, as a Jewish
and Antichristian Bondage and Burden on the Estates and Consciences of the
Godly; and that for the future they and the People might not be ensnared or
oppressed with Tithes, or any forced Maintenance to the Ministers, or any thing
like it in the stead thereof. This Petition all the Officers and Soldiers in
the Garrison by beat of Drum, upon the change of the Gards, were summoned three
several Mornings, (just before my Chamber window) to subscribe, together with a
Printed Letter sent from the said Council of Officers, to all the Garrisons and
Soldiers in England. Scotland, and Ireland, concerning the heads of their
Intentions and Designs then on foot (and since executed) desiring their
opinions of, and concurrence with them therein by their Subscriptions. This
Letter with the Petition against Tithes, were both read together to the
Soldiers three several mornings, who at the close every morning, gave two or
three great shouts; and afterward subscribed both the Letter and Petition. One
Ensign and two commen Soldiers (who had formerly read the Worcester Petition
for Tithes, which this was to countermine) though they readily subscribed the
Letter, yet refused to sign the Petition; because they thought it very
unreasonable to take away Ministers Tithes altogether, and provide no other
maintenance in lieu of them; for which they were threatened to be turned out of
the Garrison and cashiered ere long (as I was informed by other Soldiers) all
the rest subscribed it, and diverse of them against their Consciences (as they
confessed to me) because they durst not displease their Officers, nor those who
sent it to them. Some Officers and Soldiers of the Castle (who were most
against all public Ordinances and Ministers, never resorting even to their own
meetings, and unordained speaking Chaplains in the Castle) were sent and
employed into the Country to get Country-mens Subscriptions to the Petition
against Tithes, in the name of the Well-affected Godly people in the County of
Cornwall; as if it proceeded from the Countrymen, not the Officers and
Soldiers. In which service, these active stirring Spirits were very
industrious in all parts to procure hand^ to this Petition, seducing diverse to
subscribe it, by misinforming them, That it was only against Impropriators
Tithes; which some honest Religious Gentlemen, substantial Freeholders, and
Grand Jurymen of the Country being informed of, drew up a Petition (in the
name of the Gentry, Freeholders, and others of the County, for the continuance
of Tithes and Ministers settled Maintenance, subscribed with many hands, and
presented by the grand Jury men to the Justices at their General Quarter
Sessions, to send up to those then in power, as the desire of the Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and the Generality of the County) which Petition (as I have been
informed) was presented accordingly by one of the Justices, by Order from the
Bench, though one of his Companions when it was delivered by the Grand Jury to
him to present to the Bench, had the impudence to tear the Petition in pieces
in open Court, before he acquainted his Associates with it; for which he
received a public check. After the Soldiers Subscription of the foresaid
Petition against Tithes in the Castle, the like whereunto (as some Soldiers
acquainted me) was sent to most other Garrisons and Counties to subscribe, (by
which we see whence such and other Petitions originally spring) I demanding the
reason (of two or three Soldiers who were ingenuous) why they were so eager
against Ministers Tithes, since they were (Spiritual) Soldiers as well as
they, and themselves received above the Tithes of their Tithes in Taxes for
their pay? Who returned me this blunt clamorous Answer, That they conceived the
true reason of it was, that their Officers intended to have the Tithes
themselves, or at least the full value of them IN TAXES for their pay; that so
the people much impoverished and complaining of their heavy Taxes, might be
able to hold out the longer to pay them, being seemingly eased by the Soldiers
in their Tithes, though they took them all out again in their increased Monthly
Contributions; and that this was the private talk and opinion they had of this
Petition amongst themselves, but they must not speak of it in public to any. I
am not apt to be suspicious of any men's Actions or Designs, unless I see some
probable grounds of Inducement; but if this be one principal Design of the
Officers and Soldiers present stickling against Ministers Tithes, to get them
into their own hands in kind, (as they have done much of the Bishops, Deans,
Chapters and Crown Lands, and the rest in moneys in their Sales for their
Arrears and pay) or at least to fetch them out of the Peoples Purses in doubled
or augmented Taxes, equivalent to their Tithes in value, or exceeding them, (as
the premises persuade me to incline to) the Ease and Gain either promised to,
or expected by the People upon the abolishing of Tithes, will prove but a mere
Delusion and Cheat at last; and instead of easing them, will only double,
treble and augment their heavy intolerable Taxes (now imposed and disposed too
by the Soldiers themselves alone, beyond all Presidents of former Ages, or
Kings of the worst edition) and continue them the longer on their broken
Estates and drained Purses. Which will be but a most just, deserved Divine
punishment on them, for detaining their Ministers Tithes, as the forecited
Authors resolve. Whereas if these Saint-seeming Officers and Soldiers, so much
pretending the peoples ease and weal, would cast off the veil of Dissimulation,
and really ease the people in good earnest out of Conscience and Justice, they
should do it, as I told them, by disbanding all unnecessary Garrisons (mere
useless Toys to secure the Country either from an invading or pillaging Enemy
by Sea or Land, as I have made many Garrison-Souldiers acknowledge by
unanswerable Demonstrations) disband their long* continued Army and Forces,
kept up on the peoples drained Purses to their undoing (for what ends the very
blindest men now see) put the peoples necessary defense when there is occasion
into their own hands and elected Militia, and abolish all these heavy incessant
Monthly Contributions, Taxes, Excises so long continued on them, to maintain
the Army and enrich the Officers; being the Peoples sorest Grievance (not
Ministers Tithes, which few count a Burden, and then upon mere Mistakes) which
late created Monsters, (unknown to our Forefathers, who knew none but Tenths,
Fifteenths, and Subsidies duly granted, one or two in several years) will in
short time eat out not only our Ministers and Peoples Tithes, but the remaining
Nine parts too, and leave them most miserable Beggars in conclusion, without
any Food or Provision for their Souls or Bodies: and no other Magistracy,
Ministry, Government, Laws, Liberties, Privileges, but what the Army. Officers
and Soldiers, (their late pretended humble Servants, but now their Supreme
Lords and Masters) shall out of their mere Grace and Favor allow them, as
their conquered Vassals, as many of them are not ashamed even publicly in my
hearing, as well as others, for to style our own enslaved Nation, as well as
Scots and Irish. And then they shall all lament their folly when too late, in
concurring with these Swordmen to ab^^ish their Ministers Tithes, in the old
Poets Elegy, in a like e^se as ours,

Impius haec tam culta novalta Miles habebit?
Barbarus has Segetes? En quo discordia Cives
Perduxit miseros! En queis consevimus Agros!
Suidas in Leone.
Suidas records of Leo the Emperor, that when on a time he commanded Eulogius
a learned Philosopher should have a Liberal Princely Reward bestowed on him^* A
great Officer and Courtier standing by said, That money would be better bestowed
for the maintenance of Soldiers, To which the Emperor replied, Nay, I would
rather it might be brought to pass in my time, That the Riches now bestowed
upon Soldiers, might be given to maintain Philosophers. And I suppose all
rational wise men now will be of the same mind concerning Ministers, and rather
they should enjoy their Tithes and Glebes, than Soldiers and Buff-Preachers.
All which out of true Affection to our Ministry and my Native Country, without
any private design to scandalize the Soldiers, I submit to all prudent men's
consideration, who by this will be able to judge of the truth of this
Proposition, without further proof.

In the A thing formerly proposed by them in their Agreement of the People,
presented to the Commons* House, Jan. 20. ^ 649. p. 24.
Officers printed Proposals., August 13. 1652. to those they then styled, the
Supreme Power of the Nation; I found the first of all to be, The abolishing of
all Tithes, as an unequal, troublesome and contentious way of Maintenance,
respect being had therein to others Rights, but not to the Ministers: who have
the only ture, proper, legal Right unto them; and this to propagate the
preaching of the Gospel^ I profess when I read it in the Diurnal, I told some
Soldiers who brought it me to read in Pendennys, 1. I could not possibly
conceive, that the putting down of Ministers Tithes, should be a means to
propagate the preaching of the Gospel, but rather to suppress it, the very
Scripture resolving the contrary, Neh. 13. 10, 11, 12. and 3 Chron. 31. 3, etc.
and the Heathen Poet concluding, Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia
s^ tollas? 2ly. That I wondered men professing Conscience, Justice and Religion,
should have more regard to Impropriators and others Rights to Tithes, who had
no original right at all unto them, but only by Popes Bulls and Dispensations,
and did no service for them, without any special regard to Ministers Rights,
who had only a due and true Divine and human Right to them, and received them
as due wages for their Ministry: I doubted, the only cause was, because they or
some of their Friends were owners of Lessees of some Impropriations, which they
were loath to part with for the Peoples ease, or give in to the Church, without
a considerable Recompense. 3ly. That the suggestion of the unequal, troublesome
and contentious way of Tithes, was a very strange and daring Objection against
the very wisdom and Justice of God, who instituted and prescribed them to his
own chosen people: against the wisdom, justice, prudence of our own, and all
other Christian Kings, States, Parliaments, Churches, that have at first
pitched upon, and so long continued, established by successive Laws and Edicts
this way of Maintenance as most equal; rich and poor paying a Tenth alike
according to the greatness o^ smallness of their Estates, and the poor Farmer
and Tenant paying them out of his Landlords Estate, as allowed in his Rent or
Fine, not out of his own private purse alone, being more equal than any Taxes
or Excises for the Armies pay. As least troublesome to the Ministers at least,
who were only at the cost and trouble to carry in their Tithes at Harvest, when
cut and severed from the Crop to their hands, to prevent the trouble of
plowing, sowing, weeding, mowing, reaping, gathering, which might divert them
from their Studies and Ministry: And as little troublesome, or not
overtroublesom at least, it is to the Husbandman, who sows, cuts and makes it
up together with his own, and then only severs it out, and is not now bound to
carry it into his Ministers Barn, much less to thresh, cleanse and sever his
Corn, Wine or Oil, and other Tithes, and carry it to Jerusalem, and the
Treasuries of the Priests and Levites at his own cost; as the Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 18.
Neh. 13. 12, 19. 2 Chro. 31. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Purchase Pilgrimage. l. 2. c. 7. p.
130, 1^1.
Israelites were obliged by God to do: which these Officers* (had they lived
amongst them, and paid a second Tenth, as well as a first, and first fruits
besides) would have petitioned God himself to abolish, as a troublesome way of
Maintenance, which they could not brook, though the godly Israelites and Jews
repined not against it, but cheerfully brought up their Tithes to the Priests
Treasuries as they were enjoined. And as no ways contentious or litigious in
it self, were people as just and conscionable to pay their Tithes; there being
many Parishes in England, (and that wherein I live one) wherein I never heard
of any suit or quarrel betwixt the Ministers and Parishioners for Tithes, there
being far more suits and contentions for just Rents, Annuities and Debts
throughout the Nation than for Tithes (at least ten for one in proportion)
before these late contentious Lawless times, when many unconscionable,
unrighteous Wretches (pretending Religion, to cover their fraud, covetousness
and oppression) will pretend Conscience for not paying their very Rents, and
Debts, as well as Tithes: And such who have so little grace or fear of God as
to contend with their Ministers for their just Tithes, will be altogether
Litigious toward them, for any other Annuity, or settled way of Maintenance
that can be devised in lieu of Tithes, seeing nothing will content such
perverse and contentious Wretches, but a Liberty to pay their Ministers only
what they please, and that in conclusion shall be just nothing, as their
subsequent Petitions and present Practices now manifest to God, Angels and men.
And I doubt the Change of this ancient, known, long approved certain
Maintenance by Tithes, to any other certain or uncertain way, will create more
suits and troubles among people, than ever our Tithes did since their first
institution. This was my subi^^n opinion of their Proposition, when I first
read it; and shall serve for a public answer to it now, if any insist upon it
to prove Tithes inconvenient and burdensome to the People, and therefore sit to
be totally abolished.

The main Objection, I ever yet This Objection I find recited in the Council
of Lingon Anno 1404. and there Answered. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. p. 968.
read or heard against Object.
Tithes, is this, That Tithes are a great discouragement and hindrance to
Husbandmens industry and improvements; since Ministers must have not only the
Tenths of their Lands, as they found them, but likewise of their Crop, Labor,
Industry and Improvements, which is now (writes Can and others more largely)
one of the sorest Burdens and greatest Oppressions and Tyranny that lies upon
them, and discourages many from improving the Lands to the public prejudice.

I answer, 1. That this Objection no ways concerns Soldiers, Weavers, Tailors,
Tradesmen, Townsmen and other Mechanics, who are the most and greatest
Sticklers and Petitioners against Tithes; but only Husbandmen and Country
Gentlemen and Farmers living upon Tillage, very few of which (not one of a
thousand) ever yet petitioned against Tithes, as such a grievous Oppression (at
leastwise as a Farmer) for the burdensomness of Tithes, but only as an
Anabaptist, or other Sectary, out of hatred and opposition to our Ministers
Callings or Persons. And till the Generality or Major part of the Gentry,
Yeomanry and Country Farmers in each County Petition and declare against their
Predial Tithes as such an intolerable Grievance, no Officers, Soldiers,
Citizens, Anabaptistical Mechanics, and busybodies in other men's Callings
and Grievances which concern them not, are no ways to be heard, countenanced
or credited in this particular, by any Powers whatsoever in point of Justice or
Prudence. 2ly. The payment of Tithes, never yet discouraged any Person, either
in the Land of Canaan, England, or other Countries, (at least not any
considerable number of men, or any that had either true Wisdom, grace,
honesty, or love to God and the Ministrey) from any sort of Tillage or
improvement whatsoever out of which Tithes are paid, the gain by the good
husbandry and improvement being abundantly recompensed in the nine Parts, over
and above the Tithes. And therefore till the Objectors can make good their
allegation, by presidents of considerable number of wise, godly men and others,
discouraged from Tillage and Improvements merely by the payment of Predial
Tithes out of them, in all former ages, or of late years, to the real prejudice
of the Public, (which they can never do) this grand Objection against Tithes
must be decried, both as Fabulous and Ridiculous, yea as Scandalous: The late
Petition of the Cornish Gentlemen, Farmers and Yeomen (where such improvements
are most made to their great Charge) for the continuance of Tithes, being a
sufficient Evidence to prove it such. 3ly. It is observable, that the
Petitioners against Tithes upon this ground, are as eager See the Levelers New
Printed paper entitled, Englands Fundamental Laws and Liberties claimed, etc.
and many Petitions of late.
Writers and Petitioners against all ancient Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, and
usual moderate Impositions upon Merchandise imported or exported, for the
necessary defense of the Sea and Trading (amounting to as much upon every pound
of Merchandise, as Tithes do upon Husbandmens Tillage and Improvements, the
charges of the Freight, Transportation and Customs in foreign pares considered,
and to far more and that as a very great discouragement to Merchandise and
Trading. Which as all wise men know to be a mere fabulous untruth, contrary to
the experience of all States, Kingdoms, Republics in the World, and of Holland
it self, subsisting by Merchandise, where they pay ^^ high Customs or higher,
than See all Acts for Tonnage Poundage and Impositions, Mr. Hackwels argument
against Impositions, Cooks 2. Instit. p. 58, 59, to 64.
our ancient Legal Merchants Duties to the State amount to, which never made
any Merchants to give over trading; (So if, when, and where rightly imposed,
managed, they are the greatest encouragements of Trade and Merchandise, by
Guarding the Seas, and securing Traders against Enemies and Pirates, the only
encouragement to Merchant-Adventurers; who must and will all give over trading,
when they cannot safely put to Sea without apparent loss of all they trade
for, by Enemies or Pirates. And therefore this clamourous Objection against
Tithes should have no more weight with Wisemen to suppress them; than their
idle clamor against all old Legal Customs, Rates and Duties for the necessary
defense of the Sea and Trade, to abrogate them altogether, to the ruin both of
our Traffic, Navy, and Merchants too that pay them. 4ly. This Objection is
directly made against the providence, wisdom, and policy of God himself, who
prescribed Tithes amongst his own people out of all their Tillage and
Improvements; and knew it would be no impediment to them, his Mal. 3. 9, 10,
11, 12. See Augustine Sermo. 219.
Blessing promised to their payment of Tithes, being a greater improvement to
them in their Crops, than all their extraordinary cost and pains amounted to:
Wherefore it can be no impediment or discouragement to any real Saints good
Husbandry or Improvement now; who deserves to reap no benefit by his Labor or
Improvements, if God himself shall have no share or portion out of them for the
maintenance of his public worship and Ministers. 5ly. If there were any truth
or strength in this Objection, yet it extends not unto all tithes, but only to
such as are paid out of extraordinary chargeable Improvements; as to make mere
barren Heath, Ling and Sands, out of which no former profit^ naturally grew,
manurable for Corn or Pasture, Tillage and Meadows, Woods, out of which most
predial Tithes arise; So there is a sufficient remedy against this pretended
Mischief already provided in the best and strictest Statute made by the best of
our Protestant Kings, for the true payment of Tithes, at the beginning our
Reformation, when Popery was banished in the Parliament of 2 E. 6. c. 13. which
provides, That all such harren Heath, or waste Grounds, which before that time
have lain barren, and paid no Tithes by reason of the said barrenness, and now
be, or hereafter shall be improved or converted into ar able Ground or Meadow,
shall from henceforth after the term and end of seven years, next after such
Improvement fully ended and determined, pay Tithe of the Corn and Hay growing
on the same, and be discharged in the interim, as the words import, and our
Judges have expounded it. All which considered, this Objection must be
henceforth exploded and LEVELLED to the ground.

Now because I find a clear Design and Endeavor in sundry Anabaptists,
Officers, Soldiers, if they cannot prevail to put down Tithes upon other
pretexts, yet to rob the Ministers of them at present, if not in perpetuity,
upon this pretense, to sequester and convert them to the use of the Army, for
the pretended ease of the people in their future taxes. I shall for the cloze of
this Proposition, and prevention of this detestable impious Sacrilegious plot
against our Ministers and Religion too, propound and answer all such specious
Arguments, Pretenses, as may be produced by them to delude the people, veil
over the execrable Impiety, and take off the odium of this prodigious Villainy.

First, they may and will suggest, that they have some ancient punctual
Presidents to warrant, countenance, justify this their Project. As namely, the
practical example of Charles Martel King of France, who (about the year of our
Lord, 730. as the Marginal Gul. Malmesbu^iensis, De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c.
4. ^uocus Chron. in Carolo Simplici. Cent. Magd. 8. c. 7. and 9. Dr. Til lesly
in his Animad versions on Mr. seldens History of Tithes, p. 64, to 69.
Authors report) having perpetual wars, and seldom or never peace in his
Kingdom, Ideo res Ecclesiarum suis Militibus in stipendium contulit maxima ex
part; did thereupon bestow the Lands, Revenues, Rents, and Tithes too (as the
Act of Restitution with others prove) of Parish-Churches, Monasteries, Bishops,
Deans and Chapters upon his Soldiers for their Pay and Arrears; for the
greatest part: And surely upon a very Godly and just reason (as John Can, and
some Army Officers will swear) thus expressed in his Decree recorded in Tom. 3.
p. 648.
Goldastus and Mr. Review, p. 466.
Seldom: ut subveniatur necessitatibus Publicis, et Salariis Militum, pro Dei
Ecclesiae and bono statu Reipublicae, and uniuscujusque propria pace
pugnantium: That he might relieve the Public Necessities, and pay and reward
the Soldiers fighting for the Church of God, and the good of the State of the
Commonwealth, and the proper peace of every one: as our Officers and Soldiers
now say they do. And is it not then most just they should have all the Lands,
Glebes, and Tithes of the Church, King, Commonwealth, and of every particular
Person too, who have fought all this while for them and their defense? To this
they may chance to add, the President of the Extravag. De Decimis, c. 10.
Joannes Sarisbur. De Nugis Curialium, l. 7. c. 21. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, c. 6. p. 120, 121.
Templers and Hospitalers, who being no part of the Clergy, but Religious
Soldiers, employed only to fight in the defense of the Church, were by special
Bulls and Grants of several Popes exempted from paying any Tithes at all to any
Ministers out of the Lands belonging to their several Orders, Because they
fought for the Church against her Enemies, as Turks, Saracens, and other
Infidels. Therefore there is great reason, equity all our Officers and
Soldiers who have lately fought, or are now or hereafter fighting for the
Church against her Enemies and Malignants, should be totally and finally
discharged from paying any Tithes at all out of their Old or New Purchased
Lands, Leases, Cattle, Estates, Spoils, Pay or other increase. Besides, most of
our Army Officers, and very many of the Soldiers, are extraordinarily gifted,
inspired from Heaven, and constant Speakers or Preachers Cannes 2d. voice from
the Temple, p. 24, etc.
transcending all Blackcoated Ministers, yea the undoubted new Ministers and
Priests of Jesus Christ, as many deem them; So as they may be truly styled 1
Pet. 2. 5, 9.
a chosen Generation, a Roy^^ Priesthood, yea Army of Priests, being Rev. 1. 5.
made Kings and Priests by Christ himself to God the Father: as John Can has
published in his Voice, p. 24, 27, 28, 29. Therefore they may not only enter
into our Ministers Churches, Pulpits, and dispossess them of them (as he there
asserts and presses them to put in execution;) but be capable in right,
equity, justice, to receive all their Tithes to their own use: Nay one step
more, John Can in his Voice, p. 27. thus peremptorily concludes, I will
affirm, and abide by it; since it has pleased the Lord to draw out the hearts
of some Soldiers and others, (who were never brought up at Universities to
learning) publicly to preach, (which is not above 10, or 12. years) the People
of this Commonwealth have had more true Light and glorious Discoveries of
Christ and his Kingdom, than all the Nations Ministers ever before made known
to them, since first they took their calling from the Sea of Rome, till this
Day. On the contrary, the greatest Heresies and Blasphemies which have been in
the world have been broached by Ministers (and Scholars) whereas Laymen at the
same time have been sound in the Faith, and zealously earnest against such
abominable Doctrines. Therefore there is just ground that both our
Universities, and all Colleges for Advancement of Learning, should be
suppressed as the very poison, bane, subversion of Religion, Church and
Commonwealths, (as some Soldiers and the Anabaptists generally deem them and
their Lands (as well as Bishops, Deans, Chapters, and Ministers Glebes and
Tithes) sold or conferred on the Officers and Soldiers, of the Army for their
better encouragement, reward and supportation, to propagate defend Religion and
the Common wealth: A design now eagerly prosecuted by some.

To which let them receive this Answer before hand, since I intend not any
future Treatise of this nature, 1. That I never read of any pious Generals,
Armies, Officers, or Soldiers in Scripture (the Gal. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3.
rule of Faith and Manners) that spoiled the Church or Ministers of their Lands
and Tithes to maintain their wars, or enrich, reward themselves; but we find it
expressly recorded of Genesis 14. 20. Hebr. 7. 2, 4, etc.
Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful, that he paid Tithes even of the
Spoils of the first Wars, to the first P^^^st we find in Scripture, unto Christ
himself, both in the Old and New Testament, for other Christian Soldiers
imitation. The like we read of 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28.
David, and all his Officers, Captains of the Army, with sundry others
forecited; whose Presidents are more obliging and commendable than Charles
Martels. 2ly. That it was the Custom, use and pious practice of many Pagan
Warlike Nations, as the Romans, Graecians, Cartbaginians, Tyrians, Saxons to do
the like, who consecrated the Tenths of all their Spoils to their Idol-Gods and
Priests, as we may read at large in Mr. Seldens History of Tithes and Review,
c. 3. and in Mr Richard Mountague his Diatribe thereon, chapter 3. Therefore they
are worse than Pagans who neglect not only to pay their Ministers the Tenth of
their Spoils, but will even spoil them of their Glebes and Tithes besides. 3ly.
It is very observable (and let our Soldiers and Officers consider it i^ good
earnest) That God himself specially consecrated and devoted the future Spoils,
a Sacrifice for and to himself, and all the Spoils, City of Jericho (the very
first City taken by the Israelites in the Land of Canaan) as a sacred
First Fruits and kind of Tenth for the use of his Sanctuary and Priests, in
these memorable words, Josh. 6. 17, 18, 19. And the City shall be devoted, even
it and all that is therein (except Rabab and her Family and House) to the Lord,
and you in any wise keep your selves from the devoted thing, lest you make your
selves accursed, when ye take of the devoted thing, and make the Camp of Israel
a curse and trouble it. But all the Silver and Gold and Uessels of Brass and
Iron are consecrated unto the Lord, they shall come into the Treasury of the
House of the Lord. Whereupon when the City was taken, they burnt it and all
that was in it (as a Sacrifice to the Lord) But the Silver and Gold and the
Uessels of Brass and of Iron, they put into the Treasury of the House of the
Lord, v. 24. But Acban (a covetous plundring Soldier) seeing among the rich
Spoils of the City a goodly Babylonish Garment, and two hundred Sh^kels of
Silver, and a wedge of Gold, coveted, took and hid them in the midst of his
Tent* which so much kindled the Anger of God against the Children of Israel for
this his Trespass in these devoted things; That they were presently smitten
before their Enemies of Ai, and fled before them. Whereupon Joshua their
General and chief Governor humbling himself before God, and requiring the
cause of this ill success; God returned him this Answer, Israel has sinned,
and they also have transgressed my Covenant which I commanded them; for they
have taken of the devoted thing, and have also stolen and dissembled also, and
they have also put it among their own stuff. Therefore the children of Israel
could not stand before their Enemies, but turned their backs before Enemies,
Because they were accursed, neither will I go with you any more. O Israel thou
can not stand before thine Enemies, until thou have taken away the accursed
devoted thing from among you. Whereupon this Sacrilegious Robbery of Achan
being discovered by Lot and his own Confession; and hid stolen Plunder devoted
to God taken forth of his Tent, and powered out before the Lord in the presence
of Joshua, and all the Children of Israel: Joshua passed this Judgment against
him for his Sacrilege, Why have thou troubled Israel? the Lord shall trouble
thee this day: and all Israel stoned him with Stones, and they burned them with
fire (as a devoted Sacrifice to God) after they had stoned him with stones. And
they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord turned
from the fierceness of his Anger. Wherefore the place is called the Valley of
Achor (that is Trouble) to this day. And when Hiel, many hundred years after in
Idolatrous Ahabs days, would needs seize upon the devoted Spoil of Jericho,
and build it again for his own habitation; he laid the Foundation thereof in
his firstborn Abiram, and set up the Gates thereof in his youngest Son Segub,
(that is, God destroyed, and cut off all his Posterity before the Gates were
set up, and the Building finished) according to the word of the Lord, which he
spoke by Joshua the Son of Nun; as we read at large, Josh. 7. throughout, 1
Kings 16. 34. and Josh. 6. 16. I read of Herodotus, l. 5. c. 25. Valerius
Maximus, l. 5. c. 3. Diodorus, An. 4. Olymp. 98. Dr. Usher Annals Veteris
Testamenti, p. 260.
A^axerxes, that (in imitation of Cambyses before him) he caused some Judges
(betraying their Trusts, like See Holinshed, Speed, and others. 10, and 11 R.
2. Mr. St. John's Speech against the Shipmony-Judges.
Tresylian of old, and too many of late) to be excoriated alive, and their
Skins to be hanged up round about the Tribunals, that the other Judges sitting
upon them might have an example hanging before their eyes, what punishment the
pravity of Judges did demerit. I desire all Soldiers, Officers, and
Sacrilegious Anabaptists, would hang up these Skins and Examples of Achan and
Hiel before their eyes, recorded in sacred Writ: and then make this use and
application to themselves of them. If Achan for stealing away only a Babylonish
Garment and a few Shekles of Silver and Gold of the very Spoils of Jericho
devoted to the service or Treasury of the House of the Lord, brought so much
wrath, misery upon the whole Nation, and Camps of Israel, and such a fatal
death and exemplary punishment upon himself; and Hiel only for building upon
the ruins of the Soil of this devoted City drew down sudden Death and
Destruction upon all his Sons and Posterity; O what strange exemplary wrath,
vengeance, and judgments shall we then draw upon the whole Nation, Army, our
Souls, Bodies and Posterities to their utter extirpation, if instead of
rendering unto God and his Ministers the Tenth of our warlike Spoils belonging
of right unto them; we shall sacrilegiously rob them not only of these Tenthes,
and all other issuing out of our Lands and Estates, but even of all their other
Glebes, Rectories, Tithes, Revenues; demolish the very Churches, Houses,
dedicated to Gods worship, o^ turn them into Houses for us and our Posterities
to inhabit: and obstinately, yea atheistically refuse to take warning by their,
and other sacrilegious Persons tragical examples? 4ly. Let those who will
imitate Charles Martels President, remember 1. his punishment: Gul. Malmesburi.
De Gestis Regum, l. 1. c. 4. Vita Eucherii apud Surium, Tom. 1. 10. F. Gratian,
Cause. 16. qu. 1. Edit. Gregoriana. Flodourdus Rhem. Hist. l. 2. c. 12. Juoni^
Chron. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, p. 51. 465. Dr. Tillesley, p. 67.
Historians record, That for this his Sacrilege, ^e was smitten with a long and
terrible Convulsion of all his Members whereof he died in great anguish: that
Eucherius Bishop. of Orleans in a Vision SAW HIM DAMNED FOR IT; and that upon
search made in his Tomb (by an Angels Admonition) it was also confirmed for
truth, no relic of his Corpse being found therein, but only a dreadful
Serpent. Mat. (...) Flores (...) An. 853 (...) 306.
Apud Frances Carolus Martellus insignis vir fortitudinis, exactis vitae suae
diebus in Ecclesia beati Dionysii legitur esse Sepultus, sed quia Patrimonia
cum Decimis omnium fere Ecclesiarum Galliae, pro stipendio commilitonum suorum
mutilaverat, miserabiliter a malignis Spiritibus de Sepulchro corporaliter
avulsus, usque in hodiernum diem nusquam comparui^; as Matthew Westminster
stories of him. 2ly. The censure passed against him for this Sacrilegious
Robbery, by the Marginal Authors and others: especially by Agobardus Bishop of
Lions, An. 828. in his Book B^bliotheca Patrum, Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 600, 601.
De Dispensatione, and Rei Ecclesiasticae contra Sacrilegos, worthy the
reading, who thus complains, p. 269. Nunc non solum possessiones
Ecclesiasticae, sed ipsae etiam Ecclesiae cum possessionibus venundantur, etc.
Which he condemns as detestable Sacrilege execrable to God and men: By Petrus
Damianus, Anno 1060. l. 1. Epist. 11. where he gives this censure of his
practice, and others: Inter omnia vero hic mala, Illud excedit, et Diabolicam
fere modum videtur aequare nequitiam. Quia praediis in Militem profligatis,
etc. Moreover among all wicked Acts, this exceeds, and seems almost to equal
the very wickedness of the Devil, That all the Farms and Possessions of the
Church being prodigally spent upon Soldiers, insuper etiam et Decimae and
plebes adduntu^ in Beneficium Secularibus: Moreover Tithes and people are
likewise added and conferred on (these) Secular men for a reward: which in hi^
lib. 4. Epist. 12. and lib. 5. Epist. 9. he styles a great Sin, Sacrilege, and
Profanation of holy things; concluding, What is it to turn Tithes to the use
of Soldiers and Secular men, nisi mortiferum iis virus, quo pereant, exhibere?
but to give them deadly Poison whereby they may perish? Petrus Blesensis
Archdeacon of Bath: Epist. 82. and Joannis de Belith De Divinorum Officiorum
Explicatione, c. 5. write much to the same effect; making it a greater Robbery
and Sacrilege to take away Ministers Tithes, though it be by the Popes own
Bulls, than violently to take away and plunder Men's Horses as they are riding
or car^ing in the High way, and convert them to their proper use; as Soldiers
use to do. 3ly. Let them remember, That Charles Martels immediate Successors so
much detested both his practice and Sacrilege, that by Aventinus, Annal.
Boyorum, l. 3. p. 179. Centur. Magd. 8. c. 7, and 9. Goldastus Constit. Imp.
Tom. 1. p. 15. Dr. Tillesley Animadversions on Mr. Seldom, p. 64, to 75.
public Edicts they decreed in these terms, That the Tithes and Ecclesiastical
Lands and Goods seized upon by profane Persons, (so they styled the Soldiers
possessing them) should be all restored: and so they were accordingly, and
those Harpyes robbed of their Sacrilegious prey. Let the late Purchasers of
such Tithes and Lands remember it, and think of a possible, if not probable Act
of Resumption, in case they make no voluntary restitution.

4ly. Let them consider the large Revenues the Popish Clergy at this day enjoy
in France, amounting to above 12. Millions of Annual Rents, at a moderate
value, besides money and oblations; as Bodine, Thuanus, Hist. l. 28. Ioannes de
Lae^y Descriptio Galliae, c. 17, 18. record. To which ^ might add the
extraordinary great Revenues of the Popish Clergy in Spain, recorded by Lucius
Marinaeus, Siculus, Ioannes de Laet, in his Hispaniae Descriptio, cap. 20. and
Jo. Boterus in his Hist. Universalis, and of the Popish Clergy in the Kingdom
of Naples in Italy, registered by Thomas Segethus, De Principibus Italiae, p.
121. Which they still enjoy, notwithstanding their manifold Wars, without sale
or Diminution for their Soldiers pay. And will it not be an intolerable
Impiety, Sacrilege, dishonor for Protestant Soldiers, and our new Republic,
not to allow our Ministers so much as their inconsiderable remaining Rectories,
Glebes, Tithes, to support our Religion, and instruct and save the Peoples
Souls?

5ly. The reason rendered by Martel and others, That the Officers and Soldiers
deserve the Lands and Tithes of the Church and Ministers, because they fight
for the defense of the Church, is very strange, and just the self-seeking Plea
and Practice of sundry of our Officers and Soldiers at this day, scarce to be
paralleled in any Age, 1. They were raised for the Exact Collection, p. 340,
342, 376, 572, 631, 632, 641, 743. A Collection, p. 428, 8, 13, 41, 43, 44, 49,
51, 61, 64, 96, 99, 623, 696, 879. Appendix p. 15. and elsewhere.
Defense and Preservation of the late Kings Person, Posterity, and just Rights
of his Crown: Ergo in discharge of this Trust they have most justly sentenced,
beheaded the King; outed, dis-inherited his Posterity; and seized upon all the
Crown Lands and Revenues in his three Kingdoms for their own use, pay, support,
reward and inheritance. 2ly. They were raised and fought for the preserva^irn
and defense of the Kingdom, Parliament, and Members Privileges, and Laws and
Liberties of England: Therefore they have justly by armed violence invaded,
subverted them all, disposed of all the Common wealth and Revenue of the Nation
to themselves and their Instruments to support themselves and their usurped
Arbitrary Power and Government over us; and may null and pull down not only our
Old, but their own New*created Parliaments, and State-Councils (as they style
them) and change both Government and Governors at their pleasure. 3ly. They
fought for the particular Defense, Peace, Safety of every man's Person and
Estate in our three Kingdoms: Therefore they may seize upon and dispose of all
their Persons, Lands, Estates at their pleasures, and impose what Taxes,
Excises, Imposts they list, and exercise a legislative absolute Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power over them, without a lawful Parliament, to eat them quite out
of all. Lastly, They fought for our Church, Ministers, Religion: Ergo they may
subvert them all, and seize upon all Church Lands, Revenues, Rectories, Glebes,
Tithes, yea Churches and Churchyards too, for to reward, support and pay the
Army; and possess themselves of what ever our Ancestors settled on the Church
and Ministers to instruct and save the Peoples Souls, as a just Salary for
killing their Christian Brethrens Bodies, and destroying the peoples Souls and
Bodies too. Certainly the worst Enemies they fought against, would not, could
not have done worse than this, nor yet so bad. This certainly is a Devastation,
Destruction, not a Defense or Preservation, of what they were raised and paid
to protect, an Invasion and Depredation, not a Patronage and Protection: a
Remedy more destructive than the worst Disease, War, Enemy, who could but have
stripped us of no more had they conquered us, than these our new armed Defenders
of the Faith, Church, King, Parliament, Laws and Liberties have done or intend
to do, as many fear. It was John Baptists Evangelical Precept to all Soldiers
whatsoever, Luke 3. 14.
Do violence to none, (in Person, Lands, or Estate; much less to Ministers
privileged by the Law of War from Violence:) and to be content with their
Wages: without seizing, sequestring, invading the Lands, Estates, Glebes,
Tithes, Persons of Ministers, King and Members or any others they fought for,
who never raised, nor waged Soldiers to deprive them of their Patrimonies,
Estates, Callings, Rights, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of Parliament,
Government, Governors, but only to secure them in the sull possession of them
all. This new Martial law and practice then, is both irrational and
unevangelical, fitter for professed Thieves, Turks, and Pirates, than Christian
Soldiers; and far different from the foresaid Christian Soldiers practice in
former Ages; who as they would by no means be engaged by their Ambros. Orat. in
Julianum, and Grotius de Jure Belli, p. 35, 88.
Pagan Emperors or Generals commands to fight against any of their Christian
Brethren, choosing rather to obey God their Supreme Emperor than Men: So the
famous Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 1. c. 2. sect. 3. p. 35, 36, 88. Crantzius
Saxonitorum, l. 7. c. 16.
Thebean Legion of Christian Soldiers and their Officers under Julian the
Apostate, when he commanded them to bring forth their Arms against the
Christians, returned him this most Heroic Answer, worthy to be written in
Golden Letters, briefly, fully and elegantly expressing the Duty of every true
Christian Soldier in all Ages and Cases; Offerimus nostras in quemlibet hostem
manus, quas sanguine innocentium cruentare nefas ducimus. Dexterae ipsae
pugnare adversus Impios and Inimicos sciunt, laniare, pios et Cives nesciunt.
Meminerimus nos (and O that our Army Officers and Soldiers would remember it
likewise) Pro Civibus potius quam adversus Cives arma sumpsisse. Pugnabimus
semper pro Justitia, pro pietate pro innocentium salute (not for Kings,
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Ministers Lands, Revenues, Tithes, Estates, the
things now fought for:) Haec fuerunt hactenus pretia periculorum. Pugnavimus
pro fide, quam quo pacto conservemus tibi (Imperatori) Si hanc Deo nostro non
exhibemus? O that this Resolution were now engraven in every Army Officers and
Soldiers heart! our Ministers then needed not to fear the loss of their
Tithes, Rectories, Churches, nor our Universities, Colleges, Corporations, or
any other the disinheris^on of their Lands, Laws, Liberties, Powers, by
Military Rapines, violences, and usurpations.

6ly. The Exemptions of the Hospitalers and Templers Lands from paying of
Tithes, was a Extravag. De Decimis, c. 10 Mr. Seldens History p. 120, 121.
mere Papal Innovation and Devise, which Can, who pleads so much against
Tithes upon this mistake that they are Popish, and all his Confederates should
be ashamed to own and imitate: The Israelites Gods own people during their
possession of Canaan, had many foreign and Civil wars in most of their Judges,
See the Book of Judges, Kings, Chron. Maccabes, Josephus, Paul Eber and others.
Kings and High Priests successive Reigns, and Roman Governors over them: yet
we never read, that any of their Generals, Officers or Soldiers, fighting for
their Churches, Priests and Religions Defense against foreign or Domestique
idolatrous Enemies, pretended the least Exemption of their Lands or Estates
from paying all their ancient forementioned accustomed Tithes to the Levites,
Priests and Poor: no^ any Christian Soldiers else but the Popish Templers and
Hospitalers for the Lands conferred on their Orders, not for their private
Inhabitances. And if Soldiers be obliged to pay Tithes of all their Spoils and
Gains of war (as I have abundantly proved) much more then of their real and
personal Estates, as well as any others not in arms: especially where they are
well paid and war not on their own expenses, but other men's purses: Amongst the
Jews we never read of any Taxes, Tributes or Contributions imposed on the
Cities, Houses, Lands or Tithes of the People and Levites for the maintenance
of wars, or pay of Soldiers, from which even Artaxerxes (a heathen Conqueror)
exempted them by an express Decree, Ezra 7. 24. Yet they received Tithes of all
their Kings, Generals, Captains, Soldiers, as well as Peoples Lands and
increase both in times of war and peace. But our Army Officers and Soldiers
now receive above the Tithes of all our Ministers Tithes, Glebes in Monthly
Taxes and Contributions by arbitrary, illegal Impositions without their or
Consents in Parliament, contrary to their Antiq^. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 209, to
220. 282, 284, 299, 300. Thomas Walsingham. Hist Angl p. 348. See the Acts for
the Clergies subsidies in all our Kings reigns, granted only by themselves in
Convocation.
^ntient Privileges, all former Presidents and our Laws. Therefore there is all
Equity and Justice they should receive the Tenths both of their Lands, Goods
and Gains of war too, and that no Officers or Soldiers should be exempted from
Tithes as the Templers and Hospitalers were, who had no other Pay or Salaries
but their Lands, and received no constant Contributions from the Clergy.
Xenophon Helien l. 4. Mountague Diatriba p. 500, 501.
Xenophon, that famous learned Greek Heathen Commander, having made the most
Noble retreat we ever read of in Story, out of the upper part of Asia with ten
thousand men through mountains, frost and snow, in memory of his thankfullness
to the Gods for this safe return, separated the Tenth of all the Spoils that
his Army had gained in the wars, and by general consent, committed them to the
Captains to be dedicated to Apollo and Diana; That for Apollo, was laid up at
Delphos in the Athenean Treasury; but with that other Tenth Dianas share,
Xenophon himself purchased a Piece of Land, and built thereon a Temple and an
Altar to Diana, and appointed the Tenth of the yearly increase for ever unto
it. This Pagan Commander and his Captains and Soldiers were so far from
exempting their Lands from Tithes to their Idol-Deities, that they Tithed the
very Spoils of their wars to them, and built and endowed a Temple to Diana with
Lands, and Tithes out of their own ^ands and Estates for ever. Which shall for
ever silence and shame those Christian Army Officers, Soldiers, Templers and
Hospitalers, who would exempt not only their Spoils, but their Lands and
Estates from all Tithes to God and his Ministers because they are Soldiers,
and pretend to fight for their Defense.

7ly. This Reason, that they should enjoy not only their own but our Ministers
Tithes, because they are an Army of Preachers and Priests, and more Officers,
Soldiers in the present Army Preachers or Speakers (as they phrase them) than
ever in any Army in the world before, has frequently minded me of that saying
of Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Pope Gregory the first (which famous In his Exposition on 2 Thessalonians. 2. p. 116.
Bishop Jewel much insisted on) concerning Antichrist. The King of Pride
(Antichrist) is at hand, and which is an horrible Thing to be spoken,
Sacerdotum est praeparatus Exercitus, an Army of Priests is prepared to guard
and usher him in. Certainly I never heard nor read of such an Army of Priests
(as our Army now is, before; wherein there are not only some hundreds of
disguised Popish Antichristian Priests and Jesuits (as most wisemen conceive)
under the disguise of Soldiers) preaching, venting, many notorious Errors,
Blasphemies and Antichristian Tenants, to infect the Army and Nation too, but
many preaching Colonels, Captains, Officers, Soldiers of all sorts, not a
preaching General (as some say) too; And among others, one of these
Army-Preachers not long since published a Book with this Title: Antichrist with
us; by John Spittle-house, a member of the Army: printed at London, 1648. which
intimated to me at first sight, that Antichrist was in the Army: and truly if
they proceed (as Can would have them) to usurp our Ministers Office,
Rectories, Glebes, Tithes, Churches to themselves, and Suppress our Ministers,
Churches, Parishes, as Antichristian; I shall then justly suspect, and others
will confidently conclude, they are the very Army of Priests prophesied of by
Pope Gregory, who shall forcibly usher and bring in Antichrist the King of
Pride (who 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4
exalts himself above all that is called God or Worshipped, that is, above
Kings, Lords, Parliaments, and all Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers whatsoever,
as See Dr. Abbot, Dr. Beard, Dr. Squire of Antichrist, and Dr. Sclater on that
place.
Expositors resolve) into our Church, and re-establish him in his Throne.

8ly. I never read in the Old Testament or New, that Christ Authorized,
Commissioned or sent out any Captains, or Soldiers to preach the Gospel, or
made choice of such to be his Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel: Surely had
this been a part of their duty as Christian Officers and Soldiers, John
Baptist Christ's forerunner would have instructed those Luke 3. 14.
Soldiers who came purposely to and demanded of him: what shall we do? in
another manner than he did; and said unto them; Go and preach the Gospel, and
instruct the ignorant Soldiers and people publicly where ever you quarter: in
the first place; and then, Do violence to no man, and accuse no man falsely, and
be content with your wages: The only precepts he gave them; Which our
Army Officers and Soldiers since they turned Preachers have much forgotten and
neglected: I read of 2. devout Centurions in the New Testament eminent for
their faith, piety, Charity, and of one devout Soldier; yet neither of them a
public Preacher: The first of these Colonels or Centurions Luke 7. 2, to 11.
built a Synagogue for the Jews and others to meet and preach in who were
Priests and Ministers; but I read not he ever preached in it publicly himself.
The latter ( Centurion) is thus characterized, Acts 10. 1, 2. That he was a
devout man, and one that feared God with all his House, which gave much Alms to
the people, and prayed to God continually: but doubtless he never preached,
for then it would have been there recorded, that he preached continually as
well a^ prayed: Yea, he was so far from this, that when the Angel of God came
to him in a vision; he said, Thy Pr^yers and thine Alms (not thy preaching,
therefore he preached not at all, or if he did God accepted it not, but
disliked it as against his word and will) are come into remembrance before God:
And now send men to Joppa and call for Simon Peter, he shall tell thee what
thou ought to do. Whereupon he presently sent two of his Servants, and a
devout Soldier continually waiting on him (but not on preaching) for the
Apostle Peter to preach to him, his Friends and Family; who repairing to him,
Cornelius goes forth to meet him, falls down at his feet, worshippeth him,
talks with him, brings him into his House, where many were come together;
relates his vision to Peter (mentioning again his Prayers and Alms, but not his
preaching) concluding thus: Now therefore are we all here present before God TO
HEAR (not preach) all things that are COMMANDED THEE of God; Whereas some
Centurions, Colonels, Captains and Soldiers of this Age, if Peter himself
should come to their Assemblies or Quarters, would be readier to teach and
preach to him, than to hear him, and apter to be his Teachers than Auditors, as
these only were: After which Peter preached to him and his company; I find
another sort of Captains and Soldiers in the New Testament Matthew. c. 26, and
27, and 28. Mar. 14, and 15. Luke 22, 22. John 18, and 19.
"Who went out and apprehended our Savior Jesus Christ, mocked him, derided,
crowned his Head with Thorns, stripped him of his Raiment, put him on a purple
Robe, bowed their Knees before him in scorn, saying, Hayl King of the Jews,
blindfolded, and then struck him with their hands, and bade him prophecy who
smote him: guarded him to his Trial, carried and nailed him to his Cross,
crucisied him between two Thieves, pierced his side with a Spear, gave him Gall
and Vinegar to drink, parted his Garments amongst them, cast lots upon his
Vesture, and would have broke his Legs but that he was dead. After which they
watched and guarded his Sepulcher; took large Money of the Priests to smother
the truth of Christ's Resurrection by reporting a Lie, that his Disciples came
and stole him away whiles they were asleep; who TOOK the money and did as they
were taught;" and are branded for ever with this Epiphomena, These things
therefore the Soldiers did. After which some of this rank of Officers and
Soldiers by Acts 12. 1, to 12.
Herod's command killed James the Brother of John with the Sword, apprehended,
imprisoned, chained, and most strictly guarded the Apostle Peter, in order to
put him to death the next day; but that the Angel of God miraculously delivered
him. Others of them Acts 21. 31, 32, 33, etc. c. 22. 24, etc. c. 23. 23, etc.
to 35. c. 27, and 28.
apprehended, bound, and would have scourged Paul; guarded and carried him from
prison to prison; and when he was sent Prisoner to Rome; when the ship was
wracked, and their lives saved only for Paul's sake, they gave the Centurion
counsel to kill Paul, and all the other Prisoners, lest they should escape from
them by that wrack. These Soldiers no doubt were truly Antichristian; and if
the Matthew. 12. 33. Luke 6 43, 44.
Tree may be judged and known by its Fruits, and Soldiers by their Actions and
Intentions, I doubt there are far more of this later sort than of the first in
this Age, and if John Cannes Voice from the Temple be embraced for Gospel in
every point by the whole Army, no doubt they will then be all of this later
rank, not the Ministers and 2 Timothy 2. 3.
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, but of Antichrist alone; and the Hebr. 6. 6.
Crucisiers of Christ again in his faithful Ministers and Members; which I
desire them all sadly to consider.

9ly. Admit them to be made Kings and Priests to God the Father by Christ, in a
spiritual sense, as Rev. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9.
all the Elect Saints of God are; will it thereupon follow, that they may all
lawfully preach in public, administer Sacraments, and exercise the proper
Function of Priests and Ministers? If so, then by the self-same reason, they
may all lawfully exercise the office and power of Kings, as well as of Priests
(as some of them do in the highest degree beyond all Presidents of any our
Kings before them) and so under pretext of suppressing our Monarchy, and one
sole King as dangerous and pernicious; we shall have now no less than an whole
Army of Kings to rule and reign over us, and to engross not only all the old
Kings Lands and Revenues, but the greatest part of the Peoples far surmounting
of a Million or two each year in Contributions and Excise to support their new
Royal State and Dignity; as well as an Army of Priests, who have and would
swallow up our whole Churches Revenues, Glebes, Tithes, Patrimony, and our
Ministry too, for to support their new Evangelical Priesthood; that so they may
resemble both Christ and Melchisedec in their Kingly and Priestly Offices
united in one Person; though not in the Title of their Kingdom as the Apostle
interprets it, Hebr. 7. 2. being by Interpretation KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, and
after that also, King of SALEM, which is KING OF PEACE; which Soldiers who
make a gainful Trade of War and Rapine delight not in.

10ly. I do affirm, and will abide by it, that since the time some disguised
Popish Priests, Jesuits, Sectaries, Heretics, Anabaptists and other Seducers
(rather than the Lord) drew ou^ the heart of some Soldiers and other
Mechanics (in truth or disguise) publicly to preach, the People of this
Commonwealth, have had more abominable, false, damnable, atheistical,
Antichristian Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies, New Opinions, and old exploded
Heterodox Heresies and Tenants of all sorts whatsoever against the very
Essence, Nature, Attributes of God himself, the three sacred Persons in the
Trinity, the Old and New Testament, Law, Gospel, all the fundamental Articles
of Faith and Salvation, the Sacraments, Ministers, Ordinances of God; and
practical public, private Duties of Piety and Christianity, under the Names
and specious Titles of New Lights, and glorious Discoveries of Christ's Kingdom,
broached by Soldiers and Lay-Preachers, than in all the times since the Gospel
was first preached in this Island, and more than ever any one Age, Church,
Nation, or all our Ministers put together since the Creation till now were
guilty of, and these publicly averred both in Press and Pulpit, and the
Authors of them exempted from any corporal or pecuniary punishments, by the
Civil Magistrates, by the avowed see Col. Prides Beacon quenched.
printed Positions and Proposals of the General Council of Army Officers and
Soldiers in sundry Papers. For full and infallible proof whereof, I shall
remit the Reader to Mr. Edwards Gangrenaes, the Catalogues of the Heresies,
Blasphemies, Errors, collected by the London and Devonshire Ministers, the
Stationers Beaconfired, and New Law, p. 78, 97. Which styles Heaven, Hell, the
resurrection of the Flesh, a Dream of our Preachers; The History of the
Scripture an Idol, etc. And all this by the malice of Satan, the underhand
practices of Jesuits and our Popish Adversaries to defame, ruin our Church,
Ministers, Religion, seduce thee to Popery, Atheism, and reduce us back to the
Antichristian Tyranny of the Sea of Rome, as I have largely manifested in the
fifth Chapter. Whereas Can cannot charge our Parochial Ministers and
Presbyterians with any such Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, as those he pleads
for are guilty of in the highest degree, nor with those Jesuitical,
treacherous, perfidious, sacrilegious, unclean, beastly ranting, unrighteous,
profane, atheistical Innovations, Practices, Rapines, Usurpations, as they
have plunged themselves into over head and ears without any Conscience or dread
of God or Man.

11ly. What, that more true Light and glorious Discoveries of Christ and his
Kingdom made known to the people of this Commonwealth within these 10, or 12.
years by the public preaching of some Soldiers and Laymen, exceeding all the
Nations Ministers ever made known unto them before, are, is concealed by Can,
and unknown to me or others, unless it be the flat atheistical denial of God,
of Christ and all his Offices, of the Holy Ghost, Scriptures, Sacraments, all
public Ordinances in the Church, of all Kings, Princes, Parliaments, lawful
Magistrates, Laws, Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations, Engagements, by many
of them in their words, writings, and most of them in Titus, 1. 16.
their works, with their Jesuitical positions, plots, practices, recited in the
fifth Chapter. And if these be not true 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Acts 26. 18.
infernal Darkness, and clear inglorious Discoveries of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Antichrist and his Kingdom in the highest Degree, that ever yet appeared
amongst the people of this Commonwealth, let the fifth Chapter, with the
positions and practices themselves, compared with the Old and New Testament,
determine.

12ly. The decrying of our Universities, Colleges, Schools of human Learning,
Innes of Court, and some men's endeavoring to seize upon their Lands and
Revenues for the Armies use, is no doubt a Jesuitical Papal plot, to extinguish
the light of our Knowledge both Divine and humane, by putting out the Eyes of
our Nation, that so Jesuitical Popish darkness might overspread our Church and
State; and so the Mat 15. 14.
blind leading the blind in both, they must fall into the Pit of Destruction in
a moment. It is storied of Eutropius, Grimston in his Life, Theodoret,
Nicephorus, l. 10. c. 3, 4, 5, 24, 25, 32, 33. Mr. Fox, Baronius, Spondanus,
and others. Centur. Magd* 4. c. 3, 14. Col. 114, to 120, 1438, 1439. Nazianzen
Orat. 2. in Julianum, Ambros. Epist. l. 5. Ep. 29. Zozomen l. 5. c. 22.
Rush^mus, l. 1. c. 28.
Julian (that blasphemous Apostate, and professed Enemy of Christ and
Christian Religion) That he suppressed all the Schools of Christians,
prohibiting by general Laws and Decrees, that any should profess, practice or
study any Arts or Sciences in any Schools, that so they might become and remain
Idiots* without learning, and so be insufficient and unable to preach the
Christian Faith, oppose or refute any Pagan or* other Errors, Blasphemies
against the true God and his worship, devising by all means possible (whereof
this was one of the Principal) TO MAKE WAR AGAINST JESUS CHRIST, and extirpate
Christianity, without shedding any Christian blood; finding by experience, that
the Christian Faith and Christians were greatly increased by the torments and
blood of the Martyrs: So that bloody Apostate from and Persecutor of the
Christian Faith Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. l* 8. c. 13. l. 10. c. 8. Eutropius,
and Grimston in his Life. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 113. Bishop Jewels
Sermons, p.
Lucius the Emperor, as he ruined the Churches, Temples he commanded to be
built for Christ, cast out of his House, Service and all Offices and place of
Command whatsoever he that was a Christian, commanded all those Christians to
be slain who would not adore his Idols, prohibited all Assemblies of Christians
either for worship or consultation; so he was such an Enemy to Learning, that
he named the same (as some do now) A Poison and common Pestilence and the
Overthrow of Commonwealths; and especially the knowledge of the Laws: And
thought no vice worse became a Prince than Learning, because he himself was
unlearned; and thereupon prohibited Schools and Meetings for Instruction:
Whereas on the contrary See Eusebius in vita Constantini: Bacons Advancement of
Learning* Mr. Edward Waterhouse his Apology for Learning and Learned men.
Constantine the Great, and all other Godly prudent Christian Emperors, Kings
and Princes, founded Schools of Learning and Universities in all places,
encouraged and advanced learned men of all Arts and Professions, especially
Divines,Lawyers, and Philosophers; well knowing that Learning was the principle
means to promote Religion, and the glory, honor, wealth and greatness of any
Nation, more necessary than any Arms or Soldiers, and the chief means to
preserve them from Idolatry, Superstition, Confusion, ruin. We may therefore
clearly discern whence the present Outcries against our Universities, Inns of
Court, Schools of Learning, and all human learning proceed, even from desperate
Apostates from true Religion and Gods Church, and those who would erect a New
Babel of Confusion amongst us in Church, State, and thereby build up the
demolished walls of the Romish Jericho within all our Dominions: For proof
whereof, I shall transcribe this notable passage of our famous learned Bishop
Jewel in his Sermon on Joshua 6. in his works in Folio, p. 167, 168. which is
very pithy, learned and satisfactory, omitting all others.

Now to stay the restoring of Jericho, many good ways may be devised. The 1.
maintenance of Schools and Learning. That Learning and Knowledge is able to
hinder the Building of Jericho is so plain that it needs no speech. In the
time of Moses Law, Aaron the great Bishop and High Priest had written in a
Tablet before his Breast, Doctrine and Truth; not only Learning, but also Truth;
whereby was meant, that neither ought to be without the other For, as Learning
is dangerous and hurtful (in some cases) without Religion: So is Religion
unable to defend it self, and to convince the Gainsayers without Learning. For
this cause the Heathen when they erected Temples in honor of their Gods, they
did also build Libraries, that is, places to keep Books, that by such means
their Priests might grow in Knowledge, and be better able to persuade others to
their Religion. Strabo of the Sinprincians, that they built a Temple in honor
of Homer, and joined thereto a Library. Augustus the Emperor built a Temple,
and also a Library in the honor of Apollo. Trajanus in like manner built a
Library, and called it Vlpia, after his own name. At Rome in the Capitol, where
all the Gods had a Solemn place for to be worshipped in, there was also placed
a Library. Athens was a famous Universitie, and had many Colleges and Schools
of Learning, Academia, Stoa, Lycaeum, Canopus, Prytanneum, Tempe, Cynosura: in
which places were diverse Sects of Philosophers. Such were in Persia, the
Wisemen, whom they called Magi: in Babylon the Chaldees, in India Brachmanes,
in Aethiopia Gymnosophistae: in France and England Druides: and others in other
Countries* In all times the Kings and Princes which did set forth Religion,
were also Builders of Schools and Colleges, and Advancers of Learning. The
people of Israel were never in better state, (as P. Phagius a learned man
notes out of their Story) than when they had in every Town and Village Bathe
chenesioth, and Bathe medraschoth, that is, Synogogues wherein they assembled
together, and places to preach in. The same Phagius, relates of Jerusalem,
that there were in it more than four hundred common Schools and Synagogues
wherein the Law of God was taught. The Patriarch Jacob was called A Minister of
the House of Learning, because he applied himself to the knowledge of the Law
of God, and to Godliness. The Prophets of God had their Schools to breed up
under them such as might after their death draw the people from Idolatry, and
resist the false Prophets. They which were so taught by them were called the
Sons of the Prophets. Samuel taught in such sort at Rama: Elias and Elizeus the
Prophets, taught the Law of God besides Jericho. St. John the Evangelist taught
at Ephesus, and Eusebius reports out of Philo, that St. Mark had at
Alexandria sundry Scholars which gave themselves to reading, and reasoning and
expounding of the Scriptures. Others did the like at Antioch, and at other
places. Out of such Schools it pleased God to take many excellent men, and
place them in his Church, as Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Arnobius,
Basilius, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus, Hieronimus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc.
who were brought up in all kind of Learning, and became shining Stars, and
brought Lights in the House of God, notable Defenders of Religion,
Over-throwers of Idols, and Confounders of Heretics. Christian Princes herein
have witnessed their Zeal in setting forth the Glory of God. After Charles the
Great had made his notable Conquests (let our Conquerors remember it) he
erected five famous Universities, one at Paris, another at Tolouse, another at
Papia, another at Padua, and another at Prague: (to which our King Asser
Men^vensis in his life, Camdens Britannia: Oxford Universitie and Cambridge.
Alfred founder of out famous Universitie of Oxford with the founders of all
the Colleges therein, and of the Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, and those
in Scotland, to omit those Universities in Germany, Spain, Portugal, Poland,
Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and other Parts of Italy and France, mentioned by
Heylen and others, might be added:) Suidas in Leone.
" Suidas reports of Leo the Emperor, That when Le^ on a time commanded
Eulogius a Philosopher should have his Princely reward; a Noble man of the
Court, said: (as some do now of our Universities and Colleges Lands and
Revenues) that that money would be better employed for the maintenance of
Soldiers. Nay, (says he, and so all wise men now) I would rather it might be
brought to pass in my time, that the wages which are now bestowed upon
Soldiers might be given to maintain Philosophers. Cha^ion. Chron. l. ^.
Alexander Severus.
Alexander Severus, so highly esteemed that notable famous Lawyer, Vlpian, that
when certain of his Soldiers ^an feircely upon Vlpian to slay him, the Emperor
stepped forth, and set himself between the body of Vlpian, and the fury of his
Soldiers, and covered him with his own Robes, that the Soldiers might know
how careful he was for the good estate of Vlpian:" (Let our Soldiers who hate
and study to suppress Philosophers, Scholars, Lawyers, consider these two last
Stories:) And also for the contrary; such as have practiced cruelty upon
learned men, and have hated knowledge were worthily discommended in the Stories
of all ages; He instanceth in the wicked Apostates, Julian and Licinius,
forecited examples. The like is reported of Caligula, Caracalla and Domitianus,
that either they utterly hated all manner of Learning, or had some special
malice against the Note
writings of some one notable man, and therefore sought to destroy them. Such
was the policy of Satan, so thought he to get the upper hand, and to restore
again his wicked Jericho. And were these the Practices of Heathen Princes only?
may not we remember the like attempts wrought in our days? who will call ^o
mind the time that is not far past, shall find that this ignorant Jericho had
many friends: (and has it not now as many and the same?) who by all means drew
men from knowledge; they gave Liberty rather to do any thing, than to seek
understanding; and yet suffered rather the use and reading of fabulous and
unclean writers than of the Holy Scripture, and Books which carried fruitful
instruction. Good Letters to increase knowledge are not to be neglected. Such
as presume of Gods Spirit over-boldly, that without endeavor to use the
wholesome means which God has left unto his Church, they shall and do by
special inspiration, understand his will, do tempt God. He adds much more.

In brief, learning, knowledge in Arts, Tongues, Histories of all sorts, and in
the Laws, Governments of former ages, are so absolutely necessary for the right
understanding and interpretation of the Scriptures, and good Government of all
Commonwealths and Kingdoms, that without them there neither will nor can be
any true Religion, sound Knowledge of God, his word, or works, nor orderly
Government, Humanity, Civility, Navigation, or Commerce almost in the world;
and men deprived of it will be little different from Beasts, as appears by the
brutish Sottishness, Barbarousnesse, Savagenesse, ignorance of the illiterate
Indians in America, and of some other African and Northern Nations, void both
of Religion, Government and Humanity it self, because destitute of Learning, as
Purchase his Pilgrimage, Mr. Hackluits voyages, Peter Martyrs Indian History,
Mercator, and others record. Hereupon our ancient Ancestors were so careful of
Learning, Religion, Ministers, Scholars, Lands, Estates, Tithes, that they
placed them in the very front of all those ancient Laws, Liberties, Customs
which they claimed, enjoyed, and presented to William the (pretended) Conqueror
upon Oath in the 4th. Year of his Reign, who ratified them in Parliament,
without the least Alteration or Diminution, to his eternal Honor, and the
great contentment of the whole Nation, whose affections else he would have
lost, to the endangering of his new acquired Royalty, as I have proved in the
Hoveden, Annal. pars post. p. 601. Mr. seldom, ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 173.
2d. Chapter. Which our New pretended Conquerors, may do well to consider. And
so I proceed to my concluding Assertion.

CHAP. V.
I Am now arived at the fifth and last Proposition, That the present opposition
and endeavored abolition of Tithes and all other coercive maintenance for
Ministers, proceed not from any real grounds of Piety or Conscience, or any
considerable real Inconveniences or Mischiefs arising from them, but merely
from base, covetous, carnal Hearts, want of Christian Love and Charity to, and
professed enmity and batred against the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel;
and from a Jesuitical and Anabaptistical design to subvert and ruin our
Ministers, Church and Religion; the probable, if not necessary consequence of
this infernal Project, if it should take effect. Which would prove the Sea
Peter Martyr, in lib. 2. Regum Commen^. c. 5. p. 240.
eternal Shame, Infamy and Ruin of our Nation, not its Glory and Benefit.

The first part of the Proposition is sufficiently manifested by the premises,
wherein I have answered all Objections from pretended Grounds of Piety,
Conscience, and surmised Inconveniences or Mischiefs made against Tithes,
discovering them to be mere Impostures, and false Surmises, and the principal
Objections against them are, that they are Jewish, Popish: And John Can in
his Second Voice from the Alehouse (for surely it came from thence, not from
the Temple) to show his skill in Divinity most impudently asserts* That payment
of Tithes is a Sin two ways against the second Commandment, 1. In it self, as
being Jewish and Superstitious, giving honor to the ways and devises of
Antichrist. This way of Maintenance by Tithes being a Popish Custom, imposed by
the Popes Authority, etc. 2ly, As paid to an unlawful and Antichristian
Ministry, etc. Surely a Liar ought to have a good Memory; He confesses, p. 15.
That Tithes were paid by Abraham, vowed by Jacob, and prescribed by God himself
in the Ceremonial law. Therefore neither Jewish, nor Popish, nor Superstitions,
nor a Sin against the 2d. Commandment: else Abraham in paying, Jacob in
vowing, God in prescribing, the Israelites in paying them, should transgress
this Commandment, and commit a Sin against it, I would demand of this Can,
how he can reconcile these his palpable Lies and Contradictions unbecomming him
who professes himself a true Minister of the Gospel. 1. How Tithes can be
merely Jewish, since paid by Gods direction and approbation, by Abraham the
Father of the Faithful, and that to Christ himself, in the shape of
Melchisede^, and prescribed by Gods own special Precept? 2ly. How any thing
commanded by God, even when the 2d. Commandment was given, recorded in the
same Canonical Books of Scripture with it, practiced by Gods special command by
all his true Saints under the Law, and generally in all Christian Churches
under the Gospel, as I have proved; can possibly be, a Sin against the 2d.
Commandment in it self? and whether it be not direct Blasphemy in him thus
confidently to aver it, in making Gods very Commandments to fight one against
another, and to command one thing as a Duty in some Texts, and condemn it as a
Sin and damnable Superstition in another? 3ly. How Tithes if truly and
orignally Jewish, can yet be truly and originally Antichristian, Popish, and
the Popes device, many thousand years after Tithes first Institution and
customary payment? Till he can satisfactorily reconcile these apparent
contradictory Assertions, or publicly recant them if he cannot, all the world
must account him for an Antichristian Minister and Lying Impostor, his Voice,
the Voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth both God and Men, Psalm. 44.
16. and confess there is no ground at all in Piety or Conscience against
Tithes, or their payment, but grounds both of Piety and Conscience for them, as
I have proved; especially for our Godly Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel
(for whom I only plead) whose Calling being of unquestionable Divine
Institution, notwithstanding all Cannes Alehouse Arguments against them (not
worth a Can) and to continue in the world to the very end thereof, and the
consummation of all things, by Christ's own resolution, Matthew. 28. 20 Ephesians. 4.
10, 11, 12, 13. they may and ought by Divine and Human Laws, to enjoy their
Glebes and Tithes so long continued, maugre all the malice, power of their
violent Oppugners, and will do so when they and their Posterities shall not
have so much as a Name or Being upon Earth or in Heaven (unless they repent)
notwithstanding they were justly taken from Popish Friars, Abbots, Priors,
Lordly Prelates, (of mere popish Antichristian Institution, not Divine,) when
their very Orders were suppressed, as mere Usurpers, Encroachers of the
Ministers Rights, Rewards alone, for their pains in preaching, exercising their
Ministerial Function in their respective Parishes, not in Abbeys, Cathedrals,
(no Parish Churches for the people to resort unto) to which by the Sea Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes.
Popes Bulls, they were unjustly appropriated heretofore.

To clear this Proposition more fully in all its branches, I have observed,
that there are five sorts of persons of late, very busy, active both against
our Ministers tiths and callings too.

The first are Soldiers: The 2d. Anabaptists, Dippers, Quakers, with other
late blasphemous Sectaries and Heretics: The 3d. profane, covetous Earth
worms, and Atheistical Wretches; who say in their Hearts, and sometimes boldly
profess, not only by their Lives, but with their Tongues in this lawless Age,
There is no GOD. The 4th. profane, ignorant, cheating Prognosticators and
Astronomers: The 5th. Jesuitos, popish Priests and Romish Emissaries, sent from
all p^rts to ruin our Ministers and Religion.

For the first, they are either Officers and Common Soldiers, and those,
either such who have gained or purchased Lands since the Wars, liable to
Tithes; for such who have no Lands at all, and so not of present Ability,
Capacity to pay Tithes. Those who have any purchased Lands liable to Tithes,
are now so fierce against them, (for ought I c^n discern) not out of any
grounds of piety or Conscience; but, either out of an unworthy, covetous,
degenerous, fordid disposition, to ease themselves and their Heirs from this
just ancient Debt, yea a charge of Tithes upon their New cheap Purchases, and
gain them as an Overplus into their Bargains, to improve their Purchases to an
higher value; the case of such of them who approve of our Ministers, our
public Ordinances, and are no Speakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries. Or else a like
avaritious Disposition, mixed with and heightened by a professed Enmity,
Malignity against the very Persons, Calling of our Ministers, whom they usually
revile by the names of Baals Priests, Black Coats, Antichristian Locusts,
rotten, corrupt Clergymen, Seditious, Factious Varlets; and all other railing
Epithites, which Lilly in his late Almanacks and Scurrilous Pamphlets, has
furnished them with, which they much magnisie. This is the Case of such Sword
men, who are above, or against all Ordinances, Duties public or private: or
Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, Asserters of
the Souls mortality, as rising from and dying with the body; of all their
ordinary unordained Speakers, Preachers, infected with any other erroneous,
heretical, or blasphemous opinions; of all disguised Jesuits, Priests, Papists
under the Profession and Name of Soldiers Those who have no Lands liable to
Tithes, petition and speak against them; either merely to please their Superior
Landed-Officers, for fear of being cashiered by * See John Cannes Voice p. 27.
Mr. Edwards Gangrenaes, and Lillyes Ephemeris, 1650.
them; or because they are infected with Anabaptism, Jesuitism, Errors,
Blasphemy, Schism, Arianism, Atheism, contempt of all public Ordinances,
Duties, and a bitter Emnity against our Ministers Persons, Callings, or
Intruders into their Office (as well as into most other Professions) without
any Lawful call. These, in my Observation (and I appeal to every of their own
Consciences in the presence of the Searcher of all hearts, for the truth of it)
are the only true Grounds, Motives of any Officers or Soldiers present
stickling opposition against Tithes and Ministers, arising from within them, as
they are private persons. And these unchristian Grounds, seconded with the open
or underhand solicitations of their Anabaptistical, Heretical, Schismatical,
Jesuitical, Astromatical Friends and acquaintance out of the Army; backed with
a most impious, wretched, Sacrilegious Policy to please the simple oppressed,
deluded Country people in discharging them at present from the payment of
Tithes to their Ministers, that so they may augment their Taxes to the full
value of their abolished Tithes, to support themselves and the Army the longer
in a body, to uphold their Supreme enchroached Powers, preserve, increase their
New Purchases, Estates, depending wholly upon the New Law and Title of the
longest Sword, are in my apprehension the only true causes why the General
Council of Officers of the Army, with the Soldiers under them, by their
directions, as a New created All-swaying Military Corporation, have so often
appeared publicly against our Ministers Tithes to abolish them (and their
Ministry by necessary consequence with them) which all other Opponents (being
inconsiderable) were never able to effect, but by their armed power. These are
all the real principles of Piety, Conscience (if they deserve the Title) I
could ever yet find amongst them; engaging the Army Officers and Soldiers
against Tithes, which how inconsistent they are with the real profession, or
grounds of Christianity, Piety, Conscience, Justice, Saintship, let their own
Consciences and the world resolve; and what Censures, Execrations, Judgments
they may in Justice expect from God, for such a Sacrilegious Rapine, as they
intend upon these carnal, impious, atheistical grounds, policies,
hypocritically gilded over with the paint of Conscience, Reformation, Religion,
Propagation of the Gospel, etc. which makes the Design more detestable both to
God and all good men.

The second sort of Tithe Oppugners are professed Anabaptists, Dippers,
Seekers, Quakers, and other blasphemous Sectaries and Heretics, lately sprung
up amongst us, many of which have crept into the Army for their greater
security, and the better accomplishment of their dangerous destructive Designs
against our established Government, Magistrates, Laws, but especially against
our Religion, Church, Minister, Ministry, their Tithes and Glebes. Scarce one
of a thousand of these poor Sneaks were of ability to pay any Tithes of late;
and those of this prevailing Faction, who have crept into Sequestrations,
Offices, Employments of late, and thereby gained any Estates, for the most
part, have enriched themselves by sequestered Tithes, Glebes, Bishops, Deans,
Chapters Lands and Revenues, which these hungry Harpyes have most greedily
preyed upon, not out of any real grounds of Piety or Conscience (as they
pretend) which I could yet seldom or never find in any of them; but out of an
unsatiable greedy Quid non Mortalia pec^ora cogit AUR^ SACRA FAMES.
HOLY HUNGER OR THIRST (in the Poets sense) after Gold, Gain, Spoil, the
Revenues of our Church, and an implacable bitter Enmity against our Ministers
Persons, Callings; whether Presbyterians (the chief Butt against whom their
Malice is bent) or Independents of a more moderate strain; whose Ministry is
the main Fort they level all their present power against, to raze it even to
the very Foundation; now prosecuting the total abolition, not only of their
present Tithes, Glebes, but of all other future coercive maintenance in lieu of
them, only to subvert their Ministry, and quite starve (if they cannot
violently storm) them out of it. This is most perspicuous, not only by their
manifold former libellous Pamphlets against our Ministers Calling, and the late
Ordinances for Tithes, which I have In my fresh Discovery of New lights.
elsewhere collected, refuted, but by their fresh Petitions both against their
Tithes and Ministry too, as Antichristian, Jewish, Popish, etc. especially by
John Can the old Amsterdam Anabaptists Second Voice from the Temple (or Rev.
3. 9.
Synagogue of Satan rather) newly dedicated to those he styles The Supreme
Authority of the Nation, wherein he exhorts and stimulates them, by all the
Art, Rhetoric, Motives, false Arguments he can muster up, to do execution, and
take vengeance upon Babylon (to wit, the National Ministry, Churchworship and
Government of England, as he explains it, p. 2.) till it be wholly desolate, not
a Stone left upon a Stone, till it be thrown down: To take a most effectual and
certain course to Is this Christian Gospel Charity consistent with Mat. 5. 43,
to 48. c. 10. 9, 10. Romans 12. 9, 10, 13, 20, 21. c. 13. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 5.
2. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, etc. 1 John 3. 10, to 20. c. 2. 9. 10, 11. c. 4. 20, 21.
starve and famish these Antichristian Idols, by taking away the Food and
Maintenance whereby hitherto (as at this present they are nourished, fed and
left alive) and more particularly their Tithes. To repeal all Laws and Statutes
formerly made, whereby the Whore has lived deliciously and proudly, and keeps
on to this Day her Whorish attire. To make the Whore desolate and naked by
making no Act or Law to stand in force which does yield any relief to her. To
set themselves in array against her (by the Armies power no doubt, which he
alludes to) bend their Bow, fan and empty her. To set upon this work speedily,
in good earnest (as it seems they do) whiles it is to day: And why so? Because
the Lord himself has by a Call more than ordinary, called them to this more
than ordinary Employment, (if he could have proved it by Scripture or Law, it
had been more worth than all his Pamphlet) put this fair (or rather foul)
opportunity into their hands; has commanded his sanctified ones, and called
his Mighty ones (the Army Officers) to fulfill his pleasure upon this great
Whore (the Church and Ministry of England) and SION is in travel and ready to
bring forth (this Monster of Desolation and Confusion:) which if they neglect
or delay, then mark how he briefly menaces them with the Fates of their late
Predecessors, I would think you should never be sitting in that House, but be
thinking still on those who sat there before you (and why not as well on Faux
and the Gunpowder Traitors, as those, since there seems another Powder Plot in
the Vault to blow them up, intended by Can and his Confederates if they fail
in accomplishing this their desired work?) whom the Lord has lade aside as
despised broken Idols and Vessels, wherein his Soul had no pleasure. And why?
As they knew not their Generationwork (which he excites them to) neither were
faithful to the interest of Jesus Christ. God is no respecter of Persons, as
men sow, so they shall reap. Ex ungue Leonem, ex cauda Draconem. You may see by
these passages, and his whole Pamphlet pursuing them, what these malicious,
inhuman, barbarous, irreligious, hypocritical Anabaptists aim at in their
present violent prosecutions against Tithes; even utterly to starve, famish,
subvert, extirpate our Ministers, Ministry, Church, Worship, Government, and
make our Land a mere Spoil, Desolation, as their Predecessors did Munster, and
some parts of Germany, whiles in their power. But let Can and his
Anabaptistical Confederates remember what tragical Sleidens Commentaries, l. 9,
and 10. See my sword of Christian Magistracy supported, p. 46, 47, etc.
ends their New King John, with all his Princes, Grandees, Officers, Prophets,
Followers came to in conclusion in Germany: And what fatal ruin befell See
Speeds History of Great Britain, Stow, Holinshed, and the Survey of London.
Jack Cade, Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Sharp and other levelling Companions, who
had the self-same Designs against our English Laws, Lawyers, Clergy, Tithes,
Glebes, as He and they have now, animated thereto by the new-dipped Jesuits,
and other Romish Emissaries lately crept into their Anabaptistcal Fraternity to
further this their Infernal Gunpowder-plot against our Church, Religion,
Ministers, Magistrates, Government, Laws, and let them thereupon repent of,
desist from, abominate this their Diabolical, wicked Design, lest they incur
the self same punishments in conclusion, by stirring up God and all the whole
Nation against them, as most accursed Rebels, Traitors, Instruments of Satan,
yea that very Antichrist and Whore of Rome, they pretend they are blindly
acting against, whose designs in truth they are but accomplishing in the
highest degree.

I must here observe (and desire all others to take notice of) three things.
First, that in Cannes Voice, and in all other late Pamphlets, Petitions of the
Anabaptists, wherein they seem to vent their most passionate zeal against
Antichrist, Babylon, the Whore of Babylon, their chief Instruments and
Supporters, I cannot find so much as one Clause or Syllable against Jesuits,
Popish Priests, Papists, Romish Emissaries; or exciting the execution of any
Laws or Statutes formerly made against them; but the whole stream, bent of them
all is only against the Godly Ministers, Ministry, worship of the Church of
England, the Presbyterian Government, and our present Church-worship, the only
Babylon, Whore, Antichrist, they intend and fight against, not the Pope and
Church of Rome. 2ly. That they are so far from pleading against the Pope,
Popish Priests, Jesuits, and urging the execution of the good Oaths, Laws,
made by late and former Protestant Parliaments* against them and their
Treasonable practices, that they have frequently written, petitioned for their
Repeal, Abolition, as bloody Tyrannical Laws, unlawful Oaths* and procured
their Repeal or Suspension at least, in their favor from some late and present
Powers, 3ly. That when some conscientious pious Stationers late in their
Beacons fired, discovered to those then in Power, The many sorts, multitudes of
Jesuits, Popish Books printed in England within 3. years last past, in defense
of the Pope and Church of Rome, all Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, and reviling
our Church, Religion, as Heretical; desiring them to take it into their timely
considerations, to suppress this growing Mischief, Design to corrupt the
People, and reduce them back to Popery, ere they were aware: Kiffin with other
Anabaptists in the Army, headed by Colonel Pride, taking an Alarm thereat,
subscribed and printed a Book entitled, The Beacons quenched, (penned they
know best by whom, not the Subscribers of it, not yet inspired with the gift of
all the Tongues therein contained) pleading for a free Tolleration of such
Popish Books printing, dispersing amongst us, of public Disputes by those of
that Religion, traducing, accusing the Presbyterians throughout that Pamphlet,
and those honest zealous Stationers in particular, of no l^sse than a New
Gunpowder-plot, Mine, Train, (then ready to be sprung) to blow up those,
Colonel Pride and his Confederates first made, and then styled, The Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, and the Army too; only for discovering these
Popish Books and Trains to blow up our Religion: Which Scandal, as the
Stationers then fully cleared by their satisfactory Reply to that impertinent
Pamphlet, so the Subscribers of it their Fellow Soldiers of the Army (better
versed by far in Mines and Fireworks to blow up Parliaments, and nearer related
to old Speeds History of Great Britain. The Arraignment of Traitors, 3 Jac. c.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Guy Faux, a Low Country Soldier, by reason of their Military profession, than
these Stationers and Presbyterians, they thus falsely slandered) have since
cleared before all the World, to be a malicious Calumny, of which themselves
only are guilty, and given just cause of Jealousy, Fear, to all Presbyterians,
old Protestants and P^ritans to apprehend, that they now really join their
Forces and Heads together with those thus pleaded for, to ruin our Church,
Religion, Ministry, under the Notion and Project of suppressing Tithes, and of
all future compulsory Maintenance for the Ministers of England, whom they
intend to starve and famish (such is their Charity) if they can but vote Tithes
down, before they provide any other Maintenance; which Vote once passed, the
next will be, to vote them both out of their Rectories, Glebes, Churches,
Ministry too, as Cannes Voice, and the Kentish Petition against Tithes root and
branch, sufficiently discover to all who are not wilfully blind: enough to make
all men now to look about them.

That the Dominican, Franciscan, and other Popish Fryer^, were the first
Broachers of this Opinion, That L^ymen were not bound to pay Tithes to their
Ministers by any Divine law or right; on purpose to draw the Tithes of
Ministers and Curates to themselves, and exempt whatever Lands or Things were
given to them from payment of Tithes; I have elsewhere evidenced out of H^story
of Tithes, p. 14, 166, 167, 170, ^^ ^75, 127, 128.
Mr. Seldom and others; whereupon De Nugis C^^^^lium, l. 7. c. 21.
Johannes Sarisburiensis Bishop of Chartres thus censured them, Miror ut
fidelium pace loquar, quodnam sit ut Decimas and jura aliena usurpare non
erubes^unt. Inquient forte Religiosi sumus. Plane Decimas solvere Religionis
pars est. Adding, that their Exemptions from payment of Tithes did derogare
constitutioni Divinae, derogate from Divine institution. And Petrus Blesensis,
Archdeacon of Bath, in his 82. Epistle inveighs very much against the
privileges of the Cistercian Monks exemption from payment of Tithes, as
injuriosa immunitas, contra Dei justiciam: seeing Justiciae Divinae manifest
resistit, qui Ministris Ecclesiae nititur jus Decimationis auferre: Which
these* Friars not only persisted in, by substracting their own Tithes from the
Ministers by color of these Exemptions, but likewise the Tithes of their other
Parishioners, especially such who contemning and deserting their own Parish
Priests and Churches, resorted to these Friars Chapels, and acknowledged them
for their Ghostly Fathers and Confessors. This is most evident by the Petition
of the Parish Priests and Rectors of London to the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the rest of the Bishops in a Synod, (about the year of our Lord 1240.) against
the Dominicans and Franciscans, who much impaired their profit; wherein they
complained Ms. and Dr. Tillesley his Anmadversions upon Mr. Seldens Preface.
Animadv. 9.
That their Parishioners who at leastwise on Lords days and Festivals are
bound to frequent their Parish Churches, and to receive Sacraments and
Sacramentals in the same, and devoutly to hear Divine Service, as also to offer
at Solemn Masses due and accustomed Oblations; did repair to the places and
Houses of these Friars, and scorn and forsake their Parish Churches, and so
confer the due Rights of the Church wherewith the Churches were anciently
endowed, upon the Friars. Also they who confess themselves to these Friars, who
before were accustomed annually by the Canon Law to pay Tithes of their
Tradings to their Parish Churches, from the time since they submitted
themselves to the Confessions of these Friars, modo debito ac consueto
negociationes s^as decimare non curant, Neglect to pay Tithes of their
Tradings, after the due and accustomed manner. And is not this the very present
Grievance, Complaint of most London and other Ministers throughout England,
that since these disguised Romish Friars and Jesuits swarming in all places
under the Masks and Titles of Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sects, have in
imitation of these their Predecessors, in their Writings, Preachments, and
Conventicles declaimed against our Ministers Tithes, as not due unto them by
any Divine Right, to rob our Ministers of, and draw the value of them to
themselves; and since their Parishioners who are bound to resort to their
Parish Churches on Lords days and Feastivals to hear Divine Service, Sermons,
and receive the Sacraments in a devout manner have resorted to the Conventicles
and Meetings of these Friars and Jesuits, and submitted themselves to these
new Ghostly Fathers and Confessors, they have quite contemned, deserted their
own Parish Churches, neglected, refused to pay any personal or predial Tithes
or Oblations to their Ministers after the due, and formerly accustomed manner,
and bestowed the due Rights and ancient endowments of their parish Churches,
(in value or substance at least, though not in kind) upon these Friars and
Romish Locusts, whose very Doctrine, Practice in this particular of our
Ministers Tithes and Oblations, and their substraction of them (yea in most
other Tenants now broached by them for New light) are the very same in all
particulars which these Friars in former ages both at home and abroad, as I
have evidenced in my Quakers unmasked, my New Discovery of Romish Emissaries;
and our London, Lancashire, Newcastle and other Ministers, have plentifully
demonstrated in sundry publications, with Mr. Edwards in his Gangraenaes? We
may then most clearly Discover these Romish Mat. 7. 15, to 15.
wolves now crept in amongst us in Sheeps-clothing, by these their Fruits, and
practices; whose Pleas against our Ministers Tithes, resolve into these
Atheistical, unchristian Conclusions. 1. That the Tithes of Christians increase
are too much for God himself who created them, and gives all to them. 2. Too
much for Christ who redeemed them, who gave himself to death for them, and is a
Priest for ever unto God the Father after the order of Melchisede^ in their
behalf. 3. Too much for the Ministers of Christ, whose lives, studies, spirits
are wholly spent in ministerial incessant labors for their eternal welfare. 4.
Too much to be laid out for the Instruction, Salvation, of their own immortal
Souls; when as the other nine parts are consumed on their Bodies, Families, if
not Sins and Lusts. 5. Too much for an Orthodox Protestant Minister; but not
for a disgui^ed, seducing Popish Jesuitical Priest or Friar. O brutish,
foolish, bewitched, infatuated Englishmen, now at last consider this your
desperate folly, delusion, before it be over late, in following these disguised
Seducers, to your own and our Religious ruiue.

The 3d. sort of Tithe-Oppugners are profane, covetous Earthworms and
Atheistical wretches, who care not for God or Religion, saying unto God and his
faithful Ministers, like those Atheists, Job 21. 14, 15. Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; what is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Yet because few
of such are now active Sticklers and Petitioners (as such) against Tithes, but
only mere Substractors, Detainers of them at present, they are less
blameworthy, and not so culpable as the two former, and subsequent Ranks, the
chief active Sticklers, Petitioners, Writers against them.

The 4th. Rank of Grand Opposites against our Ministers and their Tithes are
Profane, Ignorant, Cheating, Monthly Prognosticators and Astrologasters, as
John Booker, Nich. Culpepper, and above all others William Lilly, a most
bitter, railing Ral shekeh, whose late Almanacks, ever Since the Army Officers
in 1649. declared in print against Ministers Tithes; these Prognosticators
gaided by these Allruling Martial earthly Planets, not the heavenly stars, have
predicted their Downfall every year, but not before.
since 1648. and other idle Prophetic Pamphlets, are so fraught with
Scurrilous Invectives, Raylings, Predictions of our Ministers, Presbyterians
Downfalls, and their Tithes, the Soldiers, Peoples general Opposition,
Insurrection against them, etc. almost in every line, as if the Army Officers,
Soldiers, Anabaptists, Priests, Jesuits, had purposely hired him, to carry on
their Designs against our Ministers, their Tithes, Maintenance, to subvert our
Religion; and the Jesuits, Anabaptists, furnished him out of all their ^ayling
Pasquils, Satyrs, with reproachful Terms, Invectives, Slanders against them,
which have swelled up his frothy, silthy Papers to an extraordinary B^lk,
beyond his Fellow- Prognosticators, and made them so much cried up, read,
studied both by Officers, Soldiers, Anabaptists, and other simple people,
incensing them against our Ministers and their Tithes, a^ things which the late
Constellations, Ecclipses of the Moon and Sun have specially designed ^o speedy
ruin. When I was close Prisoner in Dunster Castle in the year 1650. the
Officers and Soldiers there, sent me Lilies For the year 1651.
New Almanac to read, wherein I found, such a world o^ bitter, railing,
Jesuitical Epithites against our Ministers, and predictions of the sudden
Downfall of their M^nist^y, Tithes, Maintenance, from pretended Malignant
Constellations, (which y^^ on the contrary at the same time did promise Acts of
Grace and Favor to Popish Recusants, w^o in their Zeal and Loyalty to the New
Republic exceeded most Presbyterians; and pres^ged some worthy Actions, in
creating New Cardinals, etc. to be done in Rome and Italy as he therein
predicted) as made me suspect him to be more than half a Jesuit, or at least
their Scholar, Confederate, Pensioner to promote their Designs against our
Ministers; and to acquaint M^. Bradshaw (my Committer) with others at Whi^ehalt
so much in my Letters to them: But our Tithes and Ministers not falling down
that year, as he falsely prognosticated, he still continued to predict their
Downfalls in his lying Since that in 1653. and 1654. he continues in the same
strain.
Prognostications, 1651, and 1652. much read and cried up by the Officers and
Soldiers at Pendennys Castle in Cornwall, who sent me them to ^ead, wherein he
retained his former malicious Raylings against our Ministers and their Tithes,
to ^ender them odious to the Soldiers, Army, People, and all originally,
because reverend Mr. Gataker, with the Assembly of Divines in their Annotations
to the Bible, on Jer. 10. 2, 3. and other Texts, and others of them of late,
had "censured the Art of Judicial Astrology, Astronomy, and the principles of
i^ (wherewith he and his Fellow-wizards cheat poor People of their money, by
calculating their Nativities, telling what Wives, Husbands, Fortunes they
should have, whether they should recover their Sicknesses, what good or bad
Voyages they should have, what was become of their lost or stolen Goods, or
where they should find them, foretelling what Weather, Sicknesses, public
Alterations in State, Church Affairs, and Churchmen too, should happen from the
Malign or Benign Aspects, Conjunction of the Stars, Planets, or the Ecclipses
of the Sun and Moon) as a mere cheating Imposture; a Heathenish, wicked,
unchristian Practice, Delusion, contrary to Scripture, Reason, Philosophy,
Theological Doctrine, Ecclesiastical Discipline; yea a mere impious Fraud and
villainy." The Sottishness, Falsity, Groundlesnesse whereof (built upon mere
ridiculous Figments, Forgeries, Absurdities, Dreams, imaginary Signs, Houses
built by them in the Heavens, and such Malignant Qualities as their fancies
have ascribed, not God infused into the 7 Planets) those who have been deluded
by such cheating Knaves and Pickpurses, the greatest Impostors of any (as
learned Henry Bullinger in his Commentary on Jer. 10. 2. Sixtus Senensis Bibl.
l. 6. Annot. 10. and the subsequent Authors style them) may for their
satisfaction read at large in Bardesanis Syms (the best learned of all the
Chaldean Astrologers) quoted by Eusebius De Praepar. Evangel. l. 6. c. 8. in
Cicero De Divinatione, l. 2. in Picus Mirandula his 12. Books against
Astrology, in Joseph Scaliger his Preface before Manilius, in Dr. Chambers Book
against Judicial Astrology, London, 1601. in Sixtus ab Hemminga, Lib.
Astrologiae Refutatae, Antw. 1583. in Jo. Francus Offucius, in Larvatam
Astrologiam, An. 1570. in Cornelius Scepperus, contra Astrologos, Col. 1548. in
Georg. Trapezuntins, Libellus cur Astrologorum Judicia sint falsa. Alex. De
Angelis, in Astrologos Conjectores, Romae, 1615. in John Milton, his
Astrologaster, 1620. in Hieron. Savanorola, adversus Divinatricem Astronomiam,
Florentiae 1581. in Apologeticus Interpretis pro Tractatu Hieron, Savanorolae
adversus Astrologos, Flor. 1581. in Mr. Samuel Purchase his Pilgrimage, l. 1. c.
2. p. 12, 13. etc. 12. p. 64. in Ludovicus Vives de Corrupt. Artium, l. 5. who
censures it as a Fraud, not Art, in Mr. Thomas Gataker his vindication of his
Annotation on Jer. 2. against the Scurrilous Aspersions of that grand Impostor,
William Lilly; newly printed, 1653. and the Authors quoted by him, in Bochellus
Decret. Eccles Gallicanae, lib. 1. Tit. 14. where the Decrees of many French
Councils are recited against this Diabolical cheating Profession, prohibiting
Christians to buy, read, keep, or credit such Books, in which many
unprofitable, Superstitious, false, yea impious and sacrilegious things are
contained, which Books ought to be suppressed, damned, and utterly abolished
(yea burnt like those Acts 19. 19. as the Council of Bordeaux, An 1582. and
Johan Charberius de Gersonio, in his Trilogio Astrologiae Theologiza^ae, proves
at large. And those who will compare Culpeppers and Lillies wild monstrous
false Predictions concerning the several States, Kingdoms mentioned in their
Almanacks, Prognostications for this present year, and the great Plagues,
Mortality which should be both the last and this Summer in London (though never
freer from Pestilence than at these seasons) with their, and others usual false
Predictions every Month concerning the Weather, their manifold Contradictions
both to themselves and one another, will easily discern them to be mere Liars,
Impostors, and their Art a Cheat. Now let them all tell me at their leisure, by
what warrant from Scripture, Philosophy, reason, art, sense, the Constellations
of the Heavens, or Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon these 2 last years only should
certainly predict, portend, excite Soldiers, Sectaries, or Country people by
any Divine ordination, or real influence on their disaffected Spirits, to pull
down the Ministers of the Gospel, and their Tithes, being both of Divine
institution and establishment to Matthew. 28. 20.
continue to the Worlds end: When no other Constellations, Ecclipses of like
nature in any former Ages of the World since the Creation, portended or
effected the like? Or how the Stars in Heaven should thus professedly sight
against, and pull down those Rev. 21. 1. John 10. 28, 29.
Stars (the Ministers of the Churches) which Christ himself holds in his right
hand (out of which none can pull them) and their Tithes too, being ancient,
perpetual appurtenant to Christ's own eternal Priesthood, Heb. 7. 1, to 15? More
particularly, I shall desire this scurrilous Impostor Lilly to inform me, How
it comes to pass, That the Celestial Stars, Planets, (and Good Angels which he
often couples together in his Merlins) who in the year 16^7. (as he Epistle to
the Reader, p. 4. and Astrological Discourse in it toward the end.
prints in his Ephemeris for it) by their good influence stirred up by Gods
providence the Parliament to take care, that preaching Ministers should be
placed in every County of this Kingdom, and a sufficient stipend allowed where
formerly none was; For which We (writes he, including himself in the Number)
must ever acknowledge our Thankfulness: And that the Figures he erects on the
X. of March, 1647. Astrologically predicting the State of our English Affairs
and Clergy, should by the Rules of Astrology, and his own Judgment thereon
(then printed, Venus being then found in the ninth House) import, That many of
the Clergy should trot and trudge, or change their habitation out of one County
into another, nay shall willingly travel long Journies; By which I conceive
(writes he) is meant, That our present Parliament shall this year place worthy
men into warm Benesices, and distribute the deserving Clergymen of England into
several quarters of this Kingdom, as in their wisedoms they think convenient.
Blessed be God, for his Creatures. the Stars, promise they may travel safe
without prejudice, or at least, they indicate so much, etc. And shall obtain
profit and good by their often changings, and remove of Habitations. And the
Godly Ministers so dispersed into several Counties, shall prevail with the
People to amend their Lives, and live more soberly, religiously, etc. As also,
that most of those itinerant Preachers, or Divines, shall leave behind them
lesser Livings, and go to enjoy better. To which he adds by way of Jeer this
passage against Mr. Geree for writing against Astrology, "Now for that
ASTROLOGO-MASTIX is a Master of Arts, and capable of Preferment, I humbly
implore, he may be made Priest of Teuksbury, from which place ( per varios
casus) he once in haste trotted, etc. That but 3 years after this, the Heavenly
Stars, Planets, Angels in the year 1650. (as his In the Epistle, Astrological
Ptedictions, and Monthly Observations.
Ephemeris then prognosticates, very frequently) should threaten ill and
unwilling payment of Tithes, in many Counties to the Clergy: much heart burning
of the People toward them. That after a small season, or a very few years, no
Tithes shall be paid them: For a plain people will arise, gifted by God with
such spiritual Knowledge, as the generality of the People will decline their
Sophistical School Doctrines, and wholly adhere unto those who preach God only,
and Jesus Christ his Son:" And that they should be so implacable, as to
continue these and worse threat^nings against all Presbyterian Ministers,
Presbytery, Rectories, TITHES, and the whole English Clergy, ever since this
year, so far, as to portend or ascertain, not only their general Opposition by
Swordmen, the generality of the Nation, and their Governors and people, but
sudden downfall and extirpation: Of which all his Merlins and Prognostications
surfeit. Tantaene Animis Caelestibus Irae? Doubtless, the heavenly Stars,
Planets, and good Angels are not so contradictory to themselves, or
maliciously, irreconcileably Malignant against our Ministers Persons, Callings,
Tithes, Presbytery, as this Arch Cheat, would make poor Simpletons believe. But
it is only the Language and Malignity of his own malicious heart, tongue, Pen
against them, because Enemies to his absurd, Diabolical, lying, cheating,
Artlesse Art of Astrology, witness his own words; I hate Presbytery (and
hatred and affection as himself writes, cause often Errors and Mistakes in
their Art and Predictions:) Art thou a Presbyterian? Thou art an enemy to
Astrology, and weariest thy auditory with invectives against me. I desire thee
to conform, lest a worse thing happen to thee (than Deans and Chapters Lands)
For if thou labourest to root up or pull down this Fabric, which God has
erected, then I say, in a small season, or very few years, no Tithes will be
paid thee, etc. with many such like Epistle to the Reader in his Ephenens,
1650, and 1649.
Passages since, wherein he reviles, vilifies, Mr. Calvin, Perkins, Geree,
Case, Calamy, Farmer, Gataker, Owen, with sundry other Divines by name, and all
of them in general, only because, they have preached or writ against the
vanity, falsity of his cheating Astrology, by which he gets his living; as much
as he reviles, jeers his Companion, Wharton, (Naworth, New rth,) for
contradicting him in his own Science, whom yet elsewhere himself and Culpepper
too, extraordinarily applaud for his exact transcendent knowledge in Astrology,
though all 3. of them diametrically contradict each other in their Predictions
from the Stats, or different factions rather. This malice of theirs against our
Ministers and their Tithes (wherein they have proved lying Diviners hitherto,
and will do so to the Worlds end, if we credit Matthew. 28, 2c. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13) no doubt is elevated, augmented by Jesuits and Popish Spanish Agents, the
chief Promoters of this Study of Astrology amongst us, and very intimate with
these Lunatique, Star gazing Incendiaries and Time servers; it being the
express advise and project of Thomas Campanella (a great Astrologer and
Jesuited Italian Friar, much magnified by Lilly in some of his Merlins,) in his
Treatise De Monarchia Hispaniae, wherein, as he shows the King of Spain the
readiest means to make himself Monarch of the whole world, and particularly of
Cap. 25, and 2^. worthy our most se^ious perusal.
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, ( by dividing them one from and against
another by unnatural intestine Wars, turning our Monarchy into a Commonwealth;
dividing our three Kingdoms one from and against another, by making them
Republics or elective Kingdoms, breaking our naval Forces by the Dutch Fleet
and other Nothern Nations, fomenting perpetual Divisions and Schisms amongst
us: thereby to destroy our civil Government, Forces, and become a prey to the
Spaniards atlast) so he prescribes this, as Ibid. p. 204, 185, 186, 234, 235,
236. Which Art Lilly much promotes. See his Ephemeris, 1649, 1650.
the readiest way to undermine our Protestant Religion, and draw men from the
Study, Love, Practice thereof, to promote the Art, Study of Astrology and
Telestan Arts amongst us, to erect Schools of Astrology and Mathematics, and
encourage the Students of it with rewards. Which I wish all Lovers of our
Religion, vigilant Statesmen, and Lilly (with other Astrologasters, the chief
Promoters of this Design) to take special notice of, and thereupon to abandon,
suppress this impious, atheal, sottish, cheating Art, grounded upon no Rules of
Reason, Philosophy, Divinity, Experience, but mer^ imaginary Whimsies,
Figments, Chymeraes, Signs, Houses in the Air, of Lunatic cheats and
Impestors, as all rational, judicious Scholars who peruse their Scheams,
Astrological Conjectures, Judgments, Predictions, Treatises, must acknowledge;
and I by Gods assistance, may hereafter demonstrate to the world if there be
occasion, being not so pertinent to my present Theme.

The fifth and last Squadron of professed Enemies against our Ministers Tithes,
Glebes and settled Maintenance, are Jesuits and Jesuited Papists: and that not
out of any Malignity against Tithes themselves, which they all hold to be of
Divine Right and Institution, according to the definition of their idolized
Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 992.
Council of Trem, Sess. 25. De Reformatione, c. 12. which thus determines
against their present practice and design: Non sunt ferendi qui variis artibus
Decimas Ecclesiis obvenientes, substrahere moliuntur, aut qui aliis solvendis
temere occupant, and in rem suam vertunt. Cum Decimarum solutio debi^a sit Deo.
Et qui eas dare noluerit, aut dantes impediunt, res alienas invadunt. Praecepit
ergo Sancta Synodus, omnibus cujuscunque gradus aut conditionis sint, ad quas
Decimarum solutio spectat, ut eas (ad quas de Iure tenentur) in posterum
Cathedrali, aut quibuscunque aliis Ecclesiis vel Personis quibus legitime
debentur, integre persolvant: Qui vero eas aus substrahunt, aut impediunt
excommunicentur; Nec ab hoc crimine nist plena restitutione secuta,
absolvantur: But merely out of malice and design against our Ministers and
their Ministry, of purpose to starve and ruin them, thereby to set up Popery,
and intrude themselves into their Rectories, yea into our Bishoprics and
Deaneries too, and then they will not only cry up Tithes again, with the due
payment of them to themselves from the People, according to the utmost rigor
of this Trent-Canon, and other Laws, for their due payment by Divine and Human
Right, but likewise resume all Bishops, Deans, Chapters Lands, (if not Abbey
Lands too) into their hands, as sacrilegiously alienated from the Church
without lawful power and Right, as Robert Parsons the Jesuits Memorial for
Reformation, (written at A Manifestation of the folly and bad Spirit of certain
in England calling themselves Secular priests, p. 56.
) Sevil in Spain, Anno 1596.) William Watson in his Quodlibets, p. 93, 94, 144.
with the Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Tit. Durham.
Statute of 1 Mariae, Parl. 2. c. 1. for reviving the Bishopric of Durham,
restoring all Ecclesiastical and Temporal Jurisdictions, Lands, Hereditaments
whatsoever thereunto heretofore belonging, though dissolved, settled in the
Crown and Town of Newcastle, by the Statutes of 7 E. 6. c. 10. and another Act
not printed, will inform the world, and Alfonsus de Vargas de Stratag.
Jesuitarum, p. 203.

Now that the Jesuits (many hundreds of which Society now lurk every where
amongst us under the Disguise of Anabaptists, Soldiers, Tradesmen, Seekers,
Dippers, converted Jews, Physicians, Gentlemen, Travelers, Merchants, and
other like, to work our ruin) have a hand in this Design to deprive our
Ministers of their Tithes and Rectories, to work their ruin, is most apparent.
First, by their former procedings even against their own Secular Priests in
England, where they seeking to work their utter ruin, subversion,
supplantation, to int^ude themselves into their employments, by their
Machiavel, Atheal plots, about the year 1600, to 1605, did first by their
scandalous Books, Libels, Slanders against there Priests, bring their Persons
and Priesthood into scorn and contempt amongst the generality of the English
Papists, preferring every Lay Brother of their Society before them, executing
their Priestly Function without a lawful Call, or Ordination: and then
endeavored to substract all Maintenance and Contributions from them;
threatening to make them leap at a Crust, and to pine and starve them;
debarring, interrupting all their Maintenance from English Recusants, in such
sort, that many of them pined away through grief of Mind, want of Food, and
were so near perishing, that they were necessitated to petition Queen Elizabeth
and her Council, for some Allowance in their prisons to keep them from
starving. Yea they and their Jesuited Followers and Proselites derided their
Seminary Priests and Ghostly Fathers in this manner, Ah, hah, hah; A Seminary,
and old Queen M^^y Priest, a Secular, etc. You shall see them all leap at a
Crustere it be long, etc. And having got Judas his Office (to carry the Money
bagg) into their own and Substitutes hands, they disposed of the Wealth and
Charity of Catholics (consisting of many thousand pounds) where, how, and to
whom they pleased, for their own enriching and advancement: which made the
Secular Priests write, that England was become wild, Priesthood and Sacraments
had in contempt, Religion made but a matter of Atheal policy; and Priests
through the Jesuits Falsehood, Calumniations and untrue Suggestions to the
Superiors and all Estates, brought into such high contempt, that their very
Ghostly Children, whom they had begotten, had forsasaken, houted, shunned,
despised them, as if they were none other but their Stepfathers, and showed
their Charity so coldly to them, as many of them were in extreme want, and few
or none of them scarce able to live; as we may read in Watsons Quodlibets
against Parsons and his Fellow Jesuits, p. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 31, 37, 38, 42,
43, 45, 50, 51, 52, 62, 63, 70, 71, 80, 81, 92, 93. and elsewhere throughout
that Book: in Joan. Bogermanus Cateches^s Jesuit. l. 3. c. 28. Thuanus Hist. l.
126, Mercurius Jesuiticus, Tom. 1. p. 287. William Clark his Reply to Father
Parsons Libel, printed 1603. fol. 17, to 32, which being the very condition and
complaint of our Godly Protestant Ministers in most places throughout the
Nation at this day, is no doubt a storm of these Jesuits raising, a very Plot
and Design of their hatching, ^omenting to ruin our Ministers and their
Ministry now, as they would have done their own Secular Priests then in
England, to advance their own power, profit, 2ly. It is evident by See Watsons
Quod^ibets, p. 93, 94, 281. Parsons his Manifestation, fol. 61. William Watsons
Reply to Parsons Libel, fol. 74.
Rob. Parsons and other Jesuits old Project for Reformation of England, when
they should get power in it: To take away all Lands, Manors, Benefices and
settled Maintenance of the Church from the English Clergy and Universities, and
make all Ministers, and Scholars mere Pensioners and Stipendiaries at their
pleasure, set up itinerary Preachers fixed to no particular Church, (like our
wandering Quakers, Anabaptists, Sectaries of late) instead of Parochial Pastors,
of which more anon. 3ly. Alfonsus de Vargas Tole^anus: in his Relatio ad Reges
and Principes Christianos, De Stratagematis Politicis Societatis Jesu, ad
Monarchiam Orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam; printed 1641. cap. 40, to 51.
proves at large out of the Jesuits own printed Defense and other Writings;
That these new Doctors, of no Conscience, no Faith, no honesty or shame, have
persuaded the Emperor and other Kings, against their Oaths, Trusts, Duties,
Charters, the Law of Nations, and all Divine and Human Laws, that it was
lawful for them, upon a pretext of Necessity, for the ease of the people, and
Maintenance of their Wars, Soldiers, to alienate the Lands, Revenues,
Maintenance of Abbeys, Religious men and of the Church, upon Soldiers, for the
defense of their Bodies, and of the Church; that so themselves might gain a
share of them for the advantage of their own Societies, contrary to the wills,
intentions of the first Donors and Founders: Whereupon he thus justly jeers
them, cap. 46. p. 222. "That the institution of the Jesuits Society peculiarly
tends to this, that their Colleges should beinstituted and Society maintained
out of the ruins of the Church, and rapines of other men's Goods, a quibus
Societatis Institutor et Conditor Ignatius, cum etiamnum ad legionem bellator
esse^, minime alienus fuisse, nec a solita Militum rapacitate quicquam
demutasse, sine ulla ejus contumelia creditur, e^si autem Militiam mutavit ac
simul cum Sociorum ne dicam furum manipulo Christo Imperatori Sacramentum
dixit, non propterea rapinam omnem ejerare necesse habuit, etc. he remaining a
PLUNDERER still, after he became a SAINT: Seeing the Prophet Isay seems thus
to prophecy both of his Rapine and Wound in his halting Leg, cap. 33. Tunc
dividentur Spolia multarum praedarum: Claudi diripient rapinam." Therefore no
wonder this Spirit of Rapine continues in his Disciples: who doubtless have
infused the self-same Spirit of Rapine into our Anabaptists and Soldiers, into
whose Societies they have secretly insinuated themselves; somenting and
intending to lengthen out our wars so long, of purpose to make a prey of our
remaining Church-Revenues, Rectories, Tithes, and College lands too at last,
(as they have done of other Church-Revenues already dissipated) out of a
pretext of Necessity, as is most transparant to all Intelligent peoples eyes,
thereby to destroy our Religion by devouring our Ministers, Churches
Patrimonies, the probable, if not inevitable consequence of this Jesuitical
project, if effected, as is most apparent by this notable passage of Roderyck
Mors formerly a Gray Friar, in his Complaint and Supplication to the Parliament
of England, about 37 H. 8. after the Dissolution of Monasteries, pertinent to
my purpose, and as worthy consideration now as then, Ye that be Lords and
Burgesses of the Parliament House, (writes he) I require of you in the name of
my poor Brethren that are Englishmen and Members of Christ's Body, that ye
consider well (as ye will answer before the face of Almighty God in the day of
judgment) this abuse, and see it amended. When Antichrist of Rome durst openly
without any visor walk up and down thorowout England, he had so great favor
there, and his Children had such crafty wits (for the Children of this World
are wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light) they had not only
almost gotten all the best Lands of England into their hands, but also most
part of the best Benefices both of Parsonages and Vicarages which were for the
most part The Impropriations held by them were much more than the 3d. part of
all the Parish Churches of England divided into 3 parts, and of greater value
than the other 2 parts in Priests and Ministers hands.
all improved to them. And when they had the gifts of any not improved, they
gave them unto their Friends, of the which always some were learned, for the
Monks found of their Friends Children at School. And though they were not
learned, yet they kept Hospitality and helped their poor Friends. And if the
Parsonages were impropred, the Monks were bound to deal Alms to the poor and
to keep Hospitality, as the writings of the Gifts of such Parsonages and Lands
do plainly declare in these words, In puram Eleemosynam. And as touching the
Alms that they dealt, and the Hospitality that they kept, every man knows,
that many thousands were well relieved of them, and might have been better, if
they had not had so many great Men's Horse to feed, and had not been
overcharged with such idle Gentlemen, as were never out of the Abbeys. And if
they had any Vicarage in their hands, they set in some time some sufficient
Vicar, (though it were but seldom) to preach and to teach. But now that all the
Abbeys, with their Lands, Goods and impropred Parsonages be in temporal men's
hands, I do not hear tell that one half penny worth of Alms, or any other profit
comes unto the people of those Parishes. Your pretense of putting down Abbeys,
was to amend that was amiss in them. It was far amiss, that a great part of the
Lands of the Abbeys (which were given to bring up learnned men that might be
Preachers, to keep Hospitality and give Alms to the poor) should be spent upon
a few Superstitious Monks, which gave not XL. pound in Alms, when they should
have given CC. It was amiss, that the Monks should have Parsonages in their
hands, and deal but the XX. part thereof to the poor, and preached but once in
a year to them that paid the Tithes of Parsonages. It was amiss, that they
scarcely among XX set not one sufficient Vicar to preach for the Tithes that
they received. But see now, how it that was amise, is amended, for all the
Pretense. It is amended even as the Devil amended his Dams Leg (as it is in the
Proverb) when he should have set it right, he brake it quite in pieces. The
Monks gave too little Alms, and set unable Persons many times in their
Benefices. But now where xx. pound was yearly given to the poor, in more than
C. places in England is not one meals meat given. This is a fair Amendment.
Where they had always one or other Vicar, that either preached or hired some
to preach, Now is there no Vicar at all: but the Farmor is Vicar and Parson
altogether, and only an old cast away Monk or Friar which can scarcely say his
Mattins, is hired for xx. or xxx. shillings Meat and Drink, yea in some places
for Meat and Drink alone, without any wages. I know, and not I alone, but xx.
M. mo, know more than D. (we may now add 5000.) Vicarages and Parsonages thus
well Gospelly served, (yea not served at all, but the Church Doors quite shut
up) after the New Gospel of England. So he.

This doubtless will be the general sad condition of all England (as it is now
in most part of Wales) if Tithes and Rectories be quite voted down, abolished,
or disposed to the Soldiers, or brought into a common Treasury (which will
hardly leave Ministers the Tenth of their Tithes, as our late Sequestrators
left not the Tenth nor fifth part clear gains, and value, of all Sequestrations
generally throughout England, to the State, as I found by examination of their
Accounts upon Oath) which is now so violently prosecuted, endeavored by many.
And then we shall have a glorious blessed Reformation indeed, according to the
Popes and Jesuits hearts desires, who like ravening Wolves will make a prey of
all Flocks in the defect and absence of able Pastors, through want of
Maintenance and poverty, as they have done in many places throughout the Realm,
seduced by them to Jesuitism, Anabaptism, Atheism, through defect of able
Ministers, and ejection of former Incumbent Pastors under pretext of Scandal,
Insufficiency, or Malignity, by Arbitrary or Anabaptistical Committees,
Sequestrators, Prosecutors, without any legal Trial by their Peers, or any care
at all to place better, abler, or any Minister at all in diverse Parishes in
their places: Whereupon these active Jesuits, with other Romish Emissacries
under the Disguises of Anabaptists, Seekers, Dippers, inspired Brethren,
Quakers, Ranters, Soldiers, New Illuminates of extraordinary Endowments, and
Itinerary Predicants, who pretend to preach the Gospel freely, have seduced
thousands, divided the people into sundry Sects, and almost ruined our Church
and Religion in a short space, which they will soon accomplish to their hearts
content, can they now but vote down Tithes, Glebes, and set up New Committees
in all places of their own and the Anabaptistical party, (concurring in Design
and most principles with the Jesuits, as Page 26, to 31, 169, 186.
Watson in his Quodlibets, and others prove at large) to eject our remaining
Ministers at their pleasure, under pretext they are Antichristian, Scandalous,
and no Ministers of Jesus Christ (as John Can and others have already
prejudge them) that they and their Agents may step into their places; and at
last, when all their Designs against our State, Church, Governm. are produced
to maturity, reassume their Tithes, Rectories, with our Bishops, Deans,
Chapters and Abbey Lands too into their actual possessior, according to the
Jesuit Parsons and his Companions long prosecuted project, at large related by
William Watson the Priest in his Quodlibets, p. 93, 94, 98, 288, 289, 332, 333.
with other plots lately prosecuted ad unguem to subvert our Religion, Laws,
Government, Monarchy, and enslave us to the Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards Tyranny
and Vassalage in conclusion; first laid by Parsons and other pragmatical
Jesuits, then seconded by Thomas Campanella, in his Treatise De Monarchia
Hispanica c. 25. 27. and elsewhere: prosecuted of late years by the Jesuits
and Spanish Agents on the one hand; and Cardinal Richilieu and his Instruments
on the other hand; who at his death in the beginning of our late Wars (which he
was very instrumental to raise) recommended the prosecution of them to the
French King and his Successor Cardinal Mazarin; as A Noble Italian Count, Conte
Galliazzo Gualdo Priorato, in his Historia, part 3. printed at Venice in 4 to
Anno 1648. (dedicated by him to the King of Poland, and written in Italian) p.
175, 176 records in these words, worthy all English Statesmens special notice:
where Writing of the affairs of the year 1642. and the death of Cardinal
Richelieu in particular, he records, That amongst other things he caused some
Papers to be delivered before his death to the King of France, full of Policies
and Maxims of State, directing him how to carry on his Eusiness with all
Foreign States. His advice in relation to England was this. Che Sopra, etc. That
above all other things the King of France should endeavor to keep the
Government of Great Britain divided, by upholding the weakest party, that the
other might not make it self too powerful; Reducing the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland to be divided (by one of these two means or both) either
by nominating (new) Kings: or by reducting them to a Commonwealth. Yet with
this Caution, that when they are reduced to a Commonwealth, So to order it,
that it may not be entirely one, but divided: For Republiques ever enemies to
Poteut Neighbors, and Jealous of their Liberties, ought to be Suspected by the
State of France. How punctually this advice has been pursued by the French (as
well as Parsons and Campanellaes Plots of like nature by the Spaniards) those
who please to peruse the Lord George Digbies Cabinet Letters (printed in the
Collection of all the Public Orders, Ordinances and Declaration of Parliament
in folio, by the Commons Order) 1646. p. 849, 858, 862, 863, 866, 867. and my
Speech in Parliament p. 118. and 106, to 114. may read at leisure, and every
man's observing experience can sufficiently attest. The Lord now at last give us
hearts to be deeply sensible of it, and grace, zeal, courage to make timely use
of it for the Preservation of our Kingdoms, Nations, Churches, Ministers,
Religion from impendent ruin.

Having given the world this brief Account of the principal Promoters,
Prosecutors of the present Grand Plot against our Ministers, their Tithes and
Rectories, I cannot upon serious consideration of it but foresee and divine,
that if all or any of these Projectors (through Gods heavy Judgment on us for
our sins, and detestable violations of all Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Trusts,
Protestations, Promises, Declarations Divine and Human Laws) should by power,
fraud, policy, or armed force so far prevail with our present Legifers or
Swaying Grandees, as totally to take away and abolish the Rectories, Tithes and
present settled Maintenance of our Ministry, for the Soldiers pay, or other
ends; or else secretly to bring them all into a Common Treasury, and reduce all
our Ministers to set arbitrary Stipends out of them, to dispossess them of the
future actual possession of them, and make them wholly dependent on the
arbitrary discretions of new intruding Landlords into their Churches,
Patrimonies, Freeholds from whom they never received them at first; as it would
inevitably produce a world of mischiefs and Inconveniences both to all Patrons
and Parishioners throughout the Nation, without the least Ease or Benefit to
the People; so it would certainly either totally ruin our Ministers, making
them all poor Friars Mendicants, neglecting their Callings, Studies, to get
their living by begging from door to door, and as In. 2. lib. Regum c. 5. f.
240.
Peter Martyr observes, to be ventris potius quam Ecclesiae Ministros, ostiatim
valide Mendicare, and non Mendicantes, sed Manducantes appellari: and thereby
subvert our Church and Religion with them in very few years space, open such a
wide door for the Pope and whole body of Popery to flow in upon us again with
an impetuous irresistible Deluge, that we should no ways be able to resist
their progress till they were re-estated in their former Supremacy and
Prevalency amongst us. And then rhose very Romish Factors who are now so
violent against Tithes and Rectories, of purpose to starve our Ministers out of
them, and their Ministry for the present, will not only forthwith resume (as
they did in See 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. c. 8. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. c. 3. Fox Acts
and Monuments vol.
Queen Mary's days) their pristine abolished Pontifical Power, and set up
their Ecclesiastical Consistories, High Commissions, and bloody Inquisitions
amongst us, higher than ever they were in former ages, to the utter extirpation
of our Protestant Ministers and Professors too, but likewise presently resume
into their hands all those Rectories, Tithes and ancient Dues, whereof they now
endeavor to deprive our Ministers; with all our late Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Chapters, Cathedrals Lands and Revenues, as Sacrilegiously alienated
from the Church, against the Laws both of God and Man, as well as against
their Popish Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 1, and 7.
Canons, by those who had no right to dispose of them if they proceed to resume
all Abbey Lands too in Protestant hands at least. And then all late or ancient
Purchasers of such Lands, now confederating with them out of Covetousness,
Ambition, Rapine, or other respects, will repent too late of their
inconsiderable, unrighteous, unchristian compliance with them against our
Ministers Glebes and Tithes, and have as ill a Bargain in conclusion, as diverse
old Projectors had in the purchase of our Crown Revenues, when resumed, or
settled in the Crown again, by many special See 1 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 148. 1 H.
4 n. 48, 100, 141. 6 H. 4. n, 14, 15. 8 H. 4. n. 52. 28 H. 6. n. 53. 33 H. 6.
n. 47. 4 Edw. 4. ^. n. 39. 12 ^. 4. n. 6. 1 H. 5. c. 9. 31 H. 6. c. 7. with
those Resumptions in former Ages, recorded in Daniels History and others.
Acts of Resumption, for the public weal and ease of the people in their
Taxes, as being the constant, standing Revenue of the whole Kingdom to defray
its ordinary public Expenses, which none can or ought to Alien or purchase
from the Republic to enrich themselves by the public Loss. Wherefore I shall
now refer it to their saddest thoughts to consider, whether it will not be far
safer for all such Army Officers and others who have purchased Church Lands, to
join together with all such zealous Protestants who desire the continuance of
our Ministers ancient Tithes and Maintenance (more aimed at than Impropriators
Tithes) against these Jesuits and Romish Emissaries now oppugning them; and to
us: their utmost endeavors to detect, apprehend, prosecute, execute all our
former good Laws against them, to prevent their mischievous present and future
Designs against our Ministry, Church, Religion, Nation; than ignorantly or
wittingly to confederate with and assist them to accomplish their present
Sacrilegious Projects, to ruin us (and themselves with their Posterities) in
conclusion; and thereby incur the self-same Crime, Charge of High Treason which
themselves and the whole Parliament of England so lately prosecuted against
Canterbury in the 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, and 14. See Canterburies Doom, ^. 26,
27, etc.
Articles of his original Charge, for which he lost his head on Tower Hill.

To draw to a cloze of this Proposition, I shall desire all truly fearing God
throughout the Nation and Army too, sadly to consider these particulars.

1. That those who are the chiefest Sticklers against Tithes and our Ministers
settled co^rcive Maintenance (especially Jesuits and Anabaptists) are the
greatest professed open Adversaries to our Ministry, Church, Religion of all
others, desiring nothing but their utter ruin, as their late printed Pamphlets
and Petitions manifest: Therefore to gratify them in their Designs herein, is
to ruin all at once, for whose defense we have spent so much Christian Blood,
Treasure, pains of late years, against the Common Enemy and Jesuited Popish
Party.

2. That many of those who in their printed Papers, have decryed our Ministers
Tithes and coercive Maintenance as inconsistent with the Peoples Liberties, and
a great Bondage to them, have as The Levellers late printed Fundamental Laws
and Liberties. n. 15, 16, 25, 27.
earnestly declaimed against all Enclosures, Copy hold Tenures, Landlords old
Rents, Services, ancient Customs, Imposts, which being not so ancient, nor
ratified by so many Statutes, Charters, Muniments of all sorts as Tithes are,
will not be able to stand before their Opposition and Arguments against them,
if our Tithes and Ministers Glebes should once fall before them

3. That if our besotted Nation shall be so stupid as to admit or permit any
company of persons whatsoever a sufficient Legal Power or Jurisdiction without
any pretended Crime, Attainder, Legal Conviction, or Trial by their Peers, at
their mere wills and arbitrary discretions, to deprive all our godly Ministers
throughout the Nation of their Rectories, Tithes and ancient Dues, though
ratified by the Law yea Gospel of God himself, by an uninterrupted Title,
Prescription in their Predecessors from the very first planting of the Gospel
in our Nation, and more hundreds of years, than the antientest Families in the
Nation have enjoyed their Inheritances, by more Charters of our Kings, more
particular Laws, Statutes of our successive Parliaments in all ages, than all
the Nobility, Gentry, Corporations, Commons of the Realm are able to produce
for the Rights, Titles, Defense of their particular Lands and Inheritances,
against the Rapines, Intrusions, Claims, Seisures, Confiscations, Sales,
Alienations of any either claiming or usurping such a Power or Jurisdiction by
the Sword or otherwise: They will thereby both admit them and invest them in as
sufficient a Legal Power and Jurisdiction, without the least pretended Crime,
Attainder, Legal Conviction, or Trial by their Peers, at their mere arbitrary
wills and Discretions, to deprive, strip all the Nobility, Gentry,
Corporations, Commons of the Realm of all their Manors, Lands, Inheritances,
Estates, Chattels, Privileges, Franchises whatsoever; being not so well fenced
by the Laws of God and Men against their Rapines and Depredations as Tithes
are; and those who will make no conscience upon any grounds or pretenses to
invade the one, will make no Scruple to act the other, as the Histories of
Speeds Hist. p. 733, etc. 836, 849, 850, 851. Sleidens Comment. l. 7. c. 10.
Jack Cade and his Accomplices Practices, Designs at home, and the Anabaptists
abroad will sufficiently attest. Yea it will be but just with God to engage
such Arbitrary Powers to act the later, to the ruin of them and their
families, if they shall either assist, permit, encourage them by their silence
or cowardice, to perpetrate the other, to the disinheriting of the Church, the
ruin of their faithful Ministers themselves, and that very Religion which
they pretend to profess and practice.

4. That as Tithes are the fittest Maintenance for Ministers of all others, as
invented, appointed by the very Wisdom of God himself, and the best, the wisest
of his Saints in all ages; holding the self-same proportion in relation to the
Ministers and Parishioners in times of Plenty and Dearth, good years or bad,
fair harvests or foul, rising or the falling of the prices of Corn, Lands, and
other Commodities; affecting them both alike with the mercy and bounty of God
in times of Plenty, and the Judgments of God in times of Scarcity, or
unseasonable weather; more easily parted with by the Countryman in kind, by
several small parcels as they grow due, than in ready money in one or two
entire sums, which they are most loath to render and part from of any thing, as
that they 1 Timothy 6. 10. Eccles. 5. 10.
most affect: yea far less troublesome to, more convenient for our Ministers
Persons, families and necessary Cattle, than bare stipends, which must enforce
them to run to Markets to buy all their Corn and other provisions both for
their Household, Horses, Cattle at the dearest rates. So if this Maintenance by
Tithes be once abolished, either before any other competent Maintenance settled
in its steed, less grievous and inconvenient than Tithes, (which all wise men
in the world will never be able to invent, much less to establish as things
now are settled;) or Ministers left wholly to an arbitrary, unconstrained
Benevolence without any limited Proportion, or means to recover it if detained,
as some now petition: This expected proposed unconstrained Maintenance would in
verity and reality, signify just Nothing, and be no Maintenance at all, in the
Petitioners own sense and intention; as appears by John Cannes forecited
passages, and the very words of their Petitions; since they refuse to pay them
their very Tithes yet due by Law, and never freely contributed one penny to
them for their Ministry, which they revile, disclaim as Antichristian.
Wherefore if any Newfangled Politicians resolve to settle such a new
Maintenance only instead of the old, for the peoples pretended Ease; let them
first establish, settle an arbitrary Excise, Custom, uncoercive voluntary
Impost, and monthly Contribution as this on the people for Maintenance of the
Army and Navy, (not so simply necessary as the Ministry for our real welfare)
without any compulsory means to recover it if not freely rendered, till the next
harvest come, and see what a competent Maintenance that will be for the
Soldiers and Seamen; and provide that all Tenants for the year ensuing, shall
render only what Rents they please to the State, their Landlords, and Lessees,
who shall have no power to distrain, sue, or enter upon any of them in case
they deny to pay their Rents: and ^rie what a certain Annual Revenue this
whimsy will produce to the States and Landlords purses: Or else give over this
Jesuitical Anabaptistical devised new Maintenance for our Ministers, as a
Stratagem only to starve their bodies, and their Peoples souls, without any
more Debates concerning Tithes, to gratify such malicious Projectors, and
offend all Godly people through the Nation, who deem this old way of
Maintenance, of Gods own Prescription, far better, less inconvenient in all
respects than this arbitrary or any other newfangled way of these or other
men's invention.

5ly. That although God by his divine Providence is able to support the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, though totally stripped naked of all their
Glebes, Tithes, ancient Maintenance, through the unrighteousness or malice of
ungodly men, as he did the Apostles and his Ministers in all ages, in times of
Persecution; yet let all such who have, or shall have a hand in such a
Sacrilegious design consider,

1. That they shall be as bitter Enemies to and Persecutors of the Ministers of
Christ amongst us in and by this very Project, as See Nicephorus Eccles. Hist.
l. 10. Gent. Magd. 4. c. 3. 14.
Julian the Apostate Christian was to Gods faithful Ministers in the primitive
Times, when he took away their Preferments, Glebes, and Church Revenues; as the
High Commissioners and Prelates were of late to all those godly Puritan
Ministers whom they deprived of their Benefices for Nonconformity to their
Ceremonies, and no real Crime de^erving such an inhuman Censure, depriving them
of their Livelyhoods.

2ly. That they shall hereby draw a great Scandal upon our very Religion it
self, Church, Nation, render them odious, Sacrilegious to all foreign Churches,
Nations; gratify, rejoice the hearts of the Pope, Jesuits, Papists and other
professed Enemies of our Religion; accomplish their Designs against our Church
and Ministers; exceedingly sad the hearts, and grieve the righteous souls of
all Gods faithful Saints amongst us, of all Protestant Churches in Foreign
parts, and draw this just Censure on themselves, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15. An heart
they have exercised with covetous practices, cursed Children, which have
forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the way of Balaam, the son
of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. These are wells without
water, Clouds carried with a Tempest, to whom is reserved the mist of darkness
for ever.

3ly. That although God should miraculously preserve a faithful able Ministry
and his true Religion still amongst us through the bounty and charity of other
well affected Christians, yet they have done their uttermost endeavors to
destroy them, and the peoples souls with them, both for the present and
succeeding ages.

4ly. That this unrighteous violent act will in all probability bring in a
world of Confusion, Atheism, Schisms, Heresies, Divisions, Contentions,
Blasphemies, disorders amongst us, in all places; a Amos 8. 11.
famine of the sincere preaching of Gods word; a neglect and contempt of
Learning and Piety; a Ante haec sic existimatum est, speciosa strue^e sapientum
esse, and civilis vitae scientium; structa demolire, stultorum and vecordis
animi signa ad posteros transmittere, non erubescentiam: Procopius Gothico^u^.
l. 3. Grotius de Jure Belli. p. 522.
dilapidation, Spoliation of all or most Parish Churches, Chapels; a confusion
of the bounds of all Parishes, and Parochial Congregations; and bring all those
Calamities on our Nation, as it did upon the Israelites when Jeroboam thrust
out the Priests and Levites from their Glebes, Suburbs, Ministry: thus
registered 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5, 6. Now for a long season Israel was without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law (as some would have us
now) And in those days (mark the consequence) there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexation upon all the Inhabitants
of the Country: And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God
did vex them withal Adversity. In which condition they continued, till King
Asa and the people renewed, repaired the decayed Altar, House and worship of the
Lord, Gathered all the people to Jerusalem to worship God, and enter into a
Solemn Covenant and Oath to serve the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their
hearts, and with all their soul: And that whosoever would not seek the Lord God
of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman: Offered
Sacrifices to the Lord of the Spoil they had taken from the Enemy, 700* Oxen
and 7000. Sheep; and brought into the house of God, the things that his Father
had dedicated, and himself had dedicated, Silver and Gold and Vessels (formerly
taken thence) and then there was no more war in diverse years. v. 8. to the end
of the Chapter. And probably our Wars, Taxes, Vexations will never end; till we
give over our late irreligious, Sacrilegious Rapines, Church Robberies, and do
the like, as this pious King and his people here did.

5ly. That this discouraging, robbing, abusing, despising, mocking, misusing,
of Gods Messengers, Prophets sent amongst us, and of all his and their words
against our wicked Atheistical, Sacrilegious Rapines, is the High way to
provoke the wrath of God to rise against us till there be no remedy, yea to
bring in a powerful Foreign Nation upon us to pillage, waste, destroy, enslave
our whole Nation, extirpate us out of the Land of our Nativity, and carry us
Captives to a Foreign Nation, as it did Gods own people heretofore. 2 Chronicles.
36. 15, to 22. Sufficient motives to deter us from such a dangerous practice.

6ly. I must inform our Army Officers and Soldiers, that it is expressly
against the very Laws and Rules of War even in a Foreign Enemies Country won by
Conquest, to rob, destroy, pillage Churches, Temples, or things devoted for the
Maintenance of Gods public Worship; which not only the best Christian
Generals, and Soldiers, but many Heathen and Mohammedan Generals, Princes,
Commanders made conscience not to plunder, deface, demolish or substract, as
Grotius proves at large by many instances in his Book De Jure Belli. l. 3. c.
2, 12. sect. 6, 7, 8. Annotata on them. How much more then is it against the
Law of War and Arms it self to make a prey, plunder of Churches, Rectories,
Glebes, Tithes in their own native Country, against their own Consciences,
Covenants, Commissions to defend them? Yea such Generals, Soldiers and whole
Armies who have made no Conscience to observe it, have been frequently
destroyed for their Sacrilege, as many Heathen Historians observe, as well as
Christian: Herodotus, in my Edition p. 7, 8, 44, 167, 168, 169, 170, 187, 349,
350, 460, 461, 568. Diodorus Si^ulus Bibl. Hist. p. 622, 781, 782. Dion Cassius
Romans Hist. p. 589. Justini Historia ^. 8. p. 87. l. 24. p. 227, to 231, 269,
271, 308. Caelius Rhodiginus Ant. Lect. l. 18. c. 29 Eutropius Rer. Romans Hist.
p. 175, 228, 334. Paulus Diaconus p. 417. Nicetus Hist. p. 48, 50. Laurentius
Begerlink. Chronogra: p. 137, 189, 263. record sundry examples of this kind,
both among Pagans and Christians, to deter others from this dangerous
destructive sin: which if they neglect and scorn, I shall then desire them to
remember that saying of Euripedes an Heathen Poet in his Troadibus, that he
shall receive the like exemplary punishment.

Homo quisquis urbes vastat, and Dis Manibus
Seeds Sacratas, Templaque, haud recte sapit,
Nam similis ipsum Pestis Excidii manet
7ly. It is the Resolution of De Benesiciis p. 121.
Seneca the Philosopher. Quisquis id quod Deorum est, sustulerit and
consumpsit, atque in usum suum vertit, sacrilegus est: and all Gratian Cause.
16. qu. 4. summa Angelica and Rosella, Tit. Sacrilegium.
Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen, Divines whatsoever accord; That it is
Sacrilege for any Persons or Powers whatsoever to invade or take away any thing
which our Ancestors or any others have solemnly vowed, dedicated for the
necessary maintenance of Gods public worship and Ministers under what
specious pretext soever it be done. Therefore to take away or abolish our
Ministers Tithes, Glebes, Rectories and other Dues conferred on them by our
pious Ancestors, and make spoil, havoc of the Churches, Edifices erected by
them for Gods public worship, must questionless be Sacrilege; as God himself
expressly defines, Mal. 3. 8, 9. With all commentators thereon, old and new; and
Gratian Cause. 16. qu. ^. This the famous Emperor, Soldier Charles the Great,
and Ludovicus surnamed the Godly and most Christian, jointly resolve, Capit.
Caroli and Ludovici l. 6. cap. 285, 295, 296, 115, 305. and l. 7. c. 104. where
they thus conclude. Scimus res Ecclesiae Deo esse sacratas; Scimus eas esse
vota Fidelium, and pretia peccatorum. Quapropter, si quis eas ab Ecclesiis
quibus a Fidelibus collatae Deoque Sacratae sunt, au^ert, proculdubio
Sacrilegium committit. Caecus enim est qui ista non videt, etc. Si ergo amico
quippiam r^pere furtum est, Ecclesiae vero fraudari, vel abstrahi indubitanter
Sacrilegium est Omnes enim contra Legem facientes Resque Ecclesiae dirimentes,
vel Ecclesias Sacerdotesque contra Divinas Sanctiones vexantes Sacrilegi
vocantur, atque Indubitanter infames Sacrilegique Habendi sunt, etc. What
Penalties have been inflicted upon such who were guilty of this sin by
Christian Princes in foreign parts: I shall briefly inform this Sacrilegious
age. Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legu^ Antiquarum. p. 257,
Theodoricus King of the Goths in his Edict. c. 125. enacted: That if any man
should violently take any thing from Churches, he should lose his head. And
Alaricus the Gothish King, though an Arrian, when he took Rome by force of
Arms, and his "Soldiers had taken the Sacred Vessels out of St. Peter's Church
there, and brought them to him; commanded them to carry them back again to the
Church, with their own hands which took them thence, ut cupiditas quae
depraedationis ambitu admiserat scelus, devotione largissima deleret excessum:"
as Cassiodor relates, l. 12. Epist. 20. Among the Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex
Legum Antiquarum p. 508, 702.
Friseans Laws made by their wisemen, Tit. 12. De Honor Templorum; this is
one; He who shall break a Church, and take away the holy things thence, let him
be carried to the Sea, and in the Sand which the Tide is wont to cover, let his
ears be slit, and he be gelt, and then let him be sacrisiced to the Gods whose
Temples h^ has violated. The Neopolitan Laws l. 1. Tit. 5. enact; That
whosoever shall violently break open a Church, and take away any Gifts or
consecrated Vessels thence, shall be punished as a Capital Off^nder, and lose
his life. Fredericus Lindebrogus Ibid. p. 997, 998. Bochellus Decret. Eccles.
Gal. l. 8. Tit. 61. p. 1308.
Charles the Great and Jews the Godly, enacted; That if any person violently
took from any Church, Priest or Minister any thing belonging to them, and were
convicted thereof, or confessed the same, he should have sentence of death
given against him, as guilty of Sacrilege, and that it should be not only
lawful, but commendable, to prosecute and avenge this Sacrilege and Injury
done to the Church, Priests and Ministers, as a public Crime, deserving
punishment, and that if any did Sacrilegiously invade or molest the Possessions
and Lands of the Church, he should be perpetually banished for it. Capit.
Caroli and Ludovici l. 6. Tit. 113, 125. And Tit. 305. they thus determine. All
things that are offered to the Lord, are without all doubt consecrated to the
Lord, and not only the Sacrifices, which by the Priests are consecrated upon
the Altar to the Lord, are called the Oblations of the faithful, but what
things soever are offered to him by the faithful, whether in Sacrifices or in
Fields, Vineyards, Woods, Meadows, Waters, Water-streams, Artifices, Books,
Uten^ils, Stones, Buildings, Vestments, Wools, Garments, Cattle, Parchments,
Movables and Immoveables, or whatsoever, which of these things are made to the
praise of God, or the Supplement of the holy Church of God, and his Priests,
and which may give ornament unto them, whether they be freely offered by any
one to the Lord and his Church, are undoubtedly consecrated to the Lord, and
belong to the Priests Right. And because we truly acknowledge the Lord and his
Church to be one person; what ever things are the Churches are Christ's; and
whatsoever is offered to the Church, either in the aforesaid things, or in any
other Kinds, o^ by promises, or pledges, or writings, or in corporal things are
offered unto Christ, and what things by any devise are alienated or taken from
his Church, either by alienating, or by wasting, or invading, or by
diminishing, or by rapine, are taken from Christ. And if it be Robbery to take
any thing from a friend, it is Sacrilege to take away, alienate, substract, or
waste any thing especially from Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
For all Robbers of the Church are most apparently Sacrilegious persons, and no
Sacrilegious person, unless by pure, approved and public Repentance, and by
satisfaction to the Church, and by imposition of the Bishops hands, and
reconciliation according to the Canonical Sanctions, shall Inherit the Kingdom
of God; and shall not only be secluded the Kingdom of God, but likewise be shut
out of the limits of the Church, especially of the Church he has ruined, and
shall be excommunicated thence, until the foresaid Satisfaction given. And the
perpetrators of such wickednesses, ought to have no Communion at all, either
with the living o^ dead, till after such Satisfaction given. Because who ever
violently takes away his Neighbors money, commits Iniquity, but Sacrilegious
persons are not only Thee^es, but likewise Wolves and Man-stayers and Murderers
of the poor, and accursed, damned persons before God and his Saints.

And if so, as these two pious Emperors, by their Laws, with many Sr. James
Semple Sacrilege sacredly handled. Sir Henry Spelman de non Temerandis
Ecclesiis. Mr. Seldens Review. Dr. Selaters Ministers Portion. Summa Angelica,
Rosella and Tho. Zerula Tit. Sacrilegium: with many more.
Protestant Writers (as well as Papists) resolve; and all Sacrilegious Persons,
taking any Vessel or V^ensil out of a Church, though of small value by our See
Wests Presidents, Indictments and Offenses* Sect 196, 197. p. 127, 128. ^ E. 6.
c. 12
own Laws too, as well as theirs, be Sacrilegious Persons worthy to suffer
pains of death, as Felons; those who shall openly Sacrilegiously Rob, or
attempt to Rob and spoil all the Godly painful Ministers of our Nation of all
their Tithes, Rectories, Glebes, Churches and Churchyards too at once, are
doubtless Sacrilegious Persons in the highest degree, deserving to suffer a
temporal infamous death and execution, (better than any Highway Thieves or
Robbers) at Tiburn, or to be eternally banished the Nation, Articuli Cleri. 9
E. 2. c. 12.
excommunicated all Christian Society, and had in perpetual execration, for
this Sacrilegious Rapine, both by God himself and all good men, unless they
repent and make full public Restitution, Satisfaction for this their
detestable Sacrilege.

Lastly, If any Officers or Soldiers pretend, we are now a Object.
Conquered Nation; that Conquest makes all sacred things, profane and common
to the Conquerors; and that Churches may be justly spoiled of their Materials,
Vessels, Glebes, Tithes, in such a case for the pay and benefit of the
Conquering Soldiers, as Grotius De Jure Belli. l. 3. c. 5.
some affirm. Therefore they may now justly deprive our Ministers of their
Tithes, Glebes, Rectories, Churches, Churchyards, to pay, maintain themselves
and the Conquering Army, yea alter, change our Laws at present; as they now
attempt, and diverse of them openly profess they intend to do.

I Answer, 1. That the Lords and Commons, the very last Answ.
Parliament, when they first raised the Army, in Exact Collection p. 617. 631.
their Petition to the late King, sent to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to
the Army, and by him presented to his Majesty Sept. 24. 1642. or soon after,
used this expression. That the prevailing Popish party with his Majesty, who
by many wicked Plots and Conspiracies have attempted the Alteration of the true
Religion, and the ancient Government of the Kingdom, the introducing of Popish
Idolatry and Superstition into the Church, and tyranny and confusion into the
State, and by corrupting his Councels, abusing his Power, and sudden and
untimely dissolving of former Parliaments, had often hindered the Reformation
and Prevention of those Mischiefs. And in prosecution of those wicked Designs,
had (as the most Mischievous and Bloody Design of all) drawn his Majesty to
make War against his Parliament and good Subjects of this Kingdom, and to lead
in person an Army against them; as if he intended by Conquest (mark the word)
to establish an absolute and unlimited power over them. And in their Exact
Collection p. 730.
Remonstrance Nov. 2. 1642. in Reply to his Majesty's Answer to their
Remonstrance of May 26. 1642. they charge this as the last Doctrine and Position
of the Contrivers of his Majesty's Answer; That the Representative body of the
whole Kingdom, is a Faction of Malignant, Schismatical, and ambitious persons,
whose designs is and always has been to alter the whole frame of Government
both of Church and State, and to subject both King and People to their own
lawless arbitrary Power and Government, and that they design the ruin of his
Majesty's Person and of Monarchy it self; and consequently that they are
Traitors, and all the Kingdom with them: (for their Act is the Act of the whole
Kingdom) And whether their Punishment and Ruin, may not also involve the whole
Kingdom in conclusion,
and reduce it into the condition of a Conquered Nation (mark the words) no man
can tell: hut experience shows us (as now it does in good earnest more than
ever) that Success often carries men not only beyond their Profession, but
also many times beyond their first Intentions. For an Army, Officers then,
professing themselves true born English men, eminent Godly Saints, preservers
of our Nations Liberties against Regal Tyranny and Enchroachments, originally
raised, Commissioned by both Houses to protect our Laws, Liberties, Religion,
Church, Government, Parliament, Nation, from an intended Conquest by the late
Kings Army; to establish an absolute unlimited power over us, and from being
reduced into the condition of a Conquered Nation, after the total routing of
the Kings Army, Power, now at last to plead, to averr, we are now a conquered
Nation; in respect of themselves, and thereupon to endeavor to establish an
absolute unlimited power over us, by altering the whole frame of Government
both in Church and State, changing the body of our Laws yea ancient
constitution of our Parliaments; abolishing our very Ministers Rectories,
Tithes, Dues, or diverting them to pay, maintain themselves; yea now to act
over the very self-same things, which both Houses then charged upon the late
beheaded King and his Malignant Popish Council; thereby verifying these his
Predictions of their forementioned designs in every Punctilio, (then utterly
disclaimed by both Houses as the Highest Scandal to them, and their sincere
loyal Intentions) and making him a truer Prophet, than their new Merlin, Lilly;
will not be only most scandalous, dishonorable to them, but monstrous,
treacherous, perfidious, if insisted on, or persisted in, both in the Judgment
of God, Angels, Men, and their own Consciences too. Wherefore I presume on
second thoughts, they will disclaim this Plea both in words and Actions. 2ly.
They were all raised, waged, Commissioned by the late Parliament and
well-affected People, not to sight against, conquer or subdue themselves, but
to preserve them, their Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Estates, our Churches and
Religion against the Common Enemies and Invaders of them Therefore they cannot
style themselves Conquerors of those Persons, things they never fought against,
but only for, unless they will now declare their secret intentions, were ever
cross and contradictory to their open Commissions, Vows, Covenants,
Protestations, Words, and printed Declarations to God and those that raised,
waged them for their safety and defense alone; and thereby proclaim themselves
the Greatest Hypocrites under heaven, and therein as treacherous to their own
Native Country and those who trusted them, as the Purchase Pilgrimage l. 6 c. 5,
6. Heylins Microcosm p. 146, 147, 613, 614, 756, 757.
Mamalukes of Egypt, the Pretorian Soldiers of Rome were to their Lords and
Masters of Old; which I hope they will disclaim. 3ly. It is a resolved case by
the Law of Nature, Nations and War it self, as Grotius proves at large, De Jure
Belli l. 3. c. 6. sect. 8, 9, 10, etc. That things gained by Conquest in a War,
ought to redound not to the Officers, Soldiers, Generals, who manage the War,
but to the Kingdom, Nation whose servants they are, and both Commission and pay
them their wages, as the Servants, Apprentices gains redound to their Masters
Cosfers, not to them. Qui sentit Onus, sentire debet and Commodum: being both a
Principle in the Law of Nature, Reason, and in our Common Law too. Hence
Lipsius de Triumphis, Heylins Cosmography and others.
all the Roman Generals and Military Officers, brought all the Silver, Gold,
Treasures, Spoils of War into the public Treasury, putting none of it into
their private purses; and all the Lands, Countries they gat by Conquest were
the Republiques only, which bore the charges of the War, not the victorious
Conquering Generals or Soldiers. Therefore the Officers and Army being
Commissioned, raised only for, and constantly paid by the Parliament, people,
for the ends aforesaid, never warring on their own free cost; what ever
Treasures, Lands, Powers, Spoils they have gained by their victories,
Conquests, are of Right the Parliaments, Nations, Peoples only, not their own;
Therefore the Parliament, Nation, people cannot, must not be overawed, used,
reputed by them, as their mere Conquered Vassals, but as their Sovereign Lords,
and true Proprietors of all the Territories, Lands, Treasures, Powers they have
gained by their Conquests. 4ly. That Conquest is no just or Lawful Title, was
long since resolved by the greatest Conqueror ever England yet bred, even our
famous British Conquering King Arthur, in the greatest Parliamentary Council
ever yet held within this Isle, whereat were present no less then 12. Kings
besides King Arthur, and an innumerable company of Princes, Dukes, Nobles,
Prelates of the British, and most other Neighbor Nations; as Geoffry Monmouth,
Hist. Regum Brit. l. 9. c. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20. records. All these,
when Lucius Procurator of the Roman Republique, came to demand that ancient
Tribute reserved by Julius Caesar from this Isle of Britain when first
Conquered by him, then in arrear; and threatened to levy is by force of Arms, if
denied; Meeting together in a great Council or Parliament specially assembled
for that end: resolved, That the said Rent pretended to be due to the Romans
from the Britons, because Caesar by reason of the Britons divisions being
invited hither with his forces, enforced them (their Country being then shaken
with domestique troubles) to submit themselves to him by force and violence;
could not in Justice be demanded of them: because this Tribute being gained in
this manner was unjustly received. Nihil enim quod vi and violentia acquiritur,
Just ab ullo possidetur qui violentiam intulit. For nothing which is gained by
force and v^olence, is justly possessed by any who has offered and done the
violence. Irrationabilem igitur causam praetendi^, qua nos Jure sibi
Tributarios esse arbitratur. Therefore he pretends an Irrational cause, whereby
he supposes we are of Right Tributaries unto him. And because he presumes to
exact from us id quod injustum est, that which is unjust, by the like reason
let us demand a Tribute of Rome from him; and he who shall prove the stronger,
let him carry away what he desires to have. For if because Julius Caesar and
other Roman Kings heretofore Conquered Britain, he determines Tribute is now
due unto him for this cause: I now also think, that Rome ought to render
Tribute unto me, because my Ancestors heretofore got it by Conquest: Whereupon
they all resolved to assist King Arthur with their Arms against this
unrighteous Tribute, and Title to it by Conquest; and professed they would
spend their lives in the quarrel. Ipsa enim mors dulcis erit, dum enim in
vindi^^ndo Patres nostros in tuendo libertatem nostram in ex^l^ando Regem
nostrum perpessi fuerimus. Wherefore Conquest now can certainly be no Just, no
Lawful Plea, Title for any of our Officers or Soldiers, which this Greatest
Conqueror and this Great Council so long since damned as unjust and Irrational.
To which I shall annex "the Resolution of our Hoveden Annal pars posterior p.
561, to 566. Math. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 127.
Noble King Henry the 2d. and of all the Bishops, Abbots, Peers, Earls, Barons
of England assembled in a Parliamentary General Council of the Realm at
Westminster, An. 1126* to determine a Controversy between Alfonso King of
Castile, and Sancho King of Navarre, concerning diverse Castles and Territories
in Spain, won by War and Conquest by Sancho King of Navarre from Alfonso,
whiles he was a Pupil and Orphan; which they both submitted to their final
determination, who having heard both parties, unanimously resolved; that these
Castles and Lands should be restored to Alfonso, by King Sancho, with all their
bounds and appurtenances: quia per Bellum violenter and injuste abstulisset:
because he had violently and unjustly taken them away by War: which resolution
was confirmed under the Kings Great Seal, and sent unto these Kings". Therefore
Conquest alone can be no just, no legal Saintlike Right, Title to any Lands,
Possessions, Powers violently, unjustly gotten, claimed by Wars by our Swordmen
now, after these two ancient famous Parliamentary Resolutions in point, even
between foreign Conquering Princes, much less then between those Native
Englishmen, who raised, waged our Army and Officers to defend, not conquer them
in a mere intestine civil War. 5ly. See Sr. John Davis Reports ^. 40, 41, 42.
William Duke of Normandy, Edward the 3d, Henry the 4th, Edward the 4th, and
Henry the 7th, though they all came to the Crown by the Sword and Conquest of
their Competitors, yet they never claimed the Crown nor Kingdom by Conquest,
but Title only; nor esteemed the English, Irish, or Welsh a conquered Nation,
nor altered our ancient Government, Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, or Ministers
Tithes and Maintenance, but confirmed them, as all our Histories manifest in
their Lives, and Statutes made by them in the beginning of their respective
reigns attest, and I have Page 75, 76. Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 600,
601, etc.
formerly proved in the case of William commonly styled the Conqueror, who
ratified all our Liberties, Laws, Customs, Franchises presented to him upon
Oath, without the least alteration, diminution, or prevarication, to the
peoples Great content. Yea, King Henry the 4th. as Placita Corone, rot. Parl. 1
H 4. n. 17. record; did in the first Parliament held by him after his Conquest
of Richard the 2d. make this memorable Declaration to his people, entered in
that Roll. That he claimed the Realm and Crown of England with all their
Members and Appurtenances as right heir thereto by Blood, by Descent, and by
the right God had given him, through the aid of his Parents and Friends for to
recover the said Realm, which Realm was upon the point to be undone for want of
Government and abrogating of the Laws and Customs of the Realm. And that it was
not his will, that any should think, that he would by way of Conquest
disinherit any one of his Heritage, Franchise or other Right which he ought to
have* nor to out (or deprive) any man of that he had or should have by the good
Laws or Customs of the Realm (all which he confirmed by a special Act before 1
H. 4. c. 1.) but only those who were against his good purpose, and the common
profit of the Realm, and were guilty of all the evil come upon the Realm, and
were adjudged guilty thereof in that Parliament, as Sir William Le Scroop, Sir
Henry Green, and Sir John Bassy, whose Lands only he would have by Conquest, as
forfeited by their Treasons. Whereupon the Commons thanked the King, and
praised God that he had sent them such a King and Governor. Upon all which
Considerations, and the Resolution of learned De Jure Belli. l. 3. c. 14. sect.
10, 11, 12. and Annotata, p. 538, 539, 540.
Grotius, with others quoted by him; That by the very Laws of War even those
who are conquered by foreign Enemies, ought to enjoy by permission of the
Conquerors, their own Laws, Liberties, Magistrates, Religion, and a share in
their Government, (much more in such a Civil War as ours, where the Soldiers,
Generals can pretend no Conquest over those who raised, waged them for their
just defense against Conquest, and Invasion of their Laws, Liberties,
Government, Magistrates, Rights, Privileges) I hope those vaporing Officers,
Soldiers who have formerly cried up, pleaded, practiced this pretended Title
of Conquest amongst us, and used many of their former Masters, Raisers, and the
whole Nation, more like to conquered enslaved People, than their fellow
Christian Brethren and Freeborn Englishmen, who have paid them so well for all
those Services they employed them in; will henceforth totally renounce this
their false usurped Injurious Plea, Title; and no more persist under pretext
thereof, to deprive our Ministers, Church, Peers, Parliaments, Nation of their
very Native Freedoms, Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws, Government, Lands,
Possessions, which they were purposely commissioned, waged, and by all Sacred
all Civil Obligations, Trusts, Oaths, Vows, Protestations perpetually engaged
to defend against the least violation or Innovation, without their free and
full consents in a due and lawful Parliament freely elected by them, not
forcibly obtruded on them without their choice or privity. Yea I trust they
will be so just, so righteous toward me (so great a Sufferer by, under them
only for discharging my Conscience and bounden duty toward my God, our Church
and Native Country of England) as no ways to be angry with me, or Injurious
toward me for this my New Gospel Plea (interwoven with a Legal and Rational)
for the Lawfulness and Continuance of the ancient settled Maintenance and Tithes
of the Ministers of the Gospel, and the good old Fundamental Laws and Liberties
of the Nation; which their present busy Endeavors to abolish, alter, subvert,
beyond, yea against their Trusts, Commissions, Callings, have necessitated me
now to publish to the world, to preserve our Church, State, Ministry from new
Combustions and Impendent ruin: but rather sound a Retreat from these their
Heady Proceedings (which I fear the Jesuits with their Confederates the
Anabaptists, have engaged them so deeply in, to work as well their own as the
public speedy ruin both of our Church, Religion, State, Ministry, Nation) and
excite them to use the self-same deportment, words to me (who have no private
design nor interest of my own or other men's in this my voluntary undertaking,
but only the public Safety and Weal as enraged David did once to Abigail,
when she diverted him from his rash, bloody resolution to destroy Nabal and his
family for a Churlish Answer returned to him for his Kindness 1 Samuel 25. 32,
33. Now blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me;
and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and to avenge my self with my own hand: But if they shall
by Gods permission cast me again bound hand and foot into another fiery Furnace
for this my faithful Service, or not falling down and worshipping that Golden
(or rather Wooden) Image which they have or would now set up: I doubt not but
that Gracious God, who has so miraculously preserved me in, delivered me out
of so many 1 Pet. 4. 12.
fiery Trials and Fornaces heretofore, will do the like again hereafter, and
that in such a visible eminent manner, as shall enforce them at last to use
those words unto me as Nebuchadnezzar did unto Shadrac, Meshac, and Abednego
after their miraculous preservation in the midst of the fiery Furnace into
which the most valiant men of his Army cast them bound by his unrighteous
Command, to their own immediate destruction by the flame, without the least hurt
to them. Dan. 3. 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of
Shadrac, Meshac and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his
Servants that trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and have yielded
their bodies that they might not serve nor worship any God (or Idol) except
their own God. This being an undoubted Truth, which I have ever hitherto found
experimentally true from and in my former causeless Oppressors, (whose
Erroneous Practices, vices I have reproved) recorded by God himself and the
wisest of all Mortals. Prove. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man (for his faults
plainly) shall afterward find more favor, than he that flattereth (him in
them) with the Tongue. And that saying of the truth it self in such cases (of
difficulty and concernment to the reprover) will ever prove an experimental
verity, wherewith I shall conclude my Plea, which I desire may be deeply
engraven in the Hearts, Spirits of all timorous, base, unworthy Christians,
(who dare neither speak nor write their Consciences, nor Discharge their Duties
in these times of danger, and will wrong both their Consciences, Country,
Posterity, yea shame their God, Nation Religion to save their Estates, Lives as
they fondly conceit, when they will lose all with their souls to boot, by their
base carnal fears) Math. 16. 24, 25, 26. Luke 17. 33. If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. For
whosoever will Save (or shall seek to Save his life, so Luke records it) shall
Lose it; (and his Tithes, Lands, Liberties with it) and whosoever will Lose his
Lise for my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the
whole World and Lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his
Soul? I shall cloze up all with this notable Passage of our own learned Writer,
John Sarisbury against such Religious Hypocritical Cistersian Monks who in his
age sought exemption from payment of Tithes, and seized upon the Ministers Dues
about the year 1170. Joannis Sarisburiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 7. c. 21. De
Hypocritis, qui ambitio^is labem falsae Religionis imagine nituntur occultare
-- Hi sunt qui potestatibus persuadentes ut propter vitia personarum, jure suo
priventur Ecclefiae. Decimationes et Primitias Ecclestis subtrahunt, et
Ecclesias ipsas accipiunt de manu Laicorum Episcopis inconsultis. Hi sunt qui
praedia avita subtrahentes indigenis vicos and pagos redigunt in solitudinem
and in suos usus vicina quaeque convertunt: Ecclesias diruunt and ut in usus
revocant seculares, Quae Domus Orationis fuerat, aut efficitur stabulum
pecoris, aut opilionis, aut Ianificli Officina. Et ut se possunt before
exhibere and charitatis implere manus ne decimas dent, Apostolico privilegio
muniuntur. Miror tamen ut Fidelium pace Ioquar, quidnam sit, quod Decimas et
Iura aliena usurpare non erubescunt: Inquient forte, Religiosi sumus: Plane
Decimas solvere Religionis pars est. Et eas a Deo populus duntaxat religionis
(solvere) exigitur. Hi adeo religiosi sunt quod in Decimis dandis derogare
possunt constitutioni Divinae, and in eo licenter minus grati sunt gratiae Dei
quo eam amplioribus beneficiis experiuntur.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
IT is storied of Descriptio Daniae, 1629. p. 141. Historia compendiosa Daniae
p. 185, 186. Saxogrammaticus, pontanus and others in the life of Canutus and
olavus.
Canutus the 4th. the 77 King of Denmark, (an eminent professor of Piety, and
Religion, and great lover of Justice) that perceiving his Subjects to stick at
many things pertaining to Christian Religion, and not to conform to other
Christians throughout the world in Laws and Ceremonies, specially in the due
payment of Tithes to their Ministers, he urged them out of religious Piety, ut
ritu aliarum Nationum Christianam Religionem prositentium, Decimas Sacerdotibus
suis soluerent; that after the custom of other Nations professing Christian
Religion they would pay Tithes to their Priests: remitting to them a great fine
imposed on them for their Rebellion and contempt, in refusing to accompany him
in an Expedition against the English, to induce them thereunto. But they being
persuaded the contrary by his Brother Olaf, thereupon rose up in Rebellion
against him (specially the Northern Jutes, frequently perfidious, whom he could
never induce to pay Tithes) and pursuing him to Othense, cruelly murdered this
their just and pious King in the Church of St. Alban, Anno 1088. whom Olaf
succeeding, God presently sent such a great scarcity of Corn and provision in
Denmark for 7. years space together, (the intemperatenesse of the air blasting
all their Corn) that many families, not only of the poorer, but richer and
nobler sort died of famine, the people fighting with one another even for
grass to eat. At last the famine invading King Olaf his Court, he prayed to
God; that if he had conceived any anger against his Subjects (for not paying
Tithes and murdering their King) he would satisfy his wrath upon him, not
them; and the same night, Esurientem and parricidii p^nitentem animam efflavit:
he died of hunger, repenting of his paricide. O that all English
Tithe-Oppugners, and Regicides would seriously meditate on this memorable
president of Divine Justice, upon such Delinquents, and be brought to timely
repentance thereby, to prevent the like National and Personal Judgments, upon
our Nation, themselves and their posterities.

ERRATA.
COurteous Reader correct these mistakes and omissions of the Press,
occasioned by the Authors absence in the Country.

Page 2. l. 34. if, r. of, p. 8. l. 24. r Wagria. p. 14. l. 20. r. inservierat
pietati, l. 26. r. Wilfrid, p. 21. l. 39. these, those, p. 25. l. 11. Decima,
l. 15. 17. aliendis, alienandis, p. 27. l. 27. r. 17 E. 4. c. 7. l. 37.
Parliament, l. 38. sommoneri, p. 28. l. 6. Heu licet quod eo, r. Quod licet de,
l. 13. dele, ut, l. 16. indulgere, r. inducere, l. 19. quamplurimum, p. 29. l.
19. superlors, p. 30. l. 3. Lord God, p. 34. l. 4. form, r. former, l. 6. last,
r. lasting, l. 11, 12. r. peril, reproach and slander of the Gospel, l. 18. to,
r. of, l. 27. bow down, p. 35. l. 25. who builded, l. 28. Paris, r. Parker, p.
39. l. 2. in Egercituisse, r. his Chaplain, p. 44. l. 34. 11. r. 1. p. 46. l.
13. they shall, p. 50. l. 6. Balivis, l. 14 bonis, l. 15. praestiterunt, p. 51.
l. 9. dele Siquis igitur insanus importunitate, p. 63. l. 38. dele li, p. 66.
l. 11. more, r. none, l. 36. or, r. of, p. 71. l. 3. for, r. from, p. 74. l. 4.
jure, r. pure, p. 75. l. 2. Partimacensis, Portiniacensis Abbatem, Nautire, r.
Majoris, l. 6. Clamianensis, Cluniacensis, p. 76. l. 11. 6. 8. l. 18. elegant
supremam, r. Eligant sepulturam, l. 32. Iliburg, Friburg, p. 77. l. 8.
Praemonstratensian, l. 17. abuse, l. 31. Deformations, Reservations, l. 38. at
least, p. 78. l. 15. Replain, r. Mepham, l. 37. grand, p. 80. l. 14. Oxenetius,
Opmerus, p. 84. l. 23. r. charge of the cure, p. 85. l. 15. in sales, l. 23,
only, r. chiefly, p. 87. l. 4. fees, r. fines, l. 9. r. their families, p. 97.
l. 17. of, r. or, p. 98. l. 27. as litigious, p. 101. l. 20. our, r. of, p.
104. l. 8. or unto, recorded both, l. 25. spoils, r. soil, p. 105. l. 10.
requiring, r. inquiring, l. 33. spoils, r. soil, p. 107. l. 21. fere modum, r.
propemodum, p. 110. l. 27. pugnavimus, p. 111. l. 16. inhabitances, r.
inheritances, l. 23. people, r. priests, l. 31. dele or, p. 112. l. 39. if not,
p. 113. l. 2. within us, p. 115. l. 39. dele of, p. 117. l. 5. thee, r. men, p.
118. l. 21: Lucius, Licinius, p. 120. l. 35. brought, r. bright, p. 125. l. 27.
for, or, p. 133. l. 20. which, with, p. 136. l. 13. syms, Syrus, p. 150. l. 3.
proceed not, p. 156. l. 28. Nicetas, l. 29. Beyerlink.

In the margin, p. 6. over against good space, l. 32. read, At least 14. years,
as is evident by Genesis 15. 1. c. 16. 3. 16. c. 17. 24, 25. p. 41. l. 8, 9.
Monasteries, p. 47. l. 7. r. 757. p. 102. l. 5. Ivonis, p. 110. l. 11.
Saxonicorum, p. 118. l. 22, 23. Ruffinus, p. 155. l. 15. am, um.

An Admonition to all Protestants, Ministers, Lawyers, and others of whatever
Quality, within our three Nations.
BE pleased to take notice, that as the new dissolved Anti-Parliamentary Juncto
at the beginning of their last Session, and a little before their sudden
dissolution; did by their Conscientious Speaker, give the hearty thanks of the
House and (mock) Parliament, to the Petitions of sundry Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, (headed by Jesuits, and Popish Franciscan Freers) for their good
Affections, when they petitioned against Tithes; So the General Council of
Officers of the Army, usurping to themselves the Sovereign Legislative Power
and Authority of the Great General Council and Parliament of England, to
evidence to the world, by whose Counsels they are steered, whose designs they
prosecute, and that they de^^^ve to be canonized for Saints by the Pope of Rome
in his Roman Calendar; have voted down our Ministers Tithes, (and therewith our
Ministry too) and in their printed Declaration 27 October 1659. p. 18. (since
this Gospel Plea was finished at the Press) Declare to the world, that it is
upon their Spirits, and they earnestly desire, and shall endeavor, That a full
and through Reformation of the Law may be effected (by abolishing those Laws
they were raised, waged, commissioned to defend, and suppressing Lawyers and
Terms at Westminster, if not Innes of Court; as also, that a faithful, godly,
and painful Gospel-preaching Ministry, may be encouraged and provided for, by
some certain way, that may be less troublesem to them, and less vexations to
the people than Tithes. Ex cauda Draconem. What debates, Speeches many of our
Army-Saints have lately had concerning the total extirpation of Tithes,
Ministers, Law, Lawyers, Universities, Corporations, several others can inform
those whom it most concerns. Whether Saint John's description of the Army of
(Romish) Locusts, Rev. 9. coming out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, who
bad a KING, or GENERAL over them, whose name is Apollyon, that is to say, A
Destroyer; be not a true Character of our present Army of Saints, let all real
English Protestants judge, and what Good cause they have to continue and pay
them out of our quite exhausted bankrupt estates, to accomplish these good
endeavors, after all their Commissions nulled, expired, forfeited by their
Treacheries and Rebellions against their old and new Superiors; Faithfulness,
Loyalty, Obedience in the most inferior Degree, to their Old Parliament, *
Jude 12.
new Protector, and Anti-Parliamentary Juncto, ( Trees whose fruit is withered,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots by them) after all old Protestations,
Covenants, and new Commissions, Engagements, Declarations, Addresses to be
True, Faithful, Constant to them, and live and die with them, being such a
Capital crime in their General Councils eyes, even in their own Colonels,
Captains, Soldiers; as to demerit and incurr an unpardonable Censure of utter
cashiering out of the Army, as Traitors, Enemies to, and Apostates from the
Armies Interest; which is to be Faithless, Perfidious, Treacherous to all
Superiors whatsoever: wit^^ i^ the Vindication of 167. Officers, come off from,
and turned out of the Army, in March 1647, for their obedience to the old Parl.
the late cashiering of Col. Whaley, Ingoldesby, Goffe, and others for their
fidelity to Richard, Pr. and of Col. Okey, Moss, Morley, and others, for
their adhering to the dissolved Juncto, though they drew not a sword, nor
discharged one pistol in their defense; which may be justly recompensed ere
long by the Common Soldiers Disobedience, Treachery, and Infidelity toward
their present Commanders, when they stand in most need of their assistance;
Isa. 33. 1, 2.

FINIS.
TEN Considerable Quaeries CONCERNING TITHES, THE Present Petitioners and
Petitions for their total abolition, as Antichristian, Jewish, burdensome,
oppressive to the godly, conscientious People of the Nation; excited,
encouraged thereunto by disguised Jesuits, Popish Priests, Friars, and Romish
Emissaries, to starve, suppress, extirpate our Protestant Ministers, Church,
Religion; and bring them all to speedy confusion. By William Prynne Esquire; a
Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithe of the Land, of the seed of the land, or of the
fruit of the tree, IS THE LORDS, it is holy unto the Lord. Gal. 6. 6. Let him
that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things.
Calvin, in Mal. 3. 11. Videmus non esse novum vel insolitum si homines Deo sua
officia imputent, and interea manifest eripiant ei (Decimas) quod suum est, et
ad se transferunt; manifest satis appareat eorum impietas, etiamsi velo
simulationis sit obducta. LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve
in Little Britain, 1659.

Ten Considerable Quaeres concerning Tithes, and the New Petitioners,
Petitions, concerning their abolishing.
I. WHether Nine parts of Ten of the present cager Petitioners against our
Ministers Tithes (if strictly examined by the poll) will not appear to be poor
mecanical persons, of such mean inconsiderable fortunes, estates, condition,
(without any Tithable lands, livings, estates,) as are no ways interessed nor
concerned in the payment of Tithes? And so fitter to be punished as factious,
seditious, schismatical; than thanked, encouraged as zealous, conscientious,
well-affected persons, by those in present power?

II. Whether all or most of these Petitioners, be not really greater Enemies to
our See John Cannes second Voice from the Temple, 1653.
Ministers and their Ministry, then they are unto their Tithes; petitioning
purposely against their Tithes in order to the subversion, extirpation of their
Ministry, Function, and thereby of our Protestant Church and Religion? And that
by the instigation, solicitation of those disguised Jesuits, Popish Priests,
Monks and See My Quakers Unmalked. My New Discovery of Romish Emissaries. And
true and perfect Narrative.
Romish Emissaries, (the original broaches of this Doctrine, that Tithes are
not due to Ministers by Divine Right, and may be detained from them by the
people, to gain them to themselves; as you may read in Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, p. 166, 167, 170, 171. who now bear chief sway in most Separate
Congregations of Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Antagonists now attempting the
present abolition of Tithes? If so; (as will appear upon an impartial
Inquisition) whether such persons will not be fitter to be banished as
Antichristian, rather than Tithes, and to be taken into public consideration
before the debate of Tithes?

III. Whether there be not above One hundred religious well affected
Protestants, persons of Honor, Quality, Estate liable to the payment of predial
Tithes, and most concerned therein, who desire the constant payment and
continuance of them for the maintenance of their Ministers, to every one of
those Tith-payers who now petition against them as a grievance, though the
Tithes the most of them pay be not considerable? If so, (as is most apparent,
by comparing the paucity and quality of the Petitioners, with those who refuse
to join with them) Whether it can be conscionable, equitable, just,
reasonable, See Claus. 28. E. 1. m 3. dorso.
Parliamentarie, to admit of any debates for the abolishing, or altering the
payment of Tithes, upon the Petitions of so few malecontented Sectaries, and
unvaluable persons; against the wills, consents, desires, of the Generality and
most considerable part of the Nobility, Gentry, Farmers, Citizens, Freemen of
the whole Nation? And that during the absence and forcible seclusion of most of
those Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses they duly elected to represent their
persons, and give both their free Votes, Opinions, Assents, and Dissents, to
whatever public businesses should be propunded and ordained in Parliament:
Therefore to this of Tithes which is so universal, and so highly concerns both
our Religion and Proprieties?

IV. Whether it will not be an apparent breach of the Great Charter of England,
chapter 1. and 29. That the Church of England shall be free, and shall have her
whole Rights and Liberties inviolable; That no Freeman shall be disseised of
his Freehold, or Liberties, or Free-Customs, or be outlawed, ^^^led, or any
otherwise destroyed, nor shall we pass upon him nor condemn him, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, and by the Law of the Land: And of above 40.
other Statutes for its confirmation fince, (some of them in the last long
Parliament, now revived in pretext:) for those now fitting to take upon them,
the debating and voting down of Tithes, or altering their usual way of payment
in any kind (being the Inheritance, Right, Liberty, Freehold of the Church of
England, of every particular Church, Patron, Minister, Impropriator, and many
thousands of Freemen in all parts of the Nation) without any lawful summons
given to them to appear before them, to defend, maintain their respective
Inheritances, Freeholds, rights, interests in them, (ratified by prescription
time out of mind; by sundry Acts of Parliament both under our ancient See Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes, c. 8. Rastals Abridgement, Title Tithes.
Saxon, Norman, English Kings, and many late Ordinances (to which those now
convened gave their Votes, as fully as others now secluded) as well as by
Divine Right, Institution both before, under the Law, and Gospel too) without
any lawful judgment, hearing, trial by their Peers, or by the Law of the
Land? And whether this will be a conscientious real performance of their
defense of the Church of England, expressed in the Writs by which they were
elected; or of their printed Declaration, May 9. 1659 We are resolved (by the
gracious assistance of Almighty God,) to apply our se^ves to the faithful
discharge of our Legal Trust, to assert, establish, and secure, the Property
and Liberty of the people in reference unto all, both as Men and Christians?
Therefore of all Patrons, Ministers, Members as well as others, unless they
repute them neitehr Men, nor Christians.

V. Whether See his Second Voice from the Temple, 1653.
John Can, with other Adversaries to and Petitioners against Tithes as Jewish
and Antichristian; ought not first to prove them such, by clear unanswerable
Scriptures, Evidences, Demonstrations, to the conviction of the Judgments,
Consciences of the generality of the English Nation, and all now sitting? And
to answer all the Arguments Authorities, Scriptures, Reasons produced by
Tyndarus, and Rebuffus, in their Treatises de Decimis, Dr. George Carltons,
Tithes proved to be due by a Divine right, London 1606. Dr. Robert Tilleslee,
his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes London 1619. Sir John
Sempil his Sacrilege sacredly handled, London 1619. Stephen Nettles his Answer
to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, Oxon. 1625. Richard
Mountague his Answer to the first part of the History of Tithes, London 1628.
Dr. William Sclater, his Ministers portion; Foulke Roberts, The Revenue of the
Gospel is Tithes, due to the Ministry of the word by that word, Cambridge 1613.
Richard Eburne, his Maintenance of the Ministry, London 1609. R. G. his Truth
of Tithes discovered; or the Anatomy of Annanias and Saphiraes Sacrilege,
London 1608. My Gospel Plea (interwoven with a Rational and Legal) for the
Lawfulness and continuance of the ancient maintenance and Tenths of the
Ministers of the Gospel, London 1653. and others, to prove Tithes Due by Divine
Right to the Ministers of the Gospel, and neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor
illegal, nor burdensome to the people in the least degree, being allowed in all
Leases, purchases, before they be voted down, abolished, and quite abrogated as
such, upon their clamorous, scandalous Petitions, Suggestions, void of all
truth?

VI. Whether the present, and future pretended ease of the people in their
Tithes to their Ministers, (if effected) will not be recompensed with an
Augmentation or Duplication of their Monthly Taxes to the Army, or in Fines,
Rents to their Landlords, to a far greater value than they now pay to their
Ministers, and be levied with greater rigor and harder compositions, if
detained, than now they are? according to Saint Augustines prediction, Sermo
219. De Tempore, If thou will not give thy Tithes, Dabis impio Militi, quod non
vis dare Deo and Sacerdoti; Hoc tollis Fiscus, quod non accepit Christus: Thou
shall be sure to give that to an impious Soldier, which thou will not give to
God, and a pious Minister: The Exchequer takes that away, which Christ's has
not received; as some Parishes have found by experience to their costs and
grief.

VII. Whether it be not a most arrogant, high, inexcusable presumption for a
few giddy*pated Innovators in this Age, to condemn, censure, not only the
practice, wisdom, piety of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and all the
people of God in the Old Testament, before and under the Law, and of most
Christian States, Churches under the Gospel in paying, prescribing Tithes, as
the most equal, rational, just, convenient maintenance for the Priests and
Ministers of God of all others; but likewise of the wisdom, prudence,
providence of God, who is Prove. 8. 1, 14. c. 9. 1.
Wisdom it self, and Romans 16. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Jude 21.
God only wise, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
whose very Folly is wiser than men, in instituting, commanding such a
constant, settled maintenance for them in his Word, as the best, fittest of all
others; wherein both Minister and people equally lose, gain, and sympathise
with each other, which they cannot do with so much indifferency, equallity in
any other way, which human wisdom could hitherto invent?

VIII. Whether it be not an infallable evidence, that those have neither the
Faith nor Piety, and by consequence are not the Sons of Abraham, the Father of
the Faithful, in a Spiritual or Gospel sense, who refuse to do his John 8. 39,
Romans 4. 7, to 15.
works and follow his steps, in paying Tithes of all their spoils of War to
Christ himself, a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 4.
as other Soldiers by his example did both amongst Israelites, Christians and
Pagans too, Number 31. 26, to 54. 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, c. 1. 3. and endeavor to spoil them of all other Tithes due from
themselves, and others too; reputing it an eminent degree of their Saintship?
And whether this their practice be not likelier to bring them into Hell
torments, than into Abrabams bosom in conclusion, if they repent not of it?
Luke 16. 23. to 31.

IX. Whether all the Inconveniences objected against Ministers maintenance by
Tithes, be not rather fictitious, imaginary, than real, arising from the
malice, covetousness, impiety, fraud, bypocrisie, injustice, rapine,
perverseness, litigeousnesse of the wilful Deteiners, Opposers of them,
rather than from Tithes themselves? since many Ministers heretofore, and of
late years, have lived all their lives without any suits for Tithes with any of
their Parishioners, and might do so still, would they make a Conscience to pay
them without any suit? Whether those who refuse to pay Tithes in kind to
Ministers now, out of a pretext of Conscience; will not upon the same Pretense
resuse to pay them any other maintenance that can be invented, and make it more
litigious, contentious, uncertain than their Tithes, since every Innovation in
this kind ingenders new suites and disputes, when all legal Controversies,
suites for Tithes have been long since settled, resolved over and over, both in
Parliaments, and other Courts of Justice?

X. Whether the admission, permission of those few Commoners now acting without
their Fellows, (being scarce the TENTH PART OF THE HOUSE) to vote down, or take
away the Ministers Tent^s, or reduce them into one public Treasury, to divide
and distribute them at their pleasures, though amongst the Ministers themselves
at first, will not be a dangerous leading President and encouragement to them
(upon any pretended necessity) to dispose of these Tenths and the other 1 Samuel
8. 14, 15, 16, 17. 18. ^ See I^. Calvini Hom. 29. in 1 Samuel ^. 8. p. 155.
nine parts of every Man's estate, and reduce the profits of them into their
public Treasury, for the necessary defense, and preservation of their
New-Commonwealth, and the Armies pay, as they did others sequestered estates
heretofore, because Tithes, though See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 11.
The 2. part of my Gospel plea.
originally dedicated as a peculiar portion, inheritance, and rent-service to
God himself and his Church, as the Sovereign Lord of all men's Inheritances,
specially reserved by him for his own immediate honor, service, homage,
tribute, for all the other nine parts they enjoy by his free grace and
liberality; may be thus alienated and distributed at their pleasures; therefore
much more the nine remaining parts allotted unto men alone, for their own
private, and the Public good; over which they have a greater probabler,
legaller Jurisdiction, than over Gods own peculiar portion, which might neither
be alienated, exchanged, redeemed by any human powers, but only by the Priests
consents in some special cases for their advantage, Numb. 18. 20. Levit, 27.
28, 29, 30, 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 12. 17. c. 14. 22, 23. Mal. 3. 8, 9. Ezech. 48. 9 to
15. Which if once reduced into a new public Treasury, the Ministers are like
to have no other share nor better account of them, then of the Tithes of
Southwales for some years last past, or of the Deans and Chapters impropriations
for the augmentation of incompetent livings, swallowed up for the most part by
the Treasurers and their Instruments, with little or no advantage to the
public, and less to the Ministers, by reason of their unfaithfullness; far
different from those 2 Chronicles. 31. 11. to 20.
Treasurers for the Tithes and First fruits brought to Jerusalem, appointed by
King Hezekiah, over whom Coniah the Levite was ruler, who faithfully brought in
and distributed to their brethren, the Oblations, TITHES, and dedicated things,
as well to the g^cat as the small, without substraction or defalcation. The
Statutes of 27 H. 8. c. 20. 32H. 8. c. 7. 2, and 3E. 6. c. 13. style those evil
disposed Persons, not regarding their Duties to Almighty God, and to the King
their Sovereign Lord, who out of an ungodly and perverse will and mind detain
all or any part or parcel of their Tithes and Offerings, enacting strict
penalties against all Substracters and Detaine^s of them. How then they can now
be reputed conscientious Godly Saints, unless enrolled for such in the Roman
Calendar, is worthy resolution: some of them ( as the Quakers) beginning of
late to work on the Lords day, denying God one day in seven, as well as the
Tenth of their annual increase, deeming both Jewis^ and Antichristian, as they
deem our Ministers. Ex cauda draconem.

FINIS.

