THE True State and Condition OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND, Sent to the House of
Commons from their Committee there; Whose Names are signed thereto, VIZ. Robert
Reynolds, Robert Goodwyn, Both Members of the said House.

Also the true Relation of the great victory the Protestants in that Kingdom,
lately had against the Rebels there; Sent in a Letter by Sir Richard Greenvill*
to the said Committee, who has since commended it to the House of Commons.

Together with a Letter from Sir John Chicester, of great consequence, to Sir
John Clotworthy a Member of the said House.

All which are appointed by the House of Commons to be Printed to prevent false
Copies; and for the true satisfaction of all His Majesty's loving Subjects.

ORdered by the Commons, That these Letters, and Relation, be forthwith Printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



March 2. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands. 1642.

Sir,
BY our four former addresses of the 2 of November, 13 of December, 17 of
January, and 2 of February, we gave you faithful account of the state of
affairs here, as they then stood, and by our last Letter of the 2 of February,
we informed you of the Commission sent to the Lord Marquess and others, to
meet with the chiefest of the Rebels, and to hear, and receive in writing* what
they could say or propound; before the coming over of this Commission, many ill
Symptoms did appear, but now things are grown to an evident cleernesse: For
upon Monday last a Letter was read at the Board, from His Majesty (without any
Secretaries name subscribed,) the effect whereof was to this purpose; That His
Majesty took notice, that they, the Lords, Justices, and Council, without His
consent, or Privity, had admitted us to be present at their debates, and did
require them, not to suffer us to be present with them any more, as formerly we
had been; The Lords, Justices, and Council thereupon resolved to do
accordingly; And on Tuesday morning, sent Sir Paul Davis to our lodging, to
acquaint us both with the Letter, and the resolution they had taken upon it;
But because the words of the Message were not full enough, as we conceived, We
desired their Lordships to express themselves clearly, whither we should be
admitted, or not, For we were but servants to the Parliament, and must give a
strict account of our Actions to those which sent us thither; Thereupon Sir
Paul Davis returned to the Board, and acquainted their Lordships herewith, And
after an hour came to us, with a second Message, which we immediately put down
in writing, ( viz.) That the Lords, Justices, and Council, had formerly
acquainted us, by him, with a Letter they had received from His Majesty, That
they were resolved to obey His Majesty's commands; and therefore they could not
admit us any more to be present as a Committee.

Sir, you will easily imagine that affairs are steered here by the Court
Compass; and if the design be to make peace with the Rebels, that so this Army
may be applicable elsewhere: Our presence any longer at the Board, will not
further that design; however, The time we have there spent, and the experience
gained by that, will perhaps be serviceable to you at our return, which we now
hasten (as becomes us) all we can, And resolve to depart hence this week being
retarded only to see the Lord Lisle in a good Posture for his hop full
Expedition, he being resolved to march on Tuesday next. We conceive it very
necessary to send a Ship of strength and trust to ride in Bullock-Road before
Dublyn, and another of less burden, to ride before Drogheda.

Sir, We have to the utmost of our weak Abilities, endeavored to wade through
the dangers and difficulties, which on all sides do attend our employment here;
but that which does exceedingly astonish us, is* That we have not been honored
with one Letter since our coming over.

We had almost forgot to tell you, That the labor is on both sides the Sea, to
make the Rebels appear strong and considerable, and to put difficulties and
impediments upon our Military proceedings, the better to bring on a most horrid
pernicious peace, which all good men here do abhor, and are resolved to
abandon the Kingdom, rather then to be exposed to an utter extirpation upon the
next opportunity, which those blo^dy, but inconsiderabl^ villains can lay hold
of.

You may see their in-nate valor by our late victory over them upon Tuesday
the seventh of February, an exact relation whereof made by Sir Richard
Greenvell, who commanded in chief, we send you here enclosed, and you may see
their inveterate malice, who a week after this Commission came over, and the
day appointed for to hear their Complaints, Did combine to make slaughter of a
Convoy that passed by them, without offering them any violence, But were
shamefully defeated of their expectation, and has so disheartened them, that we
are confident, my Lord Lisle shall march where he pleases, with his 2000 foot,
and 300 horse; and what Religion, or to the Crown of England, do those show
that advise His Majesty, to a dishonourabl^ peace, which those miscreants which
will ere long (if you do not exceedingly negl^ct this service) disband, starve,
and cutthroats among themselves.

Thus with our most humble and hearty Prayers to the Almighty, for an
honorable and speedy Accommodation, we humbly take our leaves, and remain

Your humble and faithful Servants, Robert Reynolds, Robert Goodwyn.
Dublin, the 15 of Fe^ruary. 1642.
A Relation concerning the Fight that happenned at RATHCONNELL.
BY command from the Lord Marquess of Ormond, certain Forces of both Horse and
Foot were sent unto Trym, for the relief of Athlone, with a direction unto Sir
Rich^rd Greenvill to have the chief Command thereof; which Forces arrived at
Trym on Thursday 26 January; and on Friday morning then following, Sir Richard
marched thence toward Athlone with about 900 Foot, and also about 200 Horse;
and that night all lodged at Athboy.

Saturday the 28 being come nigh unto Ballinacur, being a very strong pass, we
found the Enemy poss^ssing it with 300 men, having cut off there a Bridge,
whereat Sir Richard commanded certain Dragooners to force that Pass, and also
sent a Party of Horse to second them; which the enemy opposed, until some of
the Horse found a place thereby, where they leapt over a deep ditch of water;
which put them all to flight over a Bogge there by: In which escape diverse of
the Rebels were slain, and as it is said, also one of their Commanders. That
night we lodged at and about Kilteenan.

Sunday the 29, marching forwards, 4 of our Horse Scouts espied 4 Horse Scouts
of the Rebels, on the top of a hill before them; who seeing our Scouts,
hastening toward them, withstood them, being Country Gentlemen of good quality;
and being but 4 to 4, they encountered each other a while fairly, with only
their swords, until one of the Rebels had both given and received a wound,
and was seized on by one of our Scouts; whereat the rest, being very well
mounted, escaped away, leaving their consort to be slain in the place: And
being come nigh Tobbercormick (where we lay that night) some of our Horse took
a Gentlewoman of some quality prisoner, who stood on a hill there by, guarded
with some Musketeers.

Monday the 30, being come within 5 miles of Athlone, we took one M. Richard
Dillon prisoner, who informed Sir Richard, That General Preston was sending
all the Forces he could make, to hinder our coming to Athlone, and therefore
wished us to make all the haste thither we could: Presently thereon, a
Horseman of our forlorn hope came back, and informed Sir Richard, That seven
Colors of the enemies Forces were then marching toward us. Sir Richard then
presently commanded forth more of his Horse to hasten to second the fore-Troop,
which in that Intrim charged the enemy, who retreated to a Bog, where most of
them might have been cut off, had not the care of the Safe Conduct of the
provisions appointed for the relief of Athlone forbidden it. That night we all
came safe at Athlone, where we all stayed the next day following.

Wednesday the 31, Sir Richard sent all our Horse and Foot to quarter at
Kilkenny-West, four miles thence, until such time as 300 of the Lord
Rannelaugh's Regiment, and three hundred of Sir Michael Earnlyes Regiment could
be drawn thither from their out-Garrisons, to march back with us: And when our
Horse approached nigh unto Kilkenny, they discovered that it was strongly
manned by Sir James Dillons Forces, Captain Thomas his Troop, and Colonel
Farrel^'s Regiment, of the County of Longford; whereat Captain Vaughan, with
some of our Horse, fell into their Quarters, and killed a Captain, and some
other Officers, and also about 50 of their Soldiers, and took many of their
Arms, and possessed their Quarters until Saturday.

Saturday the 4 of Febr: we all quartered at and about a place called, The
Moat, at which time the 600 of the Lord Rannelaugh's, and Sir Michael Earnlyes
Regiments were lodged with ours, where Captain Vaughan found in his Quarters an
English man's wife, who told him, that the general report of the Country was,
That the Irish had gathered all the Forces they could get together, and were
confident to compass us in on every side, and to cut us all off, resolving and
vowing not to leave a man of us alive: saying also, That if we should get the
Victory, the heart of their Wars would be broken, for that there was an ancient
Prophecy much talked of among the Irish, That that side which should win the
Battle at Rathconnell, should be Conquerers of the Kingdom; it being a
Tradition superstitiously held amongst the Native Irish.

On Monday the 5 and 6, we marched toward Trym, meeting with no opposition,
but very foul weather and ways, which greatly disheartened the Soldiers, and
killed diverse of them; in which time we took several of the Country people,
w^o all confirmed the former reports of the enemies Forces, and intentions: Sir
Richard Greenvill notwithstanding said, He was resolved not to march a foot out
of his way, were the enemy never so strong.

Tuesday the 7, proceeding in our March, we understood of diverse Troops of
Horse and Foot that daily had followed our Rear, which then was guarded by a
Troop of Horse commanded by Lieutenant Hatcher, who charged certain Forces of
the enemy which were advanced somewhat nigh him, and then cut off about twenty
of them. Afterward, about ^1 of the clock the same day, being come nigh
Mollingar, we took a prisoner, who told us that the Irish Forces possessed our
Pass of Rathconnell, a mile before us, being very strong in number of men, and
the prime Officers and Gentry of of the Country. Whereupon Sir Richard
hastened the advance of his Forces toward the foresaid Pass; and being come
nigh in view of it, saw the Pass to be somewhat narrow, and that it was cut
off by a broad and deep Trench, being compast in on each side with great Boggs,
and having adjoining to it on a very steep hill a strong Castle, and diverse
other Works well manned, by which there appeared no passage for either Horse or
Foot: Then did Sir Richard draw all his Forces into Battell-Order before it,
which consisted of a forlorn hope of 50 Musketeers, commanded by Lieutenant
Dikes; and two Wings of sixty shot more, commanded by two Ensigns (one of them
a coward) the forlorn hope being seconded with a Division of 200 Musketeers,
which was commanded by Sir John Sherlocke, which was the Vanguard of our
little Army; whereof, the first Division was led by Captain Verncy, and
Lieutenant Oliver; and the second Division of it, by Lieutenant Williams; and
also the third Division by Major Morris. The rest of the Forces consisted of
three Divisions of Pikes flanckt with shot, which were for the Battle of the
Army, each containing about 300 men; whereof, the first was led by Captain
Honywood; the second by Major Sir Abraham Shipman; the third by Sir Michael
Earnely: after which followed another Division of 200 Musketeers, commanded by
Major Fortescue; which was for the Rear-Guard; whose Rear was guarded by a
forlorn hope of 50 Musketeers commanded by Likewise those Foot were flanckt
with three Divisions of Horse; whereof Captain Vaughan commanded the Vanguard;
Lieutenant Rogers the Battle; and Lieutenant Hatcher the Rear-Guard. Likewise
before the Vanguard of the Foot, marched the Lord Rannelaugh, leading a Troop
of Volunteers. Likewise for the forlorn hope of the Rear, Captain Pate
commanded 40 Dragooners, which were also assisted with 20 Firelocks: which
done, seeing not only a strong enemy of above 2000 Foot, and six Horse Troops
before us, and others at least 600 on our right hand, and 600 more of Longford
men at a distance on our left hand, upon the Boggs, not far off, from which
were hastening up to second them, as it is said, 800 of the Realies; and then,
unknown to us, there was waiting upon our Rear 500 more, which then newly
possessed Mollingar, about half a mile behind us, to hinder our Retreat. Then,
for to begin the Play, the forlorn hope of 50 Shot, advanced on right toward
the Pass, and so likewise did the left Wing of Shot, to flank that, the right
Wing staying behind, contrary to command, whose ground notwithstanding was
made good by others: Those together being advanced as far as they could, were
seconded by several Divisions drawn out of the Vanguard; which also disputing
it with the enemy, without any apparent good success, Sir Richard was enforced
before the front of the rest of the Forces, to say, There was no other remedy
now, but we must resolve to tarry it, or die, because he saw great numbers of
men approaching toward our right hand, and likewise as many toward our left
hand; which if they should come to join with those before us, would be too
strong for us; therefore now of necessity all must use their best endeavors to
force through the Pass upon the enemy, and by so doing of it resolutely, there
was no doubt of good success: Whereunto all men seemed very willing, and so
accordingly the three Divisions of the Battle advanced cheerfully, with their
Colors flying, to force their way, Sir Richard keeping upon reserve 250
Musketeers; which three last Divisions being come at push of Pike with the
Rebels that defended that Pass; and Sir Michael Earnly espying the advance of
the Longford men on our left hand, marched toward them, and then presently
received a Charge by the Horse that Captain Brian commanded, which by our Shot
was repulsed, and Brian himself shot dead; and that gave a stop to the Longford
men. In the Interim of this Conflict, many of the Forces from off the Castle
were running speedily to charge our right Wing of Shot; which Sir Richard
repulsed, by sending amongst them more Shot from out of his last reserve: Which
sudden fury being stopped, and the service continuing violent on all sides for
two hours time, with a doubtful success: Sir Richard sent forth all the
remainder of the Foot, to assist those at the Pass; during which Skirmish,
Lieutenant Rogers did at several times very earnestly desire Sir Richard to
give him leave to attempt to force a way through that Pass, with the Horse that
he commanded; whereto at last Sir Richard gave him leave, and wished him good
speed; whereat he willingly departed, and hasted to find his way: And being
come at the Banck and ditch of the Pass, found no possible means there of
getting through; whereat Major Morris called unto Lieutenant Rogers, saying, He
had found a place for his Horse to pass through; then that Troop hasted unto
it, which Edward Roscarrocke of the said Troop, first rid through, the
Lieutenant and the rest of the Troop clos^ly followed; and being gotten over,
the forlorn hope Troop, led by Cornet Dixsay, followed them; and then presently
did those our Horse charge the enemies Horse that were before them; who being
not willing to receive them, begin all to run away: in the pursuit whereof;
Lieutenant Rogers, with the Troop he commanded, chanced to follow a Troop, in
whose Rear was taken prisoner Colonel Anthony Preston, the eldest son of
Gen^rall Preston; and also there were slain many others of the said Troop. At
the same time Cornet Dixsay commanding the forlorn hope, pursued another Horse
Troop, killed many of them, and found the dead body of Captain Bryan, who was
lately fled from Sir Thomas Lucas Troop; whose head was there cut off, and
brought away by Cornet Dixsay; our Foot having been at least two hours before
at handy blows, and throwing stones with the enemy, our men with one accord
cheerfully came on upon those that manned the Trenches, which made them also
resolutely run away: which sudden change drew after them all the rest of Our
Forces: and being possessed of their works and hill, Sir Richard gave charge unto
Sir John Sherlock, That he with all convenient speed should draw, and keep
together his men in good order upon that ground, and furnish all his men with
Munition, while he himself, with the Horse, pursued the Longford men flying
away; and then presently did Sir Richard, Captain Vaughan, and Lieutenant
Rogers, with about 40, or 50 Horse pursue them, wherein it chanced, That
Captain Vaughan, with a part of those Horse, taking another way, was guided by
Noble Sir Charles Co^t that wayward that the enemy was escaped; and at last
overtook the great^st part of them* and there killed, as by them all is
believed, at least 200 of them; so that we verily believe, there were killed in
all nigh 250* During which pursuit, our Foot remaining about the enemies
Castle, searching, as they usually do, all holes found in the Castle 8 Ensigns
of the Rebels: and also Captain Betagh, Captain Dowd^ll, and Lieutenant
Elmore, and three other of their Ensigns, were found abroad among the dead
bodies.

In this conflict of our men was killed in that place, but only three
soldiers, and about twenty Office^s, and Soldiers hurt, whereof Sergeant
Major Shipman, who then showed himself a very valiant Soldier, was shot about
two Inches deep, nigh the breast, and yet his Doublet not broken, Captain
Verney shot on his breast, and yet not wounded, Captain Loftus had the Tip of
his Ear a little hurt with a shot, Lieutenant Oliver shot in the breast, and
not wounded, Lieutenant Moal shot in the forehead, and but slightly hurt,
Lieutenant Bingham shot in the back, and his skin not hurt; which done, our
forces marched thence, and lodged that night at Masistown, and in the field
before the forces were drawn into their quarters, Sir Richard caused a Minister
in the head of all the Troops, publicly to give God thanks (every man
kneeling) for the victory, publicly saying, That it was the work only of God,
and not of men, which every man seemed thankfully to acknowledge. This night we
understood there was slain in the fight, Colonel Patrick, Pluncket, Captain
Bryan, and Sir Thomas Nugents only son and heir, Captain John Nugent of
Baliiniscarry, Captain Adam Cusack a Parliament man, Captain Marcas Geoghagan,
Captain Roger Darcy of Rattin.

Also the names of the Enemies Commanders* that were at the battle, are
Sergeant Major General, James Preston, Colonel Anthony Preston, Colonel Mac
Thomas Fitzgerald, Colonel Pierce Fitzgerald, Sir Luke Fitzgerald, Colonel
Roger Moore, Colonel Terrell, Colonel Walter Nugent, Colonel Mulmore o
Realy, Colonel Brian Farrell* Sir Thomas Nugent, the Lord of Trim^lston.

Likewise the names of the superior Officers of our Army, are these, The Lord
Viscount Rannelaugh, Sir Richard Greenvile, Colonel Sir Michael Earnely,
Colonel Sir John Sherlock, Lieutenant Colonel Gibbs, Sergeant Major Sir
Abraham Shipman, Sergeant Major Ashly, Sergeant Major Morris, Sergeant Major
Fortescue, Captain Honywood, Captain Lucas, Captain Verney, Captain Sands,
Captain Loftus, Captain Nichols, Captain Palmer, Sir William Bronkett, Captain
Vaughan, Captain Banger, Captain G^^, Lieutenant Oliver; Also for the Horse,
Capta^n Vaughan, Lieutenant Hatcher, and for Dragooners, Captain Pate; All
which Officers did excellently perform their services, as did all the inferior
Officers, excepting only Ensign Lake.

That night Sir Richard Greenvile, in giving out his orders for the watch, gave
out for that nights watchword, the word ( Revenge,) and also for the field,
the word ( Justice,) which was correspondent to Gods blessing in the Victory.

Wednesday the 8, we lodged at Masistowne.

Thursday the 9, all forces quartered about Tryme, from whence they marched the
next day into their former Garrisons.

My dear Brother,
WE are at length come out of our m^serable imprisonment, where the sufferings
of our Ears and Eyes, Did not a little add, to what we also felt, in a great
proportion, by seeing and hearing the miserall Spectacles, and sad cries of our
distressed poor Soldiers, God be thanked, All that were left of us, are come
hither in much safety, and by a course much better, then if we had not
incountred with such difficulties: For when we were come a mile on this side
Mullingar, at Reconnell, where the enemy had made himself very strong in good
works, They there being 6000 foot, and 10 or 12 Troops, kept the passage
against our men, whose number were not above a thousand foot, besides my Lord
Presidents men, be brought from Cornaught with them, and whose good fortune it
was to have the Van, and give the defeat: Herein Colonel Greenvill has
behaved himself very well; We have killed of the enemy 500 on the place,
amongst whom, is the great Commander Plunket, and another Colonel; We have
taken Prestons Son (who was also a Colonel) Prisoner, and Bryan, that was
sent from you hither, and proved Appostate has lost his head in the skirmish.
We have many Captains, and other inferior Officers, Prisoners; also have
brought home nine Ensigns. If this be presecuted effectually, as I hope it
will, The power and courage of that Rebellio^^ blood, must be exceedingly
lessened.

But alas Brother, our extremities for want of victual is beyond Imagination,
And if present remedy be not provided effectually, all the Officers will over
to the King quit the Kingdom, and the whole Design must be lost: Now we are
through the concurrance of most evident manifestations of Gods g^odnesse in a
probable way of reducing these mis-creants for ever; but if we are lost, as we
must be by pretermitting this present supply, ten times over the expense if
both blood and Treasure, which will now in appearance finish the work, will not
then put us in the State we are now possessed off. You cannot imagine to what
heights all sorts of people are come unto, being made desperate by the
sufferings they have undergone, and little hopes of being relieved, as bad as
things go. My Lord Lisle, with Colonel Monck, and Cromwell, having 1500 foot,
and 300 horse, some great and field Pieces, Bend their course toward Athy,
which will induce Preston either to fight with them, or quit Kilkenny. At the
same time my Lord More and Titchbourn, intend to go forth with all their forces
to East and West Mead, and Cavan; God send us his countenance and favor,
whilst we are in such neglects from man.

The King has sent express order, That your honest Committees shall not be
admitted to the Counsel Table, as formerly; and I fear they intend to go hence
immediately, God knows what inconveniency will arise by their coming away;
though I must confess, They have but poor encouragement to stay. We hear you
have had good success lately in Killultagh, and at Ennes kellen; but withal,
That your want of Victual, is like to put a soon end unto all controversies, I
am sure you hear from thence more particularly then we can.

When you represent your own necessities, fail not to remember ours, and God
put you into the Posture, to minister help unto us, otherwise, let us know
immediately, That we may not dye in a ditch, and starve, which is the
condition, threatening us all. I shall be more particular in my next, if God
continue us a being; but now can add no more, only my most humble Service to
my deer Sister, and that I am

Your faithful Servant, and affectionate Brother John Chicester.
Dublin, the 14 of Feb. 1642. I forgot to tell you, that Captain Vaughan, who
brought this news, was Knighted by the Justices, upon the report of it; And
that my Lord has left sufficient strength in the Castles of Athlone Rosconian,
and the Bail of the old Soldiers, who so long as their victual can last, will
certainly give a good account of those strengths.

For Sir John Clotworthy Knight, in Castle-yard, in Holborne.



FINIS.

