GREECE with part of ANATOLIA La Graecia con Part della Natolia
ADVERSIS MAYOR PAR SECUNDIS. To ye Rt. Hon.R^ Hencage Earl of Winchi^^e^^
^iscount Maidstone, Baron Fitz Herbert of east Well* Lord of the Royal Manor
of (...) Lord Leivtenant of ye County of Kent, and of ye City and County of
Canterbury* Ambass adr. Extraordinary To the Grand Signeor, in Ano. 1660. This
Mapp is humbly D.D By B. Randolph



Barnard Randolph Author Sold By Richard Palmer In Fu^^^^ds Rents near Grayes
Inn. And Tho: Terrey at ye Red Lion without Newgate

R. Palmer sculp
map of Greece

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE ISLANDS IN THE ARCHIPELAGO, (Or ARCHES)

Sea of CONSTANTINOPLE, and Gulf of SMYRNA; With the Islands of CANDIA, and
RHODES.

Faithfully Described by BER. RANDOLPH.

To which is Annexed an INDEX, Showing the Longitude and Latitude of all the
Places in the New Map of Greece Lately Published by the same Author.

Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD, 1687.

A. Terra ferma d' Achaja. B. Citta di Negroponte. C. Borghi. D. Castello del
Scoglio.
A. Part of Achaja. B. City of Negroponte. C. Suburbs or new Town. D. Castle on
the Islet.


view of Negropont
NEGROPONTE.
LA Citta di Negroponte Capitale dell' Isola di quel nome, La quale ha doi
miglia di Circuito senza li Borghi.

Dalli Greci su chiamata Calcis and e devisa dalla Terra ferma della Provincia
d' Achaja di un braccio di Mare nominato L'Euripo o vero il Stretto di
Negroponte. Un Imperatore di Costantinopoli la dono con tutta L' Isola alli
Signori Venetiani; Il Anno 1204 per li Grandi Servitii che quella Republica ha
resi al Imperio. Diverse volte li Turchi minacciorono di pigliarla, ma in
riguardo della Fortezza del Sito differirono sin all' Anno 1469. E. Mahometto
il Grande mando una Armata di pus di 300. Navi, Gallere, and altri bastimenti
sottili Comparendo pol Iati in Persona alla Testa di Cento e vinti mill
huomini Assedin la Citta per Mare e per Terra piu d'un mese di continuo,
trauagliandola in piu form, and Gli furono dati piu di vinti Assalti Generali.
Di Presedio e Guarniggione ui erano piu di vinti quatro mill huomini che
valorosamente resisterono al Nemico, Sprezzando Il Offerte fattegli per rendere
La Piazza. La Citta fu presa per Assalto Generale and a puochissimi del
Presidio fu data La Vita. Un Nobile Venetiano di Casa Erizzo con una picciola
part de suoi se retiro nel Castello del Scoglietto ma non poteva resistere a
tante Forze, and havendo il Gran Signore promesso di donargli la vita, si rese,
and dopo fu per ordine suo segato per mezzo. Una figlia toltagli fu tagliata in
pezzi per non volere assentire alla volonta libidinosa del Tiranno. In questa
Speditione il Turco ha perduta piu di quarauta mill huomini. La Citta per hora
e ben fortificata con Fortezze nove, Le Fosse sono fat piu fond and piu
Larghe di quel che erano.

NEGROPONTE.
THE City of Negroponte, Capital of the Island of that Name, is two miles in
Circuit, without the Suburbs.

By the Greeks it was called Calcis, and is divided from the main Land of the
Province Achaja by an Arm of the Sea called the Euripo, or Straight of
Negroponte. An Emperor of Constantinople gave it, with the whole Island, to
the Venetian Lords, Anno 1204. for the great Services that that Republic had
rendered to the Empire. Diverse times the Turks threatened to take it, but in
regard of the strength of its situation they desisted, till the year 1469.
Mahomet the Great sent a Fleet of above 300 Ships, Gallys, and smaller Vessels;
he in Person appeared at the Head of above (...) hundred thousand men,
besieging the City by Sea and Land above a month, in which time above twenty
assaults were given. The Garrison were above twenty four thousand, who
Valiantly resisted the Enemy, despising the offers made them to surrender the
place. The City was taken by General Storm; very few of the Besieged were
spared alive. A Noble Venetian, of the Family of Erizzo, with a small Party of
his, retired into the Island Castle, but could not resist so great a Power: And
the Grand Signior having promised to spare his life, surrendered himself. He
was afterward sawn asunder by the Grand Signiors command, and his Daughter cut
in pieces for refusing to yield to the lustful will of that Tyrant. The Turks
lost above forty thousand men in this Siege: The City is now well fortified
with new fortifications, and the Ditches made deeper and wider than they
formerly were.

Sold by Mr. Not in the Pall Mall, Mr. Basset at the George in Fleet Street,
Mr. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Mr. John Hill in
Exchange-Alley.

NEGRO PONTE, Anciently called EUBOEA.
IT Lies to the North of Boeotia extending North West and South East about 120
miles; Its Breadth, at the broadest place not above 30. It was taken from the
Venetians in the year 1471. The soil is very fertile, affording all sorts of
Grain, Wine, and Oil, as likewise Flesh and Fowl; the Sea abounding with
Fish. Since the Turks have had possession of it, most of the Greeks are Fled
from the Villages, and Towns; So as the inland places are mostly supplied by
Albaneses, who are the Shepherds, and serve the Turks at their Farms. Formerly
here were two Citys, and 500. Towns and Villages; Now there is but one, which
can be called a City, which is the ancient Chalcis and now has the name of the
Island; by the Turks it is called Egriboz. It stands on a point of Land, having
the Sea two Thirds about it. Betwixt it and the Maine is a small Island, with a
strong Castle. From the Maine to the small Island is a bridge built upon six
good Arches, and thence to the Maine Castle is a drawbridge about 30 yards
Long. The Maine Castle is two miles in compass, fortified with six very large
Towers, or Rondells; The walls are high and thick with a dry ditch to the Land,
which is almost filled up with rubbish. To the South of the Castle is a new
Platt-Forme with several very large Gunns, which carry stone Shot of about 18
inches diameter. When I was there in the year 1676. a Renegado was taken; He
was a Greek born on the Island of Candy; and turned Turk when the Vizier was at
the Siege of Candy; afterward he married at Scio, and lived very well; but
upon some discontent he made his escape from Scio, and got to the Privateers of
Malta, with whom he lived some years; and landing on this Island, he with some
others were surprised, and taken. His companions were condemned to the Gallys,
but his sentence was to be shot away, out of one of these great Gunns, which
was accordingly effected.

None but Turks and Jews live within the Castle, where are very spacious
houses, and four which deserve the name of Seraglios; One for the Basha, at the
right hand coming into the Castle from the Port; One for his Lieutenant or
Kiahja; a Third belonging to Ibrahim Aga's Son (of whose Father we will speak
anon;) and the Fourth, to Muzlee Aga; Which are very richly set out with carved
work and painting. At the latter I was very often entertained upon the
following account. Muzlee Aga was taken a Slave in the year 1660, and sold at
Legorne, where he continued several years, and served as a Porter about the
Streets, paying his Master daily what he got. He won the favor of Mr. William
Mico (an English Merchant) who besides his due, would often give him some small
matter, and recommended him to others of his friends. Muzlee Aga confiding in
Mr Mico, imparts the circumstances of his present condition to him, telling him
he had good friends, who would redeem him, and withal desired Mr. Mico to use
his interest with his Patron, to be moderate in exacting his Ransom, giving him
a Letter, to be sent to his friends at Negro Ponte, but without his Patron's
knowledge. Mr. Mico pursuant to his humble Address, did obtain his ransom on
easy terms. Soon after orders came from Muzlee Aga's friends to buy his ransom
for five hundred pieces of Eight, which they would pay at Smyrna. Which was
short by two hundred of what was agreed for. Upon Muzlee Aga's obligation Mr.
Mico frees him, and sends him to Smyrna to Mr. Richard Langly; in whose house
he tarried, until the remainder of the money was sent him, which he paid, and
went to his friends. I then lived at Smyrna with Mr. Langley; And now being at
Negro Ponte sitting in the Coffee house, one morning, I observed him to look
very often on me, and rising from his place he came to me, asking me what
Country man I was, from whence I came, and whether I was going. I told him that
I was an English man, come from Patrass, and was going to Constantinople; Then,
says he, you are the Man I took you for, and I thank God, that I have an
opportunity to requite the kindnesses, that I have received from your Nation.
He would often have me to eat with him. In the year 1679. I was here again,
coming from Athens I was robbed by some Albaneses. Muzlee Aga gets me passage
on a Lundra (built in form like a Galley, more for burden, and sailing, than
rowing) for Scio, sending aboard 6 henns, 10 oaks, (an oak is about two pound
eight ounces English) of white Biscuit, 10 oaks of Wine, a Jarr of Olives, and
a Jarr of Pettmesh, recommending me to the Reys (or Master) saying, I recommend
this man to you, when you see him, you see me, what you do to him, you do for
me, and I will answer it, be it good or ill.

Notwithstanding their fine houses in the Castle, the Basha has a very large
house to the NWt. of the Castle, near the Gally Haven. In the Castle are two
Mosques; the one was a Church dedicated to St. Mark. There are several Wells,
but most of the water which serves to drink is brought in with Jarrs. About a
furlong from the Castle, is the New Town very well built (after the Turkish
manner) with a large Bazare or Marketplace. Here are two Mosques, and several
Greek Churches. The Christians here, are thrice the Number of the Turks, and
Jews. The Jesuits have also a small Chapel in their house; Their care is to
look after the Slaves, when the Gallys are there. Between the Castle and the
Town is their Burying place, set out with many fine pieces of Marble, most of
which are brought from the ruins of Athens. The Harbor is very secure against
any wind, it may be said to be a Port for above two miles, the main land being
so near and the ground good ankor hold. It is secured from an Enemy by the
Castle, which has above twenty good Gunns planted this way. Upon the whole
Island, there is but one place more, which may be called a Town, which is
Castle Rosso, by the Turks called Kisil Hisar. It was formerly called Caristus,
(as the Greeks still call it) standing in a deep Bay, at the SEt. of the
Island. The Castle stands on a high and steep hill, above a mile from the Sea,
having a large plain, which stretches toward the SWt. But affords little
besides Mulberry trees, whereof there are store. The Town is built straggling
upon two Mountains Most of the houses are very mean, being made of red earth,
dried in the Sun. The Castle is to the Eastward standing very advantageously to
defend it self against an Enemy. The Bay is open to the South Winds. Vessels
which come from Canea, Malvasia, Napoli, Athens, or other parts, that way, and
bound for Constantinople, do usually put in here to inquire for news of
Privateers. For from the Mountains, to the North of the Castle, in a clear day
may be seen the high Land of Scio; and no Vessel can pass the Straight of
Andros, but what is seen from hence. Small Vessels use to come here for shelter
against the Privateers, but have been carried away by them in the night; to
prevent which one Ibrahim Aga, at his own charge, built a Fort of an Octagon
figure with two Teer of Guns, 16 Guns in each Teer. After he had finished it,
an order came from the Grand Signior to have him Strangled. He had some Private
Enemy who gave the Grand Signior to understand, that he had some bad thoughts,
in building this Fort. His Estate was all confiscated; But through the
intercession of great friends it was most part recovered for the use of his
Son, who lived at Negro Ponte.

To the With. of this Place, is a large Bay called Porto Buffolo, which is able
to contain many thousand ships. A Greek Priest told me that Xerxes had here
above 1500 sail of ships, and other Vessels of war. Close by the water side,
to the Eastward, are a great many marble Pillars; All ships that come to lade
Velania (i. e. dried Acorns) carry some away. Two miles to the North of the
Port are a great many ruins more, and several foundations of walls.

On a Mountain more Northerly is a great wall, above three miles about, and
close by it is a Village called Cupa. The ruined place they told me was called
Amatos. To the North are several good Ports, and there the Inhabitants live
more secure than to the South. They reckon to be upon the whole Island not
above 60000 souls, of which not above 10000 Turks, who most live under the
command of the Castles at Negro Ponte, and Castle Rosso. Here is abundance of
silks made, most of which is carried to Constantinople, toward payment of
their tribute, and Decimos. The Grand Signor's Revenue from this great Island,
is about 100000 Dollars. As to the Tides motion at the Bridge, I will not
trouble the Reader with the several opinions, that men have about it; only that
it has been observed by several others, as well as my self, that sometimes it
will pass contrary at the one side to the other, and this commonly on a
Southerly wind. The next Island we come to in rank to the East is

ANDROS.
This keeps its name, being called by the Turks Endros. The Inhabitants are all
Greeks, having a good large Town to the NEt. with no other walls, but those of
their houses, which join together. At the end of the lanes are Gates, which
every night are shut, to keep out the Privateers. In the Mountains are several
small Villages, which are built so convenient as they can see an Enemy, long
before he comes; so they have time to hide themselves, and the best of their
goods, in places made by their Industry in the Rocks. Upon the whole Island
there are not above 3000 Inhabitants, They have a great many Mulberry trees,
and some years make above 10000 pound of Silk. They agree at Constantinople for
about 10000 Dollars yearly, tho it stands them in above 12000: besides what the
Privateers steal from them. Corn and Wine are here very plentiful, but their
main stock is raised from Silk, and Cattle. with the latter, and other
provisions they supply Tine. There are several good Harbors for small Vessels,
but only one for ships, which is to the SEt.

TINE, formerly called TENOS.
And by the Turks Stendill, lies to the SEt. of Andros, being, about 70 miles
in compass, and the highest land of any of the Islands in the Archipelago. It
is under the Venetian Government and withstood the Turks all the wars;
notwithstanding they landed their Army several times. In the year 1658. the
Captain Basha came to a Port to the Nh. called La Colebitre, when in the night
he landed 6000 men, hoping to surprise them; But the vigilant Islanders soon
fled from their habitations, and betook themselves to the Castle, surrounding
the hill, under the great Gunns. The Proveditore dispatched away a Felucca to
acquaint the Captain General at Argentiero; and the Turks finding they could
not take the Castle, destroyed the Country, burnt the houses, and carried away
about 10 slaves. The Castle stands on a high rock on the top of the Mountain.
It is much higher than any other part of the Island, so as it may be discerned
at both sides of the Island. Upon any occasion of rejoicing, Fires were made
upon the top of the Castle, which have been seen at the Island of Scio. The
Inhabitants are most Greeks, but these the greatest part are Roman Catholics,
who have here a Bishop. His Palace is at a place called Campos, to the NWt. of
the Castle, distant from it about 3 miles. There are above thirty Villages upon
this Island, and above 20000 souls. Those of the Greek Religion are to the
Eastward end of the Island, having many pleasant Villages; though seated among
Rocks. Tine has but one Port, which is secure for shipping. It lies in the
strait of Andros, called Palermo. But the Road, where the ships usually come to
unload, is called St. Niccolo, about 6 miles South from the Castle to the East
is St. Zuanni, a small Port for Boats. To the North is another called La
Cullebithra. This Island has ever been a great Eyesore to the Turks. In the
late War of Candia, several Brigantines were manned out of this place; which
did continually torment the Turks in all their Quarters. A famous Privateer,
called Georgio Maria, was a terror to all the sea-Towns about the Archipelago;
He was of Corsica, of a good Family. He came into the service of the Venetians
with a small Briganteen, called the Lepetto (or little Fox) his success was so
great, that he built at Bagnio a place for slaves made square, to the East of
the City on the hill, in which was an account of upwards 4000 that he had
brought out of Turkey into slavery, of which he gave the tenth to the General.
From a small Vessel he came to command a squadron of three ships and Eleven
Briganteens. I will not give you an account at large of his several Victories,
if I should, it would swell my Narrative to too great a Volume. I will
therefore only give you a Relation of his Death. In the year 1667 Georgio Maria
had been very succesful against the Turks, carrying away whole Towns at a time,
so as complaint was carried from all parts to Constantinople, where his name
was in every sea-faring-mans mouth. The Captain Basha had particular orders to
search for him, and being at Scio, advice was brought him, that Georgio Maria
with his little Armado was at the Islands in the Bay of Edremitt. The Person,
who brought the news, had a Gratuity ordered him; and immediately all things
were ordered for departure, but the Basha only, and the man that brought the
news did know for what place they were going. There was in Port at Scio 36
Gallys, and six ships of Tripoli. The Captain Basha sent orders to the ships,
to be ready to sail with his Gallys. There being little wind the Gallys towed
the ships, till they were past the Island of Scio, and drawing near the Island
Metelino, with a small gale, they sailed close by Molives. The Sentinells on
the Islands made fires to give notice to Georgio Maria, and soon came
themselves with the news, that the Turkish fleet was coming toward those
Islands. Georgio Maria easily believed it, and in a little time provided
himself, notwithstanding he was before getting ready to carine his ship. With
the help of his Briganteens he gets his ships out to the North of the Islands,
ordering the Briganteens to shift for themselves; taking his last farewell of
them. The Fight was very sharp above 6 hours. Georgio Maria was killed, and his
body thrown over board, (as he had desired his friends to do) that it might not
come into the hands of the Turks, his ship was taken, another was sunk, and the
third made its escape into the Bay of Smyrna, and so to Tine. Of the Turks were
killed and wounded above two thousand, of which in the Tripoly ships above 300.
In the ship where Georgio Maria was, (of 200 men) not above 20 were taken
alive, and those most of them wounded. After this Victory the Captain Basha
went to Constantinople, towing up the ship in great Triumph at his Gallys
Stern, as he past the Serraglio point. No man since Scanderbeigh has been so
great a plague to the Turks. His loss was generally lamented by the Venetians,
but especially by those of this Island, whom he very much enriched. He was made
a Knight of St. Mark, for the good service he had done the Venetians against
the Turks. The Inhabitants of Tine are better to pass than any other of the
Islanders, paying only their tenths to the Venetians. They make great quantitys
of Silk and Wine, but have not corn nor wood to subsist a month, being supplied
from other Islands, and parts of the Maine, close by them. Since the peace
between the Venetians and Turks, they have consented to pay to the Captain
Basha a present of five hundred Dollars yearly, which was anciently a custom.
Here is a Noble Venetian Governor, who has the title of Proveditore, and
judges in all civil matters; but Appeals are allowed of for any business that
exceeds a hundred Ducats, and then the suit may be removed to Venice: All
criminal causes are judged by the Inquisitor, who resides at Suda, an Island in
a Bay near Candia. In the year 1670 I came hither from Negro Ponte, Illmo.
Signior Dominico Diedo was Proveditore, who lived in very great state. I had
the honor to dine with him several times, being introduced by Padre Emanuel a
Jesuit, and Captain Beneditto Neste a Legorness. The former I had often seen
at the Jesuits Convent, and at the English Ambassadors house at Galatta of
Constantinople. He was here in great Esteem, being a learned Scholar, a great
Traveller, and an Experienced Physician; he had an eminent interest, as well in
Turkey, as in Christendom: having an Universal correspondence in most places of
Europe, and Asia. He would entertain all Strangers of what Nation, or Religion
soever, and gave me so good an account, of my own Country, as few of my own
Countrymen abroad have been able to give me the like. He never would discourse
of Religion, nor give his opinion to any, but those who desired it. The
Proveditore has his Palace in the Castle, very pleasantly seated; above it is
the Rock and Castle called St. Helens, which commands the lower Castle. To this
Fort you go up by steps cut out of the Rock. There is no water but what is in
cisterns, or brought in upon Asses backs. Here is a Bay to the With. of St.
Niccolo called La Sciogna, where are the Foundations of a very large Temple
which was dedicated to Neptune.

MICONE.
Keeps its name, lying to the SEt. of Tine, about 12 miles distant, being near
40 miles about. It has but one Town bearing the name of the Island, which is at
the NWt. part, without any Fortification. It is a large Town, having many Greek
Churches, and one Latin Church, which serves when any Privateers come; for
here are very few other than of the Greek Religion. Most of the Inhabitants are
Privateers, who serve with the Legorneses and Malteses, leaving their women to
their own discretion, and the Civility of strangers. The chief product of the
Islands is Wine, Corn, and Fruit. The Venetians usually in time of peace come
with their ships, and provide themselves with wine. But the greatest of their
profit is from Privateers. The women are here very Beautiful, and want not for
husbands. Those, who go to sea, are the younger sort of their men, and when
they have well stock't themselves with gain, come and spend it here. This
Island is very near the Road from Constantinople, and Egypt, and seldom is it
free from Privateers. Great complaint has been made to the Port, and every year
the Captain Basha did threaten them; but the crafty old men (whom they call
their Vecchiardi) use to meet the Basha at Scio, in a sad condition,
complaining that they must leave the Island in case the Grand Signior did not
allow them a Castle and Garrison; pretending they could not command in their
own houses, while the Privateers were there: and representing their condition
in a most deplorable manner, for several years they prevented the Captain Basha
from coming to Visit them, enjoying their time in the best manner they could.
In the year 1680 in the month of September, one Anzolo Maria, takes a Saik,
which came from Alexandria, very richly laden, which Saik he carrys to Micone,
where he divided the prize amongst his Companions, letting the Reys (or Master
who was a Greek of Metelino) have his freedom to depart. The Reys pretended he
would go for Venice, and to have passage thither, he would pass to Tine,
telling Anzolo Maria that he had no money to defray his expense, and so desired
his charity. Anzolo Maria gave him 10 Dollars, with which he departed for Tine,
where he found a Boat ready to sail for Scio. Upon which he imbarques, and
arrived there the next morning. Here he finds the Captain Basha ready to go
for Constantinople; to him he runs, giving him an account of the loss he had
sustained from Anzolo Maria, whom he left but two days before at Micone. No
sooner had the Captain Basha notice, but immediately he gives the sign for
departure. About midnight he sails from Scio, and the next day about noon came
before Micone. The weather being rainy and thick, he was not seen by the
Miconiotes, till he was almost in the Haven; But comes into the Harbor to the
Southward of the Town, and immediately landed 2000 Levents (Soldiers of the
Galleys) to take possession of all the Boats and other Vessels, that were in
the Harbor before the Town. While Anzolo Maria was at dinner with his friends,
news was brought him, that the Captain Basha was arrived at the back side of
the Town, and had landed his Levents; upon which he immediately went to a Point
of land where was a small fisher boat, in which he and another man put to Sea,
and notwithstanding the Seas run very high, they passed over to Delos, in sight
of all the Gallys; the wind being so strong as none of the Gallys could get out
to pursue him, and most thought it impossible he could escape drowning.

We leave him to his Fate, and come back to Micone, where the Scene is
strangely altered since morning, when all had their best attir's on, singing
and dancing in every house. Now they had all unstript themselves, seeking
places to hide their fine clothes, and husbands, whose singing was turned into
weeping and wailing. The Vecchiardi were sent for, to whom the Captain Basha
said, Bring me Anzolo Maria immediately, or I will hang you up at the
Gally-yard. The Captain Basha's name was Kaplan Basha, he was a man of great
Resolution, and subject to Paslion. The Vecchiardi summoned all the
inhabitants, ordering the Priests to excommunicate all those who should conceal
Anzolo Maria, or any of his companions, and not bring them out before the
Captain Basha. Ten of his intimate companions were found, and carried aboard
the Basha's Gallys; None of these knew of Anzolo Maria's escape, nor did value
their lives, to save his. Most of them were Venetians, and Sclavonians; the
Basha ordered them to be put in Irons till next morning, and that night every
house in the town was searched, not a Chest but what was emptied and the Vaults
in the Churches opened to look for Privateers, so as that night above two
hundred men were clapped into Irons. The wife of Anzolo Maria, and her Mother,
were put into the Custody of the Kiahja that night. Next morning the Captain
Basha sent again for the Vecchiardi, threatening to hang them, if they did not
produce Anzolo Maria. They told him that he was certainly got out of the Island
in a small Boat, and without question must have perished in the Sea. Then he
ordered the 10 men, which were Comrades of Anzolo Maria, to be brought before
him. To the first he said; Confess if you know where your Captain is, and you
shall have your liberty. To which he boldly answered; That he knew not, and if
he did know, he would sooner loose his life, than discover him. Again says the
Basha, if you do not discover to me where he is, immediately your head shall be
separated from your body. He answered boldly, I am in your power, you may do
what you please with me, and if I might have my choice, I had rather dye than
be your Slave. He was immediately beheaded in the presence of his Companions,
thereby to terrify them. A second came, to whom the Basha offered as to the
first, but he was in the same tune with his companion. Then says the Basha,
upon my word (taking his beard in his hand) if any one of you discover to me
where Anzolo Maria is, you shall have your libertys, and money to carry you out
of the Country; But they all were of the first man's resolution. At first the
Basha resolved to take away all their lives, but upon more mature
consideration, he only condemned them to the Gallys. After these was brought a
Surgeon who had often cured Anzolo Maria of his wounds, he was laid down and
thrash't on the Feet with small sticks 100 blows; then was brought to the
Basha, who ordered the Executioner to be present, threatening him to have his
head taken off, if he did not find out Anzolo Maria. The Surgeon told him he
had not seen him, in above three days, he was then laid down again, and
received two hundred stripes on the Buttocks, two hundred on the Belly, and
being in a Swoon, he was carred away. Thus was he used for three days. All the
flesh of his feet came off, his belly was much blister'd, and his Buttocks were
like unto Carbonados. I saw him before he was perfectly cured, and from his
mouth, and several of the Vecchiardi, I had this account. The wife of Anzolo
Maria, and her Mother, to make them confess, were served as follows. They were
stripped and put into two pair of Greek breeches, which were drawn up above their
knees, the upper part tied above their breasts, and their hands tied up to a
Post. Into each pair of breeches, was put a young Kittling, which were beaten
with small sticks, which made them leap up and down about the Breeches, and
exercize their claws upon the women's bodies. Thrice were they thus served. For a
week did the Basha continue in this Island, and carried away with him what
riches he could find, (pretending they belonged to Anzolo Maria) with 100 young
men that had been with the Privateers. He threatened the Vecchiardi, that if he
heard, that they received Anzolo Maria, or suffered the Privateers to come upon
the Island, he would hang every one of them, and make their Children Slaves.
About a fortnight after the Basha's departure Anzolo Maria came with 6
Brigantines, ordering his wife to go over to Tine and to reside there; The Poor
Greeks dare not presume to oppose him, or any other Privateers; so miserable is
the condition of these poor people.

To the West of Micone about 5 miles is the little Island Delles; the Italians
call it Li delli in the plural number, including the Island Rhena with it.

DELLES or DELLOS.
Is a very small Island, not inhabited, yet are there abundance of Conies. In
this Island are the ruins of the Temple of Apollo, whereof Sr. George Wheeler
has given a full account. The Ruins are carried away by all ships who come to
anchor there, so as part are in England, France, Holland, but most at Venice.

NICSIA, formerly called NAXOS.
Is about 30 miles to the Southward of Micone, being above 80 miles about. Most
part of it is very high land; yet it has a great many pleasant, and fruitful
plains. Here is no secure Port, so that they are free from the Plague of the
Privateers. It is most inhabited by Romaniz'd Greeks. The Jesuits have here a
very fine Church in the Town, with a large house. The chief Town stand's to the
N With. on a Point jetting into the Sea, to the With. of which is a small Island,
where is a great Portal, an heap of Marble, being the ruins of a Temple
dedicated to Bacchus, who they say was born here. Without the City is a
Monastery of Franciscan Friars, who did belong to the Fryery of S. Catharina in
Candy. Here is an Archbishop, who lives very well, having a house in the Town,
and another in the Country, about 10 miles to the Eastward. Several Gentlemen
of the Family of the Genoveses live here, amongst whom are some Fieschi. The
Jesuits have great possessions here, and through means of the French Ambassador,
have got a command from the Grand Signior, that none of his Officers shall
molest them; they paying their Tribute yearly at Constantinople. This Island is
called by the Italian Mariners Bacchus's Island, for the plenty of wine there,
as well as for its being the place of his birth. A French Merchant bought 5000
Barrells of wine, while I was there, which cost him but half a Dollar per
Barrel, which is about half a Crown English for 15 Gallons of good wine;
Provision of all sorts is very plentiful; Partridges and other fowls are here
in abundance; and they live the best of any of the Islanders next to those of
Tine and Scio. Yet are they but few in number, there not being upon the whole
Island above five thousand inhabitants.

To the With. of Nicsia, about 10 miles is the Island of

PAROS, by the Turks called BAZO.
It is about 50 miles in compass, lying in length most North and South. Here
are two good Harbors; that to the North is the Port for Nicsia, where is a
pretty well built Town, which has the best Church of any place in all these
Islands, built all of Marble after the Model of St. Sophia of Constantinople.
(as those who have not seen the latter tell you.) They give you a pleasant
story, viz. The Master workman that built St. Sophia, had a Servant that was of
Paros, whose industry had brought him to that perfection in his art, as that he
was resolved to show his skill in his own Country. When he had finished the
Church he invited his Master to view it, upon which his Master takes a Voyage
from Constantinople, and having well surveyed the Building, he finds a fault in
the maine. Upon which, the man casts himself down from the top and broke his
neck. His tomb they show you at the entrance of the Church. Much like this, is
the story of him, that built the high steeple at Bruges, in Flanders. When it
was finished, one told the master workman that it was not upright, whereupon he
threw himself down from the top of the steeple: (a pretty way to be talked off)
But let us return to Paros. Here are very large Quarries of most delicate white
marble. Here were all the stones cut, which built the Temple of Apollo, and
other costly buildings on Delles. They tell you that the Temple of Diana was
built with the marble of this place. Here the privateers come not so often to
molest them, as at Micone; yet fare they alike with other Islanders, for the
Turks spare none, and will have pretentions on all, whether the Privateers come
or no; by which means they hinder the inhabitants here from being too rich.
They are of the Greek Religion, having several Churches, and Monasteries.

ANTIPAROS.
Had formerly a large Town upon it, which the Inhabitants abandoned, by reason
of great taxes that were laid upon them from the the Turks. But they are again
returned and have now a small Town.

MORGO, formerly called AMORGOS.
Lies to the South of Nicsia about 30 miles, being in compass between 50 and
60. Formerly it was very well inhabited, having two Towns and ten Villages, but
in the late War betwixt the Venetians and Turks, it is much dispeopled, having
now but one Town and some small Villages. The Ground is very good, and will
bring forth any thing that is planted; But the Privateers are so continually
plaguing them, that poor Souls, they have not sufficient to pay their tribute.
The Port is very convenient, and secure against bad weather. To the South is a
high Mountain, on which there is a Sentinel to give notice, if they see any
ships coming from the North or South, and so they are soon out upon their backs.

LEVITA, ZINARA and NIZARI.
Are three good Islands, but very thinly inhabited, for they are in the way of
the ships of Barbary, who not only take what the Island produces, but will
also carry away their Children, saying they are Bastards of the Malteses and
Legorneses.

PISCOPIA, formerly called THOLOS
Is a very pleasant Island, producing great quantities of Cyprus trees, with
the loveliest Oranges and Lemons of any part in the Archipelago. Here is a
Fountain which has a water that does weigh near three Ounces in the Pound less
than any water of the Islands about it. Here is but one Town inhabited by
Greeks. Formerly it was a Bishops See, but of late it is come under the Bishop
of Rhodes, as is also Gira, Carchi, Lemonia and Simia.

STANCOI, formerly called COOS.
Is a very large Island near 80 miles about, lying to the West of the Bay of
Halicarnassus. Though Rhodes exceeds it in bigness, this does that as much in
beauty; most part of it being low land, in comparison to the other Islands
about it. Here are woods of Cyprus trees, of a great many years standing, and
the Turks are so pleased with them that they will not suffer them to be cut
down. The Inhabitants are Turks, Greeks, and some Jews. There are several
Villages inhabited by the Greeks, and one large Town, with a strong Castle,
near the Haven which has the name of the Island. A little above the Castle is
a very large, and rich Seraglio for the Governor; close to which runs a small
Rivulet, which is very clear, and not deep. Here are 20 very large Plane trees,
that make a most dellicate shade, and being on a rising ground may be seen at a
great distance. Here is one very large tree which the Turks call Kavak agatz,
the body is above 30 foot about, spreading its boughs to a great distance,
under the boughs are 12 very stately Marble pillars to support them; but it
appears they were for a Temple, for part of a wall is yet remaining. The Turks
make this their place for recreation in hot weather, there being several shops
for Barbers, and where Coffee and Sherbett is sold, The River head is within
musket shot of these trees. At each side are many pleasant gardens full of all
sorts of delicious fruits, Oranges and Lemons are in great abundance, Lemons
are sold for half a Dollar the thousand. All ships that go from Constantinople
and those parts, bound to Egypt, or that come from Egypt and bound upwards,
usually call in here, it being almost the midd way between Rhodes and Scio.
The Port is secured with a good Mote, which (to wonder) is kept in repair. No
Christian is suffered to go into the Castle, so the Cadde has his house
without. Every night here is very good watch kept, and the Privateers dare not
venture to come near, for here are Gallys, or ships of Barbary almost
continually. In some Maps I find this Island called Lango; from whence they
derive the word I know not; for as the Turks call it Stancoi, the Greeks do
Stincos.

RHODES.
Lies about 15 miles from the Asian shore, and 110 from the Island of Candia,
being 120 miles in circumference. It was taken from the Christians in the year
1522. After a valiant, and Christianlike defense against Mahomet the great, it
surrendered to Solomon the Magnificent, who could only brag that he had won the
Town, for his loss of men was very great. The City has the name of the Island,
being seated in a Bay to the N Et. part of the Island, having a most delightful
Port with two strong Castles at the entrance, where formerly stood that famous
Colossus, between whose legs ships with a full sail might pass into the Haven.
After the Turks became Masters of it, most of the Inhabitants made their
Escape, some to Italy, others to Candia, leaving the Island almost quite
uninhabited. The Turks have since granted great privileges to those that will
come and inhabit it, so that many Greeks are returned, and it is now very well
peopled. The Basha has the Revenues of the Island, and some other small
Islands adjacent, toward the maintaining five Gallys. The Basha's name was
Cochiuk Memett Ogle, he had a great love for his Slaves, not suffering any to
abuse them. To the North of the Town he has built a large Bagno very comodious
for them, where is a very neat chapel with two Altars, one for the Roman
Priests, the other for the Greek. Here are many Jews who live within the
Castle, but the Greeks are all in the Suburbs. The Walls are in very bad repair.

SIMIE.
Is a small Island which is in a Bay to the N With. of Rhodes, about 8 miles
distant from the Asian shore, from which it was separated (as they say) by an
Earthquake. It has but one Town upon the Island, and that but small. Their
chief livelihood is by diving for Spunges, of which they make great
merchandise, supplying all parts in the Levant, from whence they are brought to
most places in Europe. They will dive 15 fathom under water being brought up to
this profession from their childhood, they reckon those the best of men, who
can longest keep under water. I was a passenger in the Zante Friggat with
Captain Robert Wilkinson, from Venice to Constantinople; through bad weather we
sprung a leak, which we could not come to stop unless we landed most of our
Goods. Being at anchor in the Port of Milo, and continually pumping, a Greek
Priest told the Captain that he would undertake to get a man that should stop
the leak, tho it were at the keele of the ship; the Captain offered him fifty
pieces of eight to get it done out of hand. Next morning the Priest brings one
of the Islanders; he first took a good swig at the bottle, and by our
directions he soon found out the hole, he ordered a piece of lead to be cut
square, and daubed with oakham and tarr, which he nailed over the leak so as
our ship was again very sound. He first put the nails into the lead, then
diving, by degrees drove them into the ship side. He was some times above a
minute under water. When they hear of any Vessel's being cast away, the first
fair weather, they go to the place, and agree with the Inhabitants, to whom
they give the tenths of what they shall get and keep the rest. The Basha of
Candia gave them 200 dollars for diving to get the Guns of the Theresia, a
French ship blown up at Standia.

SCARPANTO.
Lies almost midd-way between Candia and Rhodes. It was formerly called
Carpathos, being above 80 miles in circumference. There is no secure harbor
for Gallys, or small Vessels; But for ships there is a good Port to the
Eastward, where the Town stands on a high hill, having a ruined Castle. The
whole Island is Mountains, on which are several Greek Monasterys, one of which
stands to the North, dedicated to St. Athanasius; which maintains above 40
Callojeroes. The inhabitants are very poor, and seldom free from the visits of
the Privateers. Any ships which put in here may have all provision very cheap;
Partridges at half a dollar a hundred alive. They say that the City of Rhodes
was carried from this Island, that is the Marble: Here the Mountains are most
Marble, and to those that come from the South, they make a glorious show, the
Sun shining upon them. Not a quarter of the Island is inhabited; nor are there
above three thousand Inhabitants. To the South West part of this is the Island
of

CASSIO or CASOS.
Tho it is but a small Island, yet it abounds in all things necessary for life.
The middle of the Island is almost a plain, well planted with Olive trees, and
Vine-yards; with all sorts of Fruits. To the West are five small Islands,
amongst which is very good riding for ships. These Islanders have obtained a
great favor from the Port, by means of a Favorite of Solomon the Magnificent,
who obtained a Command, that none of the tribute-Masters should molest them,
they showing a discharge, for 1000 dollars yearly to be paid at Constantinople
for all taxes. Yet are they but poor, (or at least pretend so) Here is a
Monastery of Candiotes, who came from the City of Settia, when that City was
destroyed; They live here very well, and have the enjoyment of their
possessions on the Island of Candia, paying only the tenths to the Turks.

STAMPALIA called anciently ASTYPALA.
Is 80 miles in circumference, being very mountanous. It has but one Town, and
that but a very small one. The Port is large, being to the North, yet not of
the best anchor hold, being full of small Rocks. The Turks coming to receive
tribute from these people, but they having notice retire into the Mountains,
leaving nothing of worth behind them. Some years since they have agreed to give
1000 dollars per ann.

NIO, NAMPHO, St. ERINO ( or St. TORINO) and POLICANDRO.
Are good Islands, but they are continually plagued with the Privateers; so as
all that their land does produce, will but serve to pay their taxes; if any can
be said to have the pre-eminence, it is St. Erino, here being several
Merchants, who have some power amongst the Malteses, and drive a smart trade;
buying up prize goods: they carry them, and sell them at Scalanova, and other
places in Asia, bringing for returns cotton, which is here wrought into
Dimitys, and which are the best in all the Archipelago; great quantitys go
yearly to Candia, Zante, and other places. These Merchants also agree at
Constantinople for the tribute of the whole Island. Most strangers are given to
understand, the whole Island is enchaunted; such terrifying noises are sometimes
heard, and the ships moorings to the shore being often losed. A Dutch ship
being in the Venetians service came to anchor in the Bay, making a harsor fast
to one of the Rocks, and having understood how other Vessels were used to be
served, the Master had two men a shore to watch least any should cut his
harsor. In the night there came a Catt to the water side, one of the Dutchmen
flings a stone at the Catt. hit it, and imagined that it was dead. Immediately
came down certain overgrown Catts, and so plagued the Dutchmen, that they
called to their ship for help, upon which the Boat came a shore, to carry the
man aboard; but before they could come, one of the men was almost dead. Many
such things the Venetian mariners give an account of, having had the Cables
very often cut close to the ship. Which yet may be done in the night by a man
swimming from the shore. This Island has suffered very much by Earthquakes, a
great part being swallowed up. One part of it was blown up into the air, which
destroyed a whole Town with the Inhabitants.

MILO, called formerly MELOS.
Is a large Island, being between 80 and 90 miles in circumference. The Turks
call it Digirmenlick or Mill Island; Milo also in the Vulgar Greek signifies a
Mill. From hence yearly, great quantitys of millstones are carried to
Constantinople. The land is indifferent good for corn, and oil, but the wine is
very ordinary. The land is not very high, only to the South are two Mountains,
which to those who come from Cerigo, seem like the tops of two Sugar loaves. It
has a very fair Harbor, large, and secure against all winds. Here Privateers
do usually come to make up their Fleets, and it is most commonly their
Rendezvous, at their first coming into the Archipelago. There is but one Town,
which stands in a very fine plain, being very well built with good stone. The
Capuchins have a Church, and Convent; The Privateers continually bring them
some presents, and most of the Islanders give them a great deal of Respect. The
Greeks have several Monasteries, one of which stands on a Mountain to the
South. From whence in a clear day the Island of Candia may be discerned. The
Privateers had made this place their chief Rendezvous for several years, to
almost the ruin of the Island; but of late have not so much frequented it. The
women are equal in beauty with any in the Archipelago, and pretend to exceed
others in breeding; most of them speaking Italian. The men are industrious,
taking great pains to work their ground, it being worser soil here than in any
of the Islands, occasioned from the Sulphurous nature of it. Here are several
hot places for men to sweat, at the side of Hills, which in some places are so
hot, as to roast an Egg, if put between the hollow of some stones. All the whole
Island is esteemed to have fire under it, which is thought to consume the
stones, which are very like to Honeycombs, being all hollow. The Inhabitants
are not above 5000. Very seldom do the Turks come to disturb them, for they
take care to send their Taxes to Scio to be ready against the Captain Basha
comes thither. About 5 miles to the North of this Island is a small Island
called

ARGENTIERO.
Which lies in length No. and So. having another Island to the East called
Polina, tho most known by the name of Isola Bruciata, or burnt Island, between
these Islands is a very good road for ships, and Gallys. The Venetian Armada
did much frequent this place, it lying so convenient that they might go to Sea
with any wind, in case an Enemy should come to attacque them; for they have a
custom never to be in any Haven, or Port where they may be penned in; unless it
be under some of their Castles, or in some of their own Islands. On both these
Islands there is a continual watch (when the Armada is there) which make signs
with smoke for every sail which they see; the ships which come from Turkey,
they will examine them. In the year 1664 I was a passenger aboard the little
Hunter, Roger Hutson of Plymouth Master, bound from Smirna to Legorne. We being
off of the Island of Angentiero, a Felucca came to inform themselves of News
from Turkey, we acquainted them of what we knew and departed. But the wind
changed Westerly, so our Master put back and he came to anchor at the North of
Millo at a place called Porto Polumbo, about 4 miles from the Venetian Fleet.
So soon as we came to anchor, a boat came to command us to come to the General.
The Master was a stranger to these Seas, and did not care to venture out of his
ship, but at last I persuaded him, and we went in our own Boat with two men.
When we came to the Gally, the General ordered the Master and me to come into
the Gally, keeping us at a distance, till by our Passport (or Patento) he saw
the places, from whence we came, were free from contagious diseases; then
ordered us to be carried to the Secretary, to give an account of what we had
heard at Smirna concerning the Ottoman Forces. When we had done there, we
desired leave to fill some barrells of water, and get some other provision that
we wanted. A man was ordered to go with us, to see that we paid no more than
was the price; which was a great favor. When we returned, the General desired
the Master, that he would not sail without his Letters; which he promised
should be ready next day before noon; the Master assured him he would stay; so
we returned to our ship. About break of day the wind being fair at Et. and a
fresh gale, our Master was very impatient to be going, seeing also a ship
coming from the Eastward. All the persuasions I could use would not prevail
with him; but resolved he was to go, ordering his men to bring Cable to
Capstern, and heave. I told him what might be the ill consequence of breaking
his promise with a General, and that he would soon send after us; but he
depended upon the nimbleness of his Vessel, and questioned not but soon to be
out of their reach. All things were in readiness, our anchor up, and we set
sail. Soon did the wind abate, and the Sentinells giving notice to the General
that our ship had loosed sail, immediately two Gallys were dispatched after us,
they came soon up to us, and firing a Gun, the shot past betwixt our Mast. They
commanded the Master to come with his Boat to the General, bidding us drop
anchor. To see in what a condition the Master was in, would have gained
compassion in any one; he could not speak a word of Italian, (to discourse
with) so begged of me to go with him. Indeed I did not desire to be seen in the
business, not knowing what might befall us; but go I did. They towed our boat
at a Gally Stern and we soon came to the Generals Gally. By the way we resolved
on an Excuse, after rolling a great many, I proposed to the Master that our
safest way was to acquaint the General, that our design was not to go to Sea;
but that seeing a ship coming from the Eastward we did not know what she might
be; And we having War with Algier we were fearful, so weiged anchor to make a
trip, and get under the Generals Stern. This thought of mine pleased the
Master, and we concluded to answer in this note, when we should be examined.
When we came to the Generals Gally, we were ordered to come up; the General
asked which was the Master; I showed him the Master, he ordered him to be put
in chains at the Prow of the Gally, being in a very great passion, said that he
would make an Example of him, and give an account of his base action to the
English Consul at Venice. I let him breath out some of his passion, then spoke
to the Compagno di Standardo, desiring him to acquaint the General with the
true manner of our intent, which he did. Upon which the General calls for me,
bidding me speak the truth. I told him our design was not to sail without his
Excellencies Letters, but that we purposed to come with our ship under his
Protection, whereupon the Master was brought off again, and we were well
entertained till the General's Letters were finished, and next day the wind
proved very fair, we set sail. At my coming to Legorne the Master gives an
account of this to his Merchant, who ordered him to present me with my Passage.
This I hint, that all who travel by Sea or Land may learn to be cautious, and
not slight Governors. The Island of Argentiero has but one small Town, whose
Inhabitants are most Privateers. When the Tribute Master comes, the men hide
themselves, leaving the Women and Children to their mercy. More to the North of
Milo are the Islands

SERFU, and SERFANTE.
Called anciently Seriphus and Siphnus, lying most Et. and With. one of the
other; the former has a good harbor for ships. The people work much upon
Cotton, making Dimeties and Scamities. The latter is much the pleasanter
Island, having only a small Port for Boats; so as the Privateers do not come
often to molest them. To the North of this Port, is the Town on a high hill,
from whence they see several Islands at a great distance, and often are
diverted with Sea fights: the houses standing so near the bank over the Sea.
Both these agree yearly for their Taxes at Constantinople, and one who buys it,
is absolute Master for that year. One year some French Merchants bought the
Tribute for 1500 dollars, each Island, which they gathered from the
Inhabitants, by working Cotton's, and were considerable gainers. To the North
of Serfu is

TERMIA, anciently called ELEUSINE.
It lies at the entrance into the Bay of Athens, being indifferent low land,
but not very fruitful. Here are very good purging Waters, and hot Baths. The
Inhabitants are very industrious, the men in Fishing, the women at their
Needles. Here they say the Island habit was invented, and has been A Greek
Priest Un Prete Greco
depiction of Greek priest A Woman of the Archipelago Una De^'a dell'
Archipelago
depiction of Archipelagan woman a habit above 1000 years, but few of them know
the true original; as I was informed by Monsieur Giraud, consul at Athens;
which was thus. A Prince in Athens had a Daughter, who was guilty of a great
crime, for which she was condemned to be banished; and to make her the more
despised, it was ordered, that the sleeves of her upper Garment should be cut
off to her shoulders, with her smock sleeves hanging down to her hands, her
Pettycoats cut short to her knees, with her smock at full length to her ancles,
her hair hanging down behind. Being sent in this manner to this Island, the
Inhabitants enquired who she was, and being told that she was a Princess, that
came to bath in the waters for her healths sake, her dress pleased the common
people, and now it continues their habit in most of the Islands, only their
heads are better dressed. They have their hair plated, intermixed with Ribbon,
which is put round the hinder part of their heads, with a fine muzlin veil
carelessly thrown over. Their bodies have no sleeves to them, but the better
sort will have great wings hang down behind, richly embroidered. That which
serves for a pettycoat comes to their knees being plaited very thick. I have
seen one, which was but an ordinary one that had above 40 pikes of dimity,
which is about 30 yards; some have above 60 pikes; and so weighty are their
clothes which they wear, that they cannot be nimble in dancing. To prevent the
trouble of pulling up their coats, they are open before, and fastened with
clasps, and eyes. Their Smocks hang down to their ancles, but they are very
narrow, with sleeves fastened at the wrist, and a loose sleeve over them, which
comes over their hands, being broad. Their Stockings are most of red cloth,
hanging in plaits; some with the clocks embroidered. Their slippers are sol'd
with cork, the upper part covered with red plush. The men have several sorts of
habits; But the better sort have a long Vest, strait to their body, doubled
over before, reaching down to their ancles, girt about the loins, and the
sleeves buttoned at the wrist; Over which is another Vest hanging loose, with
broad sleeves of black cloth, resembling the Turks, to show their superiority
over their brother Christians. Their heads are shaved; they wear most of them a
red cap; but some a black.

ZEA, formerly called CIA.
Lies to the North of Termia, not above 10 miles; but it alters so much in the
temperature of the climate, as it could not be more, were it so many degrees
distant. The land is all very high, and seems at a distance like an Egg. The
Turks call it Yamurta Adasi. (i. e. Egg Island) There is a very good Port to
secure any Fleet, but it has a very narrow Entrance. At each side is a small
Chapel, that to the West are the Ruins of a Temple; and not far from hence is
the Foundation of an old City, which a Priest told me was formerly called Juli.
The Town is five miles from the Port. I came here in the year 1670 in the Noah's
Ark of Genoua, in which there were several Passengers, who were not acquainted
with the place, and very desirous to go up to the Town. The Guide would tell
them it was close by the Port, but before they came to the Town they had
traveled so long as to understand Greek; for when they asked where the Town
was, the guide would answer them inn konda Ephende, it is hard by Sr, though
they were five miles from it, the way being all unevenly rocky, which made the
Genouese wish they had not put on their new shoes and clothes. The Inhabitants
are a very healthy people. No Oranges, Lemons, nor Olives will grow here. to
the South of the Town and higher stand several wind-mills, which are very often
blown down, not withstanding they are built with very good Stone and Mortar.
This Island and Tine, are very seldom without much wind. The chief product of
the Island, is Corn, Wine, and Velania. The wine is very small in comparison to
that of other Islands. Here I saw a woman, that went to the fields to gather
Velania, big with child, and another in her arms; In the field she was
delivered, and brought both her children well home.

CIR A, formerly called CYTHNOS.
It lies about 12 miles from Tine, South West: (some Mapps name it Suda.) The
Town is at the N Et point, standing on a hill, having a fine Bay before it, and
three small Islands where ships come to anchor. The Inhabitants are Greeks, but
most of the Church of Rome. The Capucins have a Church and Monastery. They are
free from the Privateers, upon the score of the Capucins. Most of their incom
is from gardening and manuring the ground. From hence Tine is supplied with a
great store of fruit. It abounds with Muskmelons and Watermelons. Wine and Corn
they have enough for their own use.

LEMNOS.
Is a fair and large Island, lying almost in the middle, betwixt the Asian
shore, and Monte Santo, having several good Ports and Havens about it; but the
Principal Port is called Mudro, which lies to the South East, above which
stands a City with an indifferent good Castle, where is a Garrison of Turks; to
this part of the Island Monte Santo casts a shadow in the Summer time at the
Sun's going down. The Country is most level ground, affording great quantity of
Pasture land, and here are the best sheep of any place here TENE DOS.
A. The City and Castle of TENEDOS B. New Castle C. Suburbs where the Greeks
live.
A. Citta et Castello di TENEDO B. Castello novo C. Borght dove Stanno Li Greci.


view of Tenedos about. To the N Et. is a place called the Saline, Salt panns,
close to which is gathered the Terra Sigillata, of which the Turks make
waterpots more esteemed than so much China; with us, it is used for medicines.
Before the late war with the Venetians, the Island was very well peopled both
by Turks and Greeks, having above 50 Towns and Villages; but there are now not
above 20 Villages, and those very poorly inhabited. The Venetians took the
Island in the year 1662, and ruined most places of strength, carrying away the
Garrison of Turks. The Earth of this Island, or terra Sigillata, is the chief
thing which they boast of, telling many fabulous stories about it; of which
several have writ at large, so that I shall omit a repetition. This Island by
the Inhabitants is now called Stalimene.

TENEDOS or TENEDO.
Lies to the East of Lemnos about 12 miles from the Entrance into the
Hellespont or Dardanelli. The Turks call it Bosh Adasi the Barren Island. It is
most rocky, and to the No. is a high round Mountain under which is the main
Castle, standing close to the Sea, being almost a square. That part toward the
Sea has high walls, and two Roundells. Even with the Water is a battery of 20
very great Guns. On the South point of the Port is a Castle built on a rising
ground, in which are about 10 Guns. This Castle commands the Harbor, more than
the great Castle, and can batter the Town and Castle. About a furlong to the
South-West stands the Town, most inhabited by Greeks; in it there are several
stately Fountains, built with white Marble brought from the Ruins of Troy. This
Island was most valiantly won from the Turks, by the Venetian Fleet, under the
conduct of General Marco Bembo, and afterward betrayed to the Turks, by one of
the Family of Loridanno, who was Governor; since which none of that name have
had any command in the Repubick's service; nor dare he ever return to his own
Country.

THASSUS, SAMANDRACHI and IMBRO.
Are three small Islands: the first lies about 30 miles from the mouth of the
River Nester, Samandrachi opposite to the River Marizza, and Imbro about 10
miles to the West of the entrance into the Hellespont, which by the continual
coming of Privateers are almost quite forsaken, not having above two or three
Villages in each.

METELINO.
Is the largest Island on the Asian shore. Formerly it was called Lesbos, and
was estem'd the only storehouse for corn for the City of Constantinople, now
it is very little inhabited. Here is plenty of Dear, and several other Game.
They have a sort of horses less than any I have seen elsewhere, but strong and
swift. The Country affords store of Pasture, and all sorts of Provisior are
very plentiful: From hence we have considerable quantity of Oysters brought to
Smyrna. The wine is none of the best. The City under the same name is to the
Eastward, having a delicate Port before it. There are the ruins of a large
Arsenal. To the N Et. of the Town stands a very strong Castle, called Mullives,
built on a Rock which is a Peninsula, it is very well fortified, according to
the ancient way. The walls are very high, they have 4 Towers, a dry ditch, with
another low wall about it, and a drawbridge, there is but that one way to
enter into the Castle. Here is continually a good Garrison kept. At the Arsenal
is another Fort, which is level with the water, where are several very large
Guns. On the N With, part of the Island is another strong Castle called Petra,
which has a very good Port. There is a considerable Town, most inhabited by
Greeks, who trade over to the main, now called Cos-dogg but formerly the
Mountains of Ida; for the Turks who inhabit those Mountains, are such great
robbers, that none dare live amongst them, and to travel that way, is almost as
dangerous as to be amongst the Banditi in Calabria. Here is another good
Harbor for ships, called Siguri, at the With. end of the Island; but no Town or
Village nearer to it than Petra. There are several other Ports, and Creeks,
which are often haunted by the Privateers. To the N Et. are several Islands
which are called the Spalmadori, which signifies Cariners; for here often the
Privateers do come to Carine, and are in the way to meet Vessels that are bound
to Constantinople. The Inhabitants of Metelino are not above 10000 Turks and
20000 Greeks.

SCIO, formerly called CHIOS.
Is not inferior to the best Island in the Archipelago; though it is not so
large as Negro Ponte, it is much the richer, and the Inhabitants enjoy greater
privileges than any Greeks in the Grand Signiors Dominions; and more liberty
cannot be in any part, than what they enjoy. In the Summer time every evening
the marine is full with all sorts of people with music, singing, and dancing,
and none offer to molest them. At their Festivals, they are very open in their
Worship. The chief City has the name of the Island, being very well built after
the manner of the Genouese. It is above two miles in Circumference. To the
North stands a very strong Castle, and both are seated to the Eastward close to
the Sea side. Formerly there was a good Mole which sheltered ships from the N
Et. winds; and to the Southward another point runs out, upon which stood a
light-house. They are both now gone to ruin, and the Harbor is dangerous in
Stormy weather. At each side of the City are abundance of pleasant gardens,
abounding with all sorts of fruit. Coming in from Sea these Gardens and
Summer-houses do give a most delightsome prospect; the houses being for the
most part very well built, with their windows red and green. The Inhabitants
are most Greeks, of which many are of the Church of Rome. Here are several good
Churches which remain since the time the Genoueses had possession of the
Island; as that of the Jesuits, the Dominicans, and the Capucines; the two
former are in the City, the latter is at the North Westend, where they have a
large Convent, with pleasant gardens. In the time of Holy days they carry their
processions in the streets without any molestation, but it must be after Sun
set. The same have I seen in Smyrna on Good Friday by the Greeks, and also at
Galatta of Constantinople. The Vizier Cupri Ogle at his return from Candy,
tarried here several days, and lodged in the house of one Signior Dominico
Mascardi, which joins to the Capucines Convent; one day asking what bell it was
that he heard, one told him it was some bells of Mules; says the Vizier to him
that made that answer, and you are an Ass for endeavoring to make me believe
so; This is some bell to call you to prayers and be not ashamed to enjoy the
freedom which is given you. He was several times in the garden, and commended
their way of living. Before the Vizier came, order was given by the Elders to
forbid the women's walking the Streets as their custom was, fearing least some
soldiers should abuse them, and so occasion a disorder. The Vizier having been
two or three days in town, and not finding the divertisement he expected from
what he had been told, he asked what was the reason, it was told him that
fearing some disturbance might be, orders were given to forbid the women to
walk the streets. The Vizier made answer; That seeing they had such
privileges, they should enjoy them while he was there, otherwise he would
recall the Liberty they had. Next morning the streets were full with all sorts,
and in the Evening by the Seaside singing and dancing most part of the nights.
The Turks hold the Sciotes for a soft sort of People calling them, Prassinos
which signifies green: A Basha saying, it was as impossible to see a wise
Sciote, as to see a green horse. All the time that the Vizier was here, there
was not the least disorder amongst the Officers, but all were in dovere; and
notwithstanding here were upwards of fifty thousand strangers in town and in
the Fleet, the price of provision was not advanced. The Town lies about 12
miles from the Asian shore almost opposite to a very strong Castle, called
Chisme; From whence they are supplied with most of their Provision; Scio not
affording sufficient for the Inhabitants, and those passengers which are
continually here. All Vessels from Constantinople bound for the South usually
call in here, both going and coming. There are above 30 Villages upon the
Island, which are well inhabited most by Greeks; those who belong to the
Mastick Villages, to the Southward, have their hair long. The time for
gathering the Mastick, is in August and September. The Customer goes out to the
Villages, where they receive him with music, and feasting. What Mastick is
gathered, it is all delivered to the Customer, for the Grand Signiors use, and
he soon dispatches it up to Constantinople to serve in the Serraglio, for
several uses, What remains of the Grand Signiors store, the Customer sells to
merchants. It is very dangerous for the Inhabitants, to keep any Mastick by
them. In Turkey they use it to chew and some mix it in their bread. The Turks
call it Sackes, and the Island has the same name. The Italians call it Mastice,
and Masticare is to chew. When any company of women meet in Turkey, some Mastick
is brought them on a server, and each taking a little, they are chewing, and
spitting most of the time. It is comical to see the old women roale it about
their gumms; the effects which they find by it are, that it carrys away the
phlegm, cleanses and prevents the aching of the teeth; and causes a sweet
breath. Here is a continual watch kept round the Island; when they see any
ships or other Vessels, in the day time they make a smoke, and in the night
show lights; the last Tower sends a man to acquaint the Customer, what Vessels
are on the Coast. If any passengers land in any part of the Island, the
Sentinells accompany them to the Customer, who inquires whence they came, and
what business they have there; this is to prevent spies. Betwixt this Island
and the main are several small Islands called Spalmadori, which are much
frequented with Privateers as those before Metelino; they lie about 12 miles to
the North from the City. In the year 1666 a Malta ship Commanded by the
Chevalier Tincourt was at anchor between those Islands, a fisher man passing by
sees the ship; and coming to Scio finds the Captain Basha with about 40 Gallys.
And going immediately to him asked for Mustalook (a gift upon good tidings) for
he had news to tell him. The Basha hearing the news ordered the boat-man to
have 10 dollars, and put to Sea, it being very calm. The Sentinells from the
Hills came down, and acquainted Monsieur Tincourt, that the Turkish Fleet was
rowing toward the Islands, so he with his boats towed the ship out to the
Eastward, before the Gallys came up to him, and had time to provide himself to
receive them. A desperate Fight was maintained for several hours, and not a
breath of wind stirring; so as the ship lay to their mercy, and was boarded by
them several times, but were forced off again leaving many men dead behind
them. In the afternoon a fresh gale of wind began, at which those in the ship
took courage, and Forced the Basha to retire under the Guns of the Castles of
Scio; Firing several broad sides into the Town. The Captain Basha sent to the
Capucins to have them to go off in a Boat, and persuade the Captain to forbear
firing into the Town. The Capucins went aboard, carrying some fresh provision
as a present, desiring Monsieur Tincourt to forbear, for that most damage was
to the poor Christians. So he retired, and went to Micone to repair his ship.
He was a French man born, not above 24 years of age; he built and fitted out
the ship at his own charge, stiling himself the Champion of Christ. His Father
or Uncle dyed in sight against the Turks, while he was but a child, to revenge
whose blood, he took this resolution; not above two months after, his ship was
cast away on the Island of Scyros, where he perished; and of two hundred and
fifty men not above 5 escaped, which caused a great grief to all who had heard
of his Valor. He had not been in the Archipelago above two months, before he
Fought with the Turkish fleet; and intended to have past the Dardanelli (as a
merchant ship) so to do what mischief he could, to the City of Constantinople,
by firing against it and then to make his escape out of the Castles or perish
in the Action. I lived in Smyrna when this fight was, and had the particular
relation from one of the Capucines. The profit which the Turks receive from
Scio, is double what any other Island in the Archipelago pays; Nor are there
any subjects in the Turks Dominions, (of Greeks) that are richer. Their Habit
is different from all other Islanders. The women have their Coats to their
ancles, their bodies short and thick wasted, their head dress with Linen close
to their ears, raised up behind, (not unlike the Doge of Venice his Cornet) in
which their hair is laid. They esteem great Legs, and little Feet, some to be
in the fashion will have 4 or more pair of stirrup Stockens. Before their
breasts hangs a bibb which reaches a little below their wast, under it they
have their hands covered when they are abroad; when they dance a round dance
they hold a pocket handkercheif in their hands, that they may not have their
hands touched. They have earrings, neck-laces, and braceletts of gold. The men
wear strait body'd Jackets, with 4 broad skirts below the wast, strait kneed
breeches, to button, or tie at the knees, shoes and stockens most according to
the Genoueses; they have a broad lappet of Linen fastened to the neck-band of
their shirts, which hangs down behind over their backs. Their hair is cut short
to their Ears, and generally they wear little red capps or broad brim'd hatts.
But their Vecchiardi do wear long loose Garments over their Jackets and
breeches.

NICARIA formerly called ICARIA.
Lies to the North of Scio about 25 miles distant. It is in compass about 70
miles, having no Harbor for great shipping, and therefore incapable of any
trade. The land is also very barren being most Mountainous, and rocky, so that
they of Samos have a saying that when God made those Islands he ordered all the
rubbish should be cast upon Icaria, which they have no great reason to say, for
they have their share also of Mountains. The Inhabitants are generally very
poor, as the Privateers cannot get any thing out of them; nor can the Turks
bring them to pay any considerable Tribute. They have some wine, but none of
the best; it being hard: but here are the best Winter grapes which I did ever
see, they being round and red, growing between the rocks and in such dangerous
places to come at, as that with much hazard they are gathered. Sheep they have
some, but Goats are the chief of their Food. I have seen several of the
Nicariotes in their Boats that row all naked, for which they give two reasons;
one that with their coats they cannot be so active at the oar, the other that
they wear out their clothes much; for every time that they tugg the oar they
rise with their bodies, and fall back on the banks as is usual in the Gally's.

SAMOS, by the Turks called SUSSAM.
Lies about 12 miles to the East of Nicaria, and not above 3 from the maine of
Natolia, being a large Island, and the Seat of an Archbishop, though of so mean
an Estate, as it will hardly suffice to give him bread, when he has satisfied
what is due to the Patriarck of Constantinople. There is no good Harbor for
ships, yet the Privateers very often visit them, and carry away whatever they
find. There is a Caddee Aga, and about twenty Turks more, who live upon the
Greeks. Continual watch is kept, to give notice if any Privateers do land, and
then the Caddee and other Turks hide themselves up in the Mountains. But in the
year 1676 Monsieur Crevillier landed a party of men, resolving to ruin the
whole Island, he found out 4 of the Turks, whom he carried away with what else
they found. The Greeks of the Island were made to pay for the ransom of the
Turks; and since that time the Turks do not venture to live amongst them unless
it be some who are Servants to the Tribute Master, yet have these power to
exercise Lordship over the Greeks, and will not abate of the respect which is
due to their Master. In matters of Justice, when the Caddee is not here, the
Vecchiardi (Elders of the Greeks) do judge and determine Causes; but must be
sure to take the Rights of the Caddee, which are sent him to Scala nova, and
then he puts his seal to the Award of the Vecchiardi. In every Village there is
one called the Proto, or Chief, who oversees and gathers in the Tenths of their
Crop, giving an exact account to the Turks, and to ingratiate himself with
them, he will be as severe with his fellow Christians, as the Turks can be.
Notwithstanding the Mountains, which are many here, there is land enough to be
manured to employ 10000 men, which with good management, would be in few years
little inferior to Scio. There is nothing that can be planted, but the ground
does bring forth. Vines are generally more natural to this soil, than to any
of the neighboring Islands, and the wines more pleasant, but for want of
convenience to sell them, they plant no more than to suffice their own
occasions. Here, and at Tenedos, is the best Muscadine (next to that of Luxuri
on Cefalonia,) that ever I drank. This they carry to Scio, Smyrna, and several
other parts, which with Oynions, Garlik, and some earthen Ware is the chief of
their Adventures abroad. The Venetians forced them formerly to pay yearly 20000
dollars, but a great part of this was in Corn, Wine and Cattle, at a certain
price; this was when they were better to pass than now, for then the Privateers
durst not molest them. They were forced (upon the peace made betwixt the
Venetians and Turks) to pay their arrears to the Turks.

PATMOS, now called by the Venetians PALMOSA.
Although it be not half so big as Samos, has advantages that make it far the
better Island, which are many and good Ports. In the Candy War, the Venetian
Armado, almost the whole Fleet, lay here to winter, so that from several other
Islands were brought provisions to supply them; in which time the Inhabitants
had an advantage of their neighbors and many got considerable Estates; but
since that time, the Turk on the one hand, and the Privateers on the other,
have brought them so low that now they are as miserable as any. There are
several small Villages and Monasterys. Upon this Island did St John the Divine
write the Revelations (a Manuscript of which they have) and here, if we may
believe the Inhabitants, is to be seen the Pulpit in which he preached, and the
Font where he used to Baptize. Also here is a Mountain where is a deep Cave, in
which they say Cynops the Magician lived in the time of St John; this Cave they
believe to be haunted; and to try it, a man was let down by a cord to see what
was in the Cave, but he was pulled up almost dead.

LERO.
Is a little to the South of Patmos, much of the same bigness, but far inferior
to it as to the soil; nor is it so much inhabited, not having above one small
town, and a few straggling Villages and Monasterys. Here are the ruins of a
large Castle on a hill, and about 20 very great marble pillars which are
entire, and are too far from the Sea to be carried away. They say it was a
Temple built in honor of Diana, and was (after the preaching of St John) made
a Church, and dedicated to the blessed Virgin. To the Eastward are a parcel of
small Islands called Mandria. The middlemost is the largest. It formerly was
inhabited, but is now only a refuge for Privateers in time of bad weather.

SCYRO, formerly called SCYROS.
Is to the North of Negro Ponte. It Is a large Island, with several very good
harbors for smaller Vessels, and one for ships which is called St Georgio di
Sciro; there is a large Town well peopled, with a small Castle to defend
themselves from Privateers, who are a continual Plague to them. There are
several Villages and Monasterys in it. When any Privateers come, the
Inhabitants will capitulate with them, rather than have their Vines rooted up,
which they threaten to do. No Turks live upon the Island. The duties which they
yearly pay are carried to Salonico.

SCOPELO.
Lies near the Entrance of the Gulf of Volo, its soil is fruitful. To the
South is a large Port called Porto Palerma, where the Venetians very often
come. The chief Town is to the North, having a strong Castle which held out
against the Venetians a considerable time, but at last consented to pay yearly
a certain sum of money to have their own privileges, and not be forced to keep
a Garrison of Venetian Soldiers. Here are several considerable merchants, who
trade for Cairo, and other parts. The chief product of the Island is wine which
generally is the best in the Archipelago; since the peace with the Venetians,
the Turks sent a Caddee; and an Aga, and would have put in a Garrison, but by
favor from the Port, they were called back, so as now they make Laws and are
Judges amongst themselves. But the Grand Signors revenues must be yearly paid,
which amounts to above 30000 dollars, that is, pole money, and tenths, which is
easy to what was pretended. Here are delicate fruits of all sorts, peaches the
largest I ever saw, also the Winter grapes in very large bunches, some weighing
10 pounds.

SCHIATI.
Lies to the North of Scopelo, it was formerly called Schiatus. Here is a very
strong Castle on a rock, having a Drawbridge and other necessarys for its
defense. It withstood the Venetians a long time, but was at last forced to
yield, and pay a tribute both to them and the Turks. The Island is very
Mountainous, not being so fruitful as Scopelo, nor so well inhabited. There are
several other Islands here, which lie almost at the entrance into the Gulf of
Salonico, they are very little inhabited, and of no great note.

CALOJERO.
Lies between Andros and Scio, the greatest part of which, about 30 years ago
was blown up, and the Inhabitants destroyed. I have heard several Merchants at
Smyrna say, that there at Smyrna most of their plate and money was turned
blackish, when the Island was blown up. And many of the Stones were cast upon
the Islands of Tine and Andros. A very small part of the Island is now
remaining.

IPSARA.
Is a small Island which lies to the West of Scio, very poorly inhabited. It
has a safe Port. Its West side secured with a small Island lying before it. At
the entrance from the North there runs a ridg of rocks from the great Island
almost half a mile into the Sea, being about 16 Foot under water. Upon these
Rocks the ship Plymouth stuck fast, having aboard her the Rt. Honorable the
Earl of Winchelsea, a true relation of which follows. In the year 1660 his
Lordship imbarqued on the Plymouth, on an Embassy from His Majesty of Great
Britain to the Grand Signior, and about the end of December arrived at Smyrna,
where his Lordship tarryed till January the 6. When he imbarqued again for his
Voyage to Canstantinople. So soon as his Lordship was aboard they set sail,
with the wind at East, sailing toward the Castle, which is about three Leagues
from Smyrna, it fell calm; then they came to anchor, and tarryed all night,
having in their company the ship Smyrna-Factor, and a Ketch, the latter waited
upon the man of War. Next morning being the 7th the wind at S Et 'twas a fine
gale, they weighed anchor, the weather promising them a speedy passage, but the
wind veering to the N Et with a strong gale, they weathered Caraborun standing
for the Island of Metelino; intending to spend the night under the Lee of that
Island in smooth water, bringing their ship under a Maine-Course. All that
night the wind increased every hour more and more, so that in the morning it
was a most violent Storm, the Sea in a breach, the sky very black and thick,
and the Sun lowering and red, which were the undoubted Indications of its
continuance. The Spray of the Sea was so forcibly carried by the wind over the
ship, that the Masts, yards and Decks were querned with the white salt. This
extremity of weather made them think of some Port, to secure themselves. The
Island of Ipsara lying about 8 Leagues distant S by With from Metelino, it was
supposed by the Master a safe place with this wind to spend the fury of the
Storm in; so they put her before it, with fore-saile down, and main-saile in
the brailes; but the wind soon blew away their fore-saile like paper, and in
bringing another to the yard, it had the misfortune to be foul of the flook of
the anchor, and soon became as unserviceable as the other. Being thus deprived
of their commanding sails, they loosed their sprit-saile and set their
mainecourse. Steering in between the greater and lesser Islands, the ship had
swift way being shot within the Northermost point, and luffing too near the
great Island, on a sudden she stuck fast on a Rock, which astonished them with
a strange amazement; the poor ship knocked five several times to clear her
self from a total Wrack and ruin. They all began to despair of her, and with
cast up eyes and stretched out arms thought now of no other but their last and
final Port. But in the midst of this horrid consternation and distress it
pleased God, who was their best Pilot, to bring the ship off, and to all their
appearances without the least damage: an escape so wonderful and miraculous (on
the 8th day of January) as it ought to be ever recorded to Admiration by all
that were partakers in the danger, and an Anniversary thanksgiving be made to
God for his Providence over and Protection of them. When they were in this
distress, they fired a Gun to give warning to the Smyrna-Factor, and Ketch, who
thereupon stood away for Milo. The storm continued all that day, so that with
two anchors down (the sheat anchor being one) they had much ado to secure the
ship fast, the Storm continuing so very violent. The 10th the wind abated, and
the 14th it veered about to the S With, so they sailed toward the Dardanelle,
the 15th they got to Tenedos about 8 in the morning, and about 3 in the
afternoon, entered the old Castles. From the new Castles a boat came off, in
which was a messenger to acquaint his Lordship, that the Vizier had sent orders
that free passage should be granted his Lordship, and his attendance with the
ship, without any hindrance or molestation. From the old Castles came off a
Boat in which were some Janissaries and Druggermen (or Inter preters) belonging
to St Tho. Bendish, that brought letters to his Lordship. On the 17th (it being
3 Months since his Lordship imbarqued in England) they came to anchor near the
7 Towers, till such time as St Tho. Bendish had notice: then weighed anchor,
and stood for the Port. Some time before a Bostangee, one belonging to the
Grand Signiors Garden, came aboard, pretending to be sent from the Bostangee
Basha to know what ship it was of so great Equipage, and Burden, also telling
them that the Grand Signior was seated on the corner of the wall of the
Serraglio. With a fresh gale of wind they had all their colors abroad, with
all their Guns, and wastclothes out. Being almost opposite to the Serraglio
Point, the said Bustangee went aboard again, telling them that it was the Grand
Signors pleasure that they should rejoice with Guns, (which was his expression)
upon which they fired six Guns and came to an anchor at Toppanna, when St Tho.
Bendish came aboard to congratulate his Lordships arrival, his Lordship the
next day (being the 18th) was received ashore, and indeed with that great state
and handsome Equipage, that no Ambassador from England, France, or Germany ever
passed in with more honor or wonder of the Multitude. Where we will leave his
Lordship and come back with the ship which tarryed some time at Constantinople,
and in her return called in at Messina, Legorne, and several Ports of Spain,
having undergone many storms at Sea, and at last arrived in safety in the
River of Thames. At Wollwich she was hall'd into the dry Dock, and being
searched, there was found a great piece of a rock in the bottom of her, so fast
in, that it could not but with much difficulty be got out. It passed the keel
of the ship, and was so close fixed in, that it stopped the water from coming in.
This piece of Rock was carried to his Majestys Closet at Whitehall, where it is
carefully preserved.

The Islands in the Gulf of SMYRNA.
THere are 5 Islands which are not inhabited, nor have they at present any
distinct name saving one which is the largest, known to the English by the name
of the Long Island, and by other Nations Isola d' Eglese; It is about 10 miles
in length and not very broad. There are some ruins in it, which show it was
formerly inhabited, and the ruins of a large Temple is still to be seen.
Another Island there is in the Bay, close to the land near Vurlaw, which a
Greek told me was held in great Veneration in former times, having had several
fair buildings; now nothing remains great or remarkable, but the Cave which is
cut out of a firm Rock almost square, and supported with 4 pillars of the same
Rock. To the Eastward is part of an Altar, and in the middle is a Well but the
water is not fit to be drank it is so brackish. From the Island it is about a
quarter of a mile to the maine, where formerly was a made-way in the Sea for
people to pass over, being 30 Foot broad. This way is now almost consumed, yet
I have past over it on horseback. This Island I judge must be the once famous
Classomene. The other Islands are of no note.

The HELLESPONT, or entrance into the Sea of CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE Hellespont, called by the Turks Bogass Hisar, is the Southern-most strait
between Europe and Asia; the two Capes or head lands are Cape Grego on the
European, and Cape Janizary on the Asian shore, which are about two miles one
from the other, having two new Castles, which stand low and opposite to each
other, and were built after the great fight betwixt the Venetians and Turks, in
the year 1656, close under the old Castles, These two Castles have no other
name then the New Castles, and the Cape has the same name; although it be
corrupted by our Seamen, who call it Cape Janizary, taking the word Yenni bysar
(new Castles) for Janizary (a Soldier) as also going into Smyrna they call Cape
Giobernole for Cara Borun. From the new Castles to the old is about 20 miles.
These latter are not a mile wide; formerly here were the Cities of Sestos and
Abidos, and these are by the Italians called the Dardanelli, I believe from the
ruins of a City formerly called Dardanum, not far distant. The Castles stand
opposite to each other, having above 100 Guns in each, most of which lie level
with the water, so as it is almost impossible any ship should pass upward,
without leave. The Gunners there are expert Marksmen; I have seen trial made
of their skill. In the year 1670 the Captain Basha was there, when an empty
Butt was cast into the Sea about a mile above the Castles which the Stream
brought down, and it being come between them, in two shot it was sunk. When
the Basha departed he was saluted with two shot, one past just at the Prow,
the other under the Poop of his Gally, so near as the water spry'd into the
Gally. Here is a continual tide or current which runs downwards, to the South
so strong as a Gally can hardly with a full stroke gain way against it, nor was
it ever known that the Stream did run upwards. In the year 1665 I was a
passenger in the Sampson (Captain Samuel Chamblet Commander) from Smyrna to
Constantinople, the winds being contrary we lay at anchor without the new
Castles from May till the beginning of August, for here in the Summer time the
winds are most Northerly. Our chief Mate Mr Frith, was a very great Artist, and
often would make trials about the current which runs downwards; he found that
some times the water returned upward about 3 fathom deep, when at the same time
it run swift downwards above. This experiment he tried several times, with one
and the same effect. Past the Hellespont the Island of Marmora shows it self,
being but small; it has its name from the quantity of Marble which is there.
Several Slaves are employed to cut it out, and some old Gallys transport it to
Constantinople for the building those stately Mosques, Bagnos, and Palaces
wherein it now flourishes. Against the Gulf of Montania is the Island of Papa
not inhabited. About 16 miles from Constantinople are 7 Islands which some call
the Islands of Princepe, though one only has that name which is the largest; to
it the Grecian Emperors did use to banish their Sons, if guilty of any great
fault, now only one is inhabited, called Chalcis which is to the No. of
Princepe, there being a small Village and two Monasterys in it. Being so near
to Constantinople I must give the Reader a short view of it. The situation for
pleasantness, and conveniencie, and the Port for largness and security may sue
for preeminence above all others. The River between Constantinople and Galata,
is not broader then the Thames at London Bridge, but has much deeper water, so
that no bridge can be made over. The largest ships may have their heads ashore,
and 18 fathom water at their stern. The Arsenal next to that at Venice is the
best in Europe. The broadest street in Constantinople is not so broad as
Lumbard street. Very few houses (if any) are above three stories high, they are
built most with timber. Their shops and warehouses are most by the water side,
to which all people flock in the day time, which makes it seem to be so
populous. The Grand Signor's Serraglio is seated on the most East point of the
City having a prospect up into the Bosphorus, it is surrounded with a high wall
near two miles round, having upwards of 400 large Cypress trees regularly
planted in it, with many fair Summerhouses without the wall close to the Sea
side. The Turks call this City Stamboll, to signify, that it is abounding in
all things; and indeed it is the best supplied with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Fruit
and Corn of any great City in Europe. Many having given a large account of it
already, I will forbear enlarging thereon. In the year 1665 a Quaker who lived
in Dover, was persuaded to come to Constantinople to convert the Grand Signior;
those who set him on the design, persuading him, that he should have the gift
of Tongues: but he was disappointed in that, and all other his expectations,
and without seeing the Grand Signor, or Vizier, by the Right Honorable the Earl
of Winchelsea's order, was shipped aboard the ship Sun, and sent for Legorn. I
have since seen The Prospect of the GRAND SERRAGLIO or Imperial Palace of
CONSTANTINOPLE as it appears from Galata.
La Prospettiora del GRANSERRAGLIO vero Palazzo Imperial di CONSTANTINOPOLI
come si vede da Galata.
An Arm of the Sea which devides the City of Constantinople from Galata

Braccio di mare che divide la Citta di Constantinopoli da Galata.

A. The Entrance into ye Serraglio from ye City B. Lodgings for the Guards C.
The great Hall for public audience D. The Gran Signors Lodgings E. The Women's
Lodgings F. Pleasure houses where the Gran Signore comes to see the Fleet go to
and come from Sea G. Places for the Gran Signors Barges H. Part of
Constantinople called Balat I. Entrance in to the Seraglio from Sea K. The
Bosphorus or Channel which devides-Europe from Asia L. Part of the Asia Shore
M. Sta Sophia where the Gran Signore goes to his-Devotion every friday A.
L'Entrata del Serragdio per la part della Citta B. Allogiamenti delle Guardie
C. La Gran Sala di Audienza D. Apartamenti del Gran Signore E. Apartamenti
delle Done F. Gallerie dove il Gran Signore si porta perredere ^scire et
entrare L. Armata di Mare G. Ridutti per le Barche del Gran Signore H. Part
durn quartiero di Costantinopoli deto Balat I. Entrata del Serraglio per^ Mare
K. H Bosphoro o vero il Canale che divide l'Europa da Asia L. Vista della Jerra
ferma del Asia M. Moschea di Sta Sophia, dove va il Gran Signore ogni Venerdi


B. Randolph

H Cuttance (...) delin. D: Loggan Sculp.
view of Constantinople him in Kent, he being now of another persuasion.

The present State of that famous Island and Kingdom of CANDIA.
THE Island of Candia, which in old time (and now by the Turks) is called
Crete, has followed the other parts of the Empire of Greece, and is now
subjected to the Tyranny of the Turks, after a War for above 27 years. In
which time the Venetians (though in comparrison, as a flea in the beard of a
Lion, to the Ottoman Forces) did bravely, and with an unparalled Courage,
defend the City of Candia to the last extremity. After a close Siege for near 2
years continuance, the Vizier there in person, and with him the best of all the
Ottoman Forces, they were forced to surrender, yet upon the most honorable
terms, that they themselves could propose; carrying away with them not only
their Cannon, and all other ammunition, but also the bells, which were in the
Steeples, and whatever else they thought worth the Labor. The Vizier was so
over-joyed, that the City was surrendered to him, that he appointed several of
the Turkish boats, to assist the Venetians, if they should have occasion of
their help in carrying their goods to the ships. He was so observing of his
word in the Peace. that he caused two Janizarys to be put to death for
attempting to force their way into the City. All Europe has heard of this great
Seige, how many thousand Bombs were cast into the City; How many Mines, and
Fornellos were blown up; and how many bold assaults the Turks made. They had at
last workt themselves so near the Walls that it was impossible for the besieged
to make use of any of their great Guns. For no sooner could a man appear to
level a Gun, but there was a shower of bullets and arrows, so that the Turks
would often attempt to undermine the Walls, and the Venetians did countermine
them, and when they met under ground, they fought most desperately. The
Venetians have an Engine which they call trombo di fuo^^, it is as long as a
half Pike, the Staff bigger: At the end are two Irons, about two Foot long, in
the form of a fork; In which is fastened a trunk made of Iron, (and some are of
wood) in it are five charges, each firing severally at a certain time, and
carry several bullets to do execution as far as a Pistol. They set fire to it
at the fore part, and have a touch, to reach from one chamber to the other.
Another Invention they had to fish up the Turks, when they attempted to
undermine their Walls. They had hooks made in the form of a boats grapling,
the points sharp, fastn'd to a rope and 4 or 5 foot of chain at the end; These
hooks they often cast over the Walls, amongst the Turks, and seldom failed to
bring up a Turk, some fastened by the clothes, others by the body. I have heard
some of the officers say, they have taken several in a night. For when the hook
was fastened, they gave them not time to unhook themselves but had them soon
over the Walls, and many a Turk have the common soldiers eaten. At the Greeks
leaving Candia there happned a most sad accident; a new ship called La Fregatta
Galliera, or the Gally Frigot, was pitched upon for transporting most of the
Principal of the Gentry, and the greatest part of the riches of the Citizens;
there was also (besides what were mounted) 50 great brass Guns, the Passengers
were between 250 and 300 besides 200 Mariners and upward. Being between a
little Island called Ovo, and the Port of Cerigo, the ship opened, and not a
man was saved. The rest of the Fleet got well, some to Zante, others to
Ceffalonia, Corfu and Venice, landing the Greeks as they had a fancy to the
place which they came to, or as they found friends. Thus they left their
Estates to the Enemy, and not above 5 or 6 Greeks remained, who being in years,
and sickly withal, desired leave of the General, that they might tarry, and end
their days there. In the Articles of peace it was concluded, that the Venetians
should keep possession of three small Islets which are close to the Island of
Candia, and have each a very strong Castle. The Turks did laugh at their
proposals, saying we have the Henn, and the Chicken will follow of course, of
these Isletts you shall have a further account hereafter. This Island had 20
Citys, and above 1000 Towns, Villages and large Monasterys, now there is not
above 4 Citys, and 300 Towns and Villages. To give you an account of them I
will begin with the eastern part. This was formerly a Province called Sittia;
the head City had the same name, standing in a Bay, at the North East part of
the Island, at the West side extending from the North, to the bottom of the Bay
Southerly, above a mile in length. The Castle stood on a rising ground to the N
With. of the Town, built of a course Marble stone. The Venetians finding the
place was not Tenable, caused several mines to be made, by which they destroyed
the Castle and Town, and so went to Candia. By the ruins it may be seen the
builders had no thoughts, so soon to have left them; most of the Walls are
entire and some have lower rooms with beams, which are patcht up, and serve for
store houses to put corn in, when any ship comes to lade. In the year 1680 I
was here and loaded a Sattee of Provence Captain Iseppe Bremon who belonged to
Cassis about 10 miles from Marsellis. The Wheat was the Basha's own, which he
sold at 3 Timins a Killoe, (i. e. about 14d. the Bushel.) The Turk who came
with me from Candia, was an ordinary Servant. But as we traveled the Road, and
when we came hither he would domineer at a strange rate. Here are no
Inhabitants nearer then 12 miles, at a small Village called Alona, saving at a
small house and Chapel, which is a Metoiki (or Chapel of ease to a Monastery
up in the Mountains) about a quarter of a mile from the Sea. Amongst others the
Greek Priests brought their tenths, to the Turks. They all desire to have a
Seaman to measure their Corn rather then the Turks; for they will stir the corn
about with their hands, and press it down; But the Master was content to take
it with a just measure, and Favored the poor Greeks what he could. At Alona
resides the Basha's Lieutenant, who has 100 Spahees to guard the Coast from
Privateers; but more to gather in the tenths. The Greeks maintain them, at
their own charge. To the Eastward of Sittia on a point of land, is a Monastery
dedicated to St Isidoro to which belongs a great Revenue, it maintains about 40
Calojeros. There are several rich Lamps, and other ornaments of Silver and
Gold. Here they show you the Picture of the Blessed Virgin, which (they say)
was brought by Angels from Stancoi, and was found in a cave of that Mountain.
They have Lands on the Island of Rhodes, where they have a Metoiki and several
Calojeroes, to gather in the cropps of corn, oil and wine; the Turks allowing
them to enjoy it, calling it Vacofa, or possessions for Gods use, yet they will
receive their tenths from it. The Gomina or Overseer of this Monastery had made
his Escape, taking with him above two thousand pieces of Eight, in ready money
and plate, but being pursued, he was taken at Scarpante an Island lying in the
midd way, between Candia and Rhodes, and by the Basha's order put to death. To
the South of Alona about 10 miles is a very high Mountain called by the Turks
Basha Dog, from it may be seen the Sea, to East, West, North and South. Here
are the Ruins of a Castle called formerly Barozza, 'twas built by a Gentleman
of that name. It is, square, about 60 Foot high, with a tarrazzo, and
battlements on the top, each square is about 40 foot. The Wall is very thick;
the door about 10 foot from the ground, having a dry ditch about it. Of these
there are several about the Island, as the old built Castles are in Ireland.
For formerly the Candiotes, did use to War amongst themselves, but now all
such quarrels are ended by their subjection to a common Master. The City of
Girapetra is to the South of the Island, having no secure Port, but an open
Road, where Vessels in the Summer time may be with security from the Weather,
but not from Privateers; for while I was there, they carried away a Saike which
came from Alexandria. The Town is walled round, and has a small Castle which
lies higher then the Town. Here is continually a Garrison of 200 Janissaries,
besides there are several Turks, who are Merchants, so that in all they can
raise 500 fighting men. There is about it a very fine plain full of Olive trees
and some pleasant Gardens. Their houses are well built, of good stone, the
rooms very lofty; but few houses above two story high. In the year 1675, one
Monsieur Crevellier, a famous Privateer, landed 500 men in the Bay of Spina
Longa, traveling in the night, he came next morning, just at the dawning of
the day, and found the Turks at their Sabbah namas morning prayer, so he made
himself master of the Town, carried away 200 slaves, nailing up the Guns which
were in the Castle. The Turks which were at the South part of the Town, betook
themselves to some small Vessels, for they had not the heart to return home, to
fetch their arms. Monsieur Crevellier to retreat with this great prize,
resolved to kill what horses he found, securing twenty for himself, and
officers, to ride at the rear; This enter prize was effected in less then six
hours after they entered the Town, for they did not tarry to ransack the houses
much. After they were departed, about 300 men, Turks and Greeks were got
together, and marched a mile or two out of town, and had not Crevellier killed
the horses, he could never have got out of the Island. It is very strange that
so many men could come with that secresy as not to be discovered, and that the
hearts of those Turks should be so dulled. Immediately they dispatched expresses
to the City of Candia, Writing to the Basha that above 1500 Christians had
landed, and carried away 200 Prisoners, most of them men of the Garrison; the
Basha asked the messenger, if the rest of the Inhabitants were a sleep, or
dead; No says the messenger, but their hearts were, being all surprised, some
in their Mosques, and some in the Coffee houses, and not a man, that had his
senses. Most of the horses being also killed. The Basha asked him how he
escaped, he answered, that he had the wit to hide himself, as a great many
others did. There were three Gallys in the Mole at Candia, under the command of
one Babba Hassan, who were sent out to look after Crevellier, but to no
purpose, for they returned without seeing him. Since, there is an order that
the Gates shall be shut an hour before Sunn set, and not opened till an hour
after morning prayers, and now there are several guards on the Mountains,
besides the Basha of Candia, has threatened, the Providitore at Spina Longa, to
complain to Venice if he suffer any Privateers to come into that Bay; so as for
some years they have attempted nothing. The Country toward the South is not so
mountanous as to the North, and Northwest parts; having several large and
pleasant plains, which have many ruins of fine town's. To the East of
Girapetra about 10 miles I went to see a Cave under the Mountain of Iro as they
now call it, where they say St Paul preached: it is a large Chapel having 12
pillars all cut out of the Rock, which was done by the Christians in the night
time. Some say it was finished in less then a months time. Close by is a
Fountain where they say he used to Baptize, and it is now called St Paul's
Fountain, the water thereof is very good, to cure such as have sore eyes. From
Gierapetra to Bonifacia is 14 hours riding most in plains, very delightsome,
there being very high Mountains to the North, with most pleasant valleys
between, and abundance of Cyprus trees. Bonifacia stands on a rising ground,
having only the Walls of a Castle. The Inhabitants are most Greeks, very poor;
here is a Metropolitan who pretends to be next to the Archbishop of Candia.
There are two Italian Churches; the doors are made up with Walls to keep Cattle
from going in. The Greeks have four small Churches, but one will contain more
then all the Inhabitants. They have now new named the place calling it
Malafacia instead of Bonifaci (good Face) it being so much altered from what it
was in former time. From Bonifacia to the Labarinth is about 10 miles, or three
hours riding With, most a plain. Several men have several opinions about this
building, (if I may call it so.) But one Signior Venetando, who was born in a
neighboring Village, gives this account, that a certain King of this Island,
had so great a hatred for all women, that he ordered this place for his Court,
and at last lived so private that he would not suffer any to come to him but
such as ruled in his stead. He would seldom come out but to worship at a
Temple dedicated to Jupiter, which stood close by it. In this Labarinth he
ended his days, and had a famous Tomb built for him, the ruins of which they
show you. The Labarinth is above two miles about, being so covered on the top
with earth, as it seems to be all of firm land; we entered it with two torches,
and candles in Lanthornes, having a line to direct us out again. The way is
plain under foot, and archt over head, some arches being about 10 foot high,
some more, some less, with several windings. I made it my business to observe
if there was any thing of a building, in the pillars or sides, but found it
most an entire stone, which they told me, so cemented together that indeed it
appeared so. Here are a great many small places about 4 foot long, 2 broad, and
2 over, which were for burying places. There are abundance of batts, which hang
in clusters, some are larger than ordinary. We endeavored to fright them
scorching their wings, by which we found there was life in them; their sleep is
observed to be much more sound with a No. wind, than with a So. wind, as the
spring comes on, they leave their palace. We had almost ended our line, being
about 100 pikes, which is above 80 yards, and then returned out, being a good
hour in the Labarinth. The damps are very great; against rain it is always
dropping, but very dry with Northerly winds. At the end is a lake, and they
tell you, that some have attempted to go to it, and have been drawn into it.
Our curiosity did not invite us to see it, for were it not true, as in
probability it is not, the noisome smells are enough to stifle one. To the South
and close by, is a small Village with two Churches, which seem to have been
Temples. To the S With, about 10 miles distant, is that famous and great Mountain
called Psillo Vuona, formerly Mount Ida; at 4 of the Clock it casts a shadow on
the Labarinth, on it are many pleasant Monasteries with Groves of Cypress
trees, and abundance of Fountains. Some say the Coast of Barbary may be seen
from the top. From the Labarinth to Candia is about 10 hours riding, most in a
plain, till within 10 miles of the City. At the right hand, about a mile from
the road, is a most stately Monastery, dedicated to our blessed Savior, which
was built by order of the Emperor Constantine the Great. It has always been
continued to the Greeks, and kept its splendour, till the late War, when it was
much defaced. There are abundance of Monasterys, but very poor, and some are
shut up for want of Priests.

Candia Novo is about 6 miles from the City of Candia Southward, being a strong
Castle, having Mount Jove to the West. Here the Turks kept their Treasure and
Ammunition, in the Siege of Candia. It is seated very pleasantly on a rising
ground, giving a prospect to the Sea. It is now chiefly inhabited by Greeks;
the Castle has a Garrison of Turks, which the Basha intended to bring to
Candia, and demolish the Castle, having writ to the Port about it; but he had
no answer. Candia, so famous, and generally known for the brave defense it made
against the Turk, appears by the ruins to have been one of the best built Citys
in the midd-land Seas. It is seated on the North side of the Island, almost
midd-way between Canea and Sittia, in a pleasant Bay, having an artificial
Port, secured from the No wind by a Mole about 200 yards long, with a strong
and large Castle at the head, called Castle del Molo having 20 great Guns. From
the South is a low point of land, which runs into the Sea No. which secures it
from the Easterly wind's, and makes the entrance not above 30 yards wide; upon
this point of land the Turks have built a covered way, with a very thick wall,
full of holes, for small shot, strongly arch't over, reaching from the Arsenal
to the entrance into the Port, where is a small Fort with 4 great Guns, also
very strongly arch't over, so as no Bomb can offend it. At the right hand, at
coming out of the Gate to the Mole, is a new Fort built with 4 very great Guns,
which lie level with the water, over them are 8 smaller Guns. This Fort is
opposite to the mouth of the Port, and is arch't over to prevent danger from
Bombs, or wild fire. On the Mole, are several great Guns planted with arches
over them. To the East of the Arsenal, is the old Castle called La Battaria del
Arsenal, which is rebuilt, with a ditch round it, to bring in the Sea, most cut
out of a firm Rock. The Port is almost round, and secure against any wind, for
Gallys and smaller Vessels, but there is not water enough for ships of any
considerable bigness. It is filled very much with the rubbish, that the rains
carried into it, from the City, and would certainly have been choakt up in a
few years, had it not been for a French Merchant, one Monsieur Dudei, who, to
ingratiate himself with the Basha, caused an Engine to be brought from Marselle
to cleanse it. There are the ruins of 12 Arches of the Arsenal, and about 6
Arches are yet entire, but they use them only to work in when the Gallys are
there: No Gallys having been built here. The City is not repaired toward the
land, where the Walls are so much shaken, that it will require a great deal of
time and cost to fortify them. From the Port toward the West, upon the Wall
are 50 large Guns planted. The Fort of St Andrea at the N. With. of the City is
well repaired, having a double wall toward the Sea. In all there are about 400
Guns planted on the Walls, and outworks, which are 6 miles in circumference.
The Gates of Candia are the best I ever saw, the Arch or Gate House being about
100 yards long, and the Gates 10 broad, the Arch is all built of firm stone. It
will take up three hours to walk round the outworks. There are several mines
which were never blown up; Every mine had a distinct name, I was in one mine
which was above a mile in length, being about 6 foot high and three broad. All
the plain for above two miles without the Walls is like a new plowed field,
where you cannot walk, but must see pieces of dead men's bones. None are
permitted to walk round the works, but such as have a License and a Janizary
with them. The Turks take a delight to give an account of the strength of the
place, and especially will show you a small Cave or arch, where the Venetian
General did use to sleep (as they tell you) to secure himself from the Bombs.
Not above one eighth part of the houses, that formerly were, are now inhabited,
very few being left entire, nor do the Turks repair any but those where they
dwell; the chief Mosque is well repaired, it was formerly a Church dedicated to
St Mark, and stands to the Et of the great Piazza; to the South of it are part
of the Walls of old Candia, close to which are built up a row of houses, two
story high for the Janissaries. The Basha's Palace is a little below the great
Mosque on the other side of the way; opposite to it is the great Hall, formerly
called La Sala di Consiglio, which is a very stately building of white Marble,
with several works in Basso Relievo; to the S Et. of it stands the Church of St
Francisco with an entire Cloister, which is a Mosque. The street from the Mole
to the chief Piazza is in good repair, being broad and paved with an even
stone; the houses are also well inhabited. But that part toward the With. is a
heap of ruins, amongst which live the Jews, who have very large houses, but
some of their upper rooms have no other shelter from the weather, but a few
matts made fast upon poles. The beams of the old houses are bought up, and
carried to Venice, Zante, and other places; and being made of Cyprus wood they
serve to make chests and cabinets, many of which have been brought to England.
The number of the Inhabitants of the City is not reckoned to be above 10000
with Greeks and Jews. There is a continual Garrison of 2000 Janissaries besides
the Basha's guardes. Since the taking the place, they have granted liberty to
all, who will come to inhabit there, but all their encouragement cannot bring
the Candiotes to dwell there. Formerly the Plain was full of Olive trees, with
delightsom pleasure-houses and gardens. Now nothing but ruins are to be seen.
The City stands on a rising ground from the Sea. The houses were so built with
tarrazzis, as most from the tops could have a sight of the Sea. From Candia to
Rettimo is about 12 hours riding. The City stands on a point of land very
pleasantly, having a Port to the East, which is almost choakt up, so as no
Gally can get over the bar being laden, but Brigantines and smaller Vessels
are very secure against all winds. Toward the Sea are no Walls, the Rocks
there fortifying the place, so as an Enemy can only come by land. This place
was the first the Turks made themselves Masters of, putting all to the Sword,
to give the greater terror to the rest of the Island. Since they possessed it,
they have built three new Forts, toward the Sea, and a wall with a dry Ditch
to landward. It is now chiefly inhabited by Turks, who trade to Constantinople
considerably. The houses are here entire according to the Venetian manner of
building. There are some Greeks that dwell in the City; but they have a small
town about a quarter of a mile off, where are 2 Churches, where they have free
exercise of their Religion. The Country hereabout is very pleasant, full of
Olive trees, and from the Sea side, the land rises easily to the foot of the
Mountains of Sfacia, about 8 miles from the City, which from the Sea seems to
be all a wood, from which Mountains run several pleasant streams, and one very
large river called Platonico, which is continually full, being supplied from
above a thousand Fountains, which the Mountains produce. These Mountains of
Sfacia are abounding in all things necessary for life, and nothing can be more
delightsom in the Summer time. They reach near 30 miles toward the S With. in
length, and in some places about 10 in breadth, coming down close to the Bay of
Suda. The Cheese which is made here, is bought up by the Venetians and other
Merchants, and transported to France, Italy, Zante, etc. It is the best Cheese
that is made in any of the Southern parts, and generally as good as our
Cheshire Cheeses, being made as bigg. Besides which they have great store of
Honey, Wax, Silk, Wool, Cordovan-Leather, and a sort of goats Hair, little
inferior to that of Angura in Asia. No Olives, Oranges, or Lemons grow here.
There are above 100 Villages on these Mountains, besides several Monasteries.
The Inhabitants are a Warr-like People, and withstood the Turks above 20 years
after Rettimo was taken, living as the Mainiotes in the Morea. There are such
difficult passages to them, that an army cannot march. Now at last they are
brought into obedience, and by humbling themselves to the Vizier, he granted
them great privileges, to encourage them, least they should take part with the
Venetians, who have the Island of Suda so near them. As the Vizier past by in
his way from Canea to Candia, they brought him several presents, which the
Mountains produced; which he was so well pleased with, that he exempted them
from going with him, and paying their attendance on him, only he obliged them
to furnish the Camp with mutton at a certain rate. Most of his own provision
was carried from hence. Sheep at three timins (about a shilling) a piece,
butter at a timine the oak (a groat for two pound 8 ounces) Cheese at the same
rate, and at this price they were obliged to carry it as far as the Camp before
Candia, where an officer gave them an acquittance, which was abated them out of
their tribute. They have a certain Drugg, called by the Venetian Oldani, much
of the color of Liquorish in balls, it is a very great conforter of the head,
having a pleasant smell, being burnt it gives a very pleasant sent. Most of
this is bought up by the Venetians, and sent to Venice. Here is also a sort of
wood which the Greeks call Platte iksillo, it burns like a torch and gives a
most fragrant smell; much of it was used to burn at the Siege. Every night at
the Viziers, and other great men's tents they had fires of this wood, the wood
being cut small, and put into an Iron grate at the end of a pole fastened in the
ground. If a man be hot in the plain, in riding two or three hours up the
hills, he shall find so great an alteration in the air, as is incredible. About
15 miles from Retimo is a lovely Fountain called Bognare Bashe, standing so
between two mountains, that at 2 in the afternoon it is shady, continuing so
all the rest of the day. The water is so cold as will cause a dew upon any
fruit that is put into it, and be one never so hot, to drink of this water it
will do him no harm: In the Summer time here are always some persons of
Quality, who bring their beds, and continue for several days together. The
Sfacioti are a healthy, strong, and stout people, they pretend to be of a very
Ancient Stock, some there are who derive their family from before the coming of
our Savior. I saw a Callojero that was 110 years of age, he was very lusty and
could walk very well with a staff. Part of these hills are under the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Retimo, and part under that of Canea. From Retimo
to Canea, the Road is most by the Sea side passing by the Bay of Suda, having
the mountains of Sfacia on the left hand.

Canea is seated in a fine plain about 3 miles from the bottom of the Bay of
Suda, and upon the Sea to the North, having a very fair harbor which may be
called a double Port, the one being round, the other stretching away to the
Eastward; where are two Arsenals. It is secure against the worst of weathers,
The entrance is narrow, and not above 18 foot water. To the West of which the
Turks have built a new battery with 20 very large Guns, and above it to the
South is a great Citadel, in which are 40 good Guns. To the East of the
Entrance is another great Castle which commands the part called the Sabioniera,
with the Arsenal. Round about the Port is a broad key, which is always full
with merchandise, and is little inferior to the Port at Marseilles. The houses
are all very well built and not much battered. The Walls are in very good
repair, having a dry ditch about 30 yards broad, and 6 deep, from the land on
the other side. The Walls are about 30 foot high; within them the earth is
raised, about 10 foot higher than the Walls, there being a walk between. There
is a mount which they call the Marteningo where formerly were 10 Guns, but now
it is of no use. Toward the land there are 4 Bastions. To the South is the
great gate called La Porti di Retimo. To the West is a mace placed on the Wall,
to show where a Basha, at the taking of the place, first entered the City:
before the Gate is a half moon built of earth about 20 foot high; at each end
is a small Pyramid of mortar and sculls, which are the sculls of Christians,
who were slain before the place in the year 1666. The Venetians then attempting
to regain the place under the conduct of Marquis Vila, a Savojard, 5000 men
were landed at Culatte at the bottom of the Bay of Suda, and were encamped
before the City several days. The Turks sallyed out of the City, to the With.
surprising the Christians, and had a very great victory, pursuing them to the
Fort which was built at the bottom of the Bay. In this flight there were above
1500 killed and several taken Prisoners: amongst the latter was one Captain
Scot, a Scotch-man, who had his hand upon the draw-bridg of the City; he was
carried afterward to Smyrna in the Gally's and there redeemed by the English
Merchants: but when he came to Venice his arrears were paid him and he returned
his ransom to Smyrna, which remained in bank, till another like occasion should
present it self. The City is near three miles in circumference, and is much
better Inhabited than Candia, having a Basha and other officers as in Candia,
only in all Councils the other has the precedence. The Country about is very
pleasant, being all a plain for above 6 miles to the South and West, planted
with young Olive trees so that it seems to be a Garden. It is well supplied,
both with Flesh, and Fish, of the latter there is great store, for besides the
Sea, there is a Lake about 10 miles to the South, which furnishes them with
great variety of all sorts. The trade is much greater here than at Candia, it
lying so convenient, for the Morea, Italy, and other places. The French have a
great trade for oil, wools, wax, cheese, and several other commodities, having
a Consul, and two Merchants. The Venetians have also a Consul, but most of
their oil is shipped off from Suda, to which place it is brought from Retimo
and other places thereabout. All great ships come to an anchor at a place
called St Todoro, being 2 small Isletts about 5 miles to the West of the Port
of Canea; there is very good anchorage, and a small Fort to defend them. On one
Island, notwithstanding it seems to be all stone, and is very low, there are
several Fountains of water. No Greeks live within the City. They have a new
town built to the South, about half a mile off, where are two long streets,
very commodious, and here they enjoy all the liberty they desire: their
Churches are open, and the Bishop has a very pleasant house, living in good
Esteem. Close to this town runs a pleasant River, which is seldom dry, There
are likewise several pleasant gardens, well stock't with all sorts of delicious
fruits. The Turks have also some gardens here, but they must retire into the
City an hour before Sun set, winter and summer, or else must remain out all
night, the gates being then shut, and a strict watch kept about the Walls. The
Turks of this place are generally very rich, and incline to trade, giving all
encouragement to have Merchants come and reside amongst them. There was an
English merchant here one Mr Trenchard, who was recommended to the French
Consul to have his assistance, but in a little time he grew weary of the place.
Here they keep their oil in great Vessels called Tini, which are square and
made of wood, some will hold 20 Tunns. They have a special regard to preserve
the esteem of their oil, nor will they force a merchant to take any longer than
it comes clear, not mixing the bottoms, as in some parts they will, by taking a
hollow cane, and putting it to the bottom, by blowing through which they raise
the foot of the oil, so that thick and thin goes together. Here they sell the
Foot of the oil at an under price; and this serves to make soap. Most parts of
Turkey have an Esteem for Canea oil above others. Some will have it to be the
better for that the trees are all so young; others impute it to their care in
the making, for here they gather all their Olives, whereas in the Morea they
thrash them down with poles. The wines are generally Esteemed above all others.
The red muscadine they call here Leattico, it is a richer wine than Tent at
Cadize, and much more pleasant. I have seen it sold at 15 gallons for half a
dollar. White muscadine is not so good as that at Luxuria in Ceffalonia. Some
are of opinion that in the War the true Muscadine grape was lost; on the
Mountains there are smaller sorts of Wine, so as a man may have what sort he
pleases. All sorts of Provision are very plentiful, but in the Summer time the
mutton has generally a bad taste, which proceeds from their feeding on some
herb on the Mountains. Here are Fowl of all sorts in abundance; but especially
a bird called Beccha Fig, which is almost a lump of Fat: they are valued
about 4 for an asper, (or 8 for a penny) Turtle-doves and Quails are very
plentiful. Their Beef is small, but very sweet. Of Fruits there is no sort,
but what they have. I never saw larger pears than are brought from the
Mountains, being a sort of Sugar pear. Their muskmelons are very good, but
their water-melons are singular. Salating there is all the year of all sorts:
no place is esteemed to have larger and better Endive and Carduus, than there
are here. I have seen Sugar canes of a great height, full as good as what are
brought from Grand Cairo. There are abundance of Simples which are bought here
for France and Italy. Some say the reason why no Venomous thing will live on
this Island, is the quantity of Dittamo that grows here. Others say it has only
been since St Paul set foot upon the Island. Most of the Candiotes pretend to
have great knowledge in Simples. The women are experienced Doctoresses. One I
have reason to say was very skilful, she having in a little time wrought a
great cure upon me; For by accident a Bullet having past through my Leg, I
applied my self to her, and in 15 days she cured it. She did not allow me to
eat any flesh, till it was perfectly well. They have several antidotes against
the Plague, but they had not the effect they pretended, for several of the
Doctoresses were swept away by that disease, but most certain it is that after
St John Baptists day, it did here abate, as they always observe it in most of
these Eastern parts. There are several other places that have had the name of
Citys, which are now heaps of ruins; many hundred stately Palaces there were
that now have only some Walls, and those most fallen down. The Candiots keep
their Habit, that is the women, but the men are most alla Turchesca, especially
the better sort. They are as Ignorant of the Antiquity of their Country, as the
Moreotes, that have been above 200 years in slavery. There is no Latin Church
upon the whole Island (as I was informed) but what is shut up, or converted to
the Turks use. Before the Turks conquered this Island, there were above a
million of Souls, whereas now there are not 80000, of which not obove 30000
Turks on the whole Island.

The Isletts, which the Venetians have about the Island of CANDIA, are
1. CArabusa to the West end of the Island, about six miles from the main,
having a very good Port between the Islett and the main Island: the Castle is
very strong, having about 80 Guns. In the late War it withstood several
assaults, but it lying so far from any considerable City, the Turks did not so
much mind it as they did Suda. Here is a continual Garrison of Venetian
soldiers and a Proveditore, who is under the Inquisitore at Suda. In time of
peace with the Turks, they have a continual trade and very good correspondence
with them, having all sorts of provision at very reasonable rates.

2. Spina Longa, lies about 40 miles to the East of the City of Candia, at the
Entrance of a great Bay. The Islett is not above a mile and a half about, it
has a very good Fortification round it, besides it is steep all about, so as an
Enemy cannot well land. It is not above a mile from a point of land, where the
Turks raised a Battery, and continued for a week to batter the Castle, but to
little Purpose, for most of their dwellings are in Caves under ground. Here and
at Carabusa is no water but what is brought them by shipping. or what they save
in great Cisterns and Jarrs. Here is also a Proveditore and a Garrison of
Venetian soldiers.

3. Suda lies in a great Bay about 30 miles from Retimo West, 12 miles from
Canea, and 9 from the bottom of the Bay South East, having the land to the
South about a mile, and to the N With. not above half a mile distant. The Island
is about 2 miles in circumference, not above 50 foot above the water at the
highest part, being all rock and steep round. To the S With. lies a long Rock
about 10 foot above water, and not above 20 from the Island; against it is the
Entrance up to the Castle very steep and winding; having two Gates, and a
strong counterscarp before you pass into the main Castle. The Wall about the
Island is low but very thick. To the With. is a Mount called il Marteningo, about
30 Foot high, and 300 in circumference very strongly built with small stone and
mortar, which has above 1000 shot in it. They are so fast in, that it would
endanger its falling, if they should be pulled out. The Castle is quite round
the Islett, wherein and upon the Marteningo are about 120 Guns planted. The
Turks have several times attempted to take this place, and to that purpose in
the year 1659 they built 6 Castles, three on each side of the Bay, from whence
they continued to batter it, and secured the Harbor so, as no Ship or Gally
could come to bring them succor, but what in the night small Vessels would
adventure to get in. In the year 1665 the Captain Basha attempted to assault
it; he came with 45 Gally's, but durst not adventure to land any men. He caused
the Gallys to batter that part which is to Sea-ward, while on the other side
they continually fired from the 6 Forts. The Venetian Fleet was so dispersed
that they could not come to relieve them. The besieged were much straightened
for provision, but most for want of water, for above a month they had but a
pint a day, and were so disheartened that they near inclined to surrender the
place. But it pleased God to show them his goodness in a signal manner, by a
shot from the Enemy, which did cleave a rock in sunder at the bottom a little
above the Sea, out of which sprang a water which sufficed them to drink. I have
seen the Fountain, and drank of the water, tho it is not very pleasant. Several
Officers that were in the Island, when it was Besieged avouched this for a
truth; It being noted in the Venetian History of Suda. The winds coming about
Northerly the Venetian Fleet came from Zante, forcing the Turkish Gallys to
retreat. The Captain Basha was killed with a great shot, upon which the Army
broke up, and retired to Canea. The Vizier in his march from Canea to Candia
past by here, and with admiration beheld the place, but would not attempt any
thing against it, saying, it was not worth the men which had been already lost
against it. The Port is very commodious, being one of the largest in all these
Seas, and there is very good anchor-hold all over the Bay. At the bottom of
which are salt panns. The Turks have here a small Tower, where are two or three
servants of the Customer of Canea, to see that no goods are carried away; which
have not paid Custom at the City. In time of peace they have all provissions
from Canea, at the market price, and there is a good Correspondence betwixt the
Inquisitore of Suda, and the Basha, who often send letters to one another. The
Governor of Suda has the title of Inquisitore Generale delle Isole di Levante;
Cerigo and Tine, being also under his Government, although there are Providetors
to both. The Venetians have no benesit from these Islands, but are at a
continual charge to maintain the Garrisons in each. The bottom of the Bay, they
call Cullatte.

A Relation of a Storm and great Deliverance at Sea, in a Voyage from NEW
ENGLAND.
IN the year 1683, I embarked aboard the Rose Friggot (Captain William Phipps
Commander) with my Brother Mr Edward Randolph who was sent to New England with
the Quo Warranto against the Charter of the Colony of the Massathusetts Bay.
About the 12 of September we departed from the Downs, and in 5 weeks arrived in
the Port of Boston, which is the Principal Town of all New England. Upon our
arrival a Court was called to consult how they should proceed, and it was
carried in the general, that they should defend their Charter at Law, and
resolved they were to defend it; which was all the answer that my Brother could
get from them. So he resolved to Embarque upon the first ship bound for
England, which was a small Pink called the Adventure, John Balston Master,
belonging to New England. The 12 of December we imbarqued; several other
Passengers were with us, viz. Captain Mark Talbot Son of the present Earl of
Tirconnel, (who came by land from New York to Boston) Mr William Wharton, Mr
Robert Johnson, and 4 or 5 men more with three women, one being with child near
her time, having with her two small Children. About 9 of the Clock in the
morning we weighed anchor, and with a fresh N With. wind got clear of the land by
Sun set. The wind continued favorable several days, and gave us hopes of a
prosperous and quick passage. When we were got to the height of the Western
Islands, our Master ordered a New main Sail to be brought to yard, which proved
too wide by two clothes; (or breadths of Canvas) so it was again taken down,
and first fair day it was fitted, and brought to the yard. The winds were
veerable for several days, and the nearer we came to the Channel, we found a
great head Sea, (i. e. a Sea coming against us) which made us fear we should
find Easterly winds. About the 20th of January, we judged our selves to be
about 100 Leagues to the Westward of the lands-end. The wind came up at East,
and continued for two days very stormy, so as we could not carry any sail
abroad but were drove to and fro', at the mercy of the sea, whose waves were
grown to that height, that we feared we should have been swallowed up in them.
The 23d the wind abated, we saw a ship which was to Leeward of us, and made
signs to speak to us, so we boar up, and coming to Lee-ward of them, found it
was an English ship called the President, which came from the East Indies, and
had been beating (i. e. striving against the wind) above 6 weeks in the
Channel. We came so near as we durst venture, when they begged of us for Gods
sake to spare them some provision for they were ready to perish: And
notwithstanding the seas run so high yet did they adventure to hoise out their
Pinnace with which 8 men came aboard our ship, representing to us the miserable
condition which they were in, being 80 persons aboard, who for a months time
had lived on a pound of bread for a week, and a pint of water a day each man;
most humbly did they beg that we would spare them some provision, otherwise
they must of necessity perish. So our Master gave them about 100 l of bread, a
Barrel of Bear, and promised them, that he would not go from them, but if the
weather were moderate he would supply them next day with what he could well
spare. All that night the wind increased, as next morning both the President
and we were forced to hand all our sails and hull (lie with our head to the
wind without any sail.) The 25th we lost sight of the President, and the
storm increased still more and more. The 26th about 4 of the clock in the
afternoon, a sea broak upon our ship, which carried away the wastes of the ship
(i. e. that part of the sides above the upper deck) even with the upper deck,
from the quarter deck to the fore Castle; the Boat, Capstern, Windess and
Sheat-anchor were washed away, my Chest was fast at the one side of the Cabin
door, and Mr Robert Johnsons at the other, were both washed away. The Master
immediately ordered the mizane-mast to be cut down, the better to keep the ship
before the wind; the sea had a free passage into the hold between the Timber
heads (i. e. topps of the ribbs of the ship,) to stop which we employed our
blankets and ruggs, continuing to pump, with both pumps, and all little enough
to keep our ship above water; none in the ship but were wet, and washed several
times by the sea. Never was a longer night seen to any of us, and the whole
night we were employed to keep the pumps going, fearing all our endeavors
would prove vain. About 4 in the morning one of our Pumps did suck, which was
the most comfortable news we could then expect, but yet we were not free from
fears least the Seas should wash away those ruggs which we had stoped in
between the timbers. Sleep was quite banished from our eyes all that night, and
when the morning appeared (which was welcomed with our great thanks to Almighty
God for the sight of another day) we endeavored to make a stronger resistance
against the seas, finding that the continual working of the sea had almost
washed away our ruggs, and what means to use, our confused thoughts knew not.
But God put into our Masters mind the two pieces of Canvas which our main-saile
was over charged with, which he ordered to be brought up, and when we had well
forced in the blankets and ruggs, then we spread the Canvas over it, nailing it
down with pieces of hoops at each side; all the time the sea washed the men who
were made fast with ropes, and by this means (Blessed be God) we kept our ship
free with one Pump continually going. The fury of this storm continued three
days, and three nights driving us above 200 leagues back again. January the
30th. the wind abated and veer'd about to the North-West, but the sea continued
high from the Eastward, so as we were fain to keep an easy sail, not to force
the ship into a head sea. February 3d the wind increased at W N With. all night.
We having only our two Courses abroad. Toward break of day, we handed our
maincourse, but before it was well secured the storm came so violently upon us,
that the Master ordered the fore-yard likewise to be lowered, but all their
strength could not get it down, nor was there any of the men that had a knife
(having only their drawers without pockets) to cut the sail (which they would
have done) so as it forced the head of the ship into the sea, and stopped her way
as a great sea poop't us (that is it broke over our Stern) and filled us, as we
all expected immediately to go down to the bottom, nothing but the Masts and
fore-Castle were above water, the Master stood by the remaining part of the
Mizan-mast, fastened to it with a rope, nothing but his head was above water;
and for a small time the ship remained without any motion, but God of his
infinite goodness was pleased again to draw us from the Deep. Our ship with
another Sea was lifted up, and our fore-saile was got down and stowed. We were
forced to bore holes between decks to let the water into Hold, and could not
Pump out in six hours time the water we received with that sea. We continued
without sail all that day, and the wind continued fair. The 8th. the wind
abated, and the seas were more moderate; so we hoised our Main-saile, with
which and our fore-saile, (both reeft) we stood in for the Channel, about noon
we saw a sail having but one mast, judged it to be a Ketch, but drawing nearer
found it was a ship in distress, having lost her main and mizane masts, several
Guns were fierd to give us notice of their great necessity, so we loosed the
reef (holes made to lessen the sail in stormy weather) of our main-saile,
steering directly toward them. About three of the clock in the afternoon we
came up with the ship, and coming under their Stern, the Master with the rest
of the men got up, upon the quarter deck, upon their knees, with stretched-out
arms, bare heads and a doleful voice, cried out to us to save them for the
Lord Jesus sake, for that their ship had six foot water in Hold, and could not
be longer kept above water. What heart but must relent at such lamentable
cries, and who could pass by, without doing them all possible. good! We
promised them to take them all in, desireing them to bring what provission they
could well save. They had but one Boat which was but small, and could not bring
them all together, so they resolved to come away as many as could, and those
who remained aboard, were to get provision ready to bring with them. The men
promissing the Captain to return with the boat and fetch their Companions,
which without their promise he would not have come out of the ship, and without
him they questioned if they should be received by us. The Master with 12 more
(being as many as could be in the Boat) came off, the seas run so very high, as
we thought it impossible the Boat could ever get aboard us, 4 men rowed and the
rest with hats and caps, hoave the water out of the boat, and so soon as they
came to our ship side, every one greedy to get in, let the boat knock against
our ship side, so as her leaks increased, and soon filled with water that none
of the men would adventure to return for their companions, but suffered the
boat to go a drift, which so much greived the Master and us all as was
unexpressible, he having nothing but a cap on his head made of a Napkin, not so
much as his Journal or any other book, ordering the Boatswain to bring them
with him. But there was no recovering the boat, and night coming on, we came so
near as we could to the ship, calling to the men to make a raft with boards,
and keep a broad a light, so as next morning we might endeavor to get them
aboard; but so soon as they perceived the boat was gone, and no hopes of
keeping the ship above water, they gave us a sad cry, which pierced the very
hearts of us all; but all our endeavors could not avail to help them. We lay
by them to wind-ward, they putting a broad a light, but in 3 hours after their
Companions had gotten aboard our ship, (being about eight at night) their ship
sunk, in which 5 men were lost. The ship was called the Green Friggat Captain
John Sugars Commander, who came from Virginia, wanting 7 weeks, and from that
Coast saw no other Vessel but ours. They had very bad weather all the way, lost
their mainmast and mizan-mast, in the same storm in which we lost the Wastes of
our ship; they had cast over board a great part of their goods, that were
stowed between decks, two Pumps were continually employed, and the water so
increased upon them, that they despaired of all hopes. One of the men being on
the stump of the mainmast to fasten a rope to get out more goods, he saw our
ship, which so rejoiced them, that immediately they put out their Colors firing
several Guns to give us notice of their condition. The Commander had all his
Estate in the ship, nothing was Insured, and he saved nothing but his life. Now
we were to consider how we should maintain such an addition of mouths, without
any supply of provision. But God Almighty the only Preserver of all things, did
provide for us. We had about a quarter of a pound of bread a day, meat twice a
week, and a point of water a day for a man. The Seamen were allowed something
more then the Passengers by reason of their continual labor. And as our
Provision was short, so was our Appetites abated. The Seamen whom we saved,
assisted at the Pumps easing us Passengers somewhat. We reckoned our selves
about 80 Leagues from the lands end, when we took up Captain Sugars and his
men. The 10th. of February we Sounded and found about 60 fathom water, and
having the wind at So. we stood in for the Channel, at night we Sounded again,
and found we were shot within Silly at the Entrance of Bristol Channel. At day
break we saw the land on our Starboard-side, which confirmed to us where we
were; The wind increased so as we could not maintain any other sail abroad but
our Courses, with which we stood off from the shore. About noon the wind veered
to the With. blowing so hard that we were forced to hand our Courses (low sails)
and drive with the Sea, every sea washing over us. It pleased God about
midd-night the wind came to the N With. so as we lay our head toward Silly, and
next morning found the Island on our Lee, so made sail with our fore-saile,
and past between Silly, and the main, and after all our great daingers (Blessed
be God) the 13th. of February we got safe into Plymouth Sound, and immediately
all the Passengers got ashore where (upon our bended knees) we acknowledged the
great deliverance which we received. Here we had the news that the President we
mentioned, which we met and relieved at sea, was forced ashore (in the Storm we
were in the 10th.) in Mounts-Bay, and of 80 persons only 2 saved, they were so
weak for want of provision as they could not hand their Sail. The woman with
Child hired a horse with a pair of panniers, in each she put a Child, her self
riding between them, and got safe to London, where in less then a Week she was
delivered of a Boy. What is remarkable more, is, to consider the great cold
which was this year over all these Seas, and the many Shipwrecks which
happened. The sea had a continual passage over us, so as our Deck was covered
with a green. Many a time and hour, have I stood pumping, with nothing but a
Coat, over my Shirt, and a pair of drawers, that the Seas have washed me to the
Wast, so was it with the rest of the Passengers, who were able to pump, and not
one who was troubled with cough or cold, notwithstaning we were several times
wet in the places, where we slept: Oh what tongue can express the loving
kindness, and the tender Mercys of our Good God to the Children of men:
Therefore to him alone, from whom alone comes all our help and comfort, be
ascribed all Honor and Glory World without end, Amen.

Distance of Places from Constantinople to London.
Leagues. FRom Constantinople to the entrance of the Hellespont 50 To the
Straight of Andros 70 To Cerico 60 To C. Mattapan 23 To Zante 60 To the
Guardiani at Cefalonia 14 To C. Spartiventa on Calabria 75 To Messina 14 To
Stromboli 11 To Pontia 60 To M, Argentato 41 To Elba 14 To Legorn 15 To Genova
30 To C. St Martine 194 To Alicant 15 To C. Palos 16 To C. de Gatta 30 792 534
In all 1326 Leagues. To Malaga 42 To Gibraltar 22 To Tangier 9 To Cadiz 20 To
C. St Maria 32 To C. St Vincent or the Southern C. 18 To Silly 270 To the
Lizard 16 To Plymouth 14 To the Start 7 To Portland 12 To Portsmouth 13 To
Beachy 18 To Dyngeness 8 To South Foreland 8 To the Downs 2 To London 23 534

An INDEX showing the Longitude and Latitude of the places mentioned in the Map
of Greece, for the easier finding them out. p. shows the page. C. the Capes, or
head-Lands. P. the Ports or Harbors. M. Mountains.
A
Long. Lat. ACro Corinthus 43 36 Adrianopoli 47 42 Aiton 41 37 Alamama ol.
Thorone 44 40 Alessia ol. Lissus 39 41 Albanopoli 40 40 Alsson 42 39 Alona 49
33 Ambracie 40 38 Amphipolis 44 41 Antivais ol. Antibarum and Dioclia 38 41
Antipatris 40 40 Antipachsu 39 38 Antigon 42 41 Andruzza 42 35 Antimilo 46 35
Andros p. 7. 47 37 Antiparos p. 23. 47 36 Aprobo 47 41 Apolonia 44 41 Arcadia
ol. Cyparissa 41 35 Armiro ol. Larissa 43 38 Argos 43 36 Arch built by the
Trojans now Tattar Bazar 44 42 Argentiero p. 34 47 35 Argostol 39 36 Astos 41
38 Asera 43 41 Aspro Spitti ol. Chaleos 43 37 Aspri Spiro 42 36 Athens 44 37
Ayasman ol. Elaea 50 39 B
BAgao 42 42 Bazar 43 42 Basilico. 43 36 Bajatzel 46 42 Barbasti 49 42 Bambara
50 41 Bakhair 50 39 Bazarkui 51 42 Ballat ol. Meletus where St. Paul called the
Elders of the Church Act. 20.17. 51 37 La Bastia 39 39 Balachi 52 38 Bergus 49
42 Belguir 48 42 Belvari 43 43 Belgrado in Alban. 39 39 Biston Lake 46 41 Bodna
42 40 Bodza 43 42 Bojon 44 39 Bognarbashe 53 35 Bodrou 50 36 Bosphorus of
Thrace 51 43 Bonavara 50 38 Bonifacia p. 77. 48 33 Brendike 47 41 Brindice ol.
Brundisium 36 40 Budoa ol. Butva and Buthoe 37 41 Butintro ol. Buthrotas 39 39
Bulgarkui 48 41 Bursa ol. Prusa 52 41 Bylaz. 42 41 C
Castle novo in Albania 37 42 Cast. novo in Candia 47 33 Catazzo 38 42 Cataro
ol. Afcrivium 38 42 C Linguetto 38 39 C. Colonne has its name from the pillars
of a Temple which are here entire. 45 36 C. Schilli ol. Scyllaeum 45 36 C.
Mattapan ol. Tenaria 43 34 C. St Anzolo ol. Mallea 45 35 C. Deucato 39 37 C.
Sidero ol. Cynosura 39 36 C. St Maria ol. Japygium 37 39 C. Crio ol. Xili 51 36
C. Salamon ol. Samonium 50 33 C. St Giovanni ol. Frons Arietis 49 34 C. Sassoso
ol. Dion 47 34 C. Melech. ol. Drepanum 46 34 C. Spada ol. Cyamum 45 34 Casopo
38 38 Castle Tornese ol. Chelonatos 40 36 Castles at the entrance into the
Gulf of Lepanto 41 36 Caminiz 41 36 Cardica. 43 38 Cakoa Ruins of a large
City; supposed to be Thespiae lying at the foot of M. Helicon dedicated to the
Muses. In the year 1674 I was here in company with Monsieur Girand Sr Giles
Eastcourt and Mr Francis Vernon. There are the entire Walls of 12 Temples and
the Foundation of a large Castle. To the South is a great Rock, in which
several Rooms are cut, which have places about 8 foot long, 2 broad and one
deep, all cut out of the same Rock, and are supposed to have been burying
places. Some Rooms have 6 partitions, some more some less. 43 37 Cavalla alias
Bucephalus, the latter name was given it by Alexander, and was the Port for his
Navy: formerly it was called Chalastra. Here are many fair and entire Cisterns.
Upon the top of the hill near the Town are vast walls which are supposed to
have been the bounds of Macedon and Thrace. It was one of the Keys of Macedon.
Here is a most stately and large Aquaeduct built by the Macedonian Kings, and
lately restored much for the better by one Ibrahim Basha. 45 41 Castle Rosso
ol. Caristus and Gerastus 46 37 Camizana 46 42 Candia ol Crete p. 69. 48 34
Canea ol. Cydon p. 88. 46 33 Calamata ol. Thurium 43 35 Caliva 46 33 Capsa 48
42 Calojero p. 59. 47 37 Casurin 44 40 Casura 44 40 Cassandria 44 40 Canistra
ol. Pallone 44 39 Callipoli 48 41 Candia City p. 80. 48 33 Candia Nova p. 80.
48 33 Carustaran 49 42 Caraborun 49 38 Casal 43 41 Calcedon 51 43 Camera 51 47
Carchi 51 35 Cassio p. 30. 51 34 Caramusal 52 32 Carabusa p. 94. 44 43 Carave
45 35 Cesalonia 39 36 Cerigo ol. Cythero 44 34 Cerigotta 44 34 Cepelizza 38 43
Chimera ol. Acro Caraunii 39 39 Chiarenza ol. Dimam 40 36 Chilafa alias Chifala
43 34 Chiackmakui 47 42 Churli 49 42 Chirry Bay 40 35 Chora 49 42 Christiana 47
34 Chesme 49 38 Chiauskui 50 39 Chirocari 41 42 Cherdack 49 41 Citella 39 38
Cycico 49 41 Cisamopoli 45 33 Clodiani 39 40 Clomene 40 37 Cleutona 43 38 Corfu
ol. Corcyra 38 38 Corza 40 39 Comarus 40 38 Coracco 41 36 Coddekui 48 42
Coprivatz 42 42 Corobia 42 40 Coniga 42 39 Cornice 45 33 Coron 42 34 Corinth 43
36 Coliza 40 39 Colosso hod. Conos 53 37 Contessa 45 40 Comoreina 46 41 Conkui
49 40 Constantinople alias Stambuol. 51 43 Colofon 50 38 Crissa 42 37 Cranza 40
42 Craina 38 41 Croja, by the Turks called Scandaroon, being the place of
Scanderbegh's birth: another Scandaroon is a Sea port of Aleppo. 39 41 Cumirsa
39 42 Cupa 46 37 Cularo ol. Salamis 44 37 Cuchuk Main 42 35 Cursolari ol.
Echinades. 40 36 D
DAgno ol. Thermidava 39 41 Dardanelle 49 41 Demitrado 43 39 Derrikui 50 41
Degnizlee 53 37 Delica 41 39 Delles ol. Delos p. 20. 47 36 Dibra ol. Deborus 41
40 Dictamo 45 34 Dill 52 42 Dolcigno ol. Olchinium and Ulcinium 38 41 Doria 45
40 Drivasto ol. Deremistarum 38 41 Drapano 40 37 Dragumesthyr 40 37 Dragusa 41
42 Drapane 41 36 Dragona 43 42 Dragonisi 49 37 Drusiballa 48 42 Dramish 45 37
Durazzo ol. Epidamnus and Dyrrhachium 38 40 Dubren. 43 37 E
ECcesso 41 40 Edessa 42 40 Edello 48 33 Edremitt 50 39 Egribugia 42 40 Elatrio
40 38 Elvina 40 41 Elmacan 49 39 Elbassan 39 40 Embola 43 40 Enigeck 48 42
Eneo, ol. Aenoss founded by Aeneas formerly a great City, now a small Town most
inhabited by Greeks. Here are the ruins of a large Temple. 48 41 Egina ol.
Enopia 44 36 Engurguick 52 42 Epichero 40 38 Ephesus hod. Ajasluck 50 38 St
Erino ol. Therasia p. 31. 48 35 Eretria 45 37 Eskibabba 48 42 Exemille or the
Istmus 43 36 F
FAnaro 39 38 Fano 44 40 Falconera 46 35 Fascio 45 40 Feres 47 41 Fodella 47 34
Fraschia 47 34 G
GAideronesi 50 33 Galipoli 36 39 Gaston ol. Elis 41 36 Galatta in Epirus 41 37
Galatta in Thrace 51 43 St Georgio d'Alberi 45 36 Girapetra p. 74. 49 33
Girmasti 50 41 Guistandil 43 43 Gira 51 35 Gnidus 50 35 Gomanizza 39 38 Gramata
38 39 Granca 43 40 Gurgusa 41 42 Guzell Hisar ol. Cum 50 39 Guardiani 39 36
Gyriscus 42 41 H
HAsagral 44 43 Halicarnassus Mausoleo now called by the Turks Assin Collosse,
51 36 Hellespont p. 65 48 41 Heraclea 49 42 Hilledrome 45 38 Hierapolis hod.
Pambook Kalasse. 53 37 I
JAgodna 41 43 Jannina in Epirus 41 38 Jannina in Jamboli 44 40 Jassula 51 36
Jassus 50 36 Ibar 40 42 Imbro p. 44. 48 41 Imrahoar 41 37 Ipsara p. 59. 48 38
Isalla 48 41 Ithaca hod. Theaca where are the ruins of Ulisses's Castle. 40 37
St Ixett 39 40 Islands in the Gulf of Smyrna p. 64. 50 38 K
KIrk Agatz 50 39 Kalburgi 52 39 Koshyenikui 52 38 L
LArissa hod. Yenneesheir 43 39 Labarinth p. 78 47 33 Lacanakui 44 41 Landineve
39 42 Leodicea hod. Eski hysar. 53 37 Lartachi 50 41 Larta 40 38 Langistro 45
41 Lampsacco 49 41 Lamedia 38 41 Levito ol. Lebinthos p. 24. 49 35 Legiton 44
37 Lepanto 41 37 Lero p. 57. 50 36 Levadia ol. Creusa 43 37 Lemnos alias
Stalimene p. 42. 47 40 Lipsina ol. Eleusis. The Ruins speak it to have been a
large and Glorious City. The Castle by the water side stood advantagiously to
command both City and Port. Alexander was so enraged with the Inhabitants, as
he would not suffer an entire building to remain. Here is a large Statue of the
Goddess Ceres, the Pedestal is close by, on it is cut in Basso Relievo the
manner of their Processioning in honor to her; being men two and two, with
lighted torches in their hands, barefoot and bare-head, their garments to
their knees, their hair of an indifferent length. 44 37 Lipso 45 37 Lodrin 39
41 St Luca Stiriotes a large Monostary where is a famous Church built by the
Emperor Rumanus. 42 37 Luffegelaer 46 41 Lunga 42 35 Lubatt 51 41 Lywick 46 43 M
SAncta Maura ol. Leucade 40 37 Maina ol. Leuctram 43 34 Magnesia of Sipolis 50
38 Malvasia ol. Epidaurus 45 35 Maximianopolis 46 41 Mauramuri 50 33 Malgara 48
41 Maeta 48 41 Marmara ol. Proconessus 49 41 Magnasea ad Meandrum 51 37 Marmara
51 38 Mandria 50 37 Mandugo 44 38 Macronisi ol. Cranea 46 37 Marathon 45 37
Mezzalunzi 40 36 Motropoli 42 38 Melazza 43 35 Megara 44 37 Melissi Monimento
being the ruins of a Mausoleo about a quarter of a mile round. 44 36 Megara 47
41 Melanto 37 42 Melotta 47 41 Metelino ol. Lisbos p. 44. 49 39 Melada 36 42
Mennamen 50 38 Menden 50 36 Mehaleech 51 41 Melass ol. Mylasa 51 37 Microviza
42 42 Milo ol. Melos p. 32. 46 35 Micone p. 14. 48 37 Misistra ol. Lacedemon 43
35 Modon ol. Methon 41 35 Modon 38 42 Modin 40 42 Monastier alias Tolie 41 41
Mon. Calidromus 42. 37 Mon. Nigri 38 42 Mon. Corax 41 37 Mon. Parnassus 42 37
Mon. Olympia in Thesalie 43 39 Mon. Pithagon 43 39 Mon. Helicon 43 37 Mon.
Cytheron 43 37 Mon. Canina 39 39 Mon. Sipolus 50 38 Mon. Tmolus 51 38 Mon
Micale 51 37 Mon. Latmus 51 37 Mon. Palamidi 44 36 Mon. Sfacia p. 85. 47 33
Mon. Olympian in Natolia 52 42 Mon. Tagetus 43 35 Mon. Santo ol. Athos. It is a
demi Isle only Inhabited by Greek Hermits and Caloirs who have 21 Monasteries
and two Hermitages. In the narrow neck of land, is a great Cross erected,
beyond which no woman must pass; Here are above 6000 Caloirs and Hermits, and
not a woman. 45 40 Montania 52 42 Morgo ol. Amorgos p. 23 48 35 Moruli 48 43
Moscolour is a small Village. In May here is the greatest fair in all Turkey,
which lasts 14 days, during which a Cadde comes from Larissa, Merchants come
from all parts of Turkey and Germany, some years upwards 20000 head of beast
have been sold here. The whole fair takes up above 3 miles of Ground. 43 38
Mullives 49 39 N
NAsso ol. Pegunthium 39 36 Naranza alias Narante 36 43 Napoli di Romania 44 35
Nattalico ol. Alizia 40 37 old Navarino ol. Pylus 41 35 Nampho p. 31. 48 35
Navarino new was built by the Turks in 1571 and surrendered to the Venetian
Forces in the year 1686. 41 35 Neo Castro 40 37 Neostria 46 42 Negro Ponte ol.
Chalcis p. 1. 45 37 St Nicolo 39 38 Nissa 41 43 Niscia 42 35 Nicopolis 45 41
Nicopoli 44 43 Niz 48 43 Nicaria p. 53 49 37 Niloni 46 37 Nixsia p. 20. 48 36
Nio p. 31. 48 35 Nizari p. 24. 50 35 Nicomedia hod. Esmitt 52 43 Nicae hod.
Isnick 52 42 Nimpha 51 38 Nonacris 41 36 Nosli. 52 37 Noman 52 38 O
OLerno 46 33 Ombla 37 42 Oronico 39 41 Orso ol. Oricum 38 39 Onocoro 40 39
Ottranto 37 39 Ovofo 45 40 Oxica 40 39 P
PAnormo 38 39 Pachsu 39 38 Patrass 41 36 Paracopolis 42 41 Palantia 42 38
Passava 43 35 Pachino 49 33 Pagana 43 34 Palio Castro 46 37 Paros p. 22. 47 36
Paris 49 41 Paxmando ol. Claude 45 33 Papasluck ol. Alexandria 49 40 Palermo 50
41 Patmos alias Palmosa p. 56. 49 37 Palamoot 51 39 Papa ol Besbicus 51 42
Petra-alba alias Petrina 40 40 Perga 41 36 Pella the place of Alexanders birth.
43 40 Pelaguisa 45 39 Peschera 38 39 Petane 50 39 Parasto 48 41 Pergamus hod.
Bergamo 50 39 Philitra 41 35 Phillippopoli 45 42 Philipi 45 41 Philidelphia
hod. Alah Shair 51 38 Piscopia p. 24. 51 35 Platamona ol. Aliacmon 43 39 Porta
Trojanna 44 42 P. Buffolo 45 37 P. Ternice 45 37 P. Raphti 45 37 Ponte Lungo 47
42 Policandro ol. Polyegos p. 31. 47 35 Ponte Grande 50 42 Ponte Piccolo 50 42
Porosolena 50 39 Polina ol. Cimolis 47 35 Prisba 40 42 Prausta 45 41 Prelippo
40 41 Previzze ol. Nicopolis was built by Augustus after his conquest over
Mark. Ant. 40 38 Prestino 38 42 Prodino ol. Prote 41 35 Prelippo 49 41 Prestina
41 42 Q
St Quaranti ol. Onchesmus 39 39 R
RAova 44 41 Ragusa old ol. Epidaurus 37 42 Rafanna 44 35 Resina 38 42 Retimo
p. 84 47 33 Rhodes p. 26. 53 35 Reseto 39 39 Rofeo ol. Alpheus 41 35 Rodisto
ol. Bysanthe 49 42 Ruins of Colofon 50 38 Ruins of Assum 49 39 Ruins of Troy,
They appear in several places for above 20 miles circumferance. The two
Villages of New Troy and Gaurkui are on two Hills, round the topps of which run
the foundations of walls, which most judge were 2 Castles, but the greatest part
of the ruins are in the fields, and woods over against Tenedos, which ruins the
Turks now call Eski Stambol, or old Constantinople, ol. Troas Alexandra. 49 40
Ruins of Bouron 46 41 Ruins of Chiarenza 40 36 Ruins of Baccus's Temple 48 36
Ruins of Jassus 50 36 Ruins of Hallicarnassus 51 36 Ruins of a Temple dedicated
to Apollo Didimeus. 52 36 Ruins of Sittia the third City in Candia before the
Turks took that Island. 49 33 S
SAzabiech 37 43 Sapienza ol. Oenussa 41 34 Salona ol. Delphi 42 37 Sabion 36
42 Sargiogle 42 40 Saseno 38 40 Sarabrod 43 42 Salonico ol. Thesalonica 43 40
Saminthus 43 36 Sacklee 51 38 Sardes hod: Sart 51 38 Samos p. 54. 50 37 Samo 40
36 Samandraichi p. 44. 48 41 Scarpanto p. 29. 51 34 Scuttari 51 43 Scuttari ol.
Scodra. It was surrendered in the year 1578. The Turks having besieged it above
two years, Storming it several times. It stands on a high hill. 38 41 Scupia
alias Uscopia 42 41 Scyro p. 57. 46 38 Scala Nova 50 37 Sciata p. 59. 45 39
Scio ol. Chios p. 46. 48 38 Scopelo p. 58. 45 38 Servizza 42 39 Seres 44 41
Segegick 49 38 Sersu p. 38. 46 36 Selembria 50 42 Serfante p. 38. 47 35
Semanlee 51 42 Sinitt 40 42 Sittia p. 72. 49 33 Sindo 43 40 Sidro Capse 44 40
Sidero 43 40 Simie p. 27. 52 36 Sicyon 43 36 Sira p. 42. 47 37 Smyrna 50 38
Soma 50 39 Sophia 43 42 Spinarso 38 40 Spina Longa p. 94. 49 34 Stibagna 43 41
Stagno 37 42 Stancoi ol. Coos p. 25. 50 36 Stalisi 39 41 Standia 48 34 Statoria
41 42 Stymphalis 42 36 Stampalia p. 30. 49 35 Strafade 40 35 Straga 40 40
Sucova 43 42 Suguth 48 42 Suda ol. Amphimalis p. 95. 46 33 Seleman 42 35 T
TAcktali 52 41 Tacktali 50 38 Talitada 45 38 Ternova 44 43 Tegea 43 36 Tenedos
or Tenedo p. 43. 48 40 Temine 44 36 Termia p. 38. 46 36 Terese 48 35 Theaca ol.
Ithaca 40 37 Thiguitz 42 42 Thermopoli or Bocca di Lupa, where Leonidas King of
Sparta with a small number of menoppose dres an army of a Million. 43 7 St
Theodoro p. 90. 46 33 Thebes hod. Stivee 44 37 Thassus ol. Thalassia p. 44. 46
41 Thebe 43 38 Thyatira hod. Akhysar 51 39 Tiria 51 38 Tine p. 8. 47 37 Tornova
42 39 Tornea 44 36 Trigovista 41 42 Tricola 42 39 Trapolizza ol. Megapolis 42
36 Tristola 43 41 Trait 45 42 Trebigna 37 42 Treich 46 43 Trales hod. Tekekui
52 37 Tripolis 52 38 Troy old and new 49 40 Tricca 41 38 Turkmanli 49 42 V.
VAlona ol. Aulon 38 40 Varilidi 40 37 Vattica 44 35 Udagrade 39 40 Verzaraz 46
43 Verbino 42 40 Velichi 40 38 Vitrenizza 41 37 Vitolo 43 34 Viscardi 39 37
Vizmo 44 38 Vitolie 42 41 Vodizza 40 38 Volando 43 40 Volo ol. Pagasa 43 39
Vostizza ol. Aegium and Hyperisia 42 36 Voorlah 49 38 Urego 39 40 Uranopole 44
40 Y
YAkaria 43 34 Yenikui 45 41 Ynige. 46 41 Z
ZAnt ol. Zacinthus 40 36 Zagura 43 39 Zapanta 41 37 Zarnata 43 35 Zarfrana 49
35 Zea p. 40 46 36 Zinara p. 24. 49 35 Zupan 37 42 Zyton ol. Thebae Pthiotidis
In September here is a very great fair esteemed to be the second fair in all
Turkey; lasts 10 days. Here are several great ruins, one seems to have been a
Temple, built square. 43 38

ERRORS.
Page 4. l. 19. for Petmesh read Beckmez. p. 8. line 21. for South East read
South West. p. 9. l. 3. for Colebitre, r. Cullebithra. p. 21. l. 3. for an r.
and p. 22. l. 3. for Bazo r. Baro. p. 26. l. 11. for Mote r. Mole. p. 42. l. 3.
for Cira r. Sira. p. 53. l. 7. for North r. South. p. 49. l. 20. for Sackes r.
Sakiz. p. 52. l. 14. for Cornet r. Coronett. p. 50. l. 19 for Mustalook r.
Muzdaluke p. 63. l. 7. for Basha r. Bashi, p. 80. l. 7. for Novo r. Nova.

FINIS.

