A DECLARATION OF THE COMMISSIONERS For Visitation of UNIVERSITIES, and for
placing and displacing of MINISTERS in SCOTLAND; Against Praying, or Preaching
for the pretended King of SCOTLAND: With some REASONS Given by some of the
MINISTERS of Edinburgh, why they cannot in Conscience omit to pray for Him:
Together with an ANSWER to the said REASONS, Wherein the unwarrantablenesse of
that practice is proved from the Word of GOD.

And the equity and necessity of the present proceedings of the COMMISSIONERS
in order to the public Peace, is cleared and justified to the Consciences of
rational and peaceable men.

By a Friend to the Commonwealth.

Printed at Leith, in the Year 1653.

BY THE COMMISSIONERS For Visiting UNIVERSITIES in SCOTLAND, and placing and
displacing MINISTERS.
BY virtue of an Order to Us directed from the Right Honorable the Council of
State, impowering Us to punish all such in the Ministry or Universities, as
shall be found reviling the present Government, or shall endeavor to debauch
or keep the People disaffected, by praying for the pretended King of Scots, or
his late Fathers Family, or by praying or preaching for a Monarchical
Government, by which they labor to weaken the just Interest of the
Commonwealth of England in this Nation, and to affix and fasten the
Common People in their late enmity and oppositions; (who are caused to err by
following such sowers of sedition) all which being contrary to the aforesaid
Order, and also expressly forbidden by the Word of GOD, which injoyns a
peaceable subjection to Civil Powers, and much more to those that the Lord
has now appointed over this Nation, to the Justice of whose Cause, his hand
has given a Divine and immediate Testimony in most memorable and many signal
Consequences. Wherein not only not to see and acknowledge the finger of GOD;
But on the contrary, maliciously to oppose the ways of his Providence, must
needs argue a very high degree of Ignorance or wilfulness: Therefore in
conscience of our Duty to GOD, as also in reference to a faithful discharge of
that Trust and Authority committed to Us, and for preventing the great
Inconveniences by such Enormous Practices in Ministers, and others for the
future, We do by these presents Declare to all Persons whom these shall or may
concern, That whosoever shall be duly convicted to offend in any of the
aforesaid Particulars after Publication of this Our Declaration, shall be
severely punished and proceeded against, as an Enemy to, and a Disturber of the
Peace of the Commonwealth; And to the intent that due notice may be given, We
do Order that these Presents be Printed, and Publicly Proclaimed at the Market
Cross at Edinburgh, and also that Copies thereof be sent to the several
Sheriffs in the respective Counties and Shires in this Nation* to be by their
appointment Proclaimed in the Chief Market Towns or Burghs within their
Jurisdictions, and to be affixed on the Market Crosses, or most Public Places,
whereby full obedience may be given to the abovementioned Orders, and none
concerned may pretend ignorance.

At Edinburgh, the second day of August, 1653.
SOME REASONS, Why the Ministers of Christ in Scotland, ought not to be
troubled for praying for the KING; And wherefore we cannot in Conscience omit
that Duty.
HAving seriously pondered, as in his sight, whose servants we are, the
practice of this duty now prohibited; We find, that we may not omit public
Prayer for our King, notwithstanding of the said Prohibition: And least our
practice be misconstrued, as flowing from ignorance or wilfulnes. We shall
first offer to wipe away that aspersion of pertinacy, and next show the grounds
which do fix us to this necessary duty.

As for the first. Our witness is in heaven, and our record on high, that it is
not out of any carnal design, or stubborness of spirit, that we continue
performing this d^ty. It were extreme folly needlessly to provoke the Power
under whose hand the Almighty has put us. If we durst advise with flesh and
blood [spare thy self] would sound loud in our ears, and quickly present
Overtures of yielding; but the terror of the Almighty, and his Oat^ lying on
our consciences, hold us on to this duty. 2. We conceive that our peaceable and
quiet deportment in our respective charges, does vindicate us from the
imputation of stubborness and sedition in this our practice. We have been no
hinderance to people under our charge, to hear the burdens in quietness, that
are laid upon them; Neither have we anywise stirred them up to tumults and
commotions. 3. The way wherein we have formerly walked, speaks herein for us;
unless constancy in conscientious principles be misconstructed, and nicknamed
Pertinacy. 4. The point is also manifest to every one who will soberly be
pleased to consider the Petition, or Petitions which we present to God for him;
which usually are for a sanctified use of the sad afflictions that lie on him,
and preservation from snares; his condition calling for this much at our hands.
Shall others in distress, captivity, and exile be remembered to God in our
public Prayers, and this be accounted a commendable duty: And ought it to be
accounted Pertinacy, not to cast out from the Prayers of Gods Church and
People, the distressed King, compassed with so great difficulties? 5. When we
call to mind our public Prayers for our late King in the midst of his
hostility against us, We marvel, if any who profess respect to tender
consciences, will offer to put the Messengers of Christ to trouble for a duty
bound on their consciences* and so little hurtful to any. Finally, they who do,
or forbear doing out of pertinacy and stubborness of spirit, can show no just
and weighty grounds of their acting or forbearance. But we offer these ensuing
grounds and warrants of conscience, whereupon we walk in this practice.

First, We look upon this performance as a duty, not only enjoined in the Word
of God, and established by the Law of the Land, in the Directory for Worship,
confirmed by Acts of Parliament; but also as bound upon our Consciences with
our own consent, both in the National, and Solemn League and Covenant, wherein
He also has entered with us; and therein, not only our own consciences, but
also the whole world are called on to witness with God (to whom the Oath is
made) to our reallity, sincerity, and constancy in performing our duty.

Secondly This Obligation has a new tie on our consciences to this individual
Person, by the Oath sworn by the Representative of the Land, in our Names, when
the Civil Securities unto Religion, and the Interests of Christ in his
Ordinances, were likewise confirmed unto us, by his Oath, as well as by Law.

Thirdly, As it is a great sin in any, to countermand that which God has
commanded, And to give order that a precept, which God has appointed to oblige
us always (though not to all times) shall never oblige, And that we shall
never give obedience thereto; So when such a command is given out, it is then
casus confessionis: Then to adhere to the Authority of Divine Precepts, is a
necessary testimony to the truth, and does oblige them more than ever, unless
we would obey men rather than God.

Fourthly, Ministers of the Gospel are the Ambassadors and Servants of Jesus
Christ, from whom they have their Commission which may not be l^mited nor
altered by any power on earth: For if in one duty, earthly powers can alter or
limit, they may as well do it in more: And if they may prohibit a duty, they may
also command that which is no duty, and so render us the servants of men, in
matters of God.

An ANSWER to a PAPER, Entitled, Some REASONS why the Ministers of Christ in
Scotland ought not to be troubled for praying for the King, and wherefore we
cannot in conscience omit that duty.
THat Concession in the beginning of your Paper, That the Almighty has put you
under the hand of another Power, is remarkable: But how well this
acknowledgment does accord with that practice of adhering to the Power which
the same Almighty hand has removed, is not apparent. The Question is not,
Whether you may pray concerning him, either for or against him in a Christian
way, as that GOD would show mercy to his Soul, and give him pardon of sin, and
repentance under that stupendous guilt of innocent blood which lies both upon
him, and upon his Fathers house, (and that in the judgment of your very selves)
and that GOD would humble him under those dreadful appearances of God against
him, in rejecting him from reigning over his people: But whether you may pray
for him as King of Scotland, and put up those favorable requests on his
behalf, which tend to preserve a precious and religious remembrance and
observance of Him in the Peoples minds. This is the manifest scope and sense of
the Declaration, which he that runs may read.

Now for this you say, We shall first offer to wipe away that aspersion of
pertinacy, and next show the grounds which do fix us to this necessary duty.

For answer whereto, we shall first remove the grounds whereby you labor to
prove that this is your duty, and then leave you to wipe off that aspersion of
pertinacy, if any lay it on you, as well as you can. For if the course be
warrantable; to persist therein is constancy: but if it be not warrantable, it
must needs be called by some other name.

Now for the grounds and warrants of Conscience, whereupon you walk in this
practice, you offer four: whereof indeed only the two first are arguments to
prove the conclusion, that you ought to pray for the man, whom you call King:
but the two last seem rather to be inferences from it, if they be any thing.

The two first are these, which we join together, because the same answer fits
them both.

1. We look upon this performance as a duty, not only enjoined in the Word of
GOD, and established by the Law of the Land in the Directory for Worship,
confirmed by Acts of Parliament; but also as bound upon our own consciences,
with our own consent both in the National and Solemn League and Covenant,
wherein he also has entered with us, and therein not only our own consciences,
but also the whole world are called on to witness with GOD to whom the Oath is
made, to our reality, sincerity and constancy in performing our duty.

2. This obligation has a new tie on our consciences to this individual
person, by the oath sworn by the representative of the land in our name, when
the civil securities unto Religion, and the Interests of Christ in his
Ordinances, were confirmed to us by his Oath as well as by Law.

To these in four words.

1. Whereas you allege the Word of God, we are most entirely willing to submit
this whole Controversy to the alone determination thereof, judging it most
unmeet, that things of man's making should stand cheek by jowl with the Word of
God. But because you point us to no place thereof, we will point you to one or
two, wherein that word commands subjection to, and prayers for the powers
that are in being. Romans 13 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
for there is no power but of God. 1. Tim. 2. 2. Let prayers be made for Kings,
and for all that are in authority. Wherein he seems directly to obviate and
prevent any scruple that might arise about the justness of their Titie, by
pointing them so plainly to the actual existence of powers. For they all knew
that the power which then ruled the world, was set up by a world of blood, and
Nero the present Emperor, as wicked a Tyrant as ever lived, but yet to submit
to him, and to pray for him, being under his power, was not in the Apostles
judgment any justification of the unwarrantable acquisition of his power. And
the Jews are commanded to pray for the peace of Babylon, when they were in the
hand of the Babylonians. Jer. 29 7. But you are in the hand, and under the
power of the Parliament, and therefore you ought to pray for them, for in their
peace, you shall have peace. But he whom you call King, is not King. He never
exercised any kingly power on this side the water, and now he exercises none
in the other part of Scotland, therefore he is not King. If it be said, that by
the Word of God he ought to be King, let it be showed where the Word of God
has intayled the Kingdom of England or Scotland upon the Family of the Stuarts.

2. For the Law of the Land, and Acts of Parliament for him; we wonder you
should speak of these, having been long since annulled by the Authority of the
Commonwealth. And how an Act of any authority can bind and be in force, when
there is no authority that will maintain it, is to us a riddle. Your Countreyman
Mr. Knox, who was as zealous against Tyrants as you are for them, and did help
the Grandmothers head to the same block upon which the late King lost his: He
tells Queen Elizabeth, that she had no warrant of conscience to rule the Nation
of England, neither from her birth, nor from any consuetude Laws and Ordinances
of men; and that if she stood upon that, the Almighty would cut her off, but
from the providence of GOD, calling her to that place of power, who rules in
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and gives them to whomsoever he will.

3. For your Oaths and Covenants (to him or to his fathers house, for there is
the same reason of both) they were either absolute, that he should be King
whether GOD would continue him or no; or else conditional, that you would
submit to him, unless and until the overruling wisdom of God should pull him
down, and set up another power in his place. If they were conditional, the
obligation is void, because the providence of God has actually dispossessed
him. But if they were absolute, what warrant is there in the Word of God for
such Covenants? Can you promise that any man shall have power whether God will
or no? All your Oaths and Covenants were conditional. For such Covenants for
the maintaining of any power upon earth, wherein there is no condition neither
expressed nor understood, concerning giving way to the all-disposing power and
providence of God, are no better then confederacies against God, and therefore
horrible snares, and not to be defended, but repented of, lest you be found
fighters against, and resisters of the mighty Hand of God.

Suppose a quarrel arise between me and my neighbor, which of us shall be
master, and he says and swears that I shall never be his master, and I say
that he shall never be mine. If hereupon we fight, till that I have laid him
f^at upon his back, and bound him hand and foot; if now when my sword is upon
his breast, and his life is at my mercy, if I shall ask him, whether he will
yield now, and he shall refuse, is it not an unparaleld piece of pride and
stubborness? But suppose he shall say, that his conscience is so tender that he
cannot yield to me because of his oath, will not every one say, that his oath
binds no longer but whilst he was in a capacity to resist, but by my prevailing
over him, the obligation cease. For now God puts him under me, and so
determins the case on my side.

Therefore, though you have made a Covenant, and bound it with an oath, for
your King and against the Commonwealth, yet now God has cut that knot in
pieces, by putting you in another capacity from what you were then. And you may
remember what solemn appeals were made to Heaven, both by you and us, when we
came first amongst you, for our most just and necessary defense, wherein the
Lord has been pleased to give a gracious and favorable testimony to the
sincerity of the desires of his poor servants; and will you not rest in his
arbitriment to whom you have so often referred the cause? to whose
determination both you and we did with joint consent refer it. And the Lord,
that righteous Judge has been pleased to judge between us. Though much may be
argued against the works of God, when considered singly and alone, yet when the
works of God are superadded testimonies to the truths revealed in his Word, and
when they are answers of the prayers and appeals of all his people on both
sides, and favorable smiles upon the actings of some of them following him in
untroden paths of difficulty and danger, the same dispensations being also
distinguishing rebukes and frowns upon others, under these and the like
circumstances, they will argue very much. And though it is hard for man, and it
may be too hard for us to manage this argument, to the complete conviction of
opposers and gainsayers, and to improve it to the utmost in all the conclusions
which it will reach unto* yet to those who observe the Name of God in his
works, and are not biased with the guilt of former actings to this or that
interest, it will reach to conclude the present question, and abundantly
praeponderate to the purposes and resolutions of men, if laid in the balance
with them.

4. Whereas you are pleased to mention The securities which the King gave you
for the Interest of Christ and Religion, It will be hard to demonstrate to any
rational understanding, how there could be any real safety to Religion, in
receiving him to reign with his former principles, and with his unchanged
heart amongst you. The World took notice in your treaties with him at the
Hague, and here too* how little trust you had in him, and how you held him off
at first, but how you could afterward, (unless a mouthful or two of Court air
will make wise men mad) dispense with your consciences to soder with him when
you saw no real change of heart and self-abhorrence in him for his former
wicked ways, and how the emitting of a feigned, forced Declaration, upon
minatory importunities, could be just encouragement for the admitting of a
blood-thirsty and blood-guilty man (for so in that Declaration you have made
him to confess) to reign over you, you will find a time to consider all these
things.

Your 3. ground is this: As it is a great sin to countermand that which God
has commanded, and to give order, that a precept of God shall not oblige, so
when such a command is given out, it is then casus confessionis, then to adhere
to the authority of divine precepts, is a necessary restimony to the truth. But
if ever these words afford a Ground and Warrant of conscience to walk in that
practice of praying for the King, your assumption which you seem to understand
and beg, must be proved, viz. That God has given you such a command to pray
for him, which the Declaration countermands: but till then, this Proposition
will not reach the Conclusion aimed at: If you be Confessors, what truth of
Christ do you suffer for? name it. Is it not this, that Charles Stuart ought to
be King? and will you indeed stop your own mouths from preaching the blessed
Gospel of Christ, rather then be silent about that man's interest? Will you not
preach Christ, unless you may preach up Charles Stuart also? Now the Lord lay
not this sin to your charge. You will suffer upon the lowest and most
uncomfortable account that ever men did. For you suffer clearly upon the Royal
interest; not for the testimony of JESUS, not for any truth of Religion, but as
witnesses to the Kings Interest.

Your 4. ground is this: That Ministers of the Gospel receive their Commission
from Jesus Christ, which earthly powers cannot alter nor limit. For if in one
duty, then in more; and if they may prohibit a duty, they may command that
which is no duty.

And here still you take it for granted, That it is a duty to pray for that
Titular King; but you should have proved, that when you were made Ministers,
Christ did put this into your Commission, and then you had said something.
Surely a Popish exemption of the Clergy from under the arm of the secular
power, is not that which you drive at. For then you would never have alleged
Statutes and Acts of Parliament as oblieging you in conscience to the King. But
this is certain, that that which formerly was, or which now is a duty, may
cease to be a duty, not through any humane prohibition, but through a
providentiall alteration of the state of things. The woman (says the Apostle)
is bound by the Law to her husband so long as he lives, but if her husband be
dead, she is freed from that Law, Romans 7. 2* 3. And therefore your selves also
upon this account of the revolutions of providence, do find a present freedom
of conscience to desist from some former actings, to which you thought your
selves formerly obliged by the Covenant.

And this may suffice for the removal of the grounds and pillars of this your
practice of praying for the King, whereby you offer to prove that it is your
duty. Which being not yet done, we will put you into a way for the future, by
cutting out your work for you, and laying open the true state of the
controversy before you in a very few words.

If ever you will prove (therefore) that it is your duty to pray for the King,
and no duty to pray for the Commonwealth, you must prove these two things:

1. That every subject ought not only to look at the visible existence, but to
be satisfied in his conscience about the title of the Magistrates that rule
over him, before he pray for them, or yield subjection to them.

But contrary to this, it has been already proved from the Word of God, that
it is warrant enough to any man's conscience to pray for Authority, and quietly
to submit himself thereto, if that he has sensible assurance of his being in
the hand thereof. The Apostles word is, (...) which signifies, the powers that
are in being.

But secondly, when you have done this, which in this Paper you do not once
attempt, which was a strange oversight, you must also prove,

2. That the King has a just title to Authority here, and that the Parliament
has no just title.

Now for this, there are four allegations usual. 1. His birthright. 2. Acts
of Parliament for him. 3. The pretended injustice of the War against him. 4.
The Solemn League and Covenant. These are the most usual weapons of defense in
this Cause.

But each of these must be maintained and made good by that un-erring rule of
the written Word of God, before they will overcome the understandings, and
convince the consciences of conscientious men. Therefore if you have any thing
to offer from the Word of God for the maintaining of them, produce your cause,
says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob. The
Lord now calls you to bring it forth; which till it be done, we conceive,

1. That birth gives no title to Magistracy. That every beggars brat in the
highway, upon that single consideration of his birth, has as much title to
the Kingdom of Scotland, as the children of Charles Stuart.

This conceit of a birthright unto Magistracy (unless that God confer a title
upon such or such a family, as he did upon David's) is one of the blind
principles of tyranny, nourisht in men's consciences, through Popish darkness,
and now that God is discovering the mystery of Antichrist, and unravelling that
whole web of Iniquity, which is woven and made up of two threeds twisted
together, viz. civil and spiritual slavery: he has begun to discover this
also. If some families in the World had the faculty of begetting wise children,
and fit for government, there were some color of reason, why their birth
should give them a right, viz. because it gives them a fitness to govern. But
we see that wise men beget fools.

But you will say, Parliaments may intail the Crown, and give a title to such
or such a family, though God by immediate designation do not. But then you must
prove this. And then we add,

2. That it may be proved both from the Scriptures, and from common sense, that
it is both unlawful and impossible for any Parliament to make such an Act as
shall bind the hands of their successors. And the reason is this, Because that
no Humane wisdom is able to foresee all the future Inconveniences that may
arise; and therefore no Humane Constitution can be, or ought to be unalterable.
The next Power may disannul it. Therefore the King has no title upon this
account: For the Commonwealth has repealed those Acts. But if you say, The
Commonwealth does not lawfully succeed your Parliaments; then

3. You fall upon the business of the War; which if you will undertake, you
have many difficult things to prove, and that under the heavy disadvantage of a
contrary testimony from Heaven; whereof one is this, that that man had some
rights in England. For this was part of the quarrel, whereas we know that he
had no Rights there, neither by the Word of God, nor by the Laws of our Land.
And therefore the War was just. For the English Army did not march a step
against you, though there were other just provocations, till your Commissioners
had patcht up the business with him at the Hague, asserting I know not what
pretended Rights of his in England.

But 4. If you will needs be tried by the Solemn League and Covenant, a weapon
at which you seem to be very expert, we must then cut you out some more work,
viz. 1. To prove that your sense is the true sense of it. 2. If you prove that,
then you must prove that the Covenant it self was a lawful thing; when you
have justified your disobedience to Authority, by the Covenant, you must then
justify the Covenant it self by the Word of God.

We perceive, that many who talk much of the Covenant, understand it no better
than those Highlanders, who having summoned a Castle, and being asked in whose
name they summoned it: they answered, In the Name of the Solemn League and
Covenant. And truly they seem to us to understand it little better, who say, We
are tied by the Covenant to resist the Power that rules over us, to enforce
your Presbyterian way upon the whole Nation of England, to preserve from
justice that grand Delinquent, who slew with the edge of the sword so many
thousand innocent persons. For he shed innocent blood very much, till he had
filled the streets of Jerusalem from one end to another, and the whole Land
therewith in all the Cities and Coasts thereof, besides his sin in building up
again the high places, and in rearing up altars for Baalim

But by this time you see your work, and what you must prove, if every you will
justisie your present ways before God or men. And yet we must tell you once
more, That when you have proved all the rest, you have proved nothing, if you
leave out the first, as you have done in this your Paper.

And now to proceed to the rest of it. That one passage only seems worthy of
most particular Animadversion where you think fit to mention your peaceable and
quiet deportment, and that you have in no wise stirred up the people to tumults
and seditions; which, if it be a true and sincere profession, fame has done
you very much wrong. But are not prayers for the King, under that name and
notion of King, under such designations of him, and in such expressions and
petitions for him, as may insinuate your respect toward him, to the people,
(for else, why did you allege your Oaths and Covenants, which you say, bind
you to him as your King, if you put up only such modest and innocent petitions
for him as may suit any wicked man in affliction?) And are not complaints of a
strange power in your prayers to God, and preachings to the people, are these
no ways nor means of disquieting and stirring up the people? We commend unto
you that of David: Lord, lead me in a way of plainness, because of them that
observe me. Psa. 27. 11. And the primitive Church, in Acts 2. 46. walked in
simplicity and singleness of heart. But if your future deportment shall attest
and make good the truth of this your profession, that which is past will be
forgotten and forgiven. But for men of reputation to relinquish and abandon
that Interest, we are apprehensive how much it may reflect upon their honor and
wisdom in tampering with it so long, in complying with it, and cleaving to it
at the first; and we have seen Conscience pretended, when such an Interest has
layn at the bottom, which is hypocrisy. From which, as also from pertinacy in
your way, there is no better way to purge your selves, that it may not seem to
cleave to you, as Naaman's leprosy to Gehezi for ever, than by submission to
the Powers that are, and supplications for the City wherein you live: in the
peace whereof you shall have peace. For the present let us briefly commend to
your most serious thoughts these four Considerations in reference to the matter
in hand.

1. What a fruitless and sad mistake of the nature of your work it is, to pray
and preach up particular interests among your people, when you should preach
the saving truths of the Gospel to their souls. Alas! what profits it to the
business of Faith and Repentance and Spiritual union and communion with the
Lord Jesus, to cry-up the King, or to cry-down the Commonwealth? Will you
cease to preach the Gospel rather than cease to preach up Charles Stuart? We
mourn for you before the Lord in this thing, and the Lord Jesus help you in it.
Would the Spirit of God thus forsake you, and leave you to such a sinful and
dreadful mistake, were there not something wherein you have first forsaken him?
Now the Lord help you to look into your hearts, and to consider your ways, and
to make diligent search. Sure we are, that you are sadly and strangely below
and beside the business, the great business of Divinity in these impertinent
strifs about Civil Interests. And this is the first Consideration.

2. That the same obligation lies upon our consciences, to preserve the peace
of the Commonwealth, which, you say, does upon yours to hold up the Interest of
the King: and with this advantage, that we are subservient therein to Him,
whose Almighty Hand has actually placed this power over you, and has not yet
born witness to the contrary Interest. For we will remember the Name of our
God, and his wonderful works: we will often make mention of the loving
kindness of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the
Lord has bestowed on us and done for us, according to his mercies, and
according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. And indeed, it is a matter
of conscience with us, not to betray, nor to wrong, or weaken that Cause
through over much indulgence, to which God himself has born witness. We do
believe that the present Cause of the Commonwealth, has much of the Interest
of Christ wrapped up with it. And, though to tender consciences, dissenting from
us, we show much favor and forbearance; yet Conscience, you know, is not the
rule, but the Word of God. And though we hope better things of you, yet there
be two sorts of consciences, which we conceive are not usually very tender,
viz. heretical consciences, and seditious consciences.

3. Consider how long a time of tenderness and forbearance you have had, ever
since the English power first prevailed here, and how long God and man has
waited on you; which we think will not be easily paralleled in the Histories of
former Ages. We have carried our selves toward you, (to the praise of his
Grace we speak it, because you call us, and compel us to it) not as Victors to
conquered Enemies, but as Brethren, to brethren, for so indeed we desire to
look on you* and no otherwise. And whatever there is in our power, wherein we
may further encourage you and strengthen your hands in the work of the
Ministry, we hope we shall rejoice to do it, for His sake whom you ought to
serve in the Gospel of His Son. If the Lord would incline your hearts to know
and to do his work; It is our hearts desire and prayer to God, that His good
pleasure may prosper with you. Wherein, we hope, we shall one day praise Him*
when the envy of Ephraim shall depart.

You may be as good, as holy as you will, you may enjoy all the Ordinances of
Christ in the liberty and purity of the Gospel, according to your hearts
desire, in your own way, and according to your own consciences. Which is more
than you would have allowed to us. We know nothing but the carcass of Church
Discipline without the life and power of it, yea, a mungrel Discipline made up
of Civil as well as Spiritual power, and so no better than a Gospel Monster that
has been taken from you: which warming in its bowels a fatal engine of
disobedience to that Civil Government which the Hand of the Almighty has set
over you, and which does plenarily possess and protect you, it could not with
any color of conscience or reason be any longer suffered in that exorbitancy:
But if your Discipline which has been wont to be a check to your Parliaments,
will hereafter learn to keep within its own channel, you may still practice it,
as sundry godly persons of the Presbyterian Judgment do at this day in England.
Therefore, why are the dissentions of Brethren like the bars of a Palace? What
shall be done for you?

You speak of burdens: We know not what you mean, unless it be the Monthly
Assessment, for there is no other burden laid on you, (but some we are sure are
taken off) which yet is no more for all Scotland, than for that one County of
Vlster in Ireland, viz. about 8000 l. a month. And you say, you have been no
hinderance to the people to bear the burdens in quietness that are laid upon
them: For indeed, why should you? Are not you the very men that lay these
burdens on them? The Assessment is for the Pay of the Army (though it goes but
a little way toward it.) The Army is continued, because the people are unquiet
and disaffected. But who is it that feeds these malignant humors, and keeps up
this disaffection of the people? who is it? and what will they answer for it in
the great day of account? Let us reason with you before the Lord a little.

This power which God has set over you for your good, and which the Lord knows
has been favorable and tender over you: What have returns been? Protection
requires allegiance by the rule of com*mutative justice. But have you not made
unworthy, unchristian returns upon them for that protection, for that love and
tenderness whereby they have sought to win you, by being their enemies in
heaven and earth? endeavoring to alienate the hearts of the Lords People from
them, and denying them that remembrance in your prayers, which they have often
begged, and which, you know, they would prize far more than that wicked man
does, for whom you cry, even to the Lord do you cry, but be answers you not.
And are there two greater unkindnesses in the world than these? And yet the
Lord has enabled them to forgive, or at least to forbear you hitherto. But
take heed, if you persist in your course, having had dreadful meetings with God
therein, lest you bring the matter to this pass, That God will not forgive
though we would. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob, thou shall be cut
off for ever, Obad. 10. Now it may be ingenuity may work in you; but if nothing
will break your hearts, you will find to our grief, and to your trouble, that
the patience of mortal men is finite.

4. Consider sadly, how little benefit and advantage arises to the Interest of
Jesus Christ in Scotland, yea, what real dis-service you do to Him, by your
adhering to that Man, whom the Lord by a mighty Hand has taken from you, and
by dis-accepting his kindness therein, and in casting forth the branches of
that bloody House, which has been a plague to this Nation from the days of
your forefathers. If you accept not the Instruments who did it, or approve not
the manner of their proceedings therein, yet why do you not rejoice for the
thing it self? All the world knows that you were innocent enough about it. We
know not any Magistracy at this day appearing upon the Earth, to whom the Lord
has given a more abundant and immediate Testimony, and for whose establishment
he has more gloriously revealed and made bare his own Arm from Heaven, and who
have further engaged in protecting and promoting the Interest of Jesus Christ
in the world, then this which you resist, and whose hands you labor to weaken.
But will you be the men of al others, who hinder the Kingdom of God from
coming? God forbid. As for this Man, Heaven and Earth are witnesses, that you
have don your duty to him, (if so you call it) even to the utmost; both day and
night have seen it. You have wept over his grave long enough. Therefore we
leave with you, beseeching Him to set it home upon your hearts, that which the
Lord said to Samuel, (1 Samuel 16) How long wile thou mourn for Saul, whom I have
rejected from reigning over Israel.

FINIS.

