Imprimatur,

November 20. 1663. WILLIAM MORICE.

A General Collection OF DISCOURSES OF THE Virtuosi of France, Upon Questions
of all Sorts of PHILOSOPHY, AND OTHER Natural Knowledge.

Made in the Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious
Persons of that Nation.

Rendered into English by G. HAVERS, Gent.

LONDON,, Printed for Thomas Dring and John Starkey, and are to be sold at
their Shops, at the George in Fleet Street near Clifford's-Inn, and the Miter
between the Middle-Temple-Gate and Temple Bar. 1664.

To the Honorable ANCHITELL GRAY, Esquire
IF it be compliance with Custom that induces me to a Dedication of the ensuing
Discourse, it is obedience to Reason that moves me to inscribe them to your
Honorable Name. They are the ingenious Productions of the most accomplished
Gentlemen of our Neighbour-Nation, and so could not be more fitly presented
then to One of our Own, who to the advantages of a most Illustrious Descent,
has conjoined whatever is particularly excellent in Many. That celebrated
Aphorism of Plato, which pronounces Felicity to that State wherein either the
Philosophers are of chief dignity, or those of chief dignity are Philosophers,
holds no less true in the Commonwealth of Learning then in Political
Governments. Arts and Sciences, when cultivated by Persons of quality, not only
derive luster from the rank of their Professors, but acquire enlargement of
Territory by their Conduct: Heroic souls disdaining the enslaving formalities
practiced hitherto by the Sovereigns of the Schools, and by the restoration of
Freedom, laying open the way to Conquest. I shall not undertake to determine
whether the restitution of Philosophical Liberty began first by the French, or
by some great Personages of our own, particularly the renowned Lord Bacon (from
whom it is said, not improbably, their Descartes took the grounds of his new
Theory) but it is certain that his way of Experiment, as now prosecuted by
sundry English Gentlemen, affords more probabilities of glorious and profitable
Fruits, then the attempts of any other Age or Nation whatsoever. But as it
would be a fault in me to insist upon Comparisons, so it will be an injury in
such as shall think you, Sir, any way concerned in these Discourses, either
upon the account of their Matter or Translation. It Is true, they are extremely
well fitted both for Instruction and Pleasure, they handle weighty Questions
with great facility; and what would be a load in the ordinary modes of Writing
thereupon, is here as fully and substantially delivered, and yet with exceeding
Elegancy and perspicuity; but however commendable in themselves, 'twere
criminal to think that you need them; but, on the contrary, I well understood
that the Book needed you; and therefore I must humbly beg your pardon, if I
have herein been too forward for its Interest by this Dedication, as also for
my own in taking upon me so publicly the quality of,

Sir, Your most humble and obedient Servant, G. HAVERS.

The Publisher of the Ensuing Conferences,
THinks it his Duty to advertise the Ingenious Readers, I. That they are the
Productions of an Assembly of the Choicest Wits in France, whose design it was
to rescue the Liberal Sciences from the bondage of Scholastical Obscurities,
and to render Things intelligible without obliging the studious to the
unpleasing and perpetual Task of first surmounting the difficulties of Exotic
Words. To which purpose they judged fit to establish this as a principal Law of
their Discourses, That only the French Language should be used therein, in
order to cultivate and improve the same; and this, in imitation of the Greeks
and Romans, whose writings are abundant evidences of the same Practice. II.
That amongst the Arguments for the several Opinions upon each Question, it was
thought fit to wave the alleging of Authorities, except upon some very special
occasion. It being observed, that the heaping Testimonies together serves
commonly for Ostentation rather then Strength; and, (to omit the consideration
of Brevity) if any man speaks Reason, it ought to suffice without another
Authority to recommend it. Besides, that Nothing has been found more
prejudicial to the Improvement of Philosophy, then the attributing too much to
the Magisterial Sayings of an Author of Great Name. In which regard likewise,
these Virtuosi have acted with no less Prudence then Modesty, in leaving the
Determination of each Question to the judgment of the Reader, who is made the
Arbiter of the Dispute, and may, in the grateful Variety of Opinions, freely
give his suffrage to That which shall seem to him founded upon the most
convincing Reasons; or else having them all before him, establish a better of
his own. III. That these Gentlemen, leaving the way of arguing by Mode and
Figure to Colleges, have chosen to propose their sense in the freest and most
natural form of Speech, as being most suitable to Conferences, and less subject
either to the captious fallacies, or pedantical janglings and heats, resulting
from Disputes by Syllogism. To avoid which also the better, care was taken that
every one might have this Persuasion, That he was no-wise interessed to
maintain his Sentence upon any Point; but being once produced, it was as a
thing exposed to the company, and no more accounted any man's Property, then
Truth it self, the common subject of all their Inquiries. IV. That, as to the
Promiscuous Variety of the Questions discussed in each Conference, and the
immethodical series of them all, if it be not excuse enough that the
Discoursers were French Gentlemen, and besides, willing in civility to gratify
one another by leaving the choice of Subjects free, the Reader is desired to
believe, that there wanted not particular occasions for every one, though they
appear not upon the paper. Besides, that it seemed most expedient not to be
confined to the Laws of Method, since the Compliance therewith in comprizing
the Sciences in Systems and Bodies, (as they call them) would have required the
intermixture of many Questions less considerable and delightful; and indeed is
found by Judicious Men to have been a great Obstacle to the Improvement of
Philosophy. V. Lastly, The Publisher craves Pardon of the Readers that he has
forborne to divulge the Names of the Persons of Honor, who held these
Conferences weekly on Mondays at Paris, it being the principal condition which
they required of him; Some, that the judgment of their opinions might be left
free to every one, which the knowledge of the Authors commonly prepossesses;
and Others, out of desire secretly to discover what Sentiment the public would
have of theirs (like the Knights Errant of old, who sought under borrowed Arms)
leaving their Names to be conjectured by such as found any thing in them for
which to desire it: but All, through a Modesty as commendable in respect of
themselves, as injurious to the Public.

EUSEBIUS RENAUDOT, Counselor and Physician in Ordinary to the King of France,
Doctor Regent of the Faculty of Physic at Paris.

THE CONTENTS.
CONFERENCE I. I. OF Method. II. Of Entity. Page 1 CONFERENCE II. I. Of
Principles. II. Of the End of all Things. Page 5 CONFERENCE III I. Of Causes in
general. II. Whence it is that every one is zealous for his own Opinion, though
it be of no importance to him. Page 12 CONFERENCE IV I. Of the First Matter.
II. Of Perpetual Motion. Page 18 CONFERENCE V I. Of Resemblance. II. Whether it
behooves to join Arms to Letters. Page 24 CONFERENCE VI I. Of Fire. II. Of the
Universal Spirit. Page 31 CONFERENCE VII I. Of the Air. II. Whether it be best
for a State to have Slaves. Page 38 CONFERENCE VIII I. Of Water. II. Of Wine,
and whether it be necessary for Soldiers. Page 44 CONFERENCE IX I. Of the
Earth. II. What it is that makes a Man wise. Page 51 CONFERENCE X I. Of the
Motion, or Rest of the Earth. II. Of two Monstrous Brethren, living in the same
Body, which are to be seen in this City. Page 57 CONFERENCE XI I. Of the little
Hairy Girl lately seen in this City. II. Whether it is more easy to resist
Pleasure then Pain. Page 64 CONFERENCE XII I. Of three Suns. II. Whether an
Affection can be without Interest. Page 71 CONFERENCE XIII I. Whether
Melancholy Persons are the most ingenious or prudent. II. Which is most
necessary in a State, Reward or Punishment. Page 77 CONFERENCE XIV I. Of the
Seat of Folly. II. Whether a Man or Woman be most inclined to Love. Page 83
CONFERENCE XV I. How long a Man may continue without eating. II. Of the Echo.
Page 89 CONFERENCE XVI I. How Spirits act upon Bodies. II. Whether is more
powerful Love or Hatred. Page 95 CONFERENCE XVII I. Of the several fashions of
wearing Mourning, and why Black is used to that purpose rather then any other
color. II. Why people are pleased with Music. Page 103 CONFERENCE XVIII I. Of
the Original of Winds. II. Why none are contented with their Condition. Page
109 CONFERENCE XIX I. Of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea. II. Of the Point of
Honor. Page 115 CONFERENCE XX I. Of the Original of Fountains. II. Whether
there be a commendable Ambition. Page 121 CONFERENCE XXI I. Of Dreams. II. Why
Men are rather inclined to Vice then Virtue. Page 127 CONFERENCE XXII I. Of
Judiciary Astrology. II. Which is least blameable, Covetousness or
Prodigality. Page 133 CONFERENCE XXIII I. Of Physiognomy. II. Of Artificial
Memory. Page 139 CONFERENCE XXIV I. Which of the Five Senses is the most noble.
II. Of Laughter. Page 144 CONFERENCE XXV I. Of the Diversity of Countenances.
II. Whether Man or Woman be the more noble. Page 150 CONFERENCE XXVI I. Whether
it be lawful for one to commend himself. II. Of Beauty. Page 157 CONFERENCE
XXVII I. Whether the World grows old. II. Of Jealousy. Page 163 CONFERENCE
XXVIII I. What is the greatest Delight of Man. II. Of Cuckoldry. Page 169
CONFERENCE XXIX I. Whence the saltness of the Sea proceeds. II. Which is the
best Food, Flesh or Fish. Page 174 CONFERENCE XXX I. Of the Terrestrial
Paradise. II. Of Embalmings and Mummies. Page 180 CONFERENCE XXXI I. Whether
the Life of Man may be prolonged by Art. II. Whether it is better to be without
Passions then to moderate them. Page 185 CONFERENCE XXXII I. Sympathy and
Antipathy. II. Whether Love descending is stronger then ascending. Page 191
CONFERENCE XXXIII I. Of those that walk in their sleep. II. Which is the most
excellent Moral Virtue. Page 197 CONFERENCE XXXIV I. Of Lycanthropy. II. Of the
way to acquire Nobility. Page 203 CONFERENCE XXXV I. Of feigned Diseases. II.
Of regulating the Poor. Page 209 CONFERENCE XXXVI I. Of the tying of the Point.
II. Which is the greatest of all Vices. Page 214 CONFERENCE XXXVII I. Of the
Cabala. II. Whether the Truth ought always to be spoken. Page 220 CONFERENCE
XXXVIII I. Of the Period, called Fits of Fevers. II. Of Friendship. Page 226
CONFERENCE XXXIX I. Why all men naturally desire knowledge. II. Whether
Permutation or Exchange be more commodious then Buying and Selling. Page 230
CONFERENCE XL I. Of Prognostication or Presaging by certain Animals. II. Why
all men love more to command then to obey. Page 238 CONFERENCE XLI I. Of
Comets. II. Whether Pardon be better then Revenge. Page 244 CONFERENCE XLII I.
Of the Diversity of Languages. II. Whether is to be preferred, a great stature
or a small. Page 251 CONFERENCE XLIII I. Of the Philosophers stone. II. Of Mont
de piete, or charitable provision for the Poor. Page 256 CONFERENCE XLIV I. How
Minerals grow. II. Whether it be best to know a little of every thing, or one
thing exactly. Page 262 CONFERENCE XLV I. Whether the Heavens be solid or
liquid. II. Whether it be harder to get then to preserve. Page 268 CONFERENCE
XLVI I. Of Vacuity. II. Of the Extravagance of Women. Page 274 CONFERENCE XLVII
I. Of the Virtue of Numbers. II. Of the Visible Species. Page 280 CONFERENCE
XLVIII I. Whether every thing that nourishes an Animal ought to have life. II.
Of Courage. Page 286 CONFERENCE XLIX I. Whether there be Specifical remedies to
every Disease. II. Whether Tears proceed from Weakness. Page 292 CONFERENCE L
I. Whether Colors are real. II. Whether is better, to speak well, or to write
well. Page 298 CONFERENCE LI I. At what time the year ought to begin. II. Why
the Lodestone draws Iron. Page 309 CONFERENCE LII I. Of a Point. II. Whether
other Animals besides Man have the use of Reason. Page 315 CONFERENCE LIII I.
Whether there be more then five Senses. II. Whether is better, to speak, or to
be silent. Page 319 CONFERENCE LIVE I. Of Touch. II. Of Fortune. Page 325
CONFERENCE LV I. Of the Taste. II. Whether Poetry be useful. Page 331
CONFERENCE LVI I. Of the Smelling. II. Of Eloquence. Page 337 CONFERENCE LVII
I. Of the Hearing. II. Of Harmony. Page 343 CONFERENCE LVIII I. Of the Sight.
II. Of Painting. Page 349 CONFERENCE LIX I. Of Light. II. Of Age. Page 355
CONFERENCE LX I. Of Quintessence. II. Which is the most in esteem, Knowledge or
Virtue. Page 361 CONFERENCE LXI I. Which is hardest to endure, Hunger or
Thirst. II. Whether a General of an Army should endanger his person. Page 367
CONFERENCE LXII I. Of Time. II. Whether it is best to overcome by open force, or
otherwise. Page 373 CONFERENCE LXIII I. Of Motion. II. Of Custom. Page 379
CONFERENCE LXIV I. Of the Imagination. II. Which is most powerful, Hope or
Fear. Page 384 CONFERENCE LXV I. Of the Intellect. II. Whether the Husband and
Wife should be of the same humor. Page 390 CONFERENCE LXVI I. Of Drunkenness.
II. Of Dancing. Page 396 CONFERENCE LXVII I. Of Death. II. Of the Will. Page
402 CONFERENCE LXVIII I. Of the Magnetical Cure of Diseases. II. Of Anger. Page
408 CONFERENCE LXIX I. Of Life. II. Of Fasting. Page 414 CONFERENCE LXX I. Of
Climacterical Years. II. Of Shame. Page 419 CONFERENCE LXXI I. Why motion
produces heat. II. Of Chastity. Page 425 CONFERENCE LXXII I. Of Thunder. II.
Which of all the Arts is the most necessary. Page 431 CONFERENCE LXXIII I. Of
the Earthquake. II. Of Envy. Page 437 CONFERENCE LXXIV I. Whence comes
trembling in men. II. Of Navigation and Longitudes. Page 441 CONFERENCE LXXV I.
Of the Leprosy, why it is not so common in this Age as formerly. II. Of the
ways to render a place populous. Page 447 CONFERENCE LXXVI I. Of Madness. II.
Of Community of Goods. Page 452 CONFERENCE LXXVII I. Of Sorcerers. II. Of
Erotick, or Amorous Madness. Page 457 CONFERENCE LXXVIII I. Why the Sensitive
Appetite rules over Reason. II. Whether Speech be natural, and peculiar to Man.
Page 461 CONFERENCE LXXIX I. What the Soul is. II. Of the apparition of
Spirits. Page 466 CONFERENCE LXXX I. Of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness. II.
Whether there be any Art of Divination. Page 471 CONFERENCE LXXXI I. Of
Chiromancy. II. Which is the noblest part of the Body. Page 475 CONFERENCE
LXXXII I. Which is most powerful, Art or Nature. II. Whether Wine is most to be
tempered in Winter, or in Summer. Page 480 CONFERENCE LXXXIII I. Of Baths. II.
Whether the Wife has more love for her Husband, or the Husband for his Wife.
Page 485 CONFERENCE LXXXIV I. Of Respiration. II. Whether there be any
certainty in humane Sciences. Page 489 CONFERENCE LXXXV I. Whether the manners
of the Soul follow the temperament of the Body. II. Of Sights or Shows. Page
495 CONFERENCE LXXXVI I. Of the Dog Days. II. Of the Mechanics. Page 500
CONFERENCE LXXXVII I. Whether the Souls Immortality is demonstrable by Natural
Reasons. II. Whether Travel be necessary to an Ingenious Man. Page 505
CONFERENCE LXXXVIII I. Which is the best sect of Philosophers. II. Whence comes
the diversity of proper Names. Page 512 CONFERENCE LXXXIX I. Of Genii. II.
Whether the Suicide of the Pagans be justifiable. Page 517 CONFERENCE XC I. Of
Hunting. II. Which is to be preferred, the weeping of Heraclitus, or the
laughing of Democritus. Page 522 CONFERENCE XCI I. Whether heat or cold be more
tolerable. II. Who are most happy in this World, Wise Men or Fools. Page 527
CONFERENCE XCII I. Which is most healthful, moisture or dryness. II. Which is
to be preferred, the Contemplative Life or the Active. Page 531 CONFERENCE
XCIII I. Of the spots in the Moon and the Sun. II. Whether it is best to use
severity or gentleness toward our dependents. Page 536 CONFERENCE XCIV I. Of
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. II. Whether all Sciences may be profitably
reduced to one. Page 544 CONFERENCE XCV I. Of the diversity of Wits. II. Of
New Years Gifts. Page 548 CONFERENCE XCVI I. Of Place. II. Of Hieroglyphics.
Page 554 CONFERENCE XCVII I. Of Weights, and the causes of Cravity. II. Of
Coat Armor. Page 559 CONFERENCE XCVIII I. Of the causes of Contagion. II. Of
the ways of occult Writing. Page 566 CONFERENCE XCIX I. Of Ignes fatui. II. Of
Eunuchs. Page 571 CONFERENCE C I. Of the Green Sickness. II. Of Hermaphrodites.
Page 575
THE First Conference.
I. Of Method. II. Of Entity.

I. Of Method.
EVery one being seated in the great Hall of the Bureau, Report was made, That
the Resolve of the last Conference was, to Print the Matters which should be
proposed henceforward, and the Disquisitions upon them which deserved it; As
also that for the bringing in of all the most excellent Subjects that are found
in the Sciences, and for the doing it orderly, the Method requisite to be
observed therein should this day be taken into consideration: The practice of
which Method was likewise thought fit to be begun upon the most Universal
Subject, which is, Entity. Wherefore every one was entreated to set cheerfully
about opening the way in this so pleasant and profitable an Enterprise.

The first Speaker defined Method [The succinct order of things which are to be
handled in Arts and Sciences] and said that it is of two sorts; One, of
Composition, which proceeds from the Parts to the Whole, and is observed in
Speculative Disciplines; The other, of Resolution, which descends from the
whole to the parts, and has place in Practical disciplines. He said also, that
hereunto might be added the Method of Definition, which is a way of defining a
thing first, and then explicating the parts of its definition: but it
participateth of both the former.

The second said, That besides those two general Methods, there is a particular
one, which is observed when some particular Subject is handled; according to
which it behooves to begin with the Name (or Word;) Distinguish the same by its
diverse acceptations; then give the Definition, assign its Principles and
Causes, deduce its Proprieties, and end with its Species or Parts.

After this some dilated upon the Method of Cabalists, which they begin with
the Archetypal World, or Divine Idea; thence descend to the World Intellectual,
or Intelligences; and lastly, to the Elementary, which is, Physics, or Natural
Philosophy.

That of Raymond Lullie followed next. And here the Difference of humane
judgments came to be wondered at. Most other Nations could never fancy this
Art which he calls Great and Wonderful, and yet the Spaniards profess it
publicly at Majorca, in a manner engrossing it from all other places. He
makes the same to consist in thirteen Parts. The first of which he calls the
Alphabet, from B to K; to each of whose Letters he assigns, 1. a Transcendent
after his mode, 2. a Comparison, 3. a Question, 4. a Substance, 5. a Virtue;
and 6. a Vice; as to B 1. Goodness, 2. Difference, 3. Whether a thing is? 4.
Deity, 5. Justice, 6. Covetousness. To C, 1. Greatness, 2. Agreement, 3. What
it is. 4. Angel, 5. Prudence, 6. Gluttony, and so of the rest. The Second Part
contains 4. Figures; The Third Definitions. Then follow Rules, Tables,
containing the several combinations of Letters: The Evacuation, Multiplication,
and mixture of Figures; The 9. Subjects; The Application; The Questions; The
custom and manner of teaching; which I should deduce more largely unto you,
but that they require at least a whole Conference. In brief, such it is, that
he promises his disciples that they shall be thereby enabled to answer ex
tempore (yet pertinently) to all questions propounded unto them.

The fifth said, That there was no need of recurring to other means then those
of the Ordinary Philosophy, which makes two sorts of Order, namely, one of
Invention, and another of Disposition or Doctrine, which latter is the same
thing with the Method above defined. And as for the Order of Invention, it is
observed when some Science is invented, in which we proceed from Singulars to
Universals: As, after many experiences that the Earth interposed between the
Sun and the Moon caused a Lunar Eclipse, this Universal Conclusion has been
framed, That every Lunar Eclipse is made by the interposition of the Earth
between the Sun and the Moon.

An other alleged that Method might well be called a Fourth Operation of the
Mind. For, the First is the bare knowledge of things, without affirmation or
negation; The Second is a Connection of those naked Notices with Affirmation or
Negation. The Third is a right disposing of those Propositions and their
Consequence; which if it be necessary, it is called Demonstration. And the
Fourth is the Series of those Demonstrations, in such manner that those on
which others depend are the first: as it is seen in the Elements of Euclide.

Also the Lord Montagne's Method was alleged, who learnt the Latin Tongue
from the Cradle, no person speaking to him but in that Tongue. So was the
Cyropaedia of Xenophon, where the Lessons are the Practice of Political and
Military Virtues, which serve more to form the Judgment of Children then the
Memory.

II. Of Entity.
The First Hour being spent in these Remarks, the Second was employed in
discoursing concerning Entity, which was explicated by this Series, so much the
more agreeably to the Company, for that they observed such a Contrivance of it
that the end of the preceding Period is the beginning of the ensuing.

All Power requires to be reduced into Act;

Act is a Perfection;

Perfection is the accomplishment of that which is wanting;

There is wanting to Man Felicity;

Felicity is, to be united to his Principle;

He is united to his Principle when he is made like unto it;

He is made like unto it by Science;

Science is acquired by Demonstration;

Demonstration is the knowledge of a thing by its cause;

To know a cause, it is requisite to seek it.

It is sought when we admire it.

We admire that of which we are ignorant.

We are ignorant because of difficulty.

Difficulty, among other causes, arises from Disproportion.

Disproportion proceeds from hence, that our Mind is one and finite, and the
things which it ought to know are various, yea infinite. Wherefore it ought to
reduce all things to one general, which is Entity, called by the Latins Ens;
Which being known and subdivided imparteth to us the distinct knowledge of all
things which depend thereon.

The second added, That Entity is that which is. For the knowing of it, it is
requisite to consider its Principles, its Proprieties, and its Species.
Principles are of two sorts, viz. Either of Cognition; or of the Thing. A
Principle of Cognition is, That which causes us to know a thing; As, That the
Whole is greater then it is Part. The Principle of a thing is that which
constitutes it; as the Rational Soul, and the Humane Body, are the Principles
of Man. The Principle of the Cognition of Entity (which is the sole Principle
in Metaphysics) is this; It is impossible for one and the same thing to be and
not to be at the same time. The Principles of the Thing are Essence and
Existence. Essence is that which causes a Thing to be that which it is; As,
Reasonable, Animal, (or Living-creature) is the Essence of Man, because it
causes a Man to be a Man. Existence effects that a Thing exists forth of its
causes.

The Proprieties of Entity are Three; One, True, and Good. One, that which is
not divided in it self, but is different from every Thing else. True, is that
which falls under knowledge. Good, that which is convenient or suitable to
each thing.

Entity is divided into Real and Imaginary.

Real Entity is either actually, or in power.

Actual Entity is either Increated or Created.

Created Entity is either Substance or Accident.

Substance is that which subsisteth by it self.

Accident that which cannot be naturally, but in another.

Substance is either Incomplete, which is but a part; or, Complete, which is a
Whole.

The Incomplete are the Matter and the Form; The Complete, that which is
compounded thereof.

As the deduction of each of the abovementioned points was going to be made,
it was Remonstrated, That these Matters being not easy to be apprehended, nor
otherwise expressed then in Scholastic terms, (which we would avoid) it
seemed meet to pass to things more pleasant, running over the rest as lightly
as possible; And yet to pursue both the Methods above mentioned. The Company
therefore concluded to treat Of Principles, and Of the End of all things, in
general, at the next Conference.

At the hour of Inventions one presented himself and made this overture. I
offer to cause any one whatsoever, Man or Woman, of competent age, to
comprehend in eight hours, ( viz. one hour a day, for avoiding the ryring of
the Mind) a perfect Logic, wherein shall be contained all the Precepts of well
Defining, Dividing, and Arguing; All the kinds of Arguments, and the places
from whence they are drawn; Namely, the Definitions and Divisions of the
Vniversals, of the Causes, of the Opposites, of the Whole, etc. Their Axioms,
and the limitations of the same, with an Abridgement of Categories. I offer
likewise to teach perfectly the Sphere, and all the Principles of Geophraphy,
in two hours; so that afterward the person shall be able to make use of Maps
and Books for knowing the Circles, Zones, and Climates; besides the Parallels
and Meridians for finding the degrees of Longitude and Latitude, and other
things pertaining to Geography. I will also teach Moral Philosophy in twelve
hours; Metaphysics in ten; but for Natural Philosophy, I ask four times as
much time.

Another said, That to let pass these Undertakings (which he judged very
daring) there is a great difference between Wisdoms and Knowledge; Memory
principally contributing to the Latter, as Judgment to the Former. That he
proposed a Method to instruct a Child in Wisdom, the Guide and Stern of
Humane Actions.

That all things in the World are either Necessary or Contingent: The former
are immutable, the Rules concerning them few, the seeds of them within our
breasts, consequently soon learnt and easy to retain: Provided the unconstant
and irregular multitude of contingent things come not to interrupt the
Production and Growth thereof; As it happens by the thorns of Sciences which
Solomon, for this reason, says were invented to serve for a vain Labor to
Men. Sciences, in which there is always room for disputing; because if you
except their Principles which they borrow from that Wisdom, all the rest in
them is but probable and problematical. I conceive therefore that the true
Method of Instructing a Child is to begin by informing his Judgment with the
Rules of things Necessary. For which purpose, he must be taken void of all bad
impressions; between six and seven years is a fit Age. In the smooth Table of
this Mind is to be written, in good order, the service of God and the King,
Honor, Justice, Temperance, and the other Virtues. When this Mind has been
educated in the Maxims appertaining to each of those Heads; As, That nothing
is hidden from God; That it is better to dye then to revolt from the service of
the King; That after Honor there is no more loss; It will be requisite to draw
for him out of History Examples of such as have been rewarded for performing
the same, and punished for failing therein. In the mean time, care must be
taken that no evil or dishonest thing be spoken or done before him; if it
happen otherwise, chastisement and blame ought to follow the Offenders. This
being done, then only when the precepts which were necessary to his education
shall have taken such deep root in his Mind as not to be stifled by the
multitude of others; My Method proceeds to furnish him with those of the
Liberal Sciences. But with this order again, that (for the same reason) the
Rules be not confounded to him with Exceptions; but that these latter be then
only taught him after he has well comprehended the former.

For conclusion, there was an overture of a Way to teach by Playing, from the A
B C to the sublimest Sciences. The Proposers reason was, that the best Method
of Sciences is that which takes away Difficulties, the principal of which is,
The tediousness of Study. That there is nothing less tedious then Play, for the
sake of which both great and small oftentimes lose their rest and food. That
'twas the intention of the first Authors, that Children should learn as it were
playing, instead of the great rigors which cause them to study against their
inclination, with the loss of time, and other inconveniences observed therein.
That hence the Place of Learning retains still in Latin the name of the Play
of Letters, and the Regents Masters of the Play. Ludus Literarius.
Ludi-Magistri.
Then he desired of the Company of Commissioners to receive their Judgment
upon the Book which he had made upon this Subject; and the same was delivered
into their hands for them to make their report thereof, that day seven night.
After which all were desired that they would please to report there at the
following Conferences the Inventions which they conceived likely to profit the
public, with assurance that the honor and benefit thereof should be secured
to themselves: and so the Company was dismissed.

CONFERENCE II.
I. Of Principles. II. Of the End of all Things.

I. Of Principles
THese five several acceptions of Principle were first considered.

I. As it is taken for a Cause, especially the Efficient, even that of all
Things, and which has no Beginning, namely, God; who also being the End of
all, is upon that account called Alpha and Omega.

II. For the beginning of quantity; as a point is the beginning of a Line.

III. For the beginning of some Action; as the first step is the beginning of
the race.

IV. For that which is not made of it self, nor any other; but of which all
things are made.

V. For that of which a thing is made, is composed, and is known. Which
definition comprehends the Principles of Generation, Composition, and
Cognition. For according to the Order of Nature a thing is made before it is
and it is before it is known.

The Second said, That the Principles of Entity and Cognition are the same. For
in that they constitute the thing, they are called the Principles of Entity;
and inasmuch as Conclusions are drawn from them, they are called Principles of
Cognition; Nevertheless deriving their original the one from the other: As from
this Principle of Cognition, Nothing is made out of nothing, it is concluded,
That then there must be a First Matter.

The Third said, That that distinction of the Three Principles of Generation,
viz. Privation, Matter, and Form, (whereof the first and the last are
contraries, two only of Composition, viz. the two last) does not signify that
there are three Principles of the thing which is made; Seeing that in the
instant that a thing is made, to be making (fieri) and to be made (factum esse)
are the same. Since then the thing made has but two Principles, that which is
in making has no more: Privation being but a Condition requisite to
Generation, as the Agent, the End, and some other External Principles are.

The Fourth said, That our Mind alone does not make distinction between those
three Principles, but they differ in reality. Those who say Privation is more a
Principle of Generation then the rest are mistaken, in that they make
Generation participate more of Nonentity then of Entity. But it is not, seeing
it arises out of the former to tend to the latter, being in truth neither the
one nor the other. He added, that the Principle of Cognition is either First,
or Second. The First proves all, and is proved by none; it is the basis of all
Sciences, and has two conditions; namely, that it can neither be denied nor
proved. As it cannot be denied, That of two Contradictories one is true, and
the other false. Neither can the same be proved, because there is nothing
beyond it, or more clear and evident. The Second Principles are those of the
Sciences, which they prove, as themselves are proved by the first Principle.
For example, That Principle of Physic, Contraries are cured by their
Contraries, proves this, Evacuation cures the diseases caused by plenitude;
and it self is proved by that other Principle of Natural Philosophy, to which
it is subordinate, that Action is only between Contraries; which is again
proved by this, That Action tends to render the Patient like to the Agent.
Which if it be denied, it is answered that if the Agent do not render the
Patient like to it self, then this latter would not be altered, and so not be a
Patient: Which cannot be, by the first Principle of Knowledge; That a thing
cannot be, and not be, at the same time.

The Fifth divided Principles into those of Logic, which constitute a
Definition, viz. The Genus and the Difference; into those of Physics, which
constitute corporeal things, viz. Matter and Form; into those of Metaphysics,
which are Act and Power, Essence and Existence, and the Nature and Inherence in
all Accidents; And lastly, into Principles Mathematical, which are a point in
continued quantities, and an Unite in Numbers.

The sixth framed this Question, Since every thing that has a Beginning has
also an End, how is Number, which has a Unite for its Beginning, Infinite? It
was answered by another, That that infinity of Number is not in Act, as its
Beginning is, but only in Power. For when it is said, That there is no Number
so great, but may be made greater to infinity, this ought not to be accounted
more strange then that other Proposition, which is also true, viz. That a
Quantity which has a Beginning may be divided without End; There being no Body
so small but may be divided again into a less: For that some thing cannot be
resolved into nothing, as of nothing cannot be made some thing naturally.

This matter was ended with another division of Principles into General and
Particular. The General (said they) are some times, but indiscreetly,
confounded with Causes and Elements. For every Principle is not a Cause, nor
every Cause an Element, nor any Element a Principle: Although every Element be
a Cause, and every Cause be a Principle, External or Internal. That every
Principle is not a Cause, appears by Privation, which is a Principle
(notwithstanding what has been otherwise argued) by the Maxim above alleged;
That Action is only between Contraries. Principles then must be such. Now the
Matter is not contrary to the Form; Therefore Privation must. That every Cause
is not an Element, is clear by the Final and the Efficient, both of them being
extrinsical to the Thing; And nevertheless an Element is the least part of the
Thing in which it is in Act or in Power. It is also manifest that an Element is
not a Principle, for it is compounded, and corporeal; which a Principle is not.
Particular Principles are as various as there are several things in the world.
So the Principle of Divinity is the Faith; Of Physic, to preserve the Man and
destroy the disease; Of Law, that which is according to Nature, Reason, and
Custom: The Principle of Understanding is Natural Evidence; those of Economy,
lawful acquisition and use of Goods; Of Politics, Policy, Prudence applied to
right Government; Of Prudence, that which is expedient to do or avoid, The
Principles of Mathematics are its Axioms; As if, of two equal tfiings, you
take away from one as much as from the other, the remainder shall be equal.

The Principles of History are Experience and Humane Faith: Of other Arts and
Disciplines, their Rules and Precepts. The Principles of Man as Man, are the
Body and the Soul; as a mixed Substance, the Four Elements; as a Natural, the
Liver; as Vital, the Heart; as an Animal or Sensitive, the Brain; as
Reasonable, the Intellect. The Principles of an Argument are the Major and the
Minor. The End is the Principle of rational Actions; as the Matter in things
Natural, and the Idea in Artificial.

II. Of the End of all Things..
The Second Hour was employed in discourse touching the End; concerning which
it was said, First, that End may be taken as many ways as Beginning;
Improperly, for the corruption of some thing (therefore, says Aristotle, Death
is not an End, but a term) Properly, it is the Good whereunto all things tend;
and it is either first (as, to make a medicine) or last (as to cure.) Things
which can tend to this End are divided into four Classes. Some are furnished
with Reason, but not with Sense; as the Angels or Intelligences: Others have
Reason and Sense, as Man: Others have Sense without Reason, as Brutes: Others
have neither Sense nor Reason, as all the rest of the Creatures. Only the two
former Agents, namely, Angel and Man, act formally for some End; because they
alone have the four conditions requisite for so doing; viz. 1. Knowledge of the
End; 2. Knowledge of the Means which conduce thereunto; 3. A Will to attain it;
And 4. Election or Choice of those Means. Others act indeed for it, but
improperly; as the Spider and the Swallow, though they frame only by a natural
Instinct, the one its Web, the other its Neast, yet attain their End; and the
Stone is carried by its own weight to its Center, which is its Good; but
without the abovementioned conditions.

The Second went about to prove that some of those Animals, which we account
void of Reason, Act formally for their End. For, said he, not to mention the
Elephant, recorded by Plutarch, who divided his Oats in his Master's presence,
as to show him that he had but half his allowance usually given him; or that
other who carried his Kettle to the River, and filled it with water, to try
whether it had not a hole in it; Nor the Ox, who never went beyond the number
of buckets of water which he was wont to draw; Nor the Fox, which lays his Ear
to the Ice to listen whether the water moves still underneath, before he trust
himself upon it; Nor the Heart of Crete, which runs to the Dittany, and, as they
say, with that herb draws the Arrow out of his flesh: Is it not for the good of
its young that the Swallow distills into their Eyes the juice of Celandine,
with which she recovers their sight? From whence Men have learnt to make use of
that herb against the filme of the Eye. Have we not Horses which let themselves
blood? Has not the Dog election of all the ways, whereof he chooses only
that which his Master went, who (with all the goodly prerogatives that he
ascribes to himself above him) cannot do so much as his Dog? And though the
Example be familiar, do we not see Domestic Animals whom the Apprehension of
beating keeps often from doing the mischief to which their natural inclination
leads them: Which is, not only to know an End, but amongst many to choose the
best.

The Third replied, That these Examples evidence the dexterity of Man's wit;
who knows how to apply them to his own purposes: But, in reality, it belongs
not to a Brute, what ever advantage it may get by commerce with Man, to know
its End as an End: Because the End is that which measures the Means; a Mean (
Medium) being not the better for that it is greater, but for that it is fitter
proportioned to its End. So when Hippocrates cures the Cramp with cold water,
the Cure is not less excellent then if he did it with potable Gold. Now this
Comparing and Measuring is a work of the Understanding.

The Fourth said, As all other Lights disappear at the Sun's, so all the other
Ends must give place to the Last, which is the Supreme Good, or, Felicity:
Which being either Natural or Supernatural, and this latter inexpressible; It
seems that the present Exercise ought to terminate in the former, namely,
Natural Felicity. This Beatitude, in what ever thing it is found, (for Saint
Augustine reckons above eight hundred Opinions about it, and yet more may be
added to the number) consists in the most excellent Action of Man, which cannot
depend but upon the noblest Faculties, the Understanding and the Will. The
Action of the former is to Understand; That of the Latter is to Will. The
Felicity then of Man consists in Understanding well, and in Willing well, or
Loving; For the pleasure of Enjoyment is but the relishing of this Felicity,
not the Felicity it self, as some have thought, with Epicurus, who is to be
blamed only in this regard: For it is neither true, nor credible, that a
Philosopher could so much forget himself as the vulgar imputes to him, to place
the Supreme Good in Pleasures, even the foulest and grossest.

The Fifth maintained, That it was unprofitable to speak of a Thing which is
not; Meaning, that pretended worldly Felicity which Men only fancy; and to
that Induction which Solomon makes of all the things in which Men seek their
contentment in vain, he added Authorities holy and profane; to show that there
is nothing happy on all sides; and that Solon had reason to say, That Felicity
is not to be found in this Life. Nihil est ex omni part beatum.


The Sixth replied, That what is said of the Miseries of this corruptible Life,
compared with the beatitude of the other eternal, ought not to be confounded
and taken absolutely. That the contentments of the one cannot be too much
vilifi'd, in respect to the ravishments of the other; of which the Pagans
themselves had knowledge enough (though under several names) by the sole Light
of Nature, to cause them to make the Fiction of the Elizian Fields; in
comparison of which they held that there was nothing but unpleasantness in this
world. But as the barbarousness of some Ages past is not to be compared with
the Politeness and Learning of this (and yet there was always some or other
amongst them that passed for an accomplished Man) so because there is a great
Felicity in Heaven, it is not to be inferred that there is none at all upon
Earth. Besides, we might (contrary to the received Maxim) accuse Nature of
having made some thing in vain, by Imprinting in Man that desire of becoming
happy in this world, if he cannot be so.

The Seventh said, That a Man is not happy by possessing some Excellent Thing,
but by the satiating of his desire. And therefore if (which is impossible) a
happy Man should desire some greater Good, he were no longer happy. As on the
contrary, he who can satisfy himself with the least Good, is nevertheless
happy. For it is the correspondence or sutableness which makes a Good to be
esteemed such. A Good may content the Appetite without reflection; but ifthe
conditions of the Enjoyment be reflected upon, it will suffice for the rendering
it perfect, that the Imagination exempt it from all imperfection, and attribute
all the Prerogatives to it which the Will desires in it; although it deceive it
self.

The Eight defined, The Supreme Good, (after Aristotle) The Action of the most
perfect Virtue, (which is Wisdom and Prudence) in a perfect Age and a long
Life, accompanied with the Goods of the Body and of Fortune, viz. Health,
Beauty, Nobility, Riches, and Godly Children. Not that the Felicity which is
called Formal consists in these Goods; but they serve for instruments and
ornaments unto it, as it is hard for a sick Man to become Learned, and for a
poor to exercise the Virtues of Liberality and Magnisicence.

The Ninth said, That in Morality the General Propositions are easier to be
assented to, then the Particular; Yea, that there are many to which all the
world assents in general terms; As, That Virtue ought to be Loved. For then we
willingly embrace it wholly naked. But by reason of the difficulties which
accompany it, Opinions become divided. The Prudent, who knows how to moderate
his Passions, wills it; The Incontinent, who pleases to let himself be
hurried by the torrent, wills it not; And denying in the retail what he
before approved in the gross, contradicts himself. Another wills and wills
it not, because he wills it too faintly, or does not sufficiently avoid the
occasions which lead to Vice. Thus all the world agrees, That it behooves to
render to every one that which belongs to him; but in the Application, the
honest Man does so, the dishonest does the contrary. There is not the Man but
confesses, That the End ought to be preferred before the Means which conduce to
that End; But one takes for an End that which another takes for a Means. The
Covetous (and indeed most Men) take Riches for the End, and Virtue for the
Means. On the contrary, the Good Man takes Riches for the Means, and Virtue for
his End. In my Judgment, the true Felicity of Man in this world comprehends
the Goods of the Mind, as the End; the Goods of the Body and Fortune only as
the Means.

There was none in the Company but seemed to have a Mind to speak something to
this great Question; of which, out of this Conference, even every particular
Man daily passes Judgment without speaking. For he who forgets all things
else, for the acquiring of Honor or Riches, or for the taking of his Pleasure,
does he not imply that he makes the same his Supreme Good? He that enters
into a Religious Order, does he not seek the same in Religion? And so of
others. But for that the Second Hour was slipped away, the Company proceeded to
determine the matter to be treated of at the next Conference; which was, for
the First Hour, Of Causes in General. And because there is observed in some,
even the most equitable, an ardour in maintaining their Judgments, though
every one was sufficiently warned that this place is to have no disputings, and
that none is obliged to uphold what he has said with new Reasons, (our
sentiments here being all free;) It was proposed, for the second point, to be
particularly inquired, Why every one desires to have his own Judgment
followed, though he have no interest therein.

The Hour designed for Inventions began with the Report made by the
Commissioners nominated at the last Conference for examining the Book
containing the Method of Teaching the Liberal Disciplines by Playing; The
Report was, That the Author seemed very capable of performing it, the Discourse
being written in a good style; That he evidently proved that the thing is
Practicable; as well in respect of the Method it self, which seems feasible,
as the Masters of the Play, and the Disciplines. But for that he discovered his
meaning only in the Art of Teaching to read and write, and not in the other
Disciplines, they could not give their Judgments upon more then what appeared
to them; and so much they liked and approved.

Then an Other presented a Latin Poem, Entitled, Fulmen in Aquilam,
containing, in Twelve Books, Twelve Thousand Heroic Verses, in which was
comprised the Life, Atchievments, and Death of the King of Sweden; Having first
Remonstrated to the Company that the great reputation of these Conferences
brought him from his own Country to this City, that he might correct, refine,
and polish his work, by the censure of so many great Wits as met there;
Conceiving there is no better way to write things for lasting, then to pass
them under the Judgments of many. Whereupon Commissioners were assigned to him
for that end, into whose hands he delivered his Work.

After which, to show that something has a Beginning, and yet no End; Another
offered to make appear the Experiment of a Perpetual Motion, if the matter
could be kept from decaying.

A Third answered, That making it of Glass, the matter would be Eternal, Glass
being the last Product of Nature; And that thence the Conjecture is probable
that the Earth will be vitrifi'd by the last Conflagration, and by that means
become diaphanous and resplendent. And thus ended this Conference.

CONFERENCE III.
I. Of Causes in General. II. Whence it is that every one is zealous for his
own Opinion, though it be of no importance to him.

I. Of Causes in General.
HE who spoke first, said, That the word Cause must not be confounded with that
of Reason, though it seems so in our manner of Speech; because an Effect
serves sometime for a Reason to prove its Cause. As when I am asked the reason
by which I know that Fire is Light; I Answer, By its ascending upwards; which
is the Effect of Fire, and the proof but not the Cause of its lightness. Cause
also differs from Principle, because every Cause is real, and imparts a being
different from its own; which Privation (being a Principle) has not: And so
every Cause is a Principle, but every Principle is not a Cause. Now a Cause is
That which produces an Effect. There are Four; Matter, Form, the Agent, and
its End. Which Number is not drawn from any real distinction between them;
Seeing many times one and the same Thing is Form, Agent, and End, in several
respects. So the Rational Soul is the Form of Man, the Efficient Cause of his
Ratiocination, and the next End of the Creation. But it is drawn from the four
ways of being a Cause, which are called Causalities; whereof one susteineth
the Forms, to wit, the Matter, An Other informs that Matter, and is the Form;
A Third produces that Form, and uniteth it to the Matter, and is the Agent, or
Efficient Cause; The Fourth by its goodness exciteth the Agent to act, and is
the Final Cause.

The Second said, That the Causes are handled diversely, according to the
diversity of Sciences. The Logician speaks of them so far as he draws from them
his Demonstrations, Definitions, and Probable Arguments: The Natural
Philosopher, inasmuch as they are the Principles of all kind of Alterations
happening in natural bodies: The Metaphysitian, as Cause is a Species of Entity,
which is generally divided into Cause and Effect: In which consideration
Supernatural Things have also some Causes, but not all. Wherefore, in my
Judgment, said he, Cause taken in general cannot be divided into the Four
Species above mentioned; because Spirits have no Material Cause: but it ought
to be first divided, in reference to Immaterial things, into Efficient and
Final; and into the four abovesaid, in respect of Material. That Efficient
Cause is the first principle of Motion and Rest, and is of two sorts; viz.
Universal or Equivocal, and Particular or Univocal. The former can produce
several effects of different Species, whether it depend not on any other, as
God, and is then called the First Cause; or depend on some other, and is called
a Second Cause; As the Sun, which together with Man generates Man. The
Particular (otherwise, Univocal) Cause is that which produces one sort of
effect alone; As Man generateth Man. The Material Cause is that of which
something is made. The Formal Cause is that which causes the Thing to be that
which it is, whether Essentially, as the Soul makes the Man; or Accidentally,
as a round form makes a Bowl. The Final is that which incites the Agent to
act: as Gain does the Merchant to Traffic.

The Third said, Matter and Form being parts of the whole cannot be Causes
thereof; because then they would be Causes of themselves; which is absurd.
Neither is the End a Cause, but only the term and rest of the Cause; Besides,
there are some Ends which are impossible to obtain, and are nothing of reality,
such as a Cause ought to be; as when Heliogabalus propounded to himself to
become a Woman, others to fly, to become invisible, and the like absurdities.
So that there is but the Efficient Sole Cause of all Things, which is the
Internal Idea in God, which is nothing else but that Fiat which created the
World. It Is that very Cause which produces all things in all different times
and places, and acts upon Art, Nature, and Nothing; whence it is that All
Entity, conformable to that Increated Exemplar, bears those three Characters,
Truth, Goodness, and Unity, which all things are bound to represent, under the
Penalty of becoming Nothing, out of which they were produced. It Is a Circle
(according to Trismegist) whose Center is every where, and Circumference no
where; which possibly moved Galen to term Man the Center of Mixed Bodies; and
all Antiquity, a Little World; and made Saint Thomas say, that Man has been
united hypostatically to God the Son, who is the Idea of the Father, for the
rejoyning of all the productions of the world to their first Principle. Here he
fell into Divinity, but he was admonished to observe the Rules appointed by
this Assembly, to keep as far off as possible from such Matters; and so he
ended, when he had mentioned the order that is observed in the actions of that
Idea, (which said he) acts first upon the Intelligences as nearest
approaching to its pure Nature; they upon the Heavens, these upon the Elements,
and these upon mixed bodies.

The Fourth added, That that Idea is a Cause not only in Natural Things, but
also in Artificial. As in the building of a House, the Idea which the Architect
has in his Mind excited his Will, and this commands the Motive-faculty of the
Members, or those of his Laborours, to dispose the Stones, Timber, and Mortar;
which entering into the Composition of the Building, cannot (for the Reason
abovementioned) be Causes of it, as neither can the proportion and form.

An Other said, That if the Idea be a Cause, (which cannot be but in Artificial
Things) it must be the Formal, and not the Efficient; since it is nothing else
but an Original, in imitation of which the Artificer labors; and since the
work derives its form from that Idea which is the Copy.

It was added by a Sixth, That the Idea is not Cause, but the true Essence of
Things, and the first objective Verity which precedes all Knowledge Humane, but
not Divine; and is only hereby distinct from Nothing, in that it is known by
God: which suteth not with Nothing, from which any thing cannot be
distinguished; but it must be, if not in Act, at least in Power.

The Seventh, amplifying touching Ideas, said, That upon the Knowledge of them
depend all Sciences and Arts, but especially all what Men call Inventions,
which are nothing less then such; because it is no more possible to invent some
thing new, then to create some substance, and make some thing of nothing. But
as all things are made by Transmutation, so no Novelty is produced by
Imitation, either of things which are really existent, or which our Mind frames
and connects; as of a Mountain and Gold, it makes a Golden Mountain. Thus the
four most Excellent Inventions of the Modern Ages; The Compass, the Gun,
Printing, and Perspective-glasses; the two former were derived from Experiments
of the Lodestone, from the effect of shooting Trunks and Fire. As for
Printing, what is the Matrice wherein the Founders cast their Characters, or
those Characters composed in a flat Form, as also Copper-cuts, but a perfect
Exemplar and Idea, which is communicated fully to all its individuals? And
Perspective-glasses are nothing but ordinary ones multiplied.

Another said, That Causes cannot be known at all; whence it comes to pass that
we have no certain Knowledge; Now to know, is to know a thing by its Causes.
For the Universal Efficient Cause is above us, and surpasses the capacity of
our Understanding; and hence all the other inferior and subordinate ones are
unknown, because their Cause is not known. The Final is not in our power, and
being not so cannot be known, because knowing presupposes being. Forms and
Specifical Differences are hidden to us. The Matter is so unknown, and so
little a thing, that even Aristotle could not define it, saving by what it is
not, or by Analogy and Proportion to other things; But since Proportion cannot
be but between two things equally known, and the First Matter being not so, (so
much as the Wax, to which, for Example, it is compared) our Mind cannot
comprehend that Analogy.

The Ninth said, That the Elements (which he held to be the First Matter) are
ingenerable and incorruptible; Mixed Bodies being nothing else but those
Elements united in sundry fashions. That this Harmonical Union and Symmetry is
the form of Mixts, which is nothing but a certain Mode or Fashion of Being:
Whence in all kind of Generation, there being no Substantial Mutation, but
only a Conjunction and Separation of the Elements, there is no other Cause but
their Matter. Which is thus proved to be the First; because if there be a
second granted, then as Brass, being the Matter of a Statue, that Brass must
have another Matter, and this is a Third, and so to Infinity; unless one First
be acknowledged.

The Tenth said, That if a Material Cause be admitted, the Three other must be
admitted also. For Matter naturally desiring Forms, it is altered from one
into another, and that Alteration cannot arise from it self: For Nothing is
altered by it self but by an other. It comes then from some Agent which moves
that Matter, and which is the Efficient Cause; which cannot do any thing in
vain, but for some End, and this is the Final Cause. This End is in Natural
Things the same with the Form, and differs not from it but according to our
manner of Understanding. For the End of Generation is the Form of the Thing
generated; and that very Formis the End of Generation. Wherefore, admitting the
Matter, the other Three cannot be excluded.

II. Whence it is that we are zealous for out own Opinions.
Here they passed to the Second Point designed for this Conference, upon which
many Opinions of diverse Authors were alleged; Some attributing the Zeal for
our own Judgments to the Antipathy which is found in contrary Humors, caused
by the diversity of Temper, and these by the opposition of the Heavenly Bodies:
Especially when Saturn, that obstinate and melancholy Planet is predominant
there. Others referred it to Ambition, following the conceit of those who think
there is a Heap of Honor in the world, to which every one has his right, and
of which there is less left to others when some are suffered to take a great
deal. One ascribed it to the subtilty of the Mind, which seeks to sport it self
in new conceits, and having produced them will not seem to want means to defend
them. And he observed that this Cantharides of Opinastry adheres usually to the
goodliest flowers, there being otherwise nothing more necessary to the
evidencing of Truth then contest in which we propose to our selves to find it.

After this, One explicated that which gave occasion to the Question, in this
manner. Men desire nothing but Good, distinguished into Honor, Profit, and
Pleasure. None of which Three are gotten by obstinacy in an erroneous conceit,
especially when it is known for such; But, on the contrary, there is shame in
it, one loses his credit by it many times, but always the time, and renders
himself unacceptable to the hearers, as it is seen in Scholastic Disputes.
Whence it comes to pass that a Scholar brought up in these wranglings never
begins to be esteemed in company till he has laid aside that ill quality of
Neveryielding. Whereas, on the contrary, the more Ingenuous decline those
Asperities by words of yieldance even in things wherein they have apparently
most of Reason on their side. And whon they are mistaken, as a metled Horse
rather rids himself out of the Plough then stays there; So it is proper to a
strong Mind to betake to a better Sentiment then its own, without sticking at
the fear which the weaker are possessed with, lest they should be blamed for
having been subject to err either in fact or in right: Remembering that it is
incident to Humanity to err, but Diabolical to persevere in a fault.
Hippocrates has freely told his own. St. Augustine has made a Book purposely
of his Retractations, and after him Cardan, and many other great personages.
Every one knows this, every one commends it rather then Opiniastry; but when it
comes to the effect, very few people practice it. Which might be excused by the
strong Passion for particular interests, if Men gave their Opinions in a Matter
which concerned their or their Friend's Estate, etc. But I account it strange
in a Question which imports no benefit at all to any person, as in that about
the Idea's which we were newly speaking of.

The next found some scruple in the Thesis: for that it seemed impossible to
him for a Man not be concerned for his Good; Now his Good is that his judgment
be always esteemed. Nor matters it that he may be mistaken in his conceit of
that Good; for it suffices that he judge it such: Objects of the Will being to
the Understanding, as Colors are to Light; this does not give them their
Essence of Color, but they hold that from their own Principle; but it imparts
the being visible, or visibility, to them: So the Understanding gives not to
the Objects of the Will that sutableness wherein the Nature of Good consists,
they have that from their own stock and Nature; but it gives them Amability or
Appetibility, or, to speak better, the being amiable or desirable. For knowing
such convenience or sutableness, it judges the suitable thing amiable; So that
as soon as it is judged such, it is desired as a Good. Now Man judging it a Good
to have his Opinion followed, wills it as such; and as a thing wherein he
has the highest interest. For Man, as Man, has no Good more Eminent then to
Know, Judge, and give his Sentence of Things; it is his utmost Natural End.
Moreover, Truth which is the Result of that Good, is defined a Measure,
Adequateness, and Correspondence of our Understanding and the Thing known,
attributing to it nothing Extrinsical, and abstracting from it nothing that is
its own. Now a Man that has judged and given his advice, at least according to
his Apprehension, seeing that advice rejected, falls into a double interest;
One arising from the charitable inclination which he has for the good of him
that consults him, whom he sees likely to miscarry by not following his
advice; The other being his own proper interest, for that the sleighting his
advice is a tacit accusing him of failing in a Thing Essential to his End, and
calling him a Monster, or Fault of Nature. For as a Monster is called a Fault
of Nature, because the Agents producing it have slipped and gone awry out of the
way which she had prescribed and scored out to them: So Man not judging as he
ought, deviates out of the way which leads to his End. This is it which makes
him so sensible of the sleighting of his advice, which sleighting seems to
conclude that he has ill judged, and is a Liar in his Knowledge. And hence it
is said that our French cannot endure a Lie, by which a Man is implied to have
no Understanding nor ability to judge; seeing a Lie is opposite to that Truth
which I spoke of. For the same Reason a Man is ossended with being called Fool,
that is, stupid and unable to judge; in Revenge of which Injury, and to render
the like, he often gives a Cuff, which stricketh upon the Seat of Wisdom, the
Face; for according to Solomon, the Wisdom of a Man shines in his
Countenance: Therefore our Lord says in the Gospel, that he who calls his
Brother Fool is liable to Hell, for that he impeacheth the goodly luster of
Gods Image, which consists in Judgment and Knowledge; which he who calls
Fool, obscureth and brings in doubt.

The Third said, That the Reason why we are so zealous for our Opinions, is,
For that we love all that proceeds from our selves, and particularly our
Children, in whom we see portrayed somewhat of our own Images; So our Opinions
and Conceptions being the fruits of our Mind, we love them with Passion. Whence
also Men are more lovers of the wealth which they have acquired themselves,
then of that which they inherit. But the Reason why we are so zealous of our
opinions, though we know they are false, is, That the more false Things are,
the more they are their own. For a true Opinion is ours indeed, but not
altogether, for it is also in the Thing; Whereas that which is false is only
ours, since it has no foundation in the Thing, but merely in our Mind which
imagines it to be, though it be not. Whence it is that there is no Religion nor
Heresy so false, but have had their Authors and followers, Yea, it is chiefly
in this kind of Judgment that we will not be controlled; But Authorities,
Reasons, Experiences, and also punishments being ineffectual, cause it to be
conjectured that there is something more then Humane therein. For our Mind,
which of it self is pleased with sublime Things, such as they are which concern
Religion, is the more zealous of them the more false they are, as being
altogether our own.

The following Speakers referred the Cause to the difficulty of defacing that
which is engraven in our Understanding; To our being grounded in Different
Principles, to the habit which some have of contradicting all proposals of
others; like the Woman of whom Poggio the Florentine speaks, who being drowned,
her Husband went to seek her up the stream, because she fell into the River far
below; and to those who advertised him to seek her downwards, he answered; That
they did not know his wives Humor: For since others floated down according to
the current of the River, she would infallibly ascend against the stream of the
water.

The Third Hour was spent in the Report of the Poem delivered to be examined in
the preceding Conference; the Author of which was the more commended for so
great a Performance, in that there has not appeared in our Age so long-winded
a Poem: Whereof the fault was attributed to the niceness of the Wits of these
Times, impatient of long reading, and the too exact manner of writing wholly
turned into points, the continuation of which is next to impossible.

Amongst other Inventions, was offered that of an Instrument which so
magnifieth a species, that a Flea appears in it of the bigness and form of a
Rat, and the little worms which are found in all kinds of good Vinegar, of the
bigness of Eeles.

For that One had spoken otherwise of the First Matter then they do in the
Schools, and there had not been sufficient Information of the Proposal made in
the last Conference touching a Perpetual Motion, they were appointed for the
Subjects of the next.

CONFERENCE IV.
I. Of the First Matter. II. Of Perpetual Motion.

I. Of the First Matter.
THe Entrance into the former of these Subjects was made in this manner. We
should be too sensual Philosophers, if we believed nothing but what we see;
though also we see the First Matter; but it is as the Ancients said Proteus was
seen, namely, in so many forms that there was not one of them his own, and yet
he was never destitute. So I see the First Matter under the form of a Man, a
Horse, a Tree, a stone, and yet the stone, Tree, Horse, Man, are not the Form
of that First Matter, for it has none: Otherwise, if I conceive it clothed
with one single Form, it is then called Second Matter. Nevertheless they differ
not really one from the other; no more then a Man naked, and afterward
clothed. The First is the common Subject of Substantial Forms, and remains
both before and after Corruption.

The Second said, That as God is Incomprehensible, by reason of his exceeding
Grandeur; so is this First Matter, by reason of its baseness and lowness; which
makes it of all Things of the world nearest to Nothing, conceivable by its
obscurity alone, as the night which we begin to see when we no longer see any
thing else. Whence it follows that we cannot say what it is, but only what it
is not.

The Third said, That as Inachus, Father of Io, seeking his Daughter, found her
Name written every where: For being turned into a Heifer, whose Foot is cloven,
with the Pastern she engraved an O, and with the cleft an I, and so formed Io.
Nevertheless her Father knew her not; for she was under a form which covered
and hid the shapes and lines of her visage: Just so is the First Matter found
written every where. For of it (better then of Jupiter) we may say that it is
whatsoever thou see, and whatsoever is moved is Matter: Jupiter est
quodcunque vides, quodcunque movetur, Lucan.
But being covered with a form, and involved with the attires that follow it,
it cannot be seen in the pure and naked Nature of First Matter. And just as in
a loaf of Bread, the Leven which fermented it is there, though kneaded and
tempered in the mass of Meal, in which it seems lost: For being dissolved it
turns to it self, and into its own Nature, the whole Mass wherein it is
incorporated: And as in Cheese, the Rennet (though dissolved and mixed in the
Milk) ceases not to be there; yea, draws to its Nature the substance into which
it was liquifi'd: So the First Matter, though it seem to have lost its being by
entering into the Compound, retains the same notwithstanding, and also draws
all to it self, rendering material what ever it is joined to. And although it be
not visible or perceptible when it is alone, yet it is real in the Compound, in
which it puts off the Name of First, and takes that of Second. We prove this
First Matter from the Necessity of a Common Subject in all Mutations, out of
which the Agents, which destroy the forms opposite to their own, may draw
forth those which they will produce; which is the term of their Action:
Otherwise Things must become nothing, to pass from one being to another; which
would presuppose Creation, and destroy those Two Maxims, That a Thing cannot
be reduced into Nothing; and Of Nothing is not made something. It is defined An
Imperfect and Incomplete Substance, the First Subject of Natural Things, which
are composed of it as an Internal and Essential part, not by accident. Its
quality is to be a pure Passive Power, which is nothing distinct from it self,
but is taken for a Thing begun and not perfected; yet designed to be finished
by the Supervening of the Form, and the interposing of Agents, who by their
activities drawing the Form out of the bosom of it, perfect and accomplish it.
It serves for two purposes: First, To give durance and Consistence to all
Things, which last so much the longer as their Matter is less compounded; That
is to say, less alienated from its naked and pure Nature of First Matter: As it
appears in the Heavens and the Elements, which I conceive are not changed one
into another. In the Second place it serves Agents for to act, and Patients to
resist. Whence it comes to pass, that the more compact and close their Matter
is, the more powerfully they resist: As appears in a hot Iron which burns more
then common flame; in Water which moistens more then air, though it be less
humid; and in Steel, which resists more then Lead.

The Fourth said, That to know what this First Matter is, it behooves to
proceed thereunto by the way of the Senses, and then examine whether Reason can
correct what they have dictated to us. Now our Senses tell us that most part of
mixed Bodies are resolved into Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; And the Chemists
affirm, that these Three Bodies cannot be reduced into any other Matter by any
Artifice. But Reason correcting Sense teaches us, that though these Three
Bodies are Chemical Sensible Principles, yet they are not First Principles, nor
the true First Matter; for that all Bodies are not made of them (as it is seen
in the Celestial) and they may yet be reduced into another Matter, viz. into
the Elements. For in Sulphur there is Fire, seeing it is inflamable; And it
has also some Aqueous or Terrestrial Substance which makes visible that Fire.
Likewise there is Fire in Salt, seeing it is tart and biting, and according to
the Chemists, the subject of natural heat: There is Water too, for it melts,
and it extinguisheth Fire: There is also Earth in it, for it is dry, fixed,
compact, and weighty. Wherefore Reason leading us as far as the Elements, it
remains to consider whether we must stop there, or go yet further, to find
out a Matter into which these are reduced. But not finding any, I conceive they
must be the First Matter.

The Fifth replied, That the Elements being complete Substances, and
consequently compounded of Matter and Form, we must not stop there, but go
further in search of that first and ultimate subject of all Natural Mutations;
it being inconsistent, that a Compound of Matter and Form should be but one of
those Two.

The sixth held, That Water is the First Matter, if not the Elementary, at
least the Ethereal Water, which was for that purpose created first: The Holy
Scripture witnessing, that In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth: Where the Hebrew word that is rendered Heaven signify The Waters; and
it is added That the Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. Moreover, our Life
consists solely in Humidity; which failing, Death ensues.

The Seventh said, That the First Matter being a Thing most imperfect, and
least active, such as the Earth is too, she ought rather to bear that Name then
any of the Elements. To show further that the Elements are the First Matter, it
was alleged that they are not transmuted one into another, but are ingenerable
and incorruptible; that consequently in every kind of Generation or Corruption
there is not made any Substantial Mutation, but only an Union or Separation of
the Elements; And therefore it is not needful to recur to another First Matter
that may be Permanent under all Mutations, since Entities are not to be
multiplied without necessity. For as to the former, They are not transmuted one
into another, because, before the Transmutation, or Substantial Generation of a
Thing, Alteration is requisite, that is, the Introduction of Quality and
Dispositions suitable to the Form which is to be produced. For Example, before
Fire be turned into Water, Air, or Earth, it must first receive Cold, Moisture,
and Gravity, which are the Qualities suitable to those Forms which it is to
receive; but this is impossible: For Fire, while it is Fire, cannot be Cold,
Moist, and Heavy. As for the Second, viz. That the Elements are ingenerable and
incorruptible, he showed it by this other Example. From Wood that burns
proceed the Four Elements, or Four different Natures correspondent to them,
viz. Flame, Smoke, Liquor, and Ashes, but they were in it before; because they
could not be produced out of Nothing; And in the Conflagration of this Wood
there is only the Fire that Acts, which being Hot, Light, and Dry, cannot
produce such Things as are contrary to it self.

Here Experience was alleged against him; which evidenceth that Water upon the
Fire is turned into Vapor, and then into Air, that Air is turned into Fire; and
so of the other Elements. But he replied, That the Water is not turned into
Vapor, or into Air; but the Fire insinuating and joining it self with the
Water, frames that Vapor, composed Actually of Water and Fire. Whence when you
put a Cover upon a Dish of hot Viands, the Particles of Fire which are in those
Vapors, being subtle, pass through the Pores of the Cover, and sever
themselves from those of the Water; which being unable to pass through too, by
reason of their grosness, they adhere to the upper part of it. In like manner,
said he, when the Air seems set on fire, it is not changed or turned into Fire,
but only the Particles of Fire which were dispersed here and there in the Air,
become collected and united together. And when the Fire disappears, it proceeds
from its Particles being diffused amongst the other Particles of Air, Water,
and Earth.

The Last strengthened this Opinion, saying, That the pure Elements have the
same Proprieties that are attributed to the First Matter; and (amongst the
rest) fall not under the perception of Sense. Yea, that it is as hard to see a
pure Element, as to see the First Matter. For the Elementary Fire ( ex gr.)
cannot be exposed to the Air, nor the Air to the Water, nor the Water to the
Earth, (and much less those which are contrary to one another) without being
altered by their mutual contract, that is to say, without losing their Nature
of Element; which, moreover, cannot be known by the Senses, unless by its
Second Qualities; which arising from the mixture of the First, it follows that
the Elements which have no other cannot be the object of our Senses. For the
First Qualities would not be perceptible by our Senses, if they lodged in a
Simple Element. As it appears by the flame of Aqua Vitae, which burns not by
reason of the thinness of its Matter; By Ashes, which while it is making, is
more Light then heavy; By the Air, which dryes instead of moistning, and yet
is called the First Humid Body; And by Water, which following the qualities of
the Neighboring Bodies, shows that it cannot be termed of it self either hot
or cold.

II. Of Perpetual Motion.
At the Second Hour it was said, That the Perpetual Motion to which this Hour
was designed, is not meant of Motion to Substance, which is Generation and
Corruption, by reason of which Compounded Bodies are in Perpetual Motion; For
in Corruptible Things, every Moment is a degree of Corruption. Nor is it meant
of Motion to Quantity, which is Augmentation and Diminution; nor of that which
is made to Quality, which is Alteration, but of Local Motion. And again, the
Inquiry is not about the possibility of Local Motion in Animals, nor about
running-water, or Fire, to whom it is natural; as appears in Mills which are
upon Rivers, and Turn-spits, or Engines, which the Smoke causes to turn about.
Wherefore his Invention who exactly fastened a Girdle to his skin, which rising
and falling as he took his breath, served for a perpetual spring to a Watch
that hung at it, (which by that means needed not winding up) was not the
Perpetual Motion which we mean. No more was that which proceeded from the wings
of a little Windmill, placed at the mouth of a Cave, which the Vapor
continually issuing forth, caused always to move. But it must be in a subject
naturally unmovable, made by Art to continue its Motion: And this is proved
possible, I. Because, as Hermes says, That which is below is as that which is
above; Id quod inserius est sicut illud quod est superius.
Now we see above the Perpetual Motion of the Heavenly Bodies, by example of
which it is certain that this Motion must be Circular. In the Second place,
Nature has not given us a desire of Things impossible. Now, an infinite number
of good wits show by their search the desire which they have of it. Thirdly, it
is held that Archimedes had it, whence it was feigned that Jupiter was jealous
of him. In the Fourth place, it seems that if a very uniform Circle could be
put exactly upon a Pivot or Spindle, and were set in Motion, it would never
stop any more then the Heavens, because it does not poise or gravitate upon its
Center, so long as it is turning, (as it appears by a Stone, which poiseth not
in the Circle made on high in turning it round) and so nothing resisting the
external Agent, the Motion must last as long as the impression lasts; and the
impression must last always, because nothing resists it; but on the contrary,
the Agitation continues it. Thus of all the Models of Engines, contrived to
move perpetually, we see not one that makes so much as one turn; Whereas a
plain wheel makes above a thousand, though it be not exactly placed upon its
Center, and the Poles be not two simple points as they ought to be, if that Art
could come to perfection; in which Case the effect of Perpetual Motion would
follow.

The Second said, That he held it for impossible, for that it is repugnant, not
only as to the Efficient Cause, which being limited and finite cannot produce
an infinite Effect; but also as to the very form of that Motion, which must be
either Direct, Circular, or Mixed. If it be Direct, it will be made from one
term to another, in the one of which its Motion ending, it cannot be perpetual.
And because the most certain Principle of this Direct Motion comes from
Gravity, which tends from high downwards; when it shall be arrived there,
nothing will be able to mount it up again, Gravity having found its Center and
place; or if the Motion be violent, the impression being ended, it cannot
re-produce it self of its own accord in the Engine; (otherwise, it would be
animated) and therefore it will cease from Motion. If the Motion be Circular,
(as in this effect it would be the most proper in imitation of that of the
Heavens) this moving Circle shall be in all parts either of equal, or different
weight. If it be equal throughout, it shall not turn at all of it self, one
part having no advantage over another; If it be unequal, and there be put (for
example) four pound to raise up three, it will happen that when the greatest
weight has gotten the lowest place, the lighter parts will not be able to
raise up the heavier; and so the Motion will have an End. Now if the Direct and
Circular Motion are incapable of this perpetuity, the mixed or compounded of
both shall be so too. So that it seems impossible, by reason of the gravity
of the matter (not to mention its corruptibility) to compose a Machine or
Engine that moves always. And were there any ground to think of it, some have
conceived it might be done with the Lodestone, which has a Virtue of
attracting to it self on one side, and driving away on the other, and so by
continuing this little Motion (which would be of no great benefit) it might
render the same perpetual. But you ordinarily see that they who make these
inquiries, only find rest in their Engines and Motion in their brains, whereas
they hoped the contrary.

The Third said, That it appears by that which they call the Roman Balance,
that the same weight hanged near the Center, weighes less then when it is more
distant from it. Consequently that disposing the weights which shall be round a
wheel, so as to be near the Center about one half thereof, and distant from it
the other half, you shall have a Perpetual Motion, which ought not to be
accounted the less such, though the Matter should last but a year, yea but a
day; it sufficing for a night to that name, that it lasts as long as its
Matter; as it is seen in the Vice of Archimedes, termed without End, though it
be made but of wood; not by reason of its lasting, but because the Vice being
applied upon an indented wheel, instead of entering into a screw, there is no
raising or letting it down, as is practiced in those of Presses.

He proved it further, For that it is seen that by the help of that Vice
without End, by the instrument termed Polyspaston, and others of the like
Nature, a Child may easily lift up a weight of 10000 pounds; Yea, even to
Infinity, could the strength of the Cordage and the Instruments bear it. For it
follows that if a less weight can lift up a greater, this greater will lift up
a less; which will be the Perpetual Motion which we inquire after.

The Fourth replied, That this Motion seemed to him impossible to find, not for
its being unprofitable (for it would be one of the greatest helps that Art
could afford Man, to ease him in his labors) but because there is in all Arts
some thing of impossibility; as the Quadrature of the Circle in Geometry, in
Rhetoric the perfect Orator, the Philosophers Stone in Chemistry, the
Commonwealth of Plato in Polity, and in the Mechanics Perpetual Motion. And
whereas it is said that a less weight or less strength can lift up a greater,
this is to be understood in more time: So that what is gotten in strength is
lost in time; which comes all to one. For Example, one Man, or one hundred
weight, shall raise as high in one hour, as much weight as four Men or 400.
weights shall raise in a quarter of an hour by any Mechanic Invention
whatsoever.

The Last Hour was employed in the mentioning of some Engines which had some
likelihood of moving themselves endlesly; And amongst others, it was proposed,
That a Windmill having a large wing, which the wind should always drive
behind, as it does weather-cocks, and by that means always present its four
ordinary sails to the wind, might lift up so weighty a burden whilst the wind
blows, that the same burden coming to descend while the wind cease, would
cause a Motion of Continual Duration. Which also may be more easily practiced
in a Perpetual Fountain, by help of a Great Reservor which should be filled by
help of the wind, and be emptying it self all the time that it blows not.

One Demanded, Whence it comes that some are inclined to Mechanics, others
only to Contemplation and Literature. It was answered, that this proceeds from
the Resemblance which their Mind has with the Things which they affect. The
time being past for this Conference, this Question afforded the Subject to the
next, for the first point concerning Resemblance, and chiefly that of kindred
one to another; And for the Second, Whether Letters ought to be joined with
Arms.

CONFERENCE V.
I. Of Resemblance. II. Whether it behooves to join Arms to Letters.

I. Of Resemblance.
UPon the First, It was said, That there are Three Sorts of Resemblance, viz.
Of Species, of Sex, and of Aspect. The Resemblance of Species comes from the
Univocal Cause determined to produce an Effect like to it self. That of Sex
comes from the Predominancy either of the Masculine or Feminine Geniture, or
from the weakness of both: The End of Nature being always to make a perfect
work, viz. a Male; to which if she cannot attain, she makes a Female. The
Resemblance of Aspect, (or individual) which is that we are speaking of, comes
from the Formative Virtue inherent in the Geniture, which being like a
Quintessence or Extract not only of all the parts which contribute to its
Generation, but also of the Spirits which accompany, move and inform it in some
manner; it is not to be wondered if what is produced thereof bear their image
and likeness, as the Visible Species represents the luminous or colored
Thing from whence it proceeds. To which if the Imagination also concur, it
sends still to the Faetus more Spirits then there were before; which being the
Principal Artificers in Formation, imprint a shape or figure upon it like the
Body from whence they streamed, and of which themselves partake in some sort;
As the Water which issues out of Pipes, though it spout far, retains the
form thereof. The strength of which Imagination is too great to doubt of; being
such as it is able to change the color of a Child, and to cause some to be
born all hairy, by the sight of the like Objects: Of which the marks which are
imprinted on the Bodies of Infants in the womb of their Mothers, through some
such Imagination are sufficient proofs, and that in Brutes too.

The Second said, That indeed this is an Effect of the Imagination, seeing
Galen having caused the picture of a white Child to be hanged at the beds-feet
of a Moor-Lady, she brought forth a Child of the same color. And besides the
Example of Lahan's sheep, which brought forth streaked young, by reason of the
Rods of that color placed in their drinking-troughs; Experience of Hens, who
bring forth white Chickens if they be covered with Linen while they brood,
verifieth the same. The way that that Faculty produces such an Effect is thus.
The Animal Spirits which reside in the Brain slide thence into the whole Body,
but especially into the Matrice, by reason of the near Sympathy which is
between them by the Nerves of the Sixth Conjugation which unite them, and
render Women subject to so many several accidents, whereof the field of Nature
is too fertile. The Spirits then imprinting their qualities into that solid
part, it serves as a mould for the forming of the tender Embryo. Which is not
to be understood of Simple Imagination, but of those upon which the Mind makes
a vehement and constant reflection.

The Third said, That if the Imagination contributed any Thing to the
Resemblance, we should see no unhandsome Children. For could a Man beget what
he would, he would always make it resemble some fair Idea in his Imagination.
Besides, this Faculty can have no influence, saving at the moment of the Act,
or during the bearing. Not in the former, for nothing acts upon that which is
not. Now the Parts exist not yet during that Act. Not the latter, for the parts
are then already formed. It will then be demanded in what time of the bearing
this Imagination has power. If it be said in the former part, it is held that
the parts exposed to our view are not then formed, and yet it is in those that
Resemblance is observed: But in those first days only the Principal pars,
viz. The Liver, the Heart, and the Brain are formed. If you will have it to be
in the latter days, the Soul being by that time introduced, which is its true
form, and imprints upon the body the traces of the Inclinations, it cannot
thence forward be susceptible of alterations by a mere fancy. Now that the
manners of the Soul follow the External Form of the Body, appears by
Physiogmony wholly founded upon that Principle.

The Fourth argued that the Geniture is the superfluous aliment of the Third
Concoction, which proceeding from all the parts of the Body retains the
Characters of the same, and imprints them upon the Body of the Embryo; And
hence come hereditary diseases, as also the usual Resemblance of Twins: And
such is the Law of Nature, that Children resemble their Fathers and Mothers
just as Plants do the Plants which produce them. As for the unlikness, it comes
usually from the diversity of the Genitures of Father and Mother, which make a
Third Temperament; as of the colors yellow and blew mingled together is made a
green.

The Fifth attributed the Cause to the diverse Constellations; because seeing
all the alterations which happen here below cannot, said he, proceed but from
Heaven or the Elements, there is no probability in attributing them to these
latter; otherwise they would be both Agents and Patients together: And besides,
if the Elements were the Efficient Cause of the Mutations which come to pass in
Nature, there would be nothing regular, by reason of their continual Generation
and Corruption. Wherefore it is to the Heavens that it ought to be ascribed: And
as the same Letters put together in the same order make always the same word;
So, as often as the principal Planets meet in the same Aspect, and the same
Celestial Configuration, the Men that are born under such Constellations, are
found alike. Nor is it material to say, (though it is true) that the Heavenly
Bodies are never twice in the same situation; because if this should happen,
it would not be Resemblance longer, but Identity, such as Plato promised in his
great Revolution after six and forty thousand years. Besides, there is no one
so like to another, but there is always found more difference then conformity.

The Sixth affirmed, That the same Cause which produces the likeness of Bodies
is also that which renders the inclinations of Souls alike, seeing the one is
the Index of the other. Thus we see oftimes the manners of Children so expressly
imitate those of their Parents of both Sexes, that the same may be more
rightfully alleged for an Argument of their Legitimacy, then the External
Resemblance alone, which consists only in color and figure. This makes it
doubtful whether we may attribute that Resemblance to the Formative Virtue:
Otherwise, being connex'd as they are, it would be to assign an Immaterial
Effect (as all the operations of the Rational Soul are) to a Material Cause.

The Seventh ascribed it to the sole vigor or weakness of the Formative
Virtue, which is nothing else but the Spirits inherent in the Geniture, and
constituting the more pure part of it; The rest serving those Spirits for
Matter, upon which they act for the organizing it, and framing a Body thereof.
Now every Individual proposing to himself to make his like, he arrives to his
End when the Matter is suited and possessed with an Active Virtue sufficiently
vigorous; and then this likeness will be not only according to the Specifical
Nature and the Essence, but also according to the Individual Nature, and the
Accidents which accompany the same. This seems, perhaps, manifest enough in
that First Degree of Children to Fathers; but the difficulty is not small, how
a later Son that has no Features of his Fathers Countenance comes to resemble
his Grandfather or Great Grandfather. The Cause, in my Judgment, may be
assigned thus. Though the Geniture of the Ancestor was provided with sufficient
Spirits to form a Son like himself, yet it met with a Feminine Geniture
abounding with qualities contrary to its own, which infringed its formative
virtue, and checked the Action thereof, hindering the Exuberance of its Spirits
from attaining to frame such lineaments of the Countenance as Nature intended:
or else it met with a Matrice out of due temper by some casual cold, though
otherwise both the Genitures were laudably elaborated. For when those Spirits,
or Formative Virtue, become chil'd and num'd, they shrink and retire into their
mass; as he that is cold to his bed; and wanting heat, in which their Activity
consists, they remain in a manner buried, and without Action, in reference to
this Resemblance: And nevertheless there is left enough to make a Male like to
the Father, as to the species. This Son thus formed comes to Age to Generate,
and meeting with a Feminine Geniture proportioned to his own in vigor and
strength, and a Matrice proper to receive them, those Spirits of his Father,
which till then lay dormant, are awakened to Action; and concurring from all
parts of the Body suddenly impregnate the Geniture of the Immediate Father,
having by their long residence in the corporeal mass been recruited, refined,
and elaborated: And as old Wine surpasses new in strength and vigor of
Spirits, because it has less Phlegm; so those Spirits of the Grandfather
having digested all the superfluous Phlegm wherewith those of the Father
abound, are more strong then they, and win possession in the Geniture, for the
forming and organizing of it according to the shape of the Body from whence
they first issued.

The Eighth said, That he was very backward to believe that any Thing of our
Great Grandfathers remains in us, seeing it is doubted, upon probable
grounds, whether there remains in our Old Age any thing of our Childhood;
and that the Body of Man, by the continual deperdition of its Threefold
Substance, Spirits, Humors, and solid parts, is like the ship Argo, which by
the successive addition of new matter was the same, and not the same. That he
conceived not yet how the Geniture can proceed from all the parts; seeing
Anatomy teaches us, that the Spermatick Veins derive it immediately from the
Trunk of the Hollow Vein ( Vena Cava) and the Emulgent; and the Arteries from
the great Artery, ( Aorta) conveying it to be elaborated in the Glandules
called Prostatae; from whence it is set on work by Nature. The solid Parts can
have no Influence upon it; for what humor or juice is brought to them for
their nourishment goes not away naturally but by sweat, insensible
transpiration, and the production of hair. The Spirits are too subtle and
dissipable to preserve in themselves a Character, and imprint the same upon any
Subject. That Resemblance, in my Judgment, proceeds from the natural heat
which elaborateth and delineateth the Body of the Geniture, and by it the
Embryo; First with the general Idea of its species, and then with the accidents
which it has, and which it borrows from the Matrice, from the menstruous
blood, and the other Circumstances requisite to Generation; and when chance
pleases, there is found a likeness to the Father, Mother, or others. Which
Circumstances being alike in the Formation of Twinns, cause them to resemble
one another; unless when the Particles of the Geniture (which is sufficient for
two) are of unlike Natures, and are unequally severed by the natural heat: So
that (for Example) the milder and more temperate Particles are shared on one
side; and on the other, the more rough and bilious; As it happened in Jacob and
Esau, the former of whom was of a sweet, and the other of a savage humor, and
then Bodies as different as their Manners. One the contrary, many resemble one
another in Countenance, who are nothing at all related; as Augustus and that
young Man, who being asked by the Emperor whether his Mother had never been at
Rome, answered, No, but his Father had; And the true and false Martin Guerre,
who put a Parliament, their Wife, and all their kindred, to a hard task to
distinguish them.

II. Whether Letters ought to be joined with Arms.
The Second Hour, designed for treating of the Conjunction of Arms and
Letters, began with this discourse. That Arms seem not only unprofitable, but
contrary to humanity, since their End is the destruction of Man. That among the
rest, the Gun, invented by a Monk named Bertol, in the year 1380. has caused
the death of too many persons, not to be in horror to the living; from which
the most valiant cannot secure himself: And if they be compared to the studies
of humanity, they are so far distant from them, that the Beginning of the one
is the End of the other; The clashing of Arms, as Sylla said, hindering
attenion to Laws. And comparing them together, that French Hercules who drew
men to him with chains of Gold, subdued them much better, winning their Bodies
and their Hearts, then that other subduer of Monsters whose victory extended
but to the one half. That Archimedes defending Syracuse by his skill against
the Army of Marcellus, seems to void the Question. But on the other side,
since the point of Wit wins not the Victory now a days, unless it be joined
with that of the Sword; And that, on the contrary, Arms command over all; it
is certain that a City full of Philosophers, that knew not how to help
themselves with Arms, would be taken by a Regiment of Soldiers ignorant of
Letters; and that of all the Laws there is none more peremptory then the Gun:
Which is signified by that Devise which our Cannons of the new casting have
graven upon them, Ratio ultima Regum. Moreover, we see that the Turks (whose
Political Maxims are as good for the preservation and increasing of their
Empire, as their Religion is bad for the attaining to that of Heaven) excepting
what little needs to instruct the few Friars they have in their Mosquees, and
less the Judges in their Tribunals, scorn all Learning, and teach their people
no other Science but Obedience and Contempt of Death. While the Greeks and the
Romans did the same each of them got and kept a Monarchy: As on the contrary,
their declining happened when their skilfulness in all Sciences was risen to the
highest point: Having ceased to do well, when they addicted themselves too much
to speak well. So greatly does Literature intenerate and soften Hearts,
effeminating those that apply themselves thereto; whether by their Charm, or by
the too great dissipation of Spirits required by the assiduity of Study and
Contemplation; which almost draws the Soul out of the Body, and notably
weakneth its ordinary functions. Whence it comes to pass that studious Men have
not only their Sight and all other Senses, but also the Members of their Body,
more weak, how good soever their natural temper be; which is strengthened by
the exercise to which they are obliged who practice other Arts, and especially
that of War, an Enemy to Sedentary Life. Nevertheless coming to consider the
Advantages which Alexander drew from the precepts of Aristotle; Caesar from his
own Eloquence and the Mathematics, for the making of Speeches to his
Soldiers, building of Bridges, and besieging of places; That without
Astrology, which enabled Christopher Columbus to foresee an Eclipse of the
Moon, in the year 1492. whereof he made use to frighten the Americans
extremely, his Enterprise had perished: In brief, that that brave King of
Sweden, Conqueror during his Life and after his Death, so happily joined
Letters to Arms; I conclude for their Conjunction, authorized by that
excellent Sentence, That the Nations are happy whose Philosophers are Kings, or
whose Kings are Philosophers; and confirmed by the Example which the admirable
Government of this Kingdom affords.

The Next said, That if it behooves to marry the Sciences to Arms, it must be
because Learning makes the Soldier either more honest, or more valiant and
courageous, or more dextrous and warlike. Now they have none of these Effects;
not the former; For, on the contrary, the most favorable Sentence that can be
passed upon Learning, is, to say that it is neither good nor bad of it self,
but leaves the Will of the possessor in the same posture that it found it. The
most moderate Detractors allege that Knowledge puffs up; Now Presumption
conduces not much to the Amendment of Life. Others go so far as to maintain,
That Simplicity and sweetness of Manners is not found usually with great
Learning; according to that Sentence which the Company will permit me to
allege in its own Language, Postquam docti prodierunt boni desunt. Moreover S.
Paul disswades us as much as possible from Philosophy, which he calls vain,
adding that such as would know too much must be rejected from the Church: And
as the Shoo-makers are commonly the worst shod, and the richest the most
covetous; so they that know the most good are willing to do the least. Now if
this be true in persons of the highest form, is it to be hoped that a Soldier
whose inclinations are usually not too devout, should become an honester Man
after he has studied? But besides, he will become as little valiant and
courageous thereby; Reason requiring, that the more a Man knows dangers and
inconveniences, the more shy and backward he is to venture amongst them; And
Experience showing that the softness of studies is incompatible with the
warlike ardour and martial humor. Of which Marius, and other Roman Captains,
not ignorant (no more then those at present) did not go to the Schools to
choose their Soldiers, but into the Shops and Villages: Which caused Licinius
and Valentinian, Emperors of Rome, to say, That their State had no Poison more
dangerous then Learning. The Greeks by being too much addicted thereunto, were
easily subdued by the Goths, who understood nothing but to kill and burn; and
yet were not so ignorant as to take from the Greeks, overcome by them, the use
of Learning: for fear lest coming to themselves they might easily shake off
their yoke. They left them their Libraries entire, to continue their exercise
therein peaceably. So long as the Spartans flourished, they had no other
Academies but of Valor, Prudence, and Justice. The Persians had no other
Schools but the practice of Virtue, whereof only the name and definition is
known in ours, which afford nothing but unprofitable tattle. Lastly, Study, as
it is vulgarly practiced at this day, instead of rendering a Man better behaved,
imprints upon him the manners of the College, insupportable to all the world,
and rendering the name of Scholar odious. Few people have less discretion then
they; most beggars ask Alms in Latin; and this Language is more common to
Bedlam then to any other place.

The multitude and earnestness of those who vigorously maintained the Cause of
Learning, hindered the distinct Recollection of all their Reasons; but they may
be reduced to these. Arms destitute of Letters, have more of the Brute then of
the Man: the ignorance of danger not deserving the Name of Valor, but that
only which sees the danger, and despises it in comparison of the honor which
it expects from victory. What a glory would be added to the Gown, if, in
imitation of those brave Roman Consuls and Senators, a President or Counselor
were seen carrying the Flower de Luce beyond our Frontiers in the head of an
Army, and the other Officers by their Example? Arms making Laws respected, and
Laws polishing Arms.

The Inventions were very different, yea, diametrically opposite; one amongst
the rest propounding a way to build an impregnable Fortress, another an Engine
to which nothing could resist: And the Matters of the next Conference were the
Universal Spirit and Fire.

CONFERENCE VI.
I. Of Fire. II. Of the Universal Spirit.

I. Of Fire.
UPon the First Subject it was said, That there is no Elementary Fire, and that
this Opinion does not destroy the Four First Qualities; Seeing Heat may be
without that Fire, as in the Sun. Moreover, that supposed Elementary Fire
cannot be under the Moon. For if it were, the Refraction, or Parallax caused by
it, would cause the Stars to be seen in another place then they are, and of
different Magnitudes; As the Optics clearly demonstrate to us, and justify by
the experiment of a piece of Money put into a Basin, which we behold not, by
reason of the interposition of its sides; and yet it appears when you put water
into the Vessel: Because the Visual Ray is always broken, and makes an Angle
when it passes through a Medium of differing thickness, as the Air and the
Water are; and as the Air and the Fire would be, through which the Stars must
be seen; and consequently we should not see them in their true place, when they
are out of our Zenith; in which alone the Visual Ray is not broken. But this
the Prediction of Eclipses to a set moment, convinces to be false. In the
Third Place, That Fire, being but an Accident cannot be an Element. That it is
but an Accident, appears by a combustible Body; in which, for the kindling of
Fire, there is nothing else introduced but a great heat. In the Fourth Place,
This same Fire being produced by an Accident, as by the Motion of some Body,
cannot be a Substance; For Accidents do not produce Substances. Lastly, we are
composed of the same Things by which we are conserved, and yet there is no
Animal that lives of Fire, as of the other Elements; that which is said of the
Flies called Pyraustae being but a Fable. Besides, It Is hard to conceive how
Fire being in that High Region could concur to all kinds of Generation. And
therefore, if there be any Fire that enters into the Composition of mixed
Bodies, it is only the heat of the Sun which quickens and animates all things.

As for our common Fire, they say it is light and dry. But for the former, as
they do not prove it but by the Sight, which beholds it ascend; so the same
Sight sees it descend in a Candle, in Wood, and other Matters, which the Fire
consumes from the top to the bottom: And therefore of it self it is indifferent
to all Motion, and follows its Aliment upwards, when it mounts thither by its
rarefaction, and downwards when the same is detained there by the gravity of
its Matter. And though it should ascend above the Air, yet would it not follow
from thence that it is light, but only less ponderous then the Air which
thrust it out of its place; as the Earth does the Water, and the Water the Air.
Besides, whereas the Fire imparteth ponderosity, as is seen in Calcined Lead,
it cannot be said to be Light. Next, to say that Fire is dry, I account not
less strange. For it cannot have Siccity, since it introduces it not actually
into Bodies; but when it dries any humid Body it does nothing else but take
away its humidity, which being separated from that Body, it remains in the
Siccity which was there before, (but appeared not by reason of the predominancy
of its humidity;) and consequently is not introduced anew by the Fire. Besides,
by the definition which Aristotle gives of Humid, ( viz. That it is that which
is easily containd'n in an other, but hardly in it self,) the Fire should be
more humid then the Air, yea, then water it self.

The Second said, That Fire is neither Element nor Substance. For Qualities are
perceived by every Thing's manifesting those of the Element predominant in it,
and whereof it is composed. Terrestrial Bodies, as Stones, Metals, and
Minerals, are actually cold and dry to the touch. Aquatick, as Fish and Fruits,
are cold and moist. Aerial, as Oil and Wood, indifferent, sometimes hot,
sometimes cold, according to the disposition of the place where they are.
Animals alone are actually hot, but they derive that heat solely from the Soul.
We see nothing in the World actually hot of its own Nature. Why then should we
establish an Element, of which we can have no tidings? As we have of the other
Elements, of which some would make it a companion; contrary to the Maxim,
which allows not, That Entities be multiplied in Nature without Necessity.
It Is of no validity to object the actual heat of Mineral Waters. For the least
Curious know the cause thereof to be this; that those Waters passing through
Mines of Sulphur or Bitumen, imbibe the Spirits thereof; which by the Motion of
the Water are heated accidentally: As appears in that being taken out of their
own place, they presently lose that heat; which shows that this heat is no part
of them, but is derived elsewhere. Moreover that Sublunary Fire would be to no
purpose. For either it would descend to enter into the composition of Things
with the rest, or not. If it descend, that is against its Nature, which is (as
they commonly say) light, and always tending upwards; besides it would consume
all by its great Activity. If it descend not, it would be unprofitable to the
World, and so not Element. For neither Man, nor the other mixed Substances which
are generated, go to seek it in the Circle of the Moon. Besides, Generations
are made without it by the heat of the Sun. For, in the First Place, Humidity
is requisite thereto, for the uniting and binding together of the Matter, which
otherwise would be dust; and that Humidity the Air or the Water affords. In
the Second Place, such Matter, united by Humidity, is made close, firm, and
compact, by the coldness of Water, the propriety of which is to congeal. In the
Third Place, the dryness which the Earth contributes gives it a consistence and
permanent hardness; And, lastly, the heat alone of the Sun digests all this
together, and unites it very perfectly without need of any other Fire. I
confess, indeed, that we have Fire, but it never enters into the composition of
Natural Things; nor ever was it a Substance, because Two Substantial Forms
cannot be in the same Subject; and yet the true form of Fire is in a hot Iron,
together with the Substantial Form of the Iron: Which shows that Fire is but an
Accidental Form, which is consistent with the Substantial, as the Servant with
her Mistress. Moreover (according to Aristotle, l. 2. Of Generation and
Corruption.) Fire is nothing else but an execess of heat, which is a mere
Accident, as well in its little degrees, as in its excesses; More and less
making no change in the species. Our Fire then is an excessive heat, which
adheres to Things that have some crass and oleaginous humor in them, and
continues there by a continual efflux and successive Generation, without any
permanence, like the Water of a River; which Heat lasts so long till that
humor be consumed. If it be said that it ascends upwards seeking its own
place, I answer, that it is the Exhalation that carries it up; yea, that it
descends too; as we see in a Candle blown out, and still smoking, if it be
held beneath another burning one, the flame descends along the smoke, and
lights it again* So that the Fire is indifferent of it self where it goes,
for it lets it self be governed and carried by the Exhalation. And it appears
further, That Fire is less subtle then Air; for flame is not transparent, and
it engenders soot, which is very gross.

The Third added, That indeed Fire cannot be a Substance, because it has a
Contrary, viz. The Water. Besides, every Substantial Form preserves its own
Matter, and acts not against it; but Fire destroys its own. Moreover, a
certain degree of some Quality is never necessary to a Substantial Form; as the
Earth cease not to be Earth, though it be less cold or dry; and so of the
rest: But Fire cannot be Fire, unless the supreme degree of heat be in it. Add
hereunto, that Fire may be produced in a Substance without corrupting it, as we
see in a Flint, or a burning Bullet: Now a Substantial Form is not produced in
a Subject, till the preceding be destroyed; the Generation of the one being the
corruption of the other. Lastly, Every substance produces, by way of
Generation, an indivisible substantial Form; But Fire produces a divisible
Quality: For that which was cold becomes first warm, then hot, and by degrees
becomes Fire; which cannot be with a mixture of cold, non consist therewith,
unless as degrees of qualities.

The Fourth said, That Fire is a most perfect Element, hot and dry; according
to Aristotle, of the most perfect form and activity of all the Elements;
according to Plato, the principal instrument of Nature; according to
Empedocles, the Father of Things. Whence it was that the Assyrians adored it.
The Persians carried it out of Honor before their Kings, and at the head of
their Armies. The Romans made so great account of it, that they assigned it to
the care of certain Virgins to be kept immortal. Pythagoras believed it to be
an Animal, because it is nourished as Animals, and for want of Aliment dies;
And because a lighted Torch being cast into the Water, the Fire extinguishing,
sends forth such a noise as Animals do at the gasps of Death. But he esteemed
its natural place to be the Center of the Subterranean World. Whence it is
(said he) that we see so many Volcanoes, and other Fires issue out of the
entrals of the Earth; as those of Monte Vesuvio, in the Kingdom of Naples,
Monte Gibello, (formerly Aetna) in Sicily, and Monte Hecla in Iseland, and so
many other burning Mountains.

The Fifth said, That as the Sea is the Principle from whence all the Waters
come, and the end whether they return; So the Sun is the Element of Fire, from
whence all other Fires come, and whether at length they reascend as to their
Source. 1. For that all Effects, Qualities, and Properties of Fire, agree
particularly to the Sun; seeing he heats, burns, dryes, and is the cause of
all the Generations that are made here below. 2. Because the Elements stay in
their natural places. Now the Fire not only ascends from the Subterraneous
places where it is detained, by reason of a sulphurous and bituminous Matter
which serves it for food, but it passes also beyond the Heavens of the Moon,
Mercury and Venus, as appears by Comets which are igneous, and particularly by
that which appeared in the year 1618. acknowledged by all the Astronomers, upon
the reasons of Optics, to have been above the said places.

The Sixth denied, That the Sun can be the Element of Fire. 1. Because it is a
Celestial and Incorruptible Body, and by consequence not Igneous or
Elementary. 2. If all Fires come from the Sun, it will follow that all his
rays are Igneous Bodies; for there cannot be imagined other Fires to come from
the Sun hither, but his beams. Now the Sunbeams are neither Bodies nor
Igneous. Not Bodies, since Illumination and Eradiation being made in an
instant, it will follow that a Body comes from Heaven to Earth in a Moment:
Which is absurd, because No Motion is made in an instant. Besides, being those
Rays penetrate Glass, and such other solid and diaphanous Bodies, there would
be a penetration of Dimensions, which is impossible. Nor are they Igneous,
seeing Fire being of its own nature light, descends not; but the beams of the
Sun descend down hither. Moreover, Fire is actually hot, but the Sunbeams are
only so in power, viz. when they are reflected by an opake body; as appears in
the Middle Region of the Air, where it is colder then upon the Earth, though
its beams are nearer. Wherefore it is more reasonable to hold to the common
opinion, which places the Fire immediately under the Heaven of the Moon. For
there is no fear, that that Fire, how great soever, can burn the World, its
hear being allayed and dulled by the extreme humidity of the Air its Neighbor,
and by the great coldness of the same Air, which is in the Middle Region; and
counter-checketh that heat, which on one side has already lost its violence
and acrimony by its natural Rarity. Nor is there any trouble to be taken for
its nourishment; for being in its own Center and Empire it has no enemies nor
contraries, and needs no food for its support, as our common Fire does. What
if we behold it not? It Is not because there is none, but because it is so rare
and so pure that it cannot fall within the perception of our Senses: As there
is such a thing as Air, though we see it not. How many Colors, Odours,
Sapours, and Sounds are there which we never knew? And as for what is observed
in a Candle newly put out, it is clear that the Fire descends not to it, but
inflameth the unctuous Matter which it touches, and this the next, even to the
Candle from whence that Matter proceeds.

II Of the Universal Spirit.
Upon the Second Point, it was said, That it must First be known what is meant
by Universal Spirit. 2. Whether there be one. 3. What it is. As for the First,
By the word Universal Spirit, is understood some universal cause and principle
of all the actions and motions which are made in Generation. Just as they
assign one same First Matter, for the Subject of all Forms, so they speak of
an Universal Form, which contains all the rest in it self, and causes them to
act and move in the Matter rightly disposed.

As for the Second, Like as they argue, that the world is finite, round, and
corruptible, because its parts are so; So also it may be said that the world
has a Spirit which enlivens it, since all its principal parts have a
particular one for their Conservation, Action, and Motion; the parts being of
the same Nature with the whole. This Universal Spirit is proved by the
impotency of the Matter, which of it self having no activity or principle of
Life and Motion, needs some other to animate and quicken it. Now particular
Forms cannot do that, for then they would be principles of that Virtue, that is
to say, principles of themselves, which is impossible. Wherefore there must be
some Superior Form, which is the Universal Spirit, the principle of Action and
Motion, the Uniter of the Matter and the Form, the Life of all Nature, and the
Universal Soul of the World. Whence it may confidently be affirmed, that the
World is animated; but with what Soul or Spirit is the difficulty. For if we
prove by Local Motion, or by that of Generation, that a Plant or Animal are
animated, why may we not say the same of all the World, since its more noble
and principal parts afford evidence thereof? As for the Heaven and the Stars,
they are in continual Motion, which the more ^ober Opinion at this day
confesses to produce from their Internal Form, rather then from the
Intelligences which some would have fastened to the Spheres, as a Potter to his
wheel. The Sun, besides his own Motion, which some call in controversy, gives
Life to all things by his heat and influences. The Air, Water, and Earth,
afford also instances of this Life in the production and nourishing of Plants
and Animals. Thus the principal parts being animated, this suffices for the
Denomination of the whole; seeing even in Man there are found some parts not
animated, as the Hair and the Nails.

As for the Last Point, which is to know what this Universal Soul is, there are
many Opinions. The Rabbis and Cabalists say that it is the RVAH ELOHIM, that
is, the Spirit of God which moved upon Waters. Trismegistus says, that it is a
Corporeal Spirit, or a Spiritual Body; and elsewhere calls it the Blessed
GreenWood, or the Green Lion, which causes all things to grow. Plato affirms
it to be the Ideas; The Peripateticks, a certain Quintessence above the Four
Elements. Heraclitus, and after him the Chemists, that it is a certain
Ethereal Fire. For my part, I conceive, that if by this Spirit they mean a
thing which gives Life, and Spirit, and Motion to all, which is found every
where, and on which all depends, there is no doubt but it is the Spirit of God;
or rather God himself, in whom and through whom we live and move. But if we
will seek another in created Nature, we must not seek it elsewhere then in that
corporeal creature which has most resemblance with the Deity; The Sun, who
more lively represents the same then any other, by his Light, Heat, Figure, and
Power. And therefore the Sun is that Spirit of the World, which causes to move
and act here below all that has Life and Motion.

The Second said, That that Soul is a certain common Form diffused through all
things which are moved by it; as the wind of the Bellows makes the Organs to
play, applying them to that whereunto they are proper, and according to their
natural condition. So this Spirit with the Matter of Fire makes Fire, with
that of Air makes Air, and so of the rest. Some give it the name of Love, for
that it serves as a link or tie between all Bodies, into which it insinuates it
self with incredible Subtility; which Opinion will not be rejected by the Poets
and the Amorous, who attribute so great power to it.

The Third said, That the Soul being the First Act of an Organical Body, and
the word Life being taken only for Vegetation, Sensation, and Ratiocination,
the world cannot be animated; since the Heavens, the Elements, and the greatest
part of Mixed Bodies want such a Soul and such Life. That the Stoics never
attributed a Soul to this world, but only a Body, which by reason of its
Subtility is called Spirit; and for that it is expanded through all the parts
of the world, is termed Universal, which is the cause of all Motions, and is
the same thing with what the Ancients called Nature, which they defined the
Principle of Motion. The reason of the Stoics, for this Universal Spirit, is
drawn from the Rarefaction and Condensation of Bodies. For if Rarefaction be
made by the insinuation of an other subtle Body, and Condensation by its
pressing out, it follows that since all the Elements and mixed Bodies are
rarifi'd and condensed, there is some Body more subtle then those Elements and
mixts, which insinuating it self into the parts rarifies them and makes them
take up greater space; and going forth is the Cause that they close together,
and take up less. Now Rarefaction is always made by the entrance of a more
subtle Body, and Condensation by its going out. This is seen in a very thick
Vessel of Iron or Brass, which being filled with hot Water, or heated Air, and
being well stopped, if you set it into the cold, it will condense what is
contained therein, which by that means must fill less space then before: Now
either there must be a Vacuum in the Vessel, which Nature abhors, or some
subtle Body must enter into it, which comes out of the Air or the Water which
fills that space; Which Body also must be more subtle then the Elements which
cannot penetrate through the thickness of the Vessel. There is also seen an
Instance of this in the Sunbeams, which penetrate the most solid Bodies, if
they be never so little diaphanous, which yet are impenetrable by any Element
how subtle soever.

And because a great part of the Hour designed for Inventions was found to have
slipped away, during the Reciprocation of other reasons brought for and against
this opinion; some curiosities were only mentioned, and the examination of
them referred to the next Conference. In which it was determined, first to
treat of the Air, and then to debate that Question, Whether it is expedient in
a State to have Slaves.

CONFERENCE VII.
I. Of the Air. II. Whether it be best for a State to have Slaves.

I. Of the Air.
THe First said, That he thought fit to step aside a little out of the ordinary
way, not so much to impugn the Maxims of the School, as to clear them; and
that for this end he propros'd, That the Air is not distinguished from the
Water, because they are changed one into the other. For what else are those
Vapors which are drawn up from the Water by the power of the Sun, and those
which arise in an Alembic, or from boiling Water, if we do not call them Air?
Now those Vapors are nothing but Water rarifi'd and subtiliz'd by heat; as
also when they are reduced into Water by condensation, this Water is nothing
but Air condensed: And so Air and Water differ not but by Rarefaction and
Condensation, which are but Accident; and consequently cannot make different
species of Element. Both the one and the other may be seen in the Aeolipila of
Vitruvius, out of which the heat of Fire causes the Water which is therein to
issue in the form of Air and an impetuous wind; which is the very Image of that
which Nature ordinarily does. I conceive also that the Air is neither hot, nor
moist, nor light, as Philosophers commonly hold. For as to the First, the Air
is much more cold then hot, and for one torrid Zone there are two cold.
Besides, Heat is but Accidental to it, being caused by the incidence and
reflections of the rays of the Sun; So that this cause failing in the night,
when the Sun shines not; or in Winter when its rays are very oblique, and
their reflection weak; or in the Middle Region, whether the Reflection reaches
not, the Air becomes cold, and consequently in its natural quality, since
there is no External Cause that produces that coldness. As for the Second, The
Air dries more then it moistneth; and if it moistneth, it is when it is cold
and condensed, and consequently mixed with many particles of Water; and when it
dries, it is by its own heat. For the Definition which Aristotle gives of
Humid and Moist, is only proper to every thing which is fluid and not stable,
and in this respect agrees to the Air which is fluid, and gives way to all
sorts of Bodies. As for the Last, which is its levity, the harmony of the world
by which all things conspire to union, and so to one common Center, seems to
contradict it. For if the Air has its Motion from the Center, the parts of the
world might be disunited; For the Air would escape away, there being no
restraint upon it by any External Surface. Moreover, if we judge the Air light
because we see it mount above water, we must also say that Wax and Oil are
light, since we observe the same in them. But that which they do is not
mounting above the Water, but being repelled by the Water: And so the principal
of Motion being External, the same is violent and not natural. Whereas when the
Air descends into the Well, it descends thither naturally, there being no
External Cause of that descent. For Vacuum, not existing in Nature, cannot
produce this Effect; Since, according to the received Maxim, Of a Thing which
is not there can be no Actions. Besides it would be it self-cause of its own
destruction, and do contrary to its own intention, preserving Nature by this
Action; whereas it is an Enemy to it, and seeks the ruin thereof. Lastly,
Since many Particles of Air being condensed and pressed together, give
ponderosity to a thing, as is seen in a Baloon or football, it must needs be
ponderous it self; for many light Bodies joined together are more light.

The Second said, That the difference between Water and Air is as clear as
either of those Elements; For that the Vapors which arise from the Water by
means of the Suns heat, and the wind which issues out of the abovesaid Vessel
full of Water, and placed upon the Fire, cannot be called Air, saving
abusively: But they are mixts, actually composed of Water and Fire. For the
rays of the Sun entering into the Water, raise it into Vapor; And the Fire
infinuating it self by the Pores of the Vessel into the Water which it
contains, causes the same to come forth in the form of wind, which is
composed of Fire and Water; Of Fire, because the property of Fire being to
mount on high, it lifts up that subtiliz'd Water with it self; Of Water,
because this Vapor has some coldness and humidity; whence meeting with a
solid Body it is resolved into Water, because the Fire alone passes through
the Pores of that Body. Besides, Water being moist, and Air on the contrary
dry, as the precedent opinion imports, they cannot be the same thing. And
since all Alteration is made between two different things, Water and Air,
transmuting one into another, as it has been said, cannot be the same. Lastly,
as there are two Elements, whereof one is absolutely light, as the Fire, the
other absolutely heavy, as the Earth; So there are two which are such, but in
comparison with the rest. The Water compared with the Earth is light, because
it floateth above it: The Air in comparison of the Water is light too, because
it is above it. So that when it descends lower then the Water into the
Caverns of the Earth, it is Nature that obliges it to renounce its proper and
particular interest for preserving the general one, which is destroyed by the
Vacuum; not that the Vacuum is the Cause thereof, for it has no existence. And
the Air wherewith the Baloon is filled renders the same more heavy, because it
is impure and mixed with gross Vapors; Which it would not do, were it pure and
Elementary, such as is that of which we are speaking, which is not to be found
in our Region. The Common Opinion has also more probability, which holds
that the Air is hot and moist; Hot, because it is rare and light, which are
effects of heat; Moist because it is difficultly contained within its own
bounds, and easily within those of another; Thence it is that the more Bodies
partake of Air, the more they have of those qualities; As we see in Oil, which
is hot, being easily set on flame; And Moist, in that it greatly humecteth, and
easily expandeth it self on all sides. But if the Air seems sometimes to be
cold, it is by accident, by reason of the cold vapors wherewith it is filled at
that time.

The Third said, That he conceived that contrarily the Air is cold and dry. 1.
Because it freezeth the Earth and Water in Winter, and therefore is colder in
either of them. 2. Because it refreshes the Lungs, and by its coolness
tempereth the extreme heat of the Heart and of the other parts: which it could
not do if it were hot. 3. Inasmuch as hot things exposed to the Air are cooled,
which they would not be, but at least preserve their heat being in a place of
the same Nature. 4. The more it is agitated the more it refreshes (as we see
by Fans) because then the unessential things being separated from it, it is
more close and united; quite contrary to the other Elements, which grow hot by
being agitated. 5. In the night time, the more pure and serene and void of
mixtures the Air is, the colder it is. 6. Thence it is that flame burns less
then boiling water or hot Iron, because in flame there is a great deal of Air,
which being colder then Water and Iron represseth more the strength of the
Fire. Lastly, since, according to Aristotle, Air does not putrify, (what is
said of its corruption, being taken improperly) it is for that it is cold and
dry; both these qualities being Enemies to putrefication; As, on the contrary,
Hot and Moist are friends to it, and the usual ways that lead thereunto.
Wherefore, if the Air were hot and moist, it would putrify incessantly.
Besides it would be easily inflamed being so near Neighbor to the Elementary
Fire, which could have no food more proper then it.

The Fourth said, It Is true, all Antiquity believed the Air supremely, moist
and moderately hot. 1. For salving the Harmony of the Universe, the Air
becoming symbolical with the Fire by its heat, and with the water by its
moisture. 2. Because we see Heat produces Air, which thence must have affinity
of Nature with its progenitor. 3. It is light, and by consequence hot. 4.
Experience shows us this in Winter time in subterraneous places, where the
Air is hot; because the external cold, stopping the pores of the Earth, hinders
the spirits of the enclosed Air from evaporating, and so it remains hot. But to
the First Reason it is answered, That the Air, without being hot, sufficiently
makes good its party in the Harmony of the Universe; for by its humidity alone
it symbolizeth with the Water and the Celestial Heat, as is seen in Animals,
wherein Moist and Hot make so useful a Mass. To the Second, That Heat produces
vapor too, which is cold. To the Third, That this cold vapor is light as well
as a hot exhalation. To the Fourth, Experience is opposed to Experience. For in
Summer the Air is cold in the Cavities of the Earth, as well as hot there in
the Winter: Which proceeds not from the Air, but from the sense; which
whereas it ought to be void of the qualities of the object, is here preposses'd
therewith. The Moderns affirm with more probability that the Air is cold. 1.
Because in the Middle Region (where it is left in its proper Nature) it is
such. 2. In the Northern parts remote from the Sun, its rigor has such effect
as to freeze the Sea, and even in our Countries we are sensible in Winter of
the Sun, and yet in clear weather of great Frosts; To which it is answered: 1.
That the Middle Region of the Air is not so cold of its own Nature, but by
reason of the vapors which refrigerate it uniformly every where, though those
vapors ascend not equally from the Water, but more in one place then in an
other; just as the heat of the Fire which is directly under the middle of the
bottom of a great Caldron, yet heats it on all sides equally and uniformly.
Also the coldness of the Air in the Northern parts, and in our Country, must
necessarily be ascribed to a Constellation which is made when some Star
exerteth a cold influence, and is not repressed by the Sun, who then emits his
rays slopingly, and has not reverberation strong enough from the Earth. This
is proved by the Thaw, which is from the influence, (not of the Sun, for he is
too weak; and it sometimes happens when he is less elevated above our Horizon,
but) of some hot Star, which gains the ascendant over the cold. And indeed we
see a Frost and a Thaw happen without any foregoing mutation in the Air, at
least, that is sensible. I conceive then that the Air is neither hot nor cold,
but indifferent to both. What it has actual is its humidity, from whence it
deriveth its great mobility. The reason is, for that the Air is the Universal
Medium of all natural Actions, and the general interposer in all the
transactions of Agents and Patients; for which office it ought not to be an
Enemy to any of them. Now of Agents the most powerful are Heat and Cold. When
Heat acts it consignes its impression to the Air to transfer the same by
Propagation to the subject upon which it acts. But if the Air were Cold,
instead of faithfully keeping and delivering the impression of Heat, it would
abate and destroy it. On the contrary, if it were Hot, it would destroy the
Cold Body which acts, instead of assisting it in its action: Just as the
Crystalline humor which serves as a Medium to the sight, has naturally no
color, lest otherwise the Case would be the same as in colored glass, through
which all objects that are seen borrow its color; Or as in the Tongue, whose
Taste being depraved, it judges all things bitter. But the Air being only
Humid, is the common friend of both parties; For Moist symbolizing both with
Hot and Cold, fights against neither. The Air then is that Humid Substance
which takes no other figure, bounds, or enclosure, then that of the Bodies
which environ it; for the becoming most obedient, to which it has an
incomparable Mobility, Fluidity, and Flexibility; Which being consistent only
in a Humid Substance, it is by Humidity alone as its essential propriety
actuated and informed.

II. Whether it is best for a State to have Slaves.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Servitude is opposite to Dominion,
which is of Two sorts; Despoti^al or Sovereign, and Political or Civil. The
former is absolute, and with pure and full Authority commands without being
liable to be asked a reason; For the pleasure of the Commander is one. The
Latter often times receives check in its course by the right which inferiors
have to remonstrate, and also in certain Cases to declare to the Command. Such
is that of a Master over a workman, or a hired domestic that is voluntarily
subject for certain wages and time; and of this the Question now is not. The
former is contrary to natural Law, introduced only by that of Nations: For all
Men being equal by Nature, there is no Natural Reason for rendering one person
slave to an other. Nevertheless Servitude may be termed Natural, being founded
upon the inequality of the sufficiencies and abilities of Men; Some being born
with Organs so nimble and pliant, that their Mind acts almost Divinely; Others
are so dull, that the Soul seems mir'd in a slough. Moreover such as are made
to obey have usually robust Bodies; And others born to command have weak and
tender, as more suitable and fit for the functions of the Mind.

This being premised, There is furthermore an Absolute Good, and a Relative.
The Absolute is such in it self, and of its own essence, without borrowing
elsewhere the reason of its goodness. The other is Derivative, and has nothing
but by relation to some other. Extreme Servitude or Slavery cannot be an
Absolute Good, since it is contrary to Natural Right. But it is a Relative
Good, in the first place, to the Slaves: For it is an exchange, made by the
Conquerours Clemency, of Death into Servitude, to the benefit of the Captives;
whose condition is better in living Servants then in dying Freemen. 2. It Is a
Good to the Commonwealth; For as God draws Good out of Evil, so does the
Public Service from those whom it might have put to death, and would not. 3.
Their Example, and the terrible prospect of their condition, holds such in duty
as Vice would otherwise drive on to the perpetration of mischief.

An other said, That Slavery is an Institution of the law of nations, by which
one is, contrary to Nature, subjected to the Dominion of another; Which
Dominion, before the Emperor Antoninus Pius, extended to Life and Death; But
since that power has been restrained, so that he that grievously outraged his
Slave was forced to sell him. But if he killed him he incurred the same penalty
as if he had slain the Servant of another: It being for the good of the
Commonwealth, that none abuse even what belongs to himself. Since that time
the Master had absolute Power over his Slave, to employ him in all kind of
work, as he pleased, to hire him forth and draw profit by him; and in case of
non-obedience to chastise him more or less according to the attrocity of his
crime; Provided that there followed not thereby mutilation of Members. He has
also Power to alienate him, and that Power is extended likewise to the Children
which happen to be begotten by him during the servitude. The Slave also cannot
acquire any thing, but it is his Master's. Nor can he complain of his master,
or forsake him for having been lightly punished: But he may for mortal Hunger,
or grievous Contumely; as if the Master offer to force his Slave, in which case
the Slave [of either Sex] running to the Temples, Sepulchers, and Statues,
which served them for Sanctuary, ought to be sold, and his price paid to the
Master. Now there are Four sorts of Slaves: The First and most ancient are such
as have been taken in war, who of Freemen, (as they were before) being
conquered become in the power of the Conquerours. The Second are those who
having deserved Death are condemned to the punishment of the Galleys,
Common-shores, and public works, and anciently to the Mines and Mills: (in
which Mines the Spaniards at this day employ the Americans) And they are called
Forcats, or Slaves of punishment. The Third are those who being unable to
satisfy their Creditors by reason of their poverty, are sold with their own
consent, and pay the price of their liberty to be acquitted by them, that so
they may avoid the cruelty of the said Creditors, who had to dismember them.
These three sorts of Servants became such, having before been freemen. But the
Fourth sort is of those that are such by Nature, and are born Servants, being
descended from a Slave. Now, in my Judgment, it is fitting to introduce and
retain these four sorts of Servitude in a State, since they are very natural
and reasonable. For besides that there are Men who are born to command, others
to obey; It seems that Servitude having been from the Beginning of the World,
and presently after the Deluge, when Noah cursing Canaan his younger Son,
pronounced him Servant of the Servants of his Brethren: And being as ancient,
yea ancienter then the foundation of States and Empires; and having been
approved by ancient Lawgivers and wise Politicians, and by God himself, it
cannot be esteemed but reasonable and natural. For in the First Place, What is
so just and so suitable to the Law of Nature, [The First, containing only
Marriages, Procreation, and Education of Children] as to give life to him whom
you may justly deprive thereof, to feed him and cloth him; And in exchange for
so many benefits to make use of him and of all that he can earn, and to make
him return to his duty by some moderate punishments in case he recede from it?
Which is the advice of Aristotle in his Oeconomicks, where he says, That a
good Father of a Family ought to give Three Things to his Servants, viz. Work,
Food, and Discipline. I conceive it also less unsuitable to Nature, yea to
Christianity, to make use of Criminals then to put them to death; If Example,
for which principally they are punished, will permit: And also instead of
sending so many stout men to the Gallows for common crimes, or putting them to
the Sword (as they do in War) to put them to the chain for the service of the
public, either for laboring in Buildings, Cloisters, and Fortificatlons of
Cities, repairing of ways, cleansing of Streets, Towing of Boots, drawing of
Charriots, laboring in Highways, Mines, and other public works, after the
Galleys are furnished them. Possibly too, it would not be unmeet that he who is
so endebted that he cannot satisfy his Creditors, should instead of suffering
himself to lie rotting in Goal, pay with the Service of his Body what he cannot
in Money: But it would be fit to use a difference therein. And as for those
that are born of Slaves, is there any thing more ours then such fruits grown
within our walls and sprung from our own stock?

The Last opposed, that it is difficult for an Absolute Dominion to keep any
measure. Witness Quintus Flaminius, a Roman Senator, who killed his Slave to
content the curiosity which a Bardash of his had to see what aspect a Man has
when he is dying. Besides, if there be any place where Liberty ought to carry
the Cause, (were not Christian Brotherhood alone sufficient,) it is France, of
which the privilege is such, that the Slaves of any part of the world, only
setting their foot therein, obtain their freedom immediately.

The Inventions propounded were the Experiment of Vitruvius's Aeolipila, that
of walking under the Water; and the Subjects of the next Conference; The First,
Water; the Second, Wine, and Whether it be necessary in War.

CONFERENCE VIII.
I. Of Water. II. Of Wine, and whether it be necessary for Soldiers.

I. Of Water.
THe Discourse upon the First Point began with the division of the qualities of
Water into First and Second; alleging that the First, viz. Cold and Moist, are
so manifest that it is difficult to deny them: Cold, because Water being heated
returns presently to its natural coldness; Moist, because it moistneth more
then any other Element, and is not contained within its own bounds. But its
Second, and the proprieties resulting from them, are so numerous, that they
justly administer ground to the doubt which is raised; Whence proceeds the
cause of so many Varieties in Color, Taste, Odor, and the other Objects of
the Senses. Possibly one may assign the cause of the Waters Whiteness to the
Mines of Plaster; Of its Blackness to those of Iron or Stones of the same
color; The Red, to those of Cinnabar; The Green, to those of Copper; The Blew,
to those of Silver; The Yellow, to those of Orpiment; The Hot, to Sulphur; The
Acid, to Vitriol; The Stinking, to Bitumen. But that some parts of the Sea and
Rivers abound with Fish, and that with certain kinds, and others not; That the
Water of some Springs is converted into Stone, and all that is cast thereinto;
Others, (as they say) make Women fruitful or barren; Some, as it is reported of
the Fortunate Islands, cause weeping; Others, dying with laughter: That some
pass through others without mixing therewith; That others are so ponderous,
that no Body whatsoever can sink to the bottom; Some, on the contrary, are so
light, that nothing can swim upon them; and infinite other such proprieties:
It Is that which seems to surpass ordinary Ratiocination. Of this kind is that
which is said of a certain River in Sicily, the Water whereof cannot be brought
to mingle with Wine, unless it be drawn by a chaste and continent Woman. To
which was added, for a conclusion, that if the Water of Seine had this
property, we should be many times in danger of drinking our Wine unmixt.

The Second said, That nothing could be more natural and methodical then to
treat of Water after Air. For as in the Composition of a Mixed Body, the
moisture which is predominant in the Air unites and knits the matters which are
to be mixed; So the Cold which predominates in the Water closes them and gives
them consistence. And as in Drawing and Painting, the Embroiderer and Painter
passes not from one light color to another without some intermediate one, but
he loses the same insensibly in another more duskish; out of which the bright
breaks forth again by little and little to the middle of his ground: So
Nature does not pass immediately from the extreme humidity which is in the Air,
to the extreme coldness which is in the Water; but causes that the moisture of
the former abateth its great vigor at the approach of the moisture which is in
the Water in a weak and remiss degree, before it meet with the Cold of the
Water whereunto it is to be joined; Without which humidity of the Water in a
weak and remiss degree, the Cold could not compact the parts which the moisture
united. So that this humidity is found in two Subjects, one subtle, which is
the Air, the other more gross, which is the Water. As it happens also in the
Fire, which is partly in a rare Subject, namely the fat and unctuous vapor,
whereby it flameth, and (partly) in another solid and gross, which is Wood,
Iron, or Coal. As Flame, it is more apt to shine and burn, penetrating the
pores of the wood to find its Aliment there, which is the interior Oil; As
Coal it acts more powerfully, and is more durable. So if there were in the Mixed
Body no other humidity but that of the Air, the same inconvenience would befall
it that does a Conqueror, who having subdued a Country reserveth no place of
Retreat for the keeping thereof; For at the first opposition which he meets
he is constrained to let go his hold: So if moisture were not in the Air, it
would indeed penetrate the Compounded Bodies still, as it does as readily; but
it would, suddenly dislodge again, if it had not its refuge in the Water which
is more proper to preserve it.

The Third said, That Water cannot be cold in the highest degree. First,
because if it were so, it could generate nothing; Cold being an Enemy to all
Generation, because it locketh up the particles within; As, on the contrary,
Heat is the Proximate Cause thereof, by the extension and attraction which it
causes outward. Nevertheless, we see Plants and Animals in the Waters.
Secondly, If it were so cold, being moist too, it would be always frozen;
since according to Aristotle, Ice is nothing but an excess of coldness with
moisture. Thirdly, Those qualities which are attributed to Water are common to
many other things besides; As to the Air, when it is cold: and do not
necessarily belong to it, but may be separated from it; since, remaining Water
still, it may become hot by the Fire, and frozen by the Air, and so be found
destitute of its fluidity and humidity. If it be said, That it loses not its
qualities but by accident, and that of its own Nature it is cold; I answer,
That the Natural and Necessary Proprieties of Things, proceeding immediately
from their Essence, (such as those of Water are held to be) cannot be taken
from them but by Miracle: And on the contrary, That it is not cold but by the
vicinity of the cold Air which encompasseth it, and not of its own Nature;
Whence the surface of the Water is cold in Winter, and sometimes frozen, the
bottom remaining warm. And therefore the Fish do not come much to the upper
part of the Water in Winter, but stay below, where it is in its own Nature, and
is not so easily altered with foreign qualities. Moreover, since we know the
Qualities of a Thing by its Effects, the Effect of Water being, even in the
Judgment of Sense, to moisten more then any of the Elements, it ought to be
held the Chief or First Humid Body. If it be said that it moistneth more then
the Air, because it is more gross and compact (as hot Iron burns more then
flame;) I answer, That although it may owe that humidity to the thickness of
its Matter, yet the same is not the less essential to it, since Matter is one
part of the Element; And besides, it proceeds from the Form too, since it can
never be separated from it; Water always necessarily moistning whilst it is
Water. Which cannot be said of its coldness: for when it is warm it does not
lose its name of Water, though it be no longer cold; but it is always moist.

The Fourth said, That, to speak properly Water, is never hot in it self; but
it is the Fire insinuating and mingling it self with the little Particles of the
Water that we feel hot; and accordingly that Fire being evaporated, the Water
not only returns to its natural quality, but also the Fire leaving its pores
more open renders them more accessible to the Air, which freezes the same in
Winter sooner then it would do otherwise. And this is no more then as Salt and
Sulphurous Waters are made such by the Salt and Sulphur mingled therewith;
Which being separated from them, they lose also the taste thereof. And as Wine
mingled with Water is still truly Wine, and has the same Virtue as before,
though its activity be repressed by the power of the Water; So Water mingled
with Salt, Sulphur, and Fire, is true Water, and has intrinfecally the same
qualities as before that mixture; though indeed its action be retarded, and its
qualities be checked and rebated by the other contraries which are more
powerful. In like manner, Water is not cold of it self, but by the absence of
Fire; As it happens in Winter, that the igneous beams of the Sun not staying
upon the Water, it persisteth cold, and so that coldness is but a privation of
heat; As appears in the shivering of an Ague, which proceeds from the
retiring of the natural heat inwards, and deserting the external parts. But if
there happen a total privation of those igneous parts, which are infused into
it mediately or immediately by the Sun, then it becomes frozen: And because
those fiery Particles occupied some space in its Body, it is now straightened, and
takes less room then before. Whence Water freezing in Vessels well stopped, the
same break for the avoidance of Vacuum. Moreover, Humidity is not one of its
essential proprieties, because it may be separated from it, as we see in frozen
water, which is less humid then when it was cold. It follows then, that Second
Qualities being Tokens of the First, and the goodness of Water requiring that
it have the least weight that can be, as also that it have neither Taste nor
Smell; the most pure, ( i. e. the Elementary, of which we are speaking) is
without First Qualities; having been created by God only to be the band or tie
of the other parts of a mixed body.

The Fifth said, That the Scripture divides the Waters into those which are
above the Heavens, and those upon the Earth; as if to teach us that Water is
the Center, the Middle, and the end of the Universe. Which agrees with the
opinion of those who establish it for the Sole Principle of all things. Those
Supercoelestial Waters are proved by the Etymology of the word for Heavens,
Schamaim, which signifies in Hebrew, There are Waters: Because it is said that
God divided the Waters from the Waters, and placed them above the Firmament:
Which Supercoelestial Waters are also invited by the Psalmist to bless the
Lord: And lastly, because it is said that at the time of the Deluge the windows
of Heaven were opened.

The Sixth said, That the gravity of those Supercoelestial Waters would not
suffer them to remain long out of the place destinated to that Element, which
is below the Air; And therefore it were better to take the word Heaven in those
places for the Air, as it is elsewhere in the Scripture, which mentions the
Dew, and the Birds of Heaven: Since also the Hebrew word, which there signifies
Firmament, is also taken for the Expansion of the Air, and those
Supercoelestial Waters for Rain.

II. Of Wine, and whether it be necessary for Soldiers.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That if we speak of Wine moderately taken,
the Sacred Text voids the Question, saying, that it rejoices the Heart. Which
it performs by supplying ample matter to the Influent Spirits, which the
Heart by the Arteries transmitteth to all the parts; and which joining
themselves to the private Spirits, strengthen them, and labor in common with
them; And so the Soldier, entering into fight with a cheerful Heart, is half
victorious. Yea, the greatest exploits of War are achieved by the Spirits;
which constitute Courage, the Blood heated by them over-powring the coldness of
Melancholy and Phlegm, which cause backwardness and slowness of Action. For it
is with the Virtues as with Medicines, which become not active* and pass not
from power into act, but by help of the natural faculties; So the Virtues do
not produce their effects but by the Spirits. But Wine taken in excess is
wholly prejudicial to the Valor of a Soldier; who has need of a double
strength; One of Mind, to lead him on valiantly to dangers, and keep him
undaunted at dreadful occurrences; The other of Body, to undergo the long
toiles of War, and not draw back in fight. Now Wine destroys both of these.
For as for the former, Valor or Fortitude is a Moral Virtue, which, as all
other Virtues its companions, acts under the conduct of Prudence, which alone
rules and employeth them, and knows where and how they ought to act; So that
what assists Prudence assists Valor too; and that which hureth the one hurts
the other also. Now excessive Wine hurts the former very much. For by its
immoderate heat it causes a tumult and disorder in the humors, it makes the
Brain boil and work, and consequently embroyleth and confounds the
Phantasines which are imprinted in it, (as it happens in sleep or in the
Frenzy) and by its gross vapor it obstructeth all its passages. So that the
Understanding cannot take its Survey there, having no free access to come and
form its judgments and conclusions upon the Ideas and Phantasmes; And although
it should have its Avenues free, yet the Phantasmes being in confusion, like
Images in stirred waters, it would be impossible for it to judge aright, and
prudently to discern what fear or what eagerness ought to be checked and
repel'd. For all Fear is not to be rejected, no more then it is to be followed;
nor is the bridle to be let loose at all adventures, nor always restrained.
The strength of the Body is also impaird by Wine. For though Galen and others
will have it Hot and Dry, yet it being so but potentially, it is as subject to
deceive us, as that Dutchman was, who hearing that Cresses were hot, commanded
his Man to fill his Boots therewith, to warm him. For the truth is, Wine is
moist and vapourous, and that to such a degree, that by reason of its extreme
humidity it cannot be corrupted with a total corruption; For this happens
when the external heat has wholly drawn out the moisture of the corrupted
Body, and so dissolved the Union of all the dry parts which moisture keeps
together; So that the Elements flying away, there remains nothing to be seen
but Earth alone. Which cannot come to pass in Wine, by reason of the little dry
substance in it, and of its great humidity, which cannot be wholly separated:
In which regard it is never corrupted but in part, viz. when the external heat
draws away the more pure substance, and the better Spirits; as we see when it
grows sour, thick, or turbid. Being then humid to such a degree, and our parts
partaking of the nature of their food, if Soldiers nourish their Bodies
excessively with Wine, they must retain the qualities thereof, viz. softness
and weakness which follow humidity. Whence possibly came the word Dissolute,
for such as addict themselves to this debauchery, and the other which follow
it. Therefore the Soldier would be more robust if he never drank Wine; because
he would eat the more, and produce the more solid substance, which would make
him more vigorous, less subject to diseases, and more fit to endure in sight,
and undergo the other toils of War.

The Second said, That it belongs to the prudent Statesman to weigh the
benefit and the mischief which may arise from his orders; So that he always
propose to himself that he has to do with imperfect men, and who incline
rather to the abuse, then the right use of things. This holds principally in
War, Soldiers willingly aiming at nothing else but pleasure and profit: Even
in this Age, wherein we are past the Apprentisage of War, except some constant
Regiments: Soldiers are tumultuously chosen almost always out of the dregs of
the people; of whom to require the exercise of Temperance in the use of that
which ordinarily costs them nothing, were to seek an impossibility. Such is
Wine, that though it makes the Soldier sturdy, yet it makes him unfit to
govern himself, much less others; Whereunto notwithstanding he oftentimes
becomes obliged by the various contingencies of War, when the Leaders
miscarrying, or being elsewhere employed, the Soldier must supply the place of
Captain to his Companions and himself. This has moved almost all the Oriental
Nations, and particularly the Turks to abstain from Wine, though they also
adjoyn reasons for it drawn from their false Religion, to confirm their Minds
more in conformity to this piece of Policy. Therefore Mahomet, to induce them
to it by their own experience, invited the principal Persons of his Army to a
Feast, where he caused them to be served with the most exquisite Wines. First
they all agreed upon the Excellency of Wine; but having taken too much of it,
there arose such a tumult amongst them, that he took occasion thence, the next
morning, to represent to them that Wine was nothing else but the Blood of the
first Serpent, whose color it also bears; as the stock of the Vine which
produces it retains the crooked form of that vile Animal, and the rage
whereinto it puts those that use it, does testify. And to content them that
still loved the taste of it, he promised them that they should drink nonothing
else in their Paradise, where their Bodies would be proof against its violence.
Which Prohibition has been the most apparent cause of the amplification of his
Empire, and propagation of his Sect; not only because Wine was by its acrimony
dangerous to the most part of his Subjects of Africa and Arabia, where such as
are addicted to it are subject to the Leprosy; and that his people who
cultivated Vines might employ themselves more profitably in tilling the Earth,
but principally it has been more easy for him and his successors to keep
200000 men of War in the field without the use of Wine, then for another Prince
as potent as he to keep 50000 with the use of Wine; which besides is difficult
to transport, and incumbreth the place of Ammunition which is absolutely
necessary.

The Third said, That Mahomet was not the first that prohibited Wine; for
before him Zaleucus forbad the Locrians to drink it upon pain of Death. The
Lacedemoniaus and the Carthaginians, as Aristotle reports, had an express Law
by which they forbad the use of it to all people that belonged to War. And the
wise man counsels only the afflicted to drink it, to the end to forget
their miseries. But for all this he conceived that it ought not to be
prohibited now to our Soldiers, since it augmenteth Courage, envigorateth
strength, and takes away the fear of danger; though indeed it is fit to forbid
them the excess thereof, if it be possible.

In Conclusion, It was maintained that Wine ought to be forbidden not only to
Soldiers, but to all such as are of hot and dry tempers, and use violent
exercises; because it hurts them, as much as it profits weak persons. Wherefore
Saint Paul counsels Timothy to use it for the weakness of his stomach. But
God inhibited it to the Nazarens, and to those which entered into his
Tabernacle, under pain of death. Moreover, you see that Noah, who used it
first, abused it. And anciently it was to be had only in the shops of
Apothecaries; because it is an Antidote and most excellent Cordial, provided its
continual use render not its virtue ineffectual; our Bodies receiving no
considerable impression from accustomed things. Therefore Augustus gave ear to
all the other complaints which the Romans made to him; but when they mentioned
the dearness of Wine, he derided them; telling them that his Son in Law Agrippa
having brought Aquaeducts to the City, had taken care that they should not dye
of Thirst.

At the Hour of Inventions, amongst many others, these two were proposed. The
first to prepare common Water so that it shall dissolve Gold without the
addition of any other Body, etc. The second, to make a Wagon capable to
transport by the help of one Man who shall be in it, the burdens of ordinary
Wagons in the accustomed time: of which the Inventers delivered their
Memories, and offered to make the experiments at their own charges.

These Subjects were propounded to be treated of at the next Conference. First,
The Earth. Secondly, What it is that makes a Man wise.

CONFERENCE IX.
I. Of the Earth. II. What it is that makes a Man wise.

I. Of the Earth.
UPon the first Point it was said, That the Earth is a simple Body, cold and
dry, the Basis of Nature. For since there is a Hot and Moist, it is requisite
for the entire perfection of Mixts, that there be a Cold and a Dry to bound
them, and give them shape. This Earth then upon which we tread is not
Elementary; for it is almost every where moist, and being opened affords
water: which was necessary to it, not only for the union of its parts, which
without moisture would be nothing but Dust; but also in regard of its gravity,
which I conceive comes from humidity; because as the lightest things are the
hottest and driest, so the heaviest are usually the coldest and moistest.
Besides, gravity proceeding from compactedness and compactedness from moisture,
it seems that moisture is the cause of gravity. Which is proved again by the
dissolution of mixed Bodies, whereby we may judge of their composition. For the
heaviest Bodies which are easily dissolvable, are those from which most Water
is drawn; whence it is that there is more drawn from one pound of Ebeny, then
from twenty of Cork. From this gravity of the Earth its roundness necessarily
follows. For since it is the nature of heavy things to tend all to one Center,
and approach thereto as much as they can, it follows that they must make a Body
round and spherical, whereof all the parts are equally distant from the Center.
For if they made any other Figure, for Example, a Pyramide or a Cube, there
would be some parts not in their natural place, i. e. the nearest their Center
that might be. Moreover, in the beginning the Earth was perfectly spherical,
and the Waters encompassed it on all sides, as themselves were again
encompassed by the Air. But afterward, these Waters, to make place for Man,
retiring into the hollows and concavities made for that purpose in the Earth,
it could not be but that those parts of the Earth which came out of those
cavities must make those tumors which are the Mountains and Hills for the
convenience of Man. And nevertheless it cease not to be Physically round,
although it be not so Mathematically; As a bowl of Pumice is round as to the
whole, though the parts are uneven and rough. They prove this roundness, 1. By
the shadow of the Earth; which appearing round in the Eclipses of the Moon,
argues that the Body whence it proceeds is also round. 2. Because they who
travel both by Sea and by Land sooner discern the tops of Mountains and the
spires of Steeples then the bottom; which would be seen at the same time if
the Earth were flat. 3. Because, according as we approach, or go farther from
the Poles, we see the same more or less elevated. 4. Because the Sun is seen
daily to rise and set sooner in one place then in another. Lastly, it is proved
by the convenience of habitation. For as of all Isoperimeter Figures the Circle
is most capacious, so the Sphere contains more then any other Body; and
therefore if the Earth were not round, every part of it would not have its
Antipodes. So that I wonder at the opinion of Lactantius and Saint Augustine,
who denied them: For as for that story, that in the year 745. by the relation
of Aventinus, Virgilius a German Bishop was deprived of his Bishopric, and
condemned as an Heretic by Pope Zachary, it was not only for maintaining this
truth, which experience has since confirmed, but because he drew conclusions
from it prejudicial to Religion. Now whereas it may be doubted, whether as
there are uneven parts in the Earth some higher then other, so there be not
also Seas, some of whose waters too, are more elevated then the rest; I affirm,
that since all the Seas (except the Caspian) have communication amongst
themselves, they are all level, and no higher one then another. And had they no
such communication, yet the Water being of its Nature fluid and heavy, flowing
into the lowest place, would equal its surface with the rest, and so make a
perfect Sphere. Whence it follows that they were mistaken who dissuaded
Sesostris King of Egypt from joining the Red Sea with the Mediterranean, for
fear lest the former, which they judged the higher, should come to drown Greece
and part of Asia. For want of which demonstration several Learned Men have been
mistaken, and no less then the Angelical Doctor.

The Second said, That the Earth is very dry, not for that it dispelleth
moisture as Fire does, but for that it receives and imbibeth it into it self.
But it cannot be cold of its own Nature; if it were it could produce nothing.
It is cold only by the Air, as it is sometimes moist by the Water, and hot by
the Fire which insinuates into its cavities. It is also very heavy, since it
holds the lowest place in the world, and has its motion from the
circumference to the Center; which is the progression that Aristotle
attributes to heavy Bodies. Whence for being the lowest stage, it is called
the Footstool of God. But this heaviness seems to me not to proceed from
humidity, as was urged. For though the Water and Earth joined together seem to
weigh more then Earth alone; it is not that they weigh more indeed, but this
Earth which was imagined to be alone is filled with a quantity of Air; and the
Water coming to succeed in its place, it appears more heavy. For Earth and
Water joined together weigh more then Earth and Air so joined in like quantity;
because Water is heavier then Air. And to justify that Earth is heavier then
Water, a bucket filled with sand, weighes more then an other filled with Water.
For, that sand is Water congealed is as hard to prove, as that Earth is Water.

The Third said, That Earth composeth a Mixed Body by a double action, viz. from
its coldness, and of its dryness. As for the former, it secondeth the Water,
compacting by its coldness the parts which are to be mixed, and which moisture
has united. For the Second, it gives hardness and consistence, imbibing and
sucking up the superfluous moisture after the due union of the parts made
thereby. It cannot but be cold; for as good Politicians willingly reconcile two
great Families at Enmity by their mutual alliances so all the strength of the
mixture consisting only in the union of Dry and Moist, and its destruction
coming from their disunion, and the Dry and Moist being wholly Enemies and
contraries in the highest degree, Nature reconciles them together, and brings
them into union by the mediation of Water. For this being allied to Air by the
moisture which it has in a remiss degree; and Earth being allied to Water by
the coldness which it has in a less degree, it becomes allied to the Air and
its humidity: Since according to the maxim, Things which agree in the same
third agree among themselves. Thus you see coldness is necessary to the Earth,
to cause a lasting composition amongst them. Earth has also this advantage by
its siccity, that as the same is less active then heat, and yields thereunto
in vigor of action, so heat yields to it in resistance. For the dryness
inducing hardness resists division more powerfully, and consequently better
preserves the mixed Body in being, resisting the Agents which are contrary to
it. Whereto its gravity serves not a little, it rendering the Earth less
managable by the agitations of the agents its Enemies; So that gravity by this
means assisteth the hardness and consistence of the dryness; like two Kinsmen
uniting together to keep off the affronts of their Enemies.

The Fourth said, That the gravity of the Earth, and of every other Body, yea
that of Gold too, the heaviest of all mixed Bodies, depends only upon its
Figure; since not only a Vessel unequal on the side toward the Water sinketh
not, but also a single leaf of Gold swimeth upon it. Which is seen likewise in
Tera Lemnia, or Sigillata, which sinketh not in the Water; so that there is no
probility in that decuple proportion of the Elements; according to which, Earth
ought to weigh ten times more then Water, and Water only ten times more then
Air; and supposing one were in the Region of Fire, and there weighed the Air,
as we do here the Water, he would find it likewise ten times heavier then the
Fire. This is more certain, that the proportion of the weight of Earth to that
of Seawater, is as 93. to 90; that of Seawater to fresh, as 92. to 74. But
that which makes more for those who hold Water more heavy then Earth, is, that
the proportion of Earth to Salt is found to be as 92. to 106.

In fine, It was remarked that though the Earth is considered by Astronomers
but as a point in respect of the vast extent of the Celestial Orbs; yet no Man
encompas'd it round before the year 1420. when Jean de Betancourt, a Norman
Gentleman, by the discovery of the Canaries traced out the way to the
Spaniards, who attributed the honor thereof to themselves; though they began
not till above fourscore years after. Moreover, it is 15000. leagues in
circumference, of which there is not much less Land uncovered then there is
covered by the Water. But if you compare their greatness together, there is far
less Earth then Water. For it is held that there is no Sea that has a league in
depth, there is little without bottom, many to which the Anchors reach, yea
several places not capable of great vessels for want of Water. On the other
side, There are Mountains upon which you still ascend upwards for many days
journey; others inaccessible even to the sight: In a word, where ever there is
Sea there is Land, but not on the contrary. So that taking the sixth part of the
compass of the Terrestrial Globe for its Semidiametre, according to the
ordinary proportion of the circle to its ray, the Earth will be found several
times greater then the Water; the Springs that are found in opening it, being
not considerable in comparison of the rest of its bulk.

II. What it is that makes a Man wise.
He that spoke first upon the second point, said, that he wondered not that
Wisdom was taken for a Subject to be treated of in so good company, since it is
the point which all desire most, not only in themselves, but also in others
with whom they are to converse. But it behooves to distinguish the same
according to its several acceptions. For anciently Wisdom was taken for the
knowledge of things Divine and Humane, before Pythagoras called it Philosophy.
At present it is confounded with Prudence, and is either infused or acquired.
The former, which springs from the knowledge and fear of God joined with a
good life, is obtained by begging it of God, and rendering one's self worthy to
receive it: Such was that of Solomon, which brought to him all other goods. The
latter, of which we now speak, is obtained by Precepts, Experience, or both.
Whereunto Travel is conceived greatly to conduce, according to the testimony of
Homer, who calls his wise Ulysses a Visitor of Cities; and according to the
opinion of the ancient French Gentry, who would not have had a good opinion of
their Children, unless they had seen Italy and other foreign Countries. It is
also divided according to Sex, Conditions, and Age. For there is difference in
the Wisdom of a Woman, of a Child, of a Man grown, and of an Old Man; and so
there is in that of a Father of a Family, of his Domestic, of a Captain, of a
Soldier, of a Magistrate, of a Citizen, of a Master, of a Varlet, and of
infinite others, who may become wise by several, yea, sometimes by contrary
means. For Example, a wise Soldier ought to expose himself to all dangers and
events of War; quite the contrary to a wise Captain, who ought to preserve
himself the most he can. A Prince, a Magistrate, a Master, a Father, are wise,
if they command as is fitting: Whereas a Subject, a Burgess, a Servant, and a
Child, are esteemed such in obeying them. Besides Precepts and Experience,
Example serves much to the acquiring of Wisdom; whether the same be drawn from
the reading of Books, or from converse and conference with wise persons; or
sometimes too from the sight of undecent things: As of old the Lacedaemonians
taught their Children Sobriety, by showing their Helots drunk. The Example of
Animals is not useless thereunto; and therefore Solomon sends the sluggard to
the Pismire; and Lycurgus taught the same Lacedaemonians, that Education alone
made the difference between Men, by showing them two Dogs of the same litter
run, one after a Hare, the other to his Meat. Fables likewise have many times
their use. But true it is, that Nature lays the great Foundations: Whence
Cold and Dry Tempers, such as the Melancholy, have a natural restraint which
participateth much of Wisdom; Whereas the Sanguine, by reason of their
jollity, and the Choleric, in regard of their hastiness, have greater
difficulty to attain the same, as Socrates confessed of himself.

The Second said, That the true Moral Wisdom of a Man, considered alone,
consists in taming his Passions, and subjecting them to the Command of
Reason; which alone serves for a Rule and Square to all the Actions of Life;
whereas the common sort leave themselves to be governed by the Laws: And the
ancient Philosophy had no other aim but that Apathy. That of a Master of a
Family consists in the management of the same: That of a Politician in the
Administration of the State, punishing the evildoers, and recompencing the
good, establishing wholesome Laws, and maintaining Trade.

The Third said, That He alone deserves to wear the name of Wise, who seeks
and embraces the means whereby to be in favor with him who is the Chief
Wisdom. Those means are two. First, That his Understanding be duly informed
of what he ought to know, and what he ought to be ignorant of. Secondly, That
his Will be disposed to what he ought, either to love or hate. As for the
first, he must be ignorant of Humane Sciences, since they shake and undermine
the foundations of true Wisdom; their Principles being for the most part
opposite to the Articles of our Faith. For of the ancient Philosophers, the
Pythagoreans are full of Magical superstitions. The Platonists hold a Matter
coeternal to God. Democritus and all the Epicureans have thought the same of
their Atoms, not to mention their Voluptuous End. The Stoics have made their
Sage equal, and sometimes superior to God, whom they subjected to their
celebrated Destiny or Fate. The Pyrrhonians have doubted of every thing, and
consequently of the truth of Religion. The Cynicks publicly made Virtue of
Vice. The Peripateticks are as much to be feared as the former, with their
Eternity of the World, which destroys all Religion, and gave occasion to
Saint Ambrose, to say in his Offices, That the Lycaeum was much more dangerous
then the gardens of Epicurus. Moreover, the Principles of the Sciences do not
accord with those of Faith: And Saint Thomas said with good right, that Humane
Reason greatly diminishes it. And that happens often times to those who busy
themselves about those goodly principles which the Poets relate fabulously of
Bellerophon, who attempting to fly up to Heaven, Jupiter angry at him, sent
only a Fly, which overturned the winged Horseman; So those vainglorious wits
puffed up with some Humane Knowledge, venturing to hoise themselves into
Heaven, and penetrate into the secret Cabinets of the Divine Providence; it
gives them up to a thousand dubious Controversies, which precipitate them into
the darkness of Confusion and Error. Moreover Solomon, the pattern of Wisdom,
says, that after having lead his Mind through all Nature, he perceived that
all was nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit; And Saint Paul says, that
Knowledge puffs up and swells with Pride; that this Humane Wisdom is
naught but Folly before God; by which he admonishes us to beware of being
deceived; and that if any one will be wise, let him profess Ignorance, and
become a fool, since the Folly and Ignorance of the world is the true Wisdom
and Knowledge in the sight of God, who loves the poor of spirit, that is, the
simple, idiots, and ignorant. As for what our Understanding ought to know, for
becoming wise, it is, To know that Chief Wisdom, and the Christian Doctrine, by
the example of the same Saint Paul, who would not know any thing besides Jesus
and him crucisi'd. For the Second means, which regards the Will of Man, it
will be disposed to that which is to be loved or hated, when it has submitted
it self entirely to the Will of God, who is its Supreme Good; who says to it,
Eschew Evil, and Follow Good.

The Fourth said, That by the word Wisdom, is generally understood all that
which contributes to perfectionate a Man according to the rational part; as by
the word Faith we understand Christianity, and a Summary of all the Christian
Virtues. Now it is hard to prescribe a way to such Wisdom, seeing it requires
two points, namely, The Knowledge of Things, and Moral Habits, both which are
infinite. For all which is Sensible is the Object of our Senses, and enters not
by one, but by all; That which is Intelligible, is the Object of our
Understanding. Moreover, all the Good in the world is under the notion of
Convenience (or sutableness) which gives it Amability, the Object of our
Sensitive appetite, which is guided in this acquitst by the knowledge of the
Senses; If it is Spiritual, it is the Object of the Will which pursues it by
the light of the Understanding. And for the eschewing of Error in the search
of those Goods Prudence intervenes, which has at its service an infinite of
habits of the Mind; yea the whole troop of Moral Virtues, in the exercise of
which there is always something to be got, as there is always to be learnt in
the knowledge of things. Therefore every Man being fully furnished with what is
needful to be wise, he is not excusable if he become not so. For he has the
seeds of Wisdom in as many manners as there are ways to obtain it. In the
Understanding he has, from the Cradle, Intelligence, which is the Habit of
first Principles, and Maxims, which he knows by the Induction of the Senses;
by the help of which he attaineth Science. In the Will he has the Synteresis
or Conscience, which is an Habitual Cognition of the Principles of Moral
Actions, by which he easily proceeds to the exercise of Virtues, and to the
acquisition of them. And further, these pure Natural Principles may be assisted
and relieved by good Instructions; and especially, if they who learn have
Organs well disposed, and a temper proper for becoming wise.

At the Hour of Inventions, one undertook the proof of Archimedes's
Proposition, To move the Earth from its Center, if he had assigned elsewhere a
solid space, and instruments proportioned thereto in greatness and strength.
And it was proved, that the Center of Magnitude is different from that of
gravity, by many Mechanical Experiments.

After which it was resolved to treat, at the next Conference. First, Of the
Motion, or rest of the Earth. Secondly, Of two monstrous Brethren living in one
Body, to be seen at present in this City.

CONFERENCE X.
I. Of the Motion, or Rest of the Earth. II. Of Two Monstrous Brethren, living
in the same Body, which are to be seen in this City.

I. Of the Motion, or Rest of the Earth.
HE that spoke first to this Point, Said this Question had been in debate for
more then two thousand years; and the reasons brought on either side seemed to
him so strong, that he knew not which to embrace. That the most common opinion
was that of Aristotle, Ptolomy, Tycho Brahe, and the greatest part of
Philosophers, namely; That the Earth is unmovable, and placed in the midst of
the World. Which Situation is proved, I. Because the Decorum and Symmetry of
the Universe requires that every thing be placed according to its dignity. But
the Earth being the ignoblest and meanest of the Elements, all which yield in
point of dignity to the Heavens, it ought consequently to be in the lowest
place, which is the Center of the World. II. The Gravity of the Earth infers
both the one and the other; namely, its being in the Center, and its
Immobility; The former, because the heaviest things tend toward the lowest
place; and the latter, because by reason of their gravity they are less apt for
motion then for rest, whereunto the lowest place also contributeth. For in a
Circle the Center remains unmovable, whilst the other parts thereof are moved.
III. In whatsoever place of the Earth we are, we can always discover one half
of the Heaven, and the opposite signs of the Zodiac; as also experience
witnesses, that when the Moon is at the Full, we behold her rise just at the
same time that the Sun sets. Whence it follows that the Earth is at the
Center, and as it were a point in comparison to the Firmament. IV. We always
see the Stars of the same magnitude, both when they are directly over our
heads, and on the edge of the Horizon, unless there be some hindrance by the
refraction of Vapors and Clouds. All which things would not be thus, unless
the Earth were in the midst of the World. Now they have concluded the Rest and
Immobility of the Earth from the following Reasons I. It is the nature of
Simple Bodies to have but one Sole and Simple Motion. For if two contrary
Motions were in the same Subject, the one would hinder the other. Wherefore the
Earth having, by reason of its gravity, a Direct perpendicular Motion of its
own, cannot have also a Circular: and by reason of the same gravity it must
needs be firm and stable, not moveable. II. If the Earth were moved, then a
stone or other heavy thing cast upwards, would never fall down at the foot of
the caster, but at distance from him; for during the short interval of its
being in the Air, the Earth will have made a great progress; as it happens when
one in a boat that passes swiftly upon the Water, casts any thing upwards,
the same falls a far off, instead of falling into the boat. III. If the Earth
turned round, then a Bullet discharged out of a Cannon from the West toward
the East, would not fly so far from the piece, as one discharged from the East
toward the West; because the Earth will in the mean time by its Motion have
carried the Cannon forwards to the former Bullet, and removed it backwards from
the latter. IV. We should never see the Clouds unmoved, nor going toward the
East; but as for them that move Westward, they would seem to fly as swift as
lightning. V. Cities and all kind of buidings would be shattered, the Surface
of the Earth would be disunited, and all its parts dissipated; being not so
firmly linked together, as to endure such a Motion. Lastly, did the Earth turn
round, and the Air with it (as is alleged in answer to the former reasons) the
Air would have been so heated since its Motion with that swiftness, that the
Earth would have been uninhabitable* and all Animals suffocated; Besides that
the violence of that could Motion not have been supported by Men so long time;
for it is acknowledged that Demons themselves cannot carry a Man from one
Climate to another remote one, within that short time, that some Magicians have
phanci'd; because he would not be able to resist the violence of the agitation
of the Air.

The Second confirmed this Opinion, alleging, That such Motion would be
violent in respect of the Earth; which for that it naturally tends downwards
cannot be hois'd toward Heaven, but against its own Nature; and no violent
thing is durable. He added also the testimony of the Scripture, which says,
God has established the Earth that it shall not be moved; that it is firm or
stable for ever; that the Sun rises and sets, passing by the South toward
the North: And lastly, it relates the standing still of the Sun at Joshuah's
word, as one of the greatest Miracles.

On the other side, it was affirmed, That the Opinion of Copernicus is the more
probable, which Orpheus, Thales, Aristarchus, and Philolaus held of old, and
has been followed by Kepler, Longomontanus, Origanus, and diverse others of our
times, viz. That the Earth is moved about the Sun, who remains unmovable in
the Center of the World. Their Reasons are, I. The middle, being the most noble
place, is therefore due to the most noble Body of the World, which is the Sun.
II. It is not more necessary that the Heart be seated in the midst of Man, then
that the Sun be placed in the midst of the Universe, quickening and heating the
greater, as that does the lesser World. Nor do we place the Candle in a corner,
but in the midst of the Room. III. The circular Motion of the Planets round
about the Sun seems to argue that the Earth does the same. IV. It is more
reasonable that the Earth which has need of Light, Heat, and Influence, go to
seek the same, then that the Sun go to seek that which he needs not; Just as
the Fire does not turn before the Roast-meat, but the Roast-meat before the
Fire. V. Rest and Immobility is a nobler condition then Motion, and ought to
belong to the visible Image of the Deity, viz. the Sun, who in that regard has
been adored by sundry Nations. VI. We see heavy things kept up in the Air only
by virture of Motion; For instance, a stone placed in a sling, and turned round
about. VII. They who deny the Motion of the Earth, by the same means deny its
aequilibrium, which is absurd to do. For if a grain of Wheat laid upon a Sphere
exactly pendulous upon its Poles causes the same to move, the like ought to
come to pass in the Terrestrial Globe when any heavy Body is transported upon
it from one place to another: Seeing the greater a circle is, the less force is
needful to move it; and there is no impediment from the Air, much less from its
Center, which is but a point. The same comes to pass when a Bullet is shot out
of a Cannon against a Wall. VIII. If both the Direct and the Circular Motion be
found in the Lodestone, which tends by its gravity to the Center, and moved
circularly by its magnetic virtue, the same cannot be conceived impossible in
the Earth. IX. By this Simple Motion a multitude of imaginary Orbs in the
Heavens, without which their Motion cannot be understood, is wholly saved; and
Nature always acts by the most compendious way. X. It is much more likely that
the Earth moves about five leagues in a minute, then that the eight Sphere in
the same time moves above forty Millions, yea infinitely more, if it be true
that the extent of the Heavens is infinite, and that beyond them there is
neither time nor place: So that to have all the Heavens move round in four and
twenty Hours, were to measure an infinite thing by a finite.

II. Of two Monstrous Brethren living in the same Body.
He who spoke first to the Second Point, said, That in his judgment the Anger
of God is the true cause of Monsters, since the Scripture threatens to cause
the Wives of those whom God intends to punish, to bring forth Monsters. The
same is the universal conceit of the vulgar, who are terrified at the sight of
such prodigies, which are termed Monsters; not so much because the people shows
them with the finger, as for that they demonstrate the Divine Anger; whereof
they are always taken for infallible arguments. Upon which account the Pagans
were wont to make expiation for them with sacrifices. And most Writers begin or
end their Histories with such presages.

The Second said, That as it is impious not to ascribe the Natural Actions on
Earth to Heaven, so it seemed to him superstitious to attribute the same to the
Supreme Author, without seeking out the means whereby he produces them: For
though they may be very extraordinary in regard of their seldomness, yet they
have their true causes as well as ordinary events. Which does not diminish the
Omnipotence of the Divine Majesty, but, on the contrary, renders it more
visible and palpable to our Senses: As the Ministers, Ambassadors, and military
people employed by a great King for the putting of his command in execution,
are no disparagement to his Grandeur. That he conceived the cause of such
Monsters was the quantity of the Geniture, being too much for the making of one
Child, and too little for the finishing of two, which the Formative Virtue
designed to produce; as also the incapacity of the Womb, which could not
receive its usual extension, and that by reason of some fall or blow happened
when the parts of the Embryo's began to be distinguished, and separated one
from the other; whence an Abortion would have followed, had not there been a
great vigor in the two faetus, which was sufficient to retain their internal
forms, namely, their Souls; but could not repair the defects of the external
forms, at least in that wherein the matter has been most deficient: As the
Founder, how excellent an Artist soever he be, makes an imperfect Image, when
his material is defective.

The Third said, That for the passing of a certain Judgment upon the present
subject, he conceived fitting to make this description of it. The greater of
this twofold body is called Lazarus, and the other John Baptista, Son of John
Baptista Coloreto, and Perigrine his Wife, of the Parish of Saint Bartholomew,
on the Coast of the Seigniory of Genua. They were born in the year, 1617.
between the eleventh and twelfth of March, about midnight; and baptized by
Julio Codonio, Cure of the place by direction of the Abbot Tasty, Vicar general
of the Archbishop of Genua; and three months after confirmed by Pope Paul V.
Their Mother died three years after their birth. The first is of low stature,
considering his age of more then sixteen years; of temper very melancholy and
lean: Both the one and the other have brown chestnut hair. They are united
together by the belly four fingers above the Navel, the skin of the one being
continued to the other; and yet their feeling and motion are so distinct, that
the one being pricked, the other feels nothing. The first (saving this
conjunction) is well proportioned, and furnished with all his Members. The
other who came into the world with a head much less then his Brother, has one
at the present twice as big; which greatness seems to proceed from an Oedema
or Inflation, occasioned by the posture of his head, which is always pendulous
and supine; and this defluxion of humors, joined with his Brother's
negligence, has caused some sores upon him. He has the countenance of a Man,
but a most dreadful, one by the disproportion of all its parts; He is deaf,
blind, dumb, having great teeth in his mouth, by which he casts forth spittle,
and breathes very strongly, rather then by the nose, which is close stopped
within. His mouth is otherwise useless, having never drunk nor eaten; nor has
he any place for evacuation of excrements. His eyes are always shut, and there
appears no pupil in them. He has but one thigh, one leg, and one foot,
extremely ill shaped, and not reaching to the knee of the other. But he has
two arms, very lean and disproportionate to the rest of the body; and at the
end of each of them, instead of hands, a thumb and two fingers, very deformed
too. At the bottom of his belly there is a little membranous appendix without
a passage. His pulse is manifest in either arm, as also the beating of his
heart, though the external figure of his breast, and the divarication of his
jugular veins have very little of the ordinary structure and situation.
Whereby it appears that each of them has a brain, heart, and lungs distinct;
but they have both but one liver, one stomach, and one set of Intestines. For
one of them sleeps sometimes while the other is awake; one has been sick
while the other has been in health. The greater has been blooded above twenty
times in three grievous diseases; but no Physician has ventured to purge him,
lest the purgative medicament passing through those unusual windings should
produce unusual effects to his prejudice. He lives after the common manner,
exercising all his rational, vital, and natural faculties in perfection. And
they who have been to see him in this City, (as almost every one runs to see
this Wonder of Nature) may judge of his management and conduct of his affairs.
Yet the negligence of the greater in supporting the less, and holding him in a
convenient posture, is not to be passed over without notice; for though he
breathes, as I said above, yet he always keeps his head covered with a double
linen cloth, and his cloak; and although by his great weight he continually
stretches the skin of his belly, yet he endeavors not to ease either his
Brother or himself. Yea, the custom of carrying this load has rendered it so
light to him, that he performs all ordinary exercises, and plays at Tennis,
like another Man. All which considered, it seems this Monster is one of the
most notable Errors of Nature that has appeared in this Age, and perhaps in
any preceding. Besides the causes alleged above, some extraordinary
conjunction of the Stars happening at the time of his conception, may have had
some influence in this irregular production. Moreover, it appears that the less
draws nourishment from the greater by the Anastomosis, (or Insertion) of his
Vessels with those of his Brother, as the Child sucks the Maternal Blood by the
Vmbilical Vein; there being in both but one principle of sanguification. But it
is otherwise as to Life, Motion, and Feeling, which being distinct in them,
cannot proceed from one and the same principle.

The Fourth said, That it may be doubted whether this be a Monster or no, their
union being not sufficient for that denomination. For we frequently see two
trees grow together in the middle; and otherwise separate. Nor is the
deficiency of parts in the one any more monstrous, then if one single man
should be born without Arms and Legs. Moreover he inherited the same from his
Father, which does not come to pass in Monsters.

The Fifth said, That according to Plato, the case is the same with Nature as
with Virtue: All that exceeds their ordinary rules is called monstrous. As
deformity of the Mind is Vice, so is also that of Nature; That the cause of
this instance is like that of an Egg with a double yelk, out of which, the
pellicles being broken that separated them, are produced two Chickens joined
together, or else one with four wings, four feet, or other such irregularities.
So these Twins having been divided in the Womb at the place where they co-here,
either by the acrimony of humors or some other violent cause, Nature which
loves nothing so much as Union, forthwith assembled its spirits and humors to
unite that which was separated. Which design of Nature is apparent in the cure
of wounds and burns, the fingers and other parts uniting together one to the
other, contrary to its first intention, the figure, and use of the same parts.
But the difficulty is, whether there be two Souls in these two Bodies. For my
part, considering that they have two Brains, (wherein the Soul is held to
reside) and the external humane shape, they may be rightly called two Men, who
consequently have two Souls. Now if that which is in the less does not exercise
its functions, the reason is, because the Organs are not fitly disposed and
proportioned, no more then those of little Children, Idiots, and Mad men, and
through this Nature's having been hindered by the rebellion of the Matter to
receive such dispositions from the Agents, which are Heat and the Spirits:
which also being too languishing, have not been able to impart to their subject
all the degrees of necessary perfection.

The Sixth said, That he compared the framing of this Monster to the
Workmanship of a piece of Tapistry, upon which two persons are employed. The
more diligent of the two finishes his task first; the more slothful finding all
the material spent, is constrained to leave his business imperfect, and fasten
it to the other as well as he can. So the spirits being in too great abundance
to attend the fabricating of one single Child, undertook two, and began each
from the Head: The more vigorous had done first, and the other finding no more
stuff made but half a Man, who by reason of the continuity of the Matter,
became connected to the first. Now whereas it may be said that the Definition
of Monsters brought by the Civilians does not appertain to it, the answer is,
That the same thing may be a Monster Physically, inasmuch as it deflecteth from
the Laws of Nature, as this does, though it be not one Politically, in that it
is capable to make a Will, Inherit, Contract, and to do all other Actions civil.

The Hour of Inventions was spent in Replies and Comparisons of other Monsters,
particularly that of mentioned by Buchanan in the fifteenth Book of his
History, born in Northumberland with two heads, four arms, two breasts, and
only two legs; It was instructed in Music, so that each head sung its part
melodiously, and discoursed together pertinently. They died, one fifteen days
before the other, the latter by the putrefaction of his inseparable Companion.
At length these two points were chosen. First, Of the Hairy Girl seen in this
City. Secondly, Whether it be more difficult to resist Pleasure then Pain.

CONFERENCE XI.
I. Of the little Hairy Girl lately seen in this City. II. Whether it is more
easy to resist Pleasure then Pain.

I. Of the Hairy Girl.
THe First said, That this German Girl, born at Ausperg, called Barbara Vrsine,
(the Name and Surname very well suting to the person, if they were not
invented purposely) is no Monster. For a Monster is desin'd, a Natural Effect,
degenerating from the right and usual frame or perfection essential to its
species. But the same holds not in this person, who is only an extraordinary
effect of Nature, whereof two causes may be assigned. First, the prevalence of
internal heat, which more powerfully drives outward the steames (or
exhalations) that serve for the matter of Hair, and is also the cause that
Children are sometimes born with Teeth. Whence it comes to pass, that Hair
grows in more places, and more plentifully in those which are hot and dry. In
like manner it has been observed, that some notable Warriors and Pirates have
had their Hearts hairy. The Second Cause is the strong Imagination of the
Mother during her conceiving, or in the days near it; when the Embryo being
like soft wax, is capable of every impression never so little proportionate to
its subject; yea, sometimes it is so extravagant, that the effect cannot be
attributed to any other cause. Such was that young Girl mentioned by Marcus
Damascenus, and presented to the Emperor Charles IV. which, besides that she
was all hairy like this, had the feet of a Camel; her Mother having too wistly
considered the Image of Saint John Baptist clothed in Camel's hair: And this
consideration satisfied the Father, who at first disowned her. The same was the
Opinion of Hippocrates, when he saved the Honor and Life of a Princess who had
brought forth an Ethiopian, through the too attentive minding of the picture
of a Moor hanging at her beds-feet. Which moved Galen to advise such Ladies as
would have fair Children, to behold those that are such frequently, at least in
picture.

The Second said, That this Hair being an Effect against the Intention as well
of Universal Nature, which could not design any profit from a bearded Woman, as
of the particular Agents, which designed to produce an Individual like to one
of themselves, according to the ordinary course; it follows that the Girl must
be termed a Monster. The Cause whereof cannot be the indisposition of the
Matter, nor its too great quantity or deficience; since all the parts of this
Child being well proportioned, and her color native, conclude and argue the
same as to the humors of her Body. Yet it may well proceed from some
exorbitance in quality, not caused by the formative virtue, but by the
Imagination of the Mother. For that of the Father contributes nothing hereunto.
That the Formative Virtue does not the business, is proved, because the Hair is
a fuliginous vapor arising from the more dry and earthy parts of the residue
and excrement of the third Concoction, which is made in the parts, and the
Expulsive Faculty casts forth as useless and unsuitable; the same arriving at
the skin is imprisoned thereby the Cuticle; And Nature, which has no further
need of it, hinders its return. Now this Matter is forced to abide thus, till
it make it self way through the Pores framed by its heat rarifying the skin.
During its stay there it is concocted, incrassated, hardened, and puts on the
figure of the Pore through which it issues; As the soft Matter of Glass is
incrassated by the heat, and takes the form of the mould in which it is formed.
Hence it is, that they whose skin is tender have very soft Hair. For their skin
being by reason of its great rarity unable to resist the least heat, easily
opens its Pores, which thereby become very small to give the vapor passage;
which vapor because it stayed not long enough to be concocted and hardened,
produces very soft, gentle, and loose Hair. On the other, side in those whose
skin is hard and dry, the resistance of the same causes the enclosed heat to
act more vehemently, and consequently to make greater Pores; through the which
those vapors passing after a longer enclosure produce a Hair thicker, dryer,
and harder, as having been more parched and adur'd. For the vapor is by this
means thickened and hardened, like the smoke which is condensed into soot in the
Chimney. Now the Formative Virtue cannot be the cause of this production of
Hair in all parts of the Body of this person. First, because heat, the cause
efficient, is at that time too weak, through defect of which we see that a
dozen or fifteen years after the birth, Hair is not produced even in Males.
Secondly, the Matter of this little Body is too soft to furnish stuff dry
enough for the making of that fuliginous vapor. It remains therefore that it
be ascribed to the Imagination of the Mother; who being a Superior Agent, many
times hinders the Formative Virtue from doing what it designeth. That she is
Superior, it is true. For the Formative Virtue belongs to the Vegetative
Life; Man begetting only as he is Vegetative (God alone begets by the
Understanding) but the Imagination is a Faculty of the Sensitive Life, and so
subjecteth the less to it self; as the Agent which operateth by the
Understanding makes use of that which operateth by Nature. So the Smith, though
a mean Artisan, yet makes use of Fire, the most noble Elementary Agent, as a
Slave. Now the Imagination acts in this manner: It presents to the Woman some
pleasing object, this object excites her Appetite; the Appetite by its dominion
and command moves the Motive Faculty the performer of its pleasure. This Motive
Faculty discharging its Office by the Spirits, which it sets in Motion, and
sends forth as it lists; And these Spirits having their Source and Original in
the Brain, upon which the Phantasmes of the Imagination are imprinted, it comes
to pass that when a Childbearing Woman has a lively representation or
Imagination of the thing which she desires; those Spirits upon which the Image
is imprinted, coming to be sent forth by the Motive Faculty, and separating
from the rest of their troop which is in the Brain, carry along with them the
said Image or Effigies. The same happening in the Brain that does in a
Looking-glass, which being entire shows but one Object, but broken into a
hundred pieces, every piece represents the same whole. For the Nature of
Species is of it self indivisible, and is not divided but because of the
subject in which they are. So the Phantasme being in the Brain represents but
one and the same thing, but a part of the Spirits (upon which it is engraven)
separating from thence carry the same along with them; And arriving with the
blood and humors at the faetus, which incessantly draws them from the Mothers
Body by the Umbilical Veins, engrave upon it the Image configur'd to them.

The Third said, That he could not ascribe this Effect to the Imagination, no
more then all other Monsters (because the Girl resembling neither Father nor
Mother, seemed to him by this uncouth and strange hairiness, to deserve the
name of a Monster.) For:

First, The Imagination cannot produce any real Effect, the Intentions of Men
produce nothing such; this belongs only to the Deity.

Secondly, All the Animal Faculties being almost intercepted in Generation, how
can the Formative Faculty, which, according to Erastus, is the sole Agent,
conceive and apprehend those Images and Representations? For there is little
appearance that the forms of the Imagination are engraven upon Aerial Spirits
in the same manner, that these of the Formative Faculty of the Heavens, or
Universal Spirit, are imprinted in the Air, for the production of Mixed Bodies.
For if it were so, then Children would have upon their Bodies marks or tokens
of every thing that their Mothers had ardently desired and imagined, (and in
their Imagination and desires they have no commendation for Constancy) by
reason of the continual Agitation of their blood, which is incessantly
attracted by the Foetus. So that we should see strange portraits of the Mothers
Phancies upon the Infants Body; whereby would be saved much of the pains that
Baptista Porta, takes in his Natural Magic, to teach how to produce Monsters.
Moreover, as the Common Sense judges of the difference of Objects which it
carries to the Imagination; so the Imagination retains not those Species,
saving to present them to Reason, which judges and determines upon them.
Wherefore, if, for example, the Common Sense represents to the Imagnation a
Centaur, or some other Monster, and the Imagination represent the same to
Reason, this Reason of ours will never allow or consent that the Formative
Faculty attempt to bring it to effect.

The Fourth said, That he did not think this Girl ought to be termed a Monster,
unless in the large signification of the word, as it comprehends every thing
that is contrary to the intention of the agent, or is extraordinary. Thus
Aristotle calls a Woman a Monster, and a fault of Nature, which always designs
the making of a Male as the more perfect; which being unable to do, either in
regard of the disposition of the Agent, or of the Matter, she makes a Woman.
And for the same reason he calls a Child, which does not resemble its Father, a
Monster, because the Father designed to beget a Man like himself. But this
person is not truly such, since she is faulty only in the excess of
superfluities or excrements, not of any part that varies the species: As one
that voideth more excrements then others, or has greater Nails then usual,
cannot be styled a Monster. Besides, what we account monstrous in this person,
we have the same our selves. For were our Sight acute enough, we might see that
there is no part of the Body but is covered with Hair, and perhaps not so fair
and soft as hers; in which we find nothing extraordinary but in the length. For
whereas she has a light-colour'd beard of four or five fingers length, the
cause thereof is, because the Hair is carefully shaved off the rest of her
countenance, which otherwise would be all of the same length. This Hair
proceeds from extreme Moisture, and Moderate Coldness; the former supplyeth
the matter for its Generation, and the latter helps the Action of Heat, by
the occlusion of the Pores which it causes. So that if among Children, which
(according to Hippocrates) are more humid then those who have attained to
Adolescence, there be found any who have such a degree of Coldness as is able
to support the root of the Hair by condensing the skin, it will grow in all
parts of the Body, though unequally, according to the difference of humor.

The Fifth said, That besides the Imagination already alleged, (which caused
Perfina Queen of Ethiopia to bring forth a white Daughter, and a Woman in our
time to bring forth a Child like a Frog, by having held a Frog in her hand for
some disease) this Hair proceeds from a certain temper proper for producing the
same; which temper is found in this little person, as it is in other persons in
some places only, and at a certain Age. This temper seems to be cold; for we
see that Men and other Creatures are most hairy in the coldest Countries, and
cold has a great influence upon Hair; some persons having in one night had
their Hair extremely grown and changed through an excess of fear, and
consequently of cold; for fear causes all the heat of the external parts to
retire inwards. As it happened to a Gentleman of twenty eight years old, who
being condemned to death for an Adultery committed in the Palace of Charles V.
the next morning was found all white in the Prison; whereupon the Emperor
granted him his pardon: As the Grandfather of the same Emperor did formerly
upon the same account to a Spaniard named Osorio. The like happened to an other
in shorter time, who found the rope begin to break by which he was let down by
the side of a steep rock to get an airy of Hawks. Now this great abundance of
Hair cannot proceed from extreme Humidity; for then it must either be radical,
and consequently mild, and no sit Matter for Hair; or else adventitious, sharp,
and corroding, which would destroy their root. Besides, it is not credible that
so little a Body as this can afford so much excrementitious matter. Nor can it
proceed from excess of Heat; for we see heat makes Hair to shed in those that
have a burning Fever or a Hectic, and the Hair and Nails grow in dead bodies
which have no natural heat.

II. Whether it be harder to resist Pleasure then Pain.
Upon the Second Point, it was said, That if Pleasure be considered as a Good,
and Pain as an Evil, it is not to be doubted but that the latter is as
insupportable to our Nature, as the former is agreeable to it. But there are
two sorts of Good and Evil, of Pain and Pleasure: One of the Mind, and another
of the Body; and many times the pains and sufferings of the Body are the joys
of the Mind; and the pleasures and the gratifications of the flesh, the crosses
and torments of the Spirit. Now there are scarce any pure and unmixt pleasures
or pains in the world, but they are usually mingled one with the other: And if
they could be separated, Pain would turn the scale, as being the more heavy and
difficult to be supported. In reference to which mixture, the Greek Poet
judiciously feigned, that there are two vessels at the entrance of Heaven, one
full of Honey and sweetness, the other of Gall and bitterness. Of which two
Liquors mingled together Jupiter makes all men to drink, and tempers with them
every thing that he pours down here below. So that the Pains and Pleasures of
the Mind or the Body, being moderate and indifferently tempered with each of
those Liquors may be supported by Men; Pleasure and Good, (as the more natural)
much more easily then Evil and Pain, which are destructive to Nature. But when
both of them are extreme, and the sweetness of Pleasures and contentments is
not abated by some little gall, nor the bitterness of displeasures sweetened by
some little Honey, then Men cannot relish this Potion; because they are not
accustomed to things pure and sincere, but to confusion and mixture; and cannot
bear the excess of Grief or Joy, the extremities of which are found to be
fatal. As first, for Grief, Licinius finding himself condemned for the crime of
Cheating the public, died with regret; Q. Fabius, because he was cited before
the Tribunes of the People for violating the Law of Nations: Julia, Caesar's
Daughter, at the sight of the bloody garments of her Husband Pompey; And in the
last Age, one of the Sons of Gilbert Duke of Montpensier, going into Italy,
died with resentment at Puzzole, upon the Sepulcher of his Father, whom he went
thither to see. Then for Joy, Diagoras Rhodius, seeing his three Sons
victorious in one day at the Olympic Games, died with Joy. The same Fate
befell Chilo the Lacedemonian, upon the same victory of one of his Sons.
Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, and the Poet Sophocles, having heard that they
had won the bays for Tragedies, died both immediately; And so did the Poet
Philippides upon winning that for Comedies. The Painter Zeuxis having made the
portraiture of an old woman very odly, died with laughing at it. To which
Paulus Jovins produces two like examples of later date; one of Sinas, General
of the Turk's Galleys, upon the recovery of his only Son whom he accounted
lost, and the other of Leo X. upon the taking of Milain, which he had
passionately desired; both of which died for Joy. Thus each of these Passions
have great resemblance in their excesses. They equally transport a Man beyond
the bounds of Reason; The one by its pleasingness makes him forget himself, the
other by its bitterness leads him to despair. Grief destroys Life, either by
the violent agitation of the Spirits, or by their condensation, which stopping
the passages hinders respiration; From whence follows suffocation and death.
Pleasure and Joy produce the same effect by contrary causes, namely by too
great a dilatation of the Spirits, which causes weakness, and that weakness
death. It may be doubted under which rank they ought to be placed who dye for
Love: But the sweetness of this kind of death is too much extolled by the
Poets, that being to choose (said he) I should prefer it before the others.

The Second said, They who dye for Joy are of a soft temper and rare
contexture, and their Hearts being too easily dilated and expanded by it, the
Spirits evaporating leave the same destitute of strength; and so the Ventricles
close together, and they perish under this Passion. On the contrary, they who
dye with grief and sadness have the Pores more closed, but are of a very hot
temper, which requires room and freedom for the dilatation of the Heart, which
becoming compressed by sadness, (which, like Fear, stops and refrigerates, and
renders the Spirits too much thronged ad condensed among themselves) the
Spirits having their avenues obstructed, and their commerce with the Air
hindered, stifle the Heart. That nevertheless the Passions of Joy are much less
then those of Grief, because Evil more vehemently moves the Appetite then Good.
For Grief destroys the simple and absolute Existence of a thing. Pleasure
brings only a transient and casual effect, and is but a redundancy or
surplusage. An Animal has its perfect essence without it, but Grief puts its
Being into evident danger, and changes it essentially. II. The preservation of
an Animal, for which Nature endu'd it with the Passion of Grief, is the highest
internal end; whereunto also Pleasure is ordained as a means; the pleasure of
the Taste for the preservation of the Individual; that of the Touch, for the
preservation of the species. In fine, Delectation is a Female Passion, or
rather but half a Passion; for when its Object is present, it is languid and
asswag'd, and has no more but a bare union with the Object, that is, the
present Good, which is rather a Rest then a Motion of the Sensitive Appetite:
Whereas Grief, which respects a present Evil, is not only redoubled by the
presence of the same, but summons all the other Passions to its Relief, Anger,
Audacity, Courage, and all the Faculties to revenge it self.

The Third said, That if we consider these two Passions, as streams running
within their ordinary channels, and do not respect their inundations, then
Grief seems to be more powerful then Joy; for it causes us to break through
all difficulties that might stop us, it rallies the Forces of Nature (when
there needs any extraordinary performance) gives Arms to extremities, and
renders Necessity the Mistress of Fortune. On the contrary, Pleasure and Joy
abate the greatness of the Courage, enfeeble a Man by exhausting his Spirits,
and emptying his Heart too much thereof.

The Fourth said, Pleasure and Grief are two Passions of the Concupiscible
Appetite, the former of which is the perception of an agreeable Object, the
latter of a displeasing one. For all Sensation is made by a Mutation, and that
either from Good to Evil, (whence arises Grief, and if it persisteth,
Sadness;) or from Evil to Good, whence springs Pleasure, which if it be
lasting, causes Joy: which are to be carefully distinguished. They easily
succeed, set off, and give conspicuousness one to the other. Socrates would
never have found pleasure in scratching the place where his fetters fastened his
Legs, if he had not borne those shackles a long time in Prison. Their vehemence
has commonly reference to the Temper. Pleasure has more dominion over the
Sanguine. The Melancholy Man makes more reflection upon Grief. But considering
them absolutely, it seems to me more difficult to support Ease then Disease,
Joy then Sadness, Pleasure then Grief. First, because Hope, the harbinger of
good and contentment, has greater effects then Fear which fore-runs Evil, and
causes to undertake greater things; for all glorious and Heroical Actions have
Hope for their impulsive cause; whereras, commonly, Fear produces none but
servile Actions. Secondly, a Passion is termed strong or violent, when by the
impression of the species of the Object first upon the Senses, and then upon
the Fancy, it becomes so much Mistress of Reason that it hinders the Man from
freely exercising the functions of knowing aright and doing aright. Now
Pleasures and Contentments cause Men not to know themselves, but to forget God,
and run into Vices; whereas Grief and Afflictions usually retain them within
their duty, in the Fear of God, and in the exercise of the Virtues of Patience,
Obedience, and Humility. Many persons have bravely and courageously resisted
torments, and yet yielded to Pleasure. And that Emperor of whom Saint Hierome
speaks in his Epistles, desiring at any rate to make a young Christian sin,
that he might afterward avert him from the true Religion; and finding that he
had to no purpose employed tortures and other cruelties upon him, at length
shook him by the allurements of two immodest Women; whose embraces he being
unable longer to resist or fly from, because he was bound with soft fetters, he
had recourse to grief, biting his Tongue in two with his Teeth, which were
alone at liberty, to moderate the excess of pleasure by that pain. In fine, as
Enemies hid under the mask of Friends are more to be feared then open Enemies;
So Grief, though a manifest Enemy to our Nature, yet is not so much to be
dreaded as Pleasure, which under a false mask and pretext of kindness,
insinuates its sweet poison into us; And (as of old the Psylli poisoned Men by
commending them) becomes Mistress of the Man, and blindes his Reason. Wherefore
Aristotle considering the power of Pleasure, counsels him that would resist it,
not to behold its forepart as it presents it self to us, but the hinder-part
when it parts from us, and for all recompense leaves us naught but a sad
repentance.

At the Hour of Inventions many ways were spoken of conducing to the
production or hindrance of Hair, as also to the changing of its color; and
some of the chief stupifyers were mentioned that serve to assuage Grief or
Pain. After which these two Points were chosen for that day seven-night. First,
Of three Suns appearing at the same time. Secondly, Whether it be possible to
love without interest, and without making reflection upon one's self.

CONFERENCE XII.
I. Of Three Suns. II. Whether an Affection can be without Interest.

I. Of three Suns.
HE that spoke first, said, That the occasion of this Discourse of three Suns,
was the report that in August last, upon the day of our Ladies Assumption,
there appeared three in a Village within two Leagues of Vernevil in Normandy.
But lest any should attribute the cause thereof to what Virgil says made two
Suns, and two Cities of Thebes appear to Pentheus; we read in the first book of
the fifth Decade of Titus Livius's History, that there appeared three Suns of
Rome, during the War against Perseus King of Macedonia, and the night following
many burning torches, ( Faces Ardentes, a kind of Meteor) fell down in the
territory of Rome, which was then afflicted with a raging Pestilence. The same
happened again when Cassius and Brutus were overthrown, when the Civil Wars were
between Augustus and Antonius; and under the Emperor Claudius. But the most
remarkable were those two which appeared under the Empire of Vitellius; one in
the East, and the other in the West. I come now to inquire into the Causes. For
if it be true that Man alone was created with a Countenance erected toward
Heaven, on purpose to contemplate its Wonders; I conceive there are none more
admirable then Meteors, so named by reason of the elevated aspect of Men when
they admire them: and amongst those Meteors there is none more excellent then
that Triple Sun, if the Copies resemble their Original, the most admirable of
all the Celestial Bodies. Nevertheless, Reason given Man by God to render the
most strange things familiar to him, finds more facility in the knowledge of
these, then of many other things which are at our feet; and that by Induction,
which it draws from Examples. The Sun, as every other Body, fills the Air with
its Images or Species, which pass quite through the same, unless they be
reflected by some Body smooth and resplendent in its surface, but opake at the
bottom; Such are Looking-glasses, and Water, whether it be upon the Earth or
in the Clouds. Now when a smooth Cloud that is ready to fall down in rain,
happens to be opposite against the Sun, (being terminated either by its own
profundity, or some other opake body) it represents the figure or image of the
Sun; and if there happen to be another opposite to this first, it reflecteth
the figure in the same manner; As a Looking-glass opposite to that wherein we
look receives the species from the former, and represents the same; And if we
believe Seneca, there is nothing less worthy of admiration: For if no body
wonders to see the representation of the Sun here below in clear Water, or any
other resplendent body, it ought to be no greater marvel that the same Sun
imprints his image as well on high as below, not in one Cloud, or two only,
but also in many, as Pliny affirms that himself beheld. This multiplicity of
Suns (which are called Parhelij) happens usually but either at the rising or at
the setting of the Sun. First, because the Refraction, which is necessary for
seeing them, is not so well made to our eyes, which is more remote when the Sun
is in the Meridian. Secondly, because when the Sun is in the Meridian he is
more hot, and allows not the Cloud time to stay, but dissolves it as soon as it
becomes opposite to him; which he does not at his rising or setting, being then
more weak. The same Cause that shows us three Suns has also represented three
Moons under the Consulship of Cn: Domitius, and C. Faminus; as also three other
which appeared in the year 1314. after the death of S. Lewis, three months
together. Which impression is called Paraselene, and cannot be made but at full
Moon.

The Second said, That Parhelij do not only appear upon the Clouds, or at
Sunrise and Sunset, as the common opinion imports; for in the year 1629. on
the twentieth of March, the day of the Vernal Equinox, four Parhelij appeared
at Rome, You may see the figure of these Parhelij in Des Carts Meteors.
about the true Sun, between Noon and one a clock, the Heaven being clear and
the Sun encompassed with a double Crown, of a deeper color then those which
are seen sometimes about the Moon, and are found in the circumference of a
Rainbow whose Circle is perfect. Two of those false Suns occupi'd the
intersections of the Solary Crown and the Iris, and two others were opposite to
the former in the same circumference of the Iris. Yet, in my judgment, this
cause may be rendered of these five Suns. As in the Night, when the Air appears
serene, we many times see that the Moon radiating upon the Air of the lower
Region, which is more thick then the superior, by reason of vapors and
exhalations, forms about it self a great bright Crown of about forty five
degrees diametre; which space is fit for the reflecting and uniting of the
Lunar rays to the Eye, and by such reflection and union to cause the
appearance of that Crown: So also when the lower Region is full of vapors and
exhalations, which have not been dissipated by the Sun, either because of their
great quantity or viscosity, or else of the coldness of the Air, they render
the Air more dense, though serene in appearance, and so more proper to receive
the like impressions of the Sun. In the same manner were the Crown and the Iris
produced; for they were formed by a reflection and refraction of the Solar
rays, and consequently at the intersection of the Iris, and the Crown, there
was a double reflection and refraction. Whence at the the said intersection
appeared two false Suns sufficiently bright, by the new reflection of which
upon the same circumference of the Iris, were formed two other Suns of less
brightness.

The Third said, That this plurality of Suns ought to be attributed to a
reflection of the species of the true Sun received in some Stars so opposed to
him that they send back his light and species, and the concurse of those
reflected rays, causes those masses of light to appear in the centres of
concave bodies that reflect them; which cannot be Clouds, because they are
neither smooth nor opake, nor void of color; the three accidents necessary for
reflection. Moreover, the Clouds cannot receive his species upon their
uppermost surface, for then they could not reflect it; nor upon their lowermost
or interior surface; for this cannot receive it, unless it be reflected from
the Water, and then we should not see those Suns in the Air, but in the Water:
Nor lastly, upon one side, because then the Spectator must not be upon the
Earth, but in a line perpendicular to the diametre of the side of the Cloud;
according to the doctrine of the Catoptricks.

The Fourth said, That the Clouds being polite or smooth when they are turned
into Water, and their profundity serving instead of opacity (as we see in deep
Waters, which our sight is unable to penetrate) they remit the species
presented to them; And the same may happen in the Air when it is condensed.
Whence, as Aristotle reports, many have seen their own Images in the Air; and
some affirm, that they have seen whole Cities so, particularly Avignon.

The Fifth said, That the Viscosity into which the aqueousness of those Clouds
had degenerated when those four Parhelij appeared at Rome, was the cause not
only of their appearance, but also of their subsistence at midday. To the
which also, more concocted and condensed, must those three Suns ascribed which
were observed in Spain, Anno 753. for the space of three years; and the three
others that appeared over the City of Theodosia, on the twenty ninth of
October, 1596. from Sunrise to Sunset.

The Sixth said, That all these difficulties inclined him to attribute Parhelij
to one or more Clouds round and resplendent like the Sun. For what unlikelihood
is there that an unctuous exhalation may be elevated in the Air in a round
figure, which being inflamed on all sides, equally may represent by its light
that of the Sun; seeing Nature is much more ingenious then Art, which
represents him at pleasure by artificial fires; and we behold even from the
surface of the Earth, up to the Orbs of the Planets igneous bodies of all
figures and colors, and those of very long continuance.

II. Whether any Love be without self interest.
Upon the Second Point, the First said, That it is not without a mystery that
Plato in his Convivium, makes two Cupids; one the Son of Venus Celestial, the
other the Son of the common or Terrestrial Venus; intimating thereby that there
are two sorts of Love; one vile and abject, which is that of Concupiscence,
whereby a Man loves that which is agreeable to him for his own interest, the
other divine and perfect, wherewith we love a thing for it self: which kind is
very rare. And therefore Hesiod makes it to be born of the Chaos and the Earth,
to intimate that it is difficult to meet any that is pure and without any
interest. The Ancients have also made two Loves; one of Plenty, Abundance, by
which the Perfect loves the Imperfect, to communicate thereunto what it
wants; the other of Indigence, which the Defective has toward the Perfect,
that it may be made perfect by it. The former is that of God toward his
Creatures; the latter, that of Creatures toward God. And as for that which is
found between Creatures, it is more or less excellent according as it partaketh
of the one or the other. But to speak generally, it is more noble to be loved
then to love, as it is more excellent to be sought to then to seek to another,
to give then to receive.

The Second said, That there are two sorts of Love, the one of Friendship, the
other of Desire. The former causes us to love things, because they are worthy
of it; the latter, because they are convenient for us. The first is not only
possible, but more natural then the second. For the Love of Friendship is
direct, that of Concupiscence is only by reflection. Now that which is direct
is in the date of Nature before the reflected, the stroke is before the
rebound, the voice before the Echo, and the Ray before the reverberation. For
Reflection is a re-plication or re-doubling of a thing. That the Love of Desire
is such, I manifest. It is with our Knowledge as with our Love. A Man knows
himself less easily then he does others, because he knows all things else by a
direct action, and himself by reflection. He sees every thing directly, but he
cannot see himself saving in a Looking-glass. And for that nothing enters into
him but passes through the Senses, it is requisite that that which is in him
come forth to re-enter again by the Senses, and pass into the Mind. For all
Knowledge is by Assimilation; as, that I may see, the pupil of my Eye must have
the Image of the thing which I would see, and so become like to it. Now all
resemblance is between things that are distinct. So that if the Mind of Man is
to know any thing of it self, that thing must be abstracted and severed from
him, that it may be made like to him, and consequently cannot enter into his
Knowledge but by reflection, in which the species loses of its virtue; as we
see in the Echo, which is never so natural as the voice which it imitates, nor
the Object in the Looking-glass as the first Object. The case is the same in
Love: For by it we love things before we desire them. Which is evident both in
respect to the Object, and also to the Act of Love. Its Object, Good, includes
two things; First, its Nature of Good, which is an Entity considered in it as
conducing to the perfection of the thing wherein it is; And Secondly, its
communicability, or relation to other things capable of receiving its
diffusion. The former is the foundation and efficient emanative cause of the
other, which is only a Propriety, and consequently less natural; because
posterior and subservient to the former. Moreover, Love taken as an act of the
Will has the same effect; according to which it is defined an adequateness,
conformity and correspondence of our heart to the thing, and an approbation and
complacency in the goodness which is in the Object; which our Mind judging good
in this manner; First, Loves it in it self with a Love of Friendship, and then
afterward judging it amiable, applies it to it self and desires it. So that
there is a twofold convenience or agreableness in every thing that is loved,
even with the Love of Concupiscence. First, the convenience of the Good with
its proper subject: And Secondly, the convenience of the same Good with the
thing or person whereunto it is desired. The first convenience excites the Love
of Friendship: The second that of Concupiscence. Wherefore it is more natural
to Love without Interest, then for it. Besides, Love follows Knowledge, and we
know things simply and in themselves, sooner then such as are compounded and
referred to another. Lastly, the Love of Friendship is the end of the motions of
our Hearts which acquiesce and stop there. The Love of Concupiscence is for the
means which are posterior in the intention of Nature, and as servants employed
for the End.

The Third said, That Love being one of the most noble acts of the Will, or
rather of the Soul, which is created after the Image of God, it has some
lineaments of that Divine Love. Now God loves all things for his own sake. In
like manner we see all reasonable Creatures have an instinct and sympathy to
such as are convenient to themselves, and an abhorrence or antipathy to their
contraries. Moreover, the Nature of Good, which is the Object of Love, shows
that Love always precisely regards him that loves; there being no Absolute
Good, but all is with convenience or relation, without which it would not move
us to affect it. For no Love can be assigned, how perfect soever, in which the
person that loves has not some interest. Q. Curtius delivered Rome from an
infection of the Pestilence, by plunging himself into a great Vorago in the
Earth; but it was with a desire of glory, and to be talked of. A Father loves
his Children, but it is that he may perpetuate himself in them. We love Virtue
for the sweetness and delectation which it brings with it; yea, even Martyrs
offer themselves courageously to death, that they may live eternally with him
for whose sake they suffer. And if seeing two Men play at Tennis, both of them
alike unknown unto me, I yet wish that one may win rather then the other; this
proceeds from some convenience or agreeableness between us two, though the
reason of it be not then manifest to me.

The Fourth said, That Disinterested Love, which is the true, entirely
terminates in the thing loved purely and simply for the natural and
supernatural goodness which is in it. But that which reflects upon the person
who loves for his Honor, Profit, or Pleasure, is false and vicious. Now
although since the depravation of our Nature by sin the former sort of Love be
very difficult, yet is it not impossible. For since there is a Relative Love,
there must also be an Absolute, which serves for a contrary to the other. It is
much more hard to love an Enemy (a thing commanded by God) then to love another
with a Disinteressed Love. And though it be true that Pleasure is so essential
to Love that it is inseparable from it, (whence one may infer that such
Pleasure is an interest) yet provided he who loves does it not with reflection
to his Pleasure, or for the Pleasure which he takes in loving, his Love is pure
and simple, and void of all interest. So, though he who loves, goes out of
himself to be united to the thing loved, (which is the property of Love) and
becomes a part of the whole which results from that union, and consequently
interessed for the preservation of the same: Nevertheless, provided he do not
reflect upon himself, as he is a part of that whole, his love is always without
interest.

The fifth said, That as Reflex Knowledge is more excellent and perfect then
direct; So reflected Love, which is produced by knowledge of the merits and
perfections of the thing loved, is more noble and judicious then that which is
without any reflection and interest. Gods Love toward Men ought to serve them
for a rule. Therefore Plato says, that when God designed to create the World,
he transformed himself into Love, which is so much interessed, that he has
made all things for his own Glory.

The Sixth said, That true Love is (like Virtue) contented with it self; and he
that loves any thing for his particular interest does not properly love that
thing, but himself, to whom he judges it suitable. In which respect Saint
Bernard calls such kind of Love mercenary and illegitimate; because true and
pure Love is contented simply with loving; and though it deserves reward, yet
that is not its motive, but the sole consideration of the excellence and
goodness of the thing loved. Nor is this true Love so rare as is imagined,
there being examples of it found in all conditions of Men. Cleomenes King of
Lacedaemon disguised himself on purpose to be slain, as accordingly he was;
thereby to expiate to the Fate which was destinated to the loss either of the
Chiestain or his Army. Gracchus died that his Wife Cornelia might live. The
Wife of Paetus slew her self for company, to sweeten death to her Husband.
Histories are full of Fathers and Mothers that have preferred their own death
before that of their Children.

At the Hour of Inventions, One offering to speak of Amulets, Philtres, and
other means to procure Love, and mentioning the Hippomanes, or flesh which is
found in the forehead of a young Colt (whereof Virgil speaks) he was
interrupted by this intimation; That the two most effectual means for causing
Love were the graces of the Body and the Mind, and to love those by whom we
would be loved. And these two points were propounded. First, Whether Melancholy
persons are the most ingenious. Secondly, Which is most necessary in a State,
Reward or Punishment.

CONFERENCE XIII.
I. Whether Melancholy Persons are the most ingenious or prudent. II. Which is
most necessary in a State, Reward or Punishment.

I. Whether Melancholy Men are the most ingenious.
THe First said, That (according to Galen,) Humane Actions (to speak naturally)
depend on the complexion or composition of the Humors. Which Opinion has so
far prevailed, that in common Speech, the words Nature, Temper, and Humor,
signify not only the Inclination, but the Aptitude and Disposition of persons
to any thing. So we say Alexander the Great was of an Ambitious and Martial
Nature, Mark Anthony of an Amorous Temper, Cato of a severe Humor. Of the
Humors, Melancholy (whereof we are to speak) is divided into the Natural,
wherewith the Spleen is nourished, and that which is Preternatural, called
Atrabilis, or black choler. The one is like to a Lee or Sediment, the other to
the same Lee burnt, and is caused by the adustion of all the Humors, whereof
the worst is that which is made of choler. Again, it is either innate, or
acquired, by abuse of the six things which we call Non-natural, as
Imprisonment, solitary and gloomy places, immoderate watchings, Agitations and
Motions of Body and Mind, especially Sadness and Fear, immoderate fasting, the
use of base and black Wines, gross food, as Pulse, Coleworts, Beef, especially
salted, and Animals that have black hair, such as are the Stag, the Hare, and
all Water foul. Aristotle conceived that this Natural Melancholy was the
fittest humor to make Men ingenious; as he treats at large in his Problemes,
and shows that the greatest persons that have excelled in Philosophy, Policy,
Poetry, and other Arts, have partaken most of it; yea, of the atribilarious
Humor, as Hercules, Ajax, and Bellerophon. And before him Hippocrates, in his
Book De Flatibus, says, That nothing contributes more to Prudence then the
blood in a good consistence, as the Melancholy Humor is. Galen will have
Dexterity to proceed from Choler, Integrity and Constancy from Melancholy. The
first reasons are taken from the similitude which Melancholy has with Wine I.
First, as Wine is stronger upon its Lee, and keeps longer; so is the blood upon
Melancholy. II. The Spirit which is drawn from Wine mingled with its Lee, is
far better then that which is drawn from Wine alone. So the Spirits which
proceed from blood joined with Melancholy, are much more vigorous thereby. III.
As it easier to leap on high when one has his foot upon firm ground, then in a
fluid place; So Melancholy being more firm then the other Humors makes the
Spirits bound the higher, and they are also better reflected; as the rays of
the Sun are better reflected by the Earth then by the Water. IV. Melancholy
persons have a stronger Imagination, and so more proper for the Sciences;
because Knowledge is acquired by the reception of Phantasines into the
Imagination. V. Old Men, who are prudent, are Melancholy. Whence came that
saying, The prudent Mind is in a dry Body. And the blood of studious and
contemplative persons becomes dry and Melancholy by study. Therefore Plato
said, That the Mind begins to flourish when the Body is passed its flower. In
fine, the Melancholy are very patient, and are not discouraged by any obstacles
which they meet with: And as they are very slow in taking resolutions, so when
they are once taken, they perform them notwithstanding what ever difficulties
they encounter therein.

The Second said, He could not conceive how this Humor which causes the
greatest diseases in the Spleen, and in the Veins, the Hypochondriacal Dotage,
and the Quartan Ague; in any part the Scirrhus and the Cancer; and in the whole
Body the Leprosy and other incurable diseases, should increase Wit and
contribute to Prudence. For considering it even in its natural constitution, it
renders those in whom it predominates, of a leaden color, pensive, solitary,
slow in motion, sad and timorous; and causes them to have a small Pulse, which
is an argment of the weakness of their Spirits. On the contrary, the Sanguine
Humor, opposite to it, has none but commendable signs and effects; a rosey
color, a cheerful aspect; a sociable humor, an active promptitude; In brief,
all actions in perfection. Whence it follows that the Humors of a well
tempered Man being more exquisite, the Spirits which proceed from purer blood
must be also more more refined.

The Third Said, That to know whether the Melancholy Temper be most proper for
Prudence, it behooves to consider the nature both of Prudence and of
Melancholy, and see how they agree together. Prudence is the Habit of acting
according to Reason: Whereunto is requisite a clear Knowledge of the End of Man
and of his actions, as also of the Means which conduce to that end, together
with an integrity and firmness of Mind to guide a Man in the election and
practice of those means. Wherefore it is not without good reason that Prudence
is accounted the Queen and Rule of all Virtues, and that all of them are but
species or kinds of Prudence: Whence he that has all the Virtues, and has not
Prudence, cannot be said to have any Virtue. For indeed it is to Action, what
Sapience or Wisdom is to Contemplation. Melancholy not-natural, which becomes
such by adustion of the natural, of the Blood, Choler, and salt Phlegm, is
easily inflamed, and being inflamed renders Men furious; and so is very
contrary to Prudence, which requires a great tranquillity and moderation of
Mind, for right judging of the End of things, and of the Means to attain
thereunto. Choler indeed makes good Wits capable of well judging of the End and
the Means; yea, it gives Courage for the execution: But the bilious Spirits are
usually fickle, and want constancy in resolutions, and patience in executions;
which defects are very remote from Prudence. The Phlegmatic have, as we say, (
ny bouche ny esperon) neither counsel nor dispatch: They are dull both of Body
and Mind, and incapable of understanding and performing well. The Sanguine have
Wit good enough, and gentle qualities; but they they are too sensual and
tender, by reason of the softness and mildness of the numour, which ought to be
moderated in a Prudent Man. But Natural Melancholy gives a solid Judgment,
Gravity, Constancy, Patience and Temperance, which are the principal pillars of
Prudence. So then, the Melancholy Temper alone is proper for it, and of the
rest that which nearest approaches it, namely the Sanguine. Now every Temper
being compounded of the Four Humors, that in which Blood and Natural
Melancholy predominate, will be the most proper of all for Prudence. For these
two Humors make a very perspicacious Wit, and a profound and solid Judgment.
Melancholy when moderately heated by the Blood and Choler, carries a Man to
undertake and execute boldly and confidently, because it is with knowledge of
the End and Means. Thus I have given you the Common Opinion. But I esteem it
absurd to believe that the Elementary Qualities cause such noble Effects as the
Inclinations to Prudence, Magnanimity, Justice, and other Virtues. For they are
caused by the Influence of the Stars, as is found most evidently in Nativities,
by which, without seeing the person or his temper, one may tell his
Inclinations. But because in every Generation the superior and inferior causes
concur together, and the temper almost always corresponds to the Influences;
thence Aristotle and Galen (who understood not the true Science of Celestial
Powers) have affirmed, (the former in his Physiognomy) That the Manners of Man
follow his Temper; And the latter, That the Temperament is by it self the first
and true efficient cause of all the actions of the mixed Body, and consequently
of the Manners of a Man: Whereby they ascribe that to the Temper which ought to
be attributed only to the Influences. And indeed, the Hermetick Philosophy
assigns to the Elementary Qualities no other Virtues, but of heating, cooling,
moistning, drying, condensing, and rarifying. Now according to Astrologers,
Prudence is from the influence of Saturn and Jupiter, (who preside over
Melancholy and Blood) according as those Planets reign, or favorably regard
all the points of the Ascendant and the Middle of Heaven in the Nativity; which
are the principal significators of the inclinations and actions of a Man.

The Fourth said, That to attribute that property and Virtue to the Humors to
make Men wise and intelligent, is to prejudice the Rational Soul, which being
immaterial needs no material instrument for the performing of its actions;
but as it is wholly Divine and the Image of God, it is perfectly intelligent of
its own Nature, and by Reason the noblest of its Faculties, of it self knows
what ever is most hidden in Nature. For if the actions of Knowledge and
Prudence depend on the Temper of the Humors, then that which now produces
ratiocination in me should have been the food which I took yesterday: And so
those things, which, whilst they were alive, had no other actions but
vegetative or sensitive, should, when they are dead, produce intellectual. The
Spirits alone put our Humors in motion and action; and when those fail, these
remain without any Virtue. Nevertheless those Spirits (only the vehicles of
the Rational Soul) are not the Cause either of Knowledge or Prudence, but only
of Life: much less can those excellent Qualities be attributed to the Humors.

II. Whether is more necessary in a State Reward or Punishment.
Upon the Second Point, the First said, That Reward and Punishment are the two
pillars of a State; one for the satisfying of Merit, and encouraging Men to
Virtue; the other for restraining Malefactors, and turning them from Vice. That
consequently they are both necessary, and almost inseparable. Nevertheless
Reward seems to have some degree of necessity above the other; because though
Punishment, with its eight species, (which are Fine, Imprisonment, Stripes,
Retaliation, Ignominy, Banishment, Servitude, and Death,) serves for Example
and for satisfaction to Distributive Justice, (whose end is to extinguish
Crimes and reform them) and secure the Good against the Bad; (whence the
Wiseman commands Magistrates to break off Iniquity, and govern with a rod of
Iron) yet is it not good in all times, nor in all places. And Sylla did
prudently in not punishing his Soldiers, who slew the Praetor Albinus in a
Sedition. On the contrary, Reward is always necessary, and every where
welcome, being the wages of Virtue, as the other is of Vice. It Is for that the
Labourer cultivates the Earth, that the Soldier goes to the War, and that good
Wits employ their time in excellent and profitable inventions. Darius preserved
his Kingdom by having rewarded Zopyrus; And on the contrary, Philip lost the
City of Damas for want of gratifying Milesius, by whose means he had won it. So
that it is with good reason that Pliny says, in his Panegyric, That the
recompenses of good and bad deeds make Men good or bad.

The Second said, That in the beginning of the World, when our Nature was
created in the perfection of a lust Aequilibrium, we had on the one side the
inferior part of the Soul wholly subject to the superior; and on the other this
superior Soul absolutely submissive to the Divine Will. But the first Man
having broken that Aequilibrium by his sin, and turned the balance toward the
side of Evil; this Counterpoise, which like infectious Leven is left in the
flesh of Adam, has given us all a tendency and inclination to Evil. Hence it
is that Men are lead into all sorts of Vices; and because it is the property of
sin to blind the Mind, and cloud the Memory with the Reason; they have also
forgotten the way which they ought to keep, that they might live like
reasonable Men. For remedy whereof, not only God, who from all Eternity
purposed our Reparation, but also Men most versed in the knowledge of Good and
Evil have established Laws, to restore Man to his Aequilibrium, and contain him
in his duty both toward God and Humane Society. But because Original Sin
powerfully inclines us to Evil from our Nativitie, and it is very rare, if not
impossible, to find any one that erres and perseveres so wilfully without fear
or hope; therefore God and Kings have appointed two powerful counterpoises,
Rewards and Punishments; the former, for good and virtuous actions, the latter,
for the Transgression of their Laws. Since then Punishment is only for
Transgression of Laws, and Reward for those who besides observing them, proceed
further to virtuous actions and such as are profitable to the public; It is
certain, the former of the two is most necessary in a State, as that to which
Men are most prone. For it is most true, that Men are naturally more inclined
to Evil then to Good, because they are corrupted by Original Sin; and we know
the most part would willingly desire to grow great by the loss of others, and
to plunge themselves in Pleasures and Riches, if they were not restrained by
the rigor of Laws. This is further confirmed, because the Laws of Men are
better observed then the Divine Laws; not but that Men are as ready to infringe
those, as these of God, who forbears and is patient after the sin of Man; but
because the penalties of Humane Laws are appointed for this Life, and we behold
Criminals publicly executed. Wherefore Punishment is the most necessary in a
State. Nevertheless Reward is not unprofitable, because it serves to excite to
well doing, and is frequently proposed in the Divine Laws; the corruption of
our Nature not permitting us to be lead to do good, for the sake of good alone.
Moreover, our own necessity constrains us to seek the support of our Life by
our Labors, and to eat our Bread in the sweat of our Countenances, as our
Sentence imports. But to determine whether it be always fit to reward or
punish, when there is occasion, this depends upon many circumstances of Times,
Places, and Persons: wherein a good part of the skill of a Statesman consists.
Yet when Reward or Punishment tends to the good of the public, or the honor
of the Prince; neither the one nor the other ought to be omitted, in my
opinion, so far as is possible.

The Third said, That the Distick which imports, That the good hate sin out of
the love of Virtue, and the wicked out of the fear of Punishment, voids the
question. For since the good have nothing to do with any other Reward but what
they find in their own satisfaction, knowing otherwise that they are obliged to
do well; and the wicked need no other salary but the Punishment due to their
Crimes; it seems Punishment is not only necessary, but alone necessary in a
State. Not but that Reward serves for ornament, and for its better being, as
Sauces do to raise the languishing Appetite; But in reference to absolute
necessity, no person can say that they are to be compared together. For
although Plato calls Reward and Punishment the two grand Demons of Humane
Society, yet it is not thence to be inferred that the one ought to be paralleled
with the other, which is better understood by experience. For compare an
Inter-regnum, wherein Crimes are not punished, with a conjuncture wherein no
persons are rewarded; this latter indeed will discontent those that have a good
opinion of their own merit; but the former will be so destructive that no Man
can be secure of his Goods, Honor, or Life. On the contrary, fancy a State
willing to reward all that do well, it cannot be done by Honors, but the same
will be vilifi'd by their multitude; nor by money, without ruining some to
enrich others. Wherefore Reward is much less necessary then Punishment. Which I
affirm in behalf of truth, and not in compliance with my particular opinion,
being no more void of Appetite then others; but the experience of the ancient
Greeks and Romans, and of the Spaniards and Portugals, (the former of which had
all the spoils of other Nations, and the latter all the Gold discovered in the
Indies) shows us that Reward does not hinder discontents and revolts: Yea, it
is found that the Reward given to one (unless it be accounted just by all the
world, which is a rare thing) contents less, and for a less time him that
receives it, then it excites discontents in all others that cannot get as much:
Like a Mistress, who for one favorite makes a thousand jealous and desperate.
Whereas the Punishment of one single person serves for an example and powerful
lesson to all others. Add hereunto, that Reward being the sweetest when it is
least expected, good people who alone deserve it, are forward to believe and to
publish that they meant none at all.

CONFERENCE XIV.
I. Of the Seat of Folly. II. Whether a Man or Woman be most inclined to Love.

I. Of the Seat of Folly.
HE that began upon the first point said, That this Question is not
unprofitable, because it concerns the original and place of the greatest evil
that can befall the more noble part of Man: The decision of which will teach us
to avoid the assaults of this Enemy the more easily, when we know where it is
lodged. Nor is it new; for the Abderites having sent for Hippocrates to cure
Democritus of the Folly which they impertinently conceived him guilty of, sound
him busier after this inquiry by the dissection of many Animals. But it is very
difficult to comprehend, for a thing ought to be introduced into our Fancy
that we may reason upon it, and Folly is a perversion of that Ratiocination.
Now Folly is taken either relatively or absolutely. In the first acception, he
that does any thing contrary to the common opinion is called a fool. So it is
proverbially said, Chacun a sa marotte, Every one has his babble. One is
accounted foolish for being too much addicted to meddals, another to Pictures,
Flowers, or some such thing, of more curiosity then benefit. Yea one and the
same person will sometimes say, I am a great fool for having done this or that.
That which seems Wisdom to one, is oftentimes Folly to others. Thus ought
that to be understood which S. Paul says, The Wisdom of Men is Folly before
God. Absolute Folly is Absurdness, consisting in the privation and depravation
of the action of reasoning. So that methinks it may be answered to the present
Question touching the seat of Folly, that the laesion or abolition of any
action being in the same organ in which it is exercised well, (as blindness in
that part wherewith we see) the seat of Folly must be the same with that of
Reason; which is therefore to be inquired by us. But because Ratiocination
cannot injure it self, (for the Intellect uses no Corporeal Organ to
understand, but only the Memory, the Imagination, and the Common Sense,
without which it cannot apprehend, nor they without the Corporeal Organs which
are in the Brain) some have held that the Soul performs not its reasoning
with one single Organ, but with many together. Others have ventured to assign
some particular place thereunto. The former opinion is founded: I. Upon the
Maxim, That the whole Soul is in the whole Body, and the whole Soul is in
every part, and consequently she perform es her actions in the whole Body. II.
That it is the temperature of the Humors which are throughout the whole Body,
that serves for an instrument to the Soul. III. That the animal spirits are
made of the natural and the vital; and so all the parts together contribute to
Ratiocination, and not the Animal alone. Consequently, also, the whole Body,
and not the Brain alone. IV. That the Brain in other Animals is perfectly like
in structure to that of Man, having the same membranes and medullous substance,
the same sinuosities, ventricles and veins; yet he differs from a Beast in the
whole form and figure; and therefore must be considered entire, and not in one
part alone. Lastly, that as God is most eminently in Heaven, yet acts no less
upon Earth; So Reason, which is his image, discovers it self best in the Brain,
yet cease not to display it self in the Heart and other parts, which are not
moved, and perform not most of their actions but by Reason, and the Will which
is subject to it. The Second Opinion is, That the Judgment is made in one of
the four ventricles of the Brain, which most account to be the third, as the
fourth is attributed to Memory, and the two first or interior to the
Imagination: Whence it is that we scratch the hinder part of the head, as if to
chafe it, when we would remember any thing: that we lift up the head when we
are about to imagine, and hold it in a middle situation when we reason. Which
is further confirmed, for that they are wounded or hurt in those places,
respectively have those faculties impaired or abolished. Now to find the causes
of such Laesion of the faculties, we must consider what is necessary for the
exercising of them. Three things are so, the Agent, the Organ, and the Object.
The Soul which is the Agent, admitting (neither magis nor minus) no degrees,
being immortal and in no wise susceptible of alteration, cannot be hurt. The
Brain, which is the Organ, being well or ill disposed, either by distemper, or
ill conformation, or solution of continuity, may help or hinder the Memory and
the Imagination. The Object also may be fallacious, and represent to us that
which is not.

The Second said, Folly comes either from the Nativity, as some are born deaf
and dumb, or after the birth. From the Nativity, when the natural heat is
deficient; as in small heads, which have too little quantity of Brain, or those
that are flatheaded, or of some other bad figure containing less then the
round, and discomposing the Organs; Or on the contrary, in great heads which
are said to have little Wit, because the Spirits are too much dispersed and
humid, as we see in Children. After the Birth, as it happens to decripet Old
Men, to such as live in a thick Air, or through watchings, fastings, excessive
afflictions, diseases, falls or blows, especially if an Impostume follow. For
in such cases there are instances of great forgetfulness or Folly, as Gaza
forgot even his own Name: It is divided into Deliration, Frenzy, Melancholy,
and Madness. Though the word Deliration be taken for all sorts of Folly, yet it
more strictly signifies that which is caused by rising of the hot humors and
vapors to the Brain, and frequently accompanies Fevers and Inflammations of
the internal parts. Frenzy is an Inflammation of the membranes of the Brain,
caused by the bilious blood or humor, usually with a Fever, and a languid
Pulfe, in regard such phrenctick persons are intent upon other things, whereby
their respiration is less frequent. Melancholy (both the Ideopathical, which is
in the Vessels of the Brain; and the Sympathetical, or Hypochondrical, which
arises from the Liver, the Spleen, and the Mesentery) arises from that humor
troubling the Brain; and by its blackness making the patients sad and timorous;
or as Averroes will have it, by its coldness, because Heat emboldens, and Cold
makes fearful, as we see in Women. As this humor causes Prudence and Wisdom
when it is in its natural quality, so when it is corrupted it produces Folly;
there being as little distance between the one and the other, as between the
string of a Lute stretched up to the highest pitch, and the same when it is
broken: Which made Montaigne say, That there is but one turn of a peg between
Wisdom and Folly. If this Melancholy humor be moveable and bilious, it will
cause imaginations of various absurd things, like to those of Dreams. Wherefore
Aristotle compares the fame to waters in motion, which always represent
objects ill. If it be more fixed, it causes insuperable Opiniastry. As is
observed in those who fancy themselves Pitchers, Cocks, Geese, Hens, Glass,
Criminals, Dead, Damned, and so in infinitum, according to the diversity of
Phancies, Conditions, and Inclinations. The Folly of Love is of this kind,
which has caused desperation and death to many. Lastly, Mania, or Madness, is
an alienation of the Mind, not mingled with fear and sadness, as Melancholy is,
but with boldness and fury, caused by the igneous and boiling Spirits of the
other Choler, which possessing the Brain, and at times the whole Body, by their
immoderate heat render Men foolish, furious, and daring. Such a heat, that they
are insensible of cold in mid Winter, though stark naked; sometimes so
excessive that it degenerates into Lycanthropy, rage, and many other furious
diseases. By the induction of all which species of Folly, it appears, that
whence soever the matter which causes Folly arises, it makes its impression
in the Brain. For though the Soul be as much in the heel as the head, yet it is
improper to place Wisdom in the heel, but it may reasonably be assigned to the
Brain. Yet to circumscribe it to a certain place, excluding any other,
methinks ought no more to be done, then to assign some particular corner of a
Chamber to an Intelligence, of the Nature of which the Soul participates.

The Third said, Melancholy is the cause of Prudence only by accident,
hindering by its dryness the too great mobility of the Blood, and by its
coldness checking the too impetuous sallies of the Spirits; but it is by it
self the cause of Folly, and also of the two other Syncopies, Eclipses, and
Alienations of the Judgment which are observed in the Apoplexy and the
Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness. If Melancholy abound in the Brain, it either
possesses its ventricles, or predominates over its temper. If it be in the
ventricles, it either molests them by its malignity and acrimony, and causes
the Epilepsie; or else it fills them, and causes the Apoplexy. For as we put
Oil upon a piece of Wine that is prone to decay and sour; which Oil being
aerious, and consequently humid, by its subtle and unctuous humidity keeps its
particles so united, that the Spirits of the Wine cannot penetrate through it;
and so being covered by it, they are restrained and tarry in the Wine: In like
manner Melancholy by its tenacious and glutinous viscosity, like black shining
pitch, keeps its particles so conjoined, that the Spirit contained in the
ventricles, cannot issue forth into the Nerves to serve for voluntary motion
and the functions of sense; whence follows their cessation. But if the
Melancholy Humor presses the ventricles by its troublesome weight, then they
retire, and by their retiring cause that universal contraction of the Nerves.
If this Humor prevail over its temper, then it causes deliration or Dotage,
and that in two manners. For if it exceed in dryness, which is a quality that
admits degrees, then by that dryness (which is symbolical and a kin to heat) it
attracts the Spirits to it self, as it were to make them revolt from their
Prince, and to debauch them from their duty; employes them to fury and rage,
and causes madness, making them follow its own motions, which are wholly
opposite to Nature. For being cold, dry, black, gloomy, an enemy to light,
society and peace, it aims at nothing but what is destructive to Man. But if
the cold in this humor exceed the dry, then it will cause the disease called
Melancholy, which is pure Folly, and makes the timorous, trembling sad fools;
for cold not only compresseth and incloseth the Spirits in the Brain, and
stupifies them so as to become unactive, but has also a back blow upon the
Heart, the reflux of its infection exhaling even to that seat of life, and
streightning it into it self, whereby its Spirits become half mortified.
Moreover, this Humor sometimes piercing through the Brain comes about with a
circumference, and lodges amongst the Humors of the Eye, placing it self
before the pupil, and the Crystalline, under the Tunicles which cover it: by
which means the Melancholy persons seem to behold dreadful Objects abroad, but
it is within his Eye that he sees them. As for the same reason they who have
the beginning of a suffusion imagine that flies, flocks of wool, or little
hairs, because of the Humor contained there; which if it be Blood, they seem
red; if Choler, yellow; if Melancholy, black. But in all the cases hitherto
alleged, methinks, the Seat of Folly is the same with that of Imagination,
which is the Brain, and not any of the ventricles in particular: for since the
Intellect acts upon the phantasmes of the Imagination, this upon the report
of the Common Sense, and this upon the information of the External Senses,
which are diffused throughout all the Brain, and each possesses a part of it,
the whole Brain must necessarily contribute to Ratiocination.

II. Whether Women or Men are more inclined to Love.
Upon the Second Point, the First said, Women are of a more amorous complexion
then Men. For the Spirits of Women being more subtle, (according to
Aristotle's Maxim, That such as have more tender flesh have more subtle
Spirits) they are carried with more violence to amiable Objects. And Love
being, according to Plato, the offspring of Plenty and Indigence; that of
Women arising from Indigence and Necessity, moves them more powerfully to
obtain what they need, then that of Men, which proceeds from Plenty and a
desire to communicate. And therefore the Philosopher says, the Woman desires
the Man, in the same manner that the first Matter does new forms, wherewith it
is insatiable. The little knowledge they have of the goodness of what they
affect causes them also to love with greater ardour. Moreover, the Restraint
which they ought to observe, with shame and fear, makes the inward motion more
violent, and the inquietudes greater; And, like Fire covered with ashes, they
preserve their Love under a honest modesty much longer then Men, who discover
theirs undiscretely. The Hysterical Fits, Jaundies, Green-sicknesses, and other
dangerous symptoms which Love produces in them, even to Erratical Fury,
evidence that this Passion is much more violent in them then in Men, since it
is able so notably to alter their natural constitution. Wherefore if we believe
the Sooth-sayer Tiresias, Nature has in requital advantaged them above Men in
the enjoyment of the fruits of that Love.

The Second said, That the Woman is more inclined to Love, and also loves more
constantly then the Man, because of the weakness of Knowledge. For proof of
which it must be observed that Knowledge gives the condition to Good, which is
the Object of the Will, and the reason of Amability. Good has from it self and
its own principles the nature of goodness, which consists in a twofold
convenience; the one absolute, in reference to the thing which it accomplishes
and perfectionates; the other relative, in regard to other things to which that
Good may be referred, and by which it may be participated under the notion of
Honor, Profit, or Pleasure. But the being amiable, it derives from the
Knowledge. As Colors have from their own principles, (which are the four First
Qualities blended in the Mixed Body) their being of Color, but not their being
visible, which they derive from the Light; without which Scarlet is indeed, in
the night, Scarlet, but not visible. So the being amiable is derived to the
Object by the light of our Knowledge. Whence we see, that many times evil is
loved, because it is judged good. This being premiz'd, it follows, that Man
who knows more clearly loves more slightly. He knows better, because he has
more heat, and consequently a more quick Imagination, and so a stronger
Knowledge. For Minds are equal, and differ not but by reason of the Phantasmes.
Moreover, he is more dry, which hinders his Knowledge from being obscured with
the clouds of Humidity. On the contrary, the Woman being colder has less
vigor in her Imagination; and being more moist, has her Phantasmes more thick
by the vapor and inundation of humidity; and consequently has a weaker
reflection. For the dryness in Man is that which occasions the reflection of
his Knowledge; because it does not so easily obey the motion of heat, and
follow it, as humidity does; and so the heat being active is constrained to
reflect to take and carry along with it the dryness which remains behind; and
thus being forced to stay, and being incapable of idleness, it employes it self
upon the Phantasm already formed, and contemplates it better then before. On
the contrary, the Woman pursues her point and goes forward, because her
moisture follows what heat she has. Thence it is that her first thoughts
prevail over her second. For having but few reflections, the vigor of their
Knowledge, being almost always direct, languisheth in a little time. Moreover,
the Man being more perspicacious, knows better then the Woman that all
visible Good is frail and inconsiderable, and mingled with much impurity and
imperfection. Which the Woman cannot judge so well. Yea, I say, it is a sign of
a very good Spirit to be inconstant in Love. For Good* in general, being the
Object of the Will, every particular good is but a parcel of it. The strong
Mind has no sooner tasted one Sensual Good but it despises it, as not
containing the amplitude of its Object, and therefore goes to seek others.

The Third said, That indeed the less we know imperfect things, the more we
love them. Whence they who are shortsighted are soonest taken with the first
Objects: But, on the contrary, perfections the greater they are, the more
exactly they require to be known; as the work of an excellent Painter cannot
meet with Eyes too piercing, nor persons too skilful, to make known its
excellence. But the Knowledge alone of what is lovely is not enough to excite
us to love it; for Eunuchs and impotent Old Men want not Knowledge, but that
inward ardour is excited by the abundance of Spirits that kindle Love; which
their coldness is no longer fit to produce. Which being granted, Men will then
have more Love then Women for Objects, which deserve it, because they have more
Knowledge; and also they will have more for those which do not deserve it,
because they abound more with those Spirits.

CONFERENCE XV.
I. How long a Man may continue without eating. II. Of the Echo.

I. How long a Man may be without Eating.
UPon the First Point all agreed, though in several words, That if Definitions
are dangerous in Law, they are no less in Physic; and the more a Man knows,
the more he finds himself deterred from establishing Maxims: which is
principally true in the present Subject, the great diversity of circumstances
not permitting a limitation of the time. For the understanding whereof, it is
to be observed that our Body is like a Lamp, to which the natural heat is
instead of Fire, and the radical moisture of Oil. An Embnyo would be as soon
dead as formed, if the Blood of the Mother who gave him life did not serve for
Oil and Matter to entertain the natural heat which consumes part thereof,
concocteth and disi^^^teth the rest, and by little and little extends what
the genitures have contributed into Bones, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Muscles,
and Skin; till the House becoming too little for the Inhabitant, and he a
greater Lord then at his first entrance, and too burdensome to his Landlady,
his Harbingers take up a lodging for him elsewhere. And whereas before he lived
in common, and with the life of his Mother, he thenceforth begins to keep his
ordinary apart, yet so regular, that he needs no more for day and night but his
two bottles. Now if we speak of these, it is certain that a newborn Child has
been frequently seen two or three days without sucking, and continually to
reject the Milk which the Nurse offered to distill into his Mouth: The
nourishment which he had drawn by the Navel in too great abundance supplying
that defect, as the yelk of the Egg does in the Body of the Chicken newly
hatched. But when he begins to suck, the fluidity of Milk does not afford him
nourishment solid enough to serve all that time. And therefore the Cynick
Cratippus was ridiculous when he writ a Letter to his Son's Nurse to make him
fast, that he might be accustomed to abstinence betimes; that Age being no more
capable of a Habit then of Discipline. Do Children use more solid food?
Hippocrates says, they bear fasting more uneasily then grown Men, and these
then Old Men, because they abound more with natural heat, especially they,
says he, who have the best Wits. Moreover, Tempers, Seasons, Countries,
different exercises, diversity of Food, Custom, and the disposition of Health,
and the Organs, make a notable difference herein. Of Tempers, the Cholcrick is
the most impatient of fasting. They cannot sleep unless their Belly be full,
and by its mild vapors temper the acrimonious exhalations of their Choler;
which otherwise causes the exasperated Spirits to move in the Arteries and in
the Organs of the Senses; instead of filling them with the benign vapors
which cause sleep. Hence the Proverb, Choler and Hunger make a Man fretful;
and, the Hungry Belly has no Ears. Likewise the Sanguine is not very fit for
long abstinence. The Melancholy bears it better, but above all, the pituitous
and Phlegmatic. To these one day's fasting is no more trouble then to the
others to want a Breakfast. Yea, should no other consideration lead them to
fasting, they would be sick unless they sometimes debarred themselves from a
meal or two a day. Examples of fasting are afforded by Bears, Sea-calves,
Dormice, Snailes, Serpents, and other Insects, which remain for several Months
hid in their Cavernes using rest instead of food; their natural heat being then
so weak, that the fat or viscous phlegm wherewith they are provided, suffices
to support them all that time. Of the Seasons, Winter causes such as fast to
think the days longer then the Sun makes them; because the natural is then
most vigorous. Next Winter, Autumn is least proper, for the same reason; and
because the Spirits need reparation of the loss caused to them by the Summer.
The Spring is more fit, in regard of the plenty of Blood which then boyles in
us. But Summer most of all, because there needs less fuel for a less fire, as
our internal heat is at that time. Of Regions, the cold and Northern are less
compatible with abstinence, the hot and Southern more, but the temperate most
of all. Whence we see that the Orientals fast more easily for many days
together, then we one single day. Of Exerises, as the more violent disturb the
digestions, (as we see in those that ride post) the moderate promote them, and
make room for Aliments; so they who use little or none at all, need the less
food. Solid Victnals are longer before they be subdued in the Stomach then
liquid; the fat and of oiley, afford most nourishment. Therefore Bread has a
great stroke in digestion, as being all Oil. As is seen in the correction of
some Medicaments which is done with burnt Bread; for a piece of Bread as big as
ones thumb being set on flame will burn as long as the same weight of Oil.
Whence Abstinence is more supportable after such kind of food, then after broth
or potch'd eggs. But Custom is so considerable in this matter, that those who
are used to make four meals a day, are no less troubled with intermitting them,
then others are one of their two ordinary repasts. And experience shows, that
if you take up an ill custom of drinking at bedtime without necessity, you
must use violence to your self to break it off. Yet the disposition of the Body
is the main matter, whether we consider the diversity of Organs destinated for
nutrition; whence those that have large stomachs and Livers sooner yield to
hunger, or whether we divide Bodies into such as are healthy, (which dispense
with less eating) and such as are distempered with diseases, the actions
whereof are depraved. Amongst which we should speed ill if we looked for
abstinence in those who have a Boulimie, or Canine Hunger, proceeding either
from the too great suction of the Mesaraick Veins, of which the Stomach is made
sensible by the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation; or because the Melancholy
humor designed to stimulate the stomach, and provoke Appetite by its acrimony,
continually flows thither, and not after the concoction is perfected: The cure
of which Malady consists in eating, and chiefly in drinking pure Wine, which is
distributed more speedily then any nourishment. But when those Mesaraick Veins
suck no more Chyle, either because their passages are stopped, or for that the
above mentioned acide liquor is diverted elsewhere, then arises a disease
called Anorexie, or Nausea, whereunto the abstinence of those must be referred
who have continued some weeks, yea months, and years, without eating and
drinking. For we may well wonder at that Hydropick Person, to whom his
Physician having forbidden drink, he went to him at the years end to ask him
whether it were time to drink. But we may wonder more at what we find in
Histories, (even of our own time) which are full of relations of persons of
either sex, that lived some years without taking any Aliment. M. Cytoys
(Physician to the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu, a Learned Man, and who needs no
other Elogium but the choice of such a Master) published a very ingenious
treatise above twenty years since, concerning a young Maid of Confoulans in
Poictou, which lived many years in that manner. And lately there was such
another in the Province of Berry. Some have conceived such persons to be
nourished with thick Air by the Lungs, taking that for a Maxim which is not
agreed upon, That Inanimate things (and much less the Elements) can nourish.
Some ascribe the cause to the relaxation of the Nerves, which hinders the
stomach from being sensible of the suction of the Mesaraick Veins. But in my
conceit, the reason is, because their Bodies are almost indissoluble, and so
compact that nothing exhales from them. Whereunto adding a viscous and
tenacious phlegm, a very small heat, and no exercise, the case will be the same
as it is in a firebrand of Juniper. So we see fire lasts not so long in fifty
faggots of straw as in an Arm-full of Match. Yea, not to detract from Miracles,
whereby God so reserves to himself the doing what he pleases, that he does not
forbid our inquiring into Natural Causes; since it is held that there have been
found sempiternal lamps and other lights, the oily humidity not exhaling out of
the vessel, the same may seem more possible in the proportion of our natural
heat with its radical moisture: For besides those Examples, we have that of
some Animals, and Butter-flies fly, engender, and live a long time without
nourishment. Which is also seen more particularly in Silkworms, the most
exquisite Emblem of the Resurrection that is in Nature. From which
disproportion, which appears so great between those who cannot bear one day's
fasting, and others who pass years without eating; we may easily conclude (to
the end where I began) that there is no limited time as to the question
proposed. For though it be ordinarily bounded within seven days, yet a certain
person having been cured by a fast of that duration, it cannot be said that all
dye of that wherewith some are cured.

II. Of the Echo.
Upon the Second Point it was said, The Echo is a reflected, multiplied, and
reciprocal sound, or a repercussion of sound made by hollow rocks or edisices;
by the windings of which it comes to be redoubled, as the visible species is
reflected in the Mirror. It is made when the sound diffused in the Air is
driven into some hollow, smooth, and solid Body, which hinders it from
dissipating or passing further, but sends it back to the place from whence it
came, as the wall makes the ball rebound toward him that struck the same
against it. According as the sound is violent, and the space little or great,
it returns sooner or slower, and makes an Echo more or less articulate. It may
be hence gathered, whether Sound is produced by the Air or some other Body,
since fish have the use of their Ears in the Water, and the voice passes from
one end of a Pike to the other, without resounding in the Air. And which is
more strange, strike as softly as you please with your singer upon the end of a
Mast laid along, he that lays his Ear to the other end, shall hear it better
then your self; and a third that does the like at the middle, shall hear
nothing at all. In the Church de la Dorade, at Tholouze, he that whispers at
one end of the wall, is heard, at the other by reason of its smoothness. On the
contrary, it is reported that in Scotland there is a stone called the
Deaf-stone, because they which are on one side of it hear not the noise, no not
of Trumpets sounding on the other, the stone sucking up the sound as a sponge
does Water.

The Second said, That the Image which we see of our selves in a Looking-glass,
being as it were alive and yet dumb, is less admirable then the Echo which we
hear not, and yet hear, complain, sing, and talk with us, without Body and
without understanding. This Echo is not only a resilition or reflection of the
sound or voice, or rather the voice it self so reflected and sent back by the
opposition of some solid Body, which makes it return whence it came, and stops
its course and flux. For then it would follow, that as often as we speak we
should hear Echoes; seeing we never speak but there is made some resilition of
our voice, by means of the opposition of solid Bodies near us, and encompassing
us on every side. And yet we seldom hear any thing but our bare voice or some
confused murmur; as it happens in new houses, in Churches, under a vault,
before a wall, and other such places, in which we ought to hear a very
articulate Echo, since the voice is reflected better there then elsewhere. I
think therefore then the Echo is made in the same manner as the reflection of
the Sun's light; or of the rays of any other fire whatsoever, by hollow
mirrors, which unite that light and those rays, and so produce another fire.
For as fire cannot be produced by plain or unequal mirrors, which reflect but
one ray in one and the same place, and all sorts of concave or hollow mirrors
cannot be proper for it, because it is necessary that the cavity be disposed
and made in such manner that it may be able to reflect a sufficient quantity of
rays in one and the same place; which being conjoined and united together,
excite again and re-kindle that fire from which they issued, which seemed
vanished by reason of the dissipation of its heat and rays: So the Echo,
(which is nothing but the same voice reanimated and reproduc'd by the concourse
and reunion of several of its rays dissipated, and afterward reflected into
one and the same place, where they are united and recollected together, and so
become audible a second time) cannot be produced by bare walls and vaults,
which do not reflect and recollect a sufficient quantity of those rays into
one and the same place, but only resemble many of them near one another,
whence arises a murmuring or inarticulate Echo. Now as Art imitates Nature,
and sometimes surpasses her, so we find there are Burning Mirrors which
reunite the rays of fire; and in like manner there may be made Artificial
Echoes without comparison more perfect then those wherewith chance and the
natural situation of places have hitherto acquainted us. Whereunto, beside what
I have already mentioned, the Hyperbole, the Parabole, and chiefly the Oval
greatly conduce, with some other means which are treated of in the Cataptricks.

The Third said, The Echo, the Daughter of Solitude, and Secretary of weak
Minds, (who without distrusting her loquacity, fruitlesly acquaint her with
their secret thoughts) teaches us not to declare our secrets to any person,
since even stones and rocks cannot conceal them, but she especially affords
entertainment to Lovers; possibly because she ownes the same Father with Love,
namely, Chance. For as no Love is more ardent then that which arises from the
unlooked for glances of two Eyes; from the collision of which issues a spark,
little in the beginning, but which blown up by the violence of desires, grows
at length into a great flame; so though Art studies to imitate the natural
Echo, and the pretty conceits of that Nymph, yet it never equals her graces
which she borrows only from the casual occurrence of certain sinuosities of
Rocks and Caverns in which she resides; the rest of her inveiglements remain
unknown to Men; The Cause why Antiquity made her a Goddess. All which we can
truly say of her, is to define her a reflection of the voice made by an angle
equal to that of incidence: Which is proved, because the Echoes in narrow
turnings are heard very near him that sings. 2. Nature always works by the
shortest way, which is the straight; therefore Reflection is made by the same.
3. When the voice is received in a straight line it forms no distinct Echo,
because it is united with the same direct line whereby it was carried, which by
that means it dissipateth and scatters. The same happens in a unequal line.
But if the Body which receives it be concave, it will recollect it from the
perpendicular of the speakers mouth toward that Body, and it is by the
concourse of the voice reflected in that line that the Echo is formed. 4. The
Body which receives the voice must be sonorous, which none is except it be
hollow. From which four propositions I conceive, the way may be derived to
imitate the Echo, and tame that wood-Nymph in some manner.

The Fourth said, Vitruvius was not ignorant of this Artifice, having very
dexterously imitated the Nature of the Echo, by the convenient situation of some
earthen vessels, partly empty, and observing a proportion of plenitude to
vacuity; almost like that which some Musicians make use of to represent their
six voices. And that which has been made in the Tuilleries justifies him. Yet
Art finds a greater facility in this matter, near Lakes, Hills, and Woods,
naturally disposed for such a re-percussion. But which increases the wonder of
the Echo, is its reduplication, which is multiplied in some places seven times
and more; the reason whereof seems to be the same with that of multiplication
of Images in Mirrors. For as there are Mirrors which not only receive the
species on their surface so plainly as our Eye beholds, but cannot see the same
in the Air, though they are no less there then in the Mirror; so there are some
that cast forth the species into the Air, so that stretching out your arm, you
see another arm as it were coming out of the Mirror to meet yours. In like
manner it is with the voice. And as a second and a third Mirror rightly
situated, double and trebble the same species; so other Angles and Concavities,
opposite to the first, cause the voice to bound, and by their sending it from
one to another multiply it as many times as there are several Angles; but
indeed, weaker in the end then in the beginning, because all Reaction is less
then the First Action.

CONFERENCE XVI.
I. How Spirits act upon Bodies. II. Whether is more powerful, Love or Hatred.

I. How Spirits act upon Bodies.
IT is requisite to understand the Nature of ordinary and sensible actions,
that we may judge of others; as in all Sciences a known Term is laid down to
serve for a rule to those which are inquired. So Architects have a Level and a
Square, whereby to discern perpendicular Lines and Angles. Now in Natural
Actions between two Bodies there is an Agent, a Patient, a Contact, (either
Physical or Mathematical, or compounded of both) a Proportion of Nature and
Place, and a Reaction. Moreover, Action is only between Contraries; so that
Substances and Bodies having no contraries, act not one against the other,
saving by their qualities: Which, nevertheless, inhering in the subjects which
support them, cause Philosophers to say, that Actions proceed from Supposita.
Now that which causes the difficulty in the Question, is not that which
results from the Agent; for the Spirit is not only a perpetual Agent, but also
a pure Act; nor that which proceeds from the Patient; for Matter which
predominates in Bodies, is of its own Nature, purely Passive. But it is from the
want of Contact. For it seems not possible for a Physical Contact to be
between any but two complete substances. And if we speak of the Soul which
informs the Body, it is not complete; because it has an essence ordinated and
relative to the Body. If we speak of Angels or Demons, there is no proportion
of Nature between them and Bodies, and much less resemblance as to the manner
of being in a place. For Angels are in a place only definitively, and Bodies
are circumscribed with the internal surface of their place: How then can they
act one upon the other? Nor can there be reaction between them. For Spirits
cannot part from Bodies. But on the other side, since Action is only between
Contraries, and Contraries are under the same next Genus, and Substance is
divided into Spiritual and Corporeal, there ought to be no more true Action
then between the Soul and the Body, both Contraries; not only according to the
acception of Divines who constantly oppose the Body to the Spirit, and make
them fight one with the other; but speaking naturally, it is evident that the
proprieties of the one being diametrically opposite to those of the other,
cause a perpetual conflict with them; which is the same that we call Action.
Contact is no more necessary between the Soul and the Body to infer their
action, then it is between the Iron and the Lodestone which attracts it. What
Proportion can be found greater then between Act and Power, the Form and the
Matter, the Soul and the Body, which are in the same place. As for Reaction,
supposing it to be necessary (whereof yet we see no effect in the Sun, nor the
other Celestial Bodies, which no Man will say suffer any thing from our Eye,
upon which nevertheless they act, making themselves seen by us: And Lovers are
not wholly without reason when they say a subject makes them suffer, remaining
it self unmovable.) It is certain that our Soul suffers little less then our
Body, as is seen in griefs and corporal maladies, which alter the free
functions of the Mind, caused by the influence of the Soul upon the Body
through Anger, Fear, Hope, and the other Passions. The Soul then acts upon the
Body, over which it is accustomed to exercise Dominion from the time of our
Formation in our Mothers womb, it governs and inures it to obey; in the same
manner as a good Rider does a Horse whom he has managed from his youth, and
rides upon every day. Their common contentment facilitates this obedience; the
instruments the Soul makes use of are the Spirits, which are of a middle nature
between it and the Body. Not that I fancy them half spiritual and half
corporeal, as some would suppose, but by reason they are of so* subtle a
Nature that they vanish together with the Soul: So that the Arteries,
Ventricles, and other parts which contain them, are found wholly empty
immediately after death.

The Second said, That if we would judge aright what ways the Soul takes to act
upon the Body, we need only seek what the Body takes to act upon the Soul. For
the lines drawn from the center to the circumference are equal to those from
the circumference to the center. Now the course which it holds toward the Soul
is thus. The Objects imprint their species in the Organ of the outward Sense;
this carries the same to the Common Sense, and this to the Fancy: The Memory
at the same time presents to the Judgment the fore-past Experiences which she
has kept in her Treasury; The Judgment by comparing them with the knowledge
newly arrived to it by its Phantasmes, together with its natural habit of first
principles, draws from the same a conclusion which the Will approves as soon as
Reason acquiesseth therein. According to the same order the Will consignes the
Phantasmes in the Memory and the Fancy, this to the Common Sense, and this to
the Organs of the Senses. For Example, as soon as my Judgment has approved
the discourse which I make to you, and my Will has agreed thereunto, she
consigned the species to my Memory, that it might remember to reduce them into
this order, according to which my Memory distributed them to my Imagination,
this to my Common Sense; this to the Nerves appointed for the Motion of my
Tongue, and the other Organs of Speech, to recite the same, and now into those
of my hand, to write them down to you.

The Third said, That the clearing of the Question propounded depended upon two
others. First, what link or union there may be between a Spiritual and a
Corporeal thing. Secondly, (supposing that of the six sorts of Motion the
Spirits can act only by the Local, how they can touch a Body to remove it
locally; since there is no Contact but between Bodies. To the first I answer,
that there is no need of union, such as that which joins the Soul to the Body,
for joining the Act with its true Power; if there be any in us, it must be that
which we see is necessary for the communion of Action. For when Actions cannot
be exercised but by two parties of different Nature, there is found an Union
between those different Natures, which is very natural, and founded upon the
necessity of such Action. Wherefore I am so far from thinking the union of the
Soul with the Body a strange thing, that I should wonder more if there were
none. For the better understanding whereof, it is to be observed that our Soul
has two sorts of Actions; one peculiar to it self, as to Will, and to
understand; the other common with the Body, as to See, Hear, Feel, etc. These
latter are as much natural as the former. And as, if it were in a State in
which it could not exercise the former, that State would be violent to it, and
contrary to its Nature; so it is equally troublesome to her while she cannot
exercise the latter. Since therefore it is a part of the Nature of the Soul to
be able to exercise its functions, it is consequently natural to it to be
united to the Body; seeing without such union it cannot exercise those
functions. Now I am no more solicitous to know what this union is, then to
understand what that is which unites one part of an essence with the other;
since the Body is in some manner the essence of the Soul, making one suppositum
and individual with it, and the Soul has not its Nature entire, saving when it
is united with the Body. I pass to the Second, and say, that, supposing two
sorts of Contact, one of a suppositum, the other of Virtue; the Spirits touch
the Body, which they move locally, by a Contact of Virtue; by impressing the
force of their motive faculty upon the Body which they will move; as my hand
impresseth its motive virtue upon the ball which I fling; which virtue, though
extrinsecal, persists in the ball as long as it moves, even when it is distant
from my hand. And although there is some disparity, inasmuch as the hand and
the ball are both corporeal, which a Spirit and a Body are not; yet since our
Soul applies its motive virtue to the Body which it animates, it is probable
there are many qualities common both to Spiritual and Corporeal Substances; as
is the power of acquiring habits. And it is also likely that the power of
moving from one place to another, which is in a Spirit, is not different in
specie from that which is in a Horse, although their Subjects differ. If
therefore the motive faculty of Bodies is that of the same species with that of
Spirits, why should we account it strange that that of a Spirit should be
communicated to a Body?

The Fourth said, That the Example of our Lord carried by the Devil to the top
of a Mountain and of a pinnacle of a Temple, shows sufficiently that Demons
can act upon Bodies, and that all natural things falling under the cognizance
of Sense are moveable in their activity; yet not at once, and in gross, but one
thing after another. For an Angel not being an Informing Form, tied and
connected to any particular sensible Nature (as the Rational Soul is) but an
Assisting Form, that is, an External Agent which moves and agitates it to
pleasure, it is indifferent, and can determine, to move what Body, it pleases.
But sensible things are not subject to Spirits, saving so far as Local Motion.
For the Devil acts either upon the Body, or upon the Soul, as it is in its
Organs. If upon the Body, he either does it alone, or by the intervention of
another Agent. If the latter, then there must be a Local Motion to apply the
same to the Body upon which he causes it to act for the tormenting or moving
of it. If he does it by himself immediately, and causes pain in the parts, it
is either by solution of continuity, or by distention of those parts, or by
compression of them. All which is no more but dislocating them, and moving them
out of their right situation. If he causes a Fever, it is either by collecting
the humors from all the parts; For Example, Choler, which congregated together
in too great quantity, distempers the Body; or else by restraining the
perspiration of the fuliginous vapor, which is the excrement of the third
Concoction; and being withheld within causes the putrefaction of the humors:
and all this is local motion too. By which also he produces all the diseases
which he is able to cause, inspiring a putrid Air, which like Leven sowers and
corrupts the humors. If he acts upon the Senses and the Passions, he does it
either outwardly, by some mutation of the Object, or inwardly, by some
alteration of the Faculty. If the former, it is because by a Local Motion he
forms a Body, heaping together, uniting and adjusting the materials necessary
thereunto; as the Air, an aqueous vapor, a terrene and unctuous exhalation,
and the heat of the Sun, or some other, which he employes artificially
(according to the experience which he has acquired throughout so many Ages)
till he make them correspond to the Idea of the Body which he designs to form.
All the Actions of Men are performed in like manner, by putting together,
conjoyning, or retrenching, or separating things: In one word, by apposition or
separation. If he acts internally upon the Faculty, it is either upon the
Fancy, or the Appetite, or the External Sense. Upon the Fancy, either by
compounding one Phantasm of many, as it happens in sleeping, or else by acting
upon a single one, to make it appear more handsome or ugly; More handsome, by
the concourse of many pure, clear, refined Spirits, which enliven and embellish
that Phantasm; as we see a thing appear more handsome in the Sun; More ugly, by
the arrival of certain gloomy and dark Spirits, which usually arise from the
humor of Melancholy In the Appetite, if he excites Love there, it is by the
motion of dilatation expanding the Spirits, and making them take up more room;
If Hatred or Sadness, it is coarcting the same Spirits by compression. He can
also cause a subtle mutation in the outward Senses internally, especially upon
the sight. As we see those that have a suffusion beginning, imagine that they
see Pismires and Flies, which others besides themselves behold not. Moreover,
Melancholy persons often terrified with various frightful representations; the
cause whereof is an humor extravasated between the Tunicles of the Eye under
the Cornea, before the Crystalline which disturbs the sight with various shapes
by reason of its mobility; as the Clouds appear to us of several figures. Thus
and more easily can the Devil trasfer the humors, and, managing them at his
pleasure, make them put on what figure he will, to cause delusion. In fine, all
this is performed by the Local Motion of the parts, humors, or Spirits.

The Fifth said, That the foundation of doubting, is, that there is required
proportion between the Agent and the Patient. Which is proved, because it is
requisite that the patient which is in Power be determined by the form
received; and it seems that a spiritual thing cannot produce a form that may
determine a material thing. That it produces nothing material, is evident,
because the action and the product are of the same Nature. Now the action of a
Spiritual Entity cannot be material, to speak naturally. Yet it is certain that
God acts in corporeal things, though he is a pure Spirit. But it may be
answered, That an Infinite Power is not obliged to the Rules of Creatures;
Besides, that his Ubiquitary Presence suffices to impart Motion to all; as
also that he containing all things eminently is able to produce all things. But
if to contain eminently is to have a more perfect Being, capable to do what the
lesser cannot; this is not satisfactory. For the Question is, How that more
perfect Immaterial Being can produce that which Material Beings produce. To
which, the saying that it is a more perfect Being, does not satisfy. For then
an Angel should be naturally able to produce all the perfections which are
inferior to him; which is absurd. It follows therefore, that the Cause must
contain the Effect, that it may be able to produce it; and that, since a
spiritual Being does not contain material things, either those which we call
Immaterial, are not so at all; or else God immediately produces in them the
effects which we attribute to them. For I see not how immateriality is inferred
from immortality, since there may be an incorruptible matter, such as that of
the Heavens is. Which nevertheless is spoken rather to make way for some better
thought, then that I hold it as my own.

The Sixth said, That there may be some Medium serving for the union between
the Body and the Soul, beside the Animal, Vital, and Natural Spirits; to which
Medium, the many wonderful effects which we are constrained to ascribe to
Occult Qualities ought to be referd'd. For as they who know not that the Ring
which Juglers make to skip upon a Table, according to the motion of their
fingers, is fastened to them by the long Hair of a Woman, attribute that Motion
to the Devil: So they who cannot comprehend the subtility of the Medium,
uniting not only the Body with the Soul which informs it, but also the other
Spirits with the Body which they agitate, find no proportion therein, and are
constrained to let experience cross their reason. Now to understand the Nature
of this uniting Medium, I conceive is as difficult as to give an account of the
Sympathies and Antipathies of things.

II. Which is more powerful Love or Hatred.
Upon the Second Point, the First said, That E^pedocles had reason to
constitute Love and Hatred for the two Principles of Nature: which though
Aristotle endeavors to confute, yet is he constrained to acknowledge the same
thing, though disguised under other words. For when he says, that two of his
Principles are contraries and enemies, namely, Form and Privation; and
nevertheless that they are united in one common Subject which is the Matter;
what is it else but to confess that all things are made and composed by the
means of Love and Hatred? They who own no other Principles but the Four
Elements, are of the same opinion, when they say that all Mixed Bodies are made
with a discording concord, and a concording discord. For as the Elements united
together will never compose an Animal, unless they be reduced to a just
proportion, and animated, by rebatement of some little of the vigor of their
active qualities; so if there be no kind of War and Amity between them, if the
Hot act not against the Humid, the Animal will never live: since Life is
nothing but the action of Heat upon Humidity. However, Amity has something
more noble, and excites greater effects then Enmity. For the former is the
cause of the Generation and Preservation of Mixed Bodies, and the latter of
their dissolution and corruption. Now it is much more noble to give and
preserve Being, then to destroy it. Whence God himself found such perfection in
his Creation, and was so pleased with his Divine Work, that though it
frequently deserves by its crimes to be annihilated, yet his Punishments have
not hitherto proceeded so far. This is no less true in Spiritual and
Intellectual Substances then in Natural. Gods Love has more noble effects then
his Hatred. For (to leave to Divines the consideration of that Love which had
the power to draw the Second Person of the Trinity from Heaven, with that which
produces the Third* as also to leave them to proclaim that God loves Good
Actions, and that the effect of this Love is Eternal Bliss* that he hates Sins,
and that the effects of this hatred are the punishments of Hell; that it is
manifest that the glory of Paradise is much greater then of those
Chastisements; since what ever penalties God inflicts upon Man for his
mis-deeds, he renders Justice to him, and does not reduce him into a state
inferior to or against his Nature; but when he rewards with Eternal Glory, he
exalts our Nature infinitely higher then it could aspire;) let us consider Love
and Hatred in Men, and particularly as Passions, (according as the Question
propounded seems principally to be understood,) and no doubt Love will be
found more violent then Hatred. To judge the better whereof, we must not
consider them nakedly and simply, as Love is nothing else but an inclination
toward Good, and Hatred an Aversion from Evil; nor yet as such Good or Evil is
present: For in these two manners they have no violence, nor any Motions, since
according to the received Maxim; When the End is present, all Motion and
Action cease. But to know which of these two passions acts with most force
and violence for the attaining of its end, we must contemplate them with all
the train and attendance of the other Passions which accompany them; not as the
one is an inclination to Good, and the other an Aversion from Evil, present;
For in this sense, no doubt, a Present Evil which causes Grief, is more
sensible and violent then a Present Good which causes Pleasure; but as the one
is a Desire of the Absent Good which is proposed, and the other a Flight from
an Absent Evil which is feared; I conceive the Passions excited by an Absent
Evil have no great violence, but rather partake of heaviness and stupidity, as
Fear and Sadness; which render us rather unmovable and insensible, then active
and violent in our Motions. The Passions which lead toward an Absent Good are
otherwise: For Hope, which is, by the testimony of Aristotle, a species of
Love, contemnes and surmounts all difficulties which hinder its attaining to
its Good.

Here one objecting, That Anger, which arises from Hatred and inward Grief has
more violent effects then Hope and the other Passions; It was answered, that
Anger consists of a mixture of Love and Hatred; therefore Homer says, that to
be angry is a thing more sweet then Honey. For Anger tends to Revenge, and
cease when we are revenged for the wrong we apprehend done to us. Now Revenge
seems a Good and delectable thing to the person that seeks it; and therefore
all the great Ebullitions and Commotions observed in Anger ought to be referred
to the Love and Desire of Revenge. Besides, the Motions which attend Hatred are
Motions of Flight, as those which accompany Love are Motions of Pursuit; and
Anger being rather a Pursuit and seeking of Revenge, then a Flight from any
evil, it is more reasonably to be ranked under Love then under Hatred. Again,
we see amorous persons are more easily put into heat, then even those which are
drawn up in battalia, and ready to kill one another. In fine, if Hatred and all
the Passions attending it, have any force and violence, Love is the prime cause
thereof; we hate no thing but because we love some thing, and that more or
less, proportionably as we love. Wherefore the Philosophers who would introduce
an Apathy, and banish all the Passions, should have done well rather to
extinguish Love. For he who loves no thing, hates no thing; and when we have
lost any thing, our sadness and resentment is proportionable to the Love we had
for it. He that loves no thing, fears no thing; and if it be possible, that he
does not love his own life, he does not fear death. It is not therefore to be
inquired, which excites the greatest Commotions, Love or Hatred; since even
those which Hatred excites proceed from Love.

The Third said, That the Acts or Motions of the Appetite are called Passions,
because they make the Body suffer, and cause an alteration in the Heart and
Pulse. Such as aim at Pleasure enervate the Motion of Contraction; because they
dilate the Spirits, and augment that of Dilatation. Whereas, on the contrary,
those which belong to Sadness diminish the Motion of Dilatation, because they
further that of Contraction. We may consider the Passions either materially or
formally; the former consideration denotes the Impression which they make upon
the Body; the latter, the relation to their Object. So Anger considered
materially is defined, An Ebullition and Fervor of the Blood about the Heart;
and formally, A Desire of Revenge. This being premiz'd, I affirm, That Hatred
is much more powerful then Love; if we consider them materially, not as alone,
but as leaders of a party, viz. Love with all the train of Passions that follow
the same toward Good, and Hatred, with all its adherents, in reference to
Evil. For either of them taken apart, and by it self, make very little
impression and alteration in the Heart. Love is a bare acknowledgement of, and
complacency in good, and goes no further as Love. Hatred is nothing else but a
bare rejection, disavowing, and aversion of Evil. In verification of which
conception of the Nature of those Passions, it is evident that the Effects
ascribed to Love, as Ecstasy, Languishing, are the Effects not of Love, but of
Hope, weary and fainting through its own duration. Now these Passions being
thus taken, Love causes less alteration upon the Body then Hatred. For its
highest pitch is Delight, which is materially an expansion of the Spirits of
the Heart toward the parts of the whole Body; wherein appears rather a
cessation from Action, then any violence. But Hatred which terminates in Anger
makes a furious havoc. It dauseth the Blood to boil about the Heart, and
calls to its aid the same Passions that are subservient to Love, as Hope and
Boldness, conceiving it a Good to be revenged on the present Evil. The Case is
the same also, if they be considered according to their formality. For the
Object of Love is a Good, not absolute but according to some consideration;
seeing the good of an Animal is its preservation, to which that kind which is
called Delectable Good, or the Good of Delight, is ordained as a means to the
end. But the Object of Hatred is the Evil which destroys an Absolute and
Essential being of an Animal. For which reason it moves more powerfully then
Good.

The Fourth said, That for the better judging of the Question, we must suppose
that these two Passions are two Agents, which tend each to their different End.
For the end of Love is a good Being; That of Hatred, which repels what
destroys our Being, is the preservation of Being simply. Now Being is much
more perfect naturally then better being, though morally it is not so perfect:
and the preservation of Being is of the same dignity with Being. On the other
side, it is true that Love is the cause of Hatred, and that we hate nothing but
because we love. Yet it does not follow that Hatred is not more powerful then
Love; seeing many times the Daughter is more strong and fair then the Mother.
Now if they are brutish Passions, they must be measured by the standard of
Brutes. But we see a Dog leave his Meat to follow a Beast, against which he
has a natural animosity. And Antipathies are more powerful then Sympathies;
for the former kill, and the latter never give life. Nevertheless, sometimes
Love prevails over Hatred. For a Man that loves the Daughter passionately, and
hates the Father as much, will not cease to do good to the Father for the
Daughters sake.

The shortness of the days, and the enlargements upon this Subject, having in
this and some of the former Conferences, left no room for Inventions; every one
was entrealed to prepare himself for the future; and these two Points were
chosen for the next day seven-night.

CONFERENCE XVII.
I. Of the several fashions of wearing Mourning, and why Black is used to that
purpose rather than any other color. II. Why people are pleased with Music.

I. Of the several fashions of wearing Mourning, and why Black is used to that
purpose rather then any other color.
THe First said, That the greatest part of Mankind, excepting some Barbarians,
lamented the death of their friends, and expressed their sadness by external
Mourning, which is nothing but the change of Habit. Now they are observed to be
of six sorts. The Violet is for Princes. The weeds of Virgins are white in
reference to purity. Sky-colour is in use with the people of Syria, Cappadocia
and Armenia, to denote the place which they wish to the dead, namely, Heaven.
The Yellow, or Feuille-morte, among those of Egypt, to show (say they) that as
Herbs being faded become yellow; so Death is the end of Humane Hope. The Gray
is worn by the Aethiopians, because it denotes the color of the Earth, which
receives the dead, and into which they return. But the most common, and used
throughout all Europe, is Black, which also was always worn by the Romans when
they went into Mourning, except during sixty years that they wore white. The
wearing of Mourning continued ten months at Rome; the Athenians wore it but
one month; the Spartans no more but eleven days. The reason why they have all
chosen Black for denoting Sadness, is, because Black is the privation of White,
and proceeds from the defect of Light; so Death is the privation of Life and
Light. Possibly too, the reason why the Cypress Tree was esteemed a Funeral
Tree, was, because the leaves were of a dark Green, and the Nutts tincture
Black, and being cut it never puts forth again; as also Beans were, in regard
of the blackness which appears in them and their flowers.

The Second said, That Experience shows us sufficiently that the Black color
does not only put us in Mind of our griefs and sadnesses passed, but also is
apt excite new. This is known to the Senses, and unknown to Reason, by a
certain Divine Appointment, which has caused that what is manifest to the one,
is hidden to the other. As appears, for that nothing is so natural to the Sense
of Seeing as Light and Colors. But yet there is nothing in which our Mind
sooner finds its weakness, then in the enquiry into the Nature and properties
of Colors and Light. Now there are two sorts of blackness, the one Internal,
when the Soul turning it self toward the Images, upon report of which a
judgment is made, if that Image is Black and deformed, the Soul must conceive
that the Objects represented by it, are so also, and thence arises horror and
sadness; the other external, for the explicating of which, I must crave leave
to deflect a little from the ordinary opinion touching the Nature of Colors. I
affirm, that Color and Light are one and the same thing, and differ only in
regard of the Subject; so that the luster of a simple Body is Light, but the
luster of a mixed Body is called Color. By which account, Light is the Color
of a simple Body, and Color is the Light of a mixed Body. Whence Mixts
approaching nearest to the simplicity of the Element predominant in them, are
all Luminous; as precious stones, which are a simple Earth, and without mixture
of other Element; and rotten Wood, which having lost the little Air and Fire it
had, its humidity also being absum'd by the putrefaction, and there remaining
nothing almost but Earth, you see how it keeps its splendor amidst the
darkness of the night. And this, in my conceit, is the meaning of what Moses
says, when he says, that God created the Light before the Sun. For God having
created the Elements in their natural purity, they were sometimes in that state
before mixture; the Earth appeared not, but the Water covered its whole
Surface. Every Element was in its own place, and the purity of its Nature: for
which reason they had then their first Color, which is splendor. But as soon
as God had mingled them for the forming of Mixts, their Light became clouded
and changed into Color. And hence it was necessary to form a Sun in Heaven,
far from all sort of mixture and composition; to the end he might always
preserve his Light, and enlighten the world therewith. The Fire preserves it
self the most of all in its purity, by reason of its great activity which
consumes what ever approaches near it. The other Elements would do so too, if
they could preserve themselves in their purity as well as the Fire. But because
they would be unprofitable should they remain such, it is necessary that they
be mingled one with another, as well to serve for the production of Compounds,
as for their Aliment, and several uses. Hence their Light becomes changed into
Color, which is nothing else but a Light extinguished more or less; and,
accordingly, we see some Colors more luminous then others. The White is still
wholly luminous, the Red wholly resplendent, the Green less, and the Brown
begins to grow dark. Lastly, the Black is nothing but Light wholly extinct, and
a kind of darkness, and consequently has nothing of reality, but is a pure
Privation which our Eyes perceive not. As our Ear discerns or perceives not
silence, but only by not hearing any sound; so neither does the Sight behold
Black and darkness, but when it sees neither Color nor Light. So that to hear
Silence, and see darkness, is (to speak properly) a vain attempt of the Soul,
which would fain exert its action of seeing and hearing, and cannot. Hence
arises the sadness and terror which a deep silence, and the sight of extreme
blackness and darkness excites in the Soul. For the Soul knows well, that Life
is nothing else but Exercise of its Faculties, of which as soon as any thing is
deprived, there remains nothing to be expected but death. She would fain exert
her action and cannot; she distinguishes not whether it be through default of
the Object, or whether her Faculty be lost, but she finds a privation of her
actions, and represents to her self to be in the state of Death; whence arises
Sadness and Fear. For as our Soul dreadeth nothing so much as Death, so the
least suspicion, the least sign and umbrage of Death, is apt to put her into
great dejection. And this makes way for the Second Reason, why the Soul becomes
sad at the sight of a black Color, namely, because it never appears in the
Body, but Death is at hand. For this Color is produced by the mortification
and extinction of the Spirits, as a Gangrene, which is either caused by
Adustion, (whereby Coals become black) or by extreme coldness; thus Old Men are
of a leaden Color tending to blackness. Now the excess of heat and coldness is
equally contrary to Life. Wherefore as often as the Soul perceives blackness,
either in her own Body or in another, she remembers the Qualities which
produced it, and are contrary to Life which she loves; hence arises sadness.
And hence also it is that we naturally love a Countenance well proportioned
with an agreeable Color, wherein there is found a redness mingled with
whiteness, bright and lively with Spirits; which is nothing else but an effect
of the Love which our Soul bears to Life. For knowing this to be the Color of
Health, it affects the same even in another, as, on the other side, it
abhors Death. Look upon a living Body, it is full of brightness; but a dead
one is gloomy and dismal; and at the instant that the Soul parts from the Body,
a dark shade seems as it were to veil the Countenance. Now that the Soul may
understand, it must become like to its Object. Whence Aristotle said, that the
Intellect is potentially all things, forasmuch as it can form it self into as
many shapes as there are Objects. So then, it will perceive blackness, it must
become conformable to Black, which it cannot be without great resentment of
grief and sadness; since its natural Color is its brightness; and to deprive
the Soul of brightness and splendour is to deprive it of Life.

II. Why Men love Music.
Upon the Second Point the First said, That if Music be not natural to the
Heavens, considering the regularity of their Motions, which the custom of
always hearing hinders us from perceiving; yet it is so to Man, since he takes
such Pleasure therein, that Nurses quiet the frowardness of their Children in
the Cradle by their Songs; the Devotion of grown persons is increased by
singing of Psalms; the Pipe and the Drum animate the Soldier to War, and even
Horses become more courageous by the sound of the Trumpet; Not to mention
David's Harp, which drove away the evil Spirit from Saul, nor the cure which
Hoboys effect in those that are stung with the Tarantula, causing them to dance
till they sweat, by which means they are cured of what otherwise would be
mortal. All which seems more to be admired then explicated.

The Second said, That the Solution of the present Question depends upon this
other; namely, why certain Objects excite Pleasure, and others Grief? The truth
is, Nature has joined Grief with Hurtful Objects, and Pleasure with
profitable. For otherwise having placed Living Creatures amidst Life and Death,
it might have happened that through want of knowledge, or else through
intemperance, some Creature might neglect the things which are profitable to
it, or made use of such as are hurtful. It is not to be feared that an Ox will
eat Wormwood, or that an Animal will not pluck its leg out of the fire: For
Pain admonishes both the one and the other to abstain from those Objects, as
on the other side Pleasure attracts us to those which preserve our Nature. This
Pleasure is not only in the Object as it is suitable to our Nature, but also
in the Action it self. As it is a very sweet thing to live, so it is a great
pleasure to exercise the Actions of life, more or less, according as the same
are noble or necessary. Whence it is that Nature has placed more Pleasure in
the Action which tends to preserving the species of Men, then in that which
preserves every individual in particular, and yet more in this latter, then in
that of Seeing, Tasting, and the rest; because that which regards the
preservation of the individual, namely, Eating and Drinking, is considerable in
reference to Life and Being which it preserves; but the rest are only for
well-being. But in the Sense of Hearing there is not observed any Pleasure or
Pain arriving by reason of the Object; because in Hearing, as well as in
Seeing, the Objects act only intentionally not really and corruptibly. Now
Pain and Pleasure are not excited on the part of the Objects, but by real
Actions, which cause alteration in their subject. But the Hearing is capable
thereof, because it is a Natural Action, and every Natural Action is performed
with Pleasure. Whence then comes the Pain which our Ear receives with the
sound? It must be observed that the Sense of Touching is diffused through all
the Body, and every sensible part admits Pain, which is an Accident of
Touching. Upon which account the Ear is endew'd with Two Senses; it receives
not only sounds, but the Tactile qualities. Sounds of themselves excite
neither Pain nor Pleasure; but if together with sound the Air enters into the
Organ, and strike it too vehemently, or stretches the Membrane more then its
Nature is able to bear, Pain is excited in the Ear, not as it is the Instrument
of Hearing, but as it is endew'd with the Sense of Touching. Moreover, Pain may
be excited in the Sense of Hearing, another way. For the understanding whereof,
it is to be noted, that it is not sufficient that the word of him that speaks
be formed and articulated in his Mouth by the help of the Teeth and the Tongue;
but the Ear must form it anew that you may hear it. For which end it is
contrived in form of a Snail-shell, at the bottom whereof is placed a Drum, an
Anvil, and a Hammer, for the formation of sounds anew. Now as we see the Organs
which form words one after another, are troubled and discomposed when they are
to form certain sounds which have any Cacophonia or uncouth sound amongst them;
as when I say, il alla a Alenson, I feel a certain unaptness in my Organs of
speech; and the reason of this unaptness is, because the sequel or coherence of
those sounds together, does not well suit with the manner of the Organs
operation; in regard it is natural to shut the Mouth after wide opening it; as
we do in the pronuntiation of A. Now if another A must be pronounced
immediately after, there is need of more force, which is troublesome, or else
time must be allowed between both, to shut the Mouth without speaking a word;
which is also tedious to the Organ of speech, which hastens as much as he can
to pronounce the words intended. So when the Ear comes to form the sounds anew,
(as I said it does) if two or more happen together, which require to be formed
at once, as they do which have the same tone, or which gives not the Organ
leisure to rest from one end to the other, it resents the same unaptness and
inconvenience. Hence certain Concords in Music please the Ear, and others
displease it. This is seen ordinarily, that it is displeasing to the Ear to
form many sounds at a time, as when two persons speak together; or if it happen
that the two sounds presented together to be formed are wholly opposite one to
the other, as one grave, and the other sharp; the Organ cannot form them both
at once, because they require two different ways of operation, to which the
Ear cannot attend at the same time. For it operates otherwise in forming a
sharp sound then a grave, and they both strike the Organ and rend, it each
after its own mode. Whereby it is constrained to form them; but as it is by
force, so it is not without Pain. But when those two sounds, the grave and the
sharp, are united in one proportion, so that the sharp serves as it were for
salt to the other, and they are blended together; this conjunction makes them
considered but as one sound, which the Ear finds very agreeable, because it
forms the same not only without difficulty, but also with Pleasure. Hence the
good Concord of Music delights our Ears so much.

The Third said, We have suffered under the Tyranny of the Peripateticks too
long, whereas the other Philosophers afford us excellent reasons. Plato and
Pythagoras will have all things to be Number, or at least a participation and
similitude of Numbers. Aristotle agrees too, that Music is Number. Now the
perfect Number, according to Pythagoras, is that of Ten; seeing all other
Numbers are but repetitions of the first Ten. Of these Numbers the first pair
is Female and imperfect; and so is a second in Music. Three is the first Male,
and the first degree of perfection; hence a Third is agreeable to the Ear. The
Fourth is so likewise, because it makes up the Ten. Add 1, 2, 3, and 4, and you
have the grand Number of Ten, the Father of all others. Also a Fifth pleases
the Ear wonderfully, because it is an Abridgement of the grand Number, and the
marriage of the Male and the first Female. The other Numbers are useless,
except the Eighth, because Musicians call it Identity, or Unity, which is a
Divine Number, or rather no Number; nor is the Eighth as delightful as it is,
accounted by Musicians amongst their Concords.

The Fourth said, That the Reason why some Notes are agreeable, and other
unpleasing, in Music, is, because the former move the Faculty of the Soul
after a manner suitable to it, and the latter do not; as we see an Example of it
in Ballads and Dances, where when the Violin or Minstrel has sounded a braul
which goes well to the cadence, not only the Members of the Dancers comply
therewith and follow the same readily, but also the Souls seems to dance with
the Bodies; so great Sympathy have they with that Harmony. But if, on the
contrary, the power of the Soul be otherwise agitated at the same time, that
Harmony, how regular soever, will displease us. Witness the displeasure taken
at cheerful aires by those who are in Mourning, to whom doleful notes better
agree, which, on the other side, are disagreeable to such as are merrily
disposed. Add hereunto the humor of the Fancy, which has an aversion to some
sounds, as well as to some smells. For as for Discords, janglings, and other
troublesome sounds, no other cause of their general inacceptableness ought to
be sought, then that disproportion and deformity which is sound in things
Natural and Artificial, the former being more intolerable then the latter;
because the Eye is not struck with the visible species, as the Ear is with
sound, and can turn away from the Object which displeases it, which the Ear
cannot, and is closed with much more difficulty.

CONFERENCE XVIII.
I. Of the Original of Winds. II. Why none are contented with their Condition.

I. Of the Original of Winds
THere is more resemblance then one would imagine between these two points, The
Wind of the Air, and that of Ambition, to which the discontent of Men with
their condition is commonly ascribed. As for the First, Some have held that all
Wind, even that which blows upon the Sea, comes from the Earth; and that the
first conjecture which was entertained of the Region of the West Indies, was
taken from the Wind perceived to come from that quarter. But the History of
Christopher Columbus, attributing the discovery to Chance thereof, cannot
consist with that opinion. There is no Meteor whose effects have more of
Miracle, which is defined, An Effect whereof no Natural Cause is seen. For even
the Lightning is seen by the brightness of the fire which accompanies it. But
the effects of this aim at the highest things, which it overthrows, and you
neither see the Agent nor understand it. Yet the Sagacity of Humane Wit is
admirable. Sins have served to clear Cases of Conscience. Arsenick, Sublimate,
and other poisons, are converted by Physic into Cauteries and other profitable
remedies. The Civil Law has by occasion of evil manners received addition of
good Laws. The Winds, which drown Ships, are so managed by the Art of
Navigation (which divides them first into four principal, North, East, South,
West, and then into eight, by the addition of four half points, and has at
length subdivided them into 32.) that by their help Men sail upon the main Sea,
and provide foreign remedies for Physic; Sugar and spices for Kitchins, and
employments for many other professions.

The Second said, That though many causes may agitate the Air, yet all of them
are not sufficient to raise a Wind; but the Air must be agitated by some Fume
which is raised either from the Earth, and is called an Exhalation, or from the
Water, and is called a Vapor; either of which partakes of the Nature of the
Element from whence it proceeds. A Vapor is moist, an Exhalation dry. An
extrinsecal Heat which predominates in them gives them all their motions, and
makes them mount on high. And because it is the property of Heat always to
move and act, therefore these Fumes are so long in action as the Heat lasts.
They arise in company together, and are carried upwards; but are presently
separated. For the moisture of the Vapor quenches the Heat which animated it;
so that the sole absence of the Sun, or the occurse of the least Cold,
depriving the Vapor of the little Heat which was left in it, and made it still
ascend upwards, it becomes more condensed, and falls down in Rain. But an
Exhalation has a greater degree of Heat, which is rendered more active by the
dryness and tenacity of the matter. Therefore it ascends till it meets with the
Air of the Middle Region, which is thick and congealed, by which being hindered
^o pass further, it seeks a passage on one side or the other. Many times when
it strives to rise higher, it becomes engaged among Clouds which enclose it on
all sides. Being thus enclosed and straightened, it becomes united together, and
thereupon being inflamed, breaks the Clouds, and causes Thunder; or if it ^ind
less resistance toward the Earth, it descends with violence to the place from
whence it arose, and makes Whirl-winds. But if such Exhalation have not time
enough to mount as far as the Middle Region (as it happens most frequently) but
as soon as it is drawn up be hindered and enclosed by the Vapor turned into
thick and cold Air in the Lower Region of the Air, then Winds are produced in
this manner. This Exhalation being unable to mount upwards, because the whole
Region is full of thick Air which resists it, it must go either on one side or
other; wherefore it tends that way where it meets least resistance. And whereas
there are certain seasons wherein the Air is sometimes less thick toward the
South; others, wherein it is so toward the North, and the other quarters of
Heaven; thence it is that the Winds blow there most usually. Moreover, the
reason why the Wind has a kind of whistling, is, because the Exhalation
clasheth with violence against that thick Air. Hence also it is, that Winds are
more ordinary in the Night, and about Evening; because in those times the
Vapor loses its Heat through the Suns absence; and so being become a thick
Air, better incloseth the Exhalation, and resists the same with more force.
But as the Air which issues out of our Lungs is hot; yet if it be sent forth
with some little violence it becomes cold: So though the Exhalation which
causes Wind be never without Heat, yet we never feel the Wind hot. Not that
the Air loses its Heat by motion, as Cardan conceives: (For, on the contrary,
all things become Hot by motion; the Lead upon Arrows is melted, and the Wood
fired, Water becomes thinner and hotter.) But the cause thereof is, for that a
strong Wind or Hot Air driven violently draws all the neighboring Air after
it, which Air is Cold, and we feel the coldness thereof. Whence all strong
Winds are always cold.

The Third said, We ought not to seek other causes of Natural Winds then those
we find in Artificial Wind; because Art imitates Nature. Artificial Winds (such
as those of our Bellows, the most common instruments thereof, are caused by a
compression of the Air made by two more solid Bodies then themselves, which
thrust the same through a narrower place then that of their residence. For the
Bellows having sucked in a great quantity of Air, when its two sides draw
together they drive out the same again with violence; And this is that which
they call Wind. In like manner, I conceive, two or more Clouds falling upon,
and pressing one another impetuously, drive away the Air which is between them.
So we blow with our Mouths, by pressing the Air enclosed in the Palate, and
shutting the Lips to streighten its eruption. Hereunto they agree who desine
Wind to be Air stirred, moved or agitated. But if it be objected that the
Clouds are not solid enough to make such a compression, the contrary appears by
the noise they make in Thunderclaps.

The Fourth alleged, That Winds are produced in the World as they are in Man;
namely, by a Heat sufficient to elevate, but too weak to dissipate Exhalations;
whether that Heat proceeds from Celestial Bodies, or from Subterranean
Fires. Wherefore as Hot Medicaments dissipate flatuosities, so the great Heat
of the Sun dissipates Winds.

The Fifth added, It is hard to determine the Original of Winds, after what our
Lord has said thereof, That we know not whence they come, nor whither they go,
and what David affirms, That the Lord draws them out of his Treasures.
NevertheIess, I conceive, that different causes ought to be assigned of them
according to their different kinds. For although Winds borrow the qualities of
the places through which they pass; (whence the Southern and Eastern are moist
and contagious, because of the great quantity of Vapors wherewith they are
laden by coming over the Mediterranean Sea and the Ocean) yet some Winds are of
their own Nature Hot and Dry, making the Air pure and serene; being caused by
an Exhalation of the like qualities. Others are so moist that they darken the
Air, because they are produced of Vapors. Some places situated near Mountains
and Rivers, have particular Winds. But as for those which blow at certain
Periods, either every year, or every second year, or every fourth year, (as one
that blows in Provence) I refer them to the Conjunction of certain Plants which
reign at that time.

The Sixth said, That Air has a natural motion of its own, as the Heavens
have, otherwise it would corrupt; but meeting some streights, and finding it
self penned up, it rallies and reunites its forces to get forth, (as it does)
with violence, and set it self at Liberty; And this with so much the more
vehemence as the places through which it passes are streighter. Whence it is
that we always perceive a Wind near a Door or Window half open (or the mouth
of a Cave) which cease when they are set wide open.

The Seventh continued, That which is most difficult to conceive, in reference
to the Wind, is its violence, which I hold to proceed from the Rarefaction of a
matter formerly condensed, and from the opposition of a contrary. For the place
of the Generation of Wind being either the Cavernes of the Earth, or the
Clouds, the vaporous matter becoming rarifi'd so suddenly that it cannot find
room enough to lodge in, breaks forth impetuously; as we see the Bullet is by
the same reason violently driven forth by the Air enflamed in the Cannon. Some
think that Winds arise also from the Sea, because a Wave is always seen, upon
the changing of the Wind, to rise on that side from whence it is next to blow.

The Eighth said, That their motion is a direct line, because it is the
shortest way, but not from below upwards; by reason of the resistance they meet
with in the coldness and thickness of the Middle Region of the Air, whence the
same thing happens to them that does to smoke or flame; which arriving at a
ceiling or vault, is constrained by the resistance it finds thereby to decline
on one side. Also their violence is increased by the adjunction of new
Exhalations, as Rivers augment theirs by the access of new streams.

II. Why none are contentea with their own condition.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That since the inferior World follows the
course of the superior and Celestial, it is not to be wondered if the latter
being in continual motion and agitation; the former, whereof Man makes the
noblest part, cannot be at rest. For the Stars, according to their several
Positions, Aspects, or Conjunctions, move and carry us to desire sometimes one
thing, sometimes another. The Ambition and Ignorance of Man are of the party
too. The former makes him always desire to have the advantage above others, to
pursue Honors and Dignities, and to think that to acknowledge a greater then
himself, is to own fetters and servility. The latter represents things to him
otherwise then they are, and so causes him to desire them the more, by how much
he less understands their imperfections. Whence many times, by changing, he
becomes in as ill a case as Aesop's Ass, who was never contented with his
condition. But the true Cause, in my opinion, is, because we cannot find in
this World a supreme temporal Good, whereunto a concurrence of all outward and
inward goods is requisite; and were a Man possessed thereof, yet he could have
no assurance that he shall enjoy it to the end of his Life; whence, living in
fear of losing it, we should be prone to desire something that might confirm
it. The Dignity of the Soul furnishes me with another reason of our
coffeehouse. For she being derived from Heaven, and knowing that this is not
her abiding City, she may taste of terrene things, but finds them not
seasoned to her gust, as knowing that frail and mortal things are not worthy of
her, nor suitable to her eternity; And as a sick person that turns himself first
on one side, then on the other, to take rest; so the Soul finds her repose in
motion. And as morsels swallowed down have no more savor, so the present goods
which our Soul possesses give her no pleasure; but like a Hunter she quits the
game which she has taken, to pursue another.

The Second said, Though, by a wise Providence of Nature, every one loves his
own condition as much or more then another does, yet there being always some
evil mixed with, and adhering to, the most happy state in the world, that evil
is the cause that we are never contented therewith. I add further, If it were
possible to heap all the goods of the world into one condition, and all kind of
evils were banished from the same; yet could it not fill the Appetite of our
Soul, which being capable of an infinite Good, if she receive any thing below
infinite she is not filled nor contented therewith. Nevertheless, this
dissatisfaction does not proceed from the infirmity and ignorance of the Humane
Soul, but rather from her great perfection and knowledge, whereby she judging
all the goods of the world less then her self, the goods intermingled with
miseries serve her for so many admonitions that she ought not to stay there,
but aspire to other goods more pure and solid. Besides these, I have two
natural reasons thereof. First, Every Good being of it self desirable, every
one in particular may desire all the goods which all Men together possess: Yet
it is not possible for him to obtain them; wherefore every one may desire more
then he can possess: Whence there must always be frustrated desires and
discontents. Secondly, The Desires of Men cannot be contented but by giving
them the enjoyment of what they desire. Now they cannot be dealt withal butas
a bad Physician does with his Patients, in whom for one disease that he cures
he causes three more dangerous. For satisfy one Desire, and you raise many
others. The poor hungry person asks only Bread; give it him, and then he is
thirsty; and when he is provided for the present, he is sollicitous for the
future. If he has money, he is troubled both how to keep it, and how to spend
it: Which caused Solomon after he had denied his Soul nothing that it desired
to pronounce, That All is vanity and vexation of Spirit.

The Third conceived, That the Cause of this Dissatisfaction is, for that the
conditions of others seem more suitable to us, and for that our Election
depends on the Imagination, which incessantly proposes new Objects to the
Soul, which she beholding afar off, esteems highly; afterward considering
them nearer, sees (as the Fable says) that what she accounted a treasure is
but a bottle of Hay.

The Fourth said, That because every thing which we possess gives us some
ground of disgust, and we do not yet perceive the inconvenience of the thing we
desire; therefore we are weary of the present, and hope to find less in the
future: Whence we despise the one, and desire the other.

The Fifth added, That Man being composed of two parts, Body and Soul, which
love change, it is necessary that he love it too. Choose the best posture, and
the best food you will, it will weary you in a little time. Let the most
Eloquent Orator entertain you with the most excellent Subject, suppose God
himself, you will count his Sermon too long if it exceed two hours, or perhaps
less. Is it a wonder then, if the Whole be of the same Nature with the Parts?

The Sixth attributed the Cause of this Discontent to the comparison which
every one makes of his own State with that of others. For as a Man of middle
stature seems low near a Giant; so a Man of moderate fortune, comparing his
own with the greater of another, becomes discontented therewith. Wherefore as
long as there are different conditions, they of the lowest will always
endeavor to rise to the greatest; and for the taking away of this Displeasure,
Lycurgus's Law must be introduced, who made all the people of Sparta of equal
condition. If it be replied, that nevertheless they of the highest condition
will be contented; I answer, that our Mind being infinite, will rather fancy to
it self Epicurus's plurality of worlds, as Alexander did, then be contented
with the possession of a single one, and so 'twill be sufficient to discontent
us, not that there is, but that there may be, some more contented then our
selves.

The Seventh said, That the Cause hereof is the desire of attaining perfection,
which in Bodies is Light, (whence they are always changed till they become
transparent as Glass) and in Spirits, their satisfaction, which is impossible.
For Man having two principles of his Actions, which alone are capable of being
contented, namely, the Understanding and the Will; he cannot satiate either of
them. One truth known makes him desire another. The sign of a moderate Mind is,
to be contented with it self; whereas that of a great Mind is, to have always
an insatiable appetite of knowing; Whence proceeds this? It is for that it
knows that God created every thing in the world for it, and that it cannot make
use thereof unless it have an exact and particular knowledge of the virtues and
properties of all things. It knows also, that it self was created for God, and
the knowledge of the Creatures is nothing but a means to guide it to that of
God. So that if it take those means which lead it to the end for the end it
self, it deceives it self and finds not the contentment which it seeks, and
will never find the same till it be united to its First Principle, which is
God, who alone can content the Understanding. His Will is also hard to be
satifi'd. The more goods it has, the more it desires. It can love nothing but
what is perfect: It finds nothing absolutely perfect but goodness it self. For
the Light and knowledge wherewith the Understanding supplieth it, discover to
it so many imperfections and impurities in the particular goods it possesses,
that it distasts and despises them, as unworthy to have entertainment in it.
Wherefore it is not to be wondered, if Man can never be contented in this
world, since he cannot attain his utmost End in it, either for Body or Soul.

CONFERENCE XIX.
I. Of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea. II. Of the Point of Honor.

I. Of the Flux of the Sea.
THe First said, That if there be any other cause of this Flux then the heaping
together of the Waters from the beginning, under the Aequinoctial, by Gods
Command, whence they descend again by their natural gravity, and are again
driven thither by the obedience which they owe to that Command; (which is so
evident, that they who sail under the Equator, perceive them selves lifted up
so high by the currents that are usually there, that they are many times
terrified thereat) there is none more probable then the Moon, which has
dominon overall moist Bodies, and augments or diminishes this Flux according as
she is in the increase or the wane.

The Second said, That the Moon indeed makes the Flux and Reflux of the Sea
greater or less, yea, she governes and rules it; because being at the Full she
causes a Rarefaction of its Waters. But this does not argue that she is the
Efficient Cause of the said Flux. The Sea rises at the shore, when the Moon
rises in the Heaven, and retires again when the Moon is going down, their
motions are indeed correspondent one to the other; yet I know not how that of
the Moon is cause of that of the Sea: For if it were, then, when the Moon is
longest above our Horizon, as in long days, the ebbing and flowing would be
greatest; but it is equal and regular, as well when the Moon is below the
Horizon as above it. And why also does not she move the other Seas, and all
sorts of Waters, as well as the Ocean?

The Third said, That there are two sorts of Water in the Sea, one terrene,
thick, and viscous, which contains the Salt; the other thin, sweet, and
vaporous, such as that which Aristotle says enters through the Pores of a
vessel of wax, exactly stopped and plunged to the bottom of the Sea. This thin
Water being heated is rarifi'd and turned into vapors, which consequently
require more room then before. They seek for it, but being restrained and
enclosed in the thick and viscous Water can find no issue; and therefore make
the Water of the Sea to swell and rise, till that Exhalation be disengaged from
those thick Waters, and then the Sea returns to its natural state, by falling
flat, and becoming level. This is abundantly confirmed by the Tides; which are
always greater in March and August, then at other seasons; because at that
time more abundance of vapors is drawn up. But why have not Lakes also an
Ebbing and Flowing? Because their Water being more thin lets pass those vapors
which the Sun has stirred; and so not being hindered from going away, as those
of the Sea are, they do not make the Water rise and swell. So Heat having
subtiliz'd and converted into vapors the most tenuious parts of the Milk upon
the Fire, the thicker parts of the same coming to enclose them, are the cause
that it swells and rises up: But when it is removed from the fire, or its
vapors have gotten passage by agitation, it takes up no more room then it did
at first. But it is not so with Water placed upon the Fire, the rarity of its
Body giving free issue to the vapors which the Heat excites in it. The Jewish
Sea is bituminous, and therefore no more inflated then pitch; possibly because
the parts thereof being Homogeneous, cannot be subtiliz'd apart. For as for the
Mediterranean Seas, having no Flux and Reflux, I conceive it is hindered by
another motion, from North to South; because the Septentrional parts being
higher then the Austral, all Waters by their natural gravity tend that way.

The Fourth said, I acknowledge, with Aristotle, that it is partly the Sun that
causes the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; because it is he that raises most of the
Exhalations and Winds, which beating upon the Sea make it swell and so cause
the Flux; and soon after failing, the Sea falls again, which is the Reflux.
Nevertheless, because this cause is not sufficient, and cannot be applied to
all kinds of Flux and Reflux, which we see differ almost in all Seas; I add
another thereunto, Subterranean Fires, which sending forth continually
abundance of Exhalations or subtle Spirits, and these Spirits seeking issue,
drive the Water of the Sea which they meet, till it overflows; and thus it
continues till being delivered from those Spirits it falls back into its
channel, till it be agitated anew by other Exhalations, which successively
follow one another; and that more or less, according to the greater or lesser
quantity of those Spirits. The Tides which happen every two hours are an
evidence of great quantity; those which happen every four hours of less, and
those which happen every six, of least of all. So there is made in our Bodies a
Flux and Reflux of Spirits by the motion of Reciprocation, called the Pulse,
consisting of a Diastole and a Systole, (or Dilatation and Contraction) caused
by the Vital Faculty of the Heart, the Fountain of Heat. Moreover, as the Pulse
is ordinarily perceived better in the Arms, and other extreme parts, then in
the rest of the Body; So the Flux and Reflux is more evident at the shores then
in the main Sea. Therefore Aristotle proposing the Question why, if some solid
Body, as an Anchor, be cast into the Sea when it swells, it instantly becomes
calm, answers; That the solid Body cast into the Sea makes a separation in the
surface thereof; and thereby gives passage to the Spirits which were the cause
of that Commotion. Now if it be demanded, Why such motion is not so manifest in
the Mediterranean Sea, and some others, as in the Ocean, it is answered, that
the reasons thereof are: 1. Because Nature having given sluices to the
Mediterranean higher then to the Ocean, it has not room wherein to extend it
self so commodiously. 2. Because the Subterranean Fires, being united and
continually vented forth by the Out-lets, which they have in Aetna, Vesuvius,
and other Mountains within or near that Sea, there remains less then is needful
to make a rising of the Waters.

The Fifth said, I conceive there is as little cause and reason to be sought of
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, as of all other motions proceeding from Forms
informing or assisting the Bodies which they move. As it would be impertinent
to ask what is the cause of the motion of a Horse, seeing the most ignorant
confess that it is from his Soul, which is his Form: So there is more
likelihood of truth in attributing the motion of the Sea to its Form then to
any other thing. Yet because they who assign a Soul to the World and all its
parts cannot make out such a proportion therein as is requisite to the parts of
an Animal; I think more fit to affirm, that the Sea has a Form and
Intelligence assisting to it, which was assigned to it by God from the
beginning, to move it in the same manner as the Intelligences, according to
Aristotle, are assistant to the Celestial Orbs, and continue their motion.

II. Of the Point of Honor.
It was said, upon the Second Point, That since Contraries give light to one
another, we may better understand what Honor is, by considering the Nature of
Dishonor. For where ever there is Blame, there is also Honor opposite to it.
Now there is no Man that sees a vile action, (as amongst Soldiers, Murder, or
Cowardice, Collusion, or Perfidiousness in Justice) but he blames the same, and
judges the Author thereof worthy of Dishonor. On the conrary, a brave Exploit
and a Courageous Action is esteemed by Enemies themselves: The incorruptible
Integrity of a Judge is oftentimes commended by him that ^oses his Suit; and
the Courageous Fidelity of an Advocate, in well defending his Client, receives
Praise even from the Adversary; so odious is Vice, and so commendable is
Virtue. Wherefore every one abhorring Blame and Dishonor, does so vehemently
hate the memory and reproach of any thing that may bring it upon him, that many
imitate what the Fable tells of Jupiter, who going to shake off the ordure
which the Beetle had laid upon the skirt of his garment, by that means shook
out the Eggs which the Eagle had laid in his lap; that is, by thinking to repel
a small Blame, they incur a greater, and oftentimes with the prejudice of
another: As it is manifest in the rage and wildness of Duels, when for the
repelling of a small injury, a Man engages the life of a Second, who usually
becomes involved in the same destruction with himself. It is not my purpose to
declaim further here against that Madness; for the Folly of Men is come to such
excess, that they who go most unwillingly to the field, considering that they
are going possibly to destroy both their Bodies and their Souls, yet dare not
seem to obey the injunctions and prohibitions against the same by the Laws both
of God and Men. A brutishness worthy of Admiration, as it would be of Pity,
were it not voluntary among those who value themselves above others. But to
leave them to themselves, let us only consider what a strange Power the Point
of Honor has, which is able to carry before it all the torrent of Arguments
and Reasons which dissuade a furious Resolution. Now it is as various, as the
Humors and Conditions of Men. Not that I think it imaginary, but as there are
actions of themselves honest or dishonest, which are the real foundation of
this Point of Honor; so it is of the same Nature. And although Diogenes
accounted nothing dishonest ( i.e. unbecoming) which is lawful; yet it cannot
be believed by any but a Diogenes. So that the Ingenuous Youth, upon whose
shoulder that Cynick laid a flitch of Bacon, and lead him about the City in
that equipage, to accustom him to put off all shame, obeyed Reason and not his
Caprichio, when he cast the same down and ran away. When the Executioner
causes a Criminal to make an honorable amends, (by which understand a most
ignominious punishment inflicted upon an extreme Offender, who must go through
the streets barefoot and bare-headed, with a burning link in his hand, unto
the seat of Justice, or some such public place, and there confess his Offense,
and ask forgiveness of the party he has wronged) he many times endures no
other evil but that of shame; and yet I would not blame him that should prefer
a natural death before such a dishonor. It may be said that the Point of
Honor reaches not so far, but is only an image and shadow, since words are
but the images of things; and that a Man will fight a Duel when another has
reproached him for a fault, either of his own, or of some other for whom he is
concerned. But I answer, that Men fight oftener for actions and bad offices,
then for words. And although they commonly reflect thus, what will people say
of me, if I put up this? Yet the truth is, it is out of fear lest one contempt
making way for another, might give occasion to effects not only prejudicial to
our Reputation, but also to our Fortune; which we know in these days depends
upon our Reputation. A Captain known for a Coward will be cashiered. A Soldier
that does not defend himself will be beaten. A Gentleman that does not swagger
when he is affronted, he will be abused not only in his Honor, but also in
his goods, by all his Neighbors. So that the Point of Honor is not so little
real as it is imagined, since it has an influence not only upon a Man's
Honor, but likewise upon his goods and life. In brief, we may consult those
who deny the Point of Honor to be a real thing, by all this Honorable
Assembly, and especially by the many excellent Wits, who are excited by Honor
to appear therein, and acquire (what they may justly expect) the commendation
which is due to their merits.

The Second said, That he found some difference between being an Honest Man,
and a Man of Honor; for that, to be an Honest Man, it is requisite only to
possess the Honest Good ( Bonum Honestum) which is Virtue: But to be a Man of
Honor, besides that, the world must know that we possess the same, and give us
the reputation of being virtuous. For it is stupidity, not to care what opinion
Men have of us. Which caused the Wiseman to pronounce a Curse against those
who neglect a good Fame; which is so natural, and so nearly allied to Virtue,
that she seems not to have her utmost perfection when she is separated from it;
and a Prudent Man desires equally to be virtuous, and to be esteemed such: Now
if Honor consist in the possession of Virtue thus accompanied, the Point of
Honor will be the Point of Virtue, that is, the perfection thereof; or rather,
Virtue most perfect, accompanied with a complete Reputation. This perfection,
in my Judgment, is the Warlike Virtue, called by the Greeks, by way of
excellence, The Virtue of Man; and so esteemed by all the world, that no
people, however otherwise barbarous, ever denied it the Title of Nobleness. It
is not then to be wondered if Men of Courage think that the Point of Honor
consists in preserving to themselves the Reputation of being Valiant, and
endeavor by all means to make it appear to every one that they are endew'd
with this Warlike Virtue. Whence most Quarrels are occasioned by Men's accusing
one another of want of Courage, or other appurtenances of that Virtue.

The Third said, That which we call the Point of Honor, is nothing else, in my
Judgment, but the desire of being esteemed more honest persons then we are.
For Man being the greatest dissembler of all Creatures, endeavors to make
himself thought what he is not; because it being essential to him to desire
Good, and his perverse Inclination not leading him to the true, therefore at
least he desires the apparent. This is seen in all his actions, which aim only
at three kinds of Good; namely, the Honest, the Profitable, and the Delightful.
Now of these three, only the Honest is called the Good of Man; because the two
latter usually corrupt him, the former preserves him. And nevertheless, many
addict themselves to Pleasures, more run after Profit, but very few,
comparatively, follow the Honest Good for its own sake, unless it be joined
with one of the other. In the mean time there is none but would persuade others
that he is passionately in love with the latter, and not anxious for Honor.
But, I conceive, we may know persons of Honor, by the little account they make
of injuries which seem to tend to their disparagement, especially when they
think the same do not belong unto them; and they who are worthy of Honor seek
it least, and are not troubled so much as others at the injury which any one
thinks he does them. So we see a Prince will not be so sollicitous to employ
his qualities in a public act, as a Man of low condition newly exalted. An
Honest Woman will not be so much troubled at an injury offered to her Honor,
as she that is of an evil Life; because the former has true Honor, which the
latter has not: As we see paltry Pedlars, that have all their shop in a pack
hanging about their necks, make ten times more noise then the best wholesale
Tradesmen, whose storehouses are filled with all sort of wares. And amongst
all Nations, they who lie most, are most offended with the Lie. They who drink
most, are most offended with the name of Drunkard. Wherefore since, according
to Aristotle, it is the truth and not the number or quality of the honourers,
which constitutes the true Honor, which they arrogate most in whom the
substance is least found; it follows that what we call the Point of Honor is
nothing but the appearance or shadow thereof.

The Fourth said, The Point of Honor is nothing but a Desire we have to make
our selves esteemed such as we are. Wherefore when a quality which belongs not
to us is taken from us, we are far from being so much concerned, as if it
pertain'd to us. So a Gentleman who makes profession of Valor will be offended
if he be called Poltron; but a Capuchin will not, knowing well that that Virtue
is not necessary to Christian Perfection.

The Fifth said, That Honor, according to the common opinion, being the
testimony which Men give us of our virtuous actions, the Point of Honor is
that conceit which our Mind proposes and forms to it self of that opinion.
Whence it follows that the Point of Honor thus taken, being an Abstract which
our Mind draws from things, and not the things themselves, there is nothing of
reality in it, but it is a pure Imagination, which alters according to the
diversity of times, places, and persons. Such a thing was anciently honest ( i.
e. laudable and becoming) which is not so at present: Whereof the Modes and
Customs of the times past, compared with those at this day, are a sufficient
evidence. It was honorable at Rome to burn dead Bodies, and shameful to all
others, (saving to the single family of the Cornelii) to bury them. At this day
to inter them is honorable, but to burn them the most infamous of punishments.
It was in Lacedaemon an honorable thing to steal dexterously; and now the
reward of the craftiest Cutpurse is a Halter. One thing is honest, ( i. e.
seemly) in one age (as for Children to blush) which is dishonest ( i. e.
unseemly) in another, (as for old Men to do so.) Yea, one Man will sometimes
construe a thing within the Point of Honor, which another will not. And we
sometimes conceive our selves interessed in one and the same thing, and
sometimes not. Moreover, though the Point of Honor should not admit all these
mutations, yet depending upon the imagination of another, there can be nothing
of reality in it. And therefore the true Point of Honor consists not in the
opinion which others have of us, but in the exercise of honest and virtuous
actions, whether acknowledged for such, or not; yea, though they be despised or
punished, it is sufficient to render such actions honorable, that the
Conscience alone judge of their goodness.

CONFERENCE XX.
I. Of the Original of Fountains. II. Whether there be a commendable Ambition.

I. Of the Original of Fountains.
THe First said, That Springs and Rivers come from the Sea, otherwise it would
receive a great augmentation by the daily addition of their streams, if it
should not suffer an equal diminution by their derivation from it. Therefore
the Wiseman says, All Rivers go into the Sea, and the Sea is not increased
thereby; and afterward they return to the place from whence they came, that
they may go forth again. Yea, it would be a perpetual Miracle, if after about
six thousand years since the Creation of the World the Sea were not grown
bigger by all the great Rivers it receives, seeing the Danubius alone, were it
stopped but during one year, would be sufficient to drown all Europe. But how
can the Water, of its own nature heavy and unactive, especially that of the
Sea, be carried up to the highest Mountains? As we see the L' Isere, and the
Durance, and other Rivers, descend from the tops of the Alps, upon which there
are Lakes and Springs in great number, as in Mont-Cenis, Saint Bernard, and
Saint Godart. This proceeds from the gravity of the Earth, which always
inclining toward its own center, bears upon the Sea, and so pressing upon the
Water, causes it to rise up into the veins and passages of the Earth; (a
resemblance whereof is seen in Pumps) by which passages it is strained and
deprived of its saltness. Which quality is easily separable from Seawater; for
upon the shores of Africa there are pits of fresh Water, which cannot come from
elsewhere. And if Water mingled with Wine be separated from the same by a cup
made of Ivy wood, why not the saltness of the Water too? Thence also it is that
Springs retain the qualities of the places through which they pass, having put
off those which they derived from their Original.

The Second said, That the Waters are carried upwards by the virtue of the
Celestial Bodies, which attract the same without any violence; it being in a
manner natural to Inferior Bodies to obey the Superior, and follow the motion
which they impress upon them. Unless we had rather ascribe this effect to God,
who having for the common good of all the world caused the Water in the
beginning to ascend to the highest places, it has always followed that same
motion by natural consecution and the fear of that Vacuity. And of this we have
a small instance in the experiment of Siphons.

The Third said, He conceived, with Aristotle, that Springs are generated in
cavities and large spaces of the Middle Region of the Earth, which Nature (who
abhors Vacuity) fills with Air, insinuated thereinto by the pores and
chinks, and condensed afterward by the coldness of the Earth: Which coldness
is so much the greater as that Region is remote from all external agents which
might alter it. This condensed Air is resolved into drops of Water, and these
drops soon after descending by their own weight into one and the same place,
glide along till they meet with others like themselves, and so give beginning
to a Spring. For as of many Springs uniting their streams a great River is
made, so of many drops of Water is made a Spring. Hence it comes to pass that
we ordinarily find Springs in Mountains and high places, as being most hollow
and full of Air, which becomes condensed and resolved into Water so much the
more easily as the Mountains are nearer the Middle Region of the Air, apt by
its vapourous quality to be turned into Water, as well in those Gavities as in
the Clouds; or else because they are most exposed to the coldest Winds, and
usually covered with Snow.

The Fourth said, That there is no transformation of Elements, and therefore
Air cannot be turned into Water. For whereas we see drops of Water fall from
the surface of Marble or Glass, it is not that the Air is turned into Water, but
this moist Air is full of damp vapors, which are nothing but Water rarifi'd,
and which meeting with those cold and solid Bodies, are condensed and returned
to their first Nature. Wherefore the Air is so far from being the cause of so
many Springs and Rivers which water the Earth, that on the contrary, all the
Air in the world (provided it be not mixed with Water) cannot make so much as
one drop. It is more probable that in the beginning of the world, when God
divided the Elements and the Waters from the Waters which covered the whole
surface of the Earth, he gathered the grossest and most unprofitable water into
one mass* which he called Sea, and dispersed through the rest of the Earth the
fresh Water, more clear and pure, to serve for the necessities of the Earth,
Plants, and living Creatures. Moreover, the Scripture makes mention of four
great Rivers issuing out of the terrestrial Paradise, and a Fountain in the
middle of it, which watered the whole surface of the Earth from the Creation.
In not being possible that Air resolved into Water could make so great a
quantity of waters in so little time.

The Fifth added. That those Waters would soon be dried up without a new
production, for which Nature has provided by Rain, which falling upon the
Earth is gathered together in Subterraneous Cavernes; which are as so many
Reservers for Springs, according to Seneca's opinion. This is proved, 1.
Because in places where it rains not, as in the Deserts of Arabia and
Aethiopia, there is scarce any Springs; on the other side, they are very
frequent in Europe which abounds with rain. 2. Waters are very low in Summer
when it rains but little; and in Winter so high that they overflow their banks,
because the season is pluvious. 3. Hence it is that most Rivers and Springs
break forth at the foot of Mountains, as being but the rain water descended
thither from their tops.

The Sixth said, That it is true that Rivers are increased by Rain, but yet
have not their original from it. For were it so, then in great droughts our
Rivers would be dried up as well as the Brooks. As for Springs, they are not so
much as increased by Rain; for we see by experience, that it goes no deeper
into the earth then seven or eight feet. On the contrary, the deeper you dig,
the more Springs you meet with. Nor is the Air, in my judgment, the cause
thereof, there being no probability that there is under the earth cavernes so
spacious and full of Air sufficient to make so great a quantity of Water; since
there needs ten times as much Air as Water to produce it. Neither can the Sea
be the cause of Springs; since, according to the Maxim of Hydraulick, Water
cannot ascend higher the place of its original, but if Springs were from the
Sea, then they could not be higher then the level thereof; and we should see
none upon the tops of Mountains. Now that the Sea lies lower then Springs and
Rivers, is apparent, because they descend all thitherwards.

The Seventh said, That Waters coming from the Sea, and gliding in the bowels
of the Earth, meet with Subterranean Fires, which are there in great quantity,
whereby they are heated and resolved into Vapors. These Vapors composed of
Water and Fire, mounting upwards, meet some Rocks or other solid Bodies,
against which they stick and are returned into Water; the Fire which was in
them escaping through the Pores of those Bodies, the Water trickles forth by
the clefts and crevisses of the Rocks, or other sloping places.

The Eighth said, That as Art can draw forth Water by Destillation, Expression,
and other ways taught by Chymistrie; so by stronger reason Nature cannot want
ways to do the same, and possibly in diverse sorts, according to the various
disposition of places, and of the matter which she employes to that use.

II. Whether there is any Ambition commendable.
Upon the Second Subject it was said, That there is some correspondence between
the two Questions; for as Water serves for a Medium of Union in natural
Composition; so Ambition serves to familiarise pains and dangers in great
enterprises. For it makes Children strive to get credit in little exercises;
and Men think nothing so high but may be soared to by the wings of Ambitior.
Juvenal indeed gives Wings to necessity, when he says, A Hungry Greek will fly
up to Heaven if they command him; and Virgil says, Fear adds Wings to the
heels of the terrified; but those of Ambition are much more frequent in our
Language. It Is true, Ambition may many times beat and stretch forth its Wings,
but can no more exalt it self into the Air then the Estrich. Sometimes it soars
too high, as Icarus did, and so near the light that it is burnt therein like
Flies. For the ambitious usually mounts up with might and main, but thinks not
how he shall come down again. This Passion is so envious, that it makes those
possessed therewith hate all like themselves, and justle them to put them
behind. Yea, it is so eager that it meets few obstacles which yield not to its
exorbitant pertinacy; insomuch that it causes Men to do contrary to do what
they pretend, and shamefully to obey some, that they may get the command over
others. The importunateness of Ambition is proof against all check or denial;
and the ambitious is like the Clot-burr, which once fastened upon the clothes is
not easily shaken off. When he is once near the Court, neither affronts nor
other rubs can readily repel him thence. And because his Essence consists in
appearance, he many times wears his Lands upon his back; and if he cannot at
once pride himself in his Table, his Clothes, and his Train, yet he will rather
show the body of a Spaniard, then the belly of a Swiss. At his coming abroad,
he oftentimes picks his teeth while his gutts grumble, he feeds upon aerie
viands. When he has been so lucky as to snap some office, before he has
warmed the place, his desires are gaping after another: He looks upon the first
but as a step to a second, and thinks himself still to low, if he be not upon
the highest round of the ladder; where he needs a good Brain lest he lose his
judgment, and where it is as hard to stand, as it is impossible to ascend, and
shameful to descend. Others observing, That Honor is like a shadow, which
flies from its pursuers, and follows those that fly it, have indeed no less
Ambition then the former, (for I know no condition, how private soever, that is
free from it) but they artificially conceal it; like those who carry a dark
Lanthorn in the night, they have no less fire then others, but they hide it
better. They are like Thieves that shoe their Horses the wrong way, that they
may seem by their steps to come from the place whither they are going; or else
like those who hunt the Hyena. This Beast loves the voice of Man so much that
she trusts in it; and (say the Historians) she understands it so well, that
when the Hunters would take her, they must cry, I will not have her, I will not
have her. But when once they have obtained the Honor at which they thus aimed,
by contrary pretensions, they show sufficiently that they desired it.

The Second said, That Ambition is a desire of exalting our selves, and
over-topping the common sort. The Object of it is Honor, in the pursuit of
which three things are considered; namely, the Mediocrity, the Excess, and the
Defect. The Mediocrity is called Magnanimity, or greatness of Courage, by which
we seek the great Honors which we merit. The Excess is called Vanity, when we
pursue great dignities which we deserve not. The Defect is called
Pusillanimity, when a Man has so little Spirit that he deprives himself of
Honors, though he is worthy of them. Now as Liberality answers to
Magnificence, so to Magnanimity answers another Virtue which has no name in
Aristotle, and differs from it but in degree. For that has regard to great
Honors, and this to moderate; and, as all other Virtues, it has its two
vicious Extremes, its Excess, which is called Ambition, and its Defect, which
is want of Ambition. Moreover, there are two kinds of Ambition. One which is
bounded within the limits of each condition, whereby every one desires to
become perfect in his Art, and to excel others of the same condition; which is
very laudable, and argues that he whom it possesses has something more
excellent in him then the vulgar. The Other is that which carries us to
Honors, which greatly exceed the bounds of our condition, and are not due to
us. This is very blameable and dangerous, because it causes great confusion in
Men's Minds, and consequently in States. For what is more absurd, then for a
Citizen to act a Gentleman, or a Gentleman a Prince? Yea, even this last ought
to set bounds to his Ambition.

The Third added, That things are to be judged of by their Effects; and we see
most of the mischiefs which come to pass now in the World are caused by the
Ambition of those who weary of their condition, in which if they continued they
would be happy, by all means seek after others which seem higher: Ambition
making them prefer before the good which they know an evil which they know not;
because this Passion represents the same to them under the semblance of a
greater good. Wherefore the Julian Law was introduced with good reason, to
check and moderate this exorbitant appetite of Honors.

The Fourth said, That indeed extreme and immoderate Ambition is a perpetual
rack and torture to the Soul, and begets an Hydropick Thirst in it, which all
the waters of the World cannot allay. But that which is moderate, in my
judgment, is not only unblameable, but very praiseworthy; since it is a
desire of perfection, and never any person was ambitious in this manner, but he
was either virtuous, or in the way to be so. For this Ambition proceeds from a
desire of glory, and being accounted better greater, and wiser then others; and
it is grounded upon the knowledge we have, and would derive to others of our
peculiar merit. And though the Man be not virtuous, yet there is nothing more
proper to render him so then such Ambition; one of the most powerful spurs to
encourage a well-tempered Soul to Virtue. It Is an Instrument that smooths all
its rough paths. It Is a flame that enkindles generous purposes in the Soul to
surmount all kinds of obstacles. Would you see its excellence? Compare this
Ambition, from whence sprang those brave thoughts which brought so great glory
to Alexander, Caesar, and all those other Heroes of Antiquity, with the
shameful sloth of the infamous Sardanapalus, Heliogabalus, and other Epicures
buried in the ordures of their vices, for want of this noble desire of glory.
But it is most remarkable, in reference to Ambition, that they who blame it are
themselves ambitious; for they do so, only to ostentate themselves; and they
who have written Books against Vainglory, have yet set their Names in the
frontis-piece; and wherefore, but to be talked of?

The Fifth said, That the Goodness or Badness of all Actions, depending only
upon their good or bad End, it must be affirmed likewise, concerning Ambition,
that it is blameable or commendable; according as he who seeks Honors has
an honest or dishonest End, and pursues the same by lawful or oblique courses.

The Sixth said, It is so true that there is a laudable Ambition, that not
ouely all that is rare in Arts and Sciences, but also all the bravest Heroic
Actions owe their being to it. It Is one of the most commendable Virtues
natural to Man, and inseparable from a gallant Spirit; It is so much the more
excellent, in that it has for its Object the most excellent of all external
Goods, namely, Honor, which Men offer to God, as the most precious thing they
have, and which Legislators (finding nothing more valuable) propose for the
guerdon of Virtre. This may serve to explain what is commonly said, That Virtue
is a reward to it self: Legislators having determined that Virtuous Men should
find the recompense of their brave Actions, in that noble desire of the glory
which they deserve. So that he is no less blameable who deserving Honors and
Dignities, and being able to support and exercise them worthily and profitably
to the public, does not seek them, then he that strives for them and is
unworthy thereof. Yea, the former seems to me much more blameworthy then the
latter, whose Ambition, though immoderate, denotes greatness of Spirit; whereas
the former, too much distrusting himself, and not daring to attain or reach
forth his hand to what appertains by right unto him, shows abundantly the
lowness of his Mind, or the little account he makes of Virtue, by sleighting
Honor which is the shadow and reward of it, and depriving himself of the means
to perform Virtuous Actions, which he may better exercise in Offices and
Dignities then in a private life: And which is more, he sets a pernicious
example to his fellow-citizens to neglect that Recompense of Virtue, which
costs the State less then any other.

CONFERENCE XXI.
I. Of Dreams. II. Why Men are rather inclined to Vice then Virtue.

I. Of Dreams.
IT is no wonder that Men seek the interpretation of Dreams. For having from
all times bent their Minds to foresee the Future, (as the Desire of becoming
like God by the Faculty of Divining has been transmitted from the First Man to
all his Posterity) it seems the Images of things presented to them in the night
are unprofitable to any other end besides this. And truly since the highest
pitch of every Faculty consists in Divination, and the Holy Scripture has
nothing so wonderful as its Prophecies; Physic, nothing so admirable as the
Prognostication of diseases; Civil Law, then the Resolution of the good or bad
success of an Affair; Yea, since the in extinguishable thirst after the Future
has induced all Ethnic Antiquity to feed Fowls for Augury, to immolate
Sacrifices for presaging their good or bad Fortune; there is some ground to
pardon them and all others who seek some glimmerings of the future in Dreams. I
conceive, the most Incredulous, reading in the Scripture that seven lean kine
devouring so many fat ones presaged seven years Famine which consumed all the
store of seven other fertile years; and moreover, the truth confirmed by the
event of the Dreams of so many others, cannot but have them in some reverence.
But on the other side, when every one considers how many Phancies come into our
heads in sleep, both sick and well, the truth whereof is so rare that it may be
compared to that of Almanacks, which setting down all sorts of weather,
sometimes happen right upon one; or to those bad Archers, who shooting all day
long, glory if they once hit the mark; he presently concludes that credit is
not lightly to be given to them. Wherefore I think after explication how Dreams
are caused, it will be fit to examine whether there be any connection or
affinity between the things which we dream and those which are to come to pass,
as there was between the Egyptian Hieroglyphics which the things signified by
them, and as there is at this day in the Characters of China, and in the
Signatures observed by some Physicians between some Plants and the Parts or
Diseases to which they are proper. For it is not without some hidden reason,
that Experience has caused so many persons to take notice, that as (for
example) Death and Marriage make a great stir and alteration in the house where
they happen, so the one is usually the indicatour of the other; that because
the Hen makes a cry when she lays her Eggs, from whence is produced a Chicken
that cries too, therefore Eggs signify brawls or quarrels; that Pearls
signify Tears, because they resemble them; that as the Serpent is always
mischievous, and moves along with little noise, so he denotes secret Enemies;
and the cutting off his head, the getting the better of one's Enemies; that as
our Teeth are not plucked out without pain, so to dream that they fall out,
prefigures the death of a Relation; and other such things which cannot be
numbered but by a Calepine, much less the interpretation thereof unfolded.

The Second said That Dreams are caused by the rising of vapors from the
Stomach to the Brain, by whose coldness they are condensed; and then falling
like a gentle dew upon the Nerves, and stopping the passages by which the
Animal Spirits issue to the outward senses, the species of objects which we
received awake, and were then confused and agitated by heat, settle by little
and little, and become as clearly discerned as when we were awake: Or else, our
Imagination, which (as Aristotle says) is like a Painter who makes a mixture
of diverse colors) joining several of those species together, forms chimera's
and other strange images which have no antitype in Nature. Just as a Child
drawing accidentally certain Letters out of a heap mingled together, joins
them and forms words of them which have no sense. And as dirty or stirred
waters does not represent any Image, or very badly; so the Imagination being
embroiled and agitated by the gross fumes of the meat which arise after the
first sleep, represents ill, or not at all, the images of things which it has
in it self. Hence it is that Drunkards and Children dream little or not at all,
and that the Dreams of the first part of the night are turbulent, and those of
the morning more tranquil and quiet, to which alone therefore credit is to be
given. So that Interpreters of Dreams account the same nearer or farther from
their Effect, according as they more or less approach the daybreak.

The Third said, That Dreams are different according to the different Causes
whence they proceed; which are either within us or without us. That which is
within us is either Natural, or Animal, or Moral; from which arise three
different kinds of Dreams. The Natural are usually suitable to the complexion
of the Body, and constitution of Humors. Thus the Bilious or Choleric, dreams
of fire and slaughter: The Pituitous, or Phlegmatic dreams that he is swimming,
fishing, or falling: The Melancholy sees sad and dismal things in his sleep:
The Sanguine has pleasures and jollities in his Fancy. The Animal proceed
from our ordinary employments, and cause the actions on thoughts of the day to
be represented again to the Imagination in the night. The Moral follow the good
or bad inclinations of every one. Thus the Voluptuous person dreams of
Delights, and the Ambitious of Honors. The external cause of Dreams is either
God or Angels, and these either good or bad; and they either imprint new
species upon the Fancy, or dispose those which are in it before, so as thereby
to advertise us of things which concern us. These alone, in my opinion, are
those that are to be taken notice of.

The Fourth said, That besides these causes of Dreams, there are also some
corporeal causes, as the temper of the Air, or the constitution of the Heavens,
and the nature of places; to which is to be referred the relation of Ammianus
Marcellinus, That the Atlantic people have no Dreams; as also the common
report, that they who lay Lawrel-leaves under their heads when they go to sleep
have true Dreams; together with the Observation of Aristotle, that if a Candle
cast the least glimpse before the Eyes of such as are a sleep, or a little
noise be made near them, they will dream that they see Lightning and hear
Thunder; it being proper to the Soul when we are a sleep to make an Elephant of
a Fly.

The Fifth said, That the chief inquiry in this matter, is, How any Dreams can
signify that which is Future, and what connection there is between the figures
which Dreams represent to us, and the thing signified to us by them. For it is
certain, in the first place, that Dreams have some affinity and conformity with
our Temper; This with our Manners; our Manners with our Actions; and finally,
our Actions with the Accidents which betide us. Whence it appears, that
according to this series, Dreams have some great correspondence with those
Accidents. For the Soul, which knows our Temper, and by necessary sequel our
Manners and Actions, beholds in those three together the Accidents of our Life;
which are annexed, represented, and contained potentially in them, as Fruits
and Trees are in Flowers and Seeds. But as Flowers and Seeds are very different
in Figure from the Fruits and Trees which they produce; so the Characters of
the Accidents of our Life being contained, or rather produced by our Temper,
our Manners and Actions are represented to the Soul under the various species
of things which are to befall us; because being linked by a straight bond to
this corporeal mass, it cannot judge beforehand of things to come, nor
admonish us thereof but by the representation of certain Images which we have
some resemblance and agreement with those Accidents. These Images are different
in all Men, according to their several Sympathies and Antipathies, Aversions
and Complacencies, or according to the different beliefs which we have taken up
by a strong Imagination, or by hearsay, that such or such Figures represented
in a Dream signify such or such things. For in this case, the Soul
conjecturing by those impressions which are found in our Temper, is constrained
to represent the same to us by the Images which our Imagination first admitted
and apprehended either as unfortunate, or lucky and of good Augury. But if
there be any Dreams which presage to us Accidents purely fortuitous, and wholly
remote from our Temper, Manners, and Actions, they depend upon another Cause.

The Sixth said, That as during sleep the Animal and inferior part of Man
performs its office best, concocting the nourishment more succesfully; so his
superior part being then (according as Trismegistus says) more loose and
unlinked from the Body, acts more perfectly then during the time we are awake.
For being freed and loosned from the senses and corporeal affections, it has
more particular converse with God and Angels, and receives from all parts
intelligence of things in agitation. And, according to Anaxagoras, all things
bear the Image one of another; whence, if there be any effect in Nature which
is known in its cause, as a tempest in the Sea, a Murder in the Woods, a
Robbery or other accident upon the Highway; the Power, which is to be the
original thereof, sends a Copy and Image of the same into the Soul.

The Seventh said, That he as little believed that the Species and Images of
things come to the Soul, as that the Soul goes forth to seek them during sleep,
roving and wandering about the world, as it is reported of the Soul of
Hermotimus the Clazomenian. Aristotle indeed says, that there are some subtle
natures which seem to have some pre-science of what is to come; but I think it
surpasses the reach of the Humane Soul, which being unable to know why a Tree
produces rather such a Fruit then another, can much less know why those
species are determined, rather to signify one thing then another.

The Eighth said, He could not commend the superstitious curiosity of those who
seek the explication of Dreams, since God forbids expressly in the Law to
observe them; and the Wiseman assures us, that they have caused many to
stumble and fall. And why should the things which we fancy in the right have
more signification then if we imagined them in the day? For Example, If one
dream in the night that he flies, is there any more reason to conjecture from
thence that he shall arise to greatness, then if the thought of flying had come
into his Mind in the day time; with which in the days of our Fathers an
Italian had so ill success, having broken his neck by attempting to fly from
the top of the Tower De Nesse in this City; a fair Example not to mount so high.

II. Why Men are rather inclined to Vice then to Virtue
Upon the Second Point, it was said, That our Inclinations tend rather to Vice
then to Virtue, because Delight is always concomitant to Vice, as Honesty is
to Virtue. Now Delight being more facile, and honesty more laborious, therefore
we follow rather the former then the latter. Moreover, the Present has more
power to move our Inclinations, because it is nearer then the Future, which as
yet is nothing. Now Delight is accounted as present in a Vicious Action, and
the reward of Virtue is looked upon as a far off and in futurity. Whence Vice
bears a greater stroke with us then Virtue. If it be objected that a Virtuous
Action has always its reward inseparable, because Virtue is a Recompense to
it self; I answer, that this is not found true, but by a reflection and
ratiocination of the Mind, which has little correspondence with our gross
senses; and therefore this recompense, which is only in the Mind, does not
gratify us so much as the pleasures of the Body, which have a perfect
correspondence with our corporeal senses by whom the same are gusted in their
full latitude. But why does Vice seem so agreeable to us, being of its own
nature so deformed? I answer, that it was necessary that it should be
accompanied and sweetened with Pleasure; otherwise the eschewing of Evil, and
the pursuing of Virtue, would not have been meritorious, because there would
have been no difficulty therein. Moreover, Nature has been forced to season
the Actions of Life with Pleasure, lest they should become indifferent and
neglected by us. Now Vice is only an Excessive or Exorbitant exercising of the
Actions of Life which are agreeable to us; And Virtues are the Rules and
Moderators of the same Actions. But why are not we contented with a Mediocrity
of those Actions? It Is because Life consists in Action, which is the more such,
when it is extended to the whole length and breadth of its activity, and ownes
no bounds to restrain its liberty.

The Second said, All would be more inclined to Virtue then to Vice, were it
considerd in it self, there being no Man so depraved but desires to be
virtuous. The covetous had rather be virtuous and have wealth, then be rich
without Virtue. But its difficulty, the companion of all excellent things, is
the cause that we decline it. And we judge this difficulty the greater, for
that our Passions carry the natural and laudable inclinations of our Soul to
Vice, which is much more familiar and facile to them then Virtue. Wherefore
Aristotle says, all Men admit this General Proposition, That Virtue ought to
be followed; But they fail altogether in the particulars of it. Besides, Man is
able to do nothing without the Ministry of his Senses; and when, in spite of
difficulties, he raises himself to some Virtuous Action, presently the
Sensitive Appetite repugnes against it; and as many inferior Faculties as he
has, they are so many rebellious and mutinous Subjects, who refuse to obey the
Command of their Sovereign. This Intestine War was brought upon Man as a
punishment for his first sin; ever since which, Reason, which absolutely ruled
over the Sensitive Appetite, has been countercheck'd and mast'red by it.

The Third said, As there are a thousand ways of straying and erring from the
mark, and but one, and that a strait, line to attain it; so it is possible to
exceed or be deficient in Virtue infinite ways, but there is only one point
to acquire its Mediocrity.

The Fourth affirmed, That the way of Vice being more spacious then that of
Virtue, yea, Evil (according to Pythagoras) infinite, and Good bounded; it
follows that there are infinitely more Vices then Virtues; and therefore is not
to be wondered if there be more vicious persons then virtuous.

The Fifth said, We are not to seek the cause of our vicious inclinations other
where then within our selves; it being derived from the structure and
composition of our Bodies. For he who has not what to eat, and wherewith to
defend himself from cold, or who fears distress, finds the seeds of theft in
his natural inclination of self-preservation. The same Fear makes him become
covetous. When any thing obstructs the accomplishing of his wishes, if he be
weak, he becomes sad thereupon; if strong, he falls into Choler. This Passion
leads him to revenge, the height of whose violence is Murder. If the enjoyment
thereof be free to him, the pleasure which he takes therein produces Luxury
and debaucheries; and thus it is with all Vices. On the contrary, poor Virtue
meets with nothing in us but opposition: The Stomach, the Intestines, and all
the natural parts revolt against Temperance and Continence: The Choleric
Humor fights against Clemency: Covetousness inciteth to Injustice; the
Comparison of our condition with that of our betters, to Ambition and Envy;
with that of our Inferiors, to Pride and Disdain. In brief, Virtue finds
nothing in us that makes for her interest, which seems to me the reason why it
is less familiar to us then Vice.

The Sixth said, No person is either vicious or virtuous of his own nature, but
he becomes so by Instruction and Custom. Instruction is so powerful, that it
makes even Beasts capable of Discipline. Custom is of such influence, that it
is rightly termed an other nature. Wherefore our being rather vicious then
virtuons, is not from any natural inclination. For, on the contrary, we have
the seeds and sparks of Virtue within us; and I almost believe, with Plato,
that when Men become vicious, it is by force and against their nature. But the
fault proceeds from our bad Education and corrupt Customs, which become yet
worse by the conversation of vicious persons, who are very numerous.

The Seventh said, Though we consent more easily to Virtue then to Vice, yet
the number of the good and virtuous being less then that of the wicked and
vicious, has caused the contrary to be believed. The reason whereof is not the
difficulty of doing well; but because Vices are esteemed and rewarded instead
of being punished, and Virtue instead of Recompense receives nothing but
Contempt: So the Exorbitancy of Clothes, instead of being punished, causes him
to be honored who is unworthy to be so. Wherefore if there were a State in
which Reward and Punishment were duly dispensed from the Cradle, it would be a
rarer thing to see a wicked man there then a black Swan; because the good which
we love, and the evil which we hate, would be inseparably joined together, the
one with Virtue, and the other with Vice.

CONFERENCE XXII.
I. Of Judiciary Astrology. II. Which is least blameable, Covetousness or
Prodigality.

I. Of Judiciary Astrology.
THe weakness of our reasoning is a strong argument to abate the presumption of
our being able to judge of the power of the Stars. For if we are ignorant of
the nature of the least Herb we tread upon, we must be more so of that of the
Celoestial Bodies which are so remote from us and our knowledge, that the
greatest masters of this Art dispute still, whether every Star be a several
world, whether they are solid or not, what qualities they have, and which are
the true places. Besides, the local motion of Animals may wholly frustrate the
effect of their influences. And if Xanthus hindered the Sun from making his head
ache when he walked abroad, and the Moon does not chill those that are in the
house, certainly the effects of less active and remoter Stars may be declined
by the same ways; since Fire, the most active thing in nature, does not burn
if the hand be moved swiftly over it. And what more was to be feared by
Americus Vesputius, Ferdinand Magellan, and others, who sailed round the Earth
one way, whilst the Heaven turned the other? Why should we seek in Heaven the
Causes of Accidents which befall us, if we find them on Earth? And why should
we look so far for what is so near? Is it not more fit to refer the cause of
Knowledge to study; of Riches and Honor, to Birth, Merit, or Favor; of
Victory, to the dexterity and diligence of the General, who cast his
contrivance well to surprise his Enemy, then to attribute these Events to the
Planets? If experience be alleged to manifest the effect of many Predictions;
I answer,* that as the Animal which is said to have made a letter by chance
with its Hoof in the dust, was no Scribe for all that; so though amongst a
thousand false predictions, one by chance proves true, yet is not the Art ever
the more certain. Yea, I will urge it against themselves; for it is not
credible that we should see so many unfortunate Astrologers, if they could
foresee their own infelicity; or else they must acknowledge themselves fools;
since they grant that the Wiseman rules over the Stars.

The Second said, That every thing here below suffers mutation, and nothing is
able to change it self; whence it follows that that which is the cause of
Alteration must it self be exempt from the same. Whence consequently the
Heavens which are the sole Body that suffer no change, must be the cause of all
mutation. For the Elements are the material cause thereof, and therefore cannot
be the Efficient. And as the Stars are the thickest and only visible part of
Heaven, so they have most light and influence, by which (assisted with their
motions) they communicate their qualities to the Air, the Air to the Bodies
which it touches, especially to the humors in Man, over which it has such
power, that its diversity diversifyes all the complexions of Mankind. Now our
Humors model our Manners, and these our most particular Actions. They may talk
that the Wiseman overrules the Stars, but Experience shows that the Stars
guide the Will, not by compelling it, but by inclining it in such a manner that
it cannot resist; because they subminister to it the means determined to the
End whereunto they incline it; whence it is as hard (yea, impossible) for it to
draw back, as for a Drunkard to forbear drinking when he is very thirsty and
has the bottle at his command. The Impostures which are affirmed of the
Casters of Nativities, can no more prejudice or disparage Judiciary Astrology,
then Mountebanks do Physic. Yea, though the state of Heaven be never twice the
same, yet is it not so in the subjects of all other Disciplines. Never were two
diseases found altogether alike in Physic; nor in Law two Cases alike in all
their circumstances; yet the Precepts of thse Sciences are nevertheless true;
because it suffices that the principal conditions concur, as it is also
sufficient that the same principal aspects and situations of the Stars be found
in Heaven, for the making of Rules in Judiciary Astrology.

The Third said, Every Effect follows the Nature of its Cause, and therefore
the Actions and Inclinations of the Soul cannot be ascribed to a corporeal
cause, such as the Stars are; For if all were governed by their influences, we
should see nothing but what were good, as being regulated by so good causes. I
acknowledge but two virtues in the Heavens, Motion and Light, by which alone,
and not by any influences of occult qualities, they produce corporeal effects.
Thus ought Aristotle to be understood, when he refers the cause of the
continual Generation of Inferior things, to the diversity of the Motions of the
First Moveable and the Zodiac; And Hippocrates, when he foretells the events
of Diseases by the several Houses of the Moon.

The Fourth said, It is impossible to make an Art of predicting by the
Celoestial Motions, for five reasons, besides the dominion which our Will has
over Effects; without which it were free. 1. The Connection that is between the
Celoestial Bodies and the Sublunary is unknown to Men. 2. The diversity of the
Celoestial Motions causes that the Heaven is never in the same posture as it
ought to be, for the making of a sure and certain Art grounded upon many
repeated Experiments; according to which, like Effects are to be referred to
like Causes. 3. The extreme rapid and violent turning about of the Heavens does
not afford to find the precise minute of a Nativity, for drawing the Theme or
Figure of the true state of Heaven, which they say is necessary. 4. As of
sixteen Consonants joined with five Vowels are made words without number; so of
a thousand and twenty two Stars and more, with seven Planets, may be made
Conjunctions and Combinations to infinity, which surpass the comprehension of
humane wit; there being no Art of things infinite. 5. Two persons, or more,
born at the same time under the same Elevation of the Pole, and disposition of
the Heavens; (as they speak) yea, two Twins, as Jacob and Esau, are found
oftentimes different in visage, complexion, inclination, condition, and end.
But is it probable that a hundred Pioneers stifled in the same Mine, or ten
thousand Men dying at the same battle have one and the same influence?

The Fifth said, God having from all eternlty numbered the hairs of our Heads,
that is to say, foreseen even the least Accidents which ought or may befall
Men, he has established an order for them in the Heavens, disposing the
course, aspects, and various influences of the Stars, to draw out of Nothing
those accidents at the time that they are to happen to Men, whom they incline
to meet the same; yet so as to leave it in the power of their Freewill to avoid
or expose themselves unto them without any constraint. This truth is
sufficiently confirmed by the exact and admirable correspondence which is found
between the most signal accidents of our lives, and the hour of our Nativities;
so that Astrologers not only conjecture by the time of the Nativity what is to
come to pass, but they also come to the knowledge of the true minute of the
Nativity, by the time at which accidents arrive, and take this course to
correct Horoscopes, and Figures ill drawn. And although long Experience may
attest the certainty of this Art, yet I confess, since the faculties and
qualities of the Stars are not perfectly known to us, and we cannot always
precisely know the disposition of Heaven* much less all the combinations of the
Stars; Astrology, in respect of us, is very uncertain and difficult, but not
therefore the less true and admirable in it self. It is like a great Book
printed in Hebrew Letters without points, which is cast aside and slighted by
the ignorant, and admired by the more intelligent. So the Heavens being
enameled by Gods Hand with Stars and Planets as with bright Characters, which
by their Combinations figure the various accidents which are to befall Men, are
never considered by the ignorant, to dive into their Mysteries, but only by
the Learned; who themselves many times commit mistakes when they go about to
read them, because those shining Characters have no other Vowels, or rather no
other voice, but that of God, who is the true Intelligence thereof.

The Sixth said, Three sorts of persons err touching the credit which is to be
given to Astrological Predictions. Some believe them not at all, others believe
them too little, and others too much. As for the first, since they cannot deny
that the Stars are universal causes of sublunary effects; that such causes are
of different natures and virtues, and that their action and virtue is dispensed
by the motion which is successive and known; they must of necessity confess,
that knowing the disposition of sublunary subjects, the nature of the Stars,
and their motion, many natural effects may be foreseen and foretold from
them. The Devil himself knows no future things certainly, but by foreseeing the
effects of particular causes in their universal causes, which are the Stars.
They who believe too little confess that the Stars act upon the Elements and
mixed Bodies; for very Peasants know thus much, besides many particular effects
of the Moon. But as for Man, whose Soul of it self is not dependent upon any
natural cause, but free, and Mistress of its own actions, they cannot, or for
Religion's sake, dare not affirm that it is subject to Celestial Influences,
at least, in reference to manners. Yet it is no greater absurdity to say, that
the Soul is subject to the Stars, then to say with Aristotle and Galen, that it
is subject to the Temperament of the Body, which also is caused by the Stars;
from the influence and action whereof the Soul cannot exempt its Body, nor the
Temperament thereof by which she acts. Lastly, they who give too much credit to
the Stars hold that all things are guided by a fatal and irrevocable order of
Nature; contrary to Reason, which admits the Author to be the Master of his own
work; and to Experience, which assures us of the standing still of the Sun for
Joshuah, of his going backward for Hezechiah, and of his Eclipse at full Moon
during the Passion. The Fourth Opinion is certain, that there is truth in
Astrological Predictions; but it behooves to believe them only in a due
measure, since the Science of it self is but conjectural.

II. Whether is less blameable, Avarice or Prodigality.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Avarice is less blameable then
Prodigality. For the latter is more fertile in bad actions then the former,
which though otherwise vicious, yet refrains from the pleasures and
debaucheries in which the Prodigal usually swims. The Holy Scripture intending
to set forth an example of Infinite Mercy, relates that of the Prodigal Son,
who obtained pardon of the sin which is least worthy of it. Moreover,
Prodigality does far less good then Covetousness, for this always looks at its
own profit, and takes care for its own benefit, and the preservation of its
dependents; so that it exercises at least the first fundamental of Charity,
which is, to do well to those who are nearest us. On the contrary, Prodigality
ruins and perverts the Laws of Nature, leading a Man to the destruction of his
relatives, and the undoing of himself; like Saturn and Time, it devours its own
issue, and consumes it self, to the damage of the Commonwealth, whose interest
it is that every Man use well what belongs to him. Therefore all Laws have
enacted penalties against Prodigals, depriving them of the administration of
their own Estates; and the most Sacred Edicts of our Kings aim at the
correcting of the Luxury of Prodigality. But never were any Laws, Punishments,
or inflictions ordained against Covetousness, because Prodigality causes the
downfall and destruction of the most Illustrious Houses; which cannot be
attributed to Covetousness, for this seems rather to have built them.

The Second said, That, according to Aristotle, amongst all the virtuous, none
wins more Love then the Liberal, because there is always something to be
gotten by him; as amongst all the vicious none is more hated and shunned by all
the world then the covetous, who does not only not give any thing, but draws
to himself the most he can from every one and from the public, in which he
accounts himself so little concerned, that he considers it no farther then how
he may make his profit of it. He is so loath to part with his treasures when he
dies, that he would gladly be his own Heir (as Hermocrates appointed himself by
his Testament) or else he would swallow down his Crowns (as that other Miser
did, whom Athenaeus mentions.) But the Prodigal (free from that self-interest,
which causes so great troubles in the world) gives all to the public, and
keeps nothing for himself. Whence, according to Aristotle, the Prodigal is not
so remote from Virtue as the Covetous, it being easier to make the former
Liberal then the latter.

The Third said, These two Vices are equally opposed to Liberality, and
consequently one as distant from it as the other. For as the Covetous is
Vicious in that he receives too much and gives nothing; so is the Prodigal in
that he gives too much and receives nothing at all, or receives only to give.
But Covetousness has this privilege, that it finds a Virtue from which it is
very little distant, namely, Frugality, or Parsimony, to which Prodigality is
diametrically opposed. Nor is it of little advantage to it, that it is
ordinarily found in Old Men, whom we account wiser then others; for having
learned by the experience of many years, that all friends have failed them in
time of need, and that their surest refuge has been their own Purse; they do
not willingly part with what they have taken pains to gather together, which is
another reason in favor of Covetousness. For Virtue and Difficulty seem in a
manner reciprocal. But Prodigality is very easy and usual to foolish Youth,
which, thinking never to find the bottom of the barrel, draws forth
incessantly, and gives so freely, that being over-taken with necessity, it is
constraind to have recourse to Covetousness, which sets it upon its legs
again. Nor ever was there a Father that counseled his Son to be prodigal, but
rather to be thrifty and close-handed. And yet the Gospel and Experience show,
that Fathers give and advise what is most expedient to their Children.

The Fourth said, As Rashness is much less blameable then Cowardice, so is
Prodigality then Avarice. For the Prodigal holding it ignominious to receive,
and glorious always to give, likes rather to deprive and divest himself of his
goods, then to deny any one whatsoever. On the other side, the Covetous does
nothing but receive on all hands; and never gives any thing but with hope to
receive more. Now it is much more noble to give then to receive; for Giving
supposes Having. The Prodigal knowing well that goods and riches are given by
God, only to serve for necessary instruments to the living more commodiously,
and that they are not riches if they be not made use of, employes them, and
accommodates himself and others therewith; but the Covetous does not so much as
make use of them for himself, and so destroys their end.

The Fifth said, If the Question did not oblige us to compare these two Vices
together, I should follow Demosthenes's sentence which he gave in the quarrel
of two Thieves that accused one another, which was, that the one should be
banished Athens, and the other should run after him. I should no less drive out
of a well-policy'd State the Covetous and the Prodigal. The first is Aesop's
Dog, who keeps the Ox from eating the hay, whereof himself tastes not; like the
Bears who hinder Men from approaching Mines of Gold, and yet make no use
thereof. The other is like those Fruit Trees which grow in Precipices, of which
only Crows and Birds of prey eat the Fruit; vicious persons alone ordinarily
get benefit by them. But yet this latter Vice seems to me more pernicious then
the other. For whether you consider them in particular, The Covetous raises an
Estate which many times serves to educate and support better Men then himself:
But Prodigality is the certain ruin of their Fortunes who are addicted to it,
and carries them further to all other Vices, to which Necessity serves more
truly for a cause then reasonably for an excuse; or whether you consider them
in general, it is the most ordinary overthrow of States. And possibly he that
should seek the true cause of public Inconveniences, would sooner find it in
Luxury and Prodigality, then in any thing else. Therefore Solons's Law declared
Prodigals infamous, and gave power to their Creditors to dis-member them and
cut them in pieces. Our Ordinances, in imitation of the Roman Law, which ranks
them under the predicament of Madmen, forbids and deprives them of the
administration of their own goods, as not knowing how to use them.

The Sixth said, Avarice is like those Gulfes that swallow up Ships, and never
disgorge them again; and Prodigality like a Rock that causes shipwracks, the
ruins whereof are cast upon the coasts of Barbarians; and therefore both of
them ought to be banished, and I have no Vote for either. Yet Prodigality
seems to me more fair, and Covetousness more severe.

CONFERENCE XXIII.
I. Of Physiognomy. II. Of Artificial Memory.

I. Of Physiognomy.
THeophrastus accusing Nature for not having made a window to the Heart,
perhaps meant; to the Soul. For though the Heart were seen naked, yet would not
the intentions be visible; they reside in another apartment. The Countenance,
and amongst its other parts, the Eye seems to be the most faithful messenger
thereof. It does not only intimate sickness and health, it shows also hatred
and love, anger and fear, joy and sadness. In short, it is the true mirror of
the Body and the Soul, unless when the Visage puts on the mask of Hypocrisy,
against which we read indeed some experiences; as when Ulysses discovered the
dissimulation of Achilles, disguised in the dress of a Damsel, by the
gracefullness wherewith he saw him wield a sword; but there are no rules or
maxims against it, and never less then in this Age of counterseits; in which
he that is not deceived, well deserves the name of Master. For security from
it, some ingenious persons have invented Rules whereby the inclinations of
every one may be discerned; as Masons applying the Rule, Square, and Level upon
a stone, judge whether it incline more to one side then the other. For you see
there are many different species of Animals, every one whereof is again
subdivided into many others, as is observed in Dogs and Horses; but there are
more different sorts of Men. Whence the Philosophers of old took up the opinion
of Metempsychoses, or Transanimations, imagining there could not but be (for
example) the Soul of a Fox in those whom they found very crafty; and that the
Soul which delighted to plunge it self in filthiness and impurity must needs
have been heretofore in the Body of a swine. And though the outward shape of
Man puts a vail upon all those differences, yet they are visible through the
same to those who have a good sight; as we may distinguish Ladies through the
Cypress with which they vail themselves at this day, it we take good heed,
otherwise we may be mistaken. We must therefore inquire, here, whether through
the external figure common to all Men, what every one has peculiar be not the
sign of his inclinations; either as the Effect, or as the Cause of the same: As
redness of the Cheeks is usually an argument of the disposition of the Lungs.
Nor is it material to know why it is a sign, it suffices to me to know that it
is so. To which the variety of Bodies, and especially of Faces, affords great
probability, because Nature has made nothing in vain; and why this variety,
unless to serve for a sign, since it serves to distinguish them?

The Second said, Physiognomy is the knowledge of the inside by the outside,
that is, of the affections and inclinations of the Mind by external and
sensible signs, as color and Figure. It is grounded upon the correspondence
of the Soul with the Body, which is such that they manifestly participate the
affections one of the other. If the Body be sick, the Soul is altered in its
operations, as we see in high Fevers. On the contrary, let the Soul be sad or
joyful, the Body is so too. Therefore the Sophisters of old purged themselves
with Hellebor when they would dispute best. For though in its essence the Soul
depends not on the corporeal Organs, yet it depends upon the same in its
operations, which are different according to the diverse structure of the
Organs; which, if they were alike disposed, their actions would be alike in
all, and at all times. Whence, (says Aristotle) an old man would see as clear
as a young man, if he had the Eyes of a young man.

The Third said, To make a certain judgment upon external signs, heed must be
taken that they be natural. For it is possible for one of a Sanguine
Constitution to have a pale and whitish color, either through fear, sickness,
study, or some other accident. The Phlegmatic when he has drunk to excess,
been at a good fire, is in anger, or ashamed of something, will have a red
Face. And yet he that should argue from these signs would be mistaken.

The Fourth said, Since Physiognomists grant that their Rules are not to be
applied but to Men void of all Passions, which so change the Body that it
seems another from it self; I conceive, this Art is altogether impossible. For
I would know in what moment we are to be taken without Sadness, Joy, Hatred,
Love, Anger; in short, without any of those Passions so inseparable from our
Life, that Xanthus found no better way to be revenged on Aesop, then to ask him
for a Man that cared for nothing; such as he would be that should have no
Passions. What then will become of the goodly Rules of Physiognomy, after that
Education of Youth has corrected perverse inclinations, that Philosophy has
given the lie to the Physiognomists of this Age, as it did heretofore to
Zopyrus, when he pronounced his opinion upon Socrates; or that Piety, as is
seen in so many holy personages, has reformed the Will, evil habits, and
Nature it self?

The Fifth said, As there is nothing more wonderful then to judge of a Man's
manners at the first sight, so there is nothing more difficult. It is
endeavored four ways. First, By the structure of each part of the Body. So
the great Head and square Forehead, denote Prudence and good judgment; the
small Head shows that there is little brain, and narrow room for the exercise
of the internal senses; the sharp Head denotes impudence. The Second way, is,
by the Temperament. So the ruddy countenance, yellow hair, and other signs of
the Sanguine Humor, show an indifferent Spirit, pleasant, and inclined to
Love. A pale complexion, fat Body, clear voice, slow gate, which are the
characters of Phlegm, denote cowardice and sloth. Soft and tender flesh is a
token of subtlety of the Senses, and consequently of the wit; hard flesh, of
dullness. Whence Man, the wisest of all Animals, has a more delicate flesh then
any of them. The Third way, is, by comparing the external signs of every one
with those which are observed in Men when they are in Passion. So because he
that is in Choler has sparkling Eyes, hoarse voice, and the jugular veins
turgid; we conclude that he who has all these signs naturally, is naturally
inclined to that Passion. But as for the Fourth and last, which is, by
comparing Man with other Animals, heed must be taken how we credit such a sign
alone. For as a single letter does not make a discourse, so an external
similitude alone with an Animal does not infer the resemblance of our Nature to
that of that Animal. There must be a concurrence of many of these signs
together. As if I see a Man with a neck moderately fleshy, a large breast, and
the other parts in proportion, as the Lion has; harsh hair, as the Bear; a
strong sight, as the Eagle; I shall conclude that this Man is strong and
courageous.

The Sixth said, That the reason why Physiognomists choose irrational
creatures, to signify the inclinations and manners of Men rather then Men
themselves, is, because Man is a variable Animal, and most commonly uses
dissimulation in his actions; Whereas Animals, void of Reason, less conceal
from us the inclinations of their Nature, by which they permit themselves to be
guided. So we see the same person will sometimes do an act of Courage, sometime
another of Cowardice; sometimes he will be merciful, at another time cruel. But
other Animals are uniform in all their actions. The Lion is always generous,
the Hare ever cowardly; the Tiger, cruel; the Fox, crafty; the Sheep, harmless.
So that a certain judgment may be passed upon these, but not upon Men.

The Seventh said, That as the accidents superven'd to our Bodies after our
Birth afford no certain judgment, but only the signs which we bring from our
Mothers Womb; so the natural inclinations and habits may be well judged of by
exact inspection into the constitution on which they depend; but not those
which are acquisitious, whereof no certain judgment is to be had. Yet this
inspection of the Temperament is very uncertain too, by reason it is extremely
difficult to understand the constitution of every one; so that Galen confesses,
that after fifty years study in Physic, he could not attain a perfect
knowledge thereof.

The Eighth said, It is a groundless thing to make our manners depend upon the
color which the Excrementitious Humors produce in the skin; much less do they
depend upon the shape of the Muscles, which alters when a Man grows fat or
lean, and follows the conformation of the Bones; and yet less upon the
Lineaments, which have nothing to do with our internal disposition; what ever
Experiences Spigelius alleges, of having observed in his dissections, that
all those who were executed for Crimes prepens'd long before, had the two lines
which are upon the uppermost part of the Nose, crossing one the other when they
knit their brows.

II. Of Artificial Memory.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That the Art of Memory invented (as it is
reported) by Simonides, is a company of Rules, by help of which the species of
things disposed in the treasure of the Memory are revived. And the action of
this Faculty consisting in a certain temper of the Brain, which may be
preserved and amended by the right use of external things; they deny the
sensible effects of Physic, who question, whether the Memory may be perfected,
and consequently, whether there may be an Art of it. Raymond Lullie has
comprised his in a Categorical or mystical Order; Rombertio, in his memorable
Reductions; Gesualdo the Neapolitan, in certain Characters; all, in Places,
Images, and Order. First for Places, as in passing near a place, it puts you in
mind of what you have seen or done there; so taking a certain place so well
known to you that it cannot escape you, as your lodging, or the four walls of
your Chamber; it will faithfully return to you the things that you shall
consigne to it. Secondly, for Images; as it is impossible but I must remember
my friend when I see his picture; so when I look upon certain Images which
shall signify to me the things whereof I am to treat, (with which consequently
they must have correspondence) I easily remember those things. These Images
must either be without us, as Statues or Hangings of Tapistry are to a
Preacher; or else within us, and so effectual and known that they always come
into our Minds, as the red and pimpled Face of a known person does, to signify
Choler and Drunkenness; a pale face, for fear; and so of the other points of
the discourse. Thirdly, for Order, it is by consent of all termed the parent
and guardian of Memory.

The Second said, That to question the benefit of the Art of Memory, which
makes Rules for the same, is, to be an Enemy to Order. And because we cannot
judge better of one contrary then by the other; the good thereof is best
apprehended by considering the evils which arise from confusion. For as we know
nothing but what we have in our Memory, whence the words of knowing and being
mindful are very fitly taken by the vulgar for the same thing: So as Man may
have abundance of motions, yet if he know not how to use them in a ^itting
occasion, or if his knowledge be confused, he deserves rather the name of a
shufler then of a knowing man; and this for want of the Order which the Art of
Memory teaches us. For all things have some connection among themselves, either
Natural or Artificial. The former is found in Tree of Substance and Accidents.
Plants have their rank, Animals theirs; and amongst Men, Time, Place, Dignity,
and some circumstances supply the like to them. As Cyrus was before Alexander,
he before Caesar; and again, he before Cicero in dignity, and Cicero before
Roscius. But the Memory is chiefly troubled to retain the artificial connection
of things and words, assigned to them by our own disposal, especially when the
same is remote from the natural. It Is here that the wonders of this Art are
particularly discovered; by help whereof Seneca, in his Declamations, glories
that he learnt the names of two thousand persons, and repeated them in the same
order wherein they were pronounced to him. Cardan confesses that he owed all he
knew to this Art. And Cardinal Perron knew how to use it so well before Henry
III. that he caused himself to be taken for the Author of an Heroic Poem,
which he repeated, word for word, after hearing it once read.

The Third said, That seeing Memory has oftentimes failed great personages at
need, as Demosthenes before Philip, Budaeus before Charles V. and many others;
it is as profitable to strengthen it, as the Rules are difficult which conduce
thereunto. Some fancy to themselves five chambers, in each corner whereof,
they place a Man of their acquaintance, and in their Minds apply to his Head
the first word or thing which they would remember; upon his right arm, the
second; the third, upon his left arm; the fourth, upon the right foot; and the
fifth, upon the left; (the number five seeming to them the most easy for
Multiplication) If the thing be not corporeal, they conceive it under some
species representing the sound of the word; or else of two they make one, or
divide it; proceeding thus from corner to corner, and from chamber to chamber,
and adding five more to the former, if need require. Others compose a word of
the first letters or syllables of the names which they would repeat; as if I
would speak first of Augustus, then of the Emperors Rodolphus, Matthias,
Valentinian, and lastly, of Solon; I take the word Armus, in which I find their
first letters, which guide me to the rest. The same they do at the beginning of
periods, which some others make to begin where the preceding end.

The Fourth said, Memory is an Internal Sense, which (as the other two, Fancy
and Common Sense) depends only upon Nature. And as the fabulous Salmoneus was
struck with Lightning for having imitated Lightning; so they who go about to
alter by their artifice this Divine Workmanship, find themselves rewarded with
the utter loss of their natural Memory. Moreover, the softness of the Brain is
the cause of a good Memory, and the hardness thereof of its weakness; whence
Children have better Memories then grown persons. Now we cannot change the
consistence of the Brain, and they who have used Balm-water and other remedies
for that purpose, have found that they more weakened their Judgments then
strengthened their Memories. From whence arises another reason to show that
those two Faculties being for the most part equally balanced, it is no easier
for him that has a bad Memory to make it better, then to procure a good
Judgment in him which wants it.

The Fifth says, He conceived it no less difficult to remember the Places,
Images, and odd precepts of this Art, and apply them to the subject, then to
learn by heart at first the things themselves, or their words; which also when
learnt by this Art are soon lost, as being found upon chimeraes, of which the
Mind cannot always so thoroughly clear it self but there will be left some Idea
thereof; more apt to trouble the Memory then to assist it always. However, I
had rather learn a little, labouronsly, with the profit and impression
ordinarily accompanying my pains, then feed upon those vain pictures. Wherefore
I am prone to think, that either there is no Art of Memory, or else that it is
unprofitable or mischievous, and as such to be rejected by all the world.

The Sixth said, Since where ever there is defect, there is need of some Art to
correct the same, and remove from the Faculties the obstacles which they meet
with in the exercise of their Offices; why should Memory alone be destitute of
this succor? Considering it has ways so various, that not only words which
signify something, but those which signify nothing are of use to the Memory.
Therefore Aristotle says, He who would remember must make barbarismes. And to
six a name or word in the Mind, a Man will utter many which come near it. But
as this Art is not to be despised, so neither is it always to be made use of,
much less in things which have some order of themselves; as, Anatomy,
Geography, Chronology, and History; or in which a good natural Memory can
contrive any. They who have this Faculty vigorous from their birth, or made it
such by exercise, wrong themselves in employing the precepts of this Art for
that purpose; as a Man of five and twenty years old should do if he made use of
spectacles; having no need thereof. But it is only fit for those who having a
weak Memory would remember many barbarous names or some coats and numbers, the
variety whereof many times breeds confusion; for the recollecting of which,
this Art teaches to remember certain shapes, figures, or species, sometimes the
most uncouth that can be excogitated, to the end the Fancy may be more
effectually moved by the same.

CONFERENCE XXIV.
I. Which of the Five Senses is the most noble. II. Of Laughter.

I. Which of the five Senses is the most Noble.
AS he who has the present sense of any Disease, accounts that the greatest;
so they who exercise some one of their Senses more then the rest, who get
profit by it, or are delighted in it, willingly award the preceedence to the
same. Take the judgment of a Perfumer, he values nothing but Odors and the
smell, which judges thereof. He will tell you, that if we had the perfect
knowledge of Aromatical Compositions, they would ravish all our Senses; that
Perfume must needs have something Divine in it, because God so loved it, that
he particularly reserved it to himself, and forbad all others to use a certain
Composition, under pain of death. The same is also argued from the offense we
take at the evil scent of any stinking thing, that so the very name of it
passing only through our ears displeases us in such sort, as to disparage the
truth of the Proverb, that Words do not stink; as, on the contrary, the name
alone of the Rose, Violet and Jasmin, seems to recreate the smelling by the
Ear. Poets and Lovers will be for the Eyes and the Touch. They who understand
Optics will hold that it is the seeing which affords the greatest wonders;
Whence Comical Representations move so powerfully, and Sight has more
influence upon us then Hearsay. If you will take the judgment of Musicians,
the Hearing shall carry the Bell from the other senses; and this Position is
backed with the experience of Melody, Persuasion, and the Art of Oratory; which
caused Antiquity to feign two sorts of Hercules, the one who subdued monsters
with the blows of his club, and the other who captivated his Auditors with
chains of Gold, reaching from his Tongue to their Ears. Philoxenus, who wished
a Crane's neck, and they who live only to drink and eat, (whereas we drink and
eat to live) will give the pre-eminence to the Taste. Wherefore, in my Opinion,
this Question is hard to be decided, because it requires impartial Judges,
whose number is very small.

The Second said, That for the right judging of the Cause, all parties ought to
be heard. As for the Sight, the fabric of its Organ, so artificially composed
of Humors and Tunicles, and guarded with Eyelids and Brows, as so many
ramparts for its preservation, sufficiently plead its excellence. But that, of
the six Couple of Nerves, (for so many only there are) in the Brain, the first
and the second are peculiarly destinated to the Eyes; this shows how highly
Nature tenders them above all other parts. Moreover, Vision is performed in an
Instant, and makes present to us those things which are as remote from us, as
Heaven is from Earth, and this by spiritual qualities; (for the Actions of
Bodies are not expedited but in Time) this is an other argument of its
Excellence. Further, since nothing is more goodly then Light, it seems to
follow that nothing is more excellent then the Sight, whose Object it is.
Whence some Philosophers conceived the Soul to have chosen the Eyes for its
Mansion. Next then for Hearing; this Sense seems to feed the Soul, or rather
to give it birth. For if the Soul be considered naturally, its food and life is
to understand, reason, and discourse; to which purposes the Hearing alone is
serviceable, being for this cause termed the Sense of Discipline. If the Soul
be considered as it enjoyes a life more noble then the natural, namely, that of
Grace; the Sense of Hearing seems the Author of this Life. For, the Just lives
by Faith, says the Holy Scripture. Now this Faith comes from Hearing, as the
Apostle testifies, and not from Seeing; For it is the evidence of things not
seen; and where we see, there is no longer Faith. As for the Smelling; indeed
good Odors recreate the Brain, repair the Animal Spirits, purify and fit them
to assist the Soul when it exercises its most noble operations; but the weak
Title of this Sense seems to need a better Advocate then all the rest. The
Senses of Tasting and Touching remain, but both in the same degree, because one
proceeds from the other; Gustation being a sort of Contact. In considering of
these two Senses, methinks, I hear them complain of the ingratitude of Men for
placing them in the lowest form, notwithstanding their great service in the
birth of Mankind, by Generation, which is a kind of Touching, and in the
subsequent preservation thereof incessantly by the Sense of Tasting. And yet
since all the commendation of an Instrument is to be measured by its end and
benefit, (as the praise of a Knife is to cut well) therefore of the Senses,
which are the Instruments of the Body and the Soul, the most beneficial (as the
Touch and Taste are) must be the most noble: For they are absolutely necessary
to our Being, but the other three only to our Well-being, and that we may live
more pleasantly. Moreover, Nature has so highly esteemed the Sense of Touching
and its actions, that she has found none of them bad or useless, as there is
in the other Senses. Pain it self, which seems the chief Enemy of it, is so
necessary, that without the same, Animals (as Aristotle testifies) would perish
like Plants; for it is like a Sentinel, taking heed that no mischief befall
them.

The Third stood up for the Hearing. Sounds (said he) are of that efficacy and
power, that amongst the Objects of the Senses, they alone make the Soul take as
many different postures as themselves are various. The sound of the Trumpet, or
a warlike Song, animates and puts us into fury; change the Tune, and you make
the weapons fall out of the hands of the most outrageous. Devotion is enkindled
by it, Mirth increased; briefly, nothing is impossible to it. Its action is so
noble, that by it we receive the notices of all things; in which regard the Ear
is particularly dedicated to the Memory: Hence also speech is more efficacious,
and makes greater impression upon the Mind, then converse only with dumb
Masters, or the contemplation of things by help of the Sight. And the structure
of its Organ, both internal and external, contrived with so many Labyrinths, a
Drumb, a Stirrup, an Anvil, a Hammer, Membranes, Arteries, and Nerves, and so
many other parts fortified with strong battlements of Bones, is a sufficient
evidence of its nobleness.

The Fourth fell into commendation of the Eyes, which are the windows at which
the Soul most manifestly shows her self, and is made most to admire her
Creator; but he added, that many times they serve for an inlet, at which the
Devil steals the Soul; which a great person complains that he lost by his Eyes.
I should therefore attribute (said he) the preeminence to the Touch, as more
exquisite in Man then in any Animal, and consequently most noble, because found
in the most noble substance. For it is probable Nature gave Man, by way of
preeminence, the most noble Faculties not only in the Soul, but also in the
Body. Now other Animals excel us in the other Senses; the Dog, in Smelling;
the Ape, in Tasting; the Heart, in Hearing; and the Eagle, in Seeing.

The Fifth argued, in favor of Hearing, alleging that a Man may attain
Knowledge without Sight; and that upon observation, Blind people have better
Memories and Judgments then others, because their Souls being less taken up
with external actions, become more vigorous in internal operations, for that
their Spirits are less dissipated. Upon which consideration, a certain
Philosopher thought fit to pull out his own Eyes, that so he might be more free
for contemplation, and the study of Wisdom. But without the Hearing, it is
impossible to have the least degree of Knowledge in the world, not even so much
as that of talking familiarly to little Children. For one deaf by Nature is
likewise dumb, and by consequence altogether useless to humane society; yea, if
we take Aristotle's word for it, he is less then Man. For Man (says he)
deserves not that name but inasmuch as he is sociable; and such he is not, if
he be unable to express his conceptions, which cannot be done without speech.
Of which speech the Hearing being the cause, the same is also the cause that he
is capable of the denomination of Man. And being thereby differenced from
Brutes, it follows that it is the most noble piece of his accoutrements.

The Sixth said, If Nobility be taken for Antiquity, the Touch will be the
noblest of the Senses; because it appears the first and the last in an Animal.
Moreover, it is designed for the noblest End, to wit, Propagation, by which the
individual makes it self eternal; and which is more, it comprehends under it
the Taste, the Hearing and the Smelling: For we cannot Taste, Hear, or Smell,
unless the species actually touch the Tongue, the Drum of the Ear, and the
Mammillary Processes. Add hereunto, that Utility being the Note of Excellency,
as is seen in State Policy, and the Art Military, the Touch must be the most
excellent; since it serves for Eyes not only to the Blind who guide themselves
by groping, but also to some Animals, as Snails, Moles, and also all Insects,
who make use of their horns and feet as dexterously as others of their Eyes.

II. Of Laughter.
Upon the Second Point it was said, We here wanted some Priests of that God of
Laughter, to whom, as Apulieus (in his Golden Ass) relates, the Inhabitants of
the City of Hypate celebrated yearly a Feast, at which himself was made a
Victim. There are few but have read what Laughter he caused, when defending
himself against the charge of Murder he found that the three Men whom he
thought he had slain were three leathern bottles; and for his reward he
received this promise, That all should succeed to his advantage. Indeed Fortune
seems to favor Laughers; whereas here accusers and malcontents readily find
new causes of dissatisfaction and complaint. Whence possibly arose the Proverb,
which says, That when things go well with a Man, He has the Laughers on his
side. This Goddess Fortune seems to be of the Humor of Women, (in whose shape
she is portrayed) who rather love merry persons then severe. Yea, generally,
all prefer a jolly Humor, and a smilling Face, before the solemness and
wrinkled brow of the Melancholy; which you may daily observe from Children, who
avoid the latter, and readily run to the former, as it were by instinct of
Nature. The Latin Distick says, That the Spleen causes Laughter; Splen ridere
facit. --
possibly because it serves for the receptacle of Melancholy which hinders it;
just as white Wine, having more lee or sediment at the bottom then Claret,
retains less thereof in its substance, and is consequently more diuretical.

The second said, That the first rise of laughter is in the Fancy, which
figuring to it selfsome species not well according together, represents a
disproportion to the Intellect, not wholly disagreeable, for then it would
displease, but absurd, new, and unordinary. Then the Judgment coming to
conjoyn those disproportionate species, makes a compound thereof; which not
agreeing with what was expected from them, the Judgment cannot wholly approve
of the same by reason of the disproportion, nor yet wholly reject it, by reason
of something which pleases it within. From this contest arises a sally of the
Faculty, which during this contrariety, causes contraction of the Nerves.
Which if it be but small, it produces only smiling; but if it be violent,
then by the confluence of the Spirits it causes loud laughter. Now that
Laughter is seated in the Imagination appears hence, that if we have heard or
seen some ridiculous thing, we many times laugh at it, though the Object be not
present. It Is also Disproportion that makes us laugh, for we do not so when we
behold a great Beauty; but we do so when we look upon some odd ill-contriv'd
countenance, or when we find little sutableness between the Objects which are
represented to us; as an Old Man making Love, a huge Hat upon a small Head, one
intending to make a graceful Reverence, or cut a fine caper and falling all
along; in brief, every thing that is said or done incongruously besides our
expectation; especially if no other more violent Passion interpose, as Fear,
Respect, and Pity, which suppress Laughter. We laugh at a Man that falls down,
but should he break his neck with the fall, our Laughter would give place to
Compassion. In fine, it appears that there is made a retraction of the Nerves
during Laughter; for we see a Convulsion causes the same motion of the Muscles
of the Face that Laughter does; whence comes that malady which is called Risus
Sardonicus, in which, by the retraction of the Nerves toward their Original,
the Patient seems to laugh as he dies.

The Third said, He knew not whether of the two had most reason, Democritus the
Laugher, or Heraclitus the Weeper. For though the Faculty of Laughing be
peculiar to Man, and inseparable from Reason, yet immoderate Laughter is as
unacceptable as continual Tears. And whereas we read in the Holy Scripture that
our Lord sometimes wept, but not that he ever laughed; this may be resolved,
That nothing was new to him: The same being recorded of Heathens, so stayed and
reserved that they were never seen to laugh; as Crassus, Cato the Censor,
Phocion, and some others. There is more difficulty in stating the Cause of
Laughter. Aristotle attributes it to the Diaphragme which is dilated by heat.
But seeing we laugh less in a Fever when the Diaphragme is most heated, it is
certain, either that every heat of the Diaphragme does not produce this effect,
or some other cause must be joined with it. Which I conceive to be an
impression made in our Senses, and by them in our Fancy, of some agreeable,
unusual, and un-foreseen Object, when the same slips into it unawares. Which
Object, exciting Joy in us by the Dilatation of the Spirits, which is made
first in the Arteries of the Brain, and thereby insinuated into these of the
Heart which opens to that Joy; those dilated Spirits swell the Blood in the
Veins which accompanies them; so that not being containable in their own place,
the Veins and Arteries swell till they make a reflux in the Brain, Diaphragme,
Lungs, Face, and all the parts of the Body, where they cause the concussion and
agitation observed in excessive Laughter, and sometimes Tears, by the
compression of the Brain; whilst it is not possible for any to check the
eruption, what ever respect be presented to them; yea, sometimes the Spirits
are so rarifi'd that they evaporate, whence follows sudden death; as it befell
Chrysippus of old, who seeing an Ass eat figgs at the end of his table, fell
into so vehement Laughter that he died immediately.

The Fourth said, Laughter is a motion of the Body which follows that of the
Soul. Its Object is a sudden Joy surprising us, as a pleasant word after a
serious discourse. The scorn we make of any one causes Laughter likewise;
because Contempt is a kind of Anger made up of Pleasure and Grief. When the
Pleasure happens to be greater then the Grief, (as it happens when our Enemy is
so weak that we can be revenged on him when we list) this contentment causes
us to laugh. And hence it is that Sleighting is more offensive then Hatred
alone. Joubertus thinks, Laughter is excited when Pleasure expands the Heart,
which by that dilatation gives motion to the Diaphragme, and this consequently
draws the Muscles of the Lips. Aristotle says, that by tickling a motion is
caused in the Spirits, which go and come to the place where the Man feels the
Pleasure; which Spirits passing and repassing light upon the Nerves, who being
too sensible and solicited by the continual motion and agitation thereof,
endeavor to drive the same away; and to that purpose contract themselves, and
draw unto themselves the parts into which they are inserted. Hence, in a great
Laughter, a Man is forced to compress himself, and the sides ache with much
laughing, by reason of the tension of the Muscles and Nerves, which are most
agitated in that place. Wherefore, in my judgment, Laughter is caused in this
sort. The sudden Pleasure or Titillation excites a motion of the Spirits, which
being very subtle are easily carried up to the Head; there their agitation and
motion importunes the Nerves and the Brain, so that in the midst of this
Pleasure there is caused a kind of Convulsive Motion. And for that this
agitation is chiefly inward, therefore the internal parts first feel the
effects of that gentle Convulsion: the Diaphragme being more pliant, and
receiving more Nerves of the sixth Conjugation, is agitated the most
vehemently. In profuse Laughter the Nerves of the whole Body sympathize with
this disposition of the Brain, their Common Original; which being importuned by
those Spirits, (who, though but natural, are yet able to incommode the same by
their too great agitation) it contracts it self to be discharged of them,
attracting the Nerves to it self as much as it can; whence proceeds this kind
of Convulsion.

The Fifth said, That the cause of Laughter is twofold, namely, its Object
which is of great latitude, as good news, unexpected joy, which it is
impossible to receive without laughing; and its Subject, which is indeed the
Diaphragme; for they who are wounded in that part seem to dye laughing, as
Hippocrates, in the seventh of his Epidemicks, observes to have befallen one
Plychon for the same cause: And this is no otherwise then as a certain kind of
Ranunculus, (an Herb, we call Crowfoot) being eaten causes loss of the
Spirits, and by the contraction of the Lips represents the Convulsion which is
made during Laughter.

CONFERENCE XXV.
I. Of the Diversity of Countenances. II. Whether Man or Woman be the more
noble.

I. Of the Diversity of Countenances*
IDentity is so disagreeable, that in all the objects of the Senses it
displeases us. Our Taste is glutted with always eating the same Bread. The
most excellent Odor, at length, causes the Head-ake. To look too wistly upon
the same object, or to be too long together beheld by the same Eye fixed upon
us, is troublesome. The Ear is tired with twice hearing the same Tune, and
being continually struck upon by one and the same discourse, how excellent
soever it be. The Touch, the grossest of all the Senses, is weary of one and
the same temper of Air; whence is drawn a certain consequence, That the people
under the Equinoctial, or other Climate always like to it self, are sooner
weary of living, then others who have not leisure to be tired with one season
because another soon succeeds it. On the contrary, we see variety of Food
raises the languishing Appetite; the diversity of Odors which succeed one
another, delight the Smelling. Nothing is more acceptable to the Sight then a
Meadow checkered with several colors, or a garden variegated with Tulips and
other Flowers, of all sorts and hues which the Spring discloses. Harmony
proceeds from the variety of Notes; and the Orator who would move his Auditors
must not speak too long upon the same thing in the same words; he must alter
his gesture and voice, and the pauses which distinguish his action are very
serviceable to that purpose. But as there is nothing more swift then the Sight,
so no Sense is sooner weary with the semblance of its objects. The reason
whereof is this, being a most active sense, its operation does not make it self
perceived by the Eye, but by the changing of the object. So that when it
beholds always the same thing, it seems to it self as if it beheld nothing.
Look upon the Earth all covered with Snow, or a Chamber wholly hung with Black,
or some other single color, the Sight is offended therewith: If Green offends
us less, it is because it is compounded of Yellow and Blew, and the best
blended of all the Colors, and as such reunites the visual rays between its
two extremes; yet it affords nothing near the delightfulness that arises
from the variety of Tapistry. I conceive therefore that the chief end of the
diversity of Countenances, is Distinction, and lest the same thing should
betide Women that did Alcmena, in Plautus, who suffered Jupiter to quarter with
her, because she took him for her Husband Amphitryo. But the subordinate end is
the Contentment which Man finds in this variety. As for other causes, the
Efficient indeed does something; for Children commonly resemble their Fathers
and Mothers: But the Material contributes very much hereunto; so that they who
(for example) are begotten of a Masculine and Feminine Geniture, wherein the
sanguine temper is equally prevalent, resemble one another, and have a ruddy
and well shaped Countenance. But because it is next to impossible, that the said
temper should be equally found in two different subjects, thence arises the
variety of Complexions and Lineaments.

The Second said, There is as great variety in all natural things as in Faces,
though it be not so remarkable to us. For we see Birds and Beasts distinguish
one another very well. Now the Final Cause of this Diversity seems to me to be
the ornament of the World, Mundus (...), quasi (...) ornatus.
which otherwise would have nothing less then the importance of its name.
Music and Painting receive graces from things which in reality are nothing,
namely, Pauses, which are only privations of Notes; and shadows, which are
defects of light. This diversity of Visages, which arises from that of the
persons and their inclinations, is as well contributary to the splendor and
beauty of a state as of nature. For if all things were alike, there would be a
confused identity and general disorder, not much different from the ancient
Chaos. Nothing would be acted in Nature; for action is not between things like,
but between things contrary. Nor would there be Beauty in the Countenance, if
there were not diversity in the parts; but all the Face were Eye or Nose. For
Beauty arises from Proportion, and this from the correspondence of many
different parts. Very little would there be amongst Men, if all were alike;
there being no Beauty when there is no deformity whereunto it may be compared;
and who so takes away Beauty takes away Love, of which it is the foundation.
This divine link of humane society would be destroyed; for Love is a desire to
obtain what we want, and another possesses; and therefore it cannot exist but
between persons unlike. Nor could a State consist longer; because all Men being
externally alike, would be so internally too; all would be of the same
profession, and no longer seek to supply one another mutual necessities. Now
this diversity of persons proceeds from the diverse mixture of the four Humors;
which being never found twice tempered in the same sort, (each one having his
peculiar constitution, which the Physicians call Idiosyncrasie) they never
produce the same person twice, nor consequently one and the same surface, or
external shape, alike. If the Matter designed to constitute and nourish the
bones be in too great quantity, the Man is born robust, large, and bony; if it
be defective, he becomes a dwarf and a weakling. Again, this Matter, according
as it carried to every bone in particular, gives a differing conformation to
the same, which is also derived to the Muscles spread over those bones from
which they borrow the external figure which they communicate to the skin.

The Third said, He found two Causes of the Diversity of Countenances: One in
Heaven; The other in the Heads of Women, namely, in their Imaginations. Heaven
is never found twice in the same posture, by reason of the manifold Motions and
Conjunctions of the Planets, and yet it is the Sun and Man that generate a Man;
and what is said of the Sun, ought likewise to be understood of the other
Celestial Bodies. It is necessary then that this variety in the Cause produce
also variety in the Effect. Hence it is, that Twins have so great resemblance
together, as having been conceived and born under the same Constellation. As
for the Imagination, it is certain, that of the Mother which intervenes at the
time of Conception, more powerfully determines the shape and color of the
Foetus then any other Cause; as appears by the marks which Infants bring with
them from their Mothers Womb; who well remember that such things were in their
Fancy, and that they had a vehement apprehension of the same. So that as many
different Imaginations as Women have when they conceive, make so many
Countenances and other parts of the Body different.

II. Whether is the more noble, Man or Woman.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That in times of old there was found at
Rome a Widower that had buried two and twenty Wives, and at the same time a
Widow that survived her two and twentieth Husband; these two the people of Rome
constrained to marry together, after which, both Men and Women awaited which of
the two would dye first; at length the Woman died first, and all the Men, even
to the little Boys, went to her interment, every one with a branch of Laurel
in his Hand, as having obtaind the victory over that Sex. This Question of the
nobleness and dignity of the one above the other, is of greater consequence
then that other, in which not only Women very frequently get the better, there
being more old women then old men, through the sundry dangers whereunto men are
exposed, and from which women are exempted; but also Stags and Ravens, which
live hundreds of years, much surpass either of them. But one of the greatest
difficulties arising in the discussion of this Controversy, is, that there is
no Judge found but is interessed in the Cause: Do not think that the
determination of this Point is of little importance. For we should have none of
those dismal feuds both in high and mean families, did not women go about to
command over men instead of obeying them. Now whether the business be fairly
arbitrated, or whether it be yielded, out of complacency to that Sex, which
loves to be commanded, and out of pity its frugality and weakness; upon
examination of the reasons of either side, I find it safer to suspend my
judgment, that I may neither betray my own party, nor incense the other;
which, they say, is not so easily reconciled as it is offended.

The Second said, That the courtship and suing which Men use to Women, is a
tacit but sufficient argument of the esteem wherein they hold them; for we do
not seek after a thing which we under-value. But the praecellence of Women
above Men is principally argued from the Place, the Matter, and the Order of
their Creation. For Man had not the advantage to be created in the Terrestrial
Paradise, as Woman had, who also was produced out of a more noble matter then
he; for he was made out of the Earth, and she out of one of the Man's ribbs.
And as for the Order of the Creation, God, in the production of Mixed Bodies,
begun with the meanest things, and ended with the noblest. He first made the
Earth and the Sea, then Plants, Fishes, and the other Brutes. After which, he
created Man, as the Master of all things; and lastly, Woman, as the
Masterpiece of Nature, and the Model of all Perfections, Mistress of Man,
stronger then he, as the Scripture says; and consequently Mistress of all the
Creatures. Moreover, there is no sort of Goods but are found in a higher degree
in Woman then in Man. For as for the Goods of the Body, the chief whereof is
Beauty, Men have therein utterly lost the cause; which they will be as little
able to carry in reference to the Goods of the Mind: For the same are found
more vigorous, and attain sooner to maturity in Women, who, upon that account,
are by the Laws adjudg'd Puberes at twelve years of age, and Boys not till
fourteen. They commonly perform more actions of Virtue then Men; and indeed
they have more need thereof, to with-stand the assaults continually made upon
their Chastity, which is not too often found in the other Sex. They are
acknowledged by all, to be more merciful, faithful, and charitable then Men; so
Devout, that the Church (which cannot err) terms them by no other name; and so
patient, that God has judged them alone worthy to carry their Children nine
months in their bellies; no doubt, because Men had not Virtue and Resolution
enough for that office. The Poets never feigned but one Jupiter, that was able
to bear an Infant in his Body, though it were but for a few months. In fine,
there is no Science or Art in which Women have not excelled; witness the two
Virgins, Desroches, and de Gournai, the Vicountess of Auchi, and Juliana Morel,
a Sister Jacobine of Avignon, who understands fourteen Languages; and, at
Lions, maintained Theses in Philosophy at the age of thirteen years; so also of
old, Diotima and Aspacia were so excellent in Philosophy, that Socrates was not
ashamed to go to their public Lectures; in Astrology, Hipatia of Alexandria,
the Wife of Isidore the Philosopher; in Oratory, Tullia, the Daughter, and
doubly heiress of Cicero; and Cornelia, who taught Eloquence to the Gracchi her
Sons; in Poetry, Sappho, the inventress of Saphick Verses; and the three
Corynnae, of whom the first overcame Pindar, the Prince of Lyrick Poets, five
times; and in Painture, Irene and Calypso, in the days of Varro. If there have
been Prophets, there have also been Prophetesses and Sybils; yea, they were
Virgins, of old, that rendered the Oracles at Delphos. In brief, if there have
been warlike Men, there have been Amazons too, who have showed that Valor is
not solely Masculine. And, in our days, there have been found Maidens that
have fought very courageously, whose Sex was not known till they were stripped
after they had been slain in battle. But these Feminine Virtues are not so much
celebrated as those of Men, by reason of the Envy which they bear to the Sex,
having subjected the same to such a pass, that they are enforced to support all
our defects. Though indeed, Women may say to Men as the Lion did to a Man, who
showed him the picture of a Man killing a Lion; If Lions (said he) were
addicted to painting, you would see more Men killed by Lions, then Lions by
Men. If Women had had the making of Laws and Histories, you would see more
Virtues exercised by Women then by Men.

The Third said, That although none but Men are at the ventilating of this
Controversy, yet Women ought not to allege that it is easy to commend the
Athenians in the City of Athens; since God himself has passed a Decree upon
them in these words, The Woman shall be subject to the Man. And it is to no
purpose to say, that it was otherwise before the first sin* and that subjection
was imposed upon the Woman for a punishment; seeing the punishment of the
Serpent, That he should creep upon the Earth, does not presuppose that he had
feet before he caused Man to sin by the intervention of his Wife; but indeed,
God converted that into a penalty which before was natural unto him. The same
ought to be said concerning the Woman, who was no less subject to the Man
before then after his sin. Moreover, after God had taken the Woman out of
Adam's side, (whence, they say, it comes that their heads are so hard) he did
not say that she was good, as he had pronounced all the rest of his Creatures.
And to get Adam to marry her, there was no other expedient found but to cast
him into a sleep; no doubt, because, had he been awake, he would have been very
much puzzled to resolve upon it. So that they who considering, on one side, the
usefulness of that Sex for the preservation of the species of Men, and on the
other, the mischiefs whereof it is the cause, have not ill determined when they
termed Woman a Necessary Evil; to which Men are addicted, by natural instinct,
for the general good, and to the prejudice of the particular; just as Water
ascends upwards, contrary to its own nature, for the eschewing of Vacuity.
Woman is an imperfect Animal, whom Plato doubted whether he should not rank
amongst the irrational, and whom Aristotle terms a Monster; they who treat her
most gently, style her a simple Error of Nature; which through the deficiency
of natural heat, could not attain to the making of a Male. Women big with
Female Children, are more discolored, have their taste depraved, and usually
lift up their left leg first, as it were for an evidence of that sinister
conception. In the Old Testament they who were delivered of a Female were
unclean for sixty days; but if of a Male, but thirty. The Male is fully formed
in thirty days, but the Female only in forty two. The Males have life at the
seventh month, but Females not till the ninth; as if Nature hid her fault as
long as she could. The Females have less vigor in all their actions, because
less heat; which appears in that they are never ambidextrous, as Men oftentimes
are. Now, if in some species of Animals, the Females have the advantage above
Males, as Tygresses, Lyonesses, and She-wolves, it is in fierceness; and
therein we also yield to Women. But what more competent Judge amongst Men can
they find, then he who tried so many, Solomon, who inquires, Who can find a
Wise Woman? And who, after he had compared them to the bottomeless pit,
concludes that all wickedness is supportable, provided it be not the wickedness
of a Woman; yea, that the wickedness of a Man is better then the goodness of a
Woman. Eclesiasticus.


The Fourth said, Every thing is esteemed according to its Author, Structure,
and Composition, the means it makes use of, the manner how it employes the
same, and its end. Now Man and Woman having the same Author, namely, God; and
being composed almost of the same parts, it remains to inquire what means both
the one and the other makes use of for attaining their end, which is Happiness.
It is certain that the being either Man or Woman does not make either of them
good or bad, handsome or deformed, noble or infamous, happy or unhappy. There
are found of both sorts in either Sex. As, to begin in Paradise, the eleven
thousand Virgins alone show that the Feminine Sex has as good a share therein
as Men. In Thrones, Semiramis, Thomiris, many Queens and Emperesses have
manifested, that Women as well know how to command as Men. Judith cutting off
the Head of Holofernes; and the Maid of Orleans, in the days of our
Forefathers; have shown that Men alone were not courageous, and fit for
Martial Achievements. In brief, there is no kind of performances, in which
examples are not to be found both of Men and Women, that have acquitted
themselves happily therein. In Economy, or the management of a Family, if some
Men are the Masters, there are found Women too that have the supremacy, and
that in such sort, that the Men dare not complain. Wherefore they who seek the
cause of the nobleness or abjectness of Man and Woman in the Sex, seek a cause
where it is not. It Is not the being a Man or a Woman that makes noble or
ignoble; it is the being an excellent Man, or an excellent Woman. For as they
are mistaken who impute some Vice or Virtue to a whole Province, because to be
vicious or virtuous are personal things; the same ought to be said concerning
Man or Woman, who are Citizens of the whole world; either of whom taken in
general has nothing in themselves but what is very decorous, Good and perfect,
and consequently very noble; as proceeding from an Author who communicated to
them what perfection and nobleness was respectively requisite. If there be any
defect, it proceeds from the individual person, and ought no more to be
attributed to the Sex then to the Species.

CONFERENCE XXVI.
I. Whether it be lawful for one to commend himself. II. Of Beauty.

I. Whether it be lawful for a Man to commend himself.
IF things could speak, or if Men spoke always of them as is fitting, the
Question would be needless; but for that neither the one nor the other are to
be expected, it is reasonably demanded, whether ever it be lawful to supply
this default our selves. Three sorts of persons there are, each of a different
opinion touching this Subject. The first prize and respect themselves so
highly, that as one of the great Wits of these times said to a certain Author,
who would have had more praise had he given himself less; They catch cold with
too much speaking to themselves bare-headed. The Second, having heard that
Glory is a shadow that follows those that fly it, affect blame with so
palpable design, that it is plainly seen that they fall down only to be lifted
up; like those brides who would not hide themselves, if they knew that they
should not certainly be found out. The Third observing how odious self-praise
is to all the world, never attribute any to themselves, and cannot so much as
endure to hear themselves commended, accounting it no other then flattery. The
first maintain, that they who say that a Man must not praise himself, establish
a Maxim, to which none obey. Do not great Captains, say they, succesfully
animate their Soldiers by their own commendations? Does not the expert
Physician preserve his own good reputation together with the health of his
Patient? Do not they who make Panegyricks for others, find their own in the
same? Does not the Excellent Preacher preach his own Doctrine and Eloquence
together with the Gospel? Does not the acute Advocate argue as well for his own
reputation, as for the carrying of his Clients Cause? Then for Arts and Trades,
we see he is accounted the best Tradesman that has the nimblest Tongue in
commending his own wares. Moreover, he that asks an Alms by a sign, asks it no
less then if he spoke; and consequently as many ways as there are to signify
any thing, the same are as so many words; and although the one are vocal, and
the other mute, yet they equally signify: Whence it follows that a Man is as
little to blame in speaking well as in doing well. He that hangs a bush at his
door does no less say, I have Wine to sell, then if he proclaimed it. A fair
Woman who exposes her self to the view of every one, and a Painter who hangs
forth his pieces to sell to passengers, prize and commend themselves more then
if they spoke; and yet neither is censured for so doing. In brief, as we may
blame our selves without speaking, by doing some evil action; so Men, in
effect, commend themselves by performing virtuous actions. The Second, who
contemn themselves incessantly, that they may be the more esteemed by others,
find nothing that more removes the mask of their Hypocrisy, then the assent of
others to what they say; and indeed they are no less unacceptable and tedious
then the former. But the last please much more; justifying their Principle by
the enumeration of all Professions, in which all that excel abhor this vanity,
which is odious to all the world. War requires great deeds and few words.
Humility, the prime Virtue in Divinity, cannot consist with boasting. A good
Physician cannot hear the relation of his great cures without blushing; and
it is the property of a Mountebank to publish his own Achievements in that
kind. Plutarch, in an express Treatise, renders the reasons hereof. 1. Because
a Man must be impudent that can commend himself, instead of being ashamed to
hear his own praises. 2. Because it is injustice for a Man to give that to
himself, which ought to be expected from others. And, 3. Because self-praise
exercises a kind of Tyranny over the hearer, and is without effect, not
obliging him to belief.

The Second said, Two things displease us in the praise that any one gives
himself. First, the seeing a Man preferred before, or at least equaliz'd to, our
selves, whom we always account most worthy of praise. And Secondly, the seeing
a Man make himself judge in his own cause. And hence arose a common Proverb,
Praise has an ill savor in a Man's own mouth. And when the Comoedian would
decypher the two most ridiculous personages of his Scene, Chremes and Thraso,
he makes them weary the hearers with repetitions of their own commendation;
which ought to have no other end but the Reward of him to whom it is given, or
the exciting of others to Virtue by his example. Now it is deprived of both
these effects, when it proceeds from our selves. For that which comes from our
selves cannot be called Reward, and consequently others can draw no example
from it which may excite them to Virtue. If Poets praise themselves, they are
excused by the Poetical License which gives them permission, as well as
Painters, to feign and attempt what ever they please; and yet the Prince of
Poets, Virgil, never commended himself. It was not by the praise which he gave
himself that Cicero acquired the title of Father of Eloquence; on the contrary,
his Consulship, so often depredicated in his writings, is with some reason
termed the Spot or Blemish of his works. In brief, they who commend themselves
seem to fore-judge that they look not for commendation from others; either for
that they deserve none, or else for that they accuse the rest of Men of
ingratitude toward them. And in either case, it is no wonder if they be
slighted and ill willed by others.

The Third said, That he who commends himself is not to blame, provided he say
nothing but what is true; because words being the images of actions, it is
unjust to require a man to make the original, and then forbid him to draw
copies of it, such as are the commendations which typisie virtuous actions. And
it seems to be the property of the vicious to bear envy against them thereupon,
because they cannot attain to the same perfection; as an old woman beholds with
jealousy the exquisite portraict of some young Beauty. True it is, as
Alexander said, it was a great happiness for Achilles to find a Homer to
commend him. But when the unhappiness or ingratitude is such, that a goodly
action falls into oblivion unless it be recounted by its author, who knows it
better then any other; it is not reasonable for virtue to be deprived, through
such defect, of its only guerdon and aliment, which is praise. So a Father
wonderfully extimulates his children to virtue by representing to them his own
brave actions past. Yea it seems, that being his children have an interest in
his reputation, he cannot omit the recital of what he has done praiseworthy,
without wronging them.

The fourth upheld the same Opinion, by alleging that a wise man may commend
himself without blame, since he is so impartial that he does not consider
himself as himself, but as he would do another man, whom he could not without
injustice deprive of the commendation merited by him. And this is agreeable to
a percept of nature, which enjoins the rendering to every one what appertains to
him.

The Fifth said, to commend one's self merely for the sake of self-praise is a
vicious extremity; but sometiemes to commend one's self in another, or to make
use of the relation of our own commendable actions, as an Apology to oppose to
the contempt, or detraction of our enemies, is a thing not only allowable, but
also practiced by the most eminent and holy personages. so S. Paul finding
himself despised, boasted that he was noble, and a Citizen of Rome, that he had
studied much, and that God had imparted to him his highest mysteries. For in
this case we are in a manner obliged to praise our selves, by the Law of
Nature, which renders our defense just. Therefore as he were a fool that should
fence all alone in the open street, and a coward that should not defend himself
when provoked; so he that defends himself well when he is assaulted, does not
only provide for his own safety, but gets the reputation of a man of courage,
as he also does who commends himself when he is despised. Yet I would require
thus much moderation in the praise which an injury extorts from our own lips,
that it extend no further then what is needful for the repelling the offered
outrage. I would by no means have it affected, as it uses to be by some men,
who are glad when they are blamed, for that they may take occasion to expatiate
upon their own praises. For the equitable hearer is indeed on our side, yet he
is tacitly disgusted with our vauntings; because men are naturally addicted to
contradiction, whence their belief (the freest of all the mind's actions) is
always less carried thither whither it is endeavored to be carried with most
eagerness and violence. So an honest woman shall by a grave deportment, and a
single gesture of slighting, sooner quash an injurious word then another can do
by a long Apology of her whole life past. Saving in this case and manner, our
proper commendations are no less unacceptable then the blame which we attribute
to our selves. He that praises himself is like a painted Face set out to the
sight of every one; and he that blames himself resembles a sick person that
takes pride in his infirmities true or imaginary, with which himself ought to
be concerned enough, not to trouble others who have nothing to do therewith.

II. Of Beauty.
Upon the second Point, it was said that Beauty may, with as much reason, be
placld among the Transcendents, as (besides Goodness and Verity) Greatness,
Duration, Power, Virtue, Knowledge, the Will, and Glory, are placed in that
rank by Lullius and his Disciples. For speaking of accidents, we say a fair
largeness, a goodly quality, a handsome resemblance, a graceful action, a
becoming endurance or sufferance; and so of the other Categories, which result
from Place, Time, and Habit. But it is particularly attributed to Substance.
The Angels, Heavens, Elements and mixed Bodies, have all beauty, and so much the
more as they are more perfectly mixed; as appears in Gold, Pearls and Jewels, in
Flowers, Animals, and principally in Man; who again participates thereof
variously according to Sex and Age. For the beauty of a man is other then that
of a woman; of a child and a young man then that of an old man. Artificial
things have likewise their share therein, when our eyes and judgments are
pleased with their proportion, or find them conformable to the Model which the
Workman propounded to himself. And as in most Sciences and Arts men have
phancied to themselves Prototypes and Parallels, to serve instead of patterns
and models; in Policy, an accomplished Commonwealth, such as Plato, Sir Thomas
More, and some others have delineated; in Physic, a Temperament most perfect
and exquisite to a grain [call'd temperamentum ad pondus] in Eloquence, a
perfect Orator: so they who have undertaken to speak of Beauty have imagined a
perfect one, which (leaving women to set down the conditions which they require
in handsome men) we will make to consist, as to them, in thirty one
particulars, which go to the making up of a handsome woman. The 1. of those
Points is Youth, which renders even the coursest animals agreeable. The 2. is a
Stature neither too large nor too small. 3. A middle size of corpulency;
because too fat or too lean are counted amongst imperfections. 4. Symetrie and
proportion of all the parts. 5. Long, fair, and fine hair. 6. A skin soft and
smooth, through which appear small veins. 7. A lively whiteness of Lillies
blended with Roses. 8. A smooth forehead, pleasingly arched, and always serene.
9. Temples not hollow. 10. Two black lines arch-wise, in stead of Eyebrows. Two
blew eyes well set in the head, well opened and fixed with a sweet glance. 12.
A nose well shaped and rightly set on. 13. Cheeks a little rounded, making a
dimple. 14. A graceful smile. 15. Two lips of Coral. 16. A little mouth. 17.
Small Pearls smooth and well ajusted in stead of teeth. 18. A sweet breath. 19.
A well tuned voice. 20. A chin dimpled, somewhat round and fleshy. 21. Ears
small, ruddy, and well joined to the head. 22. A neck of Ivory. 23. A bosom of
Alabaster. 24. Two snow-balls. 25. A hand white, something long and plump. 26.
Fingers ending by little in a Pyramide. 27. Nails of mother of Pearl turned
into an oval. 28. A gesture free and not affected. 29. Soft and smooth flesh.
30. A modest gate. The last point may be more easily imagined then honestly
named.

The second said, that Beauty has no more but an imaginary Being, or, at
least, is more in the fancy then in Nature. Which they acknowledge who set
conditions for it never to be found in any subject whatever. Moreover, every
real Entity, if it fall under the cognizance of the Senses, is conceived in the
same manner by all people in the earth, when the Organ is not hurt, the medium
alike, and the distance equal, and all other circumstances are found the same.
Thus Honey is every where acknowledged by the same sweetness, and the Sun by
the same light. But one and the same Beauty is not conceived in the same
fashion, nor esteemed such by all the people of the world; for the judgments
thereof are found different, not only according to the diversity of Nations,
but also in reference to the same people, yea the same person, at several
times. Our ancient Gauls wore large foreheads, because in those days they
accounted the same handsomest, and we see also to this day old Pictures
representing handsome women in that sort; whence arose the reproachful word,
Effrons, Frontless, denoting one that has no forehead or shame. At this day
women think they cannot have too little, they take so much pains to hide the
same with their head-tire, and men, after their example. Much hair is at
present recommendable in many places, especially in France. The handsomest of
the Pagan Deities was called Intonsus Apollo: And the Scripture principally
sets forth the beauty of women by their long hair, without which the comeliest
would be terrible. Nevertheless, in the latter ages in France, 'twas a shameful
thing for men to have much hair. In New France, the greatest past of the people
wear no hair but on one side. The women of Camboya cut off theirs close to
their ears. The Perusians have none but a lock on the top of the head; and the
Romans of old adored Venus Calva: Our Ladies shape their Eyebrows into arches.
The Africans paint theirs into the figure of a Triangle. Some, like an Aquiline
and rising Nose; yet the flattest are counted most graceful amongst the
Abyssines. Here eyes pretty prominent and of a middle size are esteemed; in
China little eyes are most prized. The Lybians love a large mouth, and lips
turned backwards; here little ones are the most commendable. It Is one of the
most agreeable parts that our Ladies show; and yet the Arabians, esteeming the
same indecorous, cover it as carefully as their backside. The Japonnois black
their teeth; and every where else the whitest are most valued. Our Virgins
streighten their bosoms the most they can; on the contrary, the Ethiopian
women account those the most graceful breasts which they can cast over their
shoulders. Youth is elsewhere loved; yet in the West Indies the oldest women
are the handsomest. In Aethiopia and many other places the blackest are counted
the handsomest; and in painting a Devil they make him all white, as we do
black. In brief, there is not one of the assigned Characters of Beauty which is
not controverted by some Nation; and therefore there is no reality in it, but
it depends upon our Phancie, as Fashions do. What is beauty then? It Is (in my
judgments) what pleases us. For whatever deformity or defect there be in the
thing we love, yet we account it handsome: Et quae Balbinum delectat Polypus
Agnae.

The third said, It Is too great a disparagement to the Goods of Nature, to say
that Beauty, which is the most excellent of them, is only imaginary; its
admirable effects being such that it persuades whatever it pleases; it is the
surest commendatory Letter, and has influence not only upon rational souls,
but even Elephants are transported with joy (as Aelian says) when they meet a
fair woman. And reason tells us that every thing which is goodly is good;
because it is desirable, which is the essential qualification of good things.
The beauty of the body is not only the token of that of the soul, which seems
to be ill lodged, when it is found in an ugly body, but it is also a sign of the
body's health and good constitution. Yea the very beholding of Beauty conduces
to health, and continues it; whence it is that handsome Nurses and Governesses
are assigned to Children; because the soul even from the cradle (being a
Forreigner and retaining in it self the idea of its Creator's beauty) is
marvellously pleased at the sight of every thing that approaches that beauty
and harmony, and rejoices at its meeting, acknowledging it her kindred and
alley. Moreover, Plato says, that Beauty is produced when the Form
predominates over the Matter, which is of it self foul and deformed. Which he
affirms to have place also in the beauty of the soul; which he makes to
consist in the advantage of the Intellectual part, which holds the place of
Form in man, over the Sensitive, which correspondeth to Matter. Aristotle will
not allow it possible for Felicity to be perfect without the beauty of the
Body, which has sometimes conferred the Scepter in elective Kingdoms. And our
Savior, amidst all the infirmities of our nature, caused to shine in himself
the most perfect beauty that ever was in the rest of mankind. Now several
beautiful things gratify variously. White is esteemed amongst Northern
Nations, because there issues out of white bodies a certain brightness or light
agreeable to the eyes of those people. But the same color loses that
pre-eminence proportionably to a nearer approach toward the South.

CONFERENCE XXVII.
I. Whether the World grows old. II. Of Jealousy.

I. Whether the World grows old.
WEre we in those Commonwealths where the voice of the people is admitted, this
Question would be very easy to resolve; there being no body but proclaims that
the world is declining, and thinks that we are now in the very dregs of Time.
It Is the ordinary discourse of old men. But possibly herein they resemble the
old woman, who when she was grown blind, said the Sky was overcast; or those
who sailing from the shore think that the earth retreats back, while it is
themselves that are in motion. These good people no longer finding the same
gust and pleasure in the delights of the world, that they found in their youth,
lay the fault upon the world instead of imputing the same to themselves. Indeed
their accusation is too old to be receivable, having been from all time, which
made Horace say, that to represent an old man right, he must be introduced
praising the time past. Yet we may give their reasons the hearing. They affirm
that every thing which has had a beginning, and must have an end, grows old.
That since all the parts of the world are variously corrupted, the same ought
to be believed of the whole. That as for the Heavens, all the observations of
Ptolomy are found at this day false, unless they be rectified by the addition
of certain motions of Trepidation which cause all the rest to vary. In the Air,
the inconstancy of it, and the irregularity of the Seasons makes us not know
when we are sure of any; the Spring sometimes appearing in Winter (as at
present) and Winter in Autumn. In the Sea, you see it dismembers Provinces,
gains and loses whole Countries by its inundations and recessions. And as for
the Earth, it is very probably shown that in time it must naturally return to
its first state in which it was all covered with water, and consequently void
of men and most part of animals and plants, which make the three noblest parts
of the Universe. For they who endeavor the raising of low grounds know that
the same is accomplished by giving entrance to the slime which the water brings
thither, and which gathers together at the bottom; whence it comes to pass that
Valleys through which torrents and brooks of rainwater pass, grow hollower
daily; the impetuousness of the water sweeping the surface of the earth into
rivers, and thence into the Sea. Wherefore though the world should not end by
Conflagration, as it must do; since all the rain-waters, those of rivers and
brooks go into the Sea, and carry thither with them the upper parts of the
Earth, which is that that makes the waters so troubled and muddy, it is
necessary that this earth in time fill up the cavities of the Sea, and reduce
it to exact roundness; and then the water having no longer any channel must as
necessarily cover the whole surface of the earth, excepting perhaps some points
of rocks, which will decay and fall down in time, as about fifteen years ago a
mountain in Suizzerland by its fall crushed under its ruins the Town of
Pleurs, Sign. Weeping.
which by that means made good the importance of its name. And although this
may not come to pass till after diverse thousands of years if the world should
last so long, yet it is not the less feasible, since it is a doing at the
present, though by little and little.

The second said, That since the end of the world is to be supernatural, it
shall not proceed from old age; that though the earth were all covered over
with waters, yet the world would not perish for all that, since the Elements
would subsist; yea the same earth and the winds by succession of time would
come to imbibe and dry up those waters, and so again discover the face of the
earth. That if one of the Elements be diminished, another increases; if the
water evaporate, the air is augmented; if the air be condensed, it adds to the
water, and so the world cannot fail by all the alterations and changes which
happen in simple and mixed bodies. For its order consists in the alternative
succession of various dispositions (and not in one sole disposition) like a
circle which being finite in its parts is infinite in its whole. Moreover, if
the world perish, it must be either by the annihilation of its whole, or of its
parts; or else by their transmutation into some matter which cannot be part of
the world. Not the first; for there needs no less a miracle to annihilate then
to create; and therefore nothing is annihilated. Not the second; for mixed
bodies cannot be changed but either into other mixed bodies or into the
Elements; now these are transmuted one into another; wherefore in either case
they are still parts of the world. The most active of the Elements, Fire,
without the miracle of the last conflagration, if you consider it in the Sphere
which some have assigned to it, it cannot burn the rest; for should it act in
its own Sphere, which it does not, it would at length be extinguished for want
of air, into which consequently part of it would be converted: or if you place
it in the subterranean parts, the vapors and the exhalations which it would
raise from the Sea and the Earth, being resolved into water and air, would
always preserve the being of those Elements. Moreover, the world would not
serve at the day of judgment (as Philo the Jew says) for a Holocaust to its
author, if it were then found defective in any of its parts.

The third said, If you take the world for all the inferior bodies contained
under the concave of the Moon, it is certain that it changes. For the Heavens
are not altered according to their substance, though they be according to their
places. But it is impossible that the Elements acting so powerfully one against
another by their contrary qualities be not at length weakened, and their
activities refracted and impaired, and particularly the earth wherein those
subterranean fires do the same thing that natural heat does in animals when by
the consumption of their radical humidity it makes them grow dry and old.
External Agents (as the Air, and the Celestial Bodies, which in time undermine
Palaces of Marble, Brass and other bodies) contribute greatly to this
alteration of the earth, which is the mark and but of actions of the superior
bodies, by whom it suffers incessantly. This declination is observed in Plants,
which had greater virtues in times past then they have at the present (as it is
found, amongst others, in that Antidote made of tops of Rue, a Nut and a Fig,
wherewith Mithridates preserved himself from all poisons, and which is now out
of credit) but much more in man then other animals. For besides the diminution
which befalls him as a mixed body, because he draws his nourishment from the
substance of plants and animals, he has besides in himself a double ground of
this decay of his strength, every thing partaking of nature and its food. Hence
it is that we are much more short-lived then our fathers of old, who in the
flower of the world's age (to speak with Plato, who makes it an animal) lived
almost a thousand years; and since the Deluge by the corruption which its
waters overflowing the earth caused in the whole Universe, they lived six
hundred years, but at present few attain to eighty: Nor do we see any Giants
now a days, though they were very frequent in old time. Men's minds likewise
have a great share of this deterioration, in the exercise of virtues and arts.
Besides, that there was never so great a multitude of Laws and Ordinances,
which are certain evidence of the depravation of manners.

The fourth said, Besides that it is dubious whether the years of our first
Fathers were of equal length with ours, the cause of their long life may be
attributed to a special privilege of God, to the end they might by their long
experience invent Arts and Sciences, and people the world. Moreover, it is above
4000 years since the term of 70 and 80 years became the common standard of
humane life. Our age is not more corrupted then the first, made infamous by
Fratricides, Sodomites, Incests, Treasons, and such other enormous sins, so
much the more detestable in that they had no example of them, as their
posterity has had since. And as for the inferior bodies, since their actions
are at present altogether the same with what they performed in the beginning of
the world; the Fire (for example) not burning less, nor the Water cooling less,
then in Adam's time; it must be concluded that they are not changed, but remain
always in the same state.

The Fifth said, That as in the Microcosme we may judge of the corruption of
the Body by the least alteration of its parts, and foretell its death by the
disorder observed in the most noble; so we may make the like Judgment in the
Maerocosme, in which we see no Mixed Bodies, but what are corruptible. For
things are no longer then they act, action being the measure of their being.
And therefore seeing nothing can act perpetually, because the virtue of every
thing is bounded and finite, nothing can be perpetual. As Knives, and the like
instruments, are blunted with much cutting; so the qualities incessantly acting
must of necessity be weakened, and at length become impotent. But the surest
sign of the worlds corruption is the annihilation of corporeal forms, the
noblest parts of the universe. For as for spiritual forms, when they are
separated from the Body they are no longer considered as parts of the world.

The Sixth confirmed this opinion by the abundance of new diseases sprang up in
these last Ages, and unknown to the preceding; as the Neapolitane Malady, the
Scurvy, and sundry others, which cannot proceed but from the corruption of
Humors and Tempers, and this from that of the Elements.

The Seventh said, That the world is so far from growing worse, that on the
contrary it becomes more perfect; as it is proper to things created from a small
beginning, to increase, and at length attain their perfection; which the world
having attained does not decline, because it is not an organized body, whose
property it is to do so after it has attained its State. This is visible in
Metals, and particularly in Gold, which the longer they remain in the Earth the
more concoction and perfection they acquire. Moreover, the Wits of Men are more
refined then ever. For what could be more ignorant then the Age of our first
Parents, for whom God himself was fain to make Clothes; those of their own
making being only fig leaves. In the Ages following, you see nothing so gross
as what was then accounted the highest degree of subtlety, as the Learning of
the Rabbis among the Jews, and the Druids among the Gauls; the best skilled of
whom might come to school to our Batchelors. But their gross ignorance in
Handy-crafts appears, amongst others, in our Flowers de Luce, the figure
whereof, stamped on their Coin, resembles any thing rather then a Flower de
Luce.

II. Of Jealousy.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Jealousy is very hard to be defined.
If you rank it under the Genius of Fear, how comes it to make Rivals so
venturous in attempting and executing? If it is a sort of Anger and Indignation,
whence does it make them so pale? If you assign this Passion to Man alone, how
does it metamorphose them into beasts? taking from them all exercise of reason.
If you admit it in beasts too, how does it render Men so ingenious? I think
they should speak best who should term it a Rage, since the most Tragical
Histories are fullest of its actions. Yet you shall meet with some that make a
laughter of it; and if a Mistress changes them, they also change their
Mistress; who when they are married always knock at the door though it be wide
open, for fear of finding what they do not seek: Whereas others are jealous
even of the sheets of their own bed. Let us therefore rank it amongst the
caprichious Passions; or rather let us do like the Physicians, who having given
names to all the Veins and Bones, term some (which they know not how to call
otherwise) Innominate and sine pari. So this Passion shall be the nameless and
peerless Passion.

The Second said, This Passion seemed to depend on the Climates, Northern
people being very little subject to it; whereas they of the South cannot hear
Mass or Sermon, unless there be a wall between the Men and the Women. And Bodin
says, 'twas one of the things which Mendoza (Gondamor) the Spanish Ambassador
wondered at most in France and England, why Men went with Women into Churches.
Likewise, Caesar says of the English, that twelve of them were contented with
one Woman, and agreed peaceably; whereas the Indians and Africans have troops
of Wives; and yet Puna King of the Indians did not think his secure amongst his
Eunuchs, till he had disfigured them, and cut off their Arms.

The Third said, that Jealousy may be compared to the Syrian Cow, of whom the
Proverb says, that indeed she filled the pail with her Milk, but presently
overturned it with a kick. It gives Love, and it gives Ruin. And yet this
Passion is so inseparable, and so necessarily a companion of Love, that it does
the same office to it which the bellows do to the furnace which it kindles. For
imagine a friendship in which there is no fear of Rivals, it will soon be
extinguished, because the possession is accounted sure; and our affection is
not carried violently, but where it finds resistance.

The Fourth said, Jealousy is a fear lest another enjoy the Good which we
challenge or possess. It Is the more dangerous in that it puts on the mask of
Love, whereof nevertheless it partakes but little. The Poets represent Love to
us like a Child full of joy and liberty; whereas Jealousy resembles an old,
sullen, and distrustful Woman. Love proceeds from knowledge, (for we desire not
things unknown) on the contrary, Jealousy, being a distrust either of our
selves or the thing loved, or of both, presupposes a deficiency of knowledge,
and consequently of Love. Whence Women having less knowledge then Men, are
likewise more ready to entertain this Passion; and sometimes to such a degree,
that those of the Isle of Lemnos killed all their Husbands upon it, excepting
one.

The Fifth said, Jealousy is a sort of Indignation against one who intrencheth
upon the honor which we account particularly due to our selves, or some other
whom we love. Thus God is jealous of his glory, and good people likewise of the
same. Brethren are jealous of their Father's Love. Those who seek the same
office are jealous one of another. Rivals are so of the favors of their
Mistresses. The first kind of Jealousy proceeds from the good opinion which
every one has of himself, of being more capable then any other, and better
answering to the merits of the thing beloved. And although it presupposes
Love, yet many times it is changed into Hatred, as Choler into Melancholy. In
its beginning it makes use of Anger and Revenge; if it continue, of Sadness and
Discontent; and afterward of Fear, which sometimes tends to Despair.

The Sixth said, That this Passion was a Grief for that another invades what is
ours. For Grief, as the other Passions, changes its name according as it is
determined and restrained to a particular object. It serves to preserve and
increase Love, and therefore is not absolutely to be decry'd. It enkindles in
us a desire to please, for fear the person loved prefer another, in whom
appears more perfection, before us. In some cases a Man shall deserve the name
of Paltron if he shows not Jealousy; since Justice allows not that what
belongs to one should be common; for what is every body's is no body's.
Wherefore only excessive Jealousy is blameable, being a mixture of many
Passions, and the strongest and most violent affection that can seize upon the
Mind, which it leaves no longer master of it self. It infuses distrusts and
suspicions, and consequently to these, most inquieting curiosities to know the
truth of what it seeks, but would not find; and which being found produces
insupportable torments. The ill opinion which the Jealous has of the person
whom he pretends to Love causes him to misinterpret its best actions. Thus
disturbed Waters never represent well the species of Objects which they
receive; and Eyes distempered with a suffusion judge things to be of the same
color wherewith themselves are tinctured.

The Seventh said, That Love is not of the nature of those Goods which the more
they are communicated the more excellent they are; But it is a Union of Wills,
and so loses its name when divided; as the Sunbeams being dispersed are weak,
but burn when reunited by a Burning-glass. Jealousy, which is the fear of
disunion, springs from the merits of the thing beloved, and from a suspicion
lest its perfection attract others besides our selves, to love it; especially
when we acknowledge less of merit in our selves then in our Rivals, knowing
that the most perfect things are most loved.

CONFERENCE XXVIII.
I. What is the greatest Delight of Man. II. Of Cuckoldry.

I. What is the greatest Delight of Man.
THe Rejoicings of this Season seem to have been appointed at the end of
Winter, and entrance of Lent, two times equally sad, though upon different
accounts; the one Natural, and the other Canonical. Because Joy is destinated
to dilate the Trees, which Sadness shuts up. It Is caused several ways. For
nothing is pleasing but according to the correspondence which it has to our
Fancy; as Pictures and Music delight not but by the proportion which they
have with the Sight and Hearing. Whence of the two Painters who contended
together about the excellence of their skill, he carried the prize who before
he set to his work took heed to the place from whence it was to be seen. Now
the phancies and opinions of Men being so different, it is hard to know what is
the greatest Joy, considering that the same thing may have correspondence to
the Imagination of one, and repugnance to that of another. If a Musician
delights you, you should but ill requite him if you took his instrument and
played him a lesson; it is Money which rejoices him. He who could not drink his
Wine, how excellent soever, unless it were carried to him to the Tavern, would
have accounted all other delight empty without it. They who at present enjoy
their Liberty in the Seaports, show sufficiently what pleasure they take in
play. In brief, as many different humors and inclinations as there are, so
different will the judgments be upon this question: For even amongst those who
place delight in Meats, you will scarce find three together whose Appetites
agree. Besides, that who so would judge aright in the case must have tasted of
all sorts of delights; yea, of each in its full extent, and with all its
conditions requisite.

The Second said, Delight seems to be the repeated sense of some joy, such as
is seen in public and solemn jollities; as heretofore in the Lupercalia and
Saturnalia of the Romans, and now in our Carnival. Now Joy is a Passion so
loved and cherished by Man, that we may thereby judge of its value. For as some
Men are curious of rarities in Ebeny, others of Sea-shells, some of Antiquities
of Marble, Flowers and Pictures, but all generally desire Gold, and like it
well; so you see some valiant; others, studious; others, amorous; many, Sons of
the bottle; briefly, this addicted to one action, and he to another; but you
see none but loves Joy, what ever show they make; and those pretended Cato's,
each wrinckle of whose Faces is an obelisk, every word a censure, yet become
tickled within themselves at the occurrence of pleasant objects,
notwithstanding the blame which they seem to lay upon them: Like those Stoics
who durst not sit down to Dinner, for fear it should be believed that they took
Pleasure in it, and nevertheless liked the Wine as well as others. Observe how
Children, even from the cradle, caresse with their Head and Hands those that
make Mirth, and decline the sower and severe. Nor is the fear of Correction
sufficient to keep them from running after all pleasant objects, which they
will invent among themselves rather then want. Old men, as they most need, so
they receive the greatest benefit from it; in this (perhaps) more unhappy then
others, that having more knowledge by experience of what is passed, it is
harder to delight them; Pleasure most easily arising from novelty. Since
therefore all sorts of conditions and ages sacrifice to Joy, and Philosophers
have judged nothing more proper to Man then Laughter; I conceive, it is a kind
of inhumanity to forbid commerce to this inseparable companion of Man; and
although some may abuse it, yet it would be worse to interdict it, then to take
away the use of Wine under pretext that some people sometimes take too much of
it.

The Third said, Some contentments belong to the Mind, others to the Body. Not
that the Body is capable of any Passion without the Minds help; nor that the
Soul, while it informs the Body, can apprehend any without its corporeal
organs: but they borrow their name from the part which they chiefly affect.
Thus, I can neither love nor hate, without having seen or heard the subject of
my hatred or love; and yet it is the Soul, not the Body, which loves or hates:
The Body can neither drink nor eat without the Soul, and nevertheless it is not
the Soul that drinks or eats, it is the Body. This supposed, methinks, the
greatest delight of the humane Mind consists in being loved, and this is the
end of all its actions. Whence those words, Let Men hate me, provided they fear
me, Oderint dum mutuant.
were taken to be rather the voice of a savage beast then of a Man. This
appears, because all from the highest to the lowest, endeavor to gain the
goodwill of every one. It Is this which makes Men so desirous of Praise, because
the same renders them amiable; one for the excellence of his Mind, another for
the beauty of his Body. Moreover, compare the misery of a Timon hated by all
the world, with the contentment of a Titus, Vespatians Son, surnamed the
Delight of Mankind; and you will see that to be loved surpasses all the
Pleasures of the world, as much, as it is unpleasing to be hated. For the love
which is borne toward us supposes some perfection in us, which being known,
esteemed, and preferred above that of others, produces the great contentments
which we find therein. But as for those of the Body, Pani and all Greece too
well found the ill consequence of adjudging the golden apple to the Goddess,
whom Luxury made him prefer before the others, to encourage us to follow his
example. Demosthenes had reason when he refused to buy at too dear a rate the
repentance which ordinarily follows this Pleasure; the corners which it seeks,
and the shame which accompanies it, together with its little duration, allow it
not to be equaled with other Passions compatible with Honor, and practiced in
the sight of all the world; as feasts, dances, shows, sports, merry words, and
the like, all which, I conceive, ought to be added together to make perfect
Delight. But since it is requisite to prefer one, and punctually satisfy the
question, I shall affirm, according to the liberty allowed in this company,
that nothing seems to me more capable to delight a Man then Good Cheer;
there is no better friendship then that which is acquired by cracking the glass;
friendships proceeding from sympathy of humors, and this from the same viands.
And, in brief, if this receipt did not serve better to exhilarate Men then any
other, you should not see it so diligently practiced in these days by all the
world. Alexander the Great, and the Famous Marius, took no greater pleasure
then in drinking great draughts. And the tediously-severe humor of the Catoes
was not sweetened but at the table, where they ordinarily continued seven or
eight hours. Moreover, Old Age, which we ought to follow for its great
experience, after having passed through all the pleasures of life, fixes at
last upon that of the Table, as the surest and most lasting; others sliding
away so fast, that they give not our Senses time to taste them, (which word
testifies that it is the Taste which ought to judge.) And if it be said that
their bodies are not capable of other contentments, I answer, that the Organs
of all the faculties are in them equally debilitated.

II. Of Cuckoldry
Upon the Second Point, it was said, That to judge well of it, it is requisite
to understand all the cases which make Men Cuckolds. Some are so, and know
nothing of it. Some think they are, but are not; and these are more miserable
then if they were, and knew it not. If we believe Histories, some are so
without their Wives fault, who have mistaken others for their own Husbands.
Some are so, and half see it, yet believe nothing of it, by reason of the good
opinion which they have of their Wives. Further, some know they are so, but do
all they can to hinder it. Such was P. Cornelius, and Corn. Tacitus. In fine,
some know it and suffer it, not being able to hinder it; And I account these
alone infamous.

The Second said, That the word Cuckold, derived from Cuckoo, is Ironically
used; for this Bird lays her eggs in the neast of others; or else, because
they who frequent other Men's Wives are oftentimes served in the same manner; or
else for the reason upon which Pliny says Vine-dressers were anciently called
Cuckows, (that is to say, slothful) who deferred cutting their Vines till the
Cuckoo began to sing, which was a fortnight later then the right time: And thus
the same name may have been given to those who by their negligence or sloth
give their Wives so much liberty that they abuse it. Unless we had rather say,
that this Bird, being (as Aristotle says) cold and moist of its own nature,
and yet so prudent, as knowing it self unable to defend and feed its own young,
it puts them into the neasts of other Birds, who nourish them as if they were
their own; thus timorous, soft and weak Men, have been called Cuckolds, because
not being able to support their own families, they cause the same to be
maintained by others with the loss of their credit. They who derive it from the
Greek word Coccyx, which signifies the rump, are not much out of the way. In
brief, some go so far as to derive it from the Latin word Coquus, because
those people lodging and feeding their Wives, and taking care of their
Children, do like Cooks who trust out victuals to others.

The Third said, That Cuckoldry was but an imaginary thing; that the unchastity
of the Wife could not dishonor the Husband, considering that what is out of us
and our power does not any ways concern us; and it being impossible for the
wisest Man in the world, by the consent of all, to hinder the lubricity of an
incontinent Woman. Now no body is obliged to what is impossible; and as a
vicious action ought to be only imputed to its author, so ought the shame and
dishonor which follows it; and it is as absurd to reflect it upon him who
contributed not at all to the crime, as it is to ascribe the glory of a virtuous
action to him who not only did nothing toward it, but with-stood it as much
as he could. The Lawyers hold that a Contract made in secret, and without
calling all the parties who have interest in it, cannot prejudice them; so
neither can what Wives do without privity of their Husbands be any thing to
their prejudice. Besides, if the dishonor were real, it would be so every
where, and to all Men; but there are whole Nations who account not themselves
dishonored by the business. The Abyssines take it not ill that their High
Priest lies with their Wives on the marriage-night, to purify them. The people
of the East Indies permit the enjoyment of their Wives to those who give them
an Elephant, being proud of having a Wife valued at so high a price. The
Romans, though the most honorable of their time, were so little sollicitous
what their Wives did in their absence, that returning out of the Country, they
always used to send some body to advertise them of their arrival; so afraid
they were to surprise them. And indeed, Pompey, Caesar, Augustus, Lucullus,
Cato, and many other great personages, were not the less esteemed for having
the Bulls feather given them by their Wives.

The Fourth said, Horns are not always imaginary, since Histories assures us
that they have really gored some persons, as M. Benutius Cippus, Praetor of
Rome; the Ignominy likewise of them is real, and to say otherwise, is to go
against the common opinion. For since Honor is in him who honors, not in him
who is honored; (the reason of contraries being alike) dishonor shall
consequently come from him who dishonours. Now it is certain, most agree in this
that Cuckolds are derided, though they know nothing of it. For as true honor
may be given to one who deserves it not; so may he be really dishonored who
deserves nothing less. A good man publicly punished is truly dishonored,
though he be innocent; for it is requisite that the Sovereign Courts take away
the infamy which he has incurred. A Virgin unwillingly deflower'd is yet
dishonored by it; and the vicious deportments and ignominious deaths of men
derive shame to their relations. Much more, therefore, shall the shame
attending the disgraceful lightness of a wife reflect upon her husband; for
being two in one flesh, that which touches one touches the other also, the
innocence of the husbands (who are also usually styled good) remaining entire.
So that one may be dishonored and yet be virtuous; as also a Cuckold and an
honest man together.

5. The Fifth said, That he counted it strange that Horns were the sign of
infamy and ignominy in Marriage; considering that otherwise they were always
badges of grandeur and power. When one dreams that Horns are upon his forehead,
it is always a presage of dignity. Thus, at the birth of Cl. Albinus, a Cow of
his Father's having brought forth a Calfe with two red Horns, the Augurs
foretold the Empire to him; which accordingly came to pass. And to honor those
horns which had been the omen of his grandeur, he caused them to be hung up in
Apollo's Temple. The Majesty of Jupiter Hammon, Bacchus and Pan, is represented
by horns. Plenty also is signified by a horn filled with all sort of fruits.

The Sixth said, Though every one's honesty and virtue depend on himself and
not on the actions of another; yet the point of his honor and esteem is drawn
from diverse circumstance and conditions of things nearly pertaining to him;
which the tyranny of common or rather fantastic opinion have established as
marks either to raise or blemish the luster of his reputation. Hence we value
those most who are descended of an illustrious Family, though they have no
other mark of it but the name. Because, to speak after the common rate, our
happiness or infelicity, and the complete degree of our reputation, are the
effects or consequents of what we call ours. Now our Kindred are not only ours,
but are accounted to be our own blood, and our other selves; and wives are not
only so much to their husbands, or part of them, but they are the half of
whatever they are. But if a part resent alteration by the affection of a part,
it is impossible but the one half must be infected with the ignominious
impudicity wherewith the other is contaminated. It Is true, all crimes ought to
be personal; but because men have mistakingly placed their happiness in
external things (instead of establishing it in virtue which they ought to have
in themselves) it is not to be wondered if having made the principal of the
accessory, they bear the punishment of so doing. Besides, for chastisement of
this folly, their felicity is never perfect, because they constitute it in that
which is without their own power. Let it not be said, that since women derive
all their luster and splendour from their husbands, they cannot either increase
or diminish the same; for the Moon receives all its light from the Sun,
nevertheless when she is ill disposed, or looks with a bad aspect, or is in
conjunction with him in the Nodes, and especially when she is applied to some
unfortunate Planet, she covers his face with darkness and clouds, at least to
our view, though indeed he loses nothing of his clearness or light. A
comparison the more suitable to a woman of bad life, in that the one and the
other shine and rejoice most at distance from him of whom they receive their
light, and in that they do not approach near him but to make horns; and lastly,
in that they are never so sad as when they are with him. In brief, a Cuckold
cannot avoid blame, either of defect of judgment in having made so bad a
choice, or of indiscretion, weakness and want of authority, in not being able
to regulate the deportment of his inferior; or else of little wit in not
discovering her artifices to remedy the same. And should he always avoid them,
yet he will still have the name of unhappy; and in the Age we now live in,
unhappiness or misery draw shame and contempt along with them.

CONFERENCE XXIX.
I. Whence the saltness of the Sea proceeds? II. Which is the best Food, Flesh
or Fish.

I. Whence the Saltness of the Sea proceeds.
ALthough the water and other Elements were in the beginning created in their
natural purity, and without mixture of any foreign quality, such as saltness
is to the water, which covering the whole surface of the earth would have made
the same as barren as the Sea shores, yet it seems that in the separation of
things, every one going its several way, God assigned its peculiar qualities
not only for its own preservation, but for the general benefit. Thus the water
being retired into the Ocean received saltness, lest that great humid body,
coming to be heated by the Sun, might putrify (its flux and reflx, and its
motion much slower then that of rivers, not being sufficient alone to hinder
it) if the salt did not preserve it from corruption, as it does all other
things; and to the end that its waters being salt, and by that means more
terrene and thick, might bear not only Whales and other Fishes of enormous
bigness, but also the great Ships necessary for the commerce of distant
Climates, and the mutual transportation of commodities wherewith each Country
abounds; whereby the life of men is rendered far more delightful. For
experience teaches that an egg will swim in a Vessel of water sufficiently
salted, but sink in fresh. And the Chirurgions have no surer way then this, to
know whether the Lixivium (or Lee) wherewith they make their potential
Cauteries, be strong enough. Now the Ocean imparts its saltness to all Seas
which have communication with it. Whence the Caspian Sea is fresh, because it is
separated from it. And it is no more strange that saltness is natural to the
Sea, then that many other bodies, amongst Plants and Minerals, have a measure
of it. The earth is almost every where salt, as appears by Saltpeter, Vitriol,
Alum, and other kinds of Salt, which are drawn out of pits little deeper then
the surface and crust of the earth, which is incessantly washed and tempered
with water. And amongst Plants, Sage, Fearn, and many other, taste of salt,
which being augmented turns into the bitterness and acrimony which is found in
Wormwood, Spurge, and many other Herbs: all which, yea every other body,
partake thereof more or less, as Chemical operations manifest.

The Second said, Being we are not to recur to supernatural causes unless
natural fail us, methinks it is more fit to refer the Sea's saltness to some
natural cause then to the first creation, or to the will of the Creator. I
conceive, therefore, that the cause of this Saltness is the Sun, who burning
the surface of the earth leaves, as 'twere, hot and dry ashes upon it, which by
rain are carried into the rivers, and thence into the Sea. Besides, the Sun
elevating continually from the Sea by its heat the freshest parts of it, as
being the lightest and nearest the nature of air, the more terrestrial and salt
remain in the bottom: or else the Sea-waters gliding through the bowels of the
earth, to maintain springs, leave thicker parts, as those dry and acid ashes
behind, which by their mixture produce this saltness and bitterness in the Sea.
Nor is it to be wondered that the heavenly bodies draw so great a quantity of
waters out of the Sea; for though the Vessel be very large, yet is the heat of
the Sun able to heat it, since it reaches so deep as to concoct Metals in the
entrails of the earth. And if it were not thus, all the rivers disgorging
themselves into the sea, it would long ago have overflown the earth. But to
know how nature makes the saltness of the Sea, let us see by what artifice Salt
is made in our Pits. It Is made by the same activity of the Sun which draws up
the sweet parts of the water and condenseth the salt. Whereby it appears that
it is but a further progress of the first action of the same Sun, who disposed
the Seawater to become the matter of such Salt.

The Third said, A thing may become salt two ways; either by separation of the
sweetest and subtilest parts, and leaving only the earthy, which come near the
nature of salt; or else by mixture of some other body, either actually or
potentially salt. The Sea acquires saltness by both these ways. For (first) it
has two sorts of water, the one subtle and light, the other thick and
terrestrial; after the Sun has drawn up in vapor the more subtle of these
waters, and by its continual heat concocted the thick and terrene remainder,
which having not been able to ascend by reason of its ponderosity, remains on
the upper part of the water, and gives it that saltness; which is again removed
when the seawater being strained and filtr'd through the earth, or by other
ways (formerly mentioned in this Company, in discourse concerning the original
of waters) comes forth in springs and rivers; which no longer retain the nature
of their source, because they bring not along with them the earthy part, in
which the saltness consists. Now that the salt part is more gross then the
fresh, appears, in that the former becomes thick, and the latter not. Thus,
the freshest things become salt by the fire, whose heat separates the subtle
parts from the thick. As for the second way, as the waters carry with them the
qualities of places through which they pass (whence they are mineral, or
metallic) and as in a Lixivium, fresh water passing through ashes becomes
salt; so the sea-waters acquire and increase their saltness by mixture of salt
bodies, such as are the Hills of salt (as Cardan holds) which are produced
anew, like Sulphur and Bitumen in burning Mountains. Now this saltness is
caused either by rains full of mineral spirits which abound in acrimony; or by
the cinereous parts of the earth scorched by the Sun; or lastly, as things
passed through the fire taste always of an Empyreuma (or turning-to) so the
subterranean fires, likely to be as well in the bottom as in the middle and
borders of the Sea (as they are ordinarily) impart bitterness and saltness to
it. For as for those who say it is nothing else but the sweat of the earth, they
speak (says Aristotle) more like Poets then Philosophers. And this metaphor is
more proper to explain the thing then show its true cause.

The Fourth said, That all secrets consisting in the salt (if we believe the
Chemists) it is not to be wondered if it be difficult to find the cause of it;
it being the property of secrets to be hid. And to practice the Rule which
injoyns to credit every expert person in his own Art, I shall for this time be
contented with this reason, drawn from their Art: They hold the Salt to be the
balsam of nature, the connecter of the body with the spirit (for they alot
spirits to all bodies) so that every body lasts more or less according to the
salt which it has, and the salt in like manner remains longer or shorter
according as it is fixed or volatile. This being premised, I should think that
this great compounded body, the World, needing a great quantity of Salt,
answerable to its vast bulk, Nature could not find any other sufficient
receptacle for it but the Ocean.

II. Whether is the better Flesh or Fish.
Upon the second Point, it was said, The word Best is taken, at the table and
amongst food, with reference to the Taste: in Physic, for most healthful or
wholesome: In Divinity, for, most conducible to salvation, and proper to the
soul: In Policy, for, most commodious to the public. For as the word good is a
Transcendent, passing through all the Categories of substances and accidents,
its comparatives also do the like. Leaving to Divines the considerations which
pertain to them in this matters, in which they are much puzzled to apply a Rule
to so many different Climates, Seasons and Persons; we may here make comparison
of Flesh and Fish in the other three Cases; In regard of the state, of Physic,
and the Table. All which have this common, That it cannot be pronounced, as to
one of them, which of the two is best, Flesh or Fish; because it is requisite to
have regard to places and persons. To begin with Policy. It Is true, a time must
be left to fowls to lay their eggs, hatch and bring up their young; to other
animals, to suckle theirs; otherwise the earth and the air would soon be
depopulated; which time is usually the spring. But being this season and all
others follow the course of the Sun in the Zodiac, which renders it various
according to the diversity of Climates, we cannot find a time equally and
universally proper for that release of Animals. Besides, there are Countries,
as England and Holland, so abounding with fish and persons addicted to fishing,
that nature offering them fish of her own accord, and their land not producing
enough of other food for its inhabitants, the meaner people could not live of
their industry, unless they were obliged by political Rule to live a certain
time with Fish, and abstain from Flesh. As on the contrary, there is such a
defect of fish in the middle parts of Spain, that they keep fast with the least
nutritive parts of Animals, Feet and Entrails. Wherefore a general political
rule cannot be established; but, as in most other things of the world, we must
make use of a leaden Rule, and conform it to the stone. Secondly, for Physic;
the Case is much the same. For by reason of the variety of Tempers, fish will
not only be wholesome, but also appointed by the Physicians to some persons, as
to the Choleric, whose stomachs need refreshment. True it is, there are found
more to whom Fish does hurt, then otherwise. But this proceeds from satiety and
too great repletion, which would not be so frequent if we lived in the ancient
Frugality: For we see, they who eat no supper receive less hurt from fish then
others do. But it is always true that fish cannot be absolutely pronounced
wholesome or unwholesome. As for the goodness of Taste, that is yet more
controverted, as depending on the several phancies of men.

The Second said, That to judge this Question well, the same conditions are to
be observed as in Juridical Sentences; in which alliances or friendships are
allowable causes of exception, and credit is not given to those whose converse
and particular inclination to one of the Parties renders their judgments
suspected.

No doubt, he who had been fed with Stock Fish from his youth, and loved it so
much that being arrived to the Pontifical Dignity, even then made his most
delicious fare of it, would have concluded for fish. On the contrary, most
others, whose stomachs agree not so well with fish, will give the advantage to
flesh. It Is true, If it be here as it is in petty Courts, where he who cries
loudest carries the Cause, then fish, to whom nature has denied the use of
voice, must lose it, unless we maturely weigh their reasons. 1. The value and
delicacy of Meats is usually rated according to their rarity and the scarcity
of getting them; and therefore Heliogabalus never ate flesh but on the main
Sea, nor fish but when he was very distant from it. Now Nature has separated
fish from the habitation of men, and divided the one from the other as much as
the water is from the Earth. 2. There Is no kind of taste upon land which is not
found in the water; nor any terrestrial animal but has its like in the Sea.
But we cannot say the same of Fishes, that there are terrestrial animals which
have all their several tastes; and this proceeds from the almost infinite
number of Fishes good to eat: whereas the Kinds of land-animals serviceable for
man's food are very few. To that we may answer such as ask whether there be
more delicacy in Flesh or Fish, as those who should ask whether Table is more
delicious, that of a Citizen covered only with his ordinary fare, or that of
Lucullus abounding besides with all imaginable rarities. You have some fishes
who have nothing of fish but the name, having the consistence, color, smell
and taste of flesh; and the Hashes and Bisques made of them differ not from
others. But you have no flesh which has the taste of fish. 3. Animals more
subject to infirmities and diseases ought less to delight our taste, and make
us more afraid of them. Now land-animals are more sickly then fish, whose
healthiness occasioned the Proverb, As sound as a Fish. 4. Our taste is chiefly
delighted in variety. Now there is not only incomparably more sorts of Fishes
then of other Animals, but each of them is prepared after many more fashions
then Flesh; there being some Fish which is dressed five several ways: whereas
when you have roasted a Partrich, or made a hash, Capilotade, or the Cook is at
the end of his skill. 5. That which cloyes most is less delicate, as we see the
most delicious things are those which whet instead of satiating the Appetite
presently. Now Fish fills less then Flesh. 6. It Is a more friable food, and
easier to be grownd by the teeth then the flesh of land-animals; and
consequently more delicate.

3. The Third said, There Is no flesh, how delicate soever, which comes near the
odor and savor of the little Pulpe, the fish Spaga taken in Sicily, the Tunny
and Atolle of Phrygia, of those little fishes called Cappes found in the stones
in Marca d' Ancona, and infinite others so esteemed by the ancients, that they
reckoned amongst their greatest Delights, Ponds and Conservatories of Fish,
which they nourished even with the bodies of their Slaves, to the end they
might be more tender and delicate: as it is reported of Lucullus and Pollio who
caused theirs to be devoured by Lampreys. Nor is fish less nutritive then
flesh, seeing there are whole Nations, as the Ichthyophagi, which have no other
bread but fish, of which dried in the Sun and reduced into powder they make a
bread as nourishing as ours. By which means Fish serves both for bread and for
meat; which Flesh cannot be made to do.

The Fourth said, That the more affinity food has with our nature, the more
agreeable it is to us, it being the property of aliment to be like the thing
nourished. Now it is certain, there is more resemblance between our bodies and
those of landanimals, then those of fish; considering that the former breathe
the same air with us, and are nourished with the same things. Besides, aliment,
the more concocted and digested, is also the more delicate: raw flesh is not so
delicate as dressed, nor boiled as roast, upon which the Fire acts more: and
the parts of animals nearest the heart or which are most stirred, as in Sheep
the breast and shoulder, are the most savoury. Now Fish have much less heat
then terrestrial animals, as appears in that it is scarce perceivable; and
consequently are less concoct and savoury, but fuller of excrementitious and
superfluous humidity, which renders them more flat and insipid then the flesh
of animals, called Meat by way of excelience. Whence also all hunted flesh or
Venison are more delicate then domestic food, because wild animals dissipate,
by the continual motion wherewith they are chafed, the superfluous humors,
which domestic acquire by rest. But experience alone and the Church's command
are reasons sufficiently strong to establish this truth. For experience (the
mistress of things, always causing the most to seek the best) shows us that
more people eat flesh then fish. And the Church does not forbid us flesh, and
enjoin fish, but to mortify us.

The fifth said, That the Flesh of Animals is the rule of the goodness of Fish,
which is the better the nearer it comes to Flesh; whence arose the Proverb,
Young Flesh, and old Fish; because in time it acquires the consistence of
Flesh. Now that which serves for a rule must needs excel the thing to be
judged of by it. Nor does the variety of sauces wherewith Fish is prepared make
more to its advantage, then the goodness of the heaft does to prove that a
knife is very sharp.

CONFERENCE XXX.
I. Of the Terrestrial Paradise. II. Of Embalmings and Mummies.

I. Of the Terrestrial Paradise.
THe existence of the Terrestrial Paradise cannot without impiety be doubted,
since the Scripture assures us that it was in the Eastern parts toward Eden,
which place Cain inhabited afterward, and is designed by Ezechiel, cap. 27.
near Coran in Mesopotamia. But though it is not easy to know its true place,
yet I am of their mind who hold that it was in the Mountain Paliedo in Armenia,
the four Rivers mentioned to water Paradise issuing out of that Mountain; to
wit, Lareze and Araxes, Tigris and Euphrates. Lareze running toward the West
falls into Palus Maeotis, or the Mar del Zabac. Araxes going toward the East
discharges it self into the Caspian Sea, or Mar de Sala. Tigris and Euphrates
run into the Mar de Messedin, or Persian Gulf. And so Lareze and Araxes will
be the Pison and Gihon mentioned in Scripture, not the Nile and Ganges, as some
have thought; for the head of Nile being distant from that of Ganges 70
degrees, which make 1800 Leagues, how can they come from the same place? Nor is
it to be wondered if those Rivers have changed their names, it being ordinary,
not only to Rivers, but to Seas, Cities, and Provinces. Thus the River Tanais
is now called Don; Ister is named Danubius; Eridanus, Padus, or the Poe;
Pactolus, Tagus; and almost all others.

The second said, It Is with this delicious place as with Illustrious Persons,
whose Country being unknown, every one challenges for theirs. Thus after
Homer's death seven Cities fell into debate about his birth, every one
pretending to the glory of it. And thus the place of terrestrial Paradise being
unknown to men, many have assigned it to their own Country; but especially the
Orientals have right to appropriate the same to themselves, having a title for
it. Some have conceived, That before the Deluge it took up the most fertile
Regions of the East, namely, Syria, Damascus, Arabia, Egypt, and the adjacent
Provinces; but the Waters having by their inundation disfigured the whole
surface of the earth, and changed the course of the four Rivers, there remains
not any trace or foot-step of it. Many believe that it was in Palestine, and
that the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was planted upon Mount Calvary,
where our Lord was Crucified, to the end the sin of our first Father might be
expiated in the same place where it was committed: For they who place it under
the Equinoctial Line may find some reason for it as to the Heaven, but not as
to the Earth: But they who assign it to the concave of the Moon had need
establish new Principles, to keep themselves from being ridiculous. They best
excuse our ignorance who say, That it is indeed in some place upon the Earth,
but Seas, or Rocks, or intemperateness of Climate, hinder access to it:
Whereunto others add, That when God punished the sin of man with the Flood, his
Justice left the place where the first was committed still covered with waters.

The third said, What is commonly alleged, That the way to Paradise is not
easy, though meant of the Celestial, may also be applied to the Terrestrial;
for it is amongst us, and yet the way which leads to it cannot be found. The
diversity of opinions touching its true place has given ground to some Fathers
to take this History in a mystical sense, and say, That this Paradise was the
Universal Church; That the four Rivers which watered it and all the Earth were
the four Evangdlists, their Gospels (which at first were written for the
benefit of the faithful) having resounded through all the corners of the Earth;
That the Trees laden with good Fruits are the good Works of the many holy
Personages; the Tree of Life, our Lord Christ; the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, our Free Will; Adam, our Soul; Eve, our Senses; the Serpent,
Temptation; the banishment of Adam out of Paradise, the loss of Grace; the
Cherubim wielding his flaming Sword, the Divine Anger and Vengeance; and the
leaves of the Fig Tree, the vain excuses of our first Parents. But some
Geographers having taken notice of a place not far from Babylon where the
Rivers Euphrates and Tigris join together, and afterward are divided again,
and change their names, one of the Arms (which descends into the Persian Sea)
being called Phasis, which is Pison; the other (which is Gihon) passing through
Arabia Deserta, and Aethiopia, which is near it, have conceived that the
Terrestrial Paradise was at the place of the Conjunction of those four Rivers
between the Caspian, Persian, and Mediterranean Seas, toward Mesopotamia and
Arabia. And consequently it seems best to take this History according to the
Letter, there being a place still which agrees with the truth of that
description. Nevertheless the Objection, [ That the small portion of Land which
appears between those Rivers would not have sufficed to lodge and feed Adam and
his Posterity, as would have been necessary in case he had not finn'd.] makes
me rather incline to their opinion who think that the Terrestrial Paradise was
all the habitable Earth, such as it was before sin; the four Rivers, the four
Seasons of the Year, or the four Cardinal Winds, or the four Elements; which is
manifested in that the Scripture does not set down that Adam went to Travel
into any other Land after he was driven out of Paradise. 'Twas enough for him
that this Earth was no longer a Paradise to him, but produced nothing but
thorns and thistles, instead of the fruits and flowers which it afforded before
God had cursed it, and so inseparably connected man's labor with those fruits,
that now a days to express a hundred acres of Land we commonly say, A hundred
acres of Labor. And as a place ceases to be the Court when the King is no
longer in it, so the Divine Benediction withdrawn from the Earth, it ceased to
be Paradise: Yea, Adam having ceased to be King of it, and by his sin lost the
Dominion which he had over all, even the fiercest Creatures, the Earth became
no longer a Paradise to him. But if I be required to assign a particular place
to this Paradise, leaving the description of places which I never saw to the
belief of Geographers, I find none more fit for it then France: Its Climate is
temperate, especially toward the East and South: It has four Rivers, which
bring into it Gold, and all the other Commodities attributed unto Paradise by
the first Historian: It so abounds with all sorts of flowers that it has taken
three Lillies for its Arms; And with fruits, that it has for it self and its
Neighbors; yea, above any other, it produces every Tree fair to look upon, and
good for food (to use the Scripture-words). One interposed, That he should
think 'twas Normandy, so fruitful of goodly Apples, were it not that no Vines
grow there, whose fruit is so pleasant to behold.

The fourth said, As there is no great certainty in the consequences drawn from
Allegories, so neither are Allegories very successfully drawn from Histories,
and substituted in their places. I know not what History is, if that of our
first Father be not; nor where to stop, if people will subtilize upon the first
circumstance of his Creation, and what he did afterward. But if we find
difficulty in according the Geographical Tables of the present time with the
truth of that, why do not we likewise make Allegories of the Creation, and all
its sequels, which are so many Miracles? If we see no Angel that guards the
access to it, no more did Balaam see that which stood in his way, though
visible to his Ass. And being the space of the Garden of Eden is not
determinately set down, nothing hinders but that it might be of very vast
extent; and this takes away the scruple of those who object the distance which
is between all those great Rivers. Besides, being Enoch and Elias were since
Adam's fall transported into this Paradise, where they must be till the coming
of Antichrist, it is a certain Argument of its real subsistence.

II. Of Embalmings and Mummies.
Upon the second point it was said, That the Ancients were much more careful
then we, not only to preserve the Images of their Forefathers, but also to
keep their Bodies, which they variously embalmed. The Grecians washed them in
Wine mingled with warm Water, and then put them them into oil of Olives, Honey,
or Wax. The Aethyopians first salted them, and then put them into Vessels of
Glass. In the Canary Islands they season them in the Sea, and afterward dry
them in the Sun. The Scythians place them upon Mountains covered with snow, or
in the coolest Caves. Indeed every one knows there is a Cave at Tholouze which
has a particular virtue to preserve carcasses from corruption, and in which is
seen at this day the entire body of the fair Saint Baume, and many others, dead
above 200 years ago. The Indians covered them with ashes. The Egyptians
conceiving that bodies corrupted rose not again, and that the Soul was sensible
of the Bodies corruption, did not yield to any people in curiosity of
preserving them; they filled with Myrrh, Cinnamon and other Spices, or with Oil
of Cedar; then they salted them with Nitre, whose aerimony consumes all the
superfluous humidities which cause putrefaction. It Is from these bodies that we
have that excellent Mummie, whose admirable effects I ascribe to sympathy. But
concerning what is affirmed, that being transported by Sea they cause tempests
and strange agitations in the Ship; it is an effect which is to be attributed to
a more occult cause.

The Second said, Man is so admirable an Edifice, that even his Ruins have
their use. His Fat is one of the most excellent Anodynes. His Skull serves
against the Epilepsic. This liquor which is drawn from his Tomb has several
virtues: and the reasons of the great and admirable effects imputed to it, as
the healing of inwards Ulcers; and Contusions of Blood arriving to such as have
fallen from on high, seem to me imputable to three Causes; a Spiritual, a
Celestial, and an Elementary. The first arises hence, that so perfect a Form
as the reasonable Soul, having informed part of this Compositum, which by the
mixture of some Ingredients, as Myrrh and Aloes, has been preserved from
corruption, the same thing arrives to it which the Chemists say does to their
white Gold when they have extracted its Sulphur and Tincture. For being
re-joyn'd to other Gold, it easily resumes the same form, and is sooner and
more inseparably combined with it then any other thing, as having been of the
same species. So when you put Mummie into a body of the same species, it takes
part with the nature whence it proceeded, and siding with it incounters the
disease and its symptoms: like Succor coming to relieve a besieged City with
provisions and ammunition. The Celestial cause is drawn from the Heavens; for
that the light and influence of superior bodies act upon all the sublunary;
but, by the consent of all, none is so susceptible of their actions as man; and
if his soul be not subject thereunto, yet his body is, undoubtedly; to each
part of which each part of Heaven not only answers, as some hold, but the whole
to all. Whence is seen the diversity of disposition, inclinations and manners,
such and so great, that it is a palpable mistake to attribute the same to the
mere mixture of the Elements. Now Mummie, having received, not only while it
was animated* but afterward, all the influences whereof the humane body is
susceptible, it becomes, as it were, the abstract of all the Celestial powers;
and better then Talismanical figures, communicates the same to him that uses
it. The last reason, drawn from the mixture of the Elements and their
qualities, might suffice alone without the preceding. For Man being the
abridgement of the world, ought also to contain all the faculties of it; and
his Mummie being inanimate, but having lived the life of a plant, an animal and
a man, it contains all these natures eminently.

The Third said, That Man affecting nothing so much as immortality, because he
fears nothing more then death; and being unable to secure himself from it, does
all that he can to perpetuate himself in some fashion, since he cannot wholly.
The desire of supporting his Individual person, and defending it from all
inconveniences which may abridge his life, makes him count nothing difficult.
In Propagation he seeks the eternity of his species. And though he is assured,
by Reason, of his soul's immortality; and by faith, of his body's resurrection,
yet he seeks all ways he can imagine to render the memory of all his actions
perpetual. It Is this desire of getting a death-less fame, which causes us
sometimes to dye immaturely by watchings and study, and so cheerfully undergo
hazards, to eternize the memory of our names. Anciently this desire of
perpetuation was most visible in the care to keep the life-less body, even
amongst the vulgar; and hence the Mummies of the Egyptians and other Nations
remain to this day, after three or four thousand years. At present, through the
ignorance of Times, this care is practiced only amongst great persons; and yet
the effect answers very little to their intention. For the Chirurgions do not
Embalm a man now a days, but only the bones and skin, after they have taken
away his principal parts, the heart, liver and brain, which constituted him a
man, and not the rest; the cause whereof must be attributed to defect of
Invention and means fit to dry up the superfluous humidity which causes the
corruption of body; for that alone will keep them which can dry them with the
moderation requisite to the preserving of their Color and Figure.

The Fourth said, There Is a resemblance of these Mummies in bodies struck with
thunder, which are free from corruption; the Sulphur consuming the humidity,
and introducing dryness to resist putrefaction, as Fire, Salt, Vitriol, Nitre,
Chalk, Alum, Vinegar, and Aqua-vitae, do by their desiccative and astringing
virtue. Some poisons also do the same. As Placentinus reports of a Venetian
Lady, who having been poisoned, her body became so stiff, that it seemed to be
petrifi'd. But the particular temper of every place is of great moment. They
who inhabit the Southern Countries are so dry that their bodies keep entire
eight days after death. And they have so little humidity, that it is no less a
shame amongst them, then of old amongst the Lacedaemonians, to spit or blow the
Nose.

The Fifth said, That the same natural inclination of men to preserve
themselves the longest they can, which heretofore instigated them to erect
proud Mausolaeum's, Pyramids and Marbles, for eternizing their memory; put them
also upon the invention of Embalming their bodies; which is a refuge after
shipwreck, a little way after death. But as it is a general law that all things
which took their being by generation must lose it by corruption; indeed by some
artifice we may retard dissolution for a time; but perfectly to hinder it, is
impossible. For Heat determined to a certain degree by Cold, is the Agent which
mixes the Humid with the Dry, and retains them in that mixture as long as it
self remains entire and strong. But if this Heat receive any diminution, either
being suffocated and enclosed, or or else drawn out by a greater Heat of the
Air encompassing us, (the less Heat always yielding and serving for Aliment to
the greater) this natural Heat being thus weakened, presently the Humidity
leaves the Dryness, and carries away with it self that little Heat which
remained; whence this Humidity is heated it self, and excites a stink, and at
last vanishing away, the remainder turns to powder. Wherefore the moistest
bodies are most easy to corrupt, excessive humidity more easily extinguishing
the Heat which retained it in its duty. And the most solid bodies, as Gold and
Silver, corrupt difficultly, because they have very little Humidity; and that
little which they have is greatly incorporated and united with the Dryness. But
there are two sorts of Humidity; One, excrementitious and also alimentous,
which by the least defect of Heat is easily turned into putrefaction, because
it is not yet united and assimilated to the Body wherein it is found; whence it
is that foul Bodies, Trees cut at Full Moon, being full of their sap, and
Fruits gathered before their maturity, very easily corrupt. The other is an
Humidity already assimilated, which links all the parts together; and being
substantial, is not so easily corrupted as the other. Wherefore they who would
embalm Bodies well, having two Humidities to repress, must make use of several
means. The former Humidity must be absum'd by Hot Drugs, amongst which,
Wormwood and Scordium hold the first place; experience manifesting the one, and
Galen observing that the Bodies of the Graecians slain in a battle, which
touched Scordium, were found entire many days after. The latter Humidity must
be preserved by Balsames Cold, Dry and penetrating, which may preserve the
figure, color, and consistence in the dead body.

CONFERENCE XXXI.
I. Whether the Life of Man may be prolonged by Art. II. Whether it is better to
be without Passion then to moderate them.

I. Whether the Life of a Man may be prolonged by Art.
THe duration of a motion or action cannot be known, unless the measure of it
be known; nor can they be measured unless they have known bounds. Whence
neither can it be known whether the Life may be prolonged, without knowing
beforehand how long it lasts. Now it is impossible to know this duration. For,
not to mention the long lives of the Fathers in the two first thousand years of
the world, God told Noah, that the age of Man should be no more then but
sixscore years. Moses and David restrain it to seventy or eighty. And yet as
there are at this day some who come near a hundred, so there are a hundred
times as many who do not attain thirty. And whereas no body can speak of Death
by experience, because they who speak of it have not felt it, and they who have
felt it cannot speak of it more; the case is the same concerning Life. Let a
Man, by good order, or the use of remedies, live as long as he will, it will
not be believed that his life has been prolonged; but, on the contrary, that
his hour was not yet come. Nevertheless it is no less consistent with reason, to
say, that he who would infallibly have died of a Gangrene which invaded his
Leg, and thereby the rest of his Body, has had his life prolonged by cutting
off his Leg; or that he who was wounded in the crural vein, at which all his
blood would have soon issued forth, has been secured from death by the
Surgeon, who stopped the blood; then to believe, as we do, that a Rope-maker
lengthens his rope by adding new stuff to that which was ended; that a
Goldsmiths makes a chain of Gold longer by fastening new links to it; that a
Smith causes his fire to last more by putting fresh coals to it. And as, in all
this, there is nothing which crosses our Reason; so if a sick man, who is
visibly going to dye, receives help, and escapes, does he not owe the more
glory to God for having not only cured him by the hands of the Physician, or
by spiritual Physic alone, but also prolonged his Life, as he did to King
Hezekias, whose Life was lengthened fifteen years, and of which our age wants
not example? If it be objected that this may hold in violent deaths, whereof
the causes may be avoided, but that it is not credible that a decrepit old man,
who has spun out his Life to the last, can continue it; the nature and
Etymology of the radical moisture not admitting a possibility of restoration;
I answer, that reasons taken from the original of words, are not the strongest;
and that besides there are roots which endure more, and others less, according
as they are well or ill cultivated. And if the reason drawn from contraries be
considerable, being many poisons are so quick that they corrupt the radical
moisture in an instant, ought we to conceive Nature so much a step-dame as that
she has not produced something proper to restore it? And that Humane Industry
is so dull and little industrious in the thing which Man desires most, which is
long Life, that it cannot reach to prepare some matter for the support, yea,
for the restoration of that Original Humidity? Considering that we are not
reduced to live only by what is about us, as Plants and Plant-animals do, but
all the world is open and accessible to our search of Aliments and Medicines.
Moreover, we have examples not only of a Nestor who lived three ages; of an
Artephius who lived as many, and many more; and the Herb Moly, the Nectar and
Ambrosia of the Poets, which kept their gods from growing old, may well be
taken for a figure of the Tree of Life, which was designed for separation of
this Humidity, but also of compositions proper to produce that effect. Yea,
were it not actually so, yet it is not less possible; and God has not in vain
promised as a Reward to such as honor their Superiors, to prolong their days
upon the earth.

The Second said, If Medaea found Herbs, as the Poets say, to lengthen the Life
of Aeson the Father of Jason, the Daughters of Aelias miscarried of their
purpose. Indeed every thing that lives needs Heat for exercising its Actions,
and Humidity to sustain that Heat; the duration of this Heat in the Humidity is
Life, which lasts as long as the one is maintained by the other; like the
lighted wiek in a Lamp. Now Nature dispenses to every one from the Birth as
much of this Heat and Moisture as she pleases, to one for fifty, to another for
sixty, seventy, eighty years or more; which ended, the stock is spent. Physic
may husband it well, but cannot produce it anew; Aliments never repair it
perfectly, no more then Water does Wine, which it increases indeed, but weakens
too, when mingled therewith.

The Third backed this Suffrage with the opinion of Pythagoras, who held that
our Life is a strait line; that the accidents which disturb it, and at length
bring Death, constitute another; and accordingly (says he) as these two lines
incline less or much toward one another, Life is long or short; because the
Angle of their incidence, and at which they cut, which is our Death, happens
sooner or later; and it would never happen, if these two lines were parallel.
Now the meeting of these two lines cannot be deferred or put off.

The Fourth said, 'Twere a strange thing if Humane Art could repair all other
defects of the Body and Mind, excepting that whereof there is most need, and
all Ages have complained, Brevity of Life. For our Understanding has much less
need of an Art of Reasoning, our tongue of an Art of speaking, our legs of
dancing, then our Life of being continued, since it is the foundation of all the
rest. Besides, Physic would seem useless without this. For though it served
only to assuage the pains of diseases, (which is a ridiculous opinion) yet it
would thereby protract the time of Death, to which pain is the way.

The Fifth said, That for the preservation of Life, it is requisite to continue
the marriage of Heat and moisture, Death always happening immediately upon their
disjunction, and leaving the contrary qualities in their room, Cold and
Dryness. Now to know how Heat must be preserved, we must observe how it is
destroyed. And that is four ways I. By Cold, which being moderate, fights with
it; but violent, wholly destroys it. II. By suffocation, or smothering, when
the Pores are stopped, and the issue of fuliginous vapors hindered: Thus Fire
dies for want of Air. III. By its dissipation, which is caused by hot
medicaments, violent exercise, and immoderate heat of the Sun or Fire: Whence
proceeds a Syncope or Deliquium of the Heart. IV. By want of Aliment, without
which it can no more last a moment, then Fire without wood or other combustible
matter. All agree that the three first Causes may be avoided, or at least
remedied. And as for the Fourth, which is doubled of, I see nothing that
hinders but that as the spirits of our bodies are perfectly repaired by the Air
we incessantly breathe; so Aliments, or some Specificks, as, as amongst others,
Gold dissolved in some water not corrosive, may in some manner restore the
fuel of our Heat. And seeing there are found burning Mountains, in which the
Fire cannot consume so much matter apt for burning, but it always affords it
selfother new, which makes it subsist for many Ages: Why may not a matter be
prepared for our Natural Heat, which though not near so perfect as that which
it consumed, (for were it so, an Animal would be immortal) yet may be more
excellent then ordinary Aliments, and by this means prolong our Lives. And this
must be sought after, not judged impossible.

The Sixth said, That Life consisting in the Harmony and proportion of the four
first qualities, and in the contemperation of the four Humors; there is no more
required for the prolonging of Life, but to continue this Harmony. Which may be
done, not only by a good natural temper, but also by the right use of external
things; as pure Air, places healthful and exposed to the Eastern winds,
Aliments of good juice, sleep sufficiently long, exercises not violent,
passions well ruled, and the other things; whose due administration must
prolong Life by the same reason that their abuse or indiscreet usage diminishes
it.

The Seventh said, That Life consists in the salt which contains the Spirit
that quickens it, and is the preservative Balsame of all compounds. The
vivifying Spirit of Man is enclosed in a very volatile Armoniack Salt, which
exhales easily by Heat, and therefore needs incessant reparation by Aliments.
Now to preserve Life long, it is requsite to fix this volatile salt; which is
done by means of another salt extracted by Chemistry, which is not only fixed,
but also capable to fix the most volatile. For the Chemists represent this salt
incorruptible in it self, and communicating its virtue to other bodies: Upon
which account they style it Quintessence, Ethereal Body, Elixir, and Radical
Balsame, which has a propriety to preserve not only living bodies many Ages,
but dead, from corruption.

II. Whether it is better to be without Passions then to moderate them.
Upon the Second Point, it was said, Tranquillity of Mind, the scope and end of
Moral Philosophy, is of three sorts. The I. is called Alaraxic, and is in the
Understanding, whose judgment it suspends, and is not moved with any thing;
which was the end of the Scepticks. The II. is in the Reason, which regulates
the Passions of the Sensitive Appetite, and is termed Metriopathy, or
moderation of the Passions. The III. is the Apathy of the Stoics, in which
they constituted their supreme Good; which is an Insensibility, Indolence, and
want of Passions, attributed by the envious to a Melancholy Humor, or to
Ambition and Cynicall Hypocrisy. For the Melancholy Man seeking solitude as
the Aliment of his Fancy, and the Element of his black Humor, (which is the
step-dame of Virtues) by thinking to avoid external Passions, remains under the
Tyranny of internal, which he dares not vent, but covers like Fire under ashes.
This masked Sect shuts the fore-door indeed to the Passions, but opens the
postern. They passionately desire to show themselves without Passion. And their
vanity appears in that they affect to appear unlike the rest of Men, by casting
off humane sentiments and affections, as Charity and Compassion, which they
account vicious. But instead of raising themselves above Men, they degrade
themselves below beasts, by depriving themselves of the indifferent actions
which are common to us with them: Actions which Reason ought to regulate
indeed, but not wholly reject. And as the supreme Region of the Air receives
Exhalations to inflame them, and make shining Comets, but is free from Hail,
Thunder, Winds, Rains, and other Meteors which are made in the Middle Region;
so Reason ought to receive the notices of the Sensitive Appetite which are
called Passions, to make use of them; but it is to moderate them, and hinder the
disorder caused by them in the Sensitive Appetite, which is the Middle Faculty
of the Soul. In fine, as Eagles and Dolphins, which are in the tempests of the
Winds and Sea, are yet more to be esteemed then Moles, Worms, and other
creeping things which live in holes; so he who is agitated with Passions much
surpasses him who has none at all. Nor is there any body but desires rather to
be froward then stupid and insensible. And if Insensibility be a Virtue, then
stocks and stones and inanimate bodies would be more happy then we.

The Second said, Since Passion is an irregular motion of the Sensitive
Appetite, called therefore Perturbation, it alters the state of the Soul:
Whence Anger and Fear hinder us from perceiving what is visible, and Hatred or
Love pervert the Judgment; for which reason we desire that a good Judge be
without Passion. What a disease is to the Body, whose actions it hurts, that
are the Passions to the Soul. Wherefore to ask whether the Soul is happiest
without Passion, is to question whether the Body is most at ease without
sickness; and, to moderate instead of extirpating them, is to palliate a
disease instead of curing it; and to inquire of a Pilot whether a Tempest be
more proper for Navigation then a Calm. Moreover, the happiest condition of Man
is that which comes nearest Eternal Bliss, in which we shall have no Passions;
the superior and rational part having subdued the inferior or sensitive. And
Aristotle holds, that the Heroes or Demigods are exempted from them.

The Third said, It Is to derogate from our Senses, to say, with the Stoics,
that the Passions which we feel proceed only from the depravation of our
judgments. For what they call diseases of the Mind, is meant of those which
are inordinate, and not of those which are moderate and framed by the level of
Reason. It Is therefore expedient to moderate, them, but not wholly extinguish
them, though it were possible. Now that it is impossible, appears, because they
are appurtenances of our Nature, and the actions of the Sensitive Faculty,
which is part of our selves. And our Lord not having renounced these
appendances of our Humanity, has thereby manifested that they are not vicious.
Besides, the first motions are not in our power, and therefore it is impossible
totally to extirpate them. But though we could, we ought not, because they are
altogether necessary; as appears in that, I. Without the Passions there would
be no Virtues, for the Passions are the Objects of Virtues; Thus Temperance
moderates Pleasure and Pain, Fortitude regulates Boldness and Fear. II. They
sharpen them. Thus Anger serves to heighten Courage, and Fear augments
Prudence. III. They preserve an Animal. Thus Pleasure incites Animals to feed
and generate, and Grief makes them avoid what is noxious, and recur to
remedies, even in spiritual distempers; in which to be insensible of Grief is
to be desperate.

The Fourth said, If Men were void of Passions, they might be lead to Virtue
with much more success and less trouble. For they would not be averted from it
by the contrary motions of their Passions, which hurry them with so great
violence, that all that the most virtuous endeavor to do, is, to swim against
the Torrent, and repress its impetuous course: Upon which they unfruitfully
spend their time, which might be far better employed in performing virtuous
actions, when the rebated Passions (introducing an agreeable evenness in their
Humors, with a firm Constancy in their Manners, accompanied with a laudable
indifference in their Desires) would allow reason more means to incite them to
the exercise of Virtues. For Men having their Eyes unvailed of the sundry
affections which blind them, would more perfectly know the True Good, and
consequently pursue it by a shorter and surer way. And though they were not
lead to Sensible Good with so much ardour, nor decline Evil with so much
horror, yet they would do both with more reason. So that, what Men do now by a
motion of the Sensitive Appetite, they would do then by a principle of Virtue.
For the difficulty found in attaining a total privation of Passions seems
indeed to surpass our strength, yet thereby sets forth the excellence of the
Achievement.

The Fifth said, He that were exempt from all Passions, would be as unhappy as
he that should always endeavor to bridle them. But the former is impossible,
and the latter no less difficult then to walk upon a rope, where the least
false step procures a dangerous fall. For we quit our passions, but they quit
not us; as the thought of young maidens followed a good father even into his
Hermitage. And he that goes about to tame them, is the true Sisyphus, upon whom
the stone which he thrusts away incessantly revolves. The first would be
without joy, without which nevertheless a man cannot be happy. The second would
be without rest, because he would be in perpetual combat and inquietude,
wherewith felicity cannot consist. I conceive therefore (morally speaking)
there is more felicity in gently giving the bridle to one's passions, and
following his inclinations: although this opinion may well consist with
Christian Philosophy in good-natured persons, or such as have acquired a good
temper by good examples, who may innocently follow their inclination, because
it will lead them only to virtuous, or, at least, indifferent things. And for
the vicious, it is certain the evil which they do not by reason of the
repugnance which they have to it, and the fear of punishment, cannot be imputed
to them for virtue, nor consequently make them happy.

CONFERENCE XXXII.
I. Sympathy and Antipathy. II. Whether Love descending is stronger then
ascending.

I. Of Sympathy and Antipathy.
WHat a Father once said, That the first, second, and third Point of Christian
Philosophy was humility (meaning that it all referred thereunto) the same may
be said of Sympathy and Antipathy, which is the Similitude or Contrariety of
Affections. For the generation and corruption of all things is to be referred
to them. The sympathy of the simple qualities, and the Elements wherein they
are found, are causes of the temperament of mixed bodies, as the antipathy is of
their dissolution. It Is they who unite and dis-unite those compound bodies, and
by approximating or removing them one from another cause all their motions and
actions. When these causes are apparent to us, and may be probably imputed to
qualities, we recur to them as the most easy, general and common. But when we
find bodies, whose qualities seem alike to us, and nevertheless they have very
different effects, we are then constrained to seek the cause thereof elsewhere;
and finding none, we call it an Occult Propriety, whose two daughters are
Sympathy and Antipathy. For Man, being a reasonable creature, is desirous to
know the reason of every thing; and when he cannot attain to it he becomes as
much tormented as a Judge whose Jurisdiction is retrenched: and this through
want of apprehending that what he knows has no other proportion to what he
ignores, then finite, yea very little, has to infinite. And being unable to
find the true reason of an infinite number of effects which ravish him with
admiration, yet resolving to have some one, he feigns one under these names of
Sympathy and Antipathy; those two Hocus Pocus's, to which he refers the cause
why Corral stays bleeding, Amber draws straw, the Loadstone Iron, which the
Theamede rejects; why the Star-stone moves in Vinegar, the Cole-wort is an
enemy to the Vines, Garlic a friend to the Rose and Lilly, increasing one the
others' odor; why a man's fasting-spittle kills the Viper, why Eeles drowned
in Wine make the drinker thenceforward hate it; why Betony strengthens the
Brain, Succhory is proper to the Liver, Bezoar a friend to the Heart; and
infinite others. But because general causes do not satisfy us no more then
Definitions whose Genuses are remote, and the Differences common, it seems we
are obliged to a particular inquisition of their causes.

The Second said, The Subjects in which Sympathies and Antipathies are found
must be distinguished, in order to assign their true causes. For in things
alike, we may refer their effects to the similitude of their substances and
accidents. Thus the Lungs of a Fox are useful to such as are Phthisical; the
intestine of a Wolf is good for the Colic; Eyebright for the Eye,
Solomons's-Seal for the Rupture, the black decoction of Sena for Melancholy,
yellow Rhubarb for choler, white Agaric for Phlegm. Yet it is not requisite that
this resemblance be total; for then a man's Lungs should rather be serviceable
to the Phthisical, then that of a Fox, and the Lodestone should rather draw a
Load-then Iron, which yet does not hold, because there is no action between
things perfectly alike. Antipathy also arises from the contrariety of Forms,
their qualities and other accidents. Now we are much puzzled to assign the
causes of this Sympathy and Antipathy in things which have nothing either of
likeness or contrariety: as when I see two unknown men play at Tennis, the one
with as good a grace as the other, I have a kind of desire that one may rather
win then the other. Is it not rather chance which causes this? Our will, though
free, being always obliged to tend this way or that way, and cannot choose the
worst; or else, all things being made by weight, number and measure, those
affect one another most who have the same proportion in their composition; or
who had the same configuration of heaven at their birth. Or every thing
naturally affecting to become perfect seeks this perfection in all the subjects
which it meets; and when the same disposition is found in two several bodies or
minds, if they would arrive at that perfection by one and the same way, this
meeting serves for the means of union, which is our sympathy; and their
different disposition or way, the contrary.

The Third, amongst sundry examples of Antipathy, said, That if we believe
Apuleius, the Look-glassing used by an incontinent woman spoils the visage of a
chaste; that it is manifest between the horse and the Camel, the Elephant and
the Swine, the Lion and the Cock, the Bull and the Fig Tree, the Adder and a
naked man, the Ape and the Tortois, the Serpent and the shadow of the Ash. For
that which is observed amongst Animals who devour and serve for food to one
another, as the Wolf and the Sheep, the Kite and the Chicken; or amongst those
who always offend and hurt one the other, as Man and the Serpent, deserve
rather the name of Enmity, whereof the causes are manifest. But, to speak
truth, all these effects are no more known to us then their causes are unknown.
He who endu'd them with Forms having annexed Proprieties thereunto, both the
one and the other, impenetrable to humane wit.

The Fourth said, That for a lasting order amongst the creatures, it was
requisite that every one were naturally lead to its own preservation by
adhering to what was conducible thereunto, and eschewing the contrary. Now, to
do this, they needed instruments whereby to act, which are their qualities,
either manifest (which proceed from the Temperament, and are either First, or
Second, or else occult (which proceed from every form and substance) to which
the Sympathies and Antipathies, correspondences and contrarieties of all
natural, Bodies ought to be referred, from whence issue some spirits bearing
the character and idea of the form from which they flow. These spirits being
carried through the air (just as odours are) if their forces and virtues be
contrary, they destroy one another: which is called Antipathy. If the same be
friendly, they unite and join together, the stronger attracting the weaker.
Hence Iron does not attract the Lodestone, but the Lodestone Iron. So when a
Wolf sees a man first, the man loses his voice, or, at least, becomes hoarse;
because venomous spirits issue out the Wolfe's eyes, which being contrary to
those which issue out of the man, enclose the same, and by hindering them to
flow forth hinder them from forming the voice. But when the man spies the Wolf
first, his effluvia being foreseen hurt less, and have less power upon him,
because the man encourages himself against them.

The Fifth said, It Is more fit to admire these secret motions, (which depend
only on the good pleasure of Nature, who alone knows wherein consists the
proportion and correspondence which makes bodies symbolize one with another)
then to seek the true cause of them unprofitably. And Aristotle himself
confesses that he knew not whereunto to refer the Antipathy which is between
the Wolf and the Sheep, so strange, that even after their deaths, the strings
of Instruments made of their guts never agree together: as the feathers of the
Eagle consume those of other Birds. Likewise, the subtle Scaliger, after much
time unprofitably spent, acknowledges that he understands it not. They who go
about to give reasons of it are not less ignorant, but more vain then others.

The Sixth said, Words are frequently abused; as for example, when it is
attributed to Antipathy, that the Dog runs after the Hare; whereas it is for the
pleasure that he takes in his smelling, which is an effect of Sympathy. But
they who refer almost every thing to Occult Proprieties are like the
Countryman, who not seeing the springs of a Watch thinks it moves by an occult
virtue; or who being asked, why it thunders, answers, simply, because it
pleases God. Wherefore instead of imitating the ignorant vulgar (who are
contented to admire an Eclipse, without seeking the cause) the difficulty ought
to inflame our desire; as we use more care and diligence to discover a hidden
treasure; nothing seeming impossible to the Sagacious wits of these times.

The Seventh said, That, according to Plato, the reason of Sympathies and
Antipathies is taken from the correspondence and congruity, or from the
disproportion which inferior bodies have with the superior, which according as
they are more or less in terrestrial bodies, and according to the various
manner of their being so, the same have more or less sympathy. For as inferior
things take their source from above, so they have one to the other here below
the same correspondence which is common to them with the celestial bodies:
according to the Axiom, that things which agree in one third, agree also among
themselves. Thus, amongst stones, those which are called Helites and Selenites
(Sun-stone, and Moon-stone) are luminous, because they partake of the rays of
those Luminaries; and the Helioselene imitates by its figure the Conjunction of
the Sun and Moon. Amongst Plants, the Lote or Nettle-tree, the Mari-gold and
the Heliotrope or Sun-flower, follow the motion of the Sun. Amongst Solar
Animals, the Cock and the Lion are the most noble; and the Cock more then the
Lion; he always gives applauses to the Sun when he perceives him approaching
our Horizon or Zenith. Whereupon the Lion fears and respects him: because
things which are inferior to others in one and the same degree, yield to them,
though they surpass them in strength and bigness; as the arms which fury has
put into the hands of a mutinous multitude, fall out of them at the presence of
some man of respect and authority, though they be a thousand against one.

II. Whether Love descending be stronger then ascending.
Upon the second Point it was said, Although this be a common saying, and it
seems that Love ought rather to descend then ascend, yea that Fathers are
obliged to love their children even with the hatred of themselves; yet I
conceive that the love of children toward their fathers surpasses that of
fathers toward their children; inasmuch as the latter proceeds from the love
which the fathers bear to themselves, being desirous to have support and
assistance from those whom they bring into the world, and in them to perpetuate
their names, honors, estates, and part of themselves. But the love of children
to Fathers is pure and dis-interested; as may be observed in many who, having
no hope of a patrimony, love and honor their parents with most respectful
kindness. Moreover, the supreme authority and absolute power of life and death,
which the Romans and our ancient Gauls frequently used against their children,
shows their little affection. For, not to speak of those Nations who sacrificed
theirs to false gods, nor of Manlius, Mithridates, Philip II. King of Spain,
and infinite others, who put them to death; Fathers anciently held them of
worse condition then their slaves. For a slave once sold never returned more
into the Seller's power; whereas a son sold and set at liberty returned thrice
into the power of his Father. As also at this day, in Moscovia, Russia, and
particularly in Cyprus, Rhodes, and Candia, where it is an ordinary thing for
fathers to sell their sons to marry their daughter, which made Augustus say,
having heard that Herod had killed his own son, that it was better to be the
Swine then son of a Jew. But Patricide was unknown to ancient Legislators; and
Lycurgus never ordained any punishment against such criminals, not imagining
that such a crime could come into the mind of a lawful child, whom the Persians
conceived to declare himself a bastard by such an action. For that foolish
custom which reigned some time at Rome of precipitating men of sixty years old
from the bridge into Tyber, is no sign of the cruelty of children toward their
fathers, since they imagined that they did an act of piety and religion
therein, by delivering them from the miseries of this life.

The Second said, None can know how great a love a father bears his children,
but he that has been a Father. Paternal tenderness is so vehement that all the
passions and affections of the soul give place to it. Prudence and Philosophy
may preach to us restraint and moderation; but a father's love, admitting no
rule, caused a King of Sparta to run with a stick between his legs, a Grand
Cosmo to whip a top, and the wisest of all the Grecians to play at Cob-nut, to
make pastime to their children: experiences sufficient to gain the cause to
paternal love, though it were not backed by these reasons. 1. That love being
the issue of knowledge, the more there is of knowledge the more there is of
love. Therefore fathers having more knowledge then their children, have also
more love. 2. As man desires nothing so much as immortality, so he loves that
thing especially which procures the same to him; and hating death more then any
thing in the world, extremely loves what seems to keep him from dying, as his
children do, in whom he seems to revive. Whence also the Pelican feeds its
young at the expense of its own blood. On the contrary, Man being the most
ambitious of all creatures, hates nothing so much as to see himself subjected
to another. Wherefore children, that the benefits which they receive from their
fathers may oblige them to gratitude and subjections they perform the same
indeed, but with much less love then their fathers. 3. God has given no
commandment to fathers to love their children, knowing that they loved them but
too much; but he has to children, to love and honor their fathers, as having
need to be invited thereunto even by promise of reward. 4. We naturally love
that which proceeds from us, be it the most imperfect in the world. The Workman
loves his work more then that loves him; as the Creator loves his creature
better then he is loved by it. Moreover, we find in Scripture fathers who
desired and obtained the raising of their children from the dead, but no child
that prayed God to raise his father; yea, one that desired leave to go and bury
his. To conclude, our will is carried to an object by the opinion, true or
false, which it conceives of it; and accordingly we see that a man's only
believing himself to be a father inspires this paternal love into him, though
he be not.

The Third said, In this sweet debate between fathers and children, I conceive
the former ought to yield to the latter, as in all other cases the latter to
the former. And as the whole goes not to seek its part, but the part its whole;
so the child, who is part of his father, loves him more tenderly, and is more
willingly lead toward him then the father toward his child. If fathers love
their children because they resemble them, the resemblance is common to both,
and so children shall love them as much for the same reason. And the being
which fathers give their children is as much an effect of the love which they
bear to themselves as of that which they bear to their children. Indeed, if
love be a fire (as the Poets say) it must, according to its natural motion,
rather ascend then descend; and if, in humane love, the lover is less perfect
then the loved, the child who has less perfection then the father, must be the
lover, and the father the subject of his love. And this the examples of Filial
love sufficiently manifest. For not to speak of Aeneas who saved his father
from the fire and sack of Troy, nor of Amphinomus and Anapias who went to draw
theirs out of the midst of Aetna's flames; nor of Cimon the son of Miltiades
who sold his liberty to redeem the dead body of his father (which was retained
for debts) and to give it an honorable burial; nor of Athamanes King of Crete,
who voluntarily brought death upon himself that he might prolong his fathers
life, according to the answer of the Oracle; Appius alone decides the question.
He had the choice of leaving either his father or his own family in evident
danger, he chose rather to be a good son then a good father and husband,
abandoning his wife and children to the proscription of the Triumvirate, that
he might secure his father from it.

The Fourth said, It seems that Filial love is rather a payment of a debt, an
acknowledgement of a benefit, and shunning of ingratitude, then a free and
natural affection, such as that of the father is. Besides, he who gives loves
more then he who receives. Yea it seems that he who began to do good is obliged
to continue it, that his work be not imperfect. Now fathers give not only
being, which nevertheless is the foundation of well-being, but also usually
education, and their riches acquired by their labors; induced so to do by the
sole consideration of honesty, upon which their love being grounded is much
more noble and admirable then that of children, which is commonly established
upon the profit which they receive from their fathers.

The Fifth said, It Is not so much the being a father or a son that causes the
amity, as the being a good father or good son: otherwise all fathers should
love their children in the same manner, and all children their fathers; which
does not hold. Nature casts the seeds of it, co-habitation cultivates it,
custom cherishes it, example fashions it, but above all, compassion enforces
it. Thus fathers, seeing the weakness of their children has need of their aid,
love them the more. And for this reason Grandfathers love their Nephews more
tenderly then their own children. And when fathers through sicknesses or
decrepit age become objects of compassion to their children, their kindness is
redoubled; bur it is not usually so strong as that of fathers toward them.

CONFERENCE XXXIII.
I. Of those that walk in their sleep. II. Which is the most excellent Moral
Virtue.

I. Of those that walk in sleep.
SLeep-walkers, called by the Greeks Hypnobatae, are such, as, rising out of
their beds in the night, walk about in their sleep, and do the same things as
if they were awake; then return to bed again, and think not that they were out
of it unless in a dream. This affection is ranked under the symptoms of the
animal faculty, and particularly of the common sense; and though it be not a
disease, yet it seems in some sort to be against nature. For since men sleep
for the resting of their senses and motion, and wake to exercise the same,
whatever hinders and alters the one or the other, as to move when we should
rest, is against nature. And if it be strange persons remain stupid when they
are awake, as Exstaticks do, it is no less to see a man in sleep do as much, or
more then if he were awake. I ascribe the natural causes hereof, 1. To the
Imagination which receives the impression of objects, no less during sleep then
waking; yea it represents them to it self much greater then they are; as it
happened to him whose leg being become paralytical in his sleep, he dreamed that
he had a leg of stone. Now these species being strong act so powerfully upon
the Imagination of the Hypnobatae, that they constrain them to move and go
toward the things represented therein. For though sense be hindered in sleep,
yet motion is not, as appears by Respiration, which is always free; and by
infants who stir in their mothers belly though they sleep continually. For the
hinder part of the head, destinated to motion, is full of abundance of spirits,
especially at the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, where there is a very
apparent Cavity which cannot be stopped by vapors, as the anterior part of the
head is, in which the organs of the senses are, which being stopped by vapors
can have no perception during sleep. Wherefore it is groundless to say, with
Aristotle, that sleep-walkers see as well as if they were awake; for it is
impossible for one not awake to see, because visible objects make a more lively
impression in their organ then any other; and a man asleep is not distinguished
from another but by cessation of the sense of seeing. For one may Hear, Taste,
Smell and Touch, without waking, but not See. 2. The thick and tenacious
vapors seizing upon the brain, and obstructing its out-lets, contribute much
to this effect. For since the smoke of Tobacco is sometimes kept in our bodies
two whole days, the same may happen to the gross and viscous vapors raised
from the humors or aliments* 3. The particular constitution of their bodies is
of some moment toward it, as an active, hot, dry and robust temper, a great
quantity of subtle and brisk spirits, quickness of wit, a habit and custom of
doing some action; as the Postilion who sadled, bridled, and rid his horse,
asleep, and after making some careers brought him back to the Stable.

The Second said, Though, according to, Aristotle in the 5. Book of the
Generation of Animals, there is some difference between a dream and this
affection which causes men to walk in their sleep; because (says he) a dream
is when the sleeper takes that for true which is presented to him, though it be
not so. But when one dreams that he is in a place, and is there indeed, and
does really that which he imagines; it is rather a vision then a dream.
Nevertheless methinks their extraordinary motions may as well be referred to
dreams as any other motions which are made in sleep, considering that they come
from the same cause, are made by the same organs, and differ not but in degree.
The one being made by a bare representation of the species, and the other by a
strong impression. So that it is no more wonder to see a man rise out of his
bed, walk, get upon the ridge of a house, climb a tree, and do other like
things without waking; then it is so see another dreamer speak in his sleep,
laugh, cry, stir his arms and legs; both of them being led thereunto by the
same means.

The Third said, He wondered not so much to see a man walk in his sleep,
considering that it is ordinary enough to those which travel, provided they walk
in a plain and even way; as Galen records to have happened to himself, he having
gone almost a league in that manner, and not waking till he stumbled at the
foot of a tree. But he wondered (indeed) how they performed their actions
better in the night then in the day, and with more courage, and wake not during
those violent motions and stirrings. The cause whereof is, as I conceive, that
being awake they have a Reason which contradicts their Imagination and
Appetite, and which having an eye over all their actions, the same are not so
sure because they are less free in sleep, at which time the faculties of the
Understanding being, as 'twere, consopited, the others are carried toward
their objects with more certainty then when they are controlled and restrained
by that superior faculty; as we see servants are more brisk in their motions
when they are out of their masters presence. They act also with more boldness,
because having no knowledge of the present dangers they do not apprehend the
same. Which is observed in fools and children, who do themselves less hurt in
dangers because they apprehend them less. Lastly, the cause why they wake not
during those great motions, although they swim over rivers, proceeds from the
great quantity of those thick and glutinous vapors which stop the pores
serving to the commerce of the spirits during the long time that they are
dissipating; according as it is observed in drunkards or those that have taken
somniferous medicaments, who by reason of the excessive vapors of the wine or
drugs awake not, whatever be done to them. Whence the melancholy temper is most
prone to this affection; because black choler which has the consistence of
pitch, sends its gross vapors up to the brain, and they are the most difficult
to be resolved.

The Fourth said, If men left themselves to be conducted by their natural
inclination without making so many reviews and reflections upon what they do,
their actions would be much better and surer. For as where two Masters are,
neither is obeyed; so both the superior and inferior appetite striving to
command in man, neither the one nor the other is perfectly master. Besides,
it is an established order of nature, that things which have most proprieties
and faculties have less certainty; those which have most certainty have fewest
proprieties. Thus the Swallow makes its nest with more certainty then the
Architect does a house. The Vine more assuredly makes the Grape then the
Swallow its nest; the stone more infallibly descends toward its center then
the Vine-makes the Grape; because a stone has only the first step of being;
the Vine besides has a Vegetative being, and the Swallow a Sensitive; but Man,
who besides all these degrees has Reason, endeavors to make use of all these
several Utensils, and consequently makes use of none imperfection; as he who is
skilled in sundry Crafts discharges not any so well as he who addicts himself
but to one. Now whilst a man is awake, the variety of objects and of the powers
which are moved in him hinder him from performing so perfect an action; as when
all the other faculties are bound up by sleep, the sensitive alone remains
mistress.

The Fifth said, As there is but one straight line, and infinite crooked, so
there is but one right manner of acting, and infinite oblique. The right line
is, that a man perform all his animal functions only awake, the vital and
natural as well asleep as awake. Deviation from this rule happens a thousand
several ways. One is asleep when he should wake, another is unquiet when he
should sleep. In a third, inquietudes are only in the spirits, the body
remaining asleep. In some both the spirits and the body are agitated, only the
judgment and reason are bound up. Some Morbifick causes go so far as to
inflame the spirits, whence comes the Ephemera; others more vehement alter and
corrupt the humors, whence the diversity of Fevers, and amongst them,
Phrensies, in which you see bodies scarce able to turn in the bed, cast
themselves out at a window, run through the streets, and hard to be restrained
by the strongest. So great a force has the soul when she gets the head of
Reason, which served as Bit and Cavesson to her. Indeed if Naturalists say
true, that a spirit is able to move not only a Celestial Sphere, but the whole
world it self, were it not restrained by a greater power; it is no wonder if the
same spirit have a great power over a body which it informs, when it has
shaken off the dominion of Reason, as it happens in sleep-walkers.

The Sixth said, It Is probable that the more causes contribute to one and the
same effect, the more perfectly it is done. Man being awake, has not only the
action of all his parts, but that of all his senses strengthened by the
concourse of spirits renders his parts much more strong and vigorous then when
his is asleep. Reason assisted by daily experience avoucheth that he acts
better waking then sleeping: and yet we see the contrary in the persons under
consideration. Wherefore their agitation cannot be attributed to the soul alone
which informs the body, but to some spirit good or bad, whether such as they
call aerial Hob-goblins, or others; which insinuating into the body, as into a
ship whose Pilot is asleep, governs and guides it at pleasure; and as a thing
abandoned to the first occupant, carries it where it lists, and then returns it
to its former place. Witness the man mentioned by Levinus Lemnius, who walked
with his feet against the Rafters, and his head downward, in his sleep: the
cause of which cannot, with likelihood, be attributed to our spirits how light
and aerial soever they may be.

II. Which is the most excellent Moral Virtue
Upon the Second Point it was said, That they who speak best in all
professions, do not act always so; saying and doing seem to be so balanced,
that the one cannot be lifted high without depressing the other. Which was the
cause that the Architect who spoke wonders was passed by, and he chosen who
only said that he would do what the other had spoken. Hence it is we so often
desire that things could speak of themselves. Justice would come in another
garb then as she is painted, blindfold, with her scales and sword. Fortitude
would display other effects then that pillar which she is made to carry upon
her shoulder; and Temperance other examples then that of pouring Water into her
Wine. Prudence would have other attire and allurements then those which her
Looking-glass represents. In brief, the whole train and Court of the four
Cardinal Virtues, Magnificence, Liberality, Patience, Humility, Obedience,
Friendship, and all the other Moral Virtues, would set forth all their
attractives, and make it confessed that they are all charming and so linked
together, that who so would be happy must be possessed of them all. But since I
am obliged to give the pre-eminence to one, I shall prefer Liberality, which
wears the Epithete of Royal, and is the aptest to win the hearts of all the
world.

The Second said, All the Virtues here in question touching their
preheminences, accepting you for Judges of their Controversy, in hope you will
do them Justice, seem already to condemn themselves, by giving their voice
implicitly to Justice, whom they implore as their Sovereign. Moreover, in the
Scripture the name alone of Justice comprehends all the other Virtues, and he
is termed Just who is possessed of them all. Aristotle styles it, All Virtue,
and says, with his Master Plato, that it is more bright and admirable then the
Day Star. It Is the more excellent, for that it especially considers the good of
others, and not its own particular. For it is defined, and a constant steadfast
will of rendering to every one that which belongs to him; not that it is the
Will, which is a Faculty, and being capable of contraries, can do well and ill;
but because it is the noblest habit of this Faculty, therefore it retains its
name. So the most excellent habit of the Understanding, whereby to know the
first Principles, is called Intellect. Pythagoras compares Justice to the
number of Eight. For as this is the most perfect number, and has most
equality, all its parts being equal; so Justice is the perfectest of all
Virtues, because it gives them their equality and measure in which their
perfection consists. And like as the most perfect state of our Health consists
in the perfect equality of our Humors, which for this reason is called, the
temperament according to Justice; so the most perfect state of the Soul
consists in this habit which gives equality and mediocrity to all our virtuous
actions. But though Justice be the ornament of Virtues, yet it is particularly
so of Kings, and therefore ours, among all the Virtues whereof he has taken
possession, has particularly reserved to himself the title of JUST.

The Third said, I account Prudence not only the most excellent but the sole
Virtue; yea, the condition without which all other Virtues lose their name. The
Philosophers were not contented to establish it for one of the Cardinal
Virtues, they make it the salt which preserves and gives taste to all the rest,
without which they would be disagreeable, yea, odious to all the world. For too
exact Justice carries the name of highest Injustice; Fortitude becomes
Violence, and Temperance applies it self ill, without Prudence. Hence it has
chosen for its Object Reason alone, which it divides to the other Virtues. So
that a Man who does all his actions, having Reason alone for his guide, shall
be called prudent; but other Virtues do not regard reason further then as it
leads them to a particular thing. Now when Reason renders to every one what
pertains to him, this Prudence is called Justice: When the same Reason
moderates the Passions, this Prudence is called Temperance; and when it passes
above all dangers, it is called Fortitude. So that the Objects of the three
other Virtues being good, only as they partake of that of Prudence, this must
be without comparison the most excellent. The Ancients for this purpose
represented it by an Eye, to show that this Virtue has the same pre-eminence
over the rest, which the Eye has among the parts of the Body.

The Fourth said, If place makes any thing for the nobleness of Virtues,
Prudence will have the advantage, since it resides in the noblest Faculty of
Man, the Understanding. But if we regard the end of Moral Virtues, which is
civil felicity, and from whence alone their nobleness is to be measured, as the
means by their end; it is certain that an honest Friendship founded upon Virtue
is the most noble, because more proper then any other to procure that felicity,
yea, alone sufficient to obtain it. For if all were perfect Friends, Justice
would not be needful, none denying to another what belonged to him; and if all
were just, there would be no necessity of using force. Moreover, of all the
Virtues, there is none but Amity alone which has no Excess; this shows that it
is wholly excellent. How much ought we to love? infinitely if it be possible.
Justice has an excess, which is severity; but because it follows it in
dignity, it is no Vice. Prudence, Temperance, and the other Virtues which come
after, have their vicious excesses. This Virtue of Friendship is the most rare,
being found only amongst good people, who are so few, that all Antiquity
scarce affords ten couple of perfect Friends. A scarcity which attests its
value. For we must beware of comprizing under the name of this Friendship the
Passion of Love, or profitable and delightful Friendship, which have nothing of
it besides the name. Because true Friendship considers only another, but the
other virtues have only self-reflections, though they make show otherwise.

CONFERENCE XXXIV.
I. Of Lycanthropy. II. Of the way to acquire Nobility.

I. Of Lycanthropy.
THere is a sort of Wolves called by the Greeks Monolyci, and by Aristotle,
Monopiri, that is to say, solitary, never preying but alone, great lovers of
Man's Blood; we call them Garoux, possibly because they wander and roame about
the fields, as the Greeks name those Lycanthropi who are possessed with that
kind of Madness which makes them do the same as if they were Wolves indeed.
Such is that people of Livonia, which, as Olaus in his Northern History
relates, change themselves into Wolves, and on Christ-mass day exercise many
cruelties even upon little children; and those who, in our time, confess that
they have put on the shapes of Wolves, Lions, Dogs, and other Animals, that
they might exercise their cruelty upon Men with impunity. For I am not of their
mind who think such transformation is made by natural causes. To which neither
can that be attributed, which the Scripture relates of Nebuchadonozor K. of
Babylon, who became an Ox, and ate the grass of the field for the space of nine
years, and afterward resumed his former shape; that the rods of the Egyptian
Magicians were turned into Serpents, as well as that of Moses; that Lot's Wife
was changed into a Statue of Salt; no more then the most fabulous metamorphoses
of Niobe into stone, Lycaon, Demarchus, and Moeris, into Wolves; the companions
of Ulysses into sundry Animals by the Enchantress Circe, those of Diomedes into
Birds, Apuleius into an Ass; that an Egyptian Lady became a Mare, and was
restored into her former shape by S. Macarius the Hermit, as the Historian
Vincent reports in his 18. Book. Seeing a Rational Soul can not naturally
animate the Body of a Wolf. The least distemper of our Brain suffices to hinder
the Soul from exercising its functions, and can it exercise them in that of a
Beast? It Is more credible that some evil Spirit supplies the place, and acts
the part of the Sorcerer who is soundly asleep in his Bed, or in some other
place apart from the commerce of Men. As it happened to the Father of
Praestantius, mentioned by St. Augustine in his Book, De Civitate Dei, who
awaking out of a long and deep sleep, imagined himself to have been turned into
a Horse, and carried provisions upon his back to Soulders; which he obstinately
believed, though his Son assured him that he had not stirred out of bed.
Nevertheless the thing was verified by witnesses; but it was done by an evil
Spirit, who on the one side personated him abroad, and on the other so strongly
impressed those species upon his Fancy, that he could not be dissuaded from
the error. For otherwise, how should the Sorcerer reduce his Body into so small
a volumn as the form of a Rat, Mouse, Toad, and other such Animals into which
it sometimes is turned. Now if it happens that the wound which the Devil
receives under that form, is found upon the same part of the Sorcerers Body;
this may be attributed to the action of the same evil Spirit, who can easily
leave his blow upon such part as he pleases of the Body which he possesses. For
want of which possession, all his designs upon those whom he would injure
become ineffectual notwithstanding the imposture of all their waxen Images. But
if it is the Sorcerer himself that has the form of a Wolf, either he clothes
himself in a Wolf's skin, or else the Devil frames a like Body of Vapors and
Exhalations, and other materials (which he knows how to choose and can gather
together) with which he involves the Sorcerer's Body, and fits the same in such
manner, that the Eye of the Beast answers to that of the Man; and so the other
parts, according to the measure requisite to represent a Wolf. Or else that
subtle Spirit deludes our Eyes.

The Second said, If the Proverb be true, That one Man is oftentimes a Wolf to
another, we need not recur to extraordinary causes to find Men-wolves. Now the
word Wolf is here taken for mischievous, because the wealth of the first Ages
consisting in Cattle, they feared nothing so much as the Wolf. As for the
causes of this brutish malady, whereby a Man imagines himself a Wolf, or is so
indeed, they are of three sorts; the biting of a mad Wolf, the atrabilarious
humor, or the Imagination perverted. It seems at first very strange, that a
drop of foam entering into the flesh of a Man at an orifice made by the point of
a tooth, should have the power to convert all the humors into its own nature.
But seeing the stroke of a Scorpion which is not perceivable to the sight,
kills the strongest person, that admiration ceases at the comparison of a thing
no less mavelous. For it is no more wonder that the humor which issues from
an Animal imprints its Image other where, then that it kills an other. When the
foam dropped from a mad Wolf produces its like with its furious spirits, it does
nothing but what other animate bodies with other circumstances, do. Thus the
kernel of the Pear or Apple, which subverts our Senses, (called therefore malum
insanum) so well contains in power the Pear or Apple Tree which produced it,
that it reproduces another wholly alike; yea, the salt of Sage, Marjoram, Baum,
and some others being sown, produces the like Plants without slip or seed. The
atrabilarious humor sending up black and glutinous fumes into the brains of
melancholy people, not only make them to believe that the species represented
thereby to them are as true as what they see indeed, but impresse an invincible
obstinacy in their Minds; which is proof against all reasons to the contrary,
because Reason finds the Organs no longer rightly disposed to receive its
dictates. And if he who sees a stick bowed in the water can hardly rectify
that crooked species in his Common Sense, by reasons drawn from the Optics,
which tell him that the visual ray seems crooked by reason of the diversity of
the medium; how can he whose Reason is not free be undeceived, and believe that
he is not a Wolf, according to the species which are in his Fancy? But can the
Fancy alone do all this? He who feigned, and frequently pretended that he was
one-ey'd, by the power of Imagination became so indeed; and many others whom
Fancy alone makes sick, and the fear of dying kills, sufficiently show its
power, which causes that these distracted people persuading themselves that
they are Wolves, do the actions of Wolves, tearing Men and Beasts, and roaming
about chiefly in the night, which symbolizes with their Humors. Not but that a
fourth cause, (namely, evil spirits) interposes sometimes with those natural
causes, and particularly with that gloomy black Humuor, which for that reason
Saint Jerome calls Satan's bath.

The Third said, That besides those causes, the food taken from some parts of
Aliments contributes much to hurt the Imagination of Men in such sort, that
they account themselves really brutes. Thus a Maid of Breslaw in Silesia having
eaten the brain of a Cat, so strongly conceited her self a Cat, that she ran
after every Mouse that appeared before her. A Spaniard having eaten the brain
of a Bear, thought himself to be one. Another that had very often drunk Goats
milk, fed upon grass like that Animal. Another who had lived long upon Swines
blood, rolled himself in the mire as if he had been truly a Hogg. And it is
held, that especially the arterial blood of Animals, as containing the purest
of their Spirits, produces such an effect. But to believe that these changes
can be real, is repugnant to Reason, and the order which God has established
in Nature; in which being nothing can act beyond its bounds, it is impossible
for Devils to have the power to make a transmutation of substances. For though
they have some power upon natural bodies, and even upon Men, to try the good,
and punish the wicked; yet the same is so limited that as they cannot create a
Hand-worm, so much less can they change substances and transform them into
others, which were to annihilate and create both together. Besides, it is
repugnant in regard of the Form, which cannot inform and actuate any matter but
that which is prepared and disposed for it. Wherefore these transformations are
either to be attributed to the Fancy alone, which being perverted makes some
conceit themselves not only beasts, but glass, earth, and other absurd things;
or else they are to be deduced from the depravation of manners. For, as in the
Heroical State Men approached the Deity, so in that of ferity they come near to
the nature of beasts, differing therein according to each Vice. In regard of
their voluptuousness the Companions of Ulysses were accounted Swine; for his
Cruelty, one Lycaon a Wolf; for their voices and thieveries, the Companions of
Diomedes transformed into Birds; the Learned taking that metaphorically which
the vulgar does literally.

II. Of the means to acquire Nobility.
Upon the Second Point it was said, There are as many ways of acquiring
Nobility as there are several kinds of it. That which comes by descent, and is
called Civil, is not acquired, but only preserved and upheld by the
resemblance and correspondence of our laudable actions with those of our
Forefathers: It begins in him who is ennobled, increases in the Children, is
perfected in the Nephews, and lies in the common opinion, that the generous
beget a generous offspring. That which comes from Riches is acquired by
industry and good husbandry. That which attends Ecclesiastical Dignities comes
from Learning, Piety, and Favor. Thus the Cardinals are Princes, and the
Nephews of Popes are Sovereigns, in Italy. The Doctoral, which extends to
Physicians and Lawyers, the Body of whom the Emperors call the Seminary of
Dignities, (declaring them Counts, that is, Counselors and Assessors of Kings)
after exercising their charge twenty years, comes from study, knowledge, and
experience. The Military, from Courage and Valor. That which is obtained by
the grace or favor of a Prince, whether it be by granting a Fief or Manor,
which alone ennobles its possessor, or not, is acquired by merit, and the
services done to him. They who desist from all mechanic and sordid action may
become noble by virtue of the Prince's Letters. That which comes from the
Custom of places is obtained by administration of the chief Magistracies in a
City, to which the Officers are admitted by Election, as the Capitouls or
Sheriffs at Toulouse, and at Poictiers, and Maires; and Scabins were ennobled
by the privilege of King Charles V. where we must not confound the ancient
Chevalry, which are the Gentlemen, with the newly ennobled, who may indeed be
called Nobles, but not Gentlemen.

The Second said, The Sacred History gives the first Nobility to Hunters, when
it says that Nimrod, who was the first King upon Earth, was a mighty Hunter.
Aristotle gives it to such as excel in any Art or Exercise, whom he says are
so many Kings in their profession. Many, to the Inventors of things profitable
to Humane Society; and indeed Antiquity placed such in the number of the gods.
Experience causes us to add a fourth sort of persons, whose Bodies, or Minds,
or both, are endu'd with such gentle and winning perfections, that in what ever
condition they be, even the meanest, that they discover a connatural Nobility
through it, and differ as much from the vulgar, as precious stones from others;
(to use Ronsard's comparison) who says, that when Deucalion and Pyrrha
repaired mankind they threw precious stones to make the Nobility, and common
stones, to re-people the world with the vulgar.

The Fifth said, That true Nobility cannot be acquired but by arms, which are
the only original of ancient Nobility. For since more hazards are to be
undergone in war then in time of peace, it was necessary to sweeten the toil of
arms by annexing Nobility more inseparably to them then to any other exercise:
to the end, that the life of Warriors being usually shorter then that of
others, by reason of the dangers whereto it is subject, they may, in
recompense, live with more honor. Otherwise there is none but would prefer the
shadow and ease of Cities before the travels and hardships of the Campaigne:
whereas the most desirous of honor prefer above any thing that guerdon of
warlike virtue which is in the hand of Sovereigns, who, as Solon says, hold
the life, honor, and estates of men, of whom they make some Deniers, others
Millions, according as they dispose the same.

The Fourth said, There Is no true Nobility besides that of extraction, this
being unanimously received in all States, yea amongst the most barbarous
Nations. It Is for this reason desin'd by the Civilians, an Illustriousness of
Lineage, and splendour of Ancestors, with succession of Coat Armor and Images,
conferred upon some person, and through him to his Family, by the Prince, Law or
Custom, in reward of Virtues which are serviceable to the State and humane
Society. And although such virtues are proper and particular to their
Possessor; yet as the dishonor and infamy which follow Vices and Crimes
reflect upon Descendants: so the Nobility which follows those virtuous actions,
and is nothing else but the honor and reward which accompanies them, is
diffused also to Posterity, and like the streams of Springs (less considerable
in their original) is increased by time; and the more remote it is, the more it
is esteemed; the highliest prized being that which is like Nilus, whose rise is
unknown. Thus, the Athenians gloried that they were Autocthones, or sprung from
the Earth; because their Nobility was so ancient, that they affirmed it
impossible to assign the first Author of it: for which reason they wore golden
Cockle-shells at their hair, because these Insects never relinquish the place
of earth whence they took birth. As the Arcadian Nobles wore Moons in their
Hats, and the Romans Crescents upon their shoes, but for several ends; the
former intimating thereby that they were a people as old as the Moon, and the
latter denoting, by this figure of the changeable Moon, the inconstancy of
Woman, which sometimes abases the most illustrious, and raises the most abject
Families.

The Fifth said, That Nobility depends not only on opinion, as they seem to
conclude who have no other ground of it; but it has its foundation in a solid
and real cause, namely, in the proper merit and peculiar actions of every one.
So that, to speak accurately, it is no more in the power of any one whatever to
ennoble an unworthy and undeserving person, then to make a Hero illustrious in
virtue of a vicious man, or a wise man of a fool. Nor does it arise from
riches, which though the ornament yet are not the cause of Nobility. For
whereas a rich Yeoman is admitted to public Offices rather then a poor
Gentleman; it is because the former having more to lose then the latter, has
also more interest in the preservation of the common good, and consequently is
presumed more careful that all go well with it. Ease and occupation are of no
more moment. For our first Father, from whom we derive our Nobility, and his
Children, were Laborers; Noah was a Vine-dresser; Saul and David Kings of
Israel, Shepherds; and at Venice, Florence, Genua, Luca, and other places of
Italy, the Nobles are for the most part Merchants; though in other Countries
that employment is derogatory to Nobility. For as it is not in our power to be
born either of noble or mean Parents; so ought not either be imputed to us as
commendable or blameworthy; since praise and dishonor are rightly attributed
to us only for what lies in our ability, as our good or evil actions do. For
being it is no advantage to a blind man to have quick-sighted parents, or to a
gouty son to have a father of sound limbs, why should it be any to a wicked son
to have an honest man to his father? on the contrary, it ought to turn to his
reproach, that he has not followed the way which he found already beaten. For
as good wheat is oftentimes changed into Darnel, so the children of illustrious
men are ordinarily lewd slip-strings; witness the children of Cicero, Aesop,
Cimon, Socrates and Alcibiades. On the contrary, many times the greatest
personages are the issues of the most infamous and abject. Wherefore the seeds
of Nobility (namely our actions) being in our selves, the most certain way of
acquiring is to do such as are good and virtuous. True it is, those of war are
most in esteem, because most persons are capable of them. Yet excellent civil
actions ought to be accompanied with the good hap which may make them known and
recommendable to the Prince; otherwise they are as a light hid under a bushel.
But if all these conditions meet in any one whom the virtue of his Ancestors
has dignified to be of an illustrious Family; this excellency of descent
renders his virtue more acceptable; and this Gentleman's condition is like that
of a child upon a Gyant's shoulders, who sees all that the Giant sees, and also
over his head. He has all the Nobility of his Forefathers, and besides, that
which is properly his own. To conclude, if the blood of our Ancestors is the
body of Nobility, our virtue is the soul of it.

CONFERENCE XXXV.
I. Of feigned Diseases. II. Of regulating the Poor.

I. Of feigned Diseases.
AS man is the most wily of all creatures; so he best knows how to dissemble
and represent another personage then what he is indeed. But external signs
accompany and follow their effects as necessarily as they are preceded by their
causes; he cannot so artificially cover his duplicity but it will appear, and
his retentions betray themselves. It is as difficult to him to dissemble fear,
anger, hatred, envy, and the other passions, when they are real, as to
counterfeit them when they are not. The same may be said of Diseases as of the
passions of the body. As it is almost impossible to dissemble a true Gout or a
Fever; so it is very hard to feign a Disease when one is in perfect health. They
who counterfeit the same are of two sorts. People of quality, and Beggars. Of
the first order are many Generals of Armies, who have feigned themselves sick,
that they might surprise their enemies who supposed them in bed; and such as
cover with malady that of cowardice; or do it to avoid being present at
Assemblies. Thus Demosthenes pretended a Quinzy, that he might not plead
against one accused of Defrauding the State, by whom he was corrupted with
presents. Of the second sort are they who to avoid the labor common to others,
or to cause themselves to be pitied, make semblance of having, one a Leprosy,
another the Falling Sickness, a third the Jaundies, and infinite other maladies
which they have not, or having some light ones amplify and continue the same.
Such was the invention of an Italian Soldier of late years, who feigned
himself troubled with certain fits caused by the biting of a Tarantula, crying
out of extraordinary pain, except when the Musicians played; for then he fell
to dancing after the same manner as he had heard those use to do who have been
hurt by that creature. Physic, to which alone pertains the discerning of these
feigned Diseases, imploys, to that end, this maxim of Geometry, that a right
line serves for a measure not only of straight things, but also of oblique. So
the perfect knowledge of real Diseases enables us to find out counterfeit.
'Twas by this means Galen discovered the imposture of a Slave, who to excuse
himself from following his Master in a long Voyage, because he was loath to
leave his Mistress who was at Rome, made his cheeks swell with the root of
Thapsia, and pale with the fume of Cummin. For Galen seeing no other signs
agree with these two, cured him only with a Refrigerative, whereas a true
defluxion required other remedies.

The Second said, Maladies of body or mind are feigned by people, to decline
some burdensome charge and commission, or some evident danger. Thus Ulysses
counterfeited himself foolish, to avoid going to the Trojan war; and David
being pursued by Saul made himself appear distracted to King Achish. The young
wife mentioned by Martial, being married to an old man, counterfeited the
Hysterical Passions which she found a way to deceive her jealous husband. Such
pretenses are sometimes used to retard an execution of death, or else in a
civil matter to be freed from prison; and many times those things which afford
signs to the Physicians are so exquisitely ordered, that the most subtle are
overreached. One makes his Urine black with Ink, or red with Oker, or yellow
with Saffron; another applies the root of Ranunculus to his groyn, or some
other Emunctory, to counterfeit a Carbuncle; another provokes vomiting by some
Emetick, which by that means will cause extraordinary agitation in his Pulse,
and give appearences of a pestilential Fever; or else make so straight a
ligature on the upper part of his arm that his Pulse will not beat at all; as
Matthiolus reports an ancient Physician served to confirm the fraud of a
Mountebank who used that trick to make people believe that being almost dead he
was revived by his Antidote. But the most ordinary impostures of this kind are
those of Beggars; some of whom fume their faces with Brimstone that they may
appear pale. Others rub themselves with the flower of Broom, or the seed of
Carthamus, to seem yellow; or else black themselves with Oil and Soot, to
appear struck with Lightning. Which disguisements are easily discovered by
rubbing them with Soap; for it takes off all the superficial colors, and
leaves none but the natural caused by the humors. Others get some body to make
a hole near their ears, or some other place, and blow strongly thereinto
between the flesh and the skin, that so being pussed up they may be taken to
have a Dropsy. One of the hardest cheats to be discovered was that of a Jugler
of Flanders, who every morning, having first stopped his fundament very
exactly, swallowed down half a pound of Butter and some Quicksilver after it:
which put him into such hideous motions and gestures, that every one judged him
possessed. At night he unstop'd himself, and voided his Devil backwards.

The Third said, That a Fever may be caused by rubbing the Pulse with Oil in
which the horned Beetle has been boiled, or by applying Garlic to the
fundament. And that the Herbs, Spear-Crowfoot, Bryony, Turbith, the juice of
Tithymal or Spurge, Yew, and many other caustic simples, served them to make
Ulcers, which are easily discernable to be artificial. But of all feigned
maladies, the hardest to be known, and the easiest to counterfeit, is Folly,
like that of Solon, Brutus and many others; for the most incurable folly is
that which imprints fewest signs upon the body; and there are stark fools who
have intervals, during which their minds are as clear and serene as the wisest.

The Fourth said, It Is usual for those who complain of one another, after a
scuffle, to pretend themselves not only more injured then they really were, but
also wounded when they are not; but especially women big with child are apt to
be guilty in this kind. He said, that a certain lewd fellow having outrag'd one
of his companious almost unto death, yet so that there appeared no wound or
impression of cudgel or other weapon upon his body; for that he had beaten him
with a long sack filled with gravel; which not making the contusions suddenly
apparent, he caused him to be visited and searched immediately, and himself
made greater complaints then he. So that had it not been for the wile of the
Surgeon who silene'd this bawler by threatening to trepan his head for the
easing of these pains whereof he complained, the Judges were hugely at a loss
whom to charge with the wrong. Which shows how difficult it is to distinguish
true maladies from feigned.

II. Of regulating the Poor.
Upon the second point, it was said, That there are three sorts of poor, some
really are, and so call themselves; others call themselves so but are not; and
others who though they are so yet do not speak of it. The first are the poor,
become infirm through disease, age, or other inconvenience; for whose relief
and support Hospitals are designed. The second are the strong, who cannot be
termed poor so long as they have arms to gain their livings. The third are the
bashful poor. Their disorder is general; but that of the strong has most
dangerous effects. And inasmuch as an evil must be known before remedied, it
may be said that these Beggars are the most dangerous pest of States; whether
they be considered in reference to God, us, or themselves. They speak not of
God but to blaspheme him; they abuse his Sacraments, and are professed breakers
of his Commandments. For God said to man, Thou shall eat thy bread in the sweat
of thy countenance; but they devour the bread of others without doing any work.
There shall be no Beggar amongst you, says God; but they make a trade of it,
and come even to the Altars, to interrupt people's devotions. In respect of us,
they are the ordinary Seminary of the Plague, by their nastiness and
infections, which they bring even to our doors; of war too, it being always
easy, upon the least discontent, to list such people, who are ready to do any
thing you will put them upon, without fear of punishment, from which poverty is
exempted; of Famine also, these idle bellies, and unprofitable burdens of the
earth, being as unapt to cultivate it and other arts which bring good things to
men, as they are insatiable in devouring them. Yet they do less hurt to others
then to themselves, leading a dead life, yea a thousand times worse then death,
through the miseries into which their idleness involves them. Now it imports
the public no less to remedy their slothfulness, then it does the humane body
to suffer a paralytical member, under pretext that it is less noble then the
rest. I conceive therefore that it is fit to constrain sturdy Beggars to work,
by keeping them close, and chastising them; yea, to send them to the Galleys,
according to the Ordinance of Francis I. rather then suffer their disorders.

The Second said, That Hospitality toward the poor has been ever in so great
esteem, that Pagan antiquity made a principal title of it to the greatest of
their Gods; and conceived them parallel crimes, to cast the Altar out off the
Temple, and to remove mercy out of man's breast, it being so proper to him that
it is therefore termed Humanity; as inseparable as his very being. Nor is there
any thing in the world but invites us thereunto by its example. The Guardian
Angels and Celestial Intelligences take care of men; the soul immediately sends
an affluence of blood and spirits to a wounded part; the principles of nature,
how incomplete soever they be, cannot endure privation, which is the image of
Poverty: and the Celestial bodies include in their circumference, warm by their
motion, enliven by their light, and adorn by their influences, all the inferior
bodies. The Principal amongst them, the Sun, the poor-man's fire, and the type
of charity, communicates his light and his heat indifferently to all the world.
The Elements use violence, and destroy themselves, rather then endure a vacuity
in nature. Metals, the richer they are, the more they are dilatable. Plants
which cannot uphold themselves are propt up by others more robust. In brief,
all Beasts are frighted at the sight of those of their kind, if they be dead or
in any misery. Suidas tells us that there is a bird called Cyncle, which being
unable to build a nest by reason of its weakness, is welcome into those of
others. But though every thing should not preach this doctrine to us, yet
seeing men, how different soever in their belief, all agree in having care of
the poor; that Charity is to outlive all other Christian virtues; and that our
Lord in his sentence of eternal life and death was pleased to use no other
reason then this of having given or denied alms to the poor, whom he calls
himself; all this would sufficiently manifest that no greater care ought to be
had in any case then in this.

The Third said, that the point in hand was not so much to commend as to
determine Charity, and to know whether of the two sorts of Alms (mentioned by
S. Austin) Bread, or Discipline, is to be given to every poor person, the
latter being oftimes more profitable for them then the former, which, as a
Lacedemonian told Diogenes, frequently does hurt in stead of good; for the
giving to a stout Beggar encourages him to accustomed laziness. But on the
other side, being Charity is not suspicious, it seems that it ought to be
little material to the giver of an Alms, whether the receiver be worthy of it
or no, provided he give it with a good intention, according to his power, and
without vanity, so highly blamed by our Savior.

The Fourth said, That the poor ought to be left as they are; and it is enough
for us that we relieve them with our Alms, according to our ability. Experience
shows that it has been a fruitless attempt in our days to confine and
discipline them; whatever care could be used by such as were entrusted therein.
But since Poverty is no vice, why should it be punished with imprisonment?
Besides, our Lord having told us that we shall always have the poor with us,
implies that there will always be poor. Zea, were the thing possible, yet it
ought not to be put in execution, since charity will become extinguished by
losing its object. For present objects have most power upon us in all cases,
and it is not credible that he who scarce feels himself touched with compassion
at the sight of a wretch languish at his door, would think of the poor when
they no longer occurred to his view.

The Fifth said, That although we are always to have the poor with us, yet it is
not thence to be inferred that Begging ought not to be restrained, should the
one include the other, as it does not; no more then it is a good consequence
that because scandal must necessarily come to pass, therefore it is not lawful
to hinder it; or that because the good designs of pious persons which have
labored in this godly work, have not succeeded in one time, therefore they
cannot at another. But to show how easy it is to take order for the regulation
of the poor, it is manifest that almost all foreign Countries have made
provision therein; many whereof, when they come to fetch away our corn, justly
wonder how we suffer such a multitude of Beggars, considering what order they
take with them in their public penury. Yea, the City of Lions, whose territory
is none of the most fertile of France, and by its example diverse other Cities,
have already made provision for them. I conceive, therefore, that it is easy
not only for this populous City of Paris, but for this whole Kingdom, to do the
same. Now that may be applied to this regulation which Aesop said to those with
whom Xanthus laid a wager, that he would drink up the whole Sea; namely, that
he could not do it, unless they first stopped the course of all the rivers which
empty themselves thereinto: so neither is it possible ever to regulate the flux
and reflux of poor which come by shoals from all parts of France into this
gulf, or rather Parision sea, without prohibiting them entrance into the same;
which cannot be done Christianly, nor indeed politickly, without taking care
for redress of their miseries, in those places which they abandon. To effect
which, we must imitate Physicians, assuage the most urgent symptoms, and
remove the concomitant cause, yet not forgetting the antecedent, nor the
general remedies; since, as Aristotle says, he that would purge the eye must
purge the head. The robust poor must every one be sent to the place of his
birth, if he knows it, or will tell it: by which means the burden will become
lighter being divided: there they must be distinguished according to sex, age,
conditions, ability of body and mind, capacity and industry, that so they may
be distributed into the several employments whereof they shall be found
capable; with absolute prohibition not to beg or wander from one place to
another without permission in writing from him who has the charge of them,
under the penalty of the whip; as also the people being forbidden, under a
fine, to give Alms elsewhere then at the places appointed for that purpose. The
children of either sex must be put out for some certain number of years to
Masters and Mistresses that will take charge of them. Likewise such fellows as
understand any Mystery or Craft shall be disposed of to Masters; to whom, upon
that account, and to all those who shall have the care of such poor, shall be
granted the most privileges and immunities, both Royal and Civil, and of
Communities, that the rest of the inhabitants of the place can allow. Out of
the body of which inhabitants shall be chosen, from time to time, the most
considerable persons to govern them, who shall not be admitted to the highest
Offices without having first passed through this. Such as are able to do
nothing else shall be employed in public works, repairing of Bridges, Banks,
Causeys, or Buildings, at the charge of the Proprietors. And, to the end, that
all these poor may find a livelihood, they shall buy all their Victuals one of
another, and have certain Counters instead of money peculiarly current amongst
themselves. Aged persons incapable of labor shall have the care of the little
children. Such as are fit to travel shall be sent to the Plantations of New
France. But all this with such restrictions and modifications as the
circumstances of each place shall require. This design will be much furthered
by new inventions, by working at Mills, by combing old wool and stuffs; by
cleansing the streets by night, and many other occupations.

CONFERENCE XXXVI.
I. Of the tying of the Point. II. Which is the greatest of all Vices.

I. Of the tying of the Point.
THis obstacle, proceeding from the jealousy of Corrivals, or Covetousness of
Parents, is a Ligature, by which, with certain words pronounced during the
nuptial benediction, a man becomes incapable of rendering to his wife the
legitimate duty of Marriage. This kind of enchantment is, as all others, of the
Devil's invention, who bearing an irreconcilable hatred to man, endeavors all
he can to hinder the fruit of generation and of the Sacrament of marriage, by
which man acquires that immortality in his species and his successors, which
that evil spirit caused him to lose in his individual. It Is one of his old
impostures. Virgil speaks of it in his eighth Eclogue, where he makes mention
of three knots made with three ribbands of different colors, and of certain
words of enchantment. S. Augustine, in the second Book, and twentieth Chapter,
of Christian Doctrine, declaims against these Sorceries. Our Salick Law, tit.
22. sect. 4. makes mention of some Sorcerers who hinder issue by ligatures. In
our time this kind of Maleficium has been so common that it would be
ridiculous to call the experience of it in question. But since the author of it
is the spirit of darkness, it is no wonder that we see not a whit in the inquiry
of its causes.

The Second said, That he could not attribute this impediment of generation to
charms and enchantments, but rather to the power of the Imagination, which is
of great moment in this case; as we see also in Love or Hatred, which, though
by several ways, render a man incapable of this action. For if one be
solicited by a woman whom he thinks unhandsome and hates, he cannot satisfy
her, because sadness makes his spirits to retire. Another being surpised with
the enjoyment of some rare beauty, becomes alike impotent, because joy
dissipates the same spirits. The desire of doing well, and the fear of failing,
are also frequently obstacles to it; witness the impotence of Ovid, Regnier,
the man mentioned in Petronius, the Count spoken of by Montague, and many
others. Now these passions making an impression in the Phancie, disturb and
hinder it from moving the Appetite, and consequently the motive faculties,
depriving them by this means of their ordinary functions.

The Third said, There are two sorts of Impotence, one natural, and the other
supernatural. The first happens two ways; either through want of matter, which
is the geniture and spirits, or through defect of emission. The former (not to
mention the parts serving to generation) happens through the extinction of
virility, and that by reason of old age, sickness, violent exercises, aliments
or medicaments cold and dry, and generally by all causes which dissolve the
strength, and dissipate the spirits and flatuosities, as Rue, according to
Aristotle. The second defect proceeds from the obstruction of the Vessels, or
from a Resolution or Palsy befalling the foresaid parts. That which is
supernatural is acknowledged according to the Canon by the practice of the
Church, which ordains the two parties to be unmarried, if at the end of three
years they cannot undo this Gordian knot in the presence of seven witnesses. It
is made by Sorceries and charms; which indeed have no action of themselves; yet
when men make use of them, the Devil (according to a compact either tacit or
express) acts with them employing to that end the natural things whereof he
has perfect knowledge, and hinders generation in two manners; either by
disturbing the phancie with some images and species of hatred and aversion; or
else by suspending the generative faculty by the dissipation of flatuosities,
retention of spirits, and concretion of the geniture. Now natural impotence is
discerned from supernatural, because the first is always alike toward all
sort of persons, but the second is only in reference to some particular Woman,
the Man being well enough disposed for all others. But change is to no purpose,
when the impotence is natural.

The Fourth said, That Ligature is a subverting of the order established in
order, by which all things are destinated to some particular action, and are
lead to what is suitable for them. It Is an impediment whereby the actions of
agents as it were repressed and restrained, and it is either Physical or
Magical. The former proceeds from a particular Antipathy between two Agents,
the stronger whereof by some occult contrary property, extinguishes and
mortifies the virtue of the weaker. Thus Garlic or a Diamond hinder the
Loadstone from attracting Iron; Oil keeps Amber from drawing straw, and the
spirits of the Basilisk fix those of a Man. The second, of which kind is the
tying of the Point, is done by Magic, which thereunto employes certain words,
images, circles, characters, rings, sounds, numbers, ointments, philtres,
charms, imprecations, sacrifices, points, and other such diabolical
inventions; but especially barbarous names without signification, yea,
sometimes to that degree of impiety as to make use of sacred things, as the
divine appellations, prayers, and verses taken out of the Holy Scripture, which
it prophanes in its charms and fascinations. Because, as Saint Augustine
says, the Devils cannot deceive Christians, and therefore cover their poison
with a little honey, to the end that the bitterness being disguised by the
sweetness, it may be the more easily swallowed, to their ruin. These Magical
Ligatures, if we may credit those who treat of them, are almost infinite. For
there are some particularly against Thieves, restraining them from carrying
away any thing out of the house; others that hinder Merchants from buying or
selling in certain Faires, and retain ships in the Port so that they cannot get
out to sea either by wind or oars; or keep a mill from grinding, the fire from
burning, the water from wetting, the Earth from producing fruits and upholding
buildings, swords and all sorts of weapons, and even lightning it self from
doing mischief, dogs from biting or barking, the most swift and savage beasts
from stirring or committing hurt, and the blood of a wound from flowing. Yea,
if we believe Virgil, there are some which draw down the Moon to the Earth, and
effect other like wonders, by means, for the most part, ridiculous, or
profane. Which nevertheless, I conceive, are to be referred either to natural
causes, or to the credulity of those who make use of them, or to the illusions
of the Devil, or to the hidden pleasure of God, sometimes permitting such
impostures to deceive our senses, for the punishing of the overgreat curiosity
of Men, and chastising of the wicked. For I see not what power of action there
is in a number even or odd, a barbarous word pronounced lowdly or softly, and
in a certain order, a figure square or triangular, and such other things, which
being only quantities have not any virtue, power, or action; for these belong
only to Qualities.

The Fifth said, That we ought not to do as the vulgar do, who refer almost
every thing to supernatural causes. If they behold a Tempest, or Lightning fall
down upon any place, they cry the Devil is broke loose. As for effects which
are attributed to Occult Properties, it is Sorcery, as they say, to doubt that
the same are other then the works of Sorcerers. But we must rather imitate true
Philosophers, who never recurr to Occult Properties but where reasons fail
them; much less to supernatural causes, so long as they can find any in nature,
how abstruse soever they may be. Those of this knot or impotence, are of three
sorts. Some proceed from the want of due Temper, as from too great cold or
heat, either of the whole constitution, or of the parts serving to generation.
For a good Temperature being requisite to this action, which is the most
perfect of any Animal, immoderate heat prejudices the same as much as cold,
because it dries the Body, and instead of producing consumes the Spirits. The
Second Cause is in the Mind; for the Body is of it self immovable, unless it
be agitated by the Soul which does the same office to it that a Piper does to
his instrument, which speaks not a jot if he blow not into it. Now the Fancy
may be carried away else where, or prepossessed with fear, or some other
predominant passion: Whence, he that imagines himself impotent, and becomes so
indeed; and the first fault serves for a preparatory to the second. Hereupon
arises, first, displeasure, then despifing of the Women, and so their common
hatred augments the evil, and makes it last, till the conceit which produced it
be cured by a contrary one. So Amasis King of Egypt being unsatisfactory to the
fair Laodice his Wife, was restored in Nature by sacrifices offered to Venus.
And he of whom Galen speaks, having his whole Body rubbed with Oil of Sesamum,
in which the gall of a Crow had been boiled, was cured of his impotence. And
indeed those untyers of points make use of extravagant and uncouth things,
affording the Mind more ground of admiration then ratiocination; As they advise
the Man to make water through a wedding ring, to be smoked with the burnt
Tooth of a dead Man, to pass over the threshold of a door, or to sleep upon a
pillow under which is placed a quill or hazle stick filled with quicksilver,
and steeped with new wax, to eat a Bird called a Wood-pecker, to be unwarry'd
and married again to the same Woman; and other such trifles. Now every thing
that can trouble the Fancy, can also bind it and make the Man impotent; as
every thing that can content and rectify it, may again unbind it; there being
examples of many, who though ignorant of this wickedness have really bound it,
because the Husband only saw them use the same gestures as those do who intend
it; as also of others who without any skill have unbound it. But when a Man is
rightly disposed in all his parts, and his Imagination not perverted, and yet
he finds himself impotent; then, and in no other case, may we attribute the
cause thereof to damnable Sorceries; which, as we must not always credit, so
neither can we sometimes question.

The Sixth said, That indeed the near commerce of the Mind with the Body
causes that the one communicates its passions to the other. The Choleric is
easy to be displeased; and he who is froward oftentimes acquires much Choler
into his temper. Sadness increases the Melancholy Humor, and this again
causes sadness. The Patients good opinion of his Physician, and of the success
of his malady, helps to cure him; as the fear of Death oftentimes brings it,
and the apprehension of the Pestilence has produced it. And in this case the
indocility and the obedience of this Part (which seems a Province disjoined
from the State, constituted by the three principal parts of the individual) is
less to be wondered at then the repugnance of his other members; inasmuch as
this concerns only the species, and denies its use to Man during one part of
his Life, namely, from his birth to his puberty, and ordinarily in the latter
years of his old age. But Fear has oftentimes tied the Tongues of the ablest
Men at such times as they have had most need of them. Yet this reason holds
only in such as are afraid of the tying of the point; and many are found
impotent who distrust nothing less; and therefore all that can be said, is,
that perhaps some other passions supply its room.

II. Which is the greatest Vice.
Upon the Second Point it was said, There is but one goodness absolutely such,
namely, God. All other things are termed good by the participation and respect
which they have to the divine goodness, or by the comparison made of one with
another, and according to the different estates and professions of Men. Thus,
amongst Divines, he is called a good Man who has most Piety; amongst
Merchants, he who has most credit. But when a Captain bids his Soldiers
behave themselves like gens de bien, good Men, his meaning is, that they defeat
the Enemy, and not give ground. Even the lowest rank of actions have their kind
of goodness. So we call him a good Man who leaves his Wife to do all. Since
therefore Evil or Vice is nothing else but the privation of goodness and
Virtue, the reason of either is the same, and the word Great, in the question,
shows that it is only comparison intended in it; nothing being great but in
comparison of something less. Wherefore this question ought to be resolved
severally in each profession, and according to the different estate of persons.
Thus taking the word Vice lagely for Evil, the greatest in Divinity is
Atheism; and the next, Heresy; the first rendering a Man a beast, the second
making him shake off the yoke of the Church. The greatest Vice of a Statesman
is Imprudence; of a Soldier, Cowardice; of a Friend, Treachery; of a
Physician, playing the Mountebank or Cheat; of a Lawyer or Procurator,
Prevarication, and when he sells the Cause of his Country; of a Judge,
Injustice; of a Merchant, false Weights and Measures; of a Notary,
Falsification or Forgery; of a Labourer, purloining the Seed; of a Father,
forgetfulness of his Family; of a Wife, Adultery; of a Child, Disobedience; of
a Servant, Domestic Thieft.

The Second said, That the different inclination and judgment of Nations is
solely of consideration herein. 'Twas no Vice at Sparta to be a subtle Thief,
nor at present among those roamers who take upon them the name of Egyptians;
but amongst people of Honor, it is one of the most ignominious. And as for
Drunkenness, the Northern Nations and we do not agree about it. Yet if Vices be
considered in general, some one may be assigned greater then all the rest in
Humane Society. For of corporeal things which we call great, there are some
which are so only in comparisons of individual of the same species; so the
same size which denominates a Dog great, denominates a Horse small. But some
are greater then all others, namely, the highest of the Heavens. So likewise
there are some Vices greater, and some less, compared one with another; as
Theft with Sacrilege. But there is also some one greater then all others,
which I conceive to be Pride, not only in comparison of Humility, its
contrary, the foundation of all Christian and Moral Virtues, but also because
all Vices take their original from it. It Is that which caused the fall of
Angels and the first Man, which has caused and continued all the mischiefs
which befall us. Yea, it is not only the greatest, but also the most odious. As
is proved, in that if you see a Prodigal, a Miser, a debauched person, a Thief,
or a very Murderer pass by, you are not moved to so much hatred against them,
as against some proud fool; who beholding others disdainfully, knows not in
what posture to put himself.

Of those which spoke afterward, One said that he distinguished Vice from Sin,
and Malice, or Enormity. The first being an habitude to evil, the second the
act thereof, and the third the deformity which follows them both. Another held
Atheism to be the greatest Vice. Others said, it was the sin against Nature.
One assigned Philautie, or the inordinate love of ones self, as being the
impulsive cause of all other Vices, to Ingratitude, Covetousness and Idleness;
each maintaining the same to be the root of all other evils. Injustice was also
instanced to comprehend all Vices, as Justice contains in it self all Virtues.
For he who is proud, covetous, prodigal, or a Murderer, would not be so if he
were not unjust, whilst he attributes more to himself, and less to others, then
is due. And for conclusion it was said, That as of the diseases of the Body,
those are termed the greatest which invade the most noble part, or have the
most dangerous symptoms; (as the prick of a pin in the heart is more mortal
then the cutting off of an arm, and the same puncture is more perilous when
Convulsions thereupon befall the whole body, then a wound with a sword in some
fleshy part without any accidents;) so Ignorance and Imprudence are the
greatest vices, because they possess the most noble Faculty of man, the
Understanding, and produce all the rest.

At the hour of Inventions, a Proposition was reported to draw Smith's-coal out
of the lands of this Kingdom, and in so doing to cut channels for the draining
of Marshes, and making rivers Navigable, in order to the convenience of
transportation, sacilitation of commerce, feeding of Cattle, and preservation
of Forests. This Invention, besides the advantage it will bring to the meaner
sort of people, in reference to their domestic fuel, is of much benefit for
the making of Brick, Tile and Lime; as much of which may be made thereby in
three days as is made in eight or nine with wood, which is the ordinary
fashion. It will be a matter of great saving to the whole Kingdom, especially
to the abovesaid Artists, who are here in great number, and are forced to buy
such Coal from England at dear rates. The Proposer offered to continue the
experience which he had made thereof, at his own charges, for satisfaction of
the curious.

CONFERENCE XXXVII.
I. Of the Cabala. II. Whether the truth ought always to be spoken.

I. Of the Cabala.
THat which has happened to many other words, as Tyrant and Magician, which at
their first institution were taken in a good sense, but have abusively
degenerated into odious significations, is found likewise in the word Cabala,
which (according to its genuine importance) signifies nothing else but
Tradition, and comes from the Verb Cabal, denoting with the Hebrews to give or
receive. It Is a mystical doctrine concerning God and the creatures, which the
Jews received by tradition from Father to Son. If we may give credit to them,
it Began in Adam, who had a perfect knowledge not only of the whole nature and
property of things corporeal; but also of the Divine nature, of the mysteries
of Religion, and of the redemption of mankind, which his Angel Raziel assured
him was to come to pass by means of a just man whose name should consist of
four letters [which is the cause, say they, that most part of the Hebrew names
are of four letters in their language, wherein the vowels are no letters] Adam
taught these mysteries to his children; they to their successors until Abraham
and the Patriarchs. But, they say, Moses learned it anew from the mouth of God
during the forty days that he was in the Mount, where he received two Laws, one
written with the hand of God, comprised in the two Tables of stone; the other
not written and more mysterious: the former for all in general, the latter for
the learned and skilled in mysteries of Religion: which is that which Moses
taught the seventy Elders of the People, chosen by himself according to the
counsel of Jethro his Father-in-law; and they transferred the same to the
Prophets, Doctors of the Law, Scribes, Pharisees, Rabbines, and Cabalists.

The Second said, That in order to judge of the Cabala, it is requisite to know
what the Philosophy of the Jews was; as the Stoics, Peripateticks,
Pyrrhonians, and other Philosophers, had their peculiar Sects. It Is divided
commonly into that of things, and that of words or names. The first is called
by the Rabbines Bereschit, the second Mercana. That which treats of things, by
the Cabalists called Sephiroch, that is to say, numbers or knowledges (for with
them, to number and to know are almost synonymous) is either Philosophical or
Theological. The Philosophical comprehends their Logic, Physics,
Metaphysics, and Astronomy. In Logic they treat of the ten lesser Sephiroth;
which are so many steps or degrees for attaining to the knowledge of all
things, by means of Sense, Knowledge, or Faith; and they are divided into three
Regions. In the lowest, which is made by the sense, are (1) the Object, (2) the
Medium or Diaphanum, (3) the External sense. In the second and middle region
are, (4) the Internal or common Sense, (5) the Imagination or Phancie, (6) the
Estimative Faculty or inferior Judgment. In the third and supreme (7) the
Superior and Humane Judgment. (8) Reason. (9) The Intellect; (10) and lastly,
the Understanding or Men's; which performs the same office to the Soul that the
Eye does to the Body whom it enlightens. For example, when I hear a Cannon
discharged, the sound comes to my ears by the medium of the air, then the
Common Sense receiving this species of the sound transmits the same to the
Imagination, and the Estimative Faculty judges thereof simply, as beasts would
do; afterward the Judgment apprehends the essence of the sound, Reason
searches the causes thereof, and the Intellect considers them; but lastly, the
Understanding or Men's, called by the Cabalists Ceter, that is, a Crown (by way
of excellence) receiving light from on high irradiates the Intellect, and this
all the other Faculties. And these are the degrees of Cabalistical knowledge.
In the other parts of their Philosophy they treat of the fifty gates of light.
Whereof the 1. is the Divine Essence, the Symbol of which is the Tetragrammaton
and ineffable name of God; The 2. gate is the Archetypal World; the knowledge
of which two gates, they say, was hid even to Moses. The 3. is the Earth; 4.
Matter; 5. Vacuum or Privation; 6. The Abyss; 7. The Fire; 8. The Air; 9. The
Water; 10. The Light; 11. The Day; 12. Accidents; 13. The Night; 14. The
Evening; 15. The Morning. And after many other things they constitute Man for
the 50th gate. To arrive to the knowledge of these 50 gates, they have invented
32 Flambeaux or Torches to guide them into the secrets contained therein, which
they call the paths of Wisdom, namely the Intelligence miraculous or occult,
Intelligence sanctifying, resplendent, pure, dispositive, eternal, corporeal,
etc. The Theological Cabala treats of God and Angles. Of God, by expounding the
names of 12 and 42 letters, yea they attribute seven hundred several ones to
him; and particularly the ten Divine Attributes, which they term the grand
Sephiroth, namely, Infinity, Wisdom, Intelligence, Clemency or Goodness,
Severity, Ornament, Triumph, Confession of praise, Foundation and Royalty,
whereby God governs all things by weight, number, and measure. Of Angels,
namely of the 32 abovesaid Intelligences, called by them the paths of wisdom
(for they make them so many Angels) and of seventy two other Angels; the names
they compose of the 19, 20, and 21. Verses of the 14. Chapter of Exodus, in
each of which there being 72 letters, they form the name of the first Angel out
of the three first letters of each Verse; the name of the second, out of the
three second letters of the same Verses; and so the rest, adding at the end of
every word the names of God, Jah or El, the former whereof denotes God as he
exists, and the latter signifies Mighty or Strong God. The Cabala which treats
of words and names is nothing else but the practice of Grammar, Arithmetic and
Geometry. They divide it into three kinds. The first whereof is called
Notarickon, when of several first or last letters of some word is framed a
single one; as in our Acrosticks. The second, Gematrie, when the letters of one
name answer to the letters of another by Arithmetical proportion; (the Hebrews
as well as the Greeks making use of their letters to number withal.) Whence
some Moderns have affirmed that Christianity will last seven thousand years,
because the letters of (...) and of the same value in number with those of
(...). The third is called Themurath, which is a transposition of letters, like
that of our Anagrams, the most common way of which is to change the last letter
of the Alphabet into the first; and on the contrary; to which kind are referred
the words and verses which are read backwards, such as this: opus

Thus, they prove by the first word of Geneses, which is Bereschit, that the
world was created in Autumn, because in this word is found that of Bethisri,
which signifies Autumn: And that the Law ought be kept in the heart, because
the first letter of the Law is Beth, and the last Lamed, which two letters
being put together, and read after their mode, which is backwards, make Leb,
which signifies the heart.

The Third said, If the word Cabala be taken for a tradition, that is to say,
the manner in which the Jews made their sacrifices and prayers according to the
instruction which they had from Father to Son concerning the same, it deserves
to be esteemed for its antiquity, although it be abolished. And the more in
regard of the Hieroglyphical and mysterious names of God and Angels which it
contains; and whereof whosoever should have a perfect and entire knowledge
would find nothing impossible. 'Twas by this means, say they, that Moses
divided the waters of the Red Sea, and did so many other miracles, because he
had written at the end of his Rod the name of Jehovah. For if it be true that
black Magic can do wonders by the help of malignant spirits, why not the
Cabala, with more reason, by means of the names of God, and the Angels of
light, with whom the Cabalists render themselves friends and familias? Our Lord
seems to confirm the same, when he commands his Apostles to make use of his
name for casting Devils out of the possessed, and to heal diseases, as they
did, and the Church has done, after them, to this day. The victory of Judas
Maccabaeus against the enemies of his Religion, happening by means of a sign of
four letters; that of Antiochus over the Galatae, by a Pentagone; that of
Constantine the great, by the sign of the Cross; and the Thau wherewith the
Scripture arms the foreheads of the faithful, demonstrate that figures are not
wholly inefficacious. The Critical days of Diseases, and the practice of
Physicians, who administer their Pills in odd number, which the Pythagoreans
call the masculine number, show likewise that all kind of virtue cannot be
denied to number, and consequently that the Cabala is not to be blamed for
making account of numbers, names and figures, the knowledge whereof would
undoubtedly be most excellent did it not surpass the reach of humane capacity,
which cannot comprehend the connection which there is between the name and the
thing which it denotes, the number and the thing numbered, and figure and the
thing figured. For since the external figure of a man or other animal gives me
to know his substance which I see not, and the species of this figure entering
into my senses suffices to make me conceive the thing without its stirring out
of its place; why shall not the names, and particularly those imposed on things
by our first Parent in the Hebrew language, have as necessary a signification
and connection with things as the other accidents which are the objects of our
senses? And why shall we not believe the same of the letters which represent
those names in the same language?

The Fourth said, That the Cabala was either Allegorical or Literal. The former
was more conjectural; but if there be any virtue in characters which signify
nothing, with more reason the words, syllables and letters, which are the
visible names of things, shall not be without. This gave ground to the
Cabalists to consider in letters not only their number and Arithmeticall value;
but also their order, proportion, harmony, magnitudes and Geometrical figures,
observing whether they be straight, crooked or tortuous, closed or not; thus in
one passage where the Messiah is spoken of, some have concluded from a Mem
which is found closed in the middle of a word, contrary to custom, that this
Messiah should come out of the closed womb of a Virgin, contrary to the course
of the ordinary birth of men. Thus, Rabbi Haccadosch, in the first letters of
these three Hebrew words of Genesis 49. v. 10. Jebo Scilo Velo, found those
wherewith the Hebrews write the name of our Savior, namely JSV.

The Fifth said, That we ought to govern our selves in the reading of the
Cabalists, as Bees do, who gather only the good and leave the bad, which is
more plentiful; and above all avoid the loss of time which is employed in
turning over the tedious volumns of the Thalmudists, which are either so
unpleasant, or their sense so much unknown to us through the envy which they
bore to their successors, that we may with more reason tear their Books in
pieces then a Father did the Satyrs of Perseus, saying that since he would not
be understood by the surface and outside, like other Writers, he would look
within, whether he were more intelligible.

II. Whether Truth is always to be spoken.
Upon the second Point it was said; Truth and Justice being reciprocal, and the
former, according to Aristotle, a moral Duty, it much imports the interest of
Government that it be observed and kept inviolably, not only in contracts and
public actions, but also in private discourses; and it is a kind of sacrilege
to go about to hide it. Moreover, it is one of the greatest affronts that can be
put upon a man of honor, to give him the lie. For as it is the property of an
ingenuous man to avow the Truth freely, and not to dissemble; so Lying is the
sign and consequent of a servile spirit. Hence the Persians were not contented
to cause the children of their Kings to be instructed above all things, always
to speak the truth; but they erected Temples and Altars to this Virtue as to a
Deity, and adored it under the name of Oromagdes, which signifies the God of
Truth. And therefore it is my judgment that truth ought always to be spoken
although it be to one's own damage.

The Second said, If it be necessary always to speak truth, and that it be the
conformity of our words with our thoughts, mine is, that it is not always to be
spoken. This Nature teaches us, whilst she discovers to us only the surface of
the earth, but has hid all the treasures of it, as all the parts of man,
especially the more noble are concealed under the skin. That which vilifies
mysteries is the publishing of them, called Profanation. That which hinders
the effect of State-Counsels, whereof secrecy is the soul, is the letting of
them be discovered, which is Treason. That which takes away the credit from all
arts and professions, is the rendering them common. And Physic (amongst others)
knows the advantage of concealment, whilst the welfare of the Patient many
times depends upon his ignorance. Would you see what difference there is
between a wise man and a fool, a Civil Man and a Clown? it does not consist in
knowledge; for they oftentimes have the same thoughts and inclinations; but the
Fool speaks all that he thinks, the Wise man does not; as the Clown will
declare by Gesture and (if he can) do every thing that comes into his phancie,
but the better bred man uses restraint upon himself. The Comoedian therefore
wanted not reason, to say that Truth begets Hatred; and the Scripture teaches
us that God built houses for the wise Egyptian women who ly'd to Pharaoh, when
they were commanded to murder the Hebrew children at the birth, but obeyed
not. For though some hold that God pardoned them the lie in regard of the good
office which they rendered to his Church, and that 'twas for this good office
that God dealt well with them; yet, leaving this subtilety to the Schoolmen,
it is evident that their dissimulation was approved in this case.

The Third said, There Is great difference between Lying and not speaking all
the truth which is expected from us; the former being vicious, the other not;
whence S. Athanasius being asked by the Arrians who pursued him, whether he had
seen Athanasius, told them that he went that way a little while since, but did
not tell them that himself was the person. And S. Francis being asked whether
he did not see a robber pass by, showed his sleeve, and said, that he did not
pass that way.

The Fourth said, As only weak and distempered eyes are unable to bear the
light of the Sun, so none but weak and sickly minds cannot suffer the luster of
truth. All men are obliged to speak it, but particularly that which is dictated
from God's mouth; and we ought rather to choose Martyrdom then renounce the
belief of it. Less ought they to conceal it who are bound to it by their
condition, as Preachers and Witnesses; provided they have regard to place,
time, and persons. Without which circumstances it is as inacceptable and absurd
as to carry a Queen to an Alehouse. Yet in two cases particularly the telling
of truth may be dispensed with, I. when the safety of the Prince or good of the
State is concerned, for which, Plato in his Commonwealth says, it is lawful to
lie sometimes; and the Angel Raphael told Tobias that it is good to hide the
secrets of Kings. II. When our own life is concerned, or that of our Father,
Mother, and Kindred, against whom, although we certainly know them guilty of a
Crime, we are not obliged to declare it; provided, nevertheless, that it be
with the respect due to the Magistrate, and that we beware of speaking lies
whilst we intend only to decline discovery of the Truth. It Is the opinion of
the Civilians, and amongst others, of Paulus, in l. 9. ff. de Test. that a
Father cannot be constrained to bear witness against his Son, nor a Son against
his Father, except in the case of High Treason.

The Fifth said, That these three things must not be confounded, To lie, To
speak or tell a lie, and to do or act one. To lie is to go against our own
meaning; as when I know a thing, and not only conceal it, but speak the
contrary. This action, according to some, is always evil, inasmuch (say they)
as it is never lawful to do evil that good may come of it. According to others,
it is qualified according to the diversity of its end. For he who tells a lie to
save a Traveller's life who is pursued by Thieves, seems to do better then if
he exposed him to their Cruelty by his discovery. The Physician who dissembles
to his Patient the danger of his disease, and thinks it enough to acquaint his
domestics therewith, does better then if he cast him into despair by a
downright dismal prognostication; and when he chears him up in fitting time
and place by some pleasant made Story, what he speaks can scarce be reckoned
amongst idle words. But he who lies for his Profit, as most Tradesmen do, sins
proportionably to the deceit which he thereby causes; but he is most culpable
who lies to the Magistrate. One may tell or speak a lie without lying, namely,
when one speaks a false thing conceiving it to be true. To do or speak a lie,
is to lead a life contrary to ones profession; as he who preaches well and
lives ill. Whence I conclude, that many precautions are requisite to lie
without committing an offense, that a lie is to be spoken as little as
possible, and never to be done or acted at all.

CONFERENCE XXXVIII.
I. Of the Period, called Fits of Fevers. II. Of Friendship.

I. Of the Fits of Agues.
A Fever is a Heat contrary to Nature kindled in the Heart, and from thence
sent by the Arteries and Veins into the whole Body, with a manifest laesion or
disturbance of the action. It is so inseparable from the Heart in case of any
injury, that being we cannot dye without the Heart be mis-affected; therefore
many have thought that we cannot dye without a Fever, though 'twere of a
violent death. And for that there are three subjects which receive this Heat,
viz. the Parts, the Humors, and the Spirits; thence arises the distinction of
Fevers into three kinds, the Hectic, the Humoral, and the Ephemera, or One-day
Fever. The first is in the solid parts, and is called Hectic or Habitual,
because it resides in the whole habit of the Body, and is of very long
continuance, yea, ordinarily lasts till Death. The second, called Humoral, is,
when the Humors are enflamed, either through a bare excess of Heat without
other alteration in their substance, or with corruption and putrefaction, which
happens most frequently. The third kind is when only the Spirits are enflamed,
and it is called Ephemera, because it continues but one day; unless the Humors
too become of the party, as it falls out usually; and it admits of three
differences, according to the three sorts of Spirits, Animal, Vital, and
Natural. The Humoral Fever is either Simple or Compounded. The Simple is either
Continual or Intermitting. The Continual is caused when the putrefaction of the
Blood possesses the great Vessels, or some noble Part. The Intermitting,
produced by the three other Humors putrefying out of the Veins, is either
Quotidian, which is produced by Phlegm; or Tertian, by Choler; or Quartane, by
Melancholy. The Compounded (or complex) Humoral Fever is caused by the mixture
of those Humors, which then cause a double Quotidian, double Tertian, and
double Quartane, yea, sometimes, but very rarely, a Quintane, and others of
longer interval; which may be attributed to all the different from which Fevers
arise. The Efficient, causes is, in my opinion, the strength of Nature, and
every one's particular Temper; as he who is more robust, and upon whom the
disease is more violent, will have longer Fits, (the Fight of Nature with the
Malady being more stoutly maintained by the parties) and consequently shorter
intervals, because that which increases to the one decreases to the other. The
Choleric will have longer Fits of a Tertian Fever, and shorter of a
Quotidiane. The Material Cause contributes very much herein, being that which
supplies Ammunition to this intestine War, which is continued or discontinu'd
according to the proportion and quantity of the Matter. It Is more easy to name
the Formal Cause then to understand it. But as for the Final, it is certain that
Nature makes the intervals of Fevers purposely to rally and recruit her
strength; as truces and cessations of Arms use to be made when the Country is
almost spent, or the Soldiers too much harrass'd and out of heart.

The Second said, That the Periods of Fevers have been matter of torture to the
best wits, who could not without admiration consider, how, ( e. g.) one sick of
a Quartan, and appearing to day at the point of Death, should nevertheless for
two days together perform all his actions perfectly; and then upon the fourth,
many times too at the same hour (in more contumacious Fevers) become in the
like pitiful condition again. Now the Cause hereof is commonly attributed to
the time which is required for producing the matter of the Fever, and consuming
it. They hold that it is so long in consuming as the Fit lasts, the the end
whereof is the Crisis; like as the ancient water-clocks of the Romans did not
signify nor strike the hour till the vessel was full. Some have imputed the
cause to the motion of the Humor, and believed that as the humid mass of the
Sea has its flux, reflux, and interval, so have the Humors of our Bodies,
when the natural heat which regulated them, being disordered, and its effect
suspended by the disease, governes the same no longer, but abandons them to
their own Capricio. Of which motion it is no easier to render a reason then of
that of the Sea, the Lodestone, and all other occult motions. Hence many have
recurr'd to the Asylum of Last Differences, the knowledge whereof is
interdicted to Humane Capacity. And therefore they have ventured to assign no
other cause, saving that the Interval of these Fevers being their most proper
Difference, it must not be wondered if we understand their nature as little as
those of all other things in the world.

The Third said, That the time which is requisite for generating the Humor
cannot be the cause of these Intervals, since the Fits of a Fever are longer or
shorter, though the Fever change not its Nature; yea, it will become double or
trebble sometimes, and still keep the name of a Quartan. As, on the contrary,
when there is so little matter left for it that it is almost quite gone, yet it
always returns on the fourth day, although the Fit lasts a shorter time. Yea,
it comes to pass oftentimes, that he who has had a Quartan, and is cured of
all other Symptoms of his Ague, yet for a long time after feels the chilness
and weariness at the same day and hour that his Disease was wont to seize upon
him: In the mean time while it is manifest that the Fever being gone, the
Melancholy Humor is no longer gathered together in sufficient quantity to
produce it; and therefore the cause cannot be attributed to the Melancholy
Humor, since it no longer causes the fever. Whereby we may judge that the
quantity of the matter contributes to the lengthening or diminishing of the
fit, but gives not the fever its name or form. Now as for the motion which they
attribute to the Humor, like that of the Sea, and their calling this Interval
the form of the Fever, it is a confession of their Ignorance, but not a solution
of the Question. Galen, in the second Book of the Differences of Fevers, and
the last Chapter, refers the cause of these regular and periodical motions to
the dispositions of the parts of the whole Body, which being distempered cease
not to transmit or receive, generate or attract superfluous and excrementitious
humors; and he holds that so long as the cause of these dispositions lasts, so
long the circuits continue; and consequently, the reason why a Tertian which is
caused by Choler returns every third day, is, because the distempered parts
transmit, or receive, or generate bilious humors and excrements every other
day. But the question remains still, whence it is, that these parts are
affected in such manner that they cause such just and regular periods? For
though it be true that the parts, by reason of pain or heat, ( e. g.) yellow
putrid Choler; nevertheless this does not infer that they attract the same
rather the third day then the fourth or every day, as they ought to do; since
the cause being always present, viz. the pain or heat which incessantly
attracts this humor, the effect should always follow and make a Quotidian
circuit; although indeed it is but, once in three days.

The Fourth said, That as Physicians refer the unusual motions of Epileptical,
and the violent sallies of the Frantic, not barely to the phlegmatic or
atrabilarious humor, but to a certain quality of it; so ought we to do
touching the periodical motions of Fevers, which proceed not simply from the
humors corrupted, but from a particular condition and virtue of each humor,
whereby it is that putrefying Phlegm makes its approaches every day, Choler
every third, and Melancholy every fourth day. And as these humors, so long as
they retain their natural constitution, have a regular motion which carries one
into the Bladder of Gall and the Guts, the other into the Spleen, and the other
into the Stomach; so being corrupted, each acquires a certain new quality and
putrefaction, which is the cause of other periodical motions, namely, those of
Fevers.

The Fifth said, That as health is a Symmetrie and fit proportion of all the
humors while they continue in society one with another; so a Fever is a
discomposure thereof when some one comes to infringe the obedience which it
owes to the laws of the Compositum, and to usurp a Tyranny over the rest. In
which case, they do as States who apprehend their own ruin by the too great
increase of a potent neighbor; they unite against it, and go to assail it all
together. Upon this shock, the natural heat retires to the Heart which is the
center of the Body, as if it called its Council; hence proceeds the cold fit of
the Fever, during which the extreme parts, destitute of their ordinary heat,
fall into trembling, shivering, and chattering; as it comes to pass upon the
Earth, when the Sun is very remote from it: But Nature at length getting the
mastery, is not contented to return the Blood to the parts who were deprived
thereof, in the same condition that they lent it to her; she drives it into
them with a new heat acquired by the vicinity of the Heart, which is the source
thereof, and augmented by the reciprocation of its motion. But as no violent
thing is of long continuance, this heated Blood causing its sharpest serosities
to pass through the skin by sweat, becomes assuaged, and (as water removed from
off the fire ceases to boil) it no longer extends the Veins, nor stimulates
the Arteries, whether this Crisis perfectly terminates the disease, as in
Continual Fevers, or the Fit only, as in Intermitting; which leaving a leven
of the Fever, how little soever, in the humors and an empyreuma or combustion
in the parts, the best Aliments, yea, the most laudable humors, if any such
remain in the Body, are as easily turned into the matter of the Fever, as the
best Wine is spoiled when it is poured upon a corrupted lee in a musty vessel.
And it is not so much to be wondered that this corruption is made regularly in
the time of half a day in Quotidians, of one day in Tertians, and of two in
Quartans, as that the Periods of Fevers are sometimes irregular, as is seen in
Erratical Fevers; considering that all generations and corruptions are
reciprocal and have their limited time. Thus it is a less wonder that Women are
ordinarily delivered of Children likely to live, in the ninth and seventh
months, then if they were delivered so in all the other months indifferently;
which has place in all other motions of Nature, who does every thing according
to number, weight, and measure.

II. Of Friendship.
Upon the Second Point the First said, Friendship is a powerful and straight
Union which conjoynes the lover and the loved party together, making one whole
of these two parts; like that bond which in Nature unites the Matter and the
Form, the Accident and the Substance. The cause of it is Goodness, which being
proportionate to the Body, produces a natural Amity; to the Passions, an
Animal Amity; to the Understanding, a Rational one; to the Laws, a Political or
Civil; to Religion, a Divine one. This Goodness consisting in a Proportion and
Symmetry is not different from Beauty; and therefore we apprehend Beauty in
good things, and goodness and convenience in such as are handsome and graceful.

The Second said, besides goodness which is the cause of Friendship, and
toward which our will is as necessarily carried as the Intellect is toward
Truth, and all the Senses toward their proper objects; Resemblance and
Friendship it self are the causes of Friendship. The first is founded upon the
Love which we bear to our selves. For as we love our selves above any thing
else in this world, so we love those who resemble us, and symbolize with our
humors and inclinations. Hence it is that one of the most common courses to
please, is, to conform our selves to those by whom we desire to be affected; we
never contradict their Judgment, we have no other Will but theirs, we frame
our selves to their gestures and actions, without excepting those which are
imperfect. Then Friendship, the second means of acquiring Love, is no less
effectual; it being almost impossible not to love them who love us. Whence the
Ancients feigned Love to be the most ancient of all the gods, intimating that
Love has no other Principle or Origin but Love it self. And they who assigned
him a Companion which they styled Anteros, signified thereby, that Friendship
cannot last unless it be mutual.

The Third said, That Friendship must be distinguished from Love. For Love is a
Passion of the Concupiscible Appetite, arising from the imagination of a
sensible good, and is found even in brute beasts. But friendship is one of the
most excellent virtues, or rather the fruit of accomplished and perfect virtue;
it is indeed very rare, because it has place only amongst excellent persons
(who are very few) uniting and making them conspire together in the exercises
of virtue. But being once established, it is very durable, inasmuch as its
cause and foundation, Virtue, always remains, and may be exercised. Therefore
Seneca pronounces, that the friendship which knows an end was never true. Some
friendships there are (indeed the most) whose foundation is Profit and
Pleasure, but they are always imperfect. Whence it is that old men and young
men are ordinarily accounted incapable of true friendship; the former, because
they scarce regard any thing besides Profit; and the latter, because their
minds are more set upon what is pleasant and agreeable then upon what is honest
or virtuous. Nor is it ever found amongst wicked persons. For 1. a perfect
friend must love another as much as himself. And although the affection we bear
to our selves be not true friendship, because this must always have reference
to another, yet it is the most certain, yea the measure of perfect friendship,
and God has appointed it as the rule of our love to our Neighbor. Now how can
he be a perfect friend who does not love himself? How can he agree with another
who accords not with himself? and how will he do good to another, who does none
to himself? for a vicious man is his own chiefest enemy, whilst he pursues the
false and imaginary good in stead of the true; vice, instead of virtue; the
shadow, for the body; and many times he becomes his own murderer by
intemperance and other vices. He has always a civil war within himself; his
Reason is never at peace with his Appetite; what one desires, the other
rejects. Consequently, he has never any inward joy, but he is greatly
displeased with being alone, and for that reason always seeks the company of
those like himself, to divert his sad thoughts.

The Fourth said, There is nothing comparable to Friendship, which is the salt
and seasoning of humane life, the presever of societies, and the most agreeable
and sweetest consolation that persons of virtue and honor can have; by help of
which a man finds another self, to whom he may entrust his most secret
thoughts. This consideration moved Archytas the Tarentine to say, That he who
should ascend into the Heavens and attentively survey the beauty of the Stars
and all the Celestial Orbs, would have no pleasure if he found no person to
whom to recount those wonders, and communicate his felicity. It Is therefore one
of the greatest contentments to have a friend, whom you may make partaker of
your felicity, which is so much the greater when it is communicated to others
without being diminished to your self; and in case adversity befall you, the
same is sweetened by the relation you make thereof to him who shares this burden
with you, and so renders it more supportable. True it is, that although a
friend be necessary in either fortune, yet he is of more advantage to us in
adversity; in which a friend supplies his friend with help and counsel, and is
thereby distinguished from a false one, who loves only for the sake of his own
pleasure and profit. Now whatever is excellent has most of Unity. And as a
River divided into several streams is more weak; so friendship shared amongst
many is always languid and impotent. Besides, a friend should be complacent to
his friend in every thing, and they ought to be but one soul living in two
bodies. Now it is as hard to please many, as it is impossible to please all the
world. And should two friends at the same time implore the succor of a third,
he could not betake himself to both together, nor consequently satisfy the
duty of friendship.

The Fifth said, That Friendship is either Natural, Spiritual, or Moral. The
Natural is between Father and Children, Brethren and Sisters, Husband and Wife,
and between Kindred or Alliance. The Spiritual is between those who profess the
same Law and Religion, such as is that of Christians and Monasticks. The Moral
is between such as are united together upon the account of Virtue; such was
that of Theseus and Pirithous, Orestes and Pylades, Damon and Pythias, Aeneas
and Achates, Achilles and Patroclus, Jonathan and David, and so few others,
that many have conceived perfect Friendship but an Idea, a mark to be aimed at,
but never hit; much like the description of a perfect Orator. It consists only
in the union of Wills, not of Understandings; for I may have an opinion
different from that of my friend without prejudicing our friendship, but not a
different Will. And as honesty does not take away piety, nor piety honesty; so
spiritual and moral friendship do not destroy one the other. For I may love one
morally whom I love not spiritually; that is, I may conspire with him in the
exercises of honesty or virtue, though I differ in those of piety.

CONFERENCE XXXIX.
I. Why all men naturally desire knowledge. II. Whether Permutation or Exchange
be more commodious then Buying and Selling.

I. Why all men naturally desire knowledge.
ARistotle rightly teaches that the first Question ought to be whether the
thing be or exist; because it is in vain to seek the causes of that which has
no being. It Is therefore first to be inquired, whether it be true that all men
have a natural desire of knowing; and then the causes thereof must be sought.
That which is natural must be found in all; so we say it is natural to a stone
to tend downwards, because all of them do so. But it is so far from being true
that all men are desirous to know and learn, that for rectifying the defect of
such desire we see Teachers sometimes armed with the rod, sometimes forced to
use allurements and rewards, and employ all artifices they can devise to excite
a desire of learning in such as want it, the number of whom is always greater
then of others. Hence it is that in a School of five hundred Scholars you shall
scarce find fifty that have well profited in learning; and amongst a hundred
Masters of a Trade, scarce ten good workmen. Moreover, there are some men who
have not much less of the beast then of the man. And as the greatest Clerks
(according to the Proverb) are not always the wisest men, so neither are they
the most happy. The best and most knowing Philosophers are not the men that do
their business best now-adays. 'T will be said, that to understand the means of
advancing one's self is a sort of knowledge, and they who have not a genius for
learning have one for other things, and profit therein as well as in the
Sciences. But I answer, that Philosophy being the key of all other Disciplines,
it is a sign that they will not open the chest, when they refuse the key of it.
Besides, we see some persons so stupid, that they interpret the curiosity of
knowing a trouble to themselves, and a vice in others: and not only some
Philosophers have disclaimed to know any thing except that they knew nothing;
but there have been found many holy personages who made profession of ignorance.

The Second said, All naturally desire to know, but not all things, nor at all
times, nor by all the ways that are prescribed them; every one would learn
after his own mode, and things proportional to his reach: and as when these
conditions meet together, they excite the desire; so when any one is wanting,
they cause disgust. Thus one is passionately affected to Algebra, which
deterr's the wit of another: One matter may please at the beginning, and become
distastful into the continuance; and the same subject being treated in familiar
discourse will render you attentive, yet displeases you in a more lofty style,
which, on the other side, would content some other; wherefore it is not to be
wondered if some minds have reluctance against the constraint which is offered
to be laid upon them; as the stomach rises when a food which it loathes is
tendered to it, though the appetite of knowing be, in the mean time, no less
natural to the soul then that of eating is to the body.

The Third said, That supposing this desire of knowledge not general, it is
demanded whence it comes to pass that it is so great in many persons, that some
have relinquished all their fortunes for it, others have spent their whole age
in attaining it, others have put out their own eyes the better to attend it,
and some lost their lives for it. It seems to me that all of them do thus for
some good. Now good is divided into its three kinds; and correspondently, some
do it for profit, fitting themselves to gain themselves a livelihood; others
for honor, and to enjoy the prerogatives which knowledge procures to the most
learned; others again do it, only for the pleasure which they find in study,
and not for the sake of knowledge it self: for when we once have attained the
knowledge of a thing, it affords us delight no longer; whence it is that
excellent workmen are always poor; because so soon as they have arrived to a
perfection of skill they leave all further search to others; their only
pleasure was in the acquisition. This pleasure herein resembling all other
sorts, which consist only in action, and not in acquiescence or satisfaction.
But may not it also be thus, because our soul being a Number always desires and
aims to perfectionate it self? And as no number can be assigned so great but
that some others may be added to it, even to infinity; so our soul is capable
of receiving new light and new notions, to infinity? Or else, as every thing
tends to its natural place, so our soul being of celestial original aspire to
the infinite knowledge of God by that of finite things.

The Fourth said, That the reason why both young and old desire to know, is,
because of the extreme pleasure which they take in knowing things. But if some
be not inclined thereunto, it is in regard of the difficulties, which abate
indeed, but cannot wholly extinguish their natural ardour. This pleasure is
apparent, in that we take delight to know not only true things, but such as we
are conscious to be notoriously false; yea sometimes we are more delighted with
the latter then the former provided they have some pretty conceits, as with
Stories, Fables and Romances. For there is nothing so small and inconsiderable
in nature, wherein the mind finds not incomparable divertisement and delight.
The Gods, says Aristotle, are as well in the least insects as in the most
bulky animals; and to despise little things is, in his judgment, to do like
children. For, on the contrary, as in Art, the less place a Picture takes up,
the more it is esteemed; and the Iliads of Homer were sometimes the more
admired for that they were comprised in a Nut-shel: so in Nature, the less
volumn things are in, the more worthy they are of admiration. Now if there be
so much pleasure in seeing the figures and representations of natural things,
because we observe the work-man's industry in them; there is much more
contentment in clearly beholding those things themselves, and remarking in
their essence, proprieties and virtues, the power and wisdom of Nature far
transcending that of Art. But if the knowledge of natural things affords us
such great delight, that of supernatural ravishes us in a higher measure; and
it is also much more difficult, because they are remote, from our senses, which
are the ordinary conveyances of knowledge: Wherefore there being pleasure in
knowing both great things and small, natural and supernatural; it is no wonder
if man, who usually follows delectable Good, takes delight in knowing.

The Fifth said, The Philosopher in the beginning of his Metaphysics proves
this Proposition, 1. By Induction, from the senses, which are respectively
delighted in their operations; whence we love the sense of Seeing above all the
rest, because it supplies us with more knowledge then any one of the rest. 2.
Because Man being mindful of the place of his original, desires to raise
himself above Plants and the other Animals. By Sense he advances himself above
Plants; by Memory above certain Animals who have none; by Experience above them
all; but by the use of Reason, from which proceeds Science, Men excel one
another. For there are Animals which have some shadow of Prudence, but not any
has Science. And, as Seneca says, men are all equal in their beginning and
their end, that is, as to life and death, not differing but in their interval,
whereof Science is the fairest Ornament. The cause of this desire of knowing
proceeds then from the natural inclination which every thing has to follow its
own good. Now the good of Man, as Man, is to know. For as a thing exists not
but so far forth as it acts, the Rational Soul (the better part of us) cannot
be termed such, saving inasmuch as it knows; yea Action being the measure not
only of being, but also of the perfection of being (whence God, who is most
perfect, never ceases to act; and the First Matter which is the most imperfect
of all entities, acts either little or nothing at all) therefore the Reasonable
Soul being the most noble and perfect of all forms, desires to act and employ
it self incessantly in its action, which is the knowledge of things. Indeed
every thing strives after its own operation. As soon as the Plant is issued out
of the earth it thrusts forward till it be come to its just bigness. The Eye
cannot without pain be hindered from seeing; Silence causes sadness. And as we
see the Boar and the Bull, by an admirable instinct of Nature, the one oppose
its forehead, the other its mouth, against such as provoke them, though the
former as yet wants teeth, and the latter horns; so the reason and desire of
knowing appears very early in children, even before they are capable of much.

The Sixth said, That the Intellect becomes each thing which it understands.
Hence Man, the most inconstant of all creatures, is carried so ardently to the
knowledge of all things, which finding not worthy of him he relinquishes, till
he be arrived at the knowledge of his Creator, to whom conforming himself he
desires to know nothing more, but acquiesces, contemplating in him, as in a
mirror, all other things of the World.

The Seventh said, All things were made for the use and behoof of man, and
therefore he has reason to desire to know every thing, to the end he may make
use of it.

The Eighth said, We have the seeds and treasures of Knowledge hidden in our
selves; which longing to be exerted and reduced from power into act,
incessantly solicit us to put them forth. Hence comes the desire of knowing,
or rather awakning these species which are perfected in us by use, and in time
wholly displayed. In which respect Teachers are with good reason compared to
Mid-wives who do not produce the Infant in the Mother's womb, but lend a
helping hand to its coming forth. For Teachers do not infuse knowledge into the
children whom they instruct, but only assist them to produce it out of folds
and recesses of the mind, in which otherwise it would remain unprofitable, and
like matter without form; as the Steel does not give fire to the Flint, but
elicits the same of it. So those natural lights and notices being at first
invelop'd with clouds, when their veil is taken away, and they are loosned, as
the Platonists speak, from the contagion of the senses, they extremely delight
those who bore them enclosed in their breast, and needed help to exclude them.

II. Whether exchange be more convenient then buying and selling.
Upon the second Point it was said, As Unity is the beginning of Numbers in
Arithmetic, and of causes in nature; so community of goods was no doubt at
first amongst men. But because it is the occasion of negligence, and cannot
continue long, in regard some are better husbands, more easy to be contented,
and need less then others; hence arose the words of Mine and Thine, which are
more efficacious then Ours and Yours; since even Monasticks take it for a
mortification, and children cry when any thing proper to them is taken from
them. In old time, when one had eaten or spent what was his own he repaired to
his neighbor for more, accommodating him with some other thing whereof he
stood in need, by way of exchange, the respective value of the things being
limited according to their estimation of their goodness and scarcity, in the
first place, and then of their beauty or comeliness. And because Oxen and Sheep
afforded them the most commodities, as their skins for clothing, and their milk
and flesh for food, besides other uses to which they were serviceable, they
made all their traffic with Cattle, in which all their wealth consisted. But
because 'twas too troublesome a thing for a man to drive always a flock of
Sheep before him, or lead a Cow by the horn, for making of payment; the
industry of men increasing, they cast their eyes upon that which was in the
next degree of most use to them, and most durable; and finding that 'twas Iron
and Copper, and especially that the latter was the fairest and easiest to be
melted and cast into Kettles and other domestic Utensils, they made choice
thereof, mutually giving and receiving it, by weight, for other things they
needed, and divided it by pounds, which word still remains amongst us, to
signify twenty shillings, which is very near the just value that a pound of
Copper had in those days. And to save the labor of weighing this pound and the
parts of it, they stamped upon one side the figure of a ship, with the weight
and value (because Saturn, the inventer of money in Italy, arrived there in a
ship) and on the other side the pourtait of one of those beasts which are
designed by the word Pecus, whence Money came to be called pecunia. Afterward
the Arms of the Prince were substituted in stead of the Ship, and Constantine
put a Cross in place of the Beast. Now because, in old Gaulish, a Ship was
called Pile (whence the word Pilote remains to this day) the side of the Coin
on which the Ship was is still called Pile, and the other Cross, how different
stamps soever have succeeded since. Nevertheless exchange is more universal
then buying and selling, particularly between State and State, transportation
of money being generally forbidden, and only the carrying away of Merchandise
for Merchandise allowed. Moreover, there are more Nations who exercise Commerce
by trucking, then there are that make use of Money. It seems also to be more
convenient for particular persons, it being more difficult for him that is in
necessity to sell what he has, many times, at a low rate in money, and to buy
dearly what he wants, then to give out of his abundance to him that needs,
and receive from him in consideration thereof what himself wants.

The Second said, That Exchange being founded upon Commutative Justice, and
introduced by the mutual necessities men have of one another, consists in the
comparing of things between themselves; so that according as one thing exceeds
another in price and value, or else is exceeded by it, the excess or defect of
the one side or the other must be equally compensated. To which purpose men
make use of two measures, the one natural, and the other artificial. The
natural measure is the scarcity of things compared with their public use.
Whence it comes to pass that the less there is of a thing which is greatly
used, it is the dearer; and, on the contrary, the price is diminished according
to the greater plenty thereof. For it is not barely the goodness of the thing,
nor its rarity or its necessity, that is the cause of its value; but all these
together referred to its use. So water, which is better and less hurtful to man
then wine, is nevertheless of less price. Corn is more necessary then Sugar,
yet not so dear; and the rarest Plants, which are no ingredients into the
compositions of Physic, scarce find buyers. Now Money is the artificial
measure, invented by men, for measuring the price and value of all things, both
real and imaginary, moveable and immovable. These two measures are different,
in that the abundance of things diminishes their price; scarcity and defect
augments it: but contrarily, the plenty of money enhances the price of things,
and its scarcity diminishes it: whence the more money there is in a State, the
dearer every thing is; as appears by comparing our Age with that of our
Grandfathers before the discovery of the West Indies; when they were richer
and had more Merchandise with a thousand Crowns then we have now with ten
thousand. And on the contrary, the more things there are to exchange, the truck
or traffic is the easier; although that is the happiest Country from whence
more is exported then imported into it. But because many times the parties
could not agree, he that needed an Ox possessing nothing that liked the owner,
and some things of too great value being withal incapable of division, as a
House or a Ship; therefore they invented money to supply all these defects.
This money, in some Countries, consisted of Shells; in others, of precious
Stones; elsewhere, of other things; but most commonly of Metal. And although it
be not absolutely necessary, yet it is much more convenient then Exchange; for
by means thereof a man may do every thing that can be done by permutation, and
some thing more. Whence it is, that Princes always prohibit the transportation
of it, but that of other things only upon some occasions. For money is, with
good reason, said to be every thing potentially.

The Third said, That as it was sometimes doubted whether Caesar's birth were
more happy or fatal to the Roman Empire, which he on one side adorned with
glory and triumphs, and on the other desolated by Civil Wars: so it is hard to
judge whether the invention of Gold and Silver Coin has been more beneficial
or pernicious to mankind. For it is true, it greatly facilitates Commerce
amongst men; but it likewise brings along with it covetousness, and the desire
of having it. For whereas at first the most avaritious were forced to set
bounds to their covetousness, when their Granaries, Sellars and Houses were
full; and also when Iron money came in use, it took up almost as much room as
the things themselves; now, since the invention of Gold and Silver Coin, men
have begun to reckon by Millions, which give less content to the possessors
then pains to acquire, solliciotousness to preserve, and trouble to lose them.

CONFERENCE XL.
I. Of Prognostication or Presaging by certain Animals. II. Why all men love
more to command then to obey.

I. Of Divination by some Animals.
MAn is affected to nothing more passionately then to the Faculty of Divining.
Upon this account he paints Prudence, the most necessary of the Cardinal
Virtues, with a double countenance, one whereof speculates futurity. And
because this knowledge of things to come would rid him of the two most violent
passions which perplex him, Fear and Hope, therefore he spares nothing to
attain the same. To this end he employs not only the four Elements, but makes a
distinct art of the ways of Prediction by each of them. He makes use of all
mixed bodies too, and searches even the bowels of living creatures, yea the very
Sepulchers of the dead, in quest of Presages of the future. And although,
speaking absolutely, such inventions are more capable to attract the
admiration, and consequently the money of credulous persons, then to instruct
them (unless perhaps, in prudence, to take care of being so easily deceived
afterward) yet there seems to be a correspondence and connection between
present and future things, as there is between the passed and the present; for
as he who perceives the corruption of unburied bodies after a Battle to have
infected the air, and begotten the Pestilence, may certainly refer the cause of
such Contagion to the War; so he that shall behold a furious War in which great
Battles are fought may conjecture an approaching Pestilence. Possibly, if we
were as careful to contemplate the changes of all other bodies, Minerals and
Vegetables, we should remark therein Presages as much more infallible then
those of animals, as their actions, being more simple, are likewise more
certain; as may be instanced in the Mulberrytree, which buds not till all the
cold weather be passed; but because the Local Motion which is proper to
animals, affects us more, thence it becomes also more remarkable.

The Second said, That man must not be forgotten in this Disquisition. For not
to speak of Prognostication in his diseases, by means whereof the Physician
gets the esteem of a God, we see old men and other persons so regular in the
constitution of their bodies, that they will tell you, beforehand, better then
any Almanac, by a Toothache, a Megrim, or a Sciatica, what weather is
approaching, whether rain, frost or snow, or fair. This is commonly attributed
to the rarefaction or condensation of the peccant humors in their bodies, the
same discharging themselves upon what part they find weakest (as the weakest
are commonly the most oppressed) and there making themselves felt by their
acrimony: but the parties are no longer sensible thereof then that intemperate
weather continues, a new disposition of the air causing a new motion and
alteration in the humors. When Cats comb themselves (as we speak) it is a sign
of rain; because the moisture which is in the air before the rain, insinuating
it self into the fur of this animal, moves her to smooth the same, and cover
her body wherewith, that so she may the less feel the inconvenience of Winter;
as on the contrary, she opens her fur in Summer, that she may the better
receive the refreshing of the moist season. The crying of Cats, Osprey's,
Raven's, and other Birds, upon the tops of houses, in the nightime, are
observed by the vulgar to pre-signifie death to the sick; and those creatures
are thought to know the approach thereof by their cadaverous scent, which
appears not to us till after their death, by reason of the dullness of our
senses; it being no less admirable that such carrion Birds smell better then
we, then it is to see a dog distinguish by his smelling the traces of a Hare,
which are imperceptible to us. But it may as well be, that these Birds cry by
chance upon the first house where they light, and are heard only by such as
watch in attendance upon persons dangerously sick; they being likewise Birds of
but a weak sight, and therefore flying abroad most commonly in the dark. As for
the foresight of fertility, by the Honeton, and of a calm, by the Halcyon or
Kings-fisher, these ought to be referred to the same instinct of Nature, which
guides the Spider to weave her nets, and the Swallow to build her neast.

The Third said, There is a close connection between the superior and inferior
bodies, the chain whereof is to us imperceptible, though their consecution be
infallible. This was signified by Trismegistus, when he pronounced that that
which is below is like that which is on high, and therefore it is not to be
wondered if one be the sign of the other.

The Fourth said, Certain Animals are found under the domination of one and the
same Starr, of which subjection they have some character either external or
internal. And it is credible that all bodies, especially Plants, have figures or
characters of their virtues, either within or without. Thus, they say, those
Plants which are prickly, and whose leaves have the shape of a spears point, or
other offensive arms, are vulnerary; those which have the spots or speckles of
a Serpent, are noted to be good against poisons; and all are serviceable for
the conservation of such parts, and cure of such diseases as they resemble in
figure. In like manner, it is probable that the Cock has a certain internal
character which particularly rank him under the dominion of the Sun; and that
this is the cause that he crows when his predominant planet possesses one of
the three cardinal points of Heaven, in which the same has most power, namely,
in the East, when the light thereof is returning toward him; in the South, at
which time he rejoices to see it at the highest pitch of strength; and at
midnight, because he feels that it is then beginning again to approach to our
Hemisphere. But he crows not at sunset, being sad then for its departure, and
for that he is deprived of its light. And, for this reason, in my opinion, the
Romans chiefly made use of young Chickens, from which to collect their
auguries; because they conceived that being Animals of the Sun, and more
susceptible of its impressions, by reason of their tenderness, they were more
easily sensible, and consequently afforded more remarkable tokens by their
motions and particular constitution, of the various dispositions of the Sun, in
reference to the several Aspects of good and bad Planets, especially of Saturn
their opposite. Whence judging, by the dullness and sadness of the Chickens,
that the Sun was afflicted by a bad Aspect of Mars or Saturn; they drew a
consequence, that since this Luminary, which besides its universal power, was
the Disposer of their fortune with Mars, was found ill disposed when they were
projecting any design, therefore they could not have a good issue of it. Thus
people prognostice a great Famine or Mortality when great flocks of Jayes or
Crows forsake the woods; because these melancholy birds, bearing the characters
of Saturn the author of famine and mortality, have a very early perception of
the bad disposition of that Planet.

The Fifth said, Thence also it is, that if a fly be found in an Oak-apple,
it is believed that the year ensuing will be troubled with wars, because that
Insect being always in motion, and troublesome, is attributed to Mars. If a
spider be found in the said Excrescence, then a Pestilence is feared, because
this Insect has the characters of malignant Saturn; if a small worm be seen in
it, then, this Insect being attributed to Jupiter and Venus, plenty is
prognosticated. Now, did we know all the internal or external characters of
Animals, we might by their motion and disposition obtain some knowledge of that
of their Star, and thence draw some conjectures of futurities. But this cannot
be done by the deportments of Men, because these are varied by a thousand
businesses, imagination and troubles, and especially by their free Will and
Dissimulations; the latter whereof puts them upon outward motions contrary to
their internal, and the former carries them, by the sway of their wills,
against the course of celestial impressions.

II. Why Men love more to command then obey.
Upon the Second Point it was said, Man is one of the weakest, but the most
ambitious of all Creatures. He accounts himself worthy to command, not only
over all that is below him, but also over all his equals. And did not shame
restrain him, he would willingly give his own suffrage for himself, when the
person of greatest sufficiency were to be nominated. Hence it is, as I
conceive, that we have as many Enemies as Servants, if the Proverb be true. For
the Servant accounting himself equally or more able to command then his Master,
believes that Nature of Fortune does him wrong in leaving him in that
condition, and therefore he aspires to change it. The opposition of Contraries
contributes also thereunto; for observing the evils which attend such as are
reduced under the will of another; and on the other side, the content which
Masters seem to have while they live at their own discretion, and more easily
suffer any evil of their own doing, because every Man can better bear with
himself then with another; hereupon they as much desire command as they detest
obedience. Now besides all this, the reason why we are so enamored of command,
is, for that every thing desires to be in action, because all being consists
primarily in action. Our Will, accordingly, is forward to exert the act of
volition; but it wills only by halves, when it is controlled; and nothing
offends us more then when we command, and no body stirs to obey us; so that
some are impatient of being gainsaid, even in things notoriously impertinent
or unjust. Witness Philip of Macedon, who having unjustly condemned a poor
woman, chose rather to pay her condemnation for her to her Adversary, then
retract his own judgment. 'Twill perhaps be objected, that there are good
Friars and Nuns, who love better to obey then to command. I answer, that in
this act as well as in other mortifications of their appetites, they
acknowledge that they under-go very great difficulties; and these prove the
truth of the Proposition. Yea, obedience and the resignation of our own will is
more hard to observe then Poverty and Chastity; inasmuch as the goods of
Fortune and the Body are inferior to those of the Mind.

The Second said, This Question has no difficulty in the general, since all
they who are contented with a servile condition, make their obedience
subservient to their desire of raising a fortune, which may one day enable them
to command. Nor is the reason of it less easy. For since no motive is more
powerful to incline the Will of Man then Delight and Profit, no other reason
of this desire need be searched, since superiority affords such sensible
pleasure, and conspicuous advantage; command being, to speak truth, nothing
else but an effective power of applying what means we please wherewith to
compass our Profit or Delight. But seeing Nature has established this Law,
that Inferior things ought to obey the Superior, the less worthy the more
worthy; so that Obedience and Command are the different consonances which
compose the Harmony of the world; Whence is it that Man alone raising up the
Tones or Notes of his Ambition interrupts the Consort of the Universe, and
makes Discord amongst this agreeable Music? The reason hereof is, that as
Nature gives no desires but she also gives power, so she gives no power without
desire. Wherefore having made Man free by a power, to wit, a Will most free and
independent, she has also made him free by Inclination and Desire. Now
forasmuch as Obedience is the restriction and modification, or rather an
annihilation of, and contrary motion to this Will and desire of freedom, it is
no wonder that Man so abhors servitude and desires command; because in doing so
he most powerfully exercises his will in all its extent.

The Third said, The Will of Man being always mutable, and in perpetual
motion, it is no marvel if it abhors Obedience which checks its course, deprives
it of the means of change, and usually carries it by a retrograde motion
against its own inclination. Yea, it is an ordinary thing for Men to be averse
to do or abstain from any matter whatsoever, only because it is commanded or
forbidden; although we had a desire to do it before, or at least it was
indifferent to us. Whence arose the Proverb, That Forbidding inflames Appetite;
and the more, for that the order which is given us introduces into our Will
another strange Will, which, though like and conformable to ours, yet
displeases us, as it is forinsecal; as the motion which would have been natural
to the stone, if it had been barely let fall from on high downwards, becomes
violent to it when it is cast down.

The Fourth said, This desire proceeds from the love which we bear to our
selves, so natural to Man, that it lives first, and dies last in him. Now Man
loving himself more then any else, and love having for its foundation the
perfection and merit of the thing loved; hence he esteems himself more
perfect, and consequently more worthy to command then any other. And this
causes him to desire a thing which he accounts due to him.

The Fifth said, That as some Men are naturally lead to command, so others are
inclined of their own accord to obey and serve. The former are called, by the
Philosopher, Lords and Masters by Nature, having an Heroic Spirit, and capable
of governing not themselves only, but others too; their Bodies being usually
weak and delicate, hair fine, and skin smooth and thin. Others are servants by
Nature, being strong and sturdy, fit to carry burdens, to undergo labor, and
such incommodities as attend those who are subject to another's Will; they have
also, many times, so little capacity, that they have more of the beast then of
the Man; and this by the ordering of Divine Providence, lest having good
judgments and quick wits, they might reflect upon the equity or injustice of
their Masters commands, and so not execute them as they ought; or lest the
consideration of their misery, being thereby always present with them, might
render them more unhappy.

The Sixth said, That Man having been created by God for command, as holy writ
attesteth, he always retains the remembrance of his original, and would be
Master every where. For though the Creatures upon which the dominion given him
by God extends, seem to have been refractory to him ever since his sin; yet the
most part still acknowledge in him some tokens of their ancient Lord. The
otherwise most unruly Horse suffers himself to be managed by him, and a troop
of Oxen is driven by a Child. The most furious Animals become gentle, and
tremble at the occurse of Man's Countenance, because they find therein the
characters of Divinity. But as it is natural to other Animals to obey Man more
perfect then themselves, so it seems to Man a thing against Nature for the
more perfect to obey the less.

The Seventh said, That the desire of commanding has not place in all, nor at
all times. The Master of the Ship willingly resignes the management of the helm
to an experienced Pilot, and disbanded Soldiers readily suffer themselves to
be rallied and conducted by those whom they judge the most worthy to command
them. Others, far from this desire, submit and tie themselves, by natural
inclination, to the pleasure of an other. Moreover, some Virtues are so
heroical and eminent that they win hearts, as it were, by violence, and
constrain the most refractory and ambitious to confess that they ought to be
obeyed. By this means a multinous multude, impatient of all command, has been
brought to lay down their Arms. But we see some Spirits so free, that nothing
can reduce them to obedience, neither Promisings nor threatenings. They have so
high and extraordinary a genius, that they will prefer poverty and misery, yea,
beggary and torments themselves before obedience, and never stoop to the
pleasure and will of any other, although they be but little befriended by
Fortune or Nature. Whence is this? Why, sometimes from greatness of Spirit, and
oftentimes from a disorderliness of Mind which breaks forth, and is not capable
of restraint.

The Eighth said, That in the whole Universe the more noble commands the less,
the more potent quality predominates over the rest; In Animals the Soul
commands the Body, as the Master his servant, makes it move and act as it
pleases; and Man exercises sovereignty over beasts; amongst Men, Reason
commands the Appetite; in Economy, the Male, as the more perfect, commands the
Female; and, generally, the wise, learned, and virtuous, ought to have the
command over the foolish, ignorant, and vicious. For I speak of things as they
ought to be. But it is otherwise if we consider things as they are. Many times
the Appetite over-masters Reason; usually fools and ignorants are the
strongest. Wherefore if there be found any one amongst Men that differs as much
from others as the Soul from the Body, Man from beast, Reason from the
Appetite, the Male from the Female, he ought to command. For, according to
Aristotle, Every Man who commands must be of a different Nature from him who
obeyes. And as the Shepherd is of another and more excellent Nature then his
flock, so he that commands over Men ought to be a God, or at least a Hero. And
can you wonder now that every one would have a good opinion had of himself, and
be accounted a Hero or a God?

CONFERENCE XLI.
I. Of Comets. II. Whether Pardon be better then Revenge.

I. Of Comets.
THe deceitfulness of our senses causes the difficulty of understanding the
nature of Comets. For as some Colors, so some Lights are true, others
apparent. Who would not affirm, at a distance, that Gloe-wormes, some kind of
rotten wood, the scales of certain Fishes, and the eyes of Cats are real fire?
And to get to further then Heaven, who would not believe that the Moon and
other Planets have a true light, were it not for the reasons of Astronomy?
Nevertheless, Experience convinces us of the contrary on Earth, as well as
Reason does in Heaven. Yet because, in doubtful matters, it is best to keep to
the common opinion; I concur with that which holds a Comet to be a hot and dry
Exhalation inflamed in the highest Region of the Air, if the Heaven be solid;
and amongst the celestial orbs, in case they be liquid: which Exhalation
resembles the unctuosity of a torch newly extinguished; which serving for fuel
to the fire, which the reflection of the Sunbeams, or the violence of motion
excites there, represents the figure according to which the matter is disposed
to burn, and appears so long to us till its matter be consumed, unless more be
carried up which is proper to succeed it.

The Second said, There is little probability that so thin and subtle matter
as the afore-mentioned can burn for several months together. Considering that
the fires of our furnaces consume themselves in less then a day, unless they be
recruited with new matter; and that the vast bulk of these Meteors allows us
not to imagine that enough can be found for the sustenance of so great a flame.
For that which appeared in this City in November 1618. occupied forty degrees
of the Firmament, notwithstanding its remoteness from our sight, which always
makes things appear less then themselves. And the matter which should be lifted
up from the Earth to succeed that which is first consumed would not be
inflamed, because it could not arrive to the burning Comet in its first place,
by reason of its circular motion, contrary to that of Exhalations which is made
in a strait line. Nor is this opinion less inconsistent with the place which
they assign, namely, the Heaven; inasmuch as many have been above the Planets,
as is evidenced by their Parallax. For the Heavens being incorruptible, it is
impossible to fancy any corruption in them, since that which is Eternal cannot
but be incompetible with that which is corruptible. Now that they are Eternal,
the regularity of their motions domonstrates. And although the Apogees and
Perigees of the Planets, which are the points of their greatest and least
distance from the Earth, are, according to the affirmation of some Astrologers,
changed above twenty six degrees since Ptolomy's time; yet this permutation of
place induces no mutation of substance. Nor can a Comet be the reflection or
occurrence of the light of some Planets, as those Meteors are which we call la
Rose and le Soldat; for then no Comet could last longer then such occurse,
which is but momentaneous, by reason of the continual motion of the Planets;
besides that they might be as certainly prognosticated as Eclipses. But
forasmuch as there are some things which we know no further then by negation, I
conceive it more easy to say what a Comet is not, then to determine what it is.

The Third said, A Comet is only an appearing, not a real light; and it is
produced by the darting of the Sunbeams through an Exhalation, which is fit
for this purpose by its substance somewhat thin in the surface for intromitting
the beams, and dense within for reflecting them, and giving them the color of
fire; like as when the Sun casting his rays upon the clouds, at Morning or
Evening, gives them a ruddy color. And according as those are united or
compacted, enlighned by the Sun, or regard several quarters of the world; so
the Comets have different shapes or figures, which ought no more to astonish us
then these of the Clouds; which according to their conjunction together
represent innumerable forms; or at least then those of other fiery Meteors,
variously figured according to the casual occurrence of the matter which
composes them. Therefore Scaliger in his Exercitations holds that Comets are
neither signs nor causes of the events which follow them, and derides those
who believe that they fore-shew the death of Great Persons, or that destruction
of Nations and Kingdoms; alleging that many great Great Men have died, yea,
many Illustrious Families and States been destroyed, without the appearance of
any Comet; and, on the contrary, that many Comets have appeared, and no such
accidents ensued.

The Fourth said, That Comets are certain Stars whose motion is unknown to us,
and who being raised very high in their Apogaeum, remain for a long time
invisible. This is of no unfrequent observation in Mars, who, as many
Astrologers affirm, is at some times lower then the Sun; and at other times so
high above the rest of the Planets superior to his sphere, that his body
remains hid when his opposition to the Sun ought to render it most conspicuous.
In like sort, those Stars which God reserves as instruments of the greatest
events, which he has fore-ordain'd to come to pass in the Universe, remain a
long time elevated in their Apogaeum, till they come at length to descend
toward the Earth; from whence, as soon as they begin to manifest themselves,
they attract great quantity of vapors; which receiving the light variously,
according to the nature of the places whence they were raised, represent to us
sundry shapes of hairy and bearded Stars, or in form of a Dart, Sword, Dish,
Tub, Horns, Lamps, Torches, Axes, Rods, and such others, as it falls out. And
although those Stars incessantly act, yet coming to be produced anew, and being
nearer the Earth, their effects are augmented and become more sensible. As the
Fish ceases neither to be nor to move when it is in the bottom of the Sea, yet
it appears not to us to have either existence or motion, unless when it comes
near the surface of the Water.

The Fifth said, that Comets must needs be some extraordinary things, since
they always presignifie strange events, especially in Religion. Histories
observe that of sixty six Comets which have appeared since the Resurrection of
our Savior, there is not one but has been immediately followed by some
disorder or division in the Church, caused by Persecutions, Schisms or
Heresies. That which Josephus relates to have appeared over the Temple of
Jerusalem, and lasted a year (contrary to the custom of others, which exceed
not sixty days) was followed by the ruin of Judaism. That of which Seneca
speaks to have appeared in Nero's time, was the forerunner of the Heresies of
Cerinthus and Ebion. That of the year 1440 foreshew'd the Heresy of Nestorius.
That of the year 1200, the division caused by the Waldenses and Albingenses.
And lastly, those which have been seen since the year 1330 have sufficiently
manifested the truth of this effect by the multiplicity of Sects wherewith
Christendom abounds at this day. But especially, the thirty Comets which have
appeared in France since the year 1556 (four of which were in the same year,
namely, in the year 1560) but too well witness the verity of their
presignifications, which (as S. Augustine says) are ordinarily fulfilled
before the same are known by men.

The Sixth said, That as in all things else, so in Comets, the magnitude
demonstrates the vehemence and considerableness of the future event. The color
signifies the nature of the Planet under whose dominion it is. The splendour or
brightness shows the quick and effectual activity thereof, as its less lively
color testifies the contrary. The Form is a Celestial character or
hicroglyphick, denoting an effect in the earth; as if God spoke to us by signs,
or writ to us after the mode of China, where the figures of things stand for
letters, not contenting himself to destinate to this purpose the combinations
of the Planets with the other Stars, which are the next causes of all natural
effects here below. The place of the Air, or of Heaven, namely, the sign of the
Zodiac wherein the Comet is, serves to design the Country which is threatened
by it; and if it be in a falling House, it signifies sudden death. Its motion
from West to East indicates some foreign enemy, whose coming is to be feared.
If it move not at all, it is a sign that the enemy shall be of the same Land
upon which the Meteor stops; so likewise if it goes in twenty four hours from
East to West; because this motion is imputed to the first mover which hurries
along withal the other Celestial Bodies. Their effects also belong to the
places toward which their hairs or tails incline. Those which appear at
daybreak, and continue long, have their effects more sudden; those of the
evening, and of less continuance, later. They are especially of great
importance when they are found with any Eclipse: and the Precept which Ptolomy
and his Interpreters enjoin principally to observe, is, that those are deceived
who believe that every Comet signifies the death of some great person; but they
only hold, that as when the fiery Planets rise at daybreak, as so many
attendants on the Sun, he that is then born shall be a King; so when a Comet is
the forerunner of the Sun at daybreak, it signifies the death of some great
person.

The Seventh said, That Comets do not so much foretell as cause Dearths and
Famines, Wars and Seditions, burning Fevers, and other diseases, by the
inflammation which they impress upon the Air, and by it upon all other bodies,
and most easily upon our spirits. For seeing, twinkling, and falling Stars, are
signs of great drought and impetuous winds, when they shoot from several parts
of Heaven; how much more are those great fiery Meteors which we contemplate
with such solicitude, and which act no less by conceit upon our souls then by
their qualities upon our bodies. Which being found to have place in those of
delicate constitutions, as great persons are, occasioned the opinion that those
grand causes exercise their effects most powerfully upon people of high rank;
besides, that the accidents which befall such persons are much more taken
notice of, then those of the vulgar. But herein there is found less of
demonstration then of conjecture.

II. Whether Pardon be better then Revenge.
Upon the second Point it was said, That there is none but prizes an action of
clemency and forgiveness more then an action of vengeance. But all the
difficulty is to distinguish what is done through fear from what proceeds from
greatness of mind. Thus, when a Lion vouchsafes not to rise for a Cat or little
Dog that comes near him, but employs his strength only against some more stout
creature, this disdain is not called cowardice. But, when a man does not
revenge himself, if it be through inability it is prudence; if through fear, 'ts
pusillanimity. Yet Alexander was deceived herein; for when two Dogs of
extraordinary stature were presented to him, by a person who made great account
of their courage, and he saw that one of them did not defend himself against
other Dogs, he commanded him to be killed; and would have done as much by the
other, had not he who presented them alleged that the Dog's neglect of
revenging himself proceeded from eontempt of his opposers. Whereupon the King
caused a mad Bull to be turned loose to the other Dog, who finding a subject
fit to show his courage upon, flew upon him and tore him in pieces. It appears
therefore that there is some resemblance in the action of him who forbears
through poorness of spirit to revenge himself, and of him who does it through
greatness of courage. The sole difference consists in the power which the
latter has to vindicate himself, and the others wants. It Is demanded which of
the two is most honorable in him who is able to do either; I conceive
Pardoning the more honorable; not only, because it includes in it self the
power of revenge; but because it shows a greater strength to overcome one's
self then the strongest things in the world, and so become master, generally,
of bodies and minds together.

The Second said, That although at the first view it may seem that a man ought
rather be inclinable to Pardon then Vengeance, because Nature has for this
purpose furnished him with Reason as his principal weapon, to which Forgiveness
is an action particular, as proceeding from ratiocination, or, at least, from
humanity; yet the desire of Revenge has not been given us by Nature for a
useless faculty, and such as ought not to be reduced into act. For this Desire
is so great in us that it extends even to inanimate things. And to pass by the
follies of Xerxes who caused the Sea to be beaten with stripes, and writ a
challenge to mount Athos, in revenge of the fear which they had given him, and
that of Cyrus who amuz'd his whole Army a long time, about the river of Gnidus,
for the same cause: do we not see that little children are pacified when the
table which hurt them is beaten, and that Gamesters many times tear the Cards
in pieces with their teeth, and cast the Dice out of the window, to be revenged
of their loss? Hence Anaxagoras said that even they who pardon always revenge
themselves, because the satisfaction given them, or their remission of an
offense, supplies the place of punishment.

The Third said, It Is indeed natural to man, with all other living creatures,
to preserve himself; which cannot be done but by repelling the injuries which
are offered to us; nor this, but by revenge: For an injury is like fire which
burns and reduces all into ashes unless it be timely remedied; one tolerated
produces another, and by degrees brings us into the scorn of the world.
Therefore the Divine Law agrees with the Lex Talionis, or Law of Requital, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth. And as this vengeance is one of the principal
qualities which God reserves to himself, so it is one of the chief parties both
of public and private justice. He who is remiss in revenging affronts done
him, is injust; first to himself, in being careless of maintaining his honor;
and then to others, in that he suffers the respect to be violated which men owe
one to another; yea, to him too who offends him, because he gives him
encouragement to do as much to others, while he finds he may do so without
impunity.

The Fourth said, That Revenge is an encroachment upon the Authority of Laws
both Divine and Humane; God has reserved it to himself, wherewith to defend
us; and yet himself revengeth no further then to four Generations, and pardons
to a thousand. He has as strictly bound us to forgiveness as to our own
safety, since he permits us to pray to him daily for no more pardon then what
we grant to those who offend us. Moreover, he who takes satisfaction in stead
of executing it cannot more palpably declare the ill opinion he has of the
Laws under which he lives, and which he annihilates as far as lies in his
power. It Is this accursed Mis-conceit which has opened so wide a door to our
duels and re-encounters, as can hardly be shut at this day by many Ordinances
and Edicts. And if it imports the public, as the Lawyers hold, That no man
abuse his own goods; how much less his life, whereof he has but the use, and
which is due to the service of his God and his King. Add hereunto, that as
every thing which is violent is an enemy to Nature, and of no long duration; so
people seldom find constraints and rigours to answer their purpose; Man never
suffers himself to be wholly subdued and bound, no more then the Ox, saving by
the strongest part, the one by the horns, the other by the will. Which caused
Livia, the wife of Augustus, when she saw that the more he punished those who
conspired against him the more new enemies he procured to himself, to advise
her husband to try upon Cinna, one of them, whether pardon would not have
better effect then Proscription. He did so, and this Conspirator became thereby
so great a lover of the Emperor, that he afterward merited by his services to
be made his heir.

The Fifth said, That there ought to be made a distinction of conditions;
because it is as dangerous in a public person to be gentle and merciful, as
it is commendable in a private. The mildness of a Judge toward a Robber is
cruelty to the public; impunity being the Nurse of Vice. Moreover, among
private persons too, their several professions are considerable. Socrates
purposing to make himself an example of moderation had reason to slight the
kicks that were given him, as he would have done the winsings of an Ass. But
the Captain that should suffer so much must have otherwise given the world such
testimony of his valor, as to avoid the imputation of cowardice. And,
therefore, that man had no bad conceit, who seeing his friend perplexed for
that he understood by the Horoscope of his two children, that one of them would
be the greatest coward, and the other the greatest thief in the world,
counseled him to make the one a Churchman, and to put the other to a
profession whereunto the word Larron is an Epithete, being the latter would
thereby turn the prediction into a mockery; and the defect of courage in the
other would be attributed to the gentletleness whereunto Ecclesiastics are
more obliged then any others.

The Sixth said, That without some vengeance we should not understand what
Forgiveness means, as God's justice is that which sets off his mercy. Wherefore
being these two actions mutually contribute to either's luster, it cannot be
known which of the two is absolutely to be preferred before the other; but it
lies in the power of prudence to determine according to the variety of cases.

CONFERENCE XLII.
I. Of the Diversity of Languages. II. Whether is to be preferred, a good
stature or a small.

I. Of the diversity of Languages.
WE have two notable examples in the Scripture; one of God's displeasure, when
the Builders of the Tower of Babel were separated by the confusion of their
Language; the other of his favor, when the Apostles were at the feast of
Pentecost, as it were, united and incorporated into all Nations by the gift of
Tongues. Here we only adore Mysteries but fathom them not; we seek the natural
causes of the variety of speech, and whether, as there was but one at the
first, so the same may be recovered again, or any other found that may be
universal to all people. As to the first, the variety alone of the Organs seems
sufficient to diversifie speech. Those Nations whose windpipes were more free
easily retained the Hebrew aspirations, if so be this Language were the first,
and not the Syriack, as some hold, alleging that its characters speak greatest
antiquity; or the Samaritane, because the Thorath, which is the law of God, was
written in it, as also the most ancient Medals found in Palestine were stamped
with it. They whose breasts were more robust framed the German and other
Languages, which are pronounced with greater impetuosity: the more delicate
made the Greek Tongue; the middle sort, the Latin; and their posterity,
degenerating, the Italian, which is pronounced only with the outer part of the
lips: and so of all the rest. Whence it is that strangers never pronounce our
Language perfectly, nor we theirs; which caused Scaliger to tell a German who
spoke to him in Latin, but pronounced it after his own way, that he must
excuse him, for he did not understand Dutch. Now every one of these Original
Languages was changed again proportionably to the distance from its center, as
circles made by a stone cast into the water lose their figure as they become
wider. Afterward happened the transplantations of Nations, who with the
confusion of blood and manners brought also that of speech; for the Conquerours
desiring to give Law to the vanquished as well in this as in all other things,
and the Organs of the people being unapt for the pronuntiation of a foreign
tongue, hence of the mixture of two arose a third. Thus much for the first
point. But as for the second, which is to reduce all Languages to one, I hold
the thing impossible. For all things which are merely of humane institution, as
Language is, are as different as opinions are. And if one and the same Tongue
has sundry very different Idiomes and Dialects, as the French has the Breton,
the Gascon, the Poitevin, the Parisian, and many others, as different as the
French from the Italian (which has in like manner the Roman, the Tusean, the
Neapolitan, and the Sicilian, all very differing) with much more reason shall
Nations divided by Seas and Climates speak diversely. The opinions of men, even
of Philosophers themselves, touching the same subject, could never be
reconciled; and can it be imagined that all tongues should ever agree? Nature
affects nothing so much as variety, which serves for discrimination of
individuals. Two men never writ or spoke alike; and we see that even the
gestures and postures of others cannot be perfectly imitated by those who use
their utmost care therein; how then shall conformity be found in the expression
of our thoughts? besides, there being no connection or affinity between things
and words, which not only signify several things in several Languages, but
have different acceptions in the same Language, witness Homonymous words, it is
loss of time to think of such a design.

The Second said, That to judge of a River, it must be taken at its source.
Languages are the several ways of interpreting or declaring our conceptions;
and these are the means which our mind makes use of to conceive the species or
images of things. It knows them according as they are represented to it; and
they are represented to it according to the truth of the object, when the
conditions requisite to sensation or perception by sense concur, namely, a due
disposition of the object, medium, and Organ. As therefore when all these
conditions are right, it cannot be but all persons of the world must agree in
one and the same judgment, and all say ( e. g.) that this Rose is red, and
that other white; so it may seem that men should agree together in the copy and
transcript, since they do so in the Prototype; that is, have one and the same
Language, since they have one and the same conception. Otherwise, as to this
communication with his own species, man will be inferior to other animals, who
signify their passions and inclinations so plainly and intelligibly among
themselves that they answer one the other afar off? Moreover, abundance of
words are the express and natural image of the things designed by them, as
Taffata, to hiss, to creak or clash, to bounce, to howl or yell, and many
others. There are words which keep the same number of letters in all the
learned Languages, particularly the name of God; which holds also in some
modern, as in the French, Dutch, etc. but not in ours. There are others, which
vary not at all, but are one and the same among all Nations; as the word Sac.
Many things expressed by the same characters in writing are read by each people
in their own Tongue, as Figures, or Ciphers, which are read and pronounced
otherwise in Hebrew, and Greek, then in Latin or French, and yet they are
taken by all to signify the same thing. The same may be said of the
Hieroglyphics and letters of China, yea of all the figures of the
Mathematics. For every one knows a Circle, a Triangle, and a Square, although
each Nation denominate the same diversely. What hinders then but as all Nations
have conspired and agreed together in those visible words, so they may do too
in those which are pronounced?

The Third said, That to the end words may make things understood by all the
world, they ought to be signs of them; either natural, as smoke is of fire, or
by institution, depending upon a very intelligible principle or occasion, as
when a Bush denotes a Tavern. As for the first, many dumb persons express their
conceptions so genuinely by signs that all the world understands them; and the
Mimicks and Pantomimes of Rome were so excellent in this kind, that Roscius
(one of them) sometimes bid defiance to Ciero, that he would express as
perfectly by his gestures and postures, whatsover he pleased, as that
incomparable Orator could do by his words. And as those who are not given to
writing have the best memories, so those who have not that use of speech are
more excellent then others in speaking by signs and understanding them; there
being seen in our days a dumb man who answered pertinently to all that was
spoken to him, only by beholding the motion of the speaker's lips: which is
also the reason why blind men, attending only to improve the sense of Hearing,
best observe all differences of speech. Whence I draw this consequence, that
the same may be practiced in all other things which signify by humane
institution, and so there may be an universal Language. But the easiness every
one finds in making himself understood by the Language and Writing which is
familiar to him, renders men careless of advancing this excellent Design, which
would be a means to spare the best time which our youth spends in learning the
words of strange Tongues, instead of applying themselves solely to the
knowledge of things.

The Fourth said, That the possibility of this Project appears, in that there
is an order in nature, or, at least, consequent to the very nature of things,
according to which we may place, next after the Creator the created spiritual
substances, then the corporeal (one after another, according to their dignity)
particularly the corporeal according to their place, as the Heavens first, and
in them the Stars, according to their dignity; the Earth and its Animals, the
Sea and its Fishes; the Plants according to their magnitudes; those which are
equal therein, according to their virtues, and other accidents: doing the same,
with Metals, Minerals, bodies perfectly and imperfectly compounded by nature
and by art, and with the Elements: then we may come to the Categories of
accidents to which every thing in the world may be reduced and put in its right
place. Whereby it is evident that not only all things have their order but also
that he who learns them according to this order, easily avoids confusion, the
mother of ignorance. It remains, now, to find out an order of words too, which
answers to that of things; the first to the first, and the second to the
second; which order is so natural to them, that children make use of it to find
out every thing which they seek in Dictionaries and Lexicons according to the
order of the Alphabet. And I know not whether we ought not to begin this
handsome gradation and situation of all things in their rank, correspondent to
the order of the letters, with the style that God gives himself, Alpha and
Omega. But it cannot but be admired that the first combination of the letters
makes Ab and Aba, which signifies Father, the first place being due to the
Author and Father of all things.

II. Whether is to be preferred a great Stature or a small.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That largeness of body seems to be
preferrable, as well because the word Magnitude or Grandeur always includes
some perfection in it self, as because the Gods were anciently represented of a
size exceeding the ordinary. Which made Aristotle say, that not only the
greatness of the Heroes rendered them famous of old, but that their Figures and
Statues are venerable at this day. Moreover, we see that Saul, the first King
chosen by God for his own people, was taller by the head then all the rest of
the Israelites. And amongst the conditions of Beauty, magnitude so universally
holds the first place, that women advance themselves upon high Shoes, and
Patins, that they may seem the handsomer. How well shaped soever a little man
be, he is never of so majestical a presence as one that is taller. Whence you
see little men affect to seem greater, but never any tall men desire to be
less. Now the same Proportion which is between a Man and his habitation, is
found between the soul and the body which is its Mansion. For as he who has
the largest house will be accounted to be better lodged then he who dwells in a
Cottage, though they be persons otherwise of equal condition; so it is probable,
that souls (which are all equal) find themselves better lodged in a great body
then in a small, and exercise all their functions with much more freedom.

The Second said, That if magnitude put the value upon men, the same should
hold in animals: nevertheless, the Elephant yields to the Fox, yea to the
Pismire; the Estrich to the Nightingale; and the Whale is the most stupid of
all Fishes. Moreover, nothing hinders the divine operations of the soul but the
load of the body, whereby the imperfection of our nature places us below the
wholly incorporeal Intelligences; and therefore the less the body is, the
nearer we approach the Angelical nature, and our spirit is less impeded by the
matter. Hence little men are not only the most quick-witted, but also the most
active and nimble; for that the strength is more united in them, and diffused
and dissipated in others. Great and robust bodies, as being fitter for labor,
were made to obey the small and tender, which have more spirit then flesh.
Whence the Romans gave the Civil and Military charges to little men, and sent
the greater to guard the Baggage, as those who gave the enemies more aim then
the less. Nor are the greater more proper for other Arts; which made the Poet
say as a thing impossible, Sambucam potius caloni aptaveris alto. -- And Samuel
was reproved by God for offering to prefer the tall Stature of the eldest son
of Jesse before the small size of David his youngest, as if the Israelites had
been displeased with the large body of Saul. The Poets could not represent an
enraged Cyclops, and furious Ajax, but under great bodies, as, on the contrary,
they made Ulysses very small. And indeed natural Reasons agree well herein. For
amongst the causes of the body's growth, the material is a slimy or viscous
humidity; whence Fish grow most, and in shortest time. This Humidity is, as it
were, Glue or Bird-lime to the soul, hindering it from exercising its functions
freely: and therefore women, being more humid, have less wit then men; and Fish
are less disciplinable then the rest of animals. The efficient is a very gentle
heat; for were it too great it would consume the matter in stead of dilating
and fashioning it, and dry the solid parts too much, upon the increasing of
which depends that of the rest of the body. This is the reason why all gelt
animals grow most, and amongst Birds of prey the females are always greater
then the males; the excess of their heat being tempered by the humidity of
their Sex; and young persons are found to have grown extraordinarily after
Quotidian Agues which are caused by Phlegm; so that it is not hard for such
pernicious causes to produce a good effect.

The Third said, That every thing is to be commended and esteemed according to
the use for which it is appointed. Now Man being born for Reason and the
functions of the Mind, and having received a Body to be an instrument to him of
Knowledge by making a faithful report to him of what passes without, by means
of the species conveyed through the senses into the fancy: Upon which the
Intellect making reflection forms the like in it self, and thus all Notions
are produced; it follows that neither the great stature nor the little are to
be esteemed. But it is demanded, Which of the two is the less evil; I conceive,
with the Physicians, that the great is less incommodious in youth, as being
then more proper for exercises, whose toil it can better under-go, especially
those of War. And therefore when Marius levied Soldiers, he suffered none to
pass the Muster but such as could not walk under a measure raised six foot from
the ground. But in old age, when the natural heat is more languid, and
consequently less able to discharge all its functions in a large Body, the
small size is best: And little old men are never so crooked as others; besides
that their coldness serves to moderate the ardour of the choler which is
attributed to little men, because their spirits having not so much room to run
about, agitate them sooner, and more violently then others.

The Fourth said, As every living thing has bounds of its perfection, so it
has of its greatness or smallness; which, if it exceeds or falls short of,
it is held monstrous and besides Nature, as Giants and Dwarfes. But because this
term of magnitude has a great latitude, it is hard to know, precisely, which is
the least or greatest stature whereunto Man may naturally attain; and which is
the middle, and consequently who deserve the name of great or little;
considering that the same is various, according to places and climates, and
according to every one's particular temper or first conformation, which
ordinarily follows the proportion which the seed of the Father and Mother bears
with the Idea of their species, if the too great or too little quantity of the
matter, or the capacity of the place permit. For the Northern people are large,
the Southern small. Those between the 28. and the 38. climate are of middle
stature; and one that would be called a tall person among the little, will be
accounted little among the tall. Constitutions likewise contribute very much
hereunto. Those who are dry by Nature are usually small. Such as are too moist
grow more in thickness then in the other dimension; it being the property of
humidity not to mount easily upwards, unless it be accompanied with heat; for
then the Agent and the Patient being rightly disposed to extend every part, the
whole is augmented. Therefore as the Phegmatick temper is most prone to
fatness, so the sanguine contributes to tallness; especially if the persons
live idly and feed well. Hence it is that the men before the Deluge are noted
by the Scripture to have been Giants, because they lead idle, and voluptuous
lives. As, on the contrary, Fasting, Watching, and immoderate Labor in the
time destinated for men to grow, which reaches not much beyond twenty five
years of age, hinder the attaining of the just measure intended by nature;
which Divines refer to that of Adam and our Savior; as their bodies were also
the rule of the proportion which our members ought to have one to another, and
the temper of their humors the standard of ours: whence they were the
healthfullest and goodliest of all men: but they were of tall stature.

CONFERENCE XLIII.
I. Of the Philosopher's stone. II. Of Mont de piete, or charitable provision
for the Poor.

I. Of the Philsopher's stone.
THe Poets, not without reason, feigned that the gods left hope to men in the
bottom of Pandora's box, after all their other goods were flown out of it. For
nature being unwilling to show her self a Stepmother to man has made such
provision, that the almost infinite unhappy accidents of life cannot so much
cast him down on one hand, as hope raises him up on the other. And, not to
speak of that first of Christian virtues, which accompanies him even in death,
and serves him for an Anodyne in all his miseries; is he under the rod, he
comforts himself with hope to get free from it; is he of mean extraction, he
hopes to ennoble himself by his exploits; is he poor, he encourages himself to
labor with the possibility of becoming rich; is he sick, the hope of recovery
supports his fainting Spirits; yea, when ordinary means fail him, he is not out
of heart. But if there be any thing worthy of laughter to those who cannot
apprehend it, or of admiration to him that will further philosophize about the
odd motions of humane minds, this is one, how it is possible that an old,
decrepit, poor, diseased person, should nevertheless not despair of having the
train of a Prince one day; and not only hope to be cured, but to become a
young man again. Yet all this is phancy'd by the seekers of the Philosophers
stone, which is the grand work, the Panacea, the Elixir, and the Universal
Restaurator. Now this most extravagant conceit, joined to the other absurdities
of that Chimerical Art, makes me believe that it is good for nothing but to
serve for imaginary consolation to the miserable.

The Second said, That the Chemists who exercise it, are of two sorts. Some by
their sophistications give tinctures to Metals which they promise to transmute
by their mixture, fixation, cementation, and other operations. Others, who are
called the true Sons of Art, do not amuse themselves about particular things,
but solely about the grand work; at which they all aim, though by several
courses. Some think to attain it by blowing, and usually make a mixture of
Quicksilver and Gold, which they keep nine months in a small furnace over the
flame of a lamp. Some conceive, that it is a very plain operation, (terming it
Children's work) and that there needs only the knowledge of the matter, the
fire, the vessel, and the manner; the rest being done of it self. Yet others
attribute this work only to Revelation, saying that the Artist must only pray
to God; and they believe it is mentioned in the Holy Scripture, where it is
said, That much clay is requisite to the making of pots, but only a little
dust to the making of Gold; that 'twas this Wisdom which made Solomon so rich,
that, by the testimony of Scripture, Gold was common in his days as stones;
that the Gold of Ophir was that which this Philosophical stone had transmuted,
far more excellent then the natural; and that the ships he set forth to fetch
it were only parables and figures; like the golden fleece, which was nothing
but a parchment wherein this secret was written. But most hold an opinion
composed of these two, saying, that the Manual operation must be assisted by
extraordinary favor from Heaven. I conceive, with them, that there is such a
thing as the Philosophers stone, or, at least, that it is possible; that Salt
is its matter, and Motion its fire. For since these two are found every where,
this property agrees very well to them; Salt being extracted out of all Bodies,
and Heat proceeding from their friction one against another, in imitation of
that which the Heavens excite here below.

The Third said, The Philosophers stone is a Powder of Projection, a very
little of which being cast upon imperfect Metals, (as all are, except Gold)
purifies and cures them of their Leprosy and impurity, in such a manner, that
having first taken away their feculency, and then multiplied their degrees,
they acquire a more perfect nature: Metals not differing among themselves, but
in degrees of perfection. It is of two sorts; the white, which serves to make
Silver; and the red, which being more concocted is proper to make Gold. Now to
attain it, you need only have the perfect knowledge of three things, to wit,
the Agent, the Matter, and the Proportion requisite to the end the Agent may
educe the form out of the bosom of that Matter, duly prepared by the
application of actives to passives. The first two are easy to be known. For
the Agent is nothing else but Heat, either of the Sun or of our common fire, or
of a dunghill, which they call a Horse's belly, or of Balneum Mariae, (hot
water) or else that of an Animal. The patients are Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury,
Gold, Silver, Antimony, Vitriol, or some little of such other things, the
experience whereof easily shows what is to be expected from them. But the
Application of the Agent to the Patient, the determination of the degrees of
Heat, and the utmost preparation and disposition of the Matter, cannot be known
but by great labor and long experience: Which being difficult, thence we see
more delusions and impostures in this Art then truths. Nevertheless Histories
bear witness, that Hermes Trismegistus, Glauber, Raimond Lully, Arnauld,
Flamel, Trevisanus, and some others, had knowledge of it. But because for those
few that are said to have it, almost infinite others have been ruined by it,
therefore the search of it seems more curious then profitable.

The Fourth said, That as Mathematicians have by their search after the
Quadrature of a circle arrived to the knowledge of many things which were
before unknown to them; so though the Chemists have not discovered the
Philosophers stone, yet they have found out admirable secrets in the three
families of Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals. But it not the less possible,
although none should ever attain it, not only for this general reason, that
Nature gives us no desire in vain, but particularly because all Metals are of
the same species, being made of one and the same Matter, (Sulphur and Mercury)
and concocted by one and the same celestial heat; not differing but in
concoction alone, as the grains of the same raisin do, which ripen at several
times. This is evident by the extraction of Gold and Silver out of all Metals,
even out of Lead and Iron, the most imperfect of them. So that the Art ought
not to be judged inferior in this matter to all others which it perfectionates.
Moreover, the Greek Etymology of Metals shows that they are transmutable one
into another.

The Fifth said, That as in the production of Corn by Nature, the seed and the
fat of the Earth are its matter, and its efficient is partly internal, included
in the grain, and partly external, viz. the heat of the Sun, and the place in
the bosom of the Earth; so in the production of Gold by Art, its matter is
Gold it self and its Quicksilver; and the efficient cause, is partly, in the
Gold, partly in the external heat; the place is the furnace, containing the Egg
of Glass, wherein the matter is enclosed, dissolve'd and grows black, called
the Crows head, waxes white, and then is hardened into a red mass, the hardness
whereof gives it the name of a stone; which being reduced into powder, and kept
three days in a vessel hermetically sealed upon a strong fire, acquires a
purple color; and one dram of it converts two hundred of Quicksilver into pure
Gold; yea, the whole Sea, were it of like substance.

The Sixth said, That Art indeed may imitate, but cannot surpass Nature. But it
should, if we could change other metals into Gold; which is impossible to
Nature it self, even in the Mines, in how long time soever; those of Iron,
Lead, Tin, or Copper, never becoming Mines of Gold or Silver. Therefore much
less can the Alchymist do it in his furnaces, no more then he can produce some
thing more excellent then Gold, as this Philosophical stone would be; Gold
being the most perfect compound of all mixed bodies, and for that reason
incorruptible. And indeed how should these Artists accomplish such a work, when
they are not agreed upon the next matter of it, nor upon the efcien tcause,
time, place, and manner of working; there being as many opinions as there are
different Authors. Moreover, it is untrue that all Metals are of one species,
and differ only in degree of concoction; for Iron is more concocted then
Silver, as also more hard, and less fusible; and their difference was necessary
in reference to humane uses. Now perfect species which are under the same next
genius, as Metals are, can never be transmuted one into another, no more then a
Horse into a Lion. Yea, could this Philosophical stone act upon Metals, yet it
would not produce Gold or Silver, but other stones like it self, or only
imprint upon them its own qualities, according to the ordinary effects of all
natural Agents. And if it were true that the powder of Gold produced other
Gold, being cast upon Metals, as a grain of wheat brings forth many others
being cast into the Earth; it would be requisite to observe the same order and
progress in the multiplication of Gold which Men do in that of grains of Wheat.
Yet the Chemists do not so, but will have their multiplication to be made in an
instant.

The Seventh said, That since Art draws so many natural effects out of fitting
matter, as Worms, Serpents, Frogs, Mice, Toads and Bees; although the subject
of these Metamorphoses be much more difficult to be disposed and made
susceptible of a sensitive soul then insensible metal is to receive a Form
divisible like its matter; he saw no absurdity in it, but that at least by the
extraordinary instruction of good or bad spirits some knowledge of this
operation may be derived to men; considering, that we see other species
naturally trans-form'd one into another, as Egyptain Nitre into stone, a Jasper
into an Emerald, the herb Basil into wild Thyme, Wheat into Darnel, a
Caterpiller into a Butter-fly: yea, if we will believe the Scotch, they have a
Tree, whose fruit falling into the water is turned into a Bird.

II. Of a Mont de Piete or Bank for lending to the Poor.
Upon the second Point it was said, That Charity toward our Neighbor being the
most certain sign of Piety toward God; and Hills having been chosen almost by
all Nations to sacrifice upon, as nearest to Heaven; upon these accounts the
name of Mont de Piete has been given to all institutions made for relief of
the poor; whereof lending money for their necessity being one of the principal
effects, the public places established for that use retain this name in sundry
parts of Italy, Flanders, and many other States; and some have been erected in
all Cities of this Kingdom, by the King's Edict of February 1626. and the more
willingly because Popes were the first Institutors of them; as that at Rome was
instituted by Clement VII. in the year 1526. and increased by Paul III. and
Sixtus V. that of Avignon by Paul IV. and others by Pius V. and Julius III. Now
because it is not reasonable to lend without security, and the poor ordinarily
give not any but their movables, therefore the name of Mont de Piete is
attributed only to the lending upon Pledges or Pawnes. But to the end this
Institution might merit the name bestowed upon it, it were to be desired that
this loan were gratuitous and free, according to the Gospel precept, Lend,
hoping for nothing again ( Luke 6. 35.) conformably to the ancient Law of God,
which forbad the Jews to take any thing of their Brethren, besides the
principal sum. But to make even for this, they have every where practiced such
excessive Usury toward all other Nations, that the same is turned into a
Proverb, to denote such exaction as is unmeasurable, and odious to all the
world.

The Second said, That it has always been the intention of Legislators to
forbid Usury, called by the Hebrews with good reason Neschech, Biting; which
always hurts, how little soever it be. And forasmuch as the avarice of men has
continually withstood that natural Law, which allows not fruit to produce other
fruit, nor yet the principal sum any interest, silver being barren of it self;
therefore Usury was limited by the Law Duilia to a Denier in two hundred; and
the Usurer was more severely punished then the Thief; the latter being
condemned but to pay double, and the other quadruple. The reason of which seems
to be, for that it is requisite in a State that the rich help the poor; and
because the harmony of a society ceases when some one part is swelled beyond
measure while the others pine and languish; Hence it was that God instituted
Jubilees, which reestablished the Jews every fiftieth year in the inheritances
of their Fathers; and elsewhere that was introduced which they called the new
Tables, being a general discharge of all debts without payment. Now what has
been practiced since to the contrary is a mere toleration, of which heed must
be taken, that it become not a Law, no more then other unjust things; which yet
are suffered for the eschewing of worse inconveniences.

The Third said, Charity has three degrees. The first is of those who give.
The second of those who lend freely. But because these two are very rare, and
besides imply some disparagement to the receiver, the third degree is, to lend
upon moderate profit: which loan ceases not to retain the Epithete of
charitable, if the Creditor exact not his debt too severely, but allow for the
default of time and other circumstances. And the humanity of those who promote
lending upon pledges is very beneficial to the poor, who for the most part not
having immoveables enough, clear from mortgage, to secure their Creditors,
deprive them of the means to relieve themselves by their movables without
selling them; which sundry considerations oftentimes hinder them from doing.
Besides, it is the opinion of many Lawyers, that the whole estate of a man taken
in gross is in the eye of the Law accounted immoveables, although he have only
movables.

The Fourth said, That unless a new world were framed, and every particular
person inspired with charity toward his Neighbor equal to the love which he
bears to himself, it is impossible to bring men to lend freely one to another.
This is verified by the Law of the Locrenses, which strictly forbidding them to
lend upon Usury, they forbear not to pervert this Law publicly, the Borrower
feigning to steal the Creditor's money, who thereupon took witness of it, and
in case the Debtor failed to pay him his interest, caused him to be condemned
as a Thief. From which corrupt practice the inventions of our changes and
rechanges, loans upon Obligations and Pawns, are not much different; saving
that these latter, being used ordinarily with persons whose necessity is most
urgent, are likewise more unequitable. So that the same may be said concerning
this kind of lending, which a Turk said once to Mahomet when he forbad the use
of Wine to that Nation, Thou can not, said he, keep us from drinking Wine,
since we shall always drink it in secret; but thou may keep us from violating
and transgressing thy Law, by permitting the same to us. Thus, being experience
has manifested to Legislators that it is impossible to hinder lending upon
profit; even Charity ought to induce them to take away the prohibition of it,
to the end men may offend no longer. Moreover, he that would otherwise remain
idle, by this means finds wherewith to exercise his Art or Trade; and money,
which would be unprofitable to all such as have only personal estates, affords
profit to the owners: besides that it is of great advantage to persons under
age, many of whom having their fortune in money would otherwise devour the main
stock, in stead of finding it increased by their thriftiness in their nonage.
Besides that estates in land being already very dear, would become beyond all
value, and by that means scarce be of any benefit, considering their excessive
price.

The Fifth said, that the principal difficulty to erect a Mont de Piete, or
Bank for the poor, consists in such conditions as are much more tolerable then
the ordinary lendings upon Pawns. Now those conditions concern two sorts of
persons, namely, those who put money into the Bank, and those who borrow
thence. Now it is fit to make as good composition as can be had with the first;
according to what is practiced in Italy, there may be found persons, who having
not a stock of money sufficient to maintain them in case they should take no
more then the interest allowed by the Laws of their Country, put their
principal into the Bank, on condition to receive a Pension or Annuity for life
above the ordinary interest. Others put a small sum in upon the birth of a
child, on condition that the child shall receive a considerable one (agreed
upon between them) at his marriage; which sum, in case of death, accrues to the
Bank or Mont. But the same license must not be given to the Creditors, to
extort the best terms they can from their Debtors, whose necessity many times
receives any Law they please to prescribe them. I conceive, therefore, that
there ought to be made faithful supputation of what the interest of the
principal (at the lowest rate it can be had) the wages of Officers necessary
for prizing, keeping, receiving and delivering of Pawns, and selling the same
in case of need, will amount to: that so what this charge comes to may be taken
for profit upon the Pawn, and added to the principal; but the remainder
restored to the owner. And nothing above this is to be suffered.

CONFERENCE XLIV.
I. How Minerals grow. II. Whether it be best to know a little of every thing,
or one thing exactly.

I. How Minerals grow.
UNder Minerals are comprehended, Metals, Stones, and all sorts of Fossilia, or
things dig'd out of the earth. The causes of their growing or augmentation are
here inquired. All the world agrees that they grow, excepting those who hold
that God created them at the beginning together with the earth. But they who
have kept a stone in water for a long time, and find the same increased in
bigness, will confute that opinion by this experiment; as also the experience
of Miners does, who having exhausted a Mine of its Metal find more in it after
some years; and when they discover Mines, as yet imperfect, they cover the same
again with earth, and after some space of time find them fit to be wrought
upon, and, as it were, arrived to their maturity. This is also verified by that
Chemical operation, called vegetable Gold; and pieces of Cinnabar (or
Quicksilver mingled with Sulphur) melted and put amongst the filings of
Silver, being set over a furnace in a well luted Vessel produces pure Silver,
though of less profit then curiosity. For this visible artifice seems to prove
the invisible one of nature, according to the opinion of Philosophers, who hold
that all Metals are made of Quicksilver and Sulphur. So that we must not seek
other causes of their generation and increasing then a new accession of that
matter, either gliding along the veins of the earth, or reduced first into
vapor by heat, and then condensed by cold.

The Second said, That he was of Cardan's opinion who assigns a particular
vegetative soul to all Minerals as well as to all Plants, whereunto they have
great resemblance, not only in that they have some virtues and faculties alike
(yea far more excellent) which cannot come but from a principle of life (since
action is the indication of life) but also because they grow according to all
their dimensions, as Plants do; have a conformation and configuration, which is
common to Plants with them; attract, retain and concoct the nourishment which
they receive from the earth by their veins and passages, and have also an
expulsive faculty which is not in Plants, casting forth their dross, and
exhaling their superfluous vapors. They have also roots and barks as Trees
have; their substance is of parts organical, and really dissimilar, though in
appearance some of them seem to be similar and homogeneous; and Lead, out of
which are extracted Salt or Sugar, Quicksilver and Sulphur, is no more a
similar body then Ebeny, Box, and Milk, out of which such different substances
are drawn.

The Third said, That before we can know whether Minerals live, we must first
understand how life is caused in man, who is to be as the rule of all living
things. It consists but in one sole action, to wit, that of Heat upon Humidity,
which it rarefies and subtilizes, causing the same to ascend by little and
little out of the intestines through the Mesentery to the Liver, Heart and
Brain; in each of which it casting off its excrementitious parts, it acquires a
new perfection, the utmost in the Brain, where it becomes a very thin spirit
capable of receiving any form, even that of light, as appears by the internal
splendour of our sight, and that brightness which is sometimes seen outwardly
upon some Bodies. In Plants are found the like cavities destinated to receive
and prepare their nourishment which heat attracts into them; and their knots
are so many repositories, wherein that heat is reunited and takes new
strength, till being arrived at the top of the Plant, according to the
rectitude of the fibers, it circulates the matter so carried up that it spreads
into branches, leaves and fruit. For as humidity is of it self immovable, and
incapable of any action, so being accompanied with heat it moves every way; and
there is no need of admitting an attractive faculty in each part, since it is
carried thereunto sufficiently of it self. Natural heat indeed drives it
upwards, but all unusual heat makes it break out collaterally, as is seen in
sweat; for no eruption of humidity is caused but by the excess of some strange
heat, not proper or natural. Now we may observe these tokens of life in the
production of Minerals; their vaporous matter being first sublimed and purified
by heat, and then incorporated with themselves. But because all Natures works
are occult, and the instrument she uses (to wit, natural heat) is
imperceptible, it is no wonder if it be hard to know truly how Minerals hid in
the earth grow, since we are ignorant how the accretion of Plants exposed to
our view is made; we perceive them to have grown, but not to grow; as the
shadow on on the Dyal is observed to have gone its round, yet appears not to
move at all. Nevertheless, the Arborists would have us except the Plant of
Aloes out of this number, whose flower and trunk at a certain time shoot forth
so high, and so speedily, that the motion thereof is perceptible to the eye.

The Fourth said, That the generation of some Minerals is effected by heat, and
of others by cold; the former, by coction, and the latter by concretion or
co-agulation; which two agents are discovered by the dissolution of Metals: For
such as are made by cold are melted by its contrary, Heat; as Lead, Silver, and
other Metals; and those which are made by heat, dissolve in water, as all
Salts; provided, neither the one nor the other be so compact and close that
they admit not the qualities of their contraries; for which reason Glass which
is concocted by fire is not dissolved in water; and the Diamond, Marble, and
some other stones, congealed by cold, are not melted by fire. But their
accretion is not made by any vital principle, but only by a new apposition of
matter. Moreover, they have no sign of inward life, as nutrition, equal and
uniform augmentation in all their parts (which should be distinct and
organized) certain constant terms and limits of magnitude, and resemblance of
figure and conformation, both internal, and external between all individuals of
the same species. For Minerals having no cavities cannot receive aliment
inwardly. They grow as long as matter is supplied to them, and that inequally.
Their figure is indeterminate and various, according to the casual application
of their matter in the veins of the earth; and their parts are all alike. The
barks, roots, and veins attributed to them have nothing but the shape of those
things, not the use, no more then the paps of men. Nor do they bear flowers,
fruits or seeds, nor produce or multiply themselves any other way, as Plants do.

The Fifth said, We give appellations or names to things from their external
form, because their internal is unknown to us. Now diverse Minerals have the
same proportion that Trees have; and the cause why Mines are larger, is because
they are not agitated by winds, nor in danger of falling, as Trees are, to
whose magnitude, for that reason, Nature has been constrained to set bounds;
and although Minerals grow much more then they, yet it does not follow that
they have not certain terms prefixed to their quantity. If they bear neither
flowers nor fruits, it is so too with some Plants upon which the Sun shines not,
as the Capillary Herbs which grow in the bottom of Wells, and some others also,
as Fern. And the case is the same with this common Mother the Earth, as with
Nurses; for as when they become with child the infant whom they suckle dies; so
where there are Mines under the Earth, nothing grows upon the surface. The
decaying and old age of stones is also a sign of their being vital, as appears
by the Lodestone, which loses its strength in time, and needs filings of Iron
to preserve its life. All which being joined to what Scaliger relates, that in
Hungary there are threads of gold issuing out the earth, after the manner of
Plants, persuades me that Minerals have a particular soul besides that
universal spirit which informs the world and its parts; but this soul is as
much inferior to that of Plants, as the vegetative is below the sensitive.

II. Whether it be best to know a little of every thing, or one thing perfectly.
Upon the second Point, it was said, Sciences are the goods of the mind, and
the riches of the soul. And as it is not sufficient to happiness to have riches,
but the possesser must be able to preserve and enjoy them: so it is not enough
to have a great stock of notions, but they must be brought into the light and
put in practice. Now this is done better by him who understands but one single
thing perfectly, then by him who knows a little of all, ordinarily with
confusion, which is the mother of ignorance. This is what they call knowing a
little of every thing; and of all, nothing. For being our mind is terminated,
the object of its knowledge ought to be so too; whence it is that we cannot
think of two thing, at the same time. Thus, of all the world mine eye and my
mind can see but one thing at one time, one single Tree in a Forest, one Branch
in a whole Tree; yea, perfectly but one single Leaf in a whole Branch: the
exception of the mind, like that of the eye, being made by a direct line, which
has but one sole point of incidence. And the least thing, yea the least part
is sufficient to afford employment to the humane soul. Hence the consideration
of a Fly detained Lucian so long; that of a Pismire exercised the wit of a
Philosopher three and forty years. That of the Ass sufficiently busi'd
Apuleius. Chrysippus the Physician writ an entire volumn of the Colewort;
Marcion and Diocles of the Turnep and Rape; Phanias, of the Nettle; King Juba,
of Euphorbium; Democritus, of the number of Four; and Messala made a volumn
upon each Letter. Even the Flea has afforded more matter to sundry good wits
of this age, then they found how to dispose of. How then can man, who is
ignorant of the vilest things, be sufficient to know all?

The Second said, If the word knowledge be taken strictly for a true knowledge
by the proper causes, it is better to know a little of every thing then one
thing alone. If for a superficial knowledge, it is better to know one thing
solidly then all superficially; that is, a little well, then all badly. For
it is not barely by action that the Faculty is perfected, but by the goodness of
the action. One shot directly in the mark is better then a hundred thousand
beside it; one single Science which produces truth is more valuable then all
others which afford only likelihoods, (and all conjectural knowledge is no
more) wherewith nevertheless almost all our Sciences overflow; out of which
were all that is superfluous extracted, it would be hard to find in each of
them enough to make a good Chapter: as appears by the small number of
Demonstrations which can be made in any Science; yet those are the only
instruments of knowledge. Hence it is, that he who applies himself to many
Sciences never succeeds well in them, but loses himself in their Labyrinth; for
the Understanding can do but one thing well, no more then the Will can.
Friendship divided, is less; as a River which has more then one Channel, is
less rapid; and he that hunts two hares catches none. Of this we have many
instances in Nature, which ennables the Organs to perform but one action, the
Eye to see, and the Ear to hear; and one tree brings forth but one kind of
fruit. In well governed Families each officer discharges but one employment; In
States well ordered no Artificer exercises above one Trade, whereas in Villages
one workman undertakes five or six Mysteries, and performs none well; like
the knife or sword of Delphos, spoken of by Aristotle, which served to all
uses, but was good for none.

The Third said, The Understanding being a most subtle fire, a Spirit always
indefatigably moving, and which has received all things for its portion; it is
too great injustice to retrench its inheritance, to clip its wings, and confine
it to one object; as they would do who would apply it but to one single thing,
not considering that the more fuel you supply to this fire, the more it
increases, and is able to devour. Moreover, it has a natural desire to know
every thing; and to go about to confine it to one, were to limit the conquests
of Alexander to an acre of Land. And as every Faculty knows its object in its
whole latitude, and according to all its species and differences; the Eye
perceives not only green and blew, but all visible, colored, and luminous
things; the Touch feels cold, hot, soft, hard things, and all the tactile
qualities; the Fancy is carried to every sensible good, the Will loves all
that is good and convenient: In like manner the Understanding, which is the
principal Faculty of Man; and though it be most simple, yet comprehends all
things (as the Triangle, the first and simplest of all figures, contains them
all in it self, since they may be resolved into, and proved by it) ought not to
be in worse condition then the others its inferiors, but must be carried
toward its object in the whole extent thereof, that is, know it. If sundry
things cannot be conceived at a time, that hinders not but they may
successively. Besides that the variety of objects recreates the Faculties as
much as the repetition of one and the same thing tires, enervates, and dulls it.

The Fourth said, All things desire good, but not all goods. So, though Men be
naturally desirous of knowing, yet they have a particular inclination to know
one thing rather then another, infused into every one for the preservation of
Sciences. Which end of Nature would be frustrated, should we run to the
inquisition of new Sciences before we have attained the first, considering the
brevity of our lives compared with the amplitude of Arts. Wherefore it were
more expedient not only that every one applied himself to that whereunto he
finds himself inclined, but that there were as many distinct Artists as the Art
has principal parts; and that, for example, as Physic has been commodiously
divided between Physicians, Chirugeons, and Apothecaries, which were anciently
but one, so their functions were again subdivided. Because by this means every
one of them would attain a more perfect knowledge of his Subject. Therefore
Plato instead of cultivating, as he could have done, the spacious field of
Philosophy, applied himself only to Metaphysics, Socrates to Morality,
Democritus to Natural Philosophy, Archimedes to the Mathematics. For they who
would possess all the parts of a Science at once are like those who should try
to pluck off a Horse's tail at one pull, instead of doing it hair by hair.
Whence it was said of Erasmus, that he had been greater, if he had been
contented to be less.

The Fifth said, That determination of the question depends upon the capacity
of wits. For as in a poor little Mansion where there is not room enough to
place all necessary movables, 'twere impertinence to desire to place such as
serve only for luxury and ornament: So mean wits, yea, the indifferent, such
as most are, take safer course in keeping to those few things of which they
have most use, then if they embraced too many, for fear of verifying the
Proverb, He that grasps too much holds nothing. But there are some Heroic
Spirits, capable of every thing, and of which, comparing them to others, that
may be said which a Father once said of the different degrees of bliss,
comparing the Souls of the blessed to vessels of several sizes, all filled from
the same Fountain. There are little vulgar capacities, which the initiation of
a Science, or the Etymology of a word satisfies, and they never get beyond the
Apprentiship of the least trade. Others are so transcendent, that they go, like
the Sun, into all corners of the world without being wearied or contaminated
with several objects. Nothing tires them but rest. They draw every thing to
themselves, become Masters of what ever they undertake, and reduce all Sciences
to their principal study. Thus, the Divine, the Physician, and the Lawyer, will
make use of History: The first, to enrich a Sermon, or raise a Soul dejected by
the consideration of its miseries, whereunto it believes none equal: The
Second, to divert his Patient, whose Mind has no less need of redress then his
body: The Third, to show that the same judgment has been given in a parallel
case. They will call in the demonstrations of the Mathematics to back their
own, and the experiments of other Arts to serve for examples and similitudes.
To these, Nature, how vast soever it be, seems still too little, and they
would complain upon occasion, like Alexander, that there were not worlds
enough. Such were of old Hippocrates and Aristotle; and in the time of our
Fathers the Count of Mirandula, Scaliger, and some others, who though they writ
and spoke of all things, did nevertheless excel in all. Besides, nothing can be
known perfectly, without knowing a little of every thing, and this by reason of
the Encyclopaedie, or Circle of Arts; as we cannot understand a particular map
without having some knowledge of the general, and also of the neighboring
Countries.

CONFERENCE XLV.
I. Whether the Heavens be solid or liquid. II. Whether it be harder to get
then to preserve.

I. Whether the Heavens be solid or liquid.
WHen the proportion requisite to the necessary distance between the sense and
its object fails either in excess or defect, there is no more credit to be
given to Sense. That which we look upon too near, and which is applied upon the
Eye, appears greater then ordinary, as that which is too remote seems very
small, and diminishes commensurately to its distance. By which also the figure
or shape of the object becomes changed to our apprehension; and we are apt to
mistake a square Tower to be round, one color for another, nothing for a body,
a tree for a living creature, a beast for a man, one face for another. Some
things likewise deceive us near hand, as the certain of Timanthus. But if we
are abused in objects, which are terminated by an opake surface, capable of
bounding our view, and reflecting our visual rays; the same happens, with more
reason, in diaphanous and transparent bodies, as Light, Fire, Air, Water,
Glass, and every thing of that nature. The two last especially, have such
conformity that they have diverse effects alike, as to serve instead of
burning-glasses to recollect the Sunbeams, and represent the species which are
opposite to them. For, fill a viol with water, and set it in the Sun, his beams
will produce the same effect with it as with a burning-glass. Now by reason of
the possibility that our Sight may be mistaken, we are many times forced to
have recourse to some other Sense, as to that of Touching; to the end the one
may be backed with the testimony of the other. But this cannot be practiced in
the present Subject; and therefore I conceive that the Heavens, taken for the
Celestial Orbs, and not for the Air, nor the third or Empyrreal Heaven, are
neither solid nor liquid; because solidity is an effect of dryness, and
liquidity of moisture, which are Elementary Qualities; but the Heavens not
being composed of the Elements cannot partake of their qualities. But as they
constitute a Fifth Essence, of no affinity with that of the Four Elements, so
the accidents which belong to them are wholly different from ours, and can no
more be conceived then those of glorified bodies; which if you imagine solid,
you can never think how they should bow the knee, or exercise any the like
function. If they be imagined rare and liquid, and consequently penetrable,
they will seem to us divisible; qualities contrary to their immortality.
Wherefore I conclude, that the things of Heaven are not to be measured by the
standard of those on Earth.

The Second said, That when things are remote from our external Senses, we must
join the internal in their disquisition; now reason requires that there be some
utmost solid surface, serving as a boundary and limit to the Elements;
otherwise the same thing would happen to the Air or the Elementary Fire, (if
there be any such above the Air) that does to the Water and the Earth, which
exhale and evaporate their more rare and subtle parts into the Air; for so
would the Air exhale its vapors into the Heavens; and the Fire (whose Nature
is always to mount directly upwards, till the occurse of some solid body
checks its course and make it circulate) would mingle it self with the
substance of the Heavens; which by this means would be no longer pure, and free
from corruption, nor consequently eternal; yea, it might happen that such
Meteors as should be formed in the Heavens would disorder the motions of the
Planets which we behold so regular. And besides, it is not possible that the
Stars of the Firmament should not have come nearer one another in these 6000.
years; and the Planets have been so exact in their wanderings, unless the
Heavens were solid.

The Third said, That because the weakness of our reasoning cannot conceive how
the creatures obey the Creator, otherwise then by such ways as Artificers use,
who fasten nails in wheels to make their motion regular; therefore Men fancy
the like in Heaven. As if it had not been as easiy to God to have appointed a
Law to the Stars to move regulary in a liquid space, (as fishes do in the
water) yea, in a Vacuum, (if there were any in Nature) as to have riveted and
fixed them to some solid body. For it is true, we cannot make a durable Sphere
but of solid matter. But if Children make aerie spheres, or balls with water
and soap, could not God, who is an infinitely more excellent workman, make
some of a more subtle matter? Moreover, The supposition of liquid Heavens
serves better to interpret these openings of Heaven mentioned in the Scripture,
then if they be supposed solid. The melted brass to which Job compares the
Heavens, proves the contrary to what is usually inferred from it; for
immediately after this comparison made by one of Job's friends, God reproves
him, and taxes his discourse of ignorance. Whereas it is said, that Heaven is
God's throne, which is stable, and which God has established in the Heavens;
and also that it is called a Firmament, the same construction is to be made of
these expressions as of that in the beginning of Genesis, where the Sun and the
Moon are styled the two great Lights of Heaven, not because they are so in
reality, but because they appear so. But that which to me seems most
conclusive for the liquidity of the Heavens, is, That Comets have been
oftentimes observed above some Planets, which could not be, were the Heavens
solid. Besides that all the Elements are terminated by themselves, and need no
vessel to be contained in.

The Fourth said, If the matter of the Heavens were as firm as glass or
crystal, or only as water, our sight could no more perceive the Stars, then it
does things in the bottom of a deep water, how clear soever it be; for the
visual rays or species of things cannot penetrate so thick a medium. But
although the Stars are exceedingly remote from us, yet our eyes discern their
different magnitudes, colors, and motions, and distinguish such as twinckle
from others. Besides, those who should behold the same Star from different
places would perceive it of different magnitudes, as it happens to those who
look upon the same body through water or glass, in regard of the diversity of
the medium, which is thicker in one place then in another. Nor is it harder to
conceive how the Stars hang in the Air, then to imagine the same of the
Terr-aqueous Globe.

The Fifth said, Liquid is defined that which is hardly contained within its
own bounds, and easily in those of another, (which is the true definition of
Liquid, and not of Humid; since Quicksilver, Lead, and all metals melted, are
difficultly contained in their own bounds, and easily in those of another; yet
are not humid) the Heaven must be solid and not liquid; for it is contained
within its own bounds; yea, according to the Scripture, it upholds the
Supercelestial Waters.

The Sixth said, The great diversity found in the motions of the Celestial
Bodies, and especially in the Planets, makes very much for the Fluidity of the
Heavens. For Astronomers observing that the Planets not only go from East to
West by their diurnal motion, common to all the celestial bodies, but have a
particular one of their own, after a sort contrary to the former, which makes
them stray from their situation, whereunto they return only at a certain time;
therefore they will have them to be turned about by a Heaven, termed by them,
Primum Mobile, but add that each of the Planets has a sphere of its own, which
is the cause of its second motion: Moreover, observing the Planets to be
sometimes nearer, and sometimes further off from the Earth; therefore they
assigned them another sphere, called an Excentrick. But what needs this
multiplication of spheres, when as it may reasonably be affirmed, that God has
appointed to every Star the course which it is to observe, (as he has assigned
to every thing its action) what ever variety be found in Planetary bodies,
there being more in other Bodies. If it be said, That the wonder lies in their
Regularity, I answer, There is nothing here below but has and keeps a rule.
Whence Monsters are so much wondered at. Nor is there less wonder in the
natural instincts of things, and all their various operations which they
always inviolably observe, then in Uniformity, which has much more ease in
it; as it is a more facile thing for a stone to move always downwards, then
for an Animal to move according to all the diversities of place and exercise,
so many several actions.

The Seventh said, The matter of the Heavens (if they have any) is, according
to Empedocles, a most pure and subtle Air; and that of the Stars, is Light.
Wherefore they cannot be either solid or liquid. Moreover, the Center of the
World is most compact, and it grows more and more subtle still toward the
Circumference, which therefore must be immaterial, as Light is; Now the Stars
are only the thicker parts of their Orbs, like the knots in a Tree; which
density renders them visible to us, multiplying and fortifying the degrees of
Light by this union; as, on the contrary, the rarity of the intermediate space
between the Stars does not terminate or bound our sight, either because the
species which it sends forth are not strong enough to act upon the Eye, and
cause perception (which is the reason why we see not the Elementary Fire,
though we see the same Fire when it comes to be united and condensed into an
igneous meteor, or into our culinary flames. The Heavens therefore may be more
or less dense, but not solid in that sense as we attribute solidity to Crystal,
Diamonds, or other hard bodies which resist the touch. But indeed we may call
them so, if we take the word solid, for that which is filled with it self, and
not with any other intermixed thing) all whose parts are of the same nature;
according to which signification, not only the Water, but the Air, yea, the
Light it self, if it be material, may be said to be solid.

II. Whether is it easier to get or to keep.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That the difficulty of acquiring and
preserving is equal. The reason is, because all the world is eager to get, and
therefore it is a trouble to a Man to keep what he has. For the profit of one
not arising without the damage of another, (as there is no generation without
corruption) nothing accrues to one but what the other loses. Wherefore the
striving of every one to get, shows the pains there is in gaining something
from another; and again, being every one gapes after another's goods, it is
difficult to preserve the same; as a beast after which all the world is in
chase, can hardly save it self. Hence Diogenes said, that Gold might well be
pale, since every one lays plots to entrap it.

The Second said, That as for the guarding of a Place it is requisite that the
same be fortified on all sides, whereas there needs but one breach, or one gate
opened, for the surprising of it; so it seems there is more pains required to
keep then to get. Besides, the ways of losing and spending are almost infinite,
and far easier then those of gaining or acquiring, which are very few. To get,
it is sufficient to have strength (common to Men and Beasts) but to preserve,
there needs Prudence, (not only peculiar to Man, but with which very few are
well provided.) This is proved also by Nature, which acquires new forms by one
single action, but cannot preserve the same without many. For Conservation is
the duration of the existence of a thing, and this duration a continual
production of it, and consequently more difficult then Acquisition, which is
dispatched by one simple generation.

The Third said, States and Families are increased by acquiring, and upheld by
preserving what they acquired. Both the one and the other are very difficult,
as Experience teaches us; for we see but few Families and States advanced; and,
on the contrary, many others fall to decay. Nevertheless it seems more painful
to get then to keep. For if he who possesses much is troubled to preserve it,
he that has nothing is much more troubled to get something; it being far
easier for him who has a stock already, not only to preserve but increase it,
then for him who has nothing at all to become Master of any thing; as there is
more of miracle in Creation then in Conservation of the Universe; and as it is
harder to make leven out of nothing, then to make new paste with the leven
which one has already. Therefore the Latin verse tells Aemilian, that if he is
poor, he will always be so, because no body gives any thing but to the rich,
as too many examples evidence.

The Fourth said, As it is the same virtue in the Lodestone which retains, and
which attracts the Iron, and that which preserves is the same with that which
produces; so to keep and to get, are but one and the same thing; since he who
by his good management preserves his goods, continually makes them his own. But
as the harder a weight is to be lifted up, it is the harder to be held up; so
the more labor there is in acquiring, the more there is also in preserving the
thing acquired. Hence those who have undergone hard toil to get an estate are
more busied in keeping it, then they who receive one from another without
pains. And upon this account it is that Aristotle says Benefactors love those
they do good to, better then they are beloved by them, because it is more pains
to oblige then to be obliged; and women love and preserve their children so
tenderly and dearly, because of the pain which they undergo in bringing them
forth. Yet because this Sex is designed to look after the goods of the family,
and men to procure them, it may seem thereby that it is harder to get then to
keep; otherwise the strongest should not have the more difficult task, as
equity and justice require.

The Fifth said, The Question is resolved chiefly by considering the diversity
of times, inclinations, capacities, and things. In Seditions or Wars it is hard
for a man to keep his own, the stronger dispossessing the weaker, and the Laws
being little heard amidst the clashing of Arms. In Peace, when justice secures
every man's possession, it is easier to preserve. In Youth acquisition is more
facile, yet keeping is not so easily practiced then as in old age. The Prodigal
does violence to himself, when he finds a necessity of saving, and thinks
nothing more difficult. The Slothful man knows not how to get any thing. The
Covetous finds difficulty in both, but the greatest in keeping; and therefore
apprehending no security amongst men, after having experienced the trouble of
securing his wealth by the honesty of others, from the frauds of Debtors, the
subtlety of Lawyers, the violence of Thieves, he is oftentimes reduced to hide
his Treasure under ground. Persons of courage and great vivacity of spirit, but
defective in discretion, are more in pain to keep then to get. As it was said
of Alexander, Hanibal, and many other great Captains, that they knew better how
to overcome then to make use of their Victory. And indeed these two qualities
seem inconsistent; for Conquerors have almost always been so magnificent as
that they have given away with one hand what they acquired with the other,
reserving nothing to themselves but hope and glory; whereas preserving seems
proper to the Magistrate and civil Judge. Lastly, some things are acquired with
great facility, but difficulty kept, as Friendship, which oftentime is gotten
in an instant, but more difficult, yea almost impossible to continue. The
favors of Lovers are ordinarily of this rank, being more easily gotten then
kept. On the contrary, Knowledge is kept with more ease then it is gained,
because ignorance must first be removed out of the Understanding, and this is a
matter of difficulty; whereas to preserve knowledge, the species need only be
stirred up again, and the more they are excited they become the more strong and
vigorous; contrary to other things which perish in the use. For the same
actions which produced the habit preserve it, but with much less difficulty
then it was acquired. The same may be said of Virtues; for it is harder for a
bad man to become good then for one of this latter sort to continue in the
exercises of virtue. As for the goods of the Body, Beauty, Strength and Health;
as they are frail, so they are easy to lose; the Jaundise, the small Pox, the
least disorder in our humors are sufficient to alter or destroy them utterly.
The goods of Fortune (so called because they depend upon so uncertain and
mutable a cause, that he that has them can searce call himself master of them)
as riches and honors, are hard to get and easy to lose, inasmuch as a man
must perform an infinite number of virtuous actions to obtain promotion, but a
single bad action is enough to ruin him. It having pleased God, in order to
keep every one within their duty, that in this world as well as in the other
our felicity should be wrought out with fear and trembling.

CONFERENCE XLVI.
I. Of Vacuity. II. Of the extravagance of Women.

I. Of Vacuum.
THe Vulgar call that empty which is not filled with some visible body. But the
Philosophers give this name to a place destitute of all corporeity whatsoever,
yet capable of being filled; at least, if any such can be in nature. For it
cannot be understood of those imaginary spaces beyond the heavens (which,
Pythagoras said, served for their respiration) whereof he conceived they stood
in need, as animals do. Democritus and Leucippus admitted a twofold Vacuum;
one in the Air, serving for local motion; the other in all mixed Bodies,
requisite to the internal growth, and also to the lightness of things;
alleging that according as their atoms are closely or loosely connected, and
of various figures, so bodies are light or heavy. But these Opinions being
antiquated, I adhere to the common one, which admits no vacuum at all.

The Second said, Since Nature abhors vacuum, there must be such a thing; for
of two contraries the one supposes the other. And indeed it is impossible for
any local motion, condensation, or rarefaction, and inward augmentation, to be
made without admitting vacuity. For, as for local motion, when a body removes
out of a place, that into which it enters is either full or empty: not full,
for then it could not receive a new body without penetration of dimensions
(which nature cannot suffer) therefore it must be empty. For this reason
Melissus affirmed that all things are immovable. For being unable to
comprehend how motion could be made without, and unwilling to admit vacuity,
therefore he denied both. To say that bodies give way one to another, is to
increase the difficulty instead of resolving it; for the body which gives place
to another must displace a third, and this a fourth, and so to infinity. So
that, to avoid admitting little pores or interstices in the air, into which it
may be compacted, we must affirm that the air of our Antipodes is agitated at
every the least motion of a finger here. Moreover, Vacuum is proved by
condensation and rarefaction. For the former being made, when a body is reduced
into a lesser extent, and its parts approach nearer one another without loss of
any; either these parts penetrate one another, or else there was some void
space, which is possessed by themselves when they are thrust together: seeing,
if they had been so contiguous as that there were not any empty pores between
them, they could not have come closer together. Likewise, rarefaction being
caused when the parts recede one from another, if no other body interpose,
there must needs be a vacuum between the parts; or else they must have been one
within another. If it be said, that proportionably as one thing is condensed in
one place, another is as much rarefi'd somewhere else, to fill up the vacuum,
and so on the contrary; this is harder to be conceived then a vacuum. Lastly,
accretion or growth, which is caused by the reception of aliment in the body,
could not be made, if three were not some void passages to receive this
aliment. And, to conclude, experience shows us, that a pail of water will
receive its own measure of ashes or lime which it could not do, if there were
no vacuity.

The Third said, That every thing affects unity, not only because God who is
the universal cause of all is one, and most simple; and every thing ought to be
like its cause; but for that all things find their good and conservation in
unity, as they do their ruin in disunion. Wherefore every thing in the world
is so united that there is not any empty space between two; and contiguity is
as necessary in the parts of the world as continuity in those of a living
creature. For if there were a Vacuum in the world, the Heavens could not
transmit their influences into the Elements and their compounds, for the
preservation of which the same are absolutely necessary; considering that
whatever acts upon a distant thing must do it by some medium uniting the agent
and the patient.

The Fourth said, Since Nature offers violence to her self, to prevent inanity,
and all things quit their particular interest for that of the public,
undoubtedly, there is no such thing as vacuum in Nature. For we see that she
makes heavy things to ascend, light things to descend, and breaks the solidest
and strongest things without any external violence, only to avoid the
inconvenience of vacuity. If bellows be compressed and the holes stopped, no
humane force can expand them without breaking; a bottle (of what material
soever) filled with boiling water and stopped, and put into cold, immediately
flies in pieces. You cannot draw Wine out of a vessel, unless you give entrance
to the air at the bung-hole. A vessel being full of heated air, and its orifice
applied to the water, sucks the same upwards. A Cupping-glass, when the heated
and subtle air in it becomes condensed and takes up less room, attracts the
flesh into it self. Siphons and Pumps, by which the water is made to ascend
higher then its source, are founded wholly upon this eschewing of vacuity. Our
own bodies also afford us an instance, for the aliment could not be assimilated
in each part without the suction and attraction which is made of it to supply
the place of what is consumed by exercise or heat, otherwise the blood and
nourishment would tend only downwards by their own weight. And what makes the
effects of blood-letting and purgation so sensible, but this very flight of
Vacuum?

The Fifth said, A notable vacuity and of great extent cannot be without
miracle, but some small interspersed inanities may be between the particles of
the Elements and Compounds, like the pores of our bodies: for Nature abhors the
former, and can do nothing without the latter; it being impossible for
Qualities to be transmitted to any subject through a great vacuum, which would
hinder the perception of our senses, and the fire it self from heating at the
least distance. There could be no breathing in it, Birds could not fly in it;
in brief, no action could be exercised in it but those whereof the principle is
in the thing it self, and which need no medium, as local motion, which would be
more easily made, because there would be no resistance.

The Sixth said, Nature does what she can to hinder a vacuum, yet suffers one
when she is forced to it. For if you suck out all the air out of a bottle, then
stop it exactly, and having put it under water with the mouth downwards, open
it again, the water will immediately ascend to fill the vacuity left by the
exsuction of the air. And if with a Syringe you force air into a vessel strong
enough to endure such violence, when the pores of the air which were empty
before come to be filled, it will of its own accord drive out the water very
impetuously which was put first into it. Likewise, though the air naturally
keep up above the water: yet by enclosing it in some sort of vessel you may
violently make it continue under the water.

II. Of the capricious or extravagant humors of women.
Upon the second Point, it was said, It is not here pronounced that all women
are capricious; but only the reason inquired of those that are such, and why
they are more so then men. To allege the difference of souls, and suppose that
as there is an order in the Celestial Hierarchies, whereby the Archangels are
placed above Angels, so the spirits of men are more perfect then those of
women; were to fetch a reason too far off, and prove one obscure thing by
another more so. Nor is the cause to be found in their bodies, taken in
particular, for then the handsome would be free from this vice; the actions
which borrow grace from their subject appearing to us of the same nature; and
consequently their virtues would seem more perfect, and their defects more
excusable; whereas, for the most part the fairest are the most culpable. We
must therefore recur to the correspondence and proportion of the body and the
soul. For sometimes a soul lights upon a body so well framed, and organs so
commodious for the exercise of its faculties, that there seems more of a God
then of a man in its actions (whence some persons of either Sex attract the
admiration of all world:) On the contrary, other souls are so ill lodged that
their actions have less of man then of brute. And because there is more women
then men found, whose spirits are ill quartered, and faculties depraved; hence
comes their capricious and peevish humor. For as melancholy persons, whose
blood is more heavy, are with good reason accounted the more wise; so those
whose blood and (consequently) spirits are more agile and moveable, must have a
less degree of wisdom, and their minds sooner off the hooks. The irregular
motions of the organ which distinguishes their Sex, and which is called an
animal within an animal, many times have an influence in the business, and
increase the mobility of the humors. Whence the health of their minds as well
as that of their bodies many times suffers alteration. A woman fallen into a
fit of the Mother becomes oftentimes enraged, weeps, laughs, and has such
irregular motions as not only torment her body and mind, but also that of the
Physician, to assign the true cause of them. Moreover, the manner of living
whereunto the Laws and Customs subject women, contributes much to their
defects. For leading a sedentary life, wherein they have always the same
objects before their eyes, and their minds being not diverted by civil actions,
as those of men are, they make a thousand reflections upon their present
condition, comparing it with those whereof they account themselves worthy: this
puts their modesty to the rack, and oftentimes carries them beyond the respect
and bounds which they proposed to themselves. Especially, if a woman of good
wit sees her self married to a weak husband, and is ambitious of showing her
self. Another judging her self to merit more then her rival, not knowing to
whom to complain of her unhappiness, does every thing in despite. And indeed
they are the less culpable, inasmuch as they always have the principles of this
vice within themselves, and frequently find occasions abroad.

The Second said, that the word Caprichio is used to signify the extravagant
humor of most women, because there is no animal to which they more resemble
then a Goat, whose motions are so irregular that prendre la chevre signifies to
take snuff without cause, and to change a resolution unexpectedly. For such as
have searched into the nature of this animal, find that its blood is so sharp,
and spirits so ardent, that it is always in a Fever; and hence it is that being
agitated with this heat which is natural to it it leaps as soon as it comes
into the world. Now the cause of this temper is the conformation of the Brain,
which they say is like that of a woman, the Ventricles of which being very
little are easily filled with sharp and biting vapors, which cannot evaporate
(as Aristotle affirms) because their Sutures are closer then those of men:
those vapors prick the Nerves and Membranes, and so cause those extraordinary
and capricious motions. Hence it is, that women are more subject to the Meagrim
and other diseases of the head, then men. And if those that sell a Goat never
warrant it sound as they do other animals, there is no less excuse in reference
to women. Which caused the Emperor Aurelius to say, that his Father in law
Antoninus who had done so much good to others had done him mischief enough in
giving him his daughter, because he found so much bone to pick in a little
flesh. Moreover, the Naturalists say that the Goat is an enemy to the
Olive Tree especially, which is a symbol of peace, whereunto women are not
over-well affected. For, not to mention the first divorce which woman caused
between God and man by her lickorishness; her talking, her ambition, her
luxury, her obstinacy, and other vices, are the most common causes of all the
quarrels which arise in families, and in civil life. If you would have a troop
of Goats pass over any difficult place you need force but one to do it, and all
the rest will follow. So women are naturally envious, and no sooner see a new
fashion but they must follow it. And Gardeners compare women and girls to a
flock of Goats, who roam and browse incessantly, holding nothing inaccessible
to their curiosity. There is but one considerable difference between them; the
Goat wears horns, and the woman makes others wear them.

The Third said, There is more correspondence between a woman and a Mule, then
between a woman and a Goat: for (leaving the Etymology of Mulier to
Grammarians) the Mule is the most teasty and capricious of all beasts, fearing
the shadow of a man or a Tree overturned more then the spur of the rider. So a
woman fears every thing but what she ought to fear. The obstinacy of the Mule,
which is so great that it has grown into a Proverb, is inseparable from the
whole Sex, most of them being gifted with a spirit of contradiction. Mules
delight to go in companies; so do women; the bells and muzzles of the one have
some correspondence with the earings and masks of the other; and both love
priority. The more quiet you allow a Mule, it becomes the more resty; so women
become more vicious in idleness; neither of them willingly admits the bridle
between their teeth. The Mule is so untoward that it kicks in the night time
while it is asleep; so women are oftener laid then quiet. Lastly, the Mule that
has seemed most tractable all its time, one day or other pays his master with
a kick; and the woman that has seemed most discreet, at one time or other
commits some notorious folly.

The Fourth said, That those who invented the little Medals representing the
upper part of a woman, and the lower of a Mule, commend this Sex whilst they
think to blame it. For there is nothing more healthy, strong, patient of
hunger, and the injuries of seasons, or that carries more, and is more
serviceable, then a Mule. Nature shows that she is not satisfied with her other
productions whilst she makes other animals propagate by generation; but when
she has made a Mule, she stops there, as having found what she sought. Now if
certain actions of women seem full of perverseness and capricio to some,
possibly others will account them to proceed from vivacity of spirit, and
greatness of courage. And as the Poet, in great commendation of his black
Mistress, chanted her cheeks of Jet, and bosom of Ebeny; so whatever some
people's mistake may say to the contrary, the most capricious woman is the most
becoming. Nor is this humor unprofitable to them; for as people are not
forward to provoke a Mule for fear of kicks, so we are more shie of women then
otherwise we should be, for fear of capricioes, well understanding the
difference which the Proverb puts between the van of the one, and the rear of
the other. Yet some hold that this capriciousness of women follows the Moon no
less then their menstruosities do. Others, that the flower of beans contributes
very much to it.

The Fifth said, That if credit is to be given to experience, Solomon who had
experience of a thousand women, compares an ill capricious woman to a Tygress
and a Lyoness. Such were Medea, Xantippe, and many others. Moreover, the Poets
say that the Gods intending to punish Prometheus for having stolen the celestial
fire, gave him a wife. And when Satan afflicted Job he deprived him of his
flocks, of his houses, and of his children, but had a care not to take his wife
from him, knowing that this was the only way to make him desperate, as it
would have done without God's special grace. The Rabbis say, three sorts of
persons were exempted from public charges, and could not be called into
judgment, to wit, the Poor, the Nephritick, and he that had a bad wife,
because they had business enough at home without needing any abroad. The Laws
likewise exempted new married men from going to the wars the first year of
their marriage, allowing them this time, which is the roughest and most
important, to repress their quarrelsomeness, and reduce their fierce Spouses to
duty. Which if the Husbands could not effect, a little bill of Divorce
(appointed by God, and the Laws for putting an end to the poor Man's miseries)
did the business. Though the Chaldeans used not so much formality, but only*
extinguished the domestic fire which the Priest kindled at the marriage. Yet
the privilege was not reciprocal, neither Divine nor Humane Laws having ever
allowed women to relinquish their Husbands; for then, being as capricious and
inconstant as they are, they would have changed every day. For the same reason
the Laws have always prohibited to women the administration of public
affairs. And the Religion of the Mahumetan Arabians assigns them a Paradise
apart; because (say they) if the women should come into that of the men they
would disturb all the Feast.

CONFERENCE XLVII.
I. Of the Virtue of Numbers. II. Of the Visible Species.

I. Of the Virtue of Numbers.
THe Mind of Man resembles those who make the point of their tools so small
that they spoil them with too much sharpning; and in the contemplation of
natural causes there is more then enough to satisfy his desire of knowledge,
were it not that he will attempt every thing. Hence it is that the causes of
different effects here below are sought in things the most remote, and no
otherwise appertaining to them then that as accidents and circumstances. Of
these accidents some have action, as Quality; others have none, as Quantity;
under which are comprehended Number, Figure, Lines, Surface, and its other
species; which are considered either in some matter, or else abstracted from
it; in the former of these ways, they have some virtue in regard of their
matter, but not in the latter. An Army of fifty thousand Men is potent, but the
number of fifty thousand can do nothing, yea, is nothing, if taken
abstractedly. Wherefore as reasonable as it is to seek the virtues of simple
and compound bodies in their qualities, and to say, e. g. that Pepper bites and
alters the Tongue, because it is hot and dry; so absurd it seems to think that
five or seven leaves of Sage applied to the Wrist have more virtue then six or
eight.

The Second said, Nothing includes more wonders in it self then Number; and if
our Reason cannot penetrate their cause, they ought to be the more esteemed for
being unknown. This is the universal opinion of all Antiquity, both Jewish and
Pagan, which otherwise would not have made so much ado with them. Yea, there is
[divine] authority for it, contained in the eleventh Chapter of Wisdom, God
made all things in number, weight, and measure. Experience justifies their
Energy, teaching us that certain numbers are to be observed in cases where we
would have the like effects, which possibly is the canse why the operations of
one and the same remedy are found so frequently different. We see Nature so
religious in this observation, in all her works, that she never produces an
Animal, but the proportion of seeds is adjusted most exactly; that in Plants,
their grains and all other parts have the same taste, color, and virtue,
(whence it is that simple medicaments are always more certain then compound)
because Nature either produces them not at all, or makes them with the same
number, weight, and measure of matter and qualities. It Is through the virtue of
number that such a Plant, as Coloquintida, is mortal when it grows alone; and
medicinal, when many of them grow together.

The Third said, The Pythagoreans and Platonists ascribed so great power to
numbers, that they thought all things were composed of them, and more or less
active according to their several proportion. Of which they made four sorts.
First the Poetical, or Musical, the virtue whereof is such, that it gave
occasion to the Fable of Orpheus, who is said to have drawn even beasts, trees,
and rocks, by the harmonious sound of his Harp. 'Twas by the cadence of the
like numbers that David chased away Readiness evil spirit; and Poetry, which
differs from Prose only by its numbers, hence derives the power it has over
men's souls. The Second sort is the Natural, and is found in the composition of
all mixed bodies. The Third is Rational, peculiar to Man, whose soul they termed
a moving number, the connection whereof with the body they said, continued so
long as the numbers which linked them remained united together. The Fourth
Divine, upon which and the Natural the Cabalists and Magicians have founded
their profoundest secrets, and Agrippa his Occult Philosophy. But above all
others, they particularly esteemed the odd number, styling it perfect and
Masculine; as, on the contrary, the even, imperfect and Feminine. Indeed we
observe that the Birth of Man happens, for the most part, in an odd month, to
wit, the seventh or ninth; in the rest, the Infant seldom comes forth alive.
Also most of the alterations of our bodies happen according to the septenary
number; whence the number 83. called for this reason the grand Climacterical,
is so greatly feared, because it is produced by seven multiplied into nine.
Physicians never appoint Pills in an even number. Good Crises always happen on
an odd day; and he that loses his Ague at an even fit necessarily falls into a
relapse. Which cannot be attributed to any thing but number. For such effects
as are produced by the quality or quantity of the matter appear with it; and
therefore if these caused the Crisis, it would not be wholly at once, but begin
and proceed by degrees according to the augmentation of the matter; as fire is
increased by new wood cast upon it. But the motion of Crises is always sudden,
and many times against all appearance.

The Fourth said, As the beginning of all things is a most simple essence; so
all Numbers spring from Unity, which is no Number of it self, but the beginning
of Number. Osellus calls it the Symbol of Peace and Concord, because it is
indivisible; and with the Philosophers, Unity, Verity, Goodness, and Essence,
are one and the same thing. Whence it follows that the Binary is the first of
all numbers, wherewith Nature is so highly delighted that she has exactly
observed it in the structure of Man, the Organs of whose senses, and almost all
his members, are double; and therefore it is also so carefully observed by
Architects. But the Ternary, concerning which Ausonius writ an entire volumne,
being the first odd number, is of more efficacy, it is competent to the Deity
and his works; the world is distinguished into three Ages; there are three
sorts of Souls in Nature, three Faculties in Man, and three principal parts in
his Body: Which caused Aristotle to say, in his first Book De Coelo, Chapter 1.
That all things are comprehended under this Number [ Tria sunt Omnia.] The
Qaternary, dedicated to Mercury, is the first even and square number, highly
esteemed by the Pythagoreans, because it contains the grand number of Ten, (for
1, 2, 3, 4, put together, make Ten;) and by the Jews, upon the Art of the
Divine Tetragrammaton, or Name of four Letters. Moreover, there are four
Elements, four Seasons, four Humors, four Ages, and four Cardinal Virtues. As
for the Quinary, we see there are five most Simple Bodies in Nature, five
Senses, and five Fingers on a Hand. The Senary, according to Saint Jerome,
contains the mystery of the Creatures, because it arises from the double
proportion of the quaternary to the binary. Nevertheless the Septenary has
been accounted the most mysterious of all; because it is compounded of the first
odd number, and first even Square, namely, three and four. And it is held, that
by virtue of this number, the seventh Son born of the same Mother, without any
interposition of the other sex, has a particular gift of doing cures. Orpheus
so esteemed the Octonary, that he swore only by it and the Eight Deities, to
wit, the four Elements, the Sun, the Moon, Light, and Darkness. This number was
always held for the Emblem of Justice, because it is the first Cube, and has a
most perfect equality in all its parts. The Novenary being compounded of three
Triads, (the first odd and most perfect number) is also of great efficacy;
whence the Heavens, the Muses, and the orders of Angels have been comprised in
it. Lastly, the Denary, which is the first conjoined number, includes all the
preceding. By all which it appears, that there is some efficacy not only in
numbers in general, but also in every one in particular.

The Fifth said, That which is most considerable in number, is, that it is the
most sensible exemplar of the Deity, of whom you cannot conceive so many
perfections, but there will still remain more to be imagined; as you cannot ad
so many numbers together, but you may yet add more. This is peculiar to it,
that there is a least number, to wit, two, but no greatest, because you may
always assign a greater. Yet there is no number, how great sover, but may be
expressed. For set down a thousand figures in a row, and as many below them,
multiply the one by the other, the sand of the sea does not equal this number.
What will it be then, if you multiply the same again, which you may do as often
as you please. Here writing will surpass speech; for you cannot count it. Its
perfection is also manifest, in that the Philosophers knew not how to express
the forms and essences of things better then by comparing them to numbers. For
as every number is so perfect and complete a total in it self, that you cannot
add or diminish any thing from it, and it remain the same number; so are the
essences of things. Moreover, *it is particular to Man; for he alone, amongst all
Creatures, reasons, speaks, and computes. Whence Amphistides was adjudg'd a
fool because he could not count above five. And Pythagoras assigns no other
cause of the ratiocination of Man, but this, that he understands how to compute
or reckon. For Number is made by order and connection of many unites, which
actions cannot be performed but by the Understanding.

The Sixth said, Number being nothing in it self, but a simple work of the
Understanding, cannot produce any real effect. And supposing it could, yet
Parity and Imparity are but accidental, not substantial forms; and therefore
incapable of rendering a number more or less active. Which made Galen doubt
whether Pythagoras could attribute so much power to it, and yet be wise. For,
as for Plato, it is very probable he ascribed this virtue to Forms and
Essences, which he terms Formal and Rational numbers, rather then to real and
true numbers abstracted from Essence. Whereas some have divined prosperous and
sinister accidents by the imparity or parity of the syllables in some person's
name, or whether should live longest the Husband or the Wife, by the greater or
less number of their letters; this is rather to be referred to Chance then to
any thing else.

The Seventh said, Nature makes all her works in Number, since she makes them
in Time, which is the number of Motion. Yet it is not Number that acts, but
Nature alone. For Number is incapable of all action, having no essence of it
self, but by accident, and not so much as an essence of reason. For the
Understanding conjoyning many unites together, which are indivisibles, and
consequently negations, frames a number. And if many unites of substance cannot
make a real total it self, much less can many unites of Quantities.

II. Of the Visible Species.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That there is nothing barren in Nature, but
every thing incessantly produces its like. Which is no less wonderful then the
first Creation, the power of which God seems by this productive virtue to have
communicated to Creatures. But that which surpasses all admiration, is, that
even the most gross and material things incessantly emit out of themselves
infinite, species which are so many pourtraitures and resemblances, more
exquisite and excellent then their Original. And being every thing has its
sphere of activity, these species are diffused in the Air, and other diaphanous
mediums, to a certain distance, unless they meet with opake and terminated
bodies, which hinder them from passing further, and interrupt their continuity
with their source, either reflecting them, as it happens when the opposite body
is so exactly polished that it equally sends back all the parts of the species
without mutilation; or only stopping them, as all other bodies do. Our Sight
goes not to seek Objects, but they insinuate themselves into it by their
species; whence it is that in a Looking-glass we behold a person that stands
behind us. Moreover, all Sensation being a Passion, according to Aristotle, as
Hearing is made by the reception of sounds, so must Seeing by the reception of
the Visible Species; nor must this sense be in a worse condition then the rest,
who are not at the trouble to go to seek their Objects, but only to receive
them. An undoubted proof whereof is administered by the great conformity which
is between the Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling, especially between the two former.

The Second said, That the Visible Species are a reflection of light, which is
various according to the different color and figure of the Objects: Whence it
is that a Concave glass reflects not only the species but also light and heat,
augmented by the union of their scattered rays into a point. Now these Species
are carried into the Eye; and as one nail drives another, and the agitated
Water or Air thrusts that which is next it, so the tunicles and humors of the
Eye being struck by the Species the Spirits are stirred by the same means, and
take the form of the Species according as they arrive; as when the Air is
enclosed in a rock is struck by the Species of some sound, it puts on the form
of the Species of this sound, and issuing forth of its cavity with this
borrowed form, makes the voice which we call an Echo. These Species being
received by the Spirits, are by them carried to the Common Sense and the
Imagination; and then, (after the example of this Faculty) the Intellect forms
the like in it self, which are more spiritual and incorporeal then the first,
and which at length it commits to the custody of the Memory, to make use of the
same in fitting time and place.

The Third said, That the greatest difficulty arising about these Visible
Species, is, how those of each different object of the same place can fill it
all, and nevertheless all these Species together not fill it more; yea, not
confound and hinder one the other from being as well seen as if there were but
one Object. It Is otherwise in sounds and smells, which being various give not a
distinct perception of any one, but a medley of all. Now the reason hereof
seems to be, because the Visible Species alter not the Air, as odours which
are corporeal do; (as appears in that they make us healthy and sick) and it is
not needful for the Eye to paint them anew, as the Ear new frames all sounds,
which cannot be done but successively; the deep tone, (for example) being
constrained to attend at the portal of the Ear, till the shrill be new formed
in it. Whence arises the confusion of sounds.

The Fourth said, As the Visible Species are not mixed together in a
Looking-glass, but all appear distinctly, although the dimensions of the glass
be very small in respect of the extent and number of the objects, because the
Species concur there in a direct line, and are terminated as in a point, which
is capable to lodge them, being they are immaterial: So it is with the same
Species in reference to the Air, through the least part whereof it is a less
wonder that many of them pass without penetration, then to observe the actions
of our Memory; in one point of which infinite Species, not only visible, but
those introduced by all other senses, remain for a long time, yea, during all
our lives; notwithstanding their society seem very incompatible. But although
Objects send their Images toward the Sight, yet the Eye emits the most subtle
and active Spirits to receive them, which it has for this purpose. Hence it is
that to see a thing distinctly, we contract our Eyes, or shut one of them; to
the end the visual beams may be more strengthened by being more united. It Is
through the dissipation of these spirits that the Eye grows weary with seeing;
and old men, those who watch, read, or addict themselves to women too much, see
not very clear; and on the contrary, young persons, and the choleric, whose
spirits are more subtle, have a very sharp Sight. But if Sight were performed
without any Emission, the Basilisk should not kill by its aspect; the Wolf
perceiving a man first should not make him hoarse; women should not infect
Looking-glasses at certain times; those who have sore Eyes should not
communicate their infirmity to others by beholding them, or being beheld by
them: Lastly, old hags could not bewitch Children by the Sight, and Lambs too,
by the report of Virgil, if the visual spirits which they send forth were not
corrupted.

The Fifth said, If the Eye send any thing toward the Object, it must be
either a substance or an accident. An incorporal substance it cannot be, for
then a man should emit his Soul, or part of it, which is absurd; besides, that
of other Animals, whose Souls are confessedly corporeal, some see better then
we. Nor can it be a body, for no body is moved in an instant; and yet as soon
as we open our Eyes we behold the Stars; yea, we see much sooner then we hear,
and behold the Lightning before we hear the Thunder which preceded it. Nor is
it any of the Animal Spirits that issues forth; from whence should such a
quantity be produced as to reach as far as the Firmament? Neither is it an
accident, since it is against Nature for an accident to go from one subject to
another. Now this difficulty may serve for an excuse to Cardinal Perron, when
before Henry III, he was gravel'd with this Riddle, I am a man and no man, I
have neither body nor soul, I am neither shadow nor picture, and yet I am seen;
by which was meant the species of a man beholding himself in a glass. Lastly,
either these visual rays return back to their quarters, after they have been
abroad to receive the Visible Species; (and then Nature should labor in vain
by going to seek that which comes of its own accord) or else they return not,
and so the vision should not be made in the Eye, but in the Air.

CONFERENCE XLVIII.
I. Whether every thing that nourishes an Animal ought to have life. II. Of
Courage.

I. Whether every thing that nourishes an Animal ought to have Life.
EVery thing in the world is effected by an order and disposition of causes and
means subalternate *one to another. God makes himself known to Men by the
mavelous effects of Nature. The immaterial and incorruptible Heavens
communicate their virtues and influences here below; first, through the Element
of Fire, which is most subtle, and then through the Air which is most pure in
the upper Region, more gross in the middle, and in the lower infected by the
vapors and exhalations of the Water and Earth, and all compounds; in the
production whereof Nature observes such order as that she begins always with
the more simple, and never passes from one extremity to another without a
medium. Thus the Plant springs out of the ground like an herb, becomes a
shrub, and then a tree. The Embryo lives only a vegetable life at first, then
arrives to motion, and lastly, is indu'd with reason. Even in civil life too
speedy advancements are taken ill, whereas he who grows great by degrees does
not so much offend the Minds of others, and provokes less jealousy. Hence also
the deaths, and especially the violent, astonish us more then the births of
Men, because they come into the world, and grow up by little and little, but
are cut off in a moment. So likewise the burning of Cities, and overthrow of
States, cause the more admiration, because sudden vicissitudes seem less
conformable to the order of Nature then their progressive erections. That which
is observed in the composition and generation of bodies holds also in their
nutrition, for both of them proceed from the same Faculty, and are almost the
same thing. For to nourish, is to be changed into the substance of that which
is nourished. Nature makes no change from one term to another by a violent
motion and progress, but by little and little, of a matter capable of being
converted into the substance of the living thing; as only that is which has
life, it being as impossible to make a living thing of that which never was
such, and consequently whose matter has no disposition to become such, as it is
to make a thing be which cannot be.

The Second said, (setting aside Cardan's opinion who extends life even to
Stones) as there are three orders of living things, so there are three that
have need of nutrition, Plants, Animals and Men. Plants are nourished with the
juice of the earth; Animals, for the most part, with Plants; and Men better
with the Flesh of Animals, then with any other thing, by reason of the
resemblance of their natures. The first order is not here spoken of, because
Plants must needs be nourished with that which has not had life, unless we
will say, that the universal spirit informing the earth gives it virtue to
produce and nourish them. The two latter are only in question, and I think it
no more inconvenient that what has not had life may serve for aliment, and be
converted into the substance of a living creature, then that the earth and
water (simple elements in respect of a Plant) are assimilated by it and made
partakers of vegetable life. For as fire makes green wood combustible by
exsiccating its humidity; so an Animal may render such matter fit for its
nourishment which was not so before. Not only the Oestrich is nourished with
Iron which it digests, Pigeons and Pullen with gravel, the stones of which are
found in their crops smooth and round; but also men may be nourished with bread
made of earth. And the Spaniards are much addicted to the use of an earth
called Soccolante which they mingle with water and sugar; its terrene
consistence refuting their opinion who hold it to be the juice of a Plant. Yea,
some in Sieges have supported their lives with inanimate things, as with bread
of Slate* as it is reported of that of Sancerre. And, moreover, it is manifest
that some sick people are nourished with water alone for many days together.

The Third said, Nutrition is made by the help of heat, which alters and
divides the aliments, and reduces them to a most simple substance, capable of
being converted into every similary part; the property of heat being to
separate heterogeneous things, and conjoyn those of the same nature. Hence,
things least compounded are more easily assimilated. And as among Medicaments,
so among aliments, the more simple are the best, and make fewest excrements.
The air does not only refresh the natural heat, but serves for food and aliment
to the spirits, our best and noblest parts; with which air alone, as the common
opinion holds, the Camelion is nourished, as the Grasshopper with dew which is
nothing but concreted air; and the Jews were fed forty years with Manna, which
is a kind of dew (for the Scripture says it vanished with the heat of the Sun)
yea, the Manna which is found at this day in Calabria and other places is
capable of nourishing an animal, and yet it never had life, but falls from
heaven upon the stones, from which it is collected. The same may be said of
honey, which is a kind of dew too falling upon the leaves and flowers of Plants,
and serving for food to Bees who only gather it, without other preparation. And
a sort of Flies called Pyraustae live with nothing but fire, as many Fishes do
of plain water, Moles and Worms of simple earth. Antimony and diverse other
Minerals, purged from their malignant qualities, serve for aliment; and they
who are expert in Chemistry make a kind of bread of them. The Magistery of
Pearls and Coral, many precious Stones, and Gold it self, by the consent of all
antiquity, wonderfully repair our radical moisture by their fixed spirits;
whence they are called Cordials.

The Fourth said, If man were homogeneous and all of a piece, he would be not
only immortal, according to Hippocrates, but need no food, which is necessary
only for reparation of what substance is consumed; now nothing would be
destroyed in man, were it not for the heterogeneous pieces of which he is made
up. Wherefore since we are nourished with the same things whereof we are
composed, and we are not composed of one pure and simple element, but of four,
it follows, that whatever nourishes us must be mixed of those four Elements;
and therefore the more compounded it is, as animate things are, the more proper
it is to nourish. Otherwise were the aliment pure, it could not be assimilated.
And although it could be assimilated, yet it could not nourish the whole body,
but only either the terrestrial parts, if it were earth; or the humors, if it
were water; or the spirits, if it were fire or air.

The Fifth said, The life of man cost Nature dear, if it must be maintained at
the expense of so many other animals lives. If you say, that being made for
man, the greatest happiness that can befall them is to serve him in something
though by the loss of their lives. But this is rather a fair excuse to cover
our cruelty and luxury; seeing Animals are no more proper then Plants to
nourish man. Witness our first Fathers, before the flood, who were so
long-lived although they lived not of flesh. Whence it is inferred too that
inanimate things may nourish us better then Plants. For the taste is an ill
judge in this cause; the Eele, amongst animals, and the Peach, amongst fruits,
affording the worst nourishment, though they relish most deliciously. The
Similitude of substance is of little consideration; for Animals live not of
their like, and the Cannibals are ordinarily all Leprous. That a thing may be
food, it is sufficient that it have an humidity or substance proportionate to
ours, in what order of things soever it be found. And nature has had no less
care of nourishing an animal then of healing it, but she has endu'd all
sublunary bodies with properties medicinal to man. Lastly, we cannot reckon
among Plants those excrescenses which we call Truffes, and are held to be
produced by thunder in some kinds of earth, whence they are gathered; and yet
they nourish extremely.

The Sixth said, When that which enters into the Stomach is altered by it, it is
called aliment; for heat is the chief Agent by which it is united and
assimulated; whence it comes to pass that according to the diversity of this
heat, Hemlock serves for nourishment to the Starlings, but kills man. Now to
judge whether that which has had life be more proper for nutrition then that
which has not; we need only consider upon which of the two the natural faculty
which disperses this heat acts most powerfully; which, no doubt, it does upon
that which has had life, since it has the conditions requisite to food, being
in some sort like, as having been alive; and also qualified to become so again,
because when a form forsakes its subject it leaves dispositions in it for a
like form to ensue; it is also in some sort unlike, being actually destitute of
life. Wherefore as that which has life really cannot nourish a living thing
because of its total resemblance, and there is no action between things alike,
otherwise a thing might act against it self, since nothing is more like to any
thing then it self. So that which never had life cannot nourish an animal, by
reason of its entire dissimilitude, and because between things wholly unlike
there is no action.

II. Of Courage.
Upon the second Point; If it is worthy admiration that amongst Animals a little
dog gives chase to a multitude of Oxen (whence the Hebrews call a Dog Cheleb,
that is to say, All heart, in regard of his courage) it is more to be wondered
that amongst men who are of the same species, and framed after the same manner,
one puts to flight three others, greater, stronger and oftentimes more dextrous
then himself. The cause hereof is attributed to heat; but (besides that we see
many sufficiently heated in every other action, but cold when it comes to
fighting;) as they say there are good Greyhounds of all sizes, so there are
great courages of all tempers; and although the hair, complexion, stature, and
habit of body, are the most sure witnesses, yet every body knows that there are
valiant men found of all hairs and statures, yea of all Ages, the seeds of
courage being manifest in children, and the remainders in old men. It seems
therefore that courage proceeds from the fitting and well proportioned temper
and structure of the heart and arteries; for when these are too large, the
spirits are more languid, and the actions less vigorous, either to repel
present dangers, or meet those which are future. Yet the Choleric are
naturally more disposed to magnanimity, the Phlegmatic and Melancholy less,
and the Sanguine are between both. Education also and custom are of great
moment, as we see Rope-dancers and Climbers perform strange feats with
inimitable boldness, because they have been used to walk upon Ropes, and climb
the Spires of Churches, from their youth. So a child that has been accustomed
to dangers from his infancy will not fear any. Moreover, Honor and Anger are
great spurs to valor, especially, when the latter is sharpened by the desire of
revenge, which is excited by injury, derision, or ingratitude. Exhortations too
are very effectual. And therefore when ever Caesar's Soldiers did not behave
themselves well, he observes that he had not had time to make a speech to them.
Nor is Necessity and the consideration of present danger to be omitted, for the
greatest cowards oftentimes give proofs of courage upon urgent occasions, when
there is no hope of flight; and one of the best wiles of a General is to take
from his Soldiers all hope of retreat and safety otherwise then in victory.
Example also prevails much, both as to flying and to fighting. Wherefore those
that run first ought to be punished without mercy, as they who first enter a
breach, or are farthest engaged amongst the enemies, deserve great
acknowledgement of their virtue. But particularly amongst persons acquainted
and mutually affectionate, courage is redoubled by the presence of the thing
beloved; witness the sacred Legion of the Thebans. But the desire of honor and
hope of reward are the most powerful incitements to valor. Upon which account
the King's presence is always counted equivalent as all his Troops together.

The Second said, Courage is a virtue placed between boldness and fear. Yet it
is chiefly conversant in moderating fear, which is an expectation of evil.
Amongst the evils and adversities which cause terror to men, some are to be
feared by all, and cannot be slighted by a virtuous man, as ignominy,
punishment for a crime, or other infamy. Others may be feared or despised
without blame, if our selves be not the causes of them, as Poverty, Exile and
Sickness. And yet a man is never the more courageous for not fearing them. For
a Prodigal is not courageous for not fearing Poverty; an impudent fellow that
has lost all shame may easily despise banishment, as Diogenes did; and a Sot
will be insensible of an incurable disease, which a wise man supports
patiently. Lastly, some evils are to be contemned, as all dangers and
misfortunes which necessarily come to pass in life, and death it self; in the
despising of which the greatness of courage principally appears, especially in
that which happens in the wars, fighting for one's Prince and Country, as being
the most honorable and glorious of all.

The Third said, No virtue can keep us from fearing death, which gave so great
apprehension to the most wise, and to our Lord himself, and which Aristotle
deservedly calls the most terrible of terribles; the same Philosopher also
teaching us that a virtuous man infinitely desires to live, and ought to fear
death; because he accounts himself worthy of long life, during which he may do
service to others, and he knows well that death will deprive him of all the
goods of this world; since well-being presupposes being. Therefore courage does
not wholly take away the fear of death, no more then the sense of pain, which
is natural; otherwise a courageous man ought to be insensible and stupid. But
he governs this fear in such sort that it does not hinder him from overcoming
his enemy, although it render him more prudent and circumspect in seeking fit
means to attain thereunto. Herein he differs from the rash person, who casting
himself into dangers without having foreseen and maturely considered them,
becomes faint-hearted in the chiefest of the brunt.

The Fourth said, A courageous man is known by what he attempts without
rashness, and accomplishes without fear; for he always represents to himself
the danger greater then it is, to the end, to arm himself with strong
resolutions, which once taken it is impossible to make him retract. His courage
proceeds neither from experience nor necessity, nor desire of gain, ignorance
or stupidity; but having well considered the danger, and judged it honorable
to resist it, he does so upon the sole account of virtue, and shows himself
indefatigable in undergoing toils, and invincible even in death. It Is not
enough that his cause be good, he will end it by lawful means, and had rather
lose his right then attempt such as are unjustifiable and displeasing to his
Prince. Therefore our Duellists must conclude that they abandon solid honor,
to follow its shadow; since honorable and just are inseparable. The sword is
his last remedy, and he uses it more to defend then to assault, but always with
some kind of constraint, and yet none wields it with more sureness and grace,
fear not causing him to make unseemly gestures. He hates nothing so much as
vice. He speaks little but acts much, liking rather to be seen then heard. He
chooses not the kind of death, but receives that which is offered, in which
nothing troubles him saving that it deprives him of the means to do his King
and Country more service. If his ill fate make him a slave, he will not employ
death to deliver himself from servitude, as Cato of Vtica did, showing thereby
a figure of cowardice rather then of courage; but he will so deport himself as
to seem free in his bondage, yea to have dominion over those who command him.
In fine, whether he be conqueror or conquered, he loses nothing of his
magnanimity, but remains always like himself, firm in his resolutions. To
attain to which greatness of spirit it is not enough that the structure of the
body be large, or the heat of temper as great as that of Leonidas the Spartane,
Matthias the Emperor, or the Pirate burnt alive at Gradisca by the Venetians,
the hearts of which three were found hairy; there must be moreover an heroic
soul, informing this body.

The Fifth alleged, that the Original of courage is to be sought in the
nobleness of extraction, whether it be known or not. For though there seem to
be some intervals in illustrious families proceeding from malignant influences,
or other impediment; yet there is observed generally no less resemblance of
children with their Ancestors in mind then in body; Eagles never producing
Doves, nor Doves Eagles.

CONFERENCE XLIX.
I. Whether there be Specifical remedies to every Disease. II. Whether Tears
proceed from Weakness.

I. Whether there be Specifical remedies to every Disease.
MEn, in imitation of Nature, always seek the shortest way. For which purpose
they have thought fit to make maxims of every thing; whereas, to speak truth,
there is no maxim of any thing; since by the most certain rule of all, there
is none so general but has some exception; yea some have so many exceptions
that it is dubious on which side to make the rule. Nevertheless the mind of man
forbears not to make axioms in all Sciences, especially in Physic: whose
Office being to govern Nature, it involves in certain general laws all
diseases, with their causes, symptoms and remedies, although as in the Law, so
in Physic, two Cases are never alike. But when these rules come to be applied
to practice, every one confesses that he finds them not wholly correspondent to
what he expected. Now this is chiefly to be understood of particular Diseases
and Specificks; as the Pleurisy, Cataract, or Gout. For geral Infirmities, as
simple Intemperatures, may be cured by general Remedies endu'd with contrary
qualities.

The Second said, Specific is that which is determined to some one thing, and
has above it the Generick; and below, the Individual. It is demanded, here,
whether there be Remedies so determined to one species or sort of disease, as
that they suit to that alone. I conceive that since there are diseases of all
forms, as Pestilential, Venomous and Malignant, there are also Remedies so too:
and experience shows in many admirable Cures that there are Remedies whose
effects depend not on the first Qualities; as that Rheubarb purges, that
Mugwort is good for the Mother, and Bezoar a Cordial, comes not from heat and
dryness in such a degree; for then every thing that has the same temperament
should be likewise purgative, hysterical, and cordial; which is not true. But
nothing hinders but a Remedy may be specifical to one particular Distemper by
its occult qualities, and yet profitable and suitable to others by its manifest
qualities; as the same thing may be both food and physic.

The Third said, That this Question depends upon another, namely, whether mixed
bodies act only by their temperature and first qualities, or by their
substantial forms or specific virtues. For if the action of every thing
depends not on the various mixture of its qualities, but on its whole form and
substance, Medicines will never cure as they are hot or cold, but by a
particular specific virtue arising from their form, wholly contrary to that of
the disease. For understanding whereof, it is to be observed, that as the
natural constitution of every mixed body consists in a perfect mixture of the
four Elementary Qualities, in the good disposition of the matter, and in the
integrity of the form; so the same may suffer mutation in either of these three
manners, either according to its temperature, or according to its matter, or
according to its form. Whence it follows that every mixed body, as medicaments
are, may act upon our Nature, by its first, second, and third faculties. The
first proceed from the sole commixtion of the four Qualities; according to the
diversity whereof, the compound is either Hot, (as Pepper,) or Cold, (as
Mandrakes) or Moist, (as Oil,) or Dry, (as Bole Armenick,) not in act, but in
power. And by this First Faculty alone which follows the Temperament, a
Medicament acts chiefly upon the Temperament of Bodies. Their Second Faculty
arises from the various mixture of the same Qualities with the Matter. For a
Hot Temperament, joined to a matter disposed according to the degree of Heat,
will be opening, cutting, corrosive, or caustic; and so the rest, which have a
great latitude according to the degrees of their mixtion, from which they are
said to be attenuating or incrassating, detersive or emplastick, rarefying or
condensing, laxative or astringent, attractive or repelling, mollifying or
hardening. And by this Second Faculty alone Medicaments act upon the Matter. The
Third Faculty of Medicaments arises not from their qualities or matter, but
from their form and specific occult virtue; as in Sena the Faculty to purge
Melancholy; in Terra Sigillata or Lemnia, to fortify the Heart against
poisons; as also that Scorpions kill with the tail, and certain poisons cause
death without any alteration of the Temper.

The Fourth said, diseases are considered either in their genus, in their
species, or in their individuals. In the first way, as a Disease is nothing but
a disposition contrary to Nature, and injuring the actions; so it is cured by
introducing the natural disposition. In the second, if it be a intemperature (
e. g.) cold in the second degree, its specific is hot in the same degree; if
it be an Organical Disease, (as an Obstruction) the only remedy is to unstop
the passages; if it be solution of Continuity, all that is to be done, is, to
conjoyn that which is divided. But if a Disease be considered in the
Individual, then particular remedies of the same nature be employed, which are
the true specificks.

The Fifth said, It Is true of the causes of Health, as well as of those of
Diseases; that the same thing is hurtful or healthful to one but not to
another, not only amongst the different species, but also amongst the
individuals of the same species, in regard of the several circumstances. A
remedy that recovered one kills another; yea, that which not long ago was
healthful to an individual person is now quite contrary. So that it is
impossible to assign any specificks for an individual person, which
nevertheless is the subject on which the cure is to be done, and not the
species of man.

The Sixth said, Every thing in Nature is determined to a particular action,
proceeding from its form and essence, which is more adapted to such action then
to any other. So a Tree is determined to produce one kind of fruit rather then
another. Now the same may be said of Remedies drawn from the three families;
some are proper to purge a particular humor, whence they are callld Cholagoga,
Melanogoga, Hydragoga, Emeticks, Diuretics, Diaphoreticks, Discussives,
Sternutatories, and Bechicks; others strengthen a particular part, whence they
are called Cardiacks, Cephalicks, Hepaticks, and Splenicks; some have a faculty
of resisting particular poisons; so Treacle is specifical against the biting of
a Viper, a Scorpions flesh applied upon its own wounds heals it; Oil of
Pine-nuts is good against Arsenick; Long Aristoloch, or Rue, against Aconitum
or Wolfs-bane; Citron Pill against Nux Vomica, or the Vomiting Nut; the seeds
of Winter-cherry, against the Cantharides, or Spanish Fly; Mumie against Ulcers
caused by Tithymal; the flower of Water-lilly against Hellebore; the root of
Eglantine, Gentian, Bawme, Betonie, Pimpernel, are excellent against the biting
of a mad Dog; and so others of the like nature. Some Medicaments are called
Amulets, because being worn about the neck, or laid to some part of the Body,
they preserve from Diseases. So, by the testimony of Galen, Peony worn about
the neck averts the Falling Sickness; the dung of a Wolf eases the Cholick, and
the Jasper strengthens the stomach. Trallianus affirms, that the Eagle-stone (
Aetites) cures Quotidian Agues; the Beetle and green Lizard, Quartanes; that
the forehead of an Ass, and a nail taken out of a shipwrack'd vessel, is
excellent for the Epileptick Fits. The ashes of Frogs is good against bleeding;
the Lapis Judaicus, and the blood of a Goat, are useful against the stone of
the Kidneys; the water of a Stag's horn, and the bone of his heart, are
excellent for infirmities of the heart. Now to refer all these wonderful
effects to the First Qualities, is a groundless thing: And therefore Galen
derides his Master Pelops for attempting to render a reason of them.

The Seventh said, That Physic, invented at first by use and experience, has
nothing to do with Reason in things which fall manifestly under our senses, but
only in such as surpass their comprehension; which being confirmed by Reason,
are much more infallible. Nevertheless when Reason seems repugnant to
Experience, we must rather hold to Experience, provided the same be established
upon many observations. Now since Experience shows that there are Specifical
Remedies, although humane wit, in regard of its weakness, cannot find out the
cause of them; yet it is better in this case to rely upon the testimony of the
senses destitue of Reason, then to adhere to Reason contradicted by Experience.
Moreover, if there be Specificks for some Diseases, there are so for all; but
they are unknown to us by reason of their multitude. And who is he that can
know the virtues and properties of every thing which is in the world? The
Chemists are of this opinion; for they hold that all Medicaments have
Signatures or particular marks and figures, by which they have resemblance with
the parts or diseases of Man's Body, and which are, as 'twere, the titles and
inscriptions imprinted upon them by God's Hand, to teach Men their faculties.
Hence the herb Lung-wort is very good for the Lungs; Ceterach and Hart's-tongue
for the Spleen; Poppy and green Nuts for the Head; Satyrium for the Testicles;
Winter-cherry for the Bladder; Birth wort for the Womb; Madder for broken Legs;
Eyebright for the Eyes; Solomon's seal, and Thorow-wax, for Ruptures; because
the root of the one resembles a Rupture, and the stalk of the other passes
through its leaf, as the Intestine does through the Peritonaeum; the roots of
Tormentil, red Sanders, and the stone Haematites, for bleeding; blessed
Thistle, and other prickly Plants, for the pungent pains of the side.

II. Whether Tears proceed from Cowardice.
The Second Point may be determined by comparing the great and little world
together. In the former, the Suns heat draws up vapors and exhalations into
the Air; if the vapors be more in quantity then the other, they dissolve into
rain; if less, then the exhalations are turned into winds, lightnings, and
other igneous meteors. And as we cannot infer from thence, that the Sun suffers
any alteration, or is colder and hotter; for whether it rains or be fair, he is
still the same: So neither must we attribute new qualities to the reasonable
soul, though it finds in the brain a matter either apt to be condensed into
tears, or to be resolved into the blustering storms, and other effects of
Choler; yet it is always the same soul, which, according to the various temper
of the body, is easily or hardly moved to tears. Women, Children, and old men,
are prone to weep, because their brain is more moist then that of men of middle
age; and again, those of them who are phlegmatic and sanguine are more inclined
to tears then the choleric and melancholy; the latter least of all, in regard
of the solidity and dryness of their brain, and the thickness of their blood.
Although there is a sort of melancholy not-natural, much abounding in
serosities; and for that reason styled Aqueous by Hippocrates. Now weeping is
caused in this manner. A sad subject seizing upon the Heart, the Arteries carry
the fuliginous vapors thereof to the brain, which discharging the same into
the sink, called the Infundibulum, or Tunnel, they seek issue at the next
passages, which are the mouth, the nose, and the eyes, at the great angle or
Canthus, where the Glandula Lachrymalis, or Weeping Kernel is seated, which
has a hole like the point of a needle. This Glandule is made very small,
whereas the Spleen, which causes Laughter, and the Liver, which causes Love,
are very large; because Man might possibly want subjects for the two former,
and consequently ought to be provided for, but not matter of sadness.

The Second said, As amongst Animals Man has the greatest brain, so he needs
the most Aliment, and consequently makes more excrements then any other; these
are collected in the anterior Ventricles, and between the membranes, where they
remain till the Expulsive Faculty, incommoded by their too great quantity, or
pungent quality, expells them by the usual passages; and thus they supply wax
to the Ears, mucosity to the Nose, and tears to the Eyes. Whereby it appears
that tears are not always signs of Pusillanimity, since they proceed from
causes which no body can avoid. Moreover, Joy, as well as Sorrow, expresses
tears, though by means wholly contrary. For Joy dilating and opening the
passages by its heat, causes those humidities to issue forth; and Grief
compressing the passages forces the same out; as a sponge yields forth the
water which it had imbibed, if you either dilate it or squeeze it. Their
saltness, bitterness, and acrimony, is common to them with all the serosities
of the body, which they acquire by their continuance they make in the brain, as
their heat by the spirits which accompany them. For the tears both of Joy and
Sadness are hot, or rather tepid, though those shed in Joy seem cold, because
the cheeks are warm in Joy, which draws the heat and spirits from the center
to the circumference; and in Sadness they appear hot, because they drop upon
the cheeks which are cold, through the absence of the heat and spirits caused
by sadness to retire inward. But those Tears which proceed from a disease, as
from a defluxion or distillation, are really cold, because they are caused by
the crudity of the humors.

The Third said, That Tears of sorrow come not from compression, (for we cannot
weep in a great sadness) but from a particular virtue which grief has to send
them forth. For Nature being willing to drive away the cause of Grief, sends
the heat and spirits toward it, which heating the external parts attract the
humors thither. Hence it is Onyons lancinating the Eyes by their sharp spirits
cause weeping, as smoke likewise does, and the steadfast beholding of an
object, and too radiant a light, by the pain which they cause to the sight. Nor
does this hold good, only in pain but in grief, particularly in compassion,
which is a grief we resent for another misery. For the consideration of a sad
object setting the humors in motion, and attenuating them, causes them to
distill forth by the Eyes, mouth, and nose. This is also the reason why those
who run impetuously on horseback or afoot, sometimes drop rears; for the heat
excited by this motion draws sweat forth over all the body; and tears to the
Eyes, being of the same nature with sweat. Unless you rather think that this
may be caused by the coldness of the new Air, which condenses and presses forth
these humidities. Wherefore* we cannot absolutely pronounce that tears are
Symptoms of Pusillanimity, seeing it is not in our power to restrain them what
ever courage we have; and oftentimes example no less invites us, then duty
obliges us, to let this torrent take its course.

The Fourth said, If it be true that the most courageous are of the hottest
constitution, 'twill follow that tears are rather a sign of Magnanimity then of
Cowardice, since they are most frequent to such as abound in heat and moisture.
For as water issues out of green wood heated by the fire; so tears are forced
out of the Eyes by the internal heat excited by Joy, Grief, Anger, or other
disorderly motion. For through the immoderateness of this heat the coldness of
the Brain is increased by Antiperistasis, and endeavors to with-stand it; for
which purpose it collects together abundance of cold vapors, which the heat
over-powering causes that cloud of humor condensed by cold to distill by the
Eyes in a shower of tears. Yet if this be done too often, then the same happens
to the man as does to a stick or cudgel, which being too much bowed one way and
the other, is at length broken. In like manner, a courageous person often
provoked so far as to weep, at last becomes relaxed and softened through the
loss and consumption of his spirits, which are the instruments of Courage.
Therefore to weep too often is a sign of Pusillanimity and softness; never to
weep, is stupidity; to weep sometimes for the miserable estate whereinto this
valley of tears reduces us, it is necessity. Indeed, Our Lord wept often. Saint
Peter, so courageous that he struck the only blow mentioned in the Gospel,
wept bitterly. And Alexander wept for the death of Darius; as his own Triumphs
caused Caesar to weep, in whom it was accounted Humanity that he wept at the
sight of Pompey's head, as David did for the death of Saul.

The Fifth said, That as griefs are diminished by weeping, so it may seem that
tears should soften the courage which proceeds from anger, as most does. And as
pity is opposite to revenge, so tears seem contrary to valor, since they are
so both to revenge and choler, which are the effects of magnanimity. Add
hereunto, that we live by example; and therefore seeing tears more frequent to
weak and effeminate persons then to others, we easily draw a general
consequence, although the same admit many exceptions.

CONFERENCE L.
I. Whether Colors are real. II. Whether is better, to speak well, or to write
well.

I. Whether Colors are real.
THe knowledge of men is never complete: what they know in one manner they are
ignorant of in another. Nothing is so manifest to the sense as color, nothing
so obscure to the Understanding, which doubts whether it has a real existence,
or whether it only appears such to us, according as bodies variously receive
the light. Indeed Green and Blew seem all one by a candle, and the same color
seems different from what it was by daylight; which again makes the species
vary according to its diversity; for we judge of them otherwise in the
twilight, in the Sun, and in the shadow; otherwise beholding them slopingly,
directly, or through a colored glass, or near some other lively color. Are
any colors fairer then those of the Rainbow; and yet they are no more real
then those of the Clouds. The whiteness which we behold in the milky way
arises only from the light of many small Stars. The necks of Pigeons seem of a
thousand more colors then they have. The Heavens, the Air, and the Water, have
none but what we fancy, or what their depth, and the weakness of our sight,
gives them. The scales of Fish, some small worms, and certain kinds of rotten
wood, shining in the night, seem to us to be colored. And Pictures are
apprehended well or ill drawn according to their situation.

The Second said, The object of Vision is color; the Organ, the Eye; the
medium is a Diaphanous body illuminated. Provided these three be rightly
disposed, the Organ and the medium free from all colors, and the object at a
convenient distance, all men will necessarily behold colors as they are, and
always alike: which would not be so if they were imaginary, or fortuitous.
Besides, being the object of the sight, the surest of all Senses, they ought to
have a real existence, as all the objects of the other Senses have. For the
object of the outward sense must be real, otherwise it cannot act upon the
Organ; and the Agent and the Patient ought to agree in the same genus.

The Third said, Colors, as all other second qualities, have a real existence,
since they arise from the commixtion of moist and dry, caused by heat, and
determined by cold. The first thing that happens in this mixtion is, that the
humidity is thickened by the accession of some dry substance; and of this
co-agulation is made a green color, which therefore is the first of colors,
as may be observed in water, the grosser parts of which become green moss; and
in Plants when they first spring out of the earth. But if heat exceed in the
mixtion, then arises the Red, Purple, and other lively and bright colors,
which according as they degenerate, attain at length to Black, which is made by
adustion. But when mixtions take a contrary course by cold, then arise all dead
colors, which terminate in black too by a contrary cause, namely, the total
extinction of heat, as it is seen in old men and dead persons, who are of a
leaden and blackish color. As therefore green is the first, so Black is the
last of colors, yea it is properly no color, especially when the humidity is
already all consumed, as in coals; or is separated from the dry parts, as in
things become black by putrefaction, as the gangrenous parts of an animal.
Neither is white a color, but a mean between color and light. The rest are
true colors.

The Fourth said, Colors cannot proceed from the temperament or mixture of the
four first qualities, because mixed bodies of different temperature have the
same color. Sugar, Arsenic, and all Salts, are white, the Crow and Raven are
black; and, on the contrary, one and the same mixed body of the same temperature
in all its parts, is nevertheless of several colors, which it changes without
mutation of its temper. Ebeny is black in its surface, and gray within; Marble,
Jasper, and Porphyry, delight the sight chiefly by the variety of their
colors; yellow Wax grows white, and white becomes black, in the Sun. Nor can
any one say, that the part of a Tulip which differs in color from all the
rest, is therefore distinct in quality. Wherefore since colors proceed not
from the first elementary qualities, they are no more real then the intentional
species of the sight; yea they are the very same thing; for the visible species
are nothing else but qualities streaming from every terminated body, which
alter the medium, filling the same with their images which they diffuse even
into the Organ. Now colors are the same, being qualities which actually change
and alter the Diaphanous and illuminated body.

The Fifth said, This argues that we are ignorant of the reason of the mixtion
of every body, and why such a body has such a color, but not that colors are
not true and real. Yet with this distinction, that the colors alone which are
seen with the conditions requisite to sensation are real, that is to say, exist
really, and not in the Imagination. For if it were not so, we should see them
as well by night as by day, and with our eyes shut as open; as that foolish
Antiphon did, who thought he always saw his own image before him. And a
sensible faculty ought to have a real and sensible object, since the object
must be of the same nature with the faculty. But there are colors which are
not really in the surface of bodies, though they appear so to us by reason of
the diverse reception of light, or of some other extrinsecal color of a
transparent diaphanous body, or some other external cause which hinders the eye
from discerning the true color of the mixed body; which color though appearing
otherwise then it is, yet really exists, but is hidden under another apparent
one, which continues as long as its external causes. And colored bodies are no
less so by night then by day; but because vision cannot be made unless the
medium be illuminated it is only through the want of light that we see them not
in the night. For although we perceive in the dark the eyes of Cats,
Toad-stools, Worms, certain horns, and rotten wood, yet it is not their true
color, but a certain splendour different from color; which proceeds either
from their igneous spirits, or because they approach near simplicity. There is,
therefore, reality in color; but it is considered two ways; either as a
quality resulting from the mixture of the four Elementary qualities; (in which
sense it is defined, by Aristotle, the extremity of a perspicuum terminated;) or
as being simply visible, and is defined, by the same Philosopher, a motive
quality of a body actually diaphanous. In the first signification, the colors
seen in the Rainbow, or the yellow color cast upon a white wall by the
Sunbeams, passing through a glass or other medium of the same color, are no
more real and true colors of those subjects, then the blackness upon Paper by
reason of the ink hiding its natural whiteness. But, in the latter
signification, every color whatsoever is real, since the one is as well
visible as the other.

The Sixth said, Color differs not from light, saving that color is the light
of mixed, and light is the color of simple bodies, which the more simple they
are, they are also more luminous. But if they communicate not their light, it is
for want of density, which is the sole cause of all activity. The parts of
Heaven are equally luminous; and yet only the more dense and thick, as the
Stars, can diffuse their light to us. If this light grows weak, it degenerates
into a white color, as we see in the Moon and Stars; if it be more extinct, it
turns into other colors (as the Blew which we behold in a clear Sky) and
forward into others, till it come to black, which is no color, but a privation
of it; as darkness is nothing but the privation of light. So that to dispute
the reality of colors, is to question whether the clearest thing in the world,
viz. Light, be real.

The Seventh said, Light and Color differ, in that Light is the act of the
Diaphanous body, inasmuch as it is Diaphanous, and Color the extremity of the
Diaphanum, as it is terminated. For no Diaphanum, whilst it remains such, is
colored, but color arises from the condensation and thickness of the
Diaphanum, which terminates our sight. And though color be as much in the
inside of bodies as in their surface, yet it is not called color, saving when
it is visible, and it is visible only in the surface. Light is incorporeal and
immaterial; color, on the contrary, is a material and corporeal quality. Light
makes color to be seen, but makes it self seen by its own virtue. Yet there is
this resemblance between them, that every thing which we see colored, we see
it as luminous (whence Plato, in his Timaeus, call's color a flame issuing out
of bodies) and every thing that we see luminous, we see it inasmuch as it is
colored: Whence the Stars appear to us of a pale, yellow, or red color. And
as that which is terminated is seen by means of the illuminated Diaphanum, so
this Diaphanum is seen because it is terminated. For when we see the color of a
terminated body, we judge that there must be a transparent and diaphanous body
between it and our eye. Wherefore, as the Intellect does not know it self but
by another; so the eye does not see the Diaphanum, but by seeing that which is
not diaphanous. But both the one and the other seems partly real, and partly
imaginary, and arising from the various relation and proportion of the eye to
the object and the medium: since, as for colors, not only some Pictures
represent several personages, but one and the same Taffeta changes color
according to the diverse situation of the spectator's eye. And as for light, you
shall have a worm that appears great, and shines in the night, but is little,
and gray, in the day.

II. Whether is better, to speak well, or to write well.
Upon the second Point it was said* There is so great an affinity between
Speech and Reason, that the Greeks have given the same name to both. As Reason
is peculiar to man, so is Speech; and therefore (says Aristotle) he alone has
a large, soft and moveable tongue, not only for the distinguishing of Tastes,
as other Animals, but for the uttering of words, which are the interpreters of
his thoughts; called words of the mind, as the other are external words. It Is
this Speech which protects Innocence, accuses Crimes, appeases popular Tumults
and Seditions, inflames Courage, excites to Virtue, disswades from Vice, and
gives praise to God and virtuous Men. Writing it self has not much force,
unless it be animated by Speech, which gives weight and grace even to the least
things. This was implied by the Ancients when they feigned that Orpheus
assembled even Trees and Rocks by the sound of his Harp, which is the Emblem of
Speech. And, therefore, I judge Speech to have the precedence of Writing.

The Second said, There are persons who speak well and write ill; others, on
the contrary, write better then they speak; others (but very few) do both well.
And yet, if it be not through fault of the outward Organs, it seems hard to
conceive how it is possible for a man to write well and speak ill, since it is
the same judge which dictates to both Clerks, the hand and the tongue. For
though one ordinarily goes swister then the other, yet they must both express
the same thought. But it is oftentimes with Speech as it is with faces, which
seem handsome if you behold but a glance of them; whereas fixing your eye more
wistly to consider them, you discern even the least faults; so a discourse,
upon which you have not leisure to reflect, may seem elegant, yet displease you
when it is unfurnished of its external ornaments, Pronunciation and Gesture.
Moreover, we see how little effectual a Letter is in comparison of animated
words, to which I also give the precedence. It Is of little importance to an
Advocate whom his want of Eloquence causes to dye of hunger, whether his
reputation be made to live after his death. Nor was it from the eyes or hands
of our Gallic Hercules that our Fathers made the golden chains proceed which
drew the people by the ears, 'twas from the tongue. And 'twas with the voice
that the Father of Roman Eloquence oversway'd the mind of Caesar, and
Demosthenes that of all Greece.

The Third said, I much more prize Writing, which refines and polishes our
conceptions, which otherwise escape from great persons but ill digested. Whence
arose the saying, That second thoughts are usually the best. Moreover, Writing
is of long duration, and is communicated to many how remote soever in time and
place. Which astonished the people of the new world when they saw that the
letters which the Spaniards carried to their comrades communicated the mind of
one to another; and they thought them to be familiar spirits. But when this
Writing is well performed, it has great weight with Posterity too; whence it
is that we still admire the brave conceptions of antiquity, which would have
perished had they been delivered only in words, which dye as they are born.

The Fourth said, Writing has this inconvenience that it cannot be
comprehended by more then one or two persons at a time; whereas the Voice
reaches to many thousand together; without receiving any diminution (which is
some resemblance of Divinity) and consequently is the more noble.

The Fifth said, If we judge of the preeminence of Speech or Writing, by the
difficulty there is in either (according to the Proverb, which says that the
most difficult things are the most excellent) the question will remain
undecided. For there was never either a perfect Penman, or perfect Orator; but
if we judge of the advantage by the effects, it is certain that Writing has
more weight then Speech, and is therefore much more considerable. And though
words once uttered cannot be recalled (no more then a written thing be
retracted) yet being consigned to a very flitting and inconstant element, they
are of little duration; whereas being written they last to eternity. Which
consideration so highly incensed M. Anthony against Cicero, for publishing his
Philippicks against him; and made Bubalus hang himself for what Hippanax had
written against him, as Lycambes did upon Archilochus's Jambicks. For the
benefits and mischiefs of Writing are great. Which makes for it, since the more
excellent a thing is, the more hurtful the abuse of it is; and, according to
Aristotle, Men abuse every thing, except Virtue.

The Sixth said, It Is true, Speech is peculiar to man, but it is a token of the
impotence and weakness of our mind, which cannot know other's thoughts in their
purity, as Angels and blessed Spirits do, who understand one another without
external Speech. But the soul of man is so subjected to the Senses, that it
cannot apprehend spiritual things unless they be represented to it as
corporeal. Besides, Speech belongs not so to man alone, but that brutes
(especially, those who have soft, large and loose tongues, as Birds) can
imitate it, but Writing they cannot. Moreover, a thing is more excellent by how
much nobler the cause is on which it depends. But to speak well depends on the
Organs rightly disposed; to write well, on the understanding alone. For the
Air, the Lungs, the Tongue, the Teeth, and the Lips, make the Speech; but the
mind alone begets the thoughts which writing consigns to the sight, the noblest
of the Senses. Eloquence is diminished by Diseases, old Age, or the least
indisposition of the Organs; but the style which depends on the Mind alone
(which never grows old) becomes more vigorous as the body waxes weaker.

At length it was said, That the present Question making up the Century of
those propounded since the resolution of printing, it seemed fit to make them
the first Volume of Conferences; and because this Number, the Season, the
Example of others, the affairs which many have in the Country, and the
necessity for minds as well as bodies to take some relaxation, require a
Vacation for this Company; it is therefore adjourned till Monday before the
Feast of St. Martin.

The End of the First Part.
PHILOSOPHICAL CONFERENCES. PART II. Monday, November 6. (...).
FOr Introduction to the Ensuing Conferencs, it seems requisite that an Account
be given of two things I. Of what passed during the Vacation. II. Of some
difficulties touching these Exercises.

As for the first; The Vacation was spent in the proposal and examination of
diverse Secrets and Curiosities of some Arts and Sciences, a few whereof shall
be summarily mentioned in the order as they were proposed; and most of which
were found true by the person^ appointed by the Company, to examine and make
experiments of the same.

The First was a way to describe a Circle, of what greatness soever, without
knowing the Center of it, but supposing the Center were inaccessible.

II. A way to make the Vernish of China, black and yellow, gilded.

III. To make a plain Looking-glass representing the objects upon its surface,
and not inwards, as they usually appear.

IV. To make a Spherical Mirror, representing the Figures in their true
proportion, and not corrupted, as they are in the vulgar ones.

V. To make one or more very conspicuous figures appear in the Air, by the help
of a Concave Glass.

VI. To cool Wine speedily in Summer, and to freeze water for that purpose.

VII. To decypher all common and decypherable Ciphers.

VIII. To give the Invention of almost a number of Ciphers, which cannot be
decypher'd; as, among others, to write with a single point for each Letter:
with two Books, in which no extraordinary mark is to be seen.

IX. To write with a Cipher, which may be read in two different Languages.

X. To comprise under a manifest sense an other hidden signification, as ample
as the first.

XI. To write upon a body which will never perish, not even by Fire; at which
alone it is to be read, and to answer thereunto by the same way, making the
Letters disappear and return again at pleasure.

XII. A way of writing or impression, which represents all the properties of
every thing, with as few Letters as the ordinary way of writing.

XIII. A way to give intelligence in six hours at a hundred leagues distance,
without Bells, Canons, or the like means.

XIV. A way to give intelligence in an instant of what is done at fifty leagues
distance and more, and that of a sudden accident.

XV. A way whereby a person being in his Closet may make his Mind understood in
a hundred places of the house, and receive answers by the same way without
noise, and without notice taken thereof by those that shall be in his company.

XVI. To show and teach the true Proportions of Man's Body, in one Lecture, as
exactly as Albert Durer has done.

XVII. To describe all Plat-forms, and design all the orders of Columns
exactly, according to their true proportion.

XVIII. A way to engrave very easily with Aqua Fortis, without knowing how to
hatch.

XIX. To cast Account without pen or counters, by a way which cannot be
forgotten.

XX. To learn the method of Writing in one hour, by retaining only three
letters.

XXI. To keep Flowers, yea, a whole Garden, fresh, throughout the year.

XXII. To learn all the tricks and subtleties of Juglers, and consequently to
cease admiring them.

XXIII. To make two solid bodies actually cold, which being together shall
become so hot of themselves immediately, as not to be touched; and to keep
their heat for several months, and possibly for some years.

XXIV. To show in a portable Instrument, in small or greater proportion, all
objects that shall be presented.

XXV. To teach a Mother-language, of which all other Languages are Dialects,
and may be learned by it: Which the Proposer affirms so easy, that he will
teach the whole Grammar of it in six hours; but six months are requisite to
learn the signification of all its words.

XXVI. To teach all persons to argue without error, in all kind of Modes and
Figures, in a quarter of an hour.

XXVII. To show a secret, by help whereof any man may pronounce any strange
Language as naturally as his own, be it Astatick, African, or American, and he
an European; or, on the contrary; which is a way to remedy the bad Accents and
pronuntiations both in strangers and natives, whereby they are so manifestly
distinguished.

XXVIII. To make a Girder or Joint broken in two or three places, to serve
without pins.

XXIX. To pierce a door immediately with a Candle not lighted.

XXX. To make a Pistol of a foot and half in length carry three hundred paces.

XXXI. To make a good quantity of fresh water speedily in the main Sea.

XXXII. To measure the depth of the Sea, where the plummet cannot reach, or
where it is unperceiveable.

XXXIII. To show all the feats and subtleties that are performed with Cards, as
to make the Card you think of come at what number is required; to tell 15.
persons, who have two Cards a piece, what Cards every one has, etc.

XXXIV. To draw two lines, which being extended infinitely, shall always come
nearer, but never meet.

XXXV. To make a light without Oil, Wax, Tallow, Gum, or Fat, at small charge,
which shall less offend the sight in a whole nights reading, then the light of
an ordinary Candle does in a quarter of an hour.

XXXVI. To make Glasses, through which the Sun does not penetrate, though his
light do.

XXXVII. To make old defaced Characters legible.

XXXVIII. To continue under water for some hours without a Tube.

XXXIX. To make a Needle which shall always turn toward the North, though it
were never touched with a Loadstone.

XL. To make a Fire without combustible matter, portable in any place
whatsoever, fit to boil withal, and which will last many hundred years, yea,
as long as the world.

XLI. To make a Mineral Tree, of a mixture of Metals, which shall grow in form
of a Tree in a vessel of Glass well closed.

XLII. To turn Iron into Steel and Copper, to keep it from rusting; and give it
such a temper, that a complete suit of Arms of three quarters less weight then
ordinary shall resist Musket Shot.

XLIII. To increase a Man's Pulse so that he shall seem to have a Fever; and to
diminish it so, that he shall seem a dying, yet both without prejudice to his
health.

XLIV. Many Secrets were proposed for the preservation of Health, and Cure of
Diseases, the mentioning whereof I defer till experience shall be made of them;
Credulity being not less excuseable, or more dangerous in any Art or Science,
then in Physic; and therefore I am the more cautious and careful to publish
none but certain things, and such as deserve to be communicated.

As for the second Point, which consists in the resolution of some difficulties
observed in the course of these Conferences; it is true, they were not sooner
published but some took exception that there was not a choice made of some few
persons to speak, any that seemed of quality being admitted to declare their
Sentiments; because (said they) this diversity of minds, which is one of the
wonders of the Universe, cannot but produce unpleasing discords and
dissonances, sometimes prejudicial to the public: or, at least, they advised
to restrain their discourses to certain laws and modifications, and limit to a
set space of time, which it should not be lawful for any to exceed: and this in
order to remedy the itch of speaking, no less then of writing, in many who are
so fond of being heard.

On the contrary, others liked nothing so much in this free commerce of wits as
an unconfined liberty; conceiving nothing more advantageous for the initiation
of the young, the divertisement of the old, and the honest recreation of all;
nor which more testifies to Posterity the generous proceeding of those that
govern, diametrically opposite to the tyrannical slavery of some others, then
this public liberty afforded to every Gentleman to produce and speak what he
thinks in these Conferences, regulated by the bounds prescribed by themselves,
and so strictly observed, that the severest Censors of the host august Bodies,
and Sovereign Courts, who are often present at them, have hitherto found
nothing to disapprove therein, the persons nominated by the Assembly to preside
in the same, having comported themselves with such civility toward those to
whom they signified when it was time to cease speaking, that they have had
abundant cause to be satisfied, and the Assembly taken more content in the
diversity of the Speakers opinions, then if they had been all of one mind; as
the identity of many sounds does not make harmony.

Afterward some propounded that only two persons might speak upon a Question,
one for the affirmative part, and the other for the Negative; and in that, at
most, a third might conciliate their different judgments in things wherein a
third opinion might have place; to the end the hearers might have no more to do
but to assent to that which should seem best. But as this has been practiced
sometimes, and may be continued in matters convenient for it; so it seems
injust to others, to stop the mouths of the rest of the company, only for the
hearing of two or three; besides the tediousness of a long discourse; whereas
the multitude of concise verdicts resembles a Nose-gay diversifi'd with many
Flowers of different color and odor: besides that there are many subjects,
concerning which so different judgments arise that the number thereof cannot
be limited; our Reason being so little captivated, that it finds out new paths
every day to arrive at Truth which it goes to seek beyond the Imaginary spaces.

Some, to make these Conferences the more esteemed, would have them held but
once a month: others were so far from being weary of them, that they desired
them every day. But to comply with both, it was thought expedient to hold them
once a week.

Some desired to handle but one Question; others, more. Experience has
manifested, that the former course would be tedious, and the latter full of
confusion, could the brevity of the time admit it.

The Points pitched upon at the last Conference to be treated in the next, were
these.

CONFERENCE LI.
I. At what time the Year ought to begin. II. Why the Lodestone draws Iron.

I. At what time the year ought to begin.
SInce the Year begins by a Month; the Month by a Day; the Day by an Hour;
the Hour by a Minute; the Question seems to demand at what moment the Year
ought to begin. A Year is a space of Time; Time is the duration of motion; the
most perfect of motions is the local; the most excellent of local motions is
the circular and celestial, which bath something of infinity. Now, to speak
generally, a Year is the revolution of some celestial Orb, and takes its name
from the spherical bodies which return to the same place from whence they
departed. So the year of Saturn, is of 10955 days and twelve hours; that of
Jupiter, of 4331 days, eighteen hours; that of Mars, of 687 days; that of the
Sun, of 365 days, six hours, wanting eleven minutes; th^se of Venus and Mercury
are almost like that of the Sun; that of the Moon is of about twenty nine days.
But the longest year of all is that of the eighth Sphere, called the perfect or
Platonic year, at the end of which all the Stars are to return to the same
places and distances that they had at the Creation, which shall be
accomplished, as the Platonists say, in 490000 Solar years, by virtue of the
Septenary multiplied seven times, according to the number of the seven other
inferior Orbs; but more probably, according to Alphonsus, in 36000 years,
considering that the eighth Sphere moves but one degree in a hundred years, and
so in 36000 years pervades the 360 degrees of the Zodiac. The Cynical year of
the Egyptians and Babylonians was measured by the course of the celestial Dog,
or of Orion, and consisted of 1460 years. The Sabbatical year of the Jews was
every seventh year; the Jubilary, every fiftieth, in which they rested, and the
Trumpets sounded. Which minds me of the Intermission which this company made at
its fiftieth Conference, after which the Trumpet animates us to a new Career.
Now although civil years may be measured by the motion of any Celestial Body
whatsoever; yet the Sun and the Moon, the two grand Luminaries, have been by
general consent taken to describe the year; one whereof is called Solar, being
the interval during which the Sun running through the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac comes again to the same point from whence he set forth; the other is
Lunar, being the space of time in which the Moon is twelve times in conjunction
with the Sun (for otherwise the Lunar year, properly taken, is but one month)
which year is of 354 days, eight hours, and some minutes; by consequence less
then the Solar by about eleven days, whereof the difference and reduction is
called the Epact. So that it must be known, in the first place, of what year
the Question is to be understood. For if the Solar year be meant (as it seems
to be) it must begin by the minute in which the Sun enters the first point of
the Ram, who is for that reason said to open the year with his horns.

The Second said, The Year is a Circle, for that cause hieroglyphically
represented under the figure of a Serpent biting his own tail, and named by the
Greeks Eniautos, that is to say, In it self, and by the Hebrews Schanah, which
signifies Reiteration. As therefore there is neither beginning nor end in a
circle, so neither is there properly in a year, each moment whereof may be its
beginning and its end. Yet God's command to the Jews to begin the year with the
month of March, joined to the probability that the world was then created,
would make me to begin it so, had not Christians more reason to begin theirs by
the day on which they received their most signal benefits from the hand of God,
namely, our Saviors Nativity. Yet not by Christmas day, but on that of the
Circumcision, 'on which the Son of God began to effect the mystery of our
Redemption by the effusion of his blood; as the same Christians compute their
years, not from the Creation of the World, but from the Mystery of the
Incarnation.

The Third said, There are six terms, by which we may commence the year; namely
the Apogaeum, and Perigaeum, of the Sun, the two Solstices, and the two
Aequinoxes. The two first cannot be proper for it, because they are not fixed
points, but moveable according to the trepidation of the Firmament. Nor the
Solstices, since they are different according to the several Nations. For our
Summer Solstice is the Winter Solstice to our Antipodes, who dwell in the
Southern temperate Zone; and, on the contrary, our Winter Solstice is their
Summer Solstice. It follows then that the year must be begun by that of the
Aequinoxes, in which the Sun first moved at the Creation, being the
Springtime, in which the earth, according to God's command, produced the
Germen or tender Grass, and green Herb. And this likewise is the time when the
State of Heaven is such that the Astrologers make their surest Predictions from
it of the whole constitution of the year ensuing.

The Fourth said, That the year may with more reason be begun at Autumn, as
being rather the Season when the world was created, for that the Trees are at
this time laden with fruit; and God was no less provident to prepare food for
man then he is for children new born, to whom their mothers no sooner give life
but they have nourishment ready for them in their breasts.

The Fifth said, That being the Aequinoxes and Seasons of the Year happen not
always at the same time in respect of all people, they cannot be a general rule
for the beginning of the year, which 'twere more expedient to refere to the
moment of the Creation. But because only he that knows the end of it knows the
beginning of it, there remains nothing to men but light conjectures: The fruits
which appeared upon the Trees concluding no more necessarily for Autumn then
the tender Grass of the earth for the Spring, or the nakedness of our first
Parent for Summer, and the sterility of the earth immediately after his sin,
for Winter. Yea, were the instant of the Creation known to us, we should be
still in doubt, whether to begin the year from the day of the Creation which
was Sunday, or from the fourth day which is Wednesday, on which the Sun and
Moon were created; since the year depends upon their Revolution; or lastly,
from the sixth which is Friday, on which Adam was created, who alone was
capable among all creatures to compute their motions. I should therefore judge
it best to take the Apogaeum of the Sun, or the moment wherein he is most
elevated above the earth, as the most noble and eminent place in which he is
found during the whole course of the year, being then as in his throne, from
whence he makes himself conspicuous to all the world; rather then in any other
place of Heaven, and consequently may then better serve for a signal of the end
of one year and the beginning of another. And although the years would not be
perfectly equal in duration, yet the difference would be but small, and they
would be computed by all men after the same sort, which is the thing required.

The Sixth said, The commencement of the year is as various as that of the day;
which the Persians and Babylonians began at the rising of the Sun, the Arabians
from one Noon to another, as the Astrologers still do, to find the Houses of
the Sun and other Planets: the Jews, from Sunset, or from one evening to
another, according to what is said in Genesis, that the Evening and the Morning
were one day; which way of counting the hours is still practiced in Italy,
Bohemia and Silesia. The remainder of Christians reckon their day from one
midnight to another; because the night was before the day, as we read, in
Genesis, that in the beginning darkness covered the face of the deep; but
chiefly because our Lord was born at midnight. So that it is an indifferent
thing both where the natural day be begun, provided its revolution be always of
twenty four hours; and where each people begins the Solar year, provided they
agree upon the revolution of the Sun, and end it at the same point where they
began it.

The Seventh said, Although nothing be more certain then the measure of the
Sun's course, composing the Astronomical year, which is divided into
Conversional or Tropical, and Sydereal. Yet being this course is not concluded
in an entire number of months, days, nor yet of hours (for some minutes must
be added to it) hence arises the difficulty to regulate the years; the
confusion whereof has been increased by the diverse political and civil years
established by Legislators who have endeavored to comply in this point with
the vulgar, which likes nothing but what is entire and easy to comprehend.
Romulus began his year at the Vernal Aequinox, and composed it of 304 days
divided into ten months. Numa observing that the course of the Sun, and the
Lunations did no agree, and that the cold weather was often found in Summer,
and Harvest in Winter, added January and February to it. The progress of time
having shown that this reformation was still imperfect, Julius Caesar, 670
years after him, assisted by Sosigenes a great Mathematician, corrected the
defect, adding three months to the year in which he made this rectification,
which was the 708th year of the building of Rome; namely, two months between
November and December, one of 29 days and the other of 30: and another of 30
days at the end of December, to make up the days which were passed. So that
this year Debtors had three months respite. Then he divided the year into 365
days, for this cause called from his name the Julian year. But because the Sun
is near six hours more in accomplishing his Period, he added a day every fourth
year after the twenty third of February which they called Sexto Calendas, and
because in counting it twice they said bis sexto Calendas, this year truth
thence retained the name of Bissextile, attributed by the vulgar to sinister
and unfortunate things. And to confirm the months to the Lunations, he was
contented to observe that every nineteenth year the Moon is found in the same
place; which was the discovery of another Mathematician of Athens named Meton.
And forasmuch as they marked this number of 19 in their Calendar with a Cipher
of gold, thence it came to be called the Gold Number. The Christians took up
this Calculation as the best of all. But because there wants eleven minutes
every fourth year to make the Bissextile or Leap-year entire, it was found that
from the time of Julius Caesar to Gregory XIII. the Lunations and Aequinoxes
had anticipated ten days, which rendered the Golden Number useless, and removed
Easter and other moveable Feasts out of their true place. Therefore this Pope,
assisted by Doctor Lilio a Physician, retrenched those ten days throughout all
Christendom, except in places who are not pleased with novelty, unless so far
as it displeases the Pope. Which anticipation will always oblige future Ages to
use a like reformation of the Julian year; which we begin from the midnight
which precedes the first Sunrise of the month of January. But the most
sensible knowledge to be had of the duration and beginning of the Solar year is
obtained by observing the day on which the shadow of the perpendicular needle
of a Quadrant is found longest at noon, being a certain sign that the Sun is
then most depressed, and consequently that we must there set down the end of
the preceding year and the beginning of the next, which is visible by the
exaltation of the Sun, whose shadow will not be found equal again till after
the revolution of a just year.

II. Why the Lodestone draws Iron.
Had Stones life, as Cardan held, the solution of the second Question would be
easy. For the Load-stone's drawing Iron would be no more a wonder then an
Animal's going to seek its food. Now of those things which draw others, some do
it for eschewing of vacuity: so water and other more ponderous bodies ascend,
air and other light bodies descend, either of them against its proper
inclination, to prevent a vacuum. Others do it, out of desire to obtain what
they need, as their nourishment. So Plants attract the juice of the earth; the
Gallbladder, Choler; the Spleen, the Melancholy humor; and every part, blood.
Others do it by the mutual resemblance of the spirits issuing out of them; such
is the first motion of affection arising between two persons of the same humor
and inclination. But others are moved locally with out any manifest and
corporeal cause; so are the vapors and the dew drawn up by the Sun; straw by
Amber; the womb by good smells; the Lodestone by the North-star, the
Heliotrope and Selenotrope by the Sun and the Moon, whose motions they follow.
Now in attraction, it is requisite that the attractive virtue be stronger then
the resistance of the body which is attracted. The greatest resistance is from
the ponderosity of a body; the elevation of which without manifest cause is
accounted miraculous, and attributed by Divines to the Divine Power alone; as
when our Lord walked upon the water. And so indeed would be the suspension of
the gravity of iron attracted by the Lodestone, if it were not ordinary: the
cause whereof may be ascribed to the meeting of spirits streaming out of the
Iron and the Lodestone; which being viscous and once joined together are
somewhat hard to be separated.

The Second said, That as every body diffuses about it visible, odorable, and
sonorous species, which appear not to us, unless they be reflected by some body
proper to unite them; the visible species, by a Glass; odours by heat; sound,
by a hollow body, such as makes the Echo: In like manner, the Lodestone and
the Iron emit attractive species round about, which are lost, unless these of
the one light upon those of the other; for then their nature is, so to conjoyn
themselves that their union is indissoluble otherwise then by violence: wherein
there seems to be no greater marvel then in all other motions of natural
bodies, which act variously one upon another according to the disposition of
the next matter. So the fire acts upon combustible matter, and not upon other;
the reason of these affects depending upon the determination of every
particular cause, the chain whereof is invisible and concealed from men.

The Third said, The Superior bodies act upon the inferior, and all motions
here below proceed from those of the Celestial Bodies, which are therefore
purposely contiguous. That of the Lodestone and Iron proceeds from the polar
Stars, which act so sensibly upon this Stone, that being hung up in
aequilibrio, it spontaneously turns one part toward the Arctick, and the other
toward the Antarctick Pole; unless in certain places where it varies between
five and six degrees, because it is drawn by a stronger magnetic virtue
proceeding from the Earth. But this Stone draws Iron the more easily, because
it is almost of the same nature with it self; and the Magnet is easily turned
into Iron in the Mines by a coction made by the virtue of the same stars. For
the liker things are, the more inclined they are to unite together; so Flame
unites with Flame, the drops of water join together, a great Lodestone draws
the less, and Steel attracts the filings of steel.

The Fourth said, As there is a civil converse between men, for preservation of
society, so there is a natural one established by God amongst the other
creatures, for the support of their common being, consisting chiefly in their
being moved one toward another: Fire attracts unctuous exhalations, and it
self tends toward the Etherial fire, the Air is drawn by the Lungs, the Sea is
drawn up by the Moon, which causes its ebbing and flowing; straw and dust by
the Agate, Iron by the Lodestone; the virtue whereof, together with the occult
properties of all other bodies, I attribute to that universal Spirit which
carries every entity to its particular good.

The Fifth said, If we would understand the causes of the motion, we must first
discover their nature, which is the principle of motion. Now the particular
nature of every thing is unknown to all men, as well as the proportion of the
mixture of their substances, whereon their occult properties depend, as the
manifest qualities do on the mixtion of their first qualities; which we are
wont to call manifest, not but that the reason of them is as difficult as of
the rest, but because they are more ordinary. Which indeed has caused us to
give them the name, e. g. of lightness to the fire, heaviness to the earth,
though no person has hither to assigned the cause thereof. Give but a name to
this quality which the Iron has of moving toward the Lodestone, it will be
as manifest as the motive virtue which carries a stone toward its center. We
may indeed allege the final cause of both, and say, in general, that it is the
good of the thing moved that sets it in motion, or, on the contrary, the good
of the thing whereunto it tends that moves and attracts it, but the formal
cause, which we here inquire, is equally unknown.

The Sixth said, That Iron is carried to the Lodestone as to its good, and as
the stone to its center; and hence it is that the Iron turns toward the North,
which is the native place of the Magnet. For being a natural, not a violent
motion, the motive faculty must be in the Iron, which moves it self; the
goodness of the object attracting only by a metaphorical motion, which supposes
a motive faculty in the thing moved.

CONFERENCE LII.
I. Of a Point. II. Whether other Animals besides Man have the use of Reason.

I. Of a Point.
IF it be true that there are more wonders in a Hand-worm then in an Elephant,
because all the faculties which are extended and have their manifest causes and
instruments in the latter, are found compendiously Epitomized in the former,
and (as it were) independent of their organs; there will be more wonders in a
Point then in all the rest of the bodies which are composed of it. Indeed
there is nothing so small as a Point, and yet it is the object of most Sciences.
Grammar treats of the Point of distinction; Natural Philosophy, of the Point of
reflection, and that which serves for the Center of the Earth; Astrology of the
vertical points, Zenith and Nadir, and makes use of them to compute the motions
of the Celestial Bodies. Geography has its four Cardinal Points. All Sciences
and Arts borrow this word, to give some order to the things whereof they treat.
Lastly, it serves for a principle to Geometry which begins its first
Propositions with it. And because, if we believe Plato, every beginning is
divine; a Point which is the principle of a line (as this is of a surface, this
of a body; an instant, of time; and an unite, of number) has something of
Divinity; which Trismegistus, for that reason, calls a Center or Point, whose
Circumference is no where; and therefore they who hear us speak of a Point must
not think that it is of an inconsiderable matter.

The Second said, Although much is not to be argued from our manner of
speaking, in which the word Point (with us French) signifies a negation; yet it
seems to imply, that if it be something, it wants but little of being nothing.
For to speak truth, a Point is the mean which is found between nothing and
something. It Is not an accident; for it does not betide, befall or arrive to a
substance, but is before, and inseparable from the same. Nor is it a substance,
since a substance is infinitely divisible, but a Point is that which has no
parts, that is to say, is indivisible. We cannot compare it to an instant in
respect of time, for the time past has been instant or present, and the future
shall be so; but a Point is not, and never shall be, a quantity, nor to a
Unite, in regard of Number; since Number is made of Unites, and an Unite added
to the greatest number whatever renders the same yet greater; whereas a hundred
Millions of of Points together make but a Point, because that which has no
quantity of it self cannot give any. Nevertheless it is most probable that a
Point exists really, since it is the foundation of all other quantities; and two
Spheres exactly round touch one another but in a Point.

The Third said, As there is no mean between contradictories, so neither can
there be any between nothing and something, Entity and Non entity. Now a Point
being the term of a line, and every where in it, must consequently be some
thing. Yea I maintain that it is a body and divisible, by this argument. One
sole Being is not finite, to wit, the Creator; all others, to wit, the
Creatures, and every part of them, are finite. Every finite thing is composed
of parts, being composed of ends or extremities, and a middle. For it would be
as ridiculous to say that a thing is finite with out ends, as to say that a
thing is long without length, or hot without heat. A mathematical point is a
finite thing. Therefore it is composed of parts. To say that it is finite
negatively, and not positively, cannot hold. For as every mensurable solid is
composed of and terminated by Mathematical surfaces, these by lines, and lines
by points; so a point is composed of and terminated by its ends, which are its
parts and extremities: these again being composed of parts external and
internal, are also finite, and consequently divisible to infinity. Therefore a
Point is not finite by negation, which is nothing, since nothing is not the
term of a Point. Neither is it terminated by it self, since every thing is
bounded by some term which is without it; and if nothing cannot measure it
self, much less can it bound or perfect it self. For it is so true, that every
solid, how small soever, is divisible to infinity, that the Naturalists
maintain that if by Divine Omnipotence (Humane and Angelical power being too
short) a grain of Millet should be divided into a hundred millions of parts
every moment from the Creation to the end of the World, the progression would
never come to an Indivisible Point. This is justified by the Section of a
Circle or Globe. For if the Diametre of a Circle be divided into two equal
parts, the Center of it, which is a point, will be semblably into two equal
parts; for it must not be all on one side; otherwise the division would be
unequal; nor must it be turned into nothing since it is not possible for any
thing to be annihilated naturally. But if those two Semidiametres were
reunited as at first, the two parts of the divided Point would be rejoined
into one point which would make the Center again. In like manner if a Globe
perfectly round touched a perfect plain, all agree that it would be in a
Mathematical point, which is not indivisible. For the point of the plain has
parts, since it has all the situations of place whereunto parts answer, namely
before, behind, above, below, right and left; and the point of the Globe
touches the point of the plain in the upper part; now that which has an upper
part has also an under part. Moreover, every point is part of the body in
which it inheres; for a Part is one finite thing united to another, composing
the whole with the other parts together. But the point of the Globe is such;
else it must be said that the surface of the Globe is no part of it. Seeing
there is the same proportion between a point and a line, a line and a surface,
as there is between a surface and a body; and that when a Globe rouls upon many
points, it rouls also upon the surface, which therefore differs not from them
but by More and Less. Whence it follows that a Mathematical, point is a small
term of quantity, uniting and terminating Mathematical lines without length,
breadth and depth mensurable and consequently a body. For it is composed of
parts irrational and inexpressible; that is, which the Mathematician cannot
tell how long, broad and deep, they are.

The Fourth said, Nature has hid the highest mysteries in the lowest, and
seemingly vilest things; which also are hardest to be understood; not so much
through imperfection of essence; for an atome flying in the air is as true an
essence as the whole earth: But because our senses perceive only such objects
as are able to excite a motion in the Organs; now a Point cannot do this, and
so the Intellect which judges of things by the species received, cannot receive
those of a Point, nor consequently have perfect knowledge of it. Therefore the
Philosopher defines not a point By what it is, but By what it is not, when he
says that a Point is something imperceptible inherent in the Continuum. Yet
this knowledge of a point by negation, is not by negation of essence but of
divisibility, it being of its own nature an indivisible entity. For if it can
be divided into other parts, it is no longer a point, it is a line, and must be
so termed how small soever it be. Essence not finite is incommunicable to the
Creator, being a perfection of immense grandeur; yet a Point may be of an
essence not finite too, because such essence is in a Point an imperfection, and
privation of greatness. Moreover, a Point is either continuant or terminant;
each of which is nothing but a mode of being, a respect and correspondence of
parts one to another; which consequently may be produced and annihilated
without miracle, as modes, forms, and figures are. For supposing a Globe
exactly divided into two parts, there is no more inconvenience in saying that
the Central point is perished, then that when a ball of Wax is pressed flat,
the Spherical figure ceases to be.

The Fifth said, That as in the Creation natural bodies were made of nothing,
so the production of Mathematical bodies begins by a Point which is a nothing:
And (indeed) a Point is so far from being demonstrated a reality by the
application of a Globe upon a Plain, which cannot touch one the other but by a
line, that the most slender and inperceptible point of a Needle falling
perpendicularly upon the most polished steel, yea (if 'twere possible) upon as
small a point of another Needle, cannot touch one another but by the surface of
their body: Whence it appears that a Mathematical Point is infinitely less then
any material point whatsoever, which only represents the figure thereof grossly
to our senses.

II. Whether Brutes have Reason.
The second Point was prefac'd with the consideration of the difficulty of a
fair discussion, because men are parties; and none is competent to determine
the question but either he that is above both man and beast, or equally
participates of both: it being as likely in the general cause, as it is usual in
all particular, that men will arrogate the advantage to their own species. Yet
man's dominion over beasts, the conformation of his body, the operations of his
mind, and the works of both compared to those of other animals, seem to decide
the question. For man alone knows, not only God, and the other creatures, but
also himself, by a reflection of the Understanding, which is the highest act of
Reason. His body alone is shaped so that his eyes are erected toward heaven,
his members are flexible and versatile, especially his hand (the organ of
organs;) he sits down most commodiously and gracefully at the exercising of all
Arts; and his manifold artificial productions, perfecting and surpasing those
of nature, find nothing comparable to them amongst those of other animals. And
therefore I adhere to the Holy Scripture, which denies understanding to beasts;
and to what antiquity, especially Philosophy, determines, which has found no
more peculiar difference whereby to distinguish man from beast then Reason.

The Second said, Since Reason is the hand of Judgment, as the speech is of
Reason, and the hand it self is the instrument subservient to speech; one of
these degrees must lead us to the knowledge of the other. I mean, that since
Reason is the hand of the Judgment, such animals as shall be found to have
judgment can no more be without Reason then a man naturally without a hand.
Now all are constrained to acknowledge some judgment in animals, for otherwise
they could not exercise the functions of their external and internal senses,
which diverse have in a more eminent degree then we. They have a Common Sense;
for they distinguish the objects of the senses; a Fancy, since they are all
equally lead to sensible good; many of them are indu'd with memory, as Dogs and
Horses, which bark and neigh in their sleep; which cannot be done but by some
higher faculty, uniting and enjoining the species drawn out of their memory: an
effect not possible to proceed from any other cause then Reason. But that which
removes all scruple, is, that they are capable of discipline; and there is no
feat of activity but they learn it sooner then Man; witness the Elephants which
danced upon the rope at Rome, and the Goats which do as much here at this time;
not to mention Dogs, Horses, Apes, and other Creatures which are managed, and
Birds which are taught to speak.

The Third confirmed this Opinion by the Example of the Elephant, who before
the Tinker was paid, tried whether the kettle (wherein he used to have his
food) was well mended by filling it with water; of the Ox, who never drew up
above a certain number of buckets of water; of the Fox, who caused the water in
a pitcher to ascend by filling it with stones, and always lays his Ear to a
frozen river, to hear whether the water moves under the Ice, before he trusts
himself upon it; of the Dog, who having scented two paths, casts himself into
the third without Smelling at all, and concludes that the tract of his game; of
the Cat, which although hungry dares not eat the meat she sees, for fear of the
whip which she sees not. All which he said were so many Syllogismes, and
concluded with an induction of sundry Animals, which gave Man the knowledge of
building, as the Swallow; of spinning, as the Spider; of hoarding provisions,
as the Pismire, to whose School Solomon sends the sluggard; of presaging fair
weather, as the Kings-fisher; the downfall of houses, as Rats and Mice; of
making Clysters, as the Ibis; of letting blood, as the Hippopotamus, or
Seahorse; That to accuse our Masters of want of Reason, is an act of notorious
ingratitude.

The Fourth said, Faculties are discovered by their actions, and these are
determined by their end. Now the actions of Men and beasts are alike, and have
the same End, Good, Profitable, Delightful, or Honest. There is no Controversy
concerning the two former. And Honesty, which consists in the exercise of
Virtue, they have in an eminent degree. Witness the courage of the Lion, in
whom this Virtue is not produced by vanity or interest, as it is in men. Nor
was it ever seen that Lions became servants to other Lions, (as we see Men are
to one another for want of courage) which prefers a thousand deaths before
servitude. Their Temperance and Continence is apparent, in that they are
contented with pleasures lawful and necessary, not resembling the disorderly
Appetites of Men, who not contented with one sort of food depopulate the Air,
the Earth, and the Waters, rather to provoke then satiate their gluttony. The
fidelity of the Turtle, and the Chastity of the Dove, are such as have served
for a Comparison, in the Canticles, of the Spouse. The fidelity of the Dog to
his Master exceeds that of Men. The Raven is so Continent, that it is observed
to live 600. years without a Male, if her own happen to be killed. For their
good Constitution gives them so long a life, which in Men Nature or their own
disorders terminate within a few years. As for Justice, the foundation of all
Humane Laws is the Natural, which is common to beasts with Men.

The Fifth said, Reason is a proportion, correspondence, and adjustment, of two
or more things compared one with another; whence it follows that being
Comparison cannot be made but by Man, he alone is capable of Reason. Moreover,
he alone exercises Justice, which is nothing else but the same reason which he
judges to every one, under which is comprehended Religion, a thing unknown to
brutes; when Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance, are improperly attributed,
because these are habits of the Will, (which Faculty brutes have not) and
presuppose a knowledge (which they want too) of the vicious Extremes of every
of their actions.

The Sixth said, 'Twas not without Reason that the first Age of Innocence, and
afterward Pythagoras, upon the account of his Metempsychosis, spared the lives
of beasts; that when God saved but four couple of all Mankind from the deluge,
he preserved seven of every clean Animal, and made the Angel which with-stood
the Prophet Balaam rather visible to his Ass then to him; that this Animal, and
the Ox, (whose acknowledgement toward their Masters is alleged by Isaiah, to
exprobriate to the Israelites their ingratitude toward God) were the first
witnesses of our Saviors Birth, who commands to be innocent and prudent, like
some of them. Which presupposes not only Reason in them, but that they have
more thereof then Man, with what ever cavillation he may disguise their
virtues; saying, that what is Knowledge in God. Intelligence in Angels, Reason
in Man, Inclination in Inanimate Bodies, is Instinct in brutes. For since a
beast attaines to his End better then Man, and is not so subject to change as
he, it may seem that a nobler name should be given to that Faculty which
accomplisheth its work best, then to that is for the most part deficient
therein. And therefore either a brute has more reason then Man, or that which
Man calls Instinct in a beast is more excellent then his Reason, a Faculty
ordinarily faulty, subject to surprise and to be surpised.

The Seventh said, It Is too rustic an impiety (to use Saint Austine's words
against the Manichees, who inclined to this Error) to believe that beasts have
Reason, since they have not a perfect use of all the outward Senses, but only
of such as are altogether necessary to their being, Touching, and Tasting: For
Smells, Sounds, and Colors, move them not, further then the same are
serviceable to those two senses. Nor must we deceive our selves by their having
a Fancy or Inferior Judgment; so long as they have nothing of that Divine
Piece by which Man knows Universals, defines, composes, and divides,
comprehends similitudes and dissimilitudes with their causes. They have an
Appetite too, by which they are carried toward their proper Good. But because
their knowledge of this Good is neither sufficient nor entire as that of Man
is, who alone knows Good as Good, the End as such; this Appetite is ruled and
guided by a superior cause, (as a Ship by the Pilot) which cause necessarily
leads this Appetite to good, as it also inclines the stone to its center, which
it never fails to find. So that this infallibility alleged in the works of
brutes is rather a sign of their want of Reason, which is the cause that Man
endued with sufficient knowledge, and for this reason placed between Good and
Evil, Fire and Water, can alone freely move toward the one or the other;
whence it comes to pass that he frequently fails in his purposes, because his
Reason oftentimes takes appearance for truth.

CONFERENCE LIII.
I. Whether there be more then five Senses. II. Whether is better, to speak, or
to be silent.

I. Whether there be more then five Senses.
THe Maxim, That things are not to be multiplied without Reason, is founded
upon the capacity of the Humane Mind, which being one, though its faculties be
distinct in their Operations, conceives things only under the species of
unity. So that when there are many in number, it makes one species of them; of
many specifically different, one Genus; and, consequently, can much less suffer
the making two things of that which is but one. This has given ground to some
to affirm, That there is but one External Sense, which ought no more to be
distributed into five species under pretext that there are five Organs, then
one and the same River which here makes bellows blow, and hammers beat, presses
cloth, and decorticates oats, or grinds flour; For it is one breath which
passing through several Organes and Pipes renders several tones; one and the
same Sun, which penetrating through various glasses represents as many colors.
Moreover, their end is to all the same, namely, to avoid what may hurt, and
pursue what may profit the Creature.

The Second said, This would be true, if the Soul alone were the Subject of
Sensation; but when the Eye is pulled out, although the visual spirits remain
entire; or if the Eye being sound and clear, yet some obstruction hinders the
afflux of the spirits to it, (as in a Gutta Serena) there is no vision made: An
Evidence that seeing is an action of both, and, consequently, the Senses are as
many as the several Organs which determine and specificate the same. But the
Taste being comprehended under the Touch, by the Philosophers definition, must
be a species thereof; and therefore there are but four Senses, as four
Elements, the Taste and the Touch (which it comprehends) being exercised in the
earth gross as themselves; the Sight in Water, in which its Organ swims, and of
which it almost wholly consists; the Smelling by the Fire, which awakens
odours, and reduces them out of power into act; and the Hearing, in the Air,
which is found naturally implanted in the Ear, and is the sole medium of this
sense, according to Aristotle; the hearing of Fishes being particular to them
in the Water, and very obscure.

The Third said, He was of Scaliger's mind, who reckons Titillation for the
sixth sense. For if the Taste, though comprehended under the Touching, (as was
said) constitutes a distinct sense, why not Titillation, which is a species of
Touching too; considering that it represents things otherwise then the ordinary
Touch does, and has its particular Organs, as the soles of the Feet, the
palms of the Hands, the Flanks, the Armpits, and some other places. Yea,
Touching may be accounted the Genus of the Senses, since all partake thereof.

The Fourth said, That those actions which some Animals perform more perfectly
then we, (as the Dog exceeds us in Smelling, the Spider in Touching, the Eagle
in Seeing, and many in presaging the seasons and weather) seemed to be the
effects of 6, 7, or 8 Senses; there being no proportion between such great
extraordinary effects and their Organes, the structure whereof is the same with
those of other Animals, which come not near the same. Yea, that it is by some
supernumerary sense found in each Animal, that they have knowledge of what is
serviceable or hurtful to them in particular. For example, who teaches the Dog
the virtue of Grass, the Heart of Dittany? their ordinary Senses cannot. Nor is
it likely that so many occult properties have been produced by Nature, to
remain unknown. But they cannot be understood unless by some Sense which is not
vulgar, considering that all the Senses together understand not their substance.

The Fifth said, There are five external Senses, neither more, nor less;
because there needs so many and no more, to perceive and apprehend all external
objects: And as when one of our Senses is depraved or abolished, another cannot
repair it, nor succeed it in all its functions; so if there were more then
five, the overplus would be useless, there being no accident but falls under
the cognizance of these five Senses: And although each of them is not
sufficient thereunto severally, yet they serve well enough all together; as in
the perception of motion, rest, number, magnitude, and figure, which are common
objects to diverse Senses. Now if there were need of more then five Senses,
'twould be to judge of objects wherein the others fail. So that the
supernumeraries being unprofitable, it is not necessary to establish more then
five. And as for substance, it is not consistent with its Nature to be known by
the external Senses.

The Sixth said, Man being composed of three Pieces, a Soul, a Body, and
Spirits of a middle Nature between both; the five Senses suffice to the
perfection and support of these three parts. Knowledge, which is the sole Good
of the Soul, is acquired by invention and discipline; for which we have Eyes
and Ears. Good Odours recreate and repair the Spirits. The Touch and Taste are
the Body's guards, the first by preserving it from hurtful qualities which
invade it from without; and the second, from such as enter and are taken in by
the mouth. And therefore it is in vain to establish more.

The Seventh said, Since, according to the Philosophers, Sense is a passive
quality, and Sensation is made when the Organ is altered by the object; there
must be as many several Senses as there are different objects, which variously
alter the Organs. Now amongst Colors, Odours, and other sensible objects,
there are many different species; and the qualities perceived by the Touch are
almost infinite. Nor is it material to say that they all proceed from the first
qualities, since Colors, Odours, and Tastes, are likewise second qualities
arising from those first, and nevertheless make different Senses.

The Eighth said, Although it be true, that Faculties are determined by
objects, yet must not these Faculties be therefore multiplied according to the
multitude of objects. So, though White and Black are different, nevertheless
because they both act after the same manner, namely, by sending their
intentional species through the same medium, to the same Organ, the Sight alone
suffices for judging of their difference.

The Ninth said, Since four things are requisite to Sensation, to wit, the
Faculty, the Organ, the Medium, and the Object; it is by them that the number of
Senses is determined. The Object cannot do it, otherwise there would not be
five Senses, but infinitely more. Nor can the Faculty do it, being inseparable
from the Soul, or rather the Soul it self, and consequently but one; and to say
that there is but one Sense, is erroneously to make an external Sense of the
Common Sense. Much less can the Medium do it, since one and the same Medium
serves to many Senses, and one and the same Sense is exercised in several
Mediums, as the Sight in the Air and the Water. It remains therefore that the
diversity proceed from that of the Organs, which being but five, make the like
number of Senses.

II. Whether is better, to be silent or to speak.
Upon the Second Point it was said, It Is a greater difficulty, and consequently
more a virtue, to hold one's peace then to speak; the latter being natural to
Man, and very easy, when he has once got the habit of it; but the former is a
constrained Action, and to practice which handsomely the Mind must be
disciplined to do violence to the itch of declaring it self; every one
conceiving it his interest that the truth be known. And there are fewer
examples of those that have saved themselves by speaking, then of those that
have lost themselves by not keeping Secrecy; justly termed the Soul of the
State and of affairs, which once vented, of easy become impossible. Whence
arose the name of Secretaries for principal Ministers and Officers of States
and great Houses; and indeed, it is at this day a title affected by the meanest
Clerks, testifying thereby in what esteem they have Silence. And the
unworthiest of all Vices, Treachery, ordinarily takes advantage of this defect
of Secrecy, which renders Men full of chinks, and like a sieve, so that many
can more easily keep a coal in their mouths then a secret. On the contrary,
Silence is so much reverenced, that the wisest persons, when they are to speak
or write, come the nearest it they can by their brevity; and that upon this
account the fool, so long as he holds his peace, differs not from the wise.
Therefore Pythagoras made it the chief point of his Philosophy, leaving his
Scholars for five years to do nothing else but hear, and abstain from eating
fish, out of the particular esteem he had thereof for its taciturnity. All
Monastic persons account it one of their highest virtues, and the introduction
to all others; and the Pagans made a God of Silence, named Harpocrates, whose
Statue held a finger upon its mouth. And both the sacrifices of this god and
all their other mysteries, (which word implies Secrecy) were performed without
speaking. Therefore Alexander meaning to teach Hephaestion, that he that would
serve his King well must know well how to be silent, clapped the seal of his
Ring upon his lips. The greatest talkers are commonly the least actors; God
having as 'twere put in balance words on one side, and effects on the other, as
the leaves and flowers there, and the fruits here.

The Second said, As the corruption of things is the greater by how much the
more excellent they are; so speech being the fairest ornament of Man, the abuse
thereof is the most dangerous; and the rather, for that too much speaking is an
incurable malady, since it cannot be cured but by the counsel of those that
reprehend it, whereof great speakers are incapable, it being their custom not
to hear any body. In requital for which they are avoided by all the world. For
every Man thinks himself concerned to uphold the truth, and is therefore
displeased when he meets one that would arrogate this right to himself, and
frustrate all others of the glory which follows that action. But, which is
worse, no credit is given to them, although belief is the end of speech. For
Man affects nothing so much as to be esteemed true and honest, because the
perfection of his being consists in these two points) and therefore he employes
his utmost endeavors to make himself believed such; whereas a babbler finding
no belief amongst Men, and goodness and truth walking with the same foot, he is
acounted to have neither the one nor the other. Indeed great speakers are
ordinarily great liars; because words are not true but so far as they are
weighed and balanced in the Mind, which being finite cannot know many things at
once, but successively and with time, which the talker allows not to himself.
And as Truth is in Unity, so is Lying in Multiplicity, but especially in
confusion, which is a diversity without order, and is almost inseparable from
great discourses, and produces the like in the Minds of the Hearers, and
consequently unbeliefs.

The Third said, A Man should take no greater care then to govern his Tongue,
because it is a member the easilest moved, and never weary. Hence old men are so
much delighted with talking, because they have only this member at their
devotion. Which Nature foreseeing, and that Man would have frequent and long
use of it, has given it a strong Ligament, ten Muscles, and three couple of
the seven pair of Nerves which are diffused through the rest of the Body.
Besides, Man being a sociable Animal, is naturally much inclined to discourse,
which is the bond of humane society. It Is requisite therefore that Reason,
which should govern all Man's inclinations, govern this of speech chiefly, to
which the ought not give liberty except when the same may be beneficial to the
speaker, or to the hearer, or to some other. Nevertheless, (to speak generally)
as action is more noble then Privation, and Motion then Rest; so to speak is a
thing more excellent then to hold one's peace.

The Fourth said, The moderation of speech, called Taciturnity, is a species of
Temperance, and has its two extremes equally vicious; namely, immoderate
talking, and dull silence, when one holds his peace, although a just cause
obliges him to speak, as the acknowledgement of a truth, or of some benefit;
and when our own interest or friends is considerably engaged, or also when an
occasion makes some discourse to be expected from us, as in a public assembly,
feast, or other place of rejoicing, in which case silence is no less shameful,
then too much speaking is every where distateful. This Virtue, which holds the
middle, shows where, when, how, how much, we ought to speak and be silent; what
things are fit to be spoken, and to what persons. As for things, they must be
true, honest, and approved by us within, before they are exposed and laid
abroad; the Tongue must follow, and not go before the Mind, whose interpreter
it is, as the Hand is the Tongue's Secretary, and for this purpose is laid
upon the Heart, out of whose abundance it always speaks, unless dissimulation
alter the case. And as the constitution and temper of the Tongue, is taken by
Physicians for a certain sign of that of the internal parts; so the words are
of the inclinations and habits of the Soul, which has its throne in the Tongue
to make it self understood, as in the Eyes to render it self visible. Now the
Tongue, being the principal Organ of speech, hereby serves to put a manifest
discrimination between Man and brutes; some of which make a sound, as
Grasshoppers; others have a voice, as all those that have Lungs, but none have
speech. As for other circumstances, we must refrain as much as possible from
speaking with fools, of wicked persons notoriously known such, and a little
before persons of age and authority, or who understand more then our selves; as
also from speaking of a serious matter amongst mirth, or of a ridiculous matter
in grave and serious affairs; we must take care to be silent in places
destinated only to hear, as in the Church, and in Judiciary Courts. Which
injunction lies most upon Women, Children, and Servants. In brief, it is one of
the greatest points of Prudence to know when it is a fit time to speak, and when
to be silent.

The Fifth said, The Reason of Man is that Universal Spirit which is the Soul
of the world, giving activity and motion to every thing; it is this that turns
about the Celestial Spheres, and moves the inferior Elements by an innate
principle. It makes it self understood by speech and writing, the nobleness of
one whereof above the other seems to determine the question. Now Reason is more
in controversy between us and beasts then speech, and speech then writing; for
some admit a certain degree of Reason and Judgment in brutes; and many of
them, whose Tongues are soft, large, and free, perfectly imitate our speech;
but they have nothing that comes near writing, which is solely peculiar to Man.
Moreover, by Reason we are only wise to our selves, by speech we are so to
some few others who hear us. But by writing our Wisdom is communicated to all
the world, and lasts to eternity. 'Twas by writing with the finger in the dust
that our Lord confounded the Jews, without speaking a word; and when he was
falsely accused before Pilate, he opened not his mouth to defend himself. Now
this writing, free from the troublesomeness of praters, borrows all its force
from silence, which is more eloquent then all the talk of Men; but especially
in respect of God, whose praise (says the Psalmist) is silence, and with whom
the lifting up of the Heart, and mental prayer, is more prevalent then all the
voices and speeches in the world. Such was that of Moses, of whom it was said,
in Exodus that he prayed in his Heart; and yet God says to him, Wherefore
cryest thou to me in this manner? Such is the silence of true worshippers, who
worship in Spirit and Truth. Moreover, the Prophet Jeremy assures us, That it is
a good thing to wait for the mercy of God in silence. The Angel Gabriel began
his combat against the Dragon with silence. And Judith being upon the point to
slay Holofernes, made her prayers to God with tears and silence. Besides, it is
a sign of Humility and Modesty amongst Men.

The Sixth said, That to judge well of the Question, we must recur to Nature,
who having given Man two Ears open, for one Tongue shut up, intimates plainly,
that he has more need of hearing and holding his peace, then of speaking. And
because the wounds of the Tongue (compared by the Royal Prophet to a sharp
razor, and to a consuming fire by the Apostle Saint James) aresometimes more
mortal then those of the Sword; she is not contented to put a reine under it,
called Froenum Linguae, to stop its intemperance, but has also surrounded it
with strong barriers, the two rows of Teeth, besides those of the Lips. But
that which makes very much for silence, is, that Men oftener repent of having
spoken, then of having held their peace. And it is not said, in the Holy
Scripture, that Men shall be blamed for having been silent; but that they shall
give account even of the least idle words. Speaking therefore is more graceful,
but silence is more safe; speech is the property of Man, but silence of the
wise Man.

CONFERENCE LIVE.
I. Of Touch. II. Of Fortune.

I. Of the Touch
WHat the Center is in the Earth, the Earth amongst the Elements, a Star in
Heaven, Sovereignty in a State, Faith in Religion, Natural Motion in Physic,
Equity in Law, Reason in Philosophy, the Body in Man, the Sense in a living
Creature, that the Touch is in all the other Senses; that is to say, it is their
foundation, and the condition without which none of them can subsist. For there
are Animals which see not, as Moles; which hear not, as the Asp, and most
Insects; which have not Smelling, as those who are troubled with rheum; which
have no Taste, as most sick persons. But if there be found any which has not
the Sense of Touching, at the same time it ceases to be an Animal, since it is
not termed such but inasmuch as it has a sensitive life, which consists in the
knowledge of good and evil, sensible by pleasure and pain, the two symptoms of
the Touch, and which alone bear the sway, and turn the balance in all the
actions of Man; the scope of all which, is, either to pursue good, or to avoid
evil.

The Second said, That, for this purpose, as sensitive life is diffused
throughout the Body; so the Touch, which is inseparable from that life, has
not, as the other Senses, a particular and limited Organ, but is extended into
all the parts of the Body. Because, as among the objects of the Senses, only
the tangible Qualities give being, and constitute the Animal by their
proportion and temperature; so they alone destroy it by their excess and
disproportion. So that as only a small part of the Body sees, another hears,
another smells, and another tastes; if there had been but one part of the Body
that could by touching have discerned the quality of its object, it would have
happened, that whilst this part were delighted with one of those objects, the
excess of some other might have destroyed all the rest of the Animal, without
its perceiving the same; and so it would have perished without knowing, and
consequently being able to avoid the same, which is the principal end of the
Senses; which, for this reason, represent death to themselves so terrible, to
the end that the horror thereof might oblige them to a greater care of their
preservation.

The Third said, That as Man is surpassed in other senses by brutes, so he
excells them in Touching, which he has most exquisite and perfect. He alone,
of all creatures, has Hands wherewith to touch, and a smooth soft skin the
better to judge of tangible qualities. For being he was made to judge of
things, it was requisite that he should be provided of a faithful messenger, as
the touch is, to make him a true report thereof. And because he was designed to
more sublime actions then brutes, therefore he needed a more perfect
temperature; of which the goodness of Touch is a most sure sign. Hence the
Physiognomist reckons the subtlety of this sense to a most certain token of
that of the Mind; as its contrary, of stupidity; an exquisite Touch denoting
the softness and tenderness of the flesh, upon which, consequently, tangible
Qualities easily make their impression; and this tenderness denotes the good
temper of the Body, which is followed by suitable actions of the Mind. Hence it
is that great wits have commonly weak and delicate bodies; but the stupid and
dull the most robust and brawny. Therefore as the Touch distinguishes Men from
brutes, so it does Men from one another. But the Sight and the other Senses do
not so; for, on the contrary, it frequently comes to pass that great spirits
have the shortest sight, and the other Senses less exquisite.

The Fourth said, That the Touch is not only the most necessary in all Animals,
since it serves them for a specifical difference; (sensibility, which
distinguishes them from Plants, being commonly taken for the faculty of
Touching, witness our vulgar phrase, which calls one man more sensible then
another, when he is more easily affected by the tactile qualities) but it is the
sole sense of many Animals, especially, Zoophytes or Plant-animals, such as
Sponge, Coral, and all kind of Oysters. The first of which hears not, sees not,
smells not, and tastes not its nourishment; but only dilates it self to receive
it, and contracts it self to retain it as soon as it feels it near. The second,
by the relation of diverse, who fetch it from under the water, averts it self by
bowing the contrary way as soon as it feels the touch of their instruments. The
last have no Organical parts; and if they had, the same would be useless to
them, because they are destitute of local motion, and of every other sense,
except that of Touching, by which they open and shut themselves. And which
Nature has given, as gross as it is, for a supplement to the subtilest sense,
to wit, the Sight.

The Fifth said, That the nobleness of the Touch appears, principally, in that
it is the most infallible of all the senses; as the most honorable persons are
accounted most worthy of credit. Therefore our Lord being to convince S.
Thomas, at that time incredulous, caused him to feel his side; and manifest
things are called palpable, because the Touch is the last sense that is
deceived. Whence they who dream do not frequently find their error, till
putting forth their hands to the phantasin they begin to be convinced that it
is nothing but air.

The Sixth said, That as it is a common vice to all the Senses to be deceived,
so that of Touch is not more exempt from it then the rest; and the less,
because it judges of the quality of its objects only by comparison; according
to the diversity of which one and the same thing diversely affects it, and is
sometimes apprehended one way, sometimes another. A man that comes out of a hot
Bath shivers in the same air which he accounted warm before he entered into the
water; and when he that learns to dance puts off his leaden soles he thinks his
feet lighter then he did before he put them on.

The Seventh said, The Touch is an external sense, terrestrial and gross; it
perceives hot and cold, dry and moist, heavy and light* hard and soft, smooth
and rough, or unequal, acide, viscous or slippery, thick and thin, tough and
friable, or brittle, and other such tactile and earthy qualities. For, as there
are five simple Bodies in Nature, namely the Heaven and the Elements, so each
of the five external Senses corresponds to one of them; the Sight to Heaven, in
regard of its transparence and lucidity; the other four to the Elements; of
which the Earth symbolizeth with the Touch* because every thing that is felt
must have some solidity and consistence, which proceeds from the Earth;
otherwise it could not make it self felt by it self, but only by some
predominant quality, as we feel not the air when it touches us, unless it be
extremely cold or hot. The Organ of Feeling is inward skin which incompasses
the whole body of a creature, by reason of its so perfect and equal temperature
that it is neither hot nor cold, dry, moist, but equally partakes of all these
qualities (a requisite condition in the Organs of the senses which must be
unprovided of all the qualities whereof they are to judge.) So the Crystalline
humor is without color, the tongue without sapour, the nostrils without
scent, the ears without any sound. And the skin is neither hard like the bones,
nor soft like the flesh, but of a temper between both; being therefore called a
Nervous flesh, and a fleshy Nerve: which skin, never so little touched, feels
perfectly; which would not come to pass if it were not the Organ of the Touch.
It Is therefore woven of infinite nerves, terminated in it and bringing the
animal spirits to it, which are the efficient causes of the Touch as well as of
all the other Senses. For what the Philosopher says, That a sensible object
applied upon the Organ is not perceived, must be understood only of the three
Senses which are for the convenience of an animal, to wit, the Sight, Hearing
and Smelling; not of the other two, which are for its absolute necessity, upon
which consideration Nature has appointed them to judge more nearly, exercising
these two Senses by a medium internal and inseparable from the Organ.

II. Of Fortune.
Upon the second Point it was said, Fortune is a cause by accident in things
which are done for some end, by an Agent that makes use of Reason. So it is
fortune, when one walking for his health, or divertisement, finds a Purse: but
chance, hazard, or adventure is in things which act for some end without
election, as brutes, mad people and children, who are not fortunate, or
unfortunate, unless in hope. The difficulty of understanding the nature of
Fortune arises from the infinite abundance of things which may be causes of
things which befall men. And as it is proper to man to admire what he
understands not, upon the observation of the many strange and unforeseen
accidents in the world; some say that they come to pass by a fatal destiny
necessarily guiding every cause to its effect; others, that they fall out by
chance, to which the ancient Philosophers ascribed so much, that Empedocles
accounted the situation of the Elements fortuitous; Democritus and Leucippus
thought the production of all things was effected by the casual concourse of
their atoms flying in the vacuum: insomuch that out of a blind superstition
they erected Temples and Altars to Fortune. For indeed there is nothing divine
in Fortune; since there is not any cause by it self but may be a cause by
accident, and consequently Fortune. Nor is it the Divine Providence, since that
which is foreseen cannot be called fortuitous. But we give the appellation of
Fortune to any cause, which missing of its proper effect produces another
which it intended not.

The Second said, 'Twas the ignorance of men that invented Fortune, which has
no other existence but in their imagination. For every thing that is has a
certain cause determined to its effect. But Fortune and Chance are uncertain
and indeterminate; therefore not causes. And although the proximate cause of
every thing be unknown to us, yet it is not the less certain for all that, in
respect of God, who ignores nothing. Therefore if there be a fortune in respect
of us, it is an effect of our ignorance.

The Third said, We must establish in Nature either Destiny or Fortune. The
former seems to fasten man to Ixion's wheel, which permits him not to do any
thing of himself, and takes from him the commendation of good, and blame of
evil; rendering him by this means guiltless of whatever he does, and laying all
upon universal causes (whatever distinction may be made of God's will, in
general and particular; it not being conceivable that two contrary wills can at
the same time proceed from the same source. The second is more correspondent
with the daily events, which produce effects whereof no necessary cause can be
found. Indeed, if effects are to be divided according to their causes, it is
certain that some are necessary and some contingent; whereof the latter being
fortuitous cannot be referred to any thing but to Fortune. Yea of the things
which come to pass in the world, some always arrive in the same manner, as day
and night when the Sun rises and sets; others fall out ordinarily, but not
always, as that a child is born with five fingers on a hand, there being some
that have six; and others, on the contrary, arrive very rarely, as Monsters.
But if this variety of causes and effects has place in natural things, it is
found much oftener in humane actions, whose constancy is unconstancy it self;
there being not any whose effect is certain. For what man can promise himself
that when he labors he shall infallibly become rich, that when he fights he
shall have the victory, that when he serves he shall be acceptable, or that
when he loves he shall be loved? Whereas, on the contrary, we see many persons
enriched without labor, honored without fighting, and acceptable without
performance of any services; and (which is more) many times hated by those they
love, and loved by those they hate. Of all which we must either assign some
cause, or confess that there is no other cause thereof but hap or mishap, which
they call Fortune.

The Fourth said, That Dionysius the younger, the Tyrant of Syracuse, was not
of their judgment who disclaim Fortune, assigning the cause of his not being
able to preserve the Estates of his Father, That he left him Heir of all,
excepting his Fortune. Now the Ancients had Fortune in great reverence, and put
her amongst their domestic Gods. And the Emperors religiously kept her Statue
of gold, which they sent as a badge of Empire, to those whom they intended to
design their successors. Thus Antoninus Pius, being ready to dye, sent it to
Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher; and Severus sent it to his two sons,
Bassianus, and Geta. Moreover, because it visibly bears the chief stroke in
gaming, even in those Games to which she gives not the addition of her name,
and depend not upon skill; there are found some, at this day, who think they
can fix her to some thing which they wear about them while they are at play;
others attribute it to a particular situation of their bodies in respect of the
Planets. But all agree, that Caesar owed more to his valor then to his
fortune; that if she could not make an Orator of a Consul, or the contrary; yet
she can make a poor man rich by play; and he must be a great Rhetorician that
can persuade those who have good or bad luck, that there is no Fortune.

The Fifth said, 'Twould be too much presumption in us to accuse all antiquity
of ignorance, which observed not only certain persons and places, but some days
and hours fortunate and unfortunate, noting the happy days with chalk, and the
other with a black stone. Moreover, Philosophers divide goods into those of the
Mind, the Body, and Fortune, comprizing under the latter, Friends, Lineage,
Reputation, Honors and Riches, which are the things men make most account of
in this world. And riches are so commonly attributed to her, that they are
frequently denoted by the name of Fortune. So that to maintain that there is no
such thing, is to go about to overthrow common sense, and to correct Calepin.
But her efficiency is chiefly proved by the employments which happen to many,
contrary to all appearance, according to the diversity of which every one makes
progress, or not, in riches and honors. For he that labors in little things
takes most pains, and gets least, and so, on the contrary, which cannot be
attributed to any thing else but fortune, no more then the contracts, bargains,
and other actions of men, which are made almost always by chance. Whence arose
the Proverb, There is nothing but good luck and bad luck in the world. In War,
such a great Captain is constantly unfortunate, whereas Timotheus was always
the contrary, in whose Nets Cities came to be taken whilst he slept. In
Physic, such a Doctor is always accounted lucky, whereas 'twas enough to kill
a sick man but to have seen Hermocrates in a dream; not to mention what the
Lawyers themselves call the hazard of Judgments.

The Sixth said, The Ancients did like the Gouty person mentioned by Montagne,
who ate Saucidges and Gammons, and drunk of the best, that he might have whom
to lay the fault upon. They phancy'd Fortune, that they might have whom to
blame for evil events, or rather to blaspheme against the Deity. She is a pure
fiction of the Poets, who represented her upon a wheel, one half whereof always
ascends, and the other descends; to show the volubility and continual
vicissitude of humane things; blind, to signify that good or evil does not
always befall us according to desert, but oftentimes without distinction;
sometimes a man, and sometimes a woman, but principally the latter, to denote
her inconstancy; all this mysteriously, as all their other fables; to take
which literally, were to do worse then the learned Pagans themselves.

The Seventh said, Every one is the Artificer of his own fortune, and all the
Deities are present where Prudence is, though we rank Fortune among the Gods.
Of whom we may say what Hercules said to the bemired Waggoner, who invoked him,
but touched not the wheel, Help thy self, and God will help thee; none having
ever obtained the title of fortunate, but by great pains, watchings and
industries; means, which the vulgar not observing so much as their effect,
attribute it to a Deity. Moreover, dextrous men affect the title of lucky,
because the vulgar esteems them the more for it; and the great est Statesmen
hiding their counsels and the instruments they make use of to accomplish their
designs, give occasion to this error. Therefore when Zeno had lost all his
wealth by Shipwreck he should not have said, Fortune, thou have done well to
bring me to this short cloak; but rather have accused his own imprudence in
having ventured all his estate at sea. For since there is nothing in the world
but has its cause, and fortune is that which is done by no cause, it follows
that there is no such thing as fortune.

CONFERENCE LV.
I. Of the Taste. II. Whether Poetry be useful.

I. Of the Taste.
THe right handling of a subject requiring the knowledge of its differences, an
Apicius might seem fitter to discourse of Taste then a Philosopher, in whom too
exact a knowledge of Sauces would be accounted blameable; yet the word of
Sapience or Wisdom, among the Latins, taking its name from Sapours, the Sages
who profess it may seem obliged too to be expert in this matter. Besides, this
Sense supplies Physicians with the surest evidence of the faculties of every
medicament by their Sapours; which are second Qualities resulting from the
various mixture of the four first, whereof the Taste is an external sense,
discerning Sapours by help of the moisture in the mouth, and the Nerve of the
third Congjugation, which is expanded upon the tongue, whose flesh is therefore
spungy and porous, the more easily to imbibe the same. Thus the object of the
Taste is sapour or relish; the Organ is the Nerve; the medium is the flesh of
the tongue, the condition without which it is not exercised is the humor,
either internal, as that of the mouth (supplied by the Tonsils or Almonds) or
external, as the moisture which all bodies have either in act or in power.
Whence, they whose tongue is dry cannot taste that which is so; nevertheless,
the humidity must be moderate, since its excess no less depraves the taste then
its defect.

The Second said, Since the Organ ought not to be prepossessed with the quality
of its object, the Tongue which perceives Sapours which are all moist (called
therefore, by the Greeks, Juice) must be destitute of all humidity: for that
cannot be received which is possessed already. And as there is in every Organ a
principal part which makes the sensation more perfectly then the rest; so the
tip of the tongue is more proper to perceive tastes by reason of the Nerves
destinated to the sense of tasting, which are found more soft there then its
root, and of the liquor which is more retained, and more subtle there, and
consequently makes rellishes penetrate more effectually. And although some
parts of these Nerves are expanded to the palate and gullet, yet the taste is
very little perceiveable there. Therefore Philoxenus went upon a mistake when
he wished for the neck of a Crane; for a long neck conduces nothing either to
the advancing or continuing of the taste.

The Third said, Most Animals have the sense of Tasting, to the end they may
distinguish their food from poison, and what food is best, as the sweetest is.
For all animals, and particularly man, are nourished only with what is sweet.
Whence children, in whom nature being nearer its original is less corrupted,
desire sweets so much: and if we mix other Sapours, it is either because sweet
things glut and disgust sooner, easily filling the Stomach, in which by reason
of their unctuous consistence they swim uppermost; or else because the
depravation of our temper makes us sometimes desire contrary things to correct
it, and sometimes like, to preserve it.

The Fourth said, Many Animals have no taste nor perception of Sapours, as,
amongst others, the Crocodile, which also wants a tongue, the Organ of it; the
Estrich, when it eats Iron; and the Wolf, earth: both which are insipid. Such
was that Lazarus, mentioned by Columbus, who swallowed glass, pitch, tallow,
and other things, without disgust; and that Maid in the King of Persia's Court,
who eat all sort of poisons, how corroding soever, and was nourished therewith.
It being observed, in the dissection of their bodies, that the third couple of
Nerves, which serve to the Taste, was reflected toward the back part of the
head.

The Fifth said, Sapour is a quality of the aliment; but nourishes not,
because it is a mere accident; only by it the animal judges of the qualities of
its food. The matter of Sapour is humid; because sapours are easily received
and expanded in that which is humid, not in that which is dry. This humidity is
not aerious but aqueous; otherwise Sapours might be received in the air; which
cannot be, because the nature of this element is too thin and tenuious; but
Sapour being gross requires a subject that has some consistence to receive it.
Nevertheless this aqueous humidity alone, is not sapoury, because it is a simple
body, and consequently insipid. But Sapour proceeds from mixtion. It must
therefore be joined with somewhat that is dry, not with igneous siccity,
because this makes the mixtum subtle, and apt to exhale, as odor ought to be,
not sapour; but with that of the earth, which gives a body and consistence to
sapours, without which they could not be tasted. And it is by means of this
siccity with the humidity, that Mineral waters acquire the sapours of the
places through which they pass, and that the liquor of a Lie or Lixivium
becomes salt, by mixtion of the more dry and adust parts of the ashes. But
because these dry and humid substances difficultly mix, the particles of the
one being unapt to touch the particles of the other, because both are gross and
terrestrial, therefore there needs some superior agent, more powerful then
either, to open and penetrate them, such as heat is, which by its various
coction makes a different mixtion of the dry and the moist, whence arise
different sapours; as may be observed in our meats and fruits of Trees, which
differ in taste according to the degrees of heat. The sweet and fat taste is
for the most part produced by a temperate heat; the bitter, salt and
acrimonious, by immoderate heat; the acide or sharp, the austere or harsh, and
the sour, by cold. The Sweet, such as that of Honey, comes from a perfect
mixture of terrestrious with aqueous humidity. The Bitter, as that of Gall,
from abundance of gross siccity mixed with little humidity. The Fat, as Oil and
Fat are produced by excess of humidity. The Salt has more humidity then the
bitter. The Acrimonious or biting, as Pepper, has much of tenuity, and very
little of humidity. The Sour, as that of unripe fruits, comes from siccity and
humidity equally indigested. The Austere or pontick, as the juice of Oranges,
and the Acide or Sharp, as that of Vinegar, proceed from very much humidity and
little siccity.

II. Whether Poetry be useful.
Upon the second Point it was said, This division of things into necessary,
profitable and delightful, is observed particularly in speech, the soul's
interpreter. For at the beginning Languages were only for necessity, void of
all artifice, being employed to no other use but to make us understand one
another; which sort of Language the first Philosophers employed to express the
essence and nature of things. Afterward History and Oratory enriched it with
the addition of flowers and flourishes. And, Lastly, Poetry added to those
Words Number and Cadence, not barely to teach and instruct, as the other
liberal Sciences, but withal to recreate and delight; which is an excellent
method to prevent the disgust which the disciplines bring even in their
rudiments. I therefore compare our Language, considered in its original, to
Gold yet in the Oar, mingled with earth; the same Language polished by
Rhetoric to an Ingot refined from its dross; but Poetry to a goodly vessel of
gold, not less rich for the workmanship then for the matter.

The Second said, That which gave birth to Poetry and makes it so much
esteemed, is the desire of imitation, proper to man alone; as he alone that
understands the similitudes, correspondencies and proportions of things. Hence
it is that we admire the Picture of a Serpent, a dead body, and other things
whose original we have in horror; and we are ravished to hear the voice of a
Swine naturally counterfeited, though we hate it in that animal. So Poetry and
Painture imitate, and in some manner do every thing that is done in nature;
whence Poetry is termed a speaking Picture, and Picture dumb Poetry. For a Poet
does not signify merely a Versifier, and one that relates things done, which
is the property of a Historian: but as an Actor or Player by his postures does
the very things, so the Poet must both describe things and make them. And the
word Poet does not signify one that feigns, but one that makes. When he speaks
of a tempest he makes the Winds mutiny, Ships split, mountains of water clash
and lose themselves in gulfes; when of War, he makes you hear the clashing of
Arms, the thundering of Cannons, and see the field strow'd with Carcases: and so
in all other subjects which he treats. Wherefore, to be a good Poet, one must
know every thing in perfection; which makes Poetry so difficult, and
consequently so rare and admirable that few succeed well in it. For there are
many Versifiers, but few Poets.

The Third said, There need no other Judges to condemn Poetry then Poets
themselves, who call their highest conceits Fury, that is to say, Folly;
whether it arrive to them from their fabulous gods, or more truly from the
fumes of Wine, which cause them to make the best Verses, as they tell of
Ennius: the frequentation of which is one of the greatest crimes that Cato
imputed to Marcus Nobilior in the survey that he made of his Province: and it is
observed that there is so great affinity between Poetry and Folly, that the
best Poets have very odd actions and postures while they are making their
works, and retain something thereof in their ordinary carriage.

The Fourth said, Variety of Wit has not appeared in any Science more then in
Poetry. For it has not only different laws according to the diversity of
Nations, which makes it doubted what sort of Verses those of Job are,
considering that they have no resemblance with the Greek and Latin, no more
then these have with ours. But neither were ours (which consist of certain
numbers of feet, and consonances or rithmes) such as those in Caesar's time, in
which he reports that the Gauls versifi'd; and within a thousand years that our
rithme began in imitation of the Prose of the Church, French Poetry has been
so often diversifi'd, that the Poets of one age would not be so in another. And
yet, sometimes under the name of Rithmers, sometimes under that of Devisers and
Poets, they have been always very acceptable to great persons. And Charle magne
preferred the Poems containing the exploits of his Predecessors before their
Histories.

The Fifth said, That Plato and sundry other Politicians accounted Poety not
only so useless, but so hurtful to their Commonwealth, that they utterly
banished it from thence, because Poets by their shameful relations of the vices
of the gods enticed men to commit the like, conceiving they did not offend when
they had the example of a god; and for that Verses are more proper for loose
loves then the Sciences, of which the confinements of Poetry are not capable;
besides that the enthusiasm of Poets cannot consist with the gravity of
Philosophy; seldom with the probity of manners, and never with a settled
judgment; the Italian Proverb being almost always found true, Di buona terra
cattiva Gente, Di buon Poeta cattiva mente. Whence Aristophanes says that when
Bacchus desired to find Euripedes or some other good Poet, he went down to
Hell, because he could not any in Heaven. Moreover, their too great liberty of
Satirical detraction, made them sometimes be driven out of Rome. Their
dangerous doctrine has caused the reading of them to be forbidden to Christians
by the Canons; and rendered them so infamous, that Philip, the first Christian
Emperor, in the third Law, at the title of Professors and Physicians in the
Cade, grants no immunity to them as he does to all others. Indeed one may get
his living in all professions with honor, except in Poetry; and if it always
less fills the Poets Purses with Crowns then their heads with presumption; so
(as it happens in all other Conceits, or Pastimes) it may be found sometimes
proper for the divertisement of those few that have leisure to read them, but
it is most unprofitable to the Authors; for few or none are advanced by it, but
rather many have been hindered by this art of versifying from making their
fortune otherwise. Yea their profession is so vile and abject, that whereas
others count it an honor to be styled Physicians, Advocates, or the like,
these are offended with the name of Poet. And that with good reason,
considering that of all other Arts Poetry alone glories in disguising the
truth. For which cause it begins to be banished even from Theaters, to which
alone it was destinated; and Prose is come in request in sundry places, being
preferred for gracefulness and naturalness; by which means this Art is in
danger to be confined to the corners of streets, to serve only for Songs and
Ballad^. Hence it was that Ovid was so severely punished by his father, to make
him leave off this Art, which proved so unlucky to him, that for writing his
Book of the Art of Loving, he became of a rich Roman Knight a miserable exile
amongst Barbarians.

The Sixth said, It Is to be a sworn enemy of excellent things, or rather, as
Scaliger says, to renounce being man, to think of banishing Poetry out of
States; which is slighted only by the ignorant, and hated by those that have
irregular minds. For melody is natural, not only to man, but to all things in
the world which God has created in number and measure. Which made the
Pythagoreans say, that not only the Celestial Bodies make a most agreeable
consort, but also the Plants by their proportions, and the beasts by their
motions chant measured Odes in praise of their Creator. Therefore with more
reason must man, whose soul is a number moving of it self, be delighted with
numerous language, which is Poetry, the most sensible effect of that divine
Harmony which is infused into his body. And we may make the same judgment of
good from vulgar wits by their delight or disaffection to Poetry as by the
recreation which they take in Music. Indeed, if a wise man ought to be regular
in all his actions, why not in his words, the image of his Reason, as Reason is
of his soul. As if you should say that the well regulated dance of a Ball ought
to be less prized then the ordinary walk or a Country dance. Moreover, Poetry
has such power over men's minds, Tyrtaeus animated his Soldiers to fight by
the rehearsal of his Verses, which was also the custom of the Germans when they
were to charge their enemies; Moses, David, and many other Prophets, accounted
nothing more worthy then Poetry, to sing the praises of God. And the first
Poets, as Musaeus, Orpheus and Linus, were the Divines of Paganism. Yea the
gods of antiquity affected to deliver their Oracles in Verse; and so did
Legislators their Laws, to render them more venerable. Besides, they greatly
help the memory; their cadence or measure serving as a rule to the mind to keep
it from being at a loss. Poetry alone, amongst all the Arts, supplies praise to
virtue; the rampant style of Rhetorical discourse, though it borrow its fairest
flowers and square periods from Poetry, being not comparable to that of Poetry,
which is far more sublime, and consequently, more fit to immortalize the memory
of Heroic actions. Upon which account the Muses were believed the Daughters of
Mnemosyne or Memory. Now if Poets have been sometimes expelled out of States,
so have Philosophers, Physicians, Mathematicians, and many other Professors of
Arts, acknowledged nevertheless very useful to humane society. If some of them
have been lascivious, others impious, others slanderous, these are the vices of
the Poets, not of Poetry. And as the more delicate any Wine is, the more
hurtful its excess is to the body; so Poetry is so much the more excellent, by
how much its abuse is noxious. Plato, who advised the banishing of it out of
his imaginary Commonwealth, calling it a sweet poison, deserved, more then it,
to be really interdicted, there not being in all the Poets such fables,
impieties and impurities as that of his Convivium, his Phaedrus, and some other
pieces. In the mean time he is forced to admire them, to call them the sons and
interpreters of the gods, yea divine, and the fathers of wisdom. For their
raptures cannot be called folly, unless in that sense that Aristotle says, To
Philo sophize well a man must be besides himself. But their wisdom being
extreme, and their motions unknown to the vulgar; therefore they call that fury
which they ought to call the highest point and pitch of Wisdom; termed
Enthusiasm or Divine Inspiration, because it surpasses the reach of man. And
indeed every one acknowledges in Poetry some character of Divinity, and
therefore it is received by all the world, and serves for a guide and introducer
to great personages, who otherwise would not give audience, but like that well
in Verse which they would blame in Prose. Which obliged Sylla to reward the
good that they might be encouraged to continue their divine works; and the bad
Poets, on condition that they made no more. And it is of these, as of some
Rithmers of our time, that they speak who blame Poetry; in whose reproaches the
true Poets are no more concerned then Physicians in the infamy of Mountebanks.
The Fables of the ancient Poets are full of mysteries, and serve for ornament
to the Sciences and to Divinity it self, as the gold of the Egyptians did to
the Sanctuary. But if they have in all ages complained of not advancing their
fortune, this does not argue any demerit of theirs, but rather the want either
of judgment or gratitude in others.

CONFERENCE LVI.
I. Of the Smelling. II. Of Eloquence.

I. Of the Smelling.
THis Sense, which is the perception of Odours intromitted by the Nose through
the spungy bone into the Mammillary processes which are appendices of the Brain
rather then Nerves, shows by the structure of its Organ that it is more
particular to the Brain then any other. For the Nerves which carry the Spirits
for the performance of the other Senses are communicated elsewhere too; some of
them to all the rest of the Body. Only these two nervous appendices of the
Brain have nothing to do with any other part. It makes use of odours as a
perfume, sometimes to redress its native coldness, as when it is pleased with
Pomanders, Musk, L'eau d'ange (a sort of delicate compound water) Orange
flower-water, and other Aromatical things; sometimes to cool its spirits
overheated by continual action, as by the Violet, the Rose, or Jasmin; but
always for their refreshment. For the Spirits being of an aerial nature,
nothing recreates them so much as what resembles them, to wit, the Air,
especially when it is tinctured with some friendly quality. Hence arise those
different phancies upon occasion of smells. One swoons at the smell of Musk and
the Rose, which others love so much. Another loves the scent of Rue and
Wormwood, so abominated by others, that some women have miscarri'd by it. And
indeed of all the wonders resulting from the consideration of odours, there is
none greater then the relation they have to the womb, which is known to move it
self to, and approach toward, and fly away at the motion of good or bad
smells; which work upon this part by means of the animal spirits (called, for
this reason, Impellers by the Greeks) which the odours powerfully move, and
they all the other parts; but especially the womb which has a particular
sympathy with the Brain, the Conservatory of the Spirits; or else because the
contraction of the Nerves, which is caused when an odor displeased drives the
Spirits downwards, who by their impetuosity hurry along with them the more
fluid and moveable parts, as the Matrix is, when a pituitous humor has
slackned its ligaments: as, on the contrary, the spirits being dilated to
receive the steam of an odor grateful to the Brain with a full torrent, they
attract it upwards by the same reason.

The Second said, Because Faculties cannot be understood but by the
correspondenc they have to their objects; therefore to understand the Nature of
the Sense of Smelling, it is first requisite to understand the Nature of Odor,
and by what Medium it is carried to its Organ. Odor is a patible Quality,
arising from the temperament of siccity predominant above humidity; for though
many drugs, waters, essences, and liquors, in which humidity is necessarily
found, and siccity seldom, are very odoriferous, yet they borrow their smell
from the dry exhalation mingled with their humid Body; from which if the same
be separated, the humor remains inodorous. Nevertheless this exhalation is
not the Odor but the subject and vehicle of it; otherwise an Odor should be a
Substance, and not an Accident, as it is. It Is conveyed to its Organ sometimes
by species called Intentional, when it is remote from the same; or the Medium
is so disposed that it cannot alter its Substance; thus the species of the
Odor of a Worm hanging upon the hook so exquisitely penetrates the water, that
the fish though very remote instantly repairs to it; and many Animals scent
powder at two or three leagues distance. But when the Odor is present to the
Organ of Smelling, it has no need of species, with which the Senses have
nothing to do but so far as they serve to supply the absence of their Objects.
The Nose receives Odours by its two passages, and for this reason it has
somewhat a long shape; a substance partly boney for firmness sake; lest
closing together the passage should be stopped, but cartilaginous in the lower
part; for the more easy dilatation in breathing, smelling, and purging the
Brain, the three prime uses of the Nose. The true seat of Smelling are two
small sponges made of the anterior part of the Brain, passing through the
Cuneal Bone near the cavity of the Eyes, called the Mammillary Processes or
Productions; spirituous and vaporous, the better to receive Odours; and
nervous, to distinguish them; lying upon the Cribrous or spongy bone which is
full of small bones, lest the Brain might be hurt by smells if they were
carried directly and impetuously to it; which danger is avoided by their being
disunited and allayed by this transcolation; and these two Caruncles, like the
nibbles of Women's breasts, have alone, among all the parts of the Nose, a
proper figure, a certain sign for distinguishing the Organs of the Senses. For
the Brain cannot do this office, because its extreme humidity would diminish
the virtue of Odours.

The Third said, As the Nose, the instrument of Smelling, is placed in the
middle of all the rest; so this Sense is of a middle nature between them. For
it is more material then the Hearing and the sight, but more subtle then the
Touch and Taste; although it has a great affinity with this latter, by which
it perceives its object, namely, Odours, which are distinguished by help of
Sapours, and are divided according to their number, agreeable and disagreeable
being only its general differences. For there are as many particular
differences as several subjects. Moreover, Sapour and Odor are composed of the
same matter, and produced by the same heat; they are both qualities of food,
whose good and evil faculties are discerned by smell as well as by taste. Yet
they differ in this, that some Odours are not of food but of delight, as that
of Roses; with which kind of Odor Man alone is pleased, amongst all Animals,
who are not delighted with Odours further then they signify to them the
goodness of their food; that which is said of the Panther, that all other
Animals run after its smell, being accounted fabulous. They have also this
peculiar, that Odours come from an igneous and subtle siccity predominant over
humidity; whereas Sapours reside in humidity. Hence it is that flowers have
more smell then leaves, because they are made of the more tenuious parts of the
Plant; among Flowers, those that grow amidst bushes, and in other dry places,
are more odoriferous; and Roses smell sweeter about Noon when they are dried by
the heat of the Sun, then in the Morning when they are bedewed with the
humidity of the Night.

The Fourth said, Most Animals have a bad Odor, and Man the most imperfect
Smelling; partly, because Nature has thought fit to give this Sense in a more
exquisite degree to Animals that live by prey, as to the Dog and Vulture, (and
Man was to hunt otherwise then by the Nose) and, partly, by reason of the
situation of the Mammillary processes near the Brain, more cold, and moist, and
large, in Man then in any other creature. Whence it is, that Men know not the
differences of Odours as they do those of the other objects of the Senses. Yet
as there are Animals which are driven away by certain bad smells, Flies by that
of Brimstone, Serpents by that of Galbanum, and generally all by the steam of
the carcases of their own kind; so some Odours not only drive away Men, as the
fume of an Indian pepper, but are accounted mortal, not by reason of the smell,
but of the hurtful Body which it introduces into the Ventricles of the Brain.
As, on the contrary, there are Odours which recreate so much that they are
thought to nourish; for they who are conversant among the smells of meat eat
less; and the sole Odor of new Wine inebriates.

The Fifth said, Odor is a fumous exhalation excited by heat either internal
or external. Therefore Gold is inodorous, its perfect mixtion hindering it from
exhaling; and things chafed or heated have a stronger smell, because the heat
draws outward those subtle parts which cold incloses and keeps from
exexpanding themselves; and odoriferous are diminished in time through the
evaporation of their more subtle parts. So Wine, unless well stopped, loses
with its Odor its virtue and goodness, as if its strength consisted in its
smell; and Camphire exhales utterly if it be not kept close. And Perfumes have
a more agreeable smell a far off then near hand, because the subtiler parts are
scented at distance, and the grosser hard by.

II. Of Eloquence
Upon the Second Point, the First said, That if we cannot evince the Excellence
of Eloquence above all other Humane Actions, we must confess that we have no
Eloquence; for this is the golden chain which our ancient Gauls fastened to the
Tongue of their Hercules, and made him draw all his Auditors by the Ears.
Moreover, since it is the way to persuade, and persuasion is the way to do any
thing whatever, there is no power that can equal it. Which to prove by Examples
would require the transcription of all Histories. It has disarmed Anger and
Justice too a hundred times, obtained the Generalship to Demosthenes,
notwithstanding his Cowardice and inexperience in the matter of War; the
Consulship to Cicero, bent Caesar's heart for him, which the forces of the
Roman Empire could not bend, when he so ravished him as to make him let the
book fall which he held in his hands; so well can this Art of well speaking
master Bodies as well as Souls. Therefore Conquerours authorize their Cannon
shots with reasons, and employ so many Orators to justify their exploits, and
make their government acceptable; and the Romans, though they became masters of
all the world, never drew a sword out of the scabbard till they had first
charged the fault by their manifestoes upon those whom they declared their
Enemies. Which seems to be the only difference between regular wars and
pirates at Sea, or robbers on land. It Is hence also that the greatest
concussions of States, and revolutions of Monarchies, have proceeded from
Religion, which has also laid the foundation of some, bringing the Body into
subjection by persuading the Soul; (whereas, when open force subdues the
former, it loses the affection of the latter;) nor matters it whether the
Religion be true or false, provided the people be persuaded of it. For being
none are constrained to believe, as Theodosius the Emperor said, if the inward
part be not won, people pay nothing but countenances, like bad servants; and
Man is so governed by fancy that good seems bad to him if it please him not,
and bad good when he affects it. Indeed, all actions that a Man exercises by
constraint are of the Animal, but those which he does voluntarily are of the
Man, distinguished for this cause from beasts by Intellect and Will; the former
of which serving for a foundation to the latter, this Will is governed by
Reasons, as a Horse by a bridle. This is the true Magic, of which so many
Impostors falsely boast, whose admirable effects appear in all conditions,
sexes, and ages. Is any thing dearer to an old man then his Crowns? Yet
discourse entraps them, some under one pretext, some under another; and which
is most strange, such a one shall bereave him of his wealth, whilst he makes
show of increasing them. Is there any thing more precious to a Woman then her
Honor? yet insinuation oftentimes prevails upon her; we love nothing more
then life, and yet a well animated Oration will make people expose it to
apparent danger. In brief, there is no kind of profession and mystery, but
owes what it has most profitable to Eloquence. Preachers and Advocates lay the
main stress upon it. Physicians, who seem to have less need of it, acknowledge
its usefulness in their counsels, which were of small credit and authority
without it. It is wholly necessary to Merchants for their selling. Upon which
score, possibly, Mercury was made the Patron of Negotiators. For persuasion,
which is the end of it, needs not always an Oration complete in all its
members; the greatest pitch of an Orator is to contract himself according to
time, place, and persons. A General of an Army animates his Soldiers more with
three words, as he is going to charge the Enemy, then a Preacher does his
Auditors in a whole Lent. Even Gestures are sometimes eloquent, so the Curtesan
Phryne carried her lawsuit by discovering her fair bosom; as also did a
Captain by showing his scars, to their Judges who intended to condemn them.
Whereby it appears how great the power and extent of Eloquence is.

The Second said, Since some were so hardy, the last Conference, as by speaking
ill of Poets to disparage the language of the gods, let us examine that of men;
that Pallas may not complain of the same treatment that was showed to the
Muses. For not to strike the same string twice, the lasciviousness imputed to
them seems more justly to belong to Orators and Poets; since Meroury (the god
of thieves as well as of Eloquence) and not Apollo, was the messenger of the
amors of the gods. Now it is hard for the Disciples not to retain some thing of
their Master. Moreover, Socrates and Plato define Eloquence, the art of
deceiving or flattering; and this latter banishes Orators out of the excellent
Commonwealth which he took so much pains to contrive. But other real States
have done them more evil, driving them effectively out of their territories,
rightly judging, with Aeschylus, that nothing is more pernicious and
prejudicial then an affected language embellished with the graces of Eloquence;
which the more florid it is, the more poison it hides under its flowers, which
have nothing but appearance. Therefore the Romans, the wisest Politicians in
the world, drove them so often out of their Commonwealth; as during the
Consulship of Fannius Strabo, and Valerius Messala, when Cneus Domitius, and Q.
Licinius were Censors; and under the Emperor Domitian. And it is one of the
surest foundations of the Turkish Empire, and by which they have found most
advantage; their forbidding the having, by this means, instead of an Army of
talkers, good for nothing but to multiply noises and divisions, by disguising
the Truth, innumerable stout fellows of their hands, who have learned no other
lesson but Obedience: By which, from a small beginning they have subdued a
great part of the world, particularly Greece, which always made profession of
this talkativenesse. Yea, in Athens it self, the cradel of Eloquence, the
Orators were forbidden the Court, the Palace, and other public Assemblies,
because they perverted Right; and Timagoras was there condemned to death for
having made Complements to Darius, according to the mode of the Persians. The
ancient Republic of Crete, and that of Lacedaemon, (the School of Virtue) were
not unmindfull to provide against these Sophisters; the latter opposing their
design by the brevity of its Laconick style; and having banished Ctesiphon, for
boasting that he could discourse a whole day upon what ever subject were
propounded to him. What then would it have done to Demosthenes, who commonly
bragged that he could turn the balance of Justice on which side he pleased? Is
not Eloquence therefore more to be feared then the music of the Sirens, or the
potions of the inchantresse Circe, being able to involve innocence in
punishment, and procure rewards to crimes? Moreover, it is a Woman's Virtue to
talk. And therefore Caesar disdained this present which Nature had given him;
and few people value it but such as have nothing else to recommend them.
Volaterranus observed few persons both virtuous and eloquent; nor do we find
famous Orators in Macedon, which gave birth to Alexander, and so many other
great Captains. 'Twas with this Eloquence that Demosthenes incensed Philip
against his own City of Athens; that Cicero animated Marcus Antonius against
that of Rome; that of Cato was one of the causes that incited Caesar against
the liberty of his Country; and yet Cato hated this art of Oratory so much,
that he once caused audience to be denied to Carneades and his companions,
Critelaus and Diogenes, Ambassadors from Athens to Rome, upon no other reason,
but because they were too Eloquent. And, not to speak of the vanity of Orators,
a vice more incident to them then to Poets, (witness the boastings of Cicero)
their art is altogether unprofitable; since it serves only to paint and deck
the truth, which has no need of ornaments, and ought to be plain, pure,
simple, and without artifice. In a word, to represent truth adorned with
flowers of Rhetoric, is to lay Fucus upon a fair Complexion, to paint
Gilly-flowers and Anemonies, and to perfume Roses and Violets. But what may it
not falsify, since it disguises it self, covering its figures with the hard
words of Metonymy, Synecdoche, and other barbarismes, to make them admired by
the ignorant.

The Third said, That there being nothinb but is liable to be abused, both they
speak true who commend Eloquence, and they who decry it. When this faculty of
speaking well undertakes to make great things little, and the contrary, it
frustrates their wish who would have things themselves speak. Nor is there any
lover of eloquent discourses but prefers before elegant speaking the plainness
of a good counsel, when some serious matter is in debate, either touching
health, business, or the good of the Soul. And therefore I conclude, that
Eloquence is indeed more graceful, but simplicity and plainness more excellent
and desirable.

CONFERENCE LVII.
I. Of the Hearing. II. Of Harmony.

I. Of the Hearing.
THe Hearing is the Sense of Disciplines, the inlet of Faith, which the Apostle
says, comes by Hearing, the judge of sounds and their differences; the
cognition whereof is the more difficult, for that they are the least material
qualities of all; considering that they are neither the First, as the Tangible;
nor the Second, as Colors, Odours, and Sapours, depending upon the various
mixture of the first; but of another kind of qualities which have scarce any
thing of the grossnesse of matter. The little corporeity they have not
proceeding from that, but from the Air which enters with it into the Eear.
Nevertheless sound is not wholly spiritual, for it presupposes in the bodies
collided together, hardness, smoothness, and such other second qualities,
without which the collision of two bodies is not audible. But the chief cause
of the difficult cognition of sounds, is, that they are produced of nothing,
namely, of Local Motion, which (by the testimony of the Philosophers) is a pure
Nothing, Motion being rather a way to being, then a true being. Not that Motion
produces something that is real of it self, since Nothing cannot produce any
thing, but only by accident and by another. So by friction attenuating the
parts it generates heat, and by the meeting of two bodies it makes sound, which
lasts as long as its cause, and ceases when this fails; contrary to other
qualities, which have a fixed and permanent existence in Nature. For the
tingling of a bell which continues some while after the stroke, is not one
single sound, but many; the parts of the bell being put into a trembling motion
by the blow, and communicating the same to the parts of the Air contained in
the cavity of the bell, which Air is so long clash'd together till all the
insensible parts of the bell be returned to their first rest; and therefore the
laying of the hand upon it hinders this motion, and consequently stops the
sound. And it is for this reason that it resounds more when it hangs freely,
then when it is held in the hand; and some bells have been seen to fly in
pieces upon the application of a piece of Iron to them whilst they were
trembling. The cause whereof is this; if while all the parts of the bell
tremble, and equally move from their place, one part be checked, it becomes
immovable, and so not following the agitation of the rest is separated from
them.

The Second said, Though sound, (the object of the Hearing, containing under it
Voice and Speech) is oftentimes accompanied with three things, the body
striking, the body struck, and the Medium resounding; yet these three do not
always meet in all sort of sounds, as we see in that which is made by our
bellows, the noise of a Petar, Salt, Chestnuts, and other aerious and flatuous
bodies cast into the fire; because these flatuosities being rarifi'd require an
outlet, and therefore impetuously break forth out of their restraint; which
eruption striking the neighboring Air produces a sound. The same is seen also
in the Voice, which is formed by collision of the Air in the Lungs against the
Larynx, the palate and the teeth. So that the proximate cause of sound is not
the shock of two bodies, but the breaking of the Air when its motion is
hindered. A piece of cloth makes a noise in the tearing, (but not in the
cutting,) because of the sudden separation of the parts of the Air; which on
the other side, for fear of Vacuum, are impetuously carried toward the place
of their separation; and the wind whistles, by reason of the violent motion
which it causes in the Air; sometimes driving the same before it, sometimes
pressing and wracking it; or because it meets some other wind or body that
opposes its natural motion.

The Third said, A perfect sound cannot be made without the encountering of two
bodies, and Air between them; for want of which, there would be local motion,
but no sound in a Vacuum, and the motion of those great celestial orbs is not
audible. Now these bodies must be hard and solid, either of their own Nature,
as Copper and Silver, or by the union and construction of their parts, which
makes them act and resist as if they were solid; such are the Air and Water
agitated. Moreover, that this sound be perfect, it is requisite that the bodies
be large and smooth; for if they be rough and scabrous, the Air which is
compressed finds means to expand it self in the interstices of the higher
parts; if they be acute and pointed, they cut and divide, but do not break it.
So a needle striking the point of another needle makes no noise, because it
only cuts the Air, but does not compresse it. If these solid bodies be hollow
and dry, the sound is made the better; and yet more, if they be aerious. Hence,
among metals, Brass, Silver, and Gold, resound more then Lead and Iron, which
are of a terrene nature. Among Trees, the Sallow and the Fig Tree have a sound;
and the leaves of Laurel crackle in the fire, by reason of their aerious parts.
Lastly, the bodies must be friable, that is to say, divisible at the same time
into very small particles, as Air, Glass, and Ice; or in case they break not,
at least they must tremble in all their parts, as bells do. Therefore Water,
not being friable, by reason of its tenacious humidity which keeps the
particles together, cannot be the subject of sounds; that of running Water
being made by the occurse of the Air upon its surface, not in the Water it
self, in which no sound can be made although it may be somewhat confusedly
transmitted; as it is to fishes, whom the noise makes to abandon the shore.

The Fourth said, Hearing was given to Man, to satisfy his natural inclination
to understand the thoughts of his species by the utterance of words, which
would be useless to conversation, if they were not received by this faculty;
whose dignity appears chiefly in the structure of its Organ, the Ear, both
external and internal, which is destinated to the reception of sounds.
Therefore the Philosopher derides Alcmaeon for saying that Goats respire at the
ears. The external is Cartilaginous and tortuous, unmovable in man alone,
always open, on each side the head, to receive sounds from all parts, which are
carried upwards in an orbicular figure. The internal situate in the ( os
petrosum, or) bone of the Temples, has four passages, viz. the auditory meatus
closed with a membrane called the Drum, behind which is a cord fastened to the
stirrup, the anvil and hammer, small bones as dry and big in children as in old
men. 2. That which incloseth the natural and immovable Air, the principal
Organ of hearing. 3. The Labyrinth. 4. The Cochle or Shell-work. But the
passage which goes from the Ear to the Palate and the orifice of the Windpipe
is most remarkable; by which the inspired air does not only refresh the Lungs,
but also the natural implanted air in the ear. Hence arises that sympathy of
the Palate and the Ears; and to hear well, we sometimes hold our breath, for
fear of disordering the species of sounds; and those that gape or yawn, hear
little or not at all; because the vaporous spirit which causes oscitation so
puts up the drum of the ear, that it cannot well receive sounds; and for the
same reason they that yawn dare not pick their ears at that time for fear of
hurting the inflated Drum; which if it come to be touched, the yawning cease;
those that scratch their ears put themselves into a hawking or coughing. And
lastly, it is for this reason, that such as are born deaf are also dumb, because
of the straight connection of the auditory Nerve, being of the fifth
conjugation, with the seventh, which is at the root of the Tongue.

The Fifth said, Sounds are carried to the ear in the same manner as they are
produced; namely, by a fraction of the air adjoining, which has a sphere of
activity, and is like that which is caused in the water by casting a stone into
it; but without any intentional species: Otherwise sounds would be heard at the
same time, and in the same manner, by those that are near, and those that are
far off; in regard the intentional species being spiritual is carried in an
instant, being caused by a simple alteration which requires not the time
necessary to local motion whereby Hearing is performed, and by this means
distinguished from vision; in which at the same time the medium and the Organ
are both altered; whereas, in Hearing, the Organ is not altered till after the
medium. Hence it is, that the wind helps greatly to the carrying of sounds;
which would not be, if they were only intentional species; for visible things
are seen as well in a contrary wind as in a calm air; and that sounds seem
weaker a far off then near hand.

The Sixth said, Among the objects of the Senses sounds and odours have alone
had the honor to be dedicated to the Deity: Melody and Incense having always
been employed in Divine Service; either because the humane soul is most
delighted therewith; or for that either of them being somewise spiritual and
corporeal, God requires that we offer him both the body and the spirit; whereas
Demons abhor nothing more then Harmony and Perfumes, as ill suting to their
irregular and infected nature. And sounds have so great affinity with the soul,
that according to their cadence and their tones, they excite compassion,
cruelty, joy, sadness, courage, fear, lasciviousness and chastity; whence it
was said that Aegysthus could never debauch Clytemnestra till he had killed her
Musician. Because all our actions and inclinations depending upon our spirits,
they are modefi'd and made like to the sounds which they receive by the ear. So
that if the sounds be tremulous, grave, sharp, quick or flow, the spirits
become so too; and consequently the Muscles, which are instruments of voluntary
motion, having no action but by means of the spirits, they impress upon them,
and make them follow such cadence as they like. Hence it is, that hearing
others sing, we fall a singing too without thinking of it; with those that
whisper, we whisper too; with those that speak loud, we speak so also: that the
air of the Musician stirs our members to conform to it, and that our spirits
are displeased with bad cadences; as if the outward air had an absolute
dominion over our spirits.

II. Of Harmony.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That Harmony is taken for any proportion
and agreement, but chiefly for that of sounds, in which it is more perceptible;
and that even by the ignorant. Its invention is ascribed to Tubal the first
Smith, upon his observation of the various sounds that the strokes of his
Hammer made upon his Anvil; which Pythagoras also made use of to find out the
proportion of his musical numbers. Of which having elsewhere spoken, I shall
only add here, that Harmony presupposes many sounds, for one alone makes but a
Monotone, and two an unpleasing reciprocation: but six notes are requisite to
perfect Music, industriously comprised in the Hymn, VT queant LAxis REsonare
fibris MIra gestorum, etc. This harmony is either vocal or instrumental; the
former whereof having graces and variations inimitable by instruments far
surpasses the latter, but their mixture is most agreeable.

The Second said, Nature seems to have made a show of her goodliest effects to
our Senses, and concealed their causes from our knowledge. Musical harmony aims
at the instruction of men; that of man's body is the admirable artifice of the
Formative faculty, which Galen calls divine; but the harmony of the world puts
our curiosity most to a nonplus. It Is the cause why water, notwithstanding its
fluidity, gathers it self into a heap, to leave dry land for the habitation of
animals; and that the earth, which should settle about its center, by its equal
gravity, yet rises up in mountains. The air is altered by all sort of
qualities, that it may give a good one to the earth. The fire descends from its
sphere to be captivated in Furnaces for our use, and is imprisoned in cavities
of the earth to promote the generation of Metals. The Heavens move for the
benefit of inferior bodies, in a place where they might enjoy eternal rest.
It Is through this harmony that the water becomes thick at the bottom, and
contracts alliance with the earth, while its surface resolves into vapors; the
rudiments of air, whose highest region likewise approaches the nature of fire;
and this has somewhat of Ethereal, and the constitution of the Heavens on
which it borders and conjoyns with this inferior world. The cause of this
chain and connection is an universal virtue comprehended in the extent of each
being, besides the proper motive virtue destinated to content its appetite. The
necessity of this virtue is a certain evidence of its existence; for since
every thing conspires for the general good of the world, and withstands the
division of its parts, Nature must have allotted them a power which may guide
them to that end; now this power is not extrinsecal, since it resides in the
subject it self. Nor is it the motive virtue; for this and that have two
different objects and ends, namely, the public, and the particular good, which
are not always contained one in the other. Besides, 'twould be a manifest
contradiction, to say that by one and the same virtue things expose themselves
to the loss of their proper qualities for the public good, and keep them when
only their particular is concerned. Wherefore there is one general law, which
having authority to force all things to contract amities not sorting to their
inclination, is above that virtue, which leads things directly to their own
good: which is the cause of the excellent harmony observed in the whole world.

The Third said, Indeed Harmony is every where between the Creator and his
Creatures both spiritual and corporeal; in the Hierarchies of blessed Spirits
one with another, in the assistance of the motive Intelligences with their
orbs; between the great and the little world; in the latter of which the
Scripture sets forth to us a perpetual music of the blessed in the the
Empireal Heaven; Plato, a harmony proceeding from the motion of the Celestial
bodies. Daily experience makes us hear in the air a consort of winds; the Sea
beats a measure by its ebbing and flowing; the Birds of the air perform the
Cantus; the Beasts, the Base; the Fishes, the Tacet; Man, the Tenor; who again
in the structure of his body and soul is a perfect harmony. In the body, the
temperature of the humors is so harmonical, that their disproportion drives
away the soul, which Galen upon this account calls harmony. In the soul, so
long as Reason holds the sovereignty, and constrains the murmuring Appetite to
hold its base, there results from it a harmony delectable to God and Men. On
the contrary, if you would apprehend its discord, do but imagine the disorderly
uproar excited by choler, and the other passions get the mastery over Reason.
Yea man's whole life is either a perpetual harmony or discord. In Religion, when
one Head is acknowledged, and every one submits thereunto for Conscience sake,
and keeps his station; how beautiful are those Tabernacles of Sion, and how
agreeable is this Church to its Spouse, to those that behold it in this estate,
and to it self? On the contrary, in Schism and Heresy, when every one abounds
in his own sense, and will not depend upon any other, how unpleasing is this
division even to those that foment it? In the State, when a just Monarch well
counseled holds the Sovereignty; the Church, the Nobility, and the third
Estate, the other parts; nothing is impossible to him either within or without.
He may do every thing that he will, because he will do nothing but what is
just. On the contrary, represent to your self the horrible Tragedies of a
Faction revolted against its Prince, or of a furious Triumvirate, and you will
see the difference between harmony and discord; whereof the difference and
power is so notable, as to all our actions, that he shall speak truth who shall
establish it for the cause of all that is either pleasing to us, or
disagreeable. So the same materials of two buildings differently set together
will render one beautiful, the other deformed. Of two countenances composed of
the same parts, the proportion of the one will invite love, while there is
nothing but hatred and aversion for the other. Yea this Harmony extends its
jurisdiction even to things incorporeal. An injust action displeases though it
do not concern us; and the most peaceable man in the world can hardly forbear
to interess himself when he sees a great scoundrel outrage some poor little
child. The disproportion which appears in the attire of another offends us, as
when we see a Porter's wife better clothed then a Counselors; of which the
reason seems to me, that our soul being a harmony, is not pleased but with what
resembles it self.

The Fourth said, Effects, the surest evidences of their causes, so apparently
speak the power of Harmony, that Orpheus, by the relation of the Poets,
recovered his Euridice out of Hell by it. Timotheus made Alexander leave his
feast and betake himself to his Arms; but changing his tune, returned him again
to the Table. Orators made use of it to regulate their gestures and voices; and
at this day not only the harmonious sound of Organs serves to inflame our zeal,
but that of Bells is successfully employed to drive away the Demons of the air
when they raise tempests in it.

CONFERENCE LVIII.
I. Of the Sight. II. Of Painting.

I. Of the Sight.
AN ignorant Philosopher was he, who pulled out his eyes that he might the
better Philosophize; since, on the contrary, it is by the sight that we have
cognition of all the goodly objects of the world, the ornament and agreeable
variety of which seem purposely made to gratify this Sense; whose excellence
and privilege appears in that it is free from the condition requisite to all
the other Senses, viz. that their objects be at a moderate distance; for it
discerns as far as the Stars of the Firmament, knows more things then they
(there being nothing but has some light and color, which are its objects) and
that most exactly, distinguishing even their least differences; yea it has
this of divinity, that it acts in an instant, being no more confined to time
then place, and much more certain then any of the other Senses. And as if it
alone were left in the free enjoyment of its own rights, there is none besides
it that has the power to exercise or not exercise its function, as it lists;
the muscles of the eyelids serving to open or close the curtain when it
pleases, whereas all the rest are constrained to do their offices when their
objects are present. Moreover, man's noblest faculty, the Understanding, is
called the Eye of the Soul, because it performs the same, office to it that the
Eye does to the Body, which guides and governs. And therefore, in the dark,
which hinders the use of this sense, the most daring are not without some fear
which cannot proceed from the black color, as some hold, but from our being
destitute of our guide and conductor, which serves for a sentinel to us to
discover such things as are hurtful; for in the same darkness we are pretty
confident in case we be in the company of persons that can conduct us, and
supply the use of our own eyes.

The Second said, Were it not for custom which renders all things common, there
would be nothing so admired as the Eye, which, as small as it is, gives
reception to all corporeal things of what magnitude soever; yea every one is
represented there in its own natural proportion, though the species of an
Elephant be no bigger in mine Eye then that of a Fly; and nevertheless the
Senses judge of their objects by the species streaming from them. And the
unequal fabric of the eye representing a mirror, seems to argue that we do not
behold objects in their true magnitude, but very much smaller then they are.
For we see things so as they are received in the eye. But they are received
there as the visible species are in Looking-glasses, which if plain represent
the same in their true magnitude; if spherical, as the eye is, render them much
smaller. And nevertheless we see things in their just proportion. Whence it is
to be concluded that our Sight which is the most certain of all the Senses is
in a perpetual, yea a general error, which consequently is no longer an
error, since to err is to deviate from rule, which is a general law.
Moreover, this too is wonderful in the Sight; that all the other Organs make
several reports to the Senses; one accounts that hot which another judges cold
or tepid; one taste seems fresh to one which another thinks too salt; they are
of one opinion in odours and sounds, and these are of another; though their
Organs be rightly disposed. But that which appears black to one seems so
likewise to every body else. And if the Sight happen to be deceived, as when we
judge the Moon greater in the Horizon by reason of the vapors of the earth
then when she is in the Meridian; or when a straight stick seems crooked in the
water; the same eye which is deceived finds its own error by comparison of
other objects. Hence arises the doctrine of the Parallaxes, and the rules of
Optics, Catoptricks, and Dioptricks, which are practiced by the sight. So that
as he does not perfectly delire who knows that he is in a delirium, so the
sense cannot be said altogether faculty when it discerns its fault. Which the
other senses do not.

The Third said, The excellence of the Sight will be better understood by
considering its contrary, Blindness, and the misery of the Blind; their life
being an image of death, whilst they pass it in perpetual darkness. Therefore
the Civilians exclude them from public Offices; because, say they, they cannot
perceive, nor consequently esteem the badges, and ensigns of their Magistracy.
Moreover, the Egyptians thought nothing fitter to represent their Deity then
the figure of the Eye, which the Stoics call a god, others a divine member,
and the Luminary of the little World; Theophrastus, Beauty, because it resides
principally in the Eyes, the most charming part of a handsome face. Their
color, twinkling, fixedness, and other dispositions serve the Physiognomists
for certain indications of the inclinations of the soul, which all antiquity
believed to have its seat in the eyes; in which you read pride, humility,
anger, mildness, joy, sadness, love, hatred, and the other humane affections.
And as the inclinations and actions of men are more various then those of other
creatures, so their eyes alone are variously colored; whereas the eyes of all
beasts of the same species are alike. Yea the eyes are no less eloquent then
the tongue, since they express our conceptions by a dumb but very emphatical
language; and a twinkle of the eye many times moves more to obedience then
speech. Plato being unable to conceive the admirable effects of the Sight
without somewhat of divinity, believed there was a celestial light in the eye,
which issuing forth to receive the outward light, brought the same to the soul
to be judged of; which nevertheless we perceive not in the dark, because then
the internal streaming forth into the obscure air, which is unlike to it self,
is altered and corrupted by it. Indeed, if it be true that there is a natural
implanted sound in the ear, why may there not be a natural light in the eye?
considering too that the Organs ought to have a similitude and agreement with
their objects. And hence it is that the eyes sometimes flash like lightning in
the night, as Cardan says his did; and Suetonious relates the same of
Tiberius; and that those that are in a Phrensy imagine that they see lightning.
For it seems to me more rational to refer this Phenomenon to the lucid and
igneous spirits of the sight, which being unable to penetrate the crystalline
or vitreous humor by reason of some gross vapors, reflect back into the eye,
and make those flashes; then to the smoothness of the eye, or to attrition of
the spirits, or, as Galen holds, to an exhalation caused by the blood which is
carried to the head; though this latter may sometimes be a joint cause.

The Third said, The Eye is composed of six Muscles, as many Tunicles, three
Humors, two pair of Nerves, and abundance of small Veins and Arteries: its
object is every thing that is visible, as color, light and splendour; light, in
the Celestial Bodies, wherein the object and the medium are the same thing,
since the light of the Sun is seen by it self; color, in inferior bodies,
where the object and the medium are two, for color cannot be seen without
light; splendour, in the scales of Fishes, rotten wood, the eyes of some
animals, Gloe-worms and the like; for it is different from their natural
color. Its Organ is the Eye, so regarded by Nature that she has fortified it
on all sides for its safety, with the bone of the Forehead, the Eyebrows, the
Eyelids, the hair thereof, the Nose, the rising of the Cheeks, and the Hands
to ward off outward injuries; and if Galen may be believed, the Brain it self
(the noblest part of the body) was made only for the eyes; whence Anaxagoras
conceived that men were created only to see or contemplate. The Eyes are dearer
to us then any other part; because, says Aristotle, they are the instruments
of most exact knowledge, and so serve not only for the body but the soul, whose
food is the knowledge which the eye supplies, called for this reason the Sense
of Invention, as the Ear is that of discipline. It Is of an aqueous nature,
because it was requisite that it should be diaphanous, to receive the visible
species and light; for if it had been of a terrestrial matter, it would have
been opake and dark; if aerious, or igneous, it could not have long retained
the species; air and fire being thin diaphanous bodies which receive well but
retain not; for though the air be full of the species of objects which move
through it from all parts, yet they are not visible in it by reason of its
rarity. It was fit therefore that the Eye should be of a pellucid and dense
substance, that it might both receive and retain the visible species; which
kind of substance is proper to water, as appears by the images which it
represents. Moreover, the Eye being near, and conjoined to the Brain by the
Nerves of the first and second conjugation, and to the membranes thereof by its
Tunicles, could not be of an igneous nature perfectly contrary to that of the
Brain, as Plato held it to be because of its agility, lucidity and orbicular
figure, like that of fire (as he said) and because the Eye is never tense or
stiff as all the other parts; all which he conceived could not be but from
fire. For the Eyes agility or nimbleness of motion is from its Muscles and its
lubricity; its brightness, from the external light; its round figure rather
denotes water, whose least particles are so, then fire whose figure is
pyramidal. It Is never stiff, because of the fat wherewith it is stuffed, and
because it is destitute of flesh.

II. Of Painting.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That Painting is a sort of writing, by
which many times that is expressed which cannot be spoken; witness the story of
Progne and Philomel: and as the latter represents things by letters, so does
the former by their natural figure; so perfectly that it is understood by the
most ignorant; because it exhibits, in their proper color, bigness,
proportion, and other natural accidents: whereas Writing makes use of
characters and figures which have no affinity with the things denoted by them,
but only signify the same by the institution of men, who therefore differ in
Writing, but all agree in painting: Both the one and the other (like all Arts
whose scope is imitation, as Oratory, Statuary, Sculpture, Architecture, and
many others) depend upon the strength of the Imagination; and that Painter
succeeds bests who has in his mind the most perfect idea of his work. And
because a Painter is to imitate every thing, it is required to his being a
Master that he be ignorant of nothing; particularly he must know both the
natural and artificial proportions and agreements of things with their several
modes and uses. And where there are three ways of representing; the first in
surfaces, by flat painting; the other in bodies themselves, which belongs to
Statuary and the Plastic Art; the third between both, as Graving and Carving:
Painting is the most difficult, and (consequently) the most noble. For it must
so deceive the sight, as to make cavities, folds, and bosses appear in a flat
surface by the help of shadows; which although a mere nothing, because but a
privation of light, yet they gave all the gracefulness and value to Pictures.
For the way of painting without shadows used in China being nothing but a
simple delineation without hatchment, as it is very excellent so it is exceeding
rare; and being not used amongst us cannot come into comparison with the rest.
Whereas Sculpture and Statuary consisting only in paring away the overplus of
matter, or, if the matter be fusible, in casting it into a mould, made from the
original (as the moulds of Plaster are from the faces of persons newly
deceased) need less industry.

The Second said, Although Painting be sensible and visible* yet it belongs to
very few persons to judge well of it; witness Alexander, who going to see
Appelles, and offering to talk concerning Painting, he spoke so ill that the
Apprentices of that Artist could not forbear laughing. Indeed Painting is one
of the noblest parts of the Mechanics, and ought as well to be ranked amongst
the Mathematics as Astronomy. For if the reason of the Celestial motions gave
cause for accounting this Science amongst the Mathematics, more justly may the
reason of the motions and proportions of man's body, the object of Painting,
more admirable and of which more certain and real knowledge may be had then of
those remote bodies, deserves to be of that rank; considering that it makes use
of the same Mathematical Rules. Proportions, whose Rules are so infallible that
seven excellent Statuaries very distant one from the other, being employed to
make a brazen Colossus, performed their tasks by the precepts of their Art; and
the parts which each of them made severally being put together represented a
well proportioned man. According to which proportion a man's body must be eight
lengths of his head; from the less corner of the eye to the tip of the Ear is
to be twice the length of the Eye; the Feet and Hands stretched forth, equally
distant from the Navil; and such other remarks.

The Third said, The reason of the measures and proportions observed in
Painting consists principally in four points, viz. in the form and figure of
the thing represented, which is taken from the visual rays; in the shadow,
which is to be taken from the rays of light; in color, which is to imitate the
natural; and in the handsome posture or situation of the thing painted. For
Painting is the imitation of the affections of bodies, with reference to the
light, made upon a solid Plane. Hence a face is otherwise represented under the
water then bare, distant then near, in the Sunshine then in the shadow, by
Candlelight, or Moonlight. And though the Painter represents also the
dispositions of the soul, as anger or sadness, yet he does it always by the
features and qualities of the body.

The Fourth said, They who blame Painting and Statuary, because they represent
unfitting objects, and gave occasion to the Idolatry of antiquity, may as
justly blame beauty because it is sometimes the occasion of sinning. Painting
has this preeminence above all Arts, that it imitates God more perfectly then
they; for God was the first Painter when he made man, the goodliest piece of
the world, after his own image and likeness; and all the blessed spirits are
but contracted copies of so perfect an original. It Is that which frees the body
from the tomb, and, like a second table after shipwreck, preserves the memory
of virtuous men, renders present those who are absent, and makes almost as
strong impressions upon our Soul as the thing it self; witness the friendships
of the greatest personages of the world contracted by its means. And as if the
desire of pourtraying it self were natural to all things, there is no body but
incessantly produces its own image; which flies and wanders in the Air, till it
meet with some solid and smooth body whereon to represent it self; as we see in
Looking-glasses, and polished marble, where the images are much more exact then
those which Art draws with a pencil, yea, then their own originals, of whose
corporeal matter they are wholly divested. And (as the beginning of all Arts
are rude) this of Painting is attributed to the Daughter of Belus, who
observing her Fathers shadow upon a wall, delineated it with a coal. For
Pourtraiture, invented by Philocles the Egyptian, is ancienter then Painting,
invented either by Gyges the Lydian in Egypt, according to Pliny; or by
Pyrhus, Cousin to Daedalus, according to Aristotle.

The Fifth said, That in Painting, as in other disciplines, Ignorance of the
principles is the cause that so few succeed well in it. These principles are
the methodical proportion of Man's Body, Perspective, the reason of shadows,
Natural Colors, Designing, and History, all which must be found in a good
Piece; and the defect of some of them (as it frequently happens) causes us to
wonder, (though we know not the reason) that there is commonly something in all
draughts that does not satisfy our Minds. For oftentimes when all the rest is
good, Perspective has not been well observed, or the Design is naught, or the
History ill followed. But as things are the more to be esteemed which are the
most simple, so there is more of wonder in Painting to the life with a coal,
(as Appelles did before Ptolomy, to denote a person to him whom he could not
name) then with colors, the least part of Painting, which consists properly
only in proportion; and this being the most divine action of Understanding,
it is no wonder if there be so few good Painters. For they are mistaken who
place the excellence of painting in the smallness of the strokes; because they
fancy that Appelles was discovered to Protogenes by having made a smaller line
then he. For, on the contrary, the most excellent strokes of Masters are many
times the grossest; and that this proportion may be exact, it must imitate not
only particular subjects, but generally the species of every thing. Which
Michel Caravague neglecting to do about 90. years since, and instead of
following Albert Durer's excellent Rules, addicting himself to draw only after
the life, has lead the way to all his successors, who care not for his Rules,
but give themselves only to imitation; and this is the cause of the defects of
painting at this day.

CONFERENCE LIX.
I. Of Light. II. Of Age.

I. Of Light.
I Conceive (with a learned Physician of the most worthy Chancellor that France
ever had, in his Treatise of this subject) that Light is of two sorts; one
radical and essential, which is found perfectly in the Stars, the fire, and
some other subjects, but imperfectly in colored bodies, because Color is a
species of Light; The other secondary and derivative, which is found in bodies
illuminated by the Light. Both are made in Transparent Bodies; those of the
Stars, in the Heaven, and that of flame and bodies ignited in the fire;
whiteness, in the Air; and blackness, in the Water. But these transparent
bodies must be condensed, that those Lights and Colors may appear; and
therefore the principle of Light is in transparence alone, whereof neither
purity, rarity, tenuity, nor equality of surfaces, are the causes; but they all
proceed from the quantity of matter; some bodies having more matter then
others, not by rarity alone, or local extension, but by formal extension, or
internal quantity; and consequently, that a little matter under a great
internal quantity, is the principle cause of tenuity, rarity, and transparence,
to which the evenness of surfaces is also requisite in gross bodies. So that
Light consists in a proportion between the quantity and the matter of its
subject; and Light is great when the matter is little under a great quantity,
as in the Heavens; on the contrary, the body is dark, when a very small
quantity is joined to a great deal of matter; as is seen in the Earth. To prove
this, you must observe that all simple bodies are luminous, excepting the
Earth, which is opake; and we find Light in sundry animated bodies, as in the
Eyes of Cats, and of those Indian Snailes which shine like torches, and in our
Gloe-wormes, whose Light proceeds from their Spirits; which being of a middle
nature between the Body and the Soul, are the least material thing in the
world. Whence it follows that Light is a form with the most of essence amongst
sensible forms, as obscurity has the least.

The Second said, The wonder of Marsilius Ficinus was with reason, how 'twas
possible that nothing should be so obscure as Light. For if Transparence be the
subject of it, why does Crystal heated red hot in the fire come forth more
luminous, and less transparent then it was? The same may be said of Rarity; for
we see that Air and Aqua Vitae are well rarified by the fire which inflames
them, but cease to be transparent as soon as they are made more rare and
luminous; which is an evident sign that rarity and transparence are not causes,
nor yet conditions of Light. So the whole remainder of Heaven is lucid; but
only the less rare parts, and such as you might call vapors in respect of the
pure Air. And the light which proceeds from the Sun, the most luminous of all
those celestial bodies, would never be visible, but be deprived of all its
effects which are heating and enlightening, if it were not reflected by some
solid body. Then it not only appears, but exerts its activity. And if things
be produced by the same causes which preserve and multiply them, the solidity
of burning mirrors made of Steel, the hardest of all metals, which make the
Sunbeams do more then their own nature empowers them to, shows sufficiently
that their Light cannot arise from a rare and diaphanous cause. Nor may the
Light of rotten wood be assigned to its rarity alone, since many other bodies
of greater rarity shine not at all; nor that of Gloe-worms and Cats Eyes to
their spirits, since the flesh of some animals shines after their death; as
it is affirmed of Oxen, that have frequently eaten a sort of Moon-wort; and not
only the scales of diverse fishes shine after separation from their bodies, but
sparkles of fire issue from the hair of some persons in great droughts,
whereunto the spirits contribute nothing. Which would persuade me to believe,
that Light is a Form, to the introduction whereof several conditions are
requisite, according to the diversity of subjects; just as we see the Souls of
some irrational creatures need great dispositions for their reception, a Brain,
a Heart, and a Liver, with their dependances; whereas others, as Insects,
require less, and are contented with something that may supply this defect;
some are generated in an instant, without any apparent preparation, as Frogs in
a summer shower; and therefore to assign the cause of Light, is to seek the
reason of Forms, which is unknown to us. Which similitude the vulgar speech
confirms; for the people say, The Candle is dead when it is extinguished,
presupposing that it had life before; as an Animal has so long as its form is
conjoined with its body. Moreover, Fire has a Local Motion (as Animals have)
to obtain its food.

The Third said, Light is a substance; for it was created by God; but it is a
Sixth Essence, more subtle then that of Heaven, which is called a Quintessence
in respect of the Four Elements. A substance which subsisted before the Sun,
having been created three days before it; and nothing hinders but it may be
communicated in a moment from Heaven to Earth, since the intentional species of
visible things is so. Indeed, whereunto shall we attribute the effect of Light,
which heats at distance, and blinds being too great, which colors and gives
ornament to the Universe, if it be not a substance? And the Penetration of
Dimension, objected hereunto, is salv'd by saying that it has no more place
here, then when an Iron is red hot with the Fire, which yet none will affirm to
be an accident; and nevertheless it enters into the whole substance of the
Iron, and Light with it; for it is transparent and luminous at its center when
it is thoroughly heated in the Fire.

The Fourth said, The excellence of Light appears, in that nothing has greater
resemblance with the Deity. Which made some Heathen Philosophers say, that
Light is Gods Body, and Truth his Soul. Moreover, the Scripture teaches us,
that God dwells in inaccessible Light. And the blessed Spirits are styled
Angels of Light, as Demons Spirits of darkness. Light enlivens and animates
all things, it rejoices all Creatures by its presence; Birds begin to sing, and
even flowers to display their beauties at its arrival. And because Nothing
gives what it has not, therefore some have conceived, that Light, the
enlivener of all the world, is it self indu'd with life, and that it is the
Universal Spirit, and the Soul of the whole world. Whence Plato, in his
timaeus, brings no other argument to prove that Fire is an Animal, but that it
is luminous. And, in the sixth Book of his Commonwealth, he makes the Sun (who
is the known Father of all living things) the son of Light; without which
Pythagoras forbad to do any thing. Moreover, it has no contrary; Darkness
being opposed to it only privatively. For its being is so excellent that
Nature found not her self so able to make any thing that might be equaled with
it, that might alter and corrupt it, as the nature of Contraries require;
whereas all Qualities have each their particular enemy. And it is upon this very
reason that Light acts in an instant; because having no contrary quality to
expel from its subject, it needs no time or successive motion, which is
necessary to other qualities, as to heat, to warm cold water.

The Fifth said, Light is a real form produced in the medium by a luminous
body; Aristotle calls it the act of the Perspicuum as it is Perspicuum. This
Form is accidental, and falls under the head of Patible Qualities, because it is
sensible by it self, which is the property of accidents alone; (whereas
substance is not sensible, (that is, falls not under the perception of sense)
but by means of accidents;) and as it is the principle of action, which belongs
only to a Quality. For it cannot be a corporeal substance, and Democritus and
Epicurus conceived, saying, that Light is an Emanation of particles, or little
bodies from a lucid body; or as they who make it a species of fire, which they
divide into That which burns and shines; That which burns and shines not, and
That which shines but burns not, which is this Light. For no natural body is
moved in an instant, nor in all sorts of places, as Light is; but they have all
a certain difference of position or tendency, some toward the center, others
toward the circumference, and others circularly.

The Sixth said, It Is true, Light is not of the nature of our sublunary bodies,
for it is not generated and corrupted as they are. It is not generated, since
generation is effected by corruption of one form, and introduction of another.
But we have instances of incorruptible Light even here below; as that in the
Temple of Venus, which could not be extinguished nor consumed, though neither
oil nor wick were put to it; and that other found in a Sepulcher where it had
burned for fifteen hundred years, but as soon as it took Air went out. And
indeed the subtilety and activity of Fire is such, that it may be reasonably
conceived to attract the sulphurous vapors for its subsistence, which are in
all parts of the Air, but especially in Mines, whose various qualities produce
the diversity of subterraneal fires, as to their lasting continuance, and
interval; which some compare to the intermitting fevers excited in our bodies
by a praeternatural heat.

II. Of Age.
Of the Second Point it was said, That Age is the measure of the Natural
Changes whereunto Man is subject by the principles of his being, which are
various according to every ones particular constitution; some being puberes,
having a beard, or gray hairs, or such other tokens, sooner then others,
according to the diversity of their first conformation: Whence arises that of
their division. Aristotle, following Hippocrates, divides them into Youth,
Middle Age, and Old Age; or according to Galen, into Infancy or Childhood,
vigor, or Manhood, or old age; or according to most, they are divided into
Adolescence, Youth, the Age of Consistence, and Old Age. Adolescence
comprehends Infancy, which reaches to the seventh year; Puerility, which
reaches to the fourteenth year; Puberty, which reaches to the eighteenth; and
that which is called by the general name, Adolescence, reaching to the five and
twentieth; Youth, which is the flower of Age, is reckoned from twenty five to
thirty three years of age; Virile, and Consistent Age, from thirty five to
forty eight, where Old Age begins, which is either green, middle, or decrepit.
These Four Ages are the Four Wheels of our Life, whose mutations they denote;
the First, being nearest the original, hot and moist, symbolizing with the
blood; the Second, hot and dry, with Choler; the Third, cold and dry, with
melancholy; the Fourth, cold and moist, with Phlegm, which being contrary to
the radical humidity leads to death. Now if it be true (that they say) that
life is a punishment, and an Abridgement of miseries, Old Age, as being nearest
the haven and the end of infelicities, is the most desirable. Moreover, being
the most perfect by its experiences, and alone capable to judge of the
goodness of Ages, it is fit we refer our selves to the goodness of its
judgment, as well in this point as in all others.

The Second said, Since to live is to act, the most perfect and delightful of
all the Ages of life is that in which the functions of body and mind (whereof
we consist) are best exercised; as they are in Youth (which alone seems to
dispute pre-eminence with Old Age) not only by reason of the bodily health and
vigor which it possesses in perfection, and which supplies Spirits and Courage
for brave deeds, whereof that declining Age (which is it self a necessary and
incurable malady) is incapable; but also in regard of the actions of the mind
which is far more lively, inventive, and industrious in young persons then in
old, whose wit wears out, grows worse with the body; whence came that so true
Proverb, That old men are twice children. For it is a disparagement to the
original of wisdom, to deduce it from infirmity, to name that ripe which is
rotten, and to believe that good counsels can come only from the defect of
natural heat, since according to his judgment who has best described wisdom,
old age causes as many wrinkles in the mind as in the face; and we see no souls
but as they grow old smell sour and musty, and acquire abundance of vices and
evil habits, of which Covetousness alone inseparable from old age (which shows
its weakness of judgment, to scrape together with infinite travel what must
shortly be forsaken) is not less hurtful to the State then all the
irregularities of youth. Now if the supreme good be in the Sciences, then the
young men must infallibly carry the cause; since sharpness of wit, strength of
fancy, and goodness of memory, (of which old men are wholly destitute) and
ability to undergo the tediousness of Lucubration, are requisite to their
acquisition. If it consists in a secret complacency which we receive from the
exercise of virtuous actions, then young men, who, according to Chancellor
Bacon, excel in morality, will carry it from old men; it being certain that the
best actions of life are performed between twenty and thirty years of age, or
thereabouts, which was the age at which Adam was created in Paradise; as our
Lord accomplished the mystery of our Redemption at the age of 33 years, which
shall also be the age at which the blessed shall rise up to glory, when every
one shall enjoy a perfect youth (such as given to the Angels) and put off old
age, which being not much different from death, may (as well as that) be called
the wages of sin; since if our first Parent had persisted in the state of
Innocence, we should have possessed the glory of perpetual undeclining Youth.
Moreover, it is at this Age that the greatest personages have manifested
themselves; we have seen but few old Conquerors, and if there be any, he has
this of Alexander, that he aspires to the conquest of another world, not having
long to live in this. Wherefore in stead of pretending any advantage over the
other ages, old men should rather be contented that people do not use them as
those of Cea and the Massagetes, who knocked them on the head, or the ancient
Romans who cast them headlong from a Bridge into Tiber, accounting it an act
of piety to deliver them from life, whose length was displeasing to the
Patriarchs; the Scripture saying, that they died full of days.

The Third said, That the innocence of Infants should make us desire their age;
considering that our Lord requires that we be like them, if we would enter into
his Kingdom; and the Word of God speaks to us as we do to children. Moreover,
since Nature could not perpetuate infancy, she has found no sweeter Anodyne to
the miseries and sadnesses of old people then the sight of children, (whom they
extremely love) and then the memory of things done or learned in their nonage;
which the less distant it is from its source, the Deity, the more it partakes
thereof.

The Fourth said, Youth has too many extravagancies, to be accounted happy;
nor can Childhood and Old Age deserve that title, since 'twould be contrary to
the order of nature if the extremes contained more perfection then that which
is in the middle, where she has established the virtue of all things. For as
for Childhood, its weakness sufficiently shows that it has not wherewith to
content it self, since it needs the help of others, and is an object of pity, a
passion that never arises but from misery. There Is no commendation in its
innocence, which depends upon impotence, and the imperfection of the souls
operations; and they as much want the will and power to do well as the
intention and means to do ill. But true Innocence consists in the action of
difficult good. If Infancy has no apprehension of the future, it receives the
present evil with much more pain, and shows it self as sensible to the least
displeasures, as incapable of consolation and prudence to avoid them; if it
wants fear (though indeed every thing terrifies it) the hope of good to come
never anticipates and prolongs its enjoyment. In a word, he cannot be happy who
has not the knowledge of his happiness, which Children cannot have while they
want the use of Reason, which is peculiar to Man. Old Age, which is a second
Childhood (and the more to be disliked in that it always grows worse) partakes
all the defects of the first age, and has this besides, that the desires
awakened by the remembrance of passed conrentments are constantly jarring with
his impotence; and the ardency of getting and possessing has a perpetual
contract with the necessity of forsaking and losing; pains and aches, the
forerunners of death, daily attempt his patience, and there is no hope of other
cure but the extremity of all evils, not-being. Infancy therefore is like the
Spring, which has only flowers, and expects the fruits afterward; it is an age
of hope, without enjoyment; Youth has only Summer fruits, of little lasting;
Old Age is a Winter, without either flowers, or fruits, has nothing but
present evils in possession, is to fear all, and to lose all. But Virility or
Manhood holds the middle between them both, and resembles Autumn, denoted by
the horn of Plenty, possesses the happiness of life, enjoys the present goods,
and by hope anticipates those to come; the soul in this age commonly
corresponds with the body; its faculties make an agreeable symphonie with the
actions hereof, and the sweet union of a reciprocal complacency. On the
contrary, in childhood the soul seems not yet well tuned to the body; in
adolescence it always jars with the appetites of the Senses; and in old age it
altogether disagrees with it self, and by a sudden departure endeavors to have
its part separately.

CONFERENCE LX.
I. Of Quintessence. II. Which is the most in esteem, Knowledge or Virtue.

I. Of Quintessence.
THe mind of man, as it is the purer part of him, so it is always pleased with
that which is most pure. In conversation it loves the most refined, and prefers
simplicity, which is most pure, above the windings and double-dealings of
deceivers. Amongst Metals it prefers Gold and Silver, which are the purest,
above Lead, Iron, and other imperfect and course Minerals. In food, Physic and
the stomach of the diseased choose that which is most freed from its gross and
unprofitable parts. Among sounds, the most subtle are the most charming. Among
artificial things, we find more sprightliness in the gracefulness of small
works then in others. In the Sciences, the more subtle a reason is, the more
it is applauded. But being health is the greatest, yea the only true good, being
the foundation of all the rest; and sickness the greatest, yea the only real
evil of our life; therefore our minds have herein most sought after subtilety,
especially to subtilize aliments and medicaments; not but that there may be a
quintessence as well drawn from other things, but it would not be so useful.
Now it is to be observed that this word is taken either generally for any body
depurated from its more course matter, as Spirits, Waters, and Oils; excluding
Magisteries which retain the entire substance of the bodies from whence they
are taken, only rendered more active by its subtilization: or else it is taken
properly; and in this acception Quintessence is some thing different from all
this, and is compared to the soul which informs the body.

The Second said, That in every compound body there is a mixture of substance,
besides that of qualities; whence arise the occult properties and forms of
things, which is their fifth Essence: it is no Body, for it takes not up place;
nor yet a Spirit, since it is found also in inanimate bodies; but some thing of
a middle nature between both, and neither one nor the other. Of which kind we
want not examples in Nature; Shadow, the Image in a Glass, yea all intentional
species, are neither body nor spirit. Now that it takes not up place, may be
proved; because a bottle of Wine exposed unstop'd to the air, is not diminished
in its quantity, yet lofes its taste, smell, and other qualities; by which
change it becomes another thing from what it was before; an evidence that it
has lost its form, which is nothing else but the Quintessence we speak of; and
should another body receive the same it would have the qualities the Wine lost,
which after separation of them is no more Wine then the carcass of a man is a
man after his soul is departed. Moreover, that which nourishes in food is not a
body, but the form or quintessence of it; since by the observation of the most
Inquisitive, it is found that the excrements of all the concoctions equal the
aliments both in weight and quantity, as the Urine of Drunkards is commonly as
much as the Wine they have drunk, and Mineral waters are voided in the same
quantity that they were taken. This fifth Essence is found every where, in the
Elements and in compound bodies. In those it is the purest of the Element
impregnated with the Universal Spirit; in these it is likewise the purest part
of the compound animated by the same Spirit.

The Third said, There is no other Quintessence but the Heaven in comparison of
the Elements; in the mixtion whereof, the Heaven concurs as an universal Agent,
whose influence (which is the soul of the World) determining the matter informs
and renders it active; thus the Stars produce Metals even in the center of the
Earth. Hence the world Heaven is taken by Chemists for Quintessence, because of
the simplicity and activity common both to the one and the other. But, because
it cannot fall under the cognizance of our Senses, in regard of its ethereal
nature, the most searching Naturalists give its name to the most subtle
extracts, especially such as are made by fire; although the same be not
eternal, as Quintessence ought to be, but only of long duration.

The Fourth said, It Is the humor of unsettled heads, instead of cultivating the
precepts of antiquity, to go about to fabricate new; and hence comes the
contemplation and the extraction of Quintessences. For (besides that it is not
certain that what is drawn out of a Plant was there before; it being probable
that the action of the fire may have introduced it in part, or in whole, into
the compositum) this Quintessence has not the conditions requisite to merit
that name, because it has both first and second qualities; and consequently is
not only corporeal, but also corruptible. And if it were incorruptible, it
would be wholly unprofitable, yea hurtful to man's body, since it could not be
changed or altered by it, and none but poisons are such. For Medicaments and
aliments are altered by our nature. But however, the Empyrema or Adustion which
these Quintessences commonly acquire in the fire renders their activity too
great and disproportionate to our temper: Which is the cause that things
already excessive in quality, as Salt and Vitriol* are very hurtful being made
into Quintessences; because there is no more proportion between them and us.
And therefore I am of the judgment of the Vulgar, who never speak of those
drawers of Quintessences but with contempt, considering that they make
profession of a thing which is not; and which if there were any such, would be
either unprofitable or hurtful.

The Fifth said, That the Chemical Quintessence is an ethereal, celestial, and
most subtle substance, composed of the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury of bodies
dissolved, spoiled of all their elementary qualities, corruptible and mortal,
united to a spiritual body, or corporeal spirit, which is the medium and bond
uniting bodies and spirits in nature; and called by some, for its rarity,
Elixir; for its wonderful use in preserving the health of man's body, the
Sovereign Medicine by which they hold that youth may be restored, and all sorts
of diseases cured; it not being requisite in its action that it be altered by
our natural heat, which, on the contrary, it changes and perfectionates, taking
the part of nature, as all poisons destroy it. And it is certain that since
there are bodies which are barely altered by our nature, as aliments; others,
which are altered by it, but reciprocally alter it, as medicaments; others
which destroy it without being altered by it; so there is a fourth sort which
preserves it without being altered by it, which is the Quintessence, thoroughly
separated from the four Elements, yea from every thing that enters into the
composition; as is seen in Treacle, whose virtue proceeds from some body which
is not any of all the ingredients, but results from them all together after
convenient fermentation. And, possibly, they who blame this curious inquisition
do it to decline the pains, or because they understand it not; as it is said the
Fox that wanted a tail counseled all his fellows to cut off theirs.

The Sixth said, Being all the Chemical Principles are resolved into our four
Elements, their Quintessence which is compounded thereof will be nothing else
but these Elements more pure and refined, and consequently no more a
Quintessence then all mixts are in respect of the Elements whereof they
consist. For a Quintessence must be a simple body, not any of the four
Elements, much less compounded of them; and Heaven alone is such; whatever
certain Philosophers have said, some holding it to be only a continuation of
the air; others, that it is of an igneous nature, because its denser parts
appear such, and its name Ether signifies Fire; some, that it is a fluid and
aqueous substance; others, on the contrary, a pure and solid earth. For Heaven
has a simple, to wit, a circular motion, which, as the most perfect of all,
ought to belong to the most noble of all bodies; and this circular motion
belongs not to any of the Elements, since each of them moves in a direct line;
two from the Center, and two others toward the Center. But a simple body
cannot have two motions: it follows therefore that Heaven has a motion
different from that of the four Elements; since motion, particularly local, the
first and commonest of all is an effect of the nature of every thing which is
the principle of motion. Moreover, Heaven alone is exempt from all elementary
and corporeal qualities. It Is neither heavy nor light, because it neither moves
toward the Center nor the circumference, but about the Center. It Is neither
generated nor corrupted, because it has no contrary. And for this reason it
has neither augmentation nor diminution, inasmuch as these are species of
generation and corruption. It Is not any way altered, since alteration is caused
by the action of some contrary. Lastly, it cannot enter into any composition;
and, consequently, there is indeed a Quintessence, but it is not in sublunary
bodies.

II. Which is most in esteem Knowledge or Virtue.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That it is first requisite to remove the
equivocation of those who comprehend Knowledge under Virtue; since by the word
Virtuous we understand, here, not a Virtuoso, but a good man; who though he
deserves to be more, yet is always less esteemed then a knowing or learned man:
because every one esteems that most which has most show and price. Now a
virtuous man is not only destitute of this, but his greatest virtue consists in
not seeking vainglory; whereof the greatest part of manking being adorers, and
every one affecting such as resemble themselves, therefore the learned is
commonly esteemed above the other. Moreover, the reasoning of man being wholly
depraved since the Fall, he is rather for Verisimilitude then Verity. Now the
learned easily persuades that he is more to be esteemed then the virtuous, who
does good because it is good, and not to be esteemed for it; whereas the other
is like those bad Officers who make amends for their ill deeds by fair writing.
So Demosthenes having run with the first from the Battle, made such an
excellent Oration, that he was commended for that which deserved perpetual
shame. But that which makes virtue less prized, is, because it falls upon all
sorts of conditions and sexes; a poor man and a poor woman exercising not less
virtue in supporting their misery with constancy, then a great Captain in
overcoming his enemy: and learning being not so common, especially that which
is sublime, it is the more esteemed for its rarity. They who judge of the worth
of men's actions account of them according to the pains that there is in
performing them. But it is judged more painful to become learned then to live
well. Others say, It Is best to be virtuous for the other world, and knowing for
this; good Nature, which is no way suspicious, being ordinarily subject to the
deceits of the more crafty. But I conceive, that it is best to be virtuous both
for this world and the other too. For if you be in prosperity it serves to set
off and illustrate your Virtues; if in adversity (which nevertheless may be
declined by the prudence whereof the virtuous is not destitute) Fortieude and
Temperance make it judged less; and Justice makes us reflect upon others who
are in a worse estate. And as for the other world, virtuous actions merit
grace, which is the seed of eternal glory, a reward to which knowledge alone
cannot entitle us; for Solomon calls it a vain travel given to men, whilst the
poor of spirit are called happy. What then ought we to know? To be virtuous, to
the end that the Sciences may be subservient to the Virtues their Mistresses.

The Second said, Science is so much inferior to Virtue as the Means are to
their end, since all Sciences are only in order to acquire Virtue, without
which they are but troublesome talk, and dead notions; and since such knowledge
as edifies not the Conscience is but vain, Divinity, the prime of all Sciences,
proposes Piety to it self; Physic, Charity; the Law, Justice. Yea they all
seem to have no other aim but to render homage to Virtue, and cherish it with
praise, its only aliment: the ordinary employment of learned persons being to
extol the virtuous. If few persons embrace Virtue, it is because they know it
not; for it is one of those things, a sight whereof is sufficient to make it
loved; and were it not veiled, or covered with rags, but appeared wholly naked,
its charms would attract all the world. Hence we so admire and honor the few
that are virtuous, who have in all times been extolled above other men.
Moreover, Divines hold that every sinner is ignorant; and that a man cannot
prefer Vice before Virtue without being blind of Understanding.

The Third said, It Is true, if we judge of the excellence of Virtue and
Knowledge by their necessity, Virtue will carry it; because it is much more
necessary, yea alone absolutely so to a State, which rather resembles a Cavern
of robbers or wild beasts when Virtue is banished; whereas whole States and
Kingdoms very easily and many times profitably dispense with the Sciences. And
the gross ignorance of the Ancients did not hinder, but that they left
flourishing States. But because on one side the most excellent things are not
always the most necessary, as appears by the Mechanical Arts, we must inquire
the preeminence of Knowledge or Virtue upon another ground. They are both
habits, whose excellence is taken from the subjects wherein they are; so the
habit of speaking well is more excellent then that of Painting, and Painting
then Dancing; because the Tongue is more noble then the Hand, and this then the
Feet. Now Virtue is a habit of the Will; Knowledge a habit of the Intellect,
which as much surpasses the Will as Contemplation does Action. For whether we
consider the actions and manner of acting of either of these Faculties, or
their objects, the Will yields to the Understanding; which being the Eye of the
Soul governs all the Faculties, guides the Will, of it self blind, and
incapable of any action without the light of the Intellect. Moreover, compare
the Intellectual Virtues with the Moral, and you will see what difference there
is between Sapience, which is the knowledge of the highest things by their
Causes; Intelligence, which is the intuitive knowledge of first Principles; in
brief, Science, Prudence, and the Arts, on one part; and on the other,
Temperance, Courage, Justice, and the other moral Virtues, which ordinarily
have no other employment but to keep the Concupiscible and Irascible appetites
within bounds, though they can never bring it to pass without Reason. The
Object of the Understanding which is Entity, as such (because in this sense
it is intelligible) is also more noble then that of the Will, namely, Entity, as
good and desirable; because Entity, as such is first, more simple and more
abstracted then Entity, as good; which is only a passion of Entity. And this
Entity which the Understanding considers is not only material and singular, but
spiritual, universal, and infinite. Yea it not only knows that which is
extrinsecal to it self, but by a special privilege it knows it self, and by an
action wholly divine reflects upon it self and its own actions. And as if it
were not content with its jurisdiction it knows not only that which is, but
also that which is not, entities of Reason, and Possibilities.

The Fourth confirmed the preceding Judgment, because all Moral Virtues depend
on the Understanding in their production and conservation. For as we are lead
to good because we know it such by the Understanding, so the Virtues become
vicious when they are destitute of Prudence, which is a Virtue of the
Understanding, who alone gives law and weight to all the other Virtues which it
guides. But what makes most for Knowledge, it is pecular to Man, who alone of
all Animals knows things by their proper causes; whereas Virtue is common to
him with brutes, from whom he many times learns a lesson. But if you deny them
the title of Virtue, at least they have the shadow and image of it; the
Pismire, of diligence; the Serpent, of prudence; the Lion, of courage, and so
of the rest; but not any of Science, which is the only good and difference of
Man; and once gotten is so inseparable from him, that it alone of all his good
accompanies him into the other life, in which he is abandoned by all Moral
Virtues, as being then unprofitable; because they are but the means to attain
beatitude, which most Divines make to consist in the knowledge of God, who
alone has an infinite knowledge of all things, but has nothing to do with
Virtue, which presupposes Vice to be subdued.

The Fifth said, That the promise of knowledge made to the first Man by the
Devil, having triumphed over all his Virtues, shows that Science is sometimes
stronger then Virtue; but this having the promises of reward both in this and
the other life; and Knowledge, on the contrary, being often blamed of puffing
up Men's Minds and called vain, determines the Question to the advantage of
Virtue.

CONFERENCE LXI.
I. Which is hardest to endure, Hunger or Thirst. II. Whether a General of an
Army should endanger his person.

I. Which is hardest to endure, Hunger or Thirst.
THe natural heat of Man, which lasts as long as his life, is preserved by
reparation, and avoiding of suffocation; the former by food, and the latter by
the Air which ventilates it, and refreshes its ardour. The greater this heat
is, the more need it has of fuel and refreshment. On the contrary, among
Animals, those that have no blood, as most Insects, and those that have but
little, as Fishes, who consequently have but little heat, (since we have as
much heat as blood) have less need of ventilation, and therefore are destitute
of Lungs, excepting Whales and Dolphins, as having more heat. Now as the Air
repairs our spirituous parts; so Aliments, (to wit, meat and drink) restore our
solid and liquid parts, which are in continual decay. And because their
continual reparation was absolutely necessary to the conservation of the
Creature, therefore Nature gave it an Appetite and desire of them; which if it
be of meats, is called Hunger; if of drink, Thirst; either of them accompanied
with pain and pleasure; the pain, to give notice of the time to take food; the
pleasure, to make these natural actions performed the more willingly. All
which, for the same reason, Nature has seasoned with pleasure, so long as they
are not excessive. Therefore being Pleasure and Pain still follow one another in
natural actions, it seems that the one ought to be the rule of the other: And
so, since there is more pleasure in drinking then in eating, there is also more
pain in thirst then in hungger. Now that drinking is more delicious then eating
is manifest, because drink refreshes the body almost in an instant, without
disturbing it, as food does, restoring it but by little and little, and so with
less pleasure, which is again diminished by the agitation caused in the head,
by the motion of the nether jaw for the grinding of the meat. Yea, if we may
believe good drinkers, as experienced in this matter, they eat only to
irritate their thirst, to the end they may have more contentment in drinking.

The Second said, The more necessary a thing is, the more painful is the want
of it. Now the needs of thirst seem the more considerable, for that the
absumption of humid substance is more speedy then that of dry, which
consequently has not so urgent necessity of being repaired as the humid.
Moreover, most drinks allay Hunger too as well as thirst; and therefore there
is no more excellent remedy against a Boulimie, or Doggish Hunger then Wine;
whereas, on the contrary, eating provokes Thirst instead of appeasing it. And
this Thirst is not only intolerable in health, but almost in all diseases;
for, excepting the aforesoid Boulimie, all sick persons prefer drinking before
eating, as having more need of it; yea, those to whom eating is necessary, (for
many are cured by abstinence) their food must ordinarily be liquid, that is to
say, of the nature of drink; the dryness of solid food requiring a greater
strength of stomach then sick persons have, for reducing it into Chyle, whose
form is liquid; Nature being unable to accommodate it self to any other. All
which evidenceth that Humidity is the more necessary, and also the more
difficult to be forborne.

The Third said, Experience determines the Question to the advantage of Hunger,
since none of us returning home to a meal he begins it with drink, unless be
indisposed. And even they who have intention to begin it so do it in
preparation to eating. Moreover, Thirst is only a mutation of quality, which is
for that reason most properly called Alteration; because the humidity of the
superior orifice of the stomach, in which alone Thirst resides, is then found
altered, and changed into dryness: But Hunger is an inanition and defect of
the substance requisite to fill the vacuities of our parts. So that Hunger
surpasses Thirst, as much as substance does an Accident. For these Definitions,
that Hunger is a desire of Hot and Dry, as Thirst is of Cold and Moist, seem to
be defective; not only because Hunger* would never be appeased by an
exhalation Hot and Dry, or by any other body of the same nature intromitted
into the stomach, unless it were proper to nourish and mixed with the other
qualities; but also because Hunger and Thirst are pains, and particularly
Hunger, a Convulsion of the stomach, and not Desires or Appetites, whose seat
is in the Heart, and not in the Ventricle. And if Hunger were only after Hot
and Dry, then Purslane, Lettice, Melons, and other Cold and Moist Aliments
would never satisfy it; as likewise broths would not allay Thirst when taken
(as it is the custom) actually Hot, nor yet Wine which is hot in power, and
heats effectually instead of refrigerating, if Thirst were only after Cold and
Moist. But that which shows Hunger to be more insupportable then Thirst, is,
that many Hydropical persons, and others, have lived some years without
drinking; whereas no body ever could spend much time without eating, unless by
miracle; and Famine is often reckoned among the scourges of God, but Thirst
never.

The Fourth said, Hunger is caused by the continual action of heat upon our
substance, which, to secure it self, by help of the same heat attracts what
ever is most fluid and moveable in the next part; this again draws what it can
from its neighbor, to supply fuel to this heat. And thus successively from
the extremities of the body to the mesaraick veins in the center; which, to
give supply to this continual suction, powerfully drain out of the guts the
purest of the aliment, as these do from the stomach; which being exhausted, the
acide humor diffused in the bottom of it, whither it is conveyed from the
spleen by the Vas breve, vellicates the internal tunicle, and causes a pain in
it not to be asswag'd but by the application of Aliment; and this they call
Hunger, which also is increased by acid things. And this pain, according as
it is more or less sensible, in regard of the acrimony or quantity of the acide
humor, and according as the inside of the stomach is lined with natural
mucosity, makes Hunger to be more easily tolerated by some, then by others.
Thirst is a Desiccation, and Calefaction of the upper orifice of the stomach,
greater or less according to the degrees of heat, or as any defluxion of fresh
or salt Phlegm descends from the Brain upon the orifice. So that they whose
natural or accidental heat is less endure Hunger and Thirst best. Which, to the
end this Question, must be considered neither absolutely or respectively. In
the first manner, since eating and drinking are equally necessary, thence
Hunger and Thirst shall be equally insupportable. But comparing one Age, one
Sex, and one Constitution with another; Hunger will be more intolerable then
Thirst to a Child, to a Woman, and to an Old Man, especially if they be
Phlegmatic or Melancholy; on the contrary, Thirst will be more difficult to
endure by a young man if he be choleric or sanguine.

The Fifth said, That the afflux of the melancholy humor may cause the Canine,
but not that natural Hunger, which is only a suction made in the upper orifice
of the Ventricle, perceptible by the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation, were the
melancholy humor cannot come. Moreover, Nature, who always takes the shortest
way, makes the melancholy humor descend from the Spleen into the Haemorrhoidal
Veins; otherwise that impure blood, and the most malignant of all the
excretions, would infect the Ventricle, and by it the Chyle. And there being no
humor that causes natural Thirst, it is not necessary there should be any to
produce Thirst; which I account more or less supportable, according to the
several habits of Body; to the fat, Thirst, and Hunger to the lean.

II. Whether a General of an Army should endanger his person.
Upon the Second Point, That the value which Men put upon Valor, which is
nothing else but a contempt of dangers, shows that those who would partake most
of honor must also have the greatest share in the danger, according to the
Proverb, None triumphs without fighting; and if we take the opinion of
Soldiers, who are the best judges in this case, they never so willingly resign
themselves to any Leader, as to him that freely ventures his life with them; it
being no less incompetible for a General to advance himself, and get credit and
Reputation in Arms without indangering his person, then for a Pilot to sail
well upon the Sea without incurring the hazard of shipwreck. So that we may say
of war, what is commonly said of the Sea, He that fears danger must not go to
it. The Civilians have the same meaning when they commit the charge of
guardianships to those that are most qualified to succeed, and there can be no
honor without a charge; whence the words are promiscuously used in our
Language. Moreover, as no Sermon is more eloquent then the exemplary life of
the Preacher; so no Military Oration is so persuasive, or so well received by
an Army, as the example of its General, when they see him strike the first
blow; as, on the contrary, if he testifies any fear, every one taking his
actions for a rule, and conforming thereunto, will do the same; he will not be
obeyed but with regret, and through a servile fear of punishment, not out of a
gallant sense of honor, because he that is most honored in the Army is most
remote from blows; at least, the other Leaders and Officers will do as much,
and all the Soldiers in imitation of them. In brief, we need but consider, how
not only the Marcelli, the Camilli, the Scipio's, Hannibal, and many other
Generals of Armies, but Alexander, Caesar, and in our time Henry the Great, and
the King of Sweden, all Sovereign Princes, were sufficiently venturous of their
persons; and that it was not by not taking part in dangers, that they triumphed
over their enemies.

The Second said, That to know how to command well, and how to execute well,
are two several Talents, and depend upon several abilities; they who are born
to command, being unfit to execute; and, on the contrary, they who are proper
to obey being incapable of commanding. Wherefore the Head of an Army, who gives
Orders and Commands, must cause them to be executed by others. So the Judge
pronounces the Sentence, and appoints Sergeants to put it in execution; the
Physician commands his Patient, who obeys his prescriptions; the Pilot, the
Officers of the Ship, but himself Steers not. But that which should most
restrain a General from acting in person, is, that he cannot in this occurrence
preserve the prudence which is absolutely necessary to him. For the heat of
Courage heightened by that of the Charge and the Encounter, being wholly
contrary to the coldness of Prudence, which is inconsistent with the violent
motions caused by the ardour of fury, commonly attending Valor, renders him
precipitate, inconstant and incapable, for the time, to deliberate of fit
means, to choose them, and cause them to be executed. Moreover, the General
being the Chieftain of the Army ought to resemble the Head; which derives sense
and motion to the parts, yet stirs not for their defense, but on the contrary,
employs them for its own. So the prime Captain ought to sway and manage the
body of his Army by his Counsels and Orders; but not put his own person in
danger, because upon his safety depends that of all the rest, who being
destitute of a Chieftain remains like a body without a head, and an
unprofitable trunk. Therefore Generals of Armies are compared to the heads of
Cypress-Trees; which being once lop'd off, the stem never thrives afterward.

The Third said, The highest point of judgment is to distinguish appearence
from truth, and in all professions it is very dangerous, though in appearence
more honorable, to be carried to extremes, but especially in War, where there
is not room for many mistakes. The General who exposes his life cannot be
excused from ambition or imprudence; from the former, if he does it without
necessity; from the latter, if for want of having rightly ordered his affairs
he sees himself reduced to that point. Whereas, as in Artificial Engines the
piece which gives motion to the rest is immovable; so the General who gives
order to the main of the Army ought to have the like influence upon it: as the
heart in the middle of the body, and the brain in the middle of the head, to
transmit life and spirits to the whole body, and to occur to accidents both
foreseen and unexpected. Otherwise, should the principal parts not be contented
to follow the body, but change their natural situation, all the parts would be
doubly inconvenienc'd; both because they would not know where to find them when
they needed their direction; and because the least offense of the nobler parts
being mortal, their hurt would redound not only to themselves, but also to the
rest of the body. Moreover, if the General act the Soldier, who shall act the
Captain? how will the Corporal and common Soldier do? They will all think
themselves become equal to their superiors, they will no longer do any thing
but in their company; and 'twill be no wonder if disorder slides into all the
member; when it has begun at the head. If they be blamed for not knowing how to
obey, their excuse will be ready, That they have to do with Leaders who know
not how to command. Besides, the General has the same relation to his Army
that the First President has to a Parliament. Now what would you say if the
First President should manage the cause, and undertake to plead it, although
the Advocates acquitted themselves ill? Even Domestic Government may serve for
a rule in this case; the head of a Family losing his credit among his servants,
when he sets himself to do their work. For whereas almost all the affairs of
men depend upon opinion, when the respect which arises from the authority of
the superior over his inferiors is once shaken, as it is by the too great
familiarity which the society of dangers begets, contempt will be apt to justle
out duty. And the common Soldier looks upon his General but as another man
when he sees him partake of the same hardships with him. Upon this account were
invented the Diadems, Scepters, Crowns, and other ornaments of Sovereigns, and
their Magistrates; the meanest of which, instructed by experience, are jealous
of their authority, which they keep up by separating themselves from the
commerce of the vulgar; but lose it as soon as they receive those for
companions over whom they are to command.

The Fourth said, That Reward and Punishment being the two Supports of all our
actions (but especially in War, where there is not time to make all the
inductions requisite to a good ratiocination) neither of them can be well
administered without the presence of the Chieftain, who alone can judge of the
merit of his Soldiers, free from all passions, especially, envy and jealousy,
which are found amongst equals: for want of which both the one and the other
sometimes complain with good reason, the meaner of not being seen, and the
great persons of not seeing but by the eyes of others. And therefore the
presence of the King has been always of more value then twenty thousand men.

The Fifth said, That in this, as in all other moral Questions, it is impossible
to give a definitive judgment, because things of this nature depend not upon
certain and infallible causes (as natural things do) but upon free causes,
which borrow their commendation or blame from the diversity of the
circumstances of things, of time, place, persons, and other accidents; which
being infinite, and consequently impossible to be known, have no other rule but
that of Prudence assisted by experience. So that it cannot be determined
absolutely whether the Chieftain of an Army ought to fight or not, but we must
distinguish the different occasions which oblige him thereunto, or not. When he
understands himself weaker then his enemy, and sees the courage of his
Soldiers low, if he cannot avoid giving battle, he must animate his Soldiers
by his own example; as also when he is obliged by some notable surprizal to lay
all at stake; or when he undertakes such great matters, that otherwise he can
never accomplish them; as when Alexander conquered the whole World, his Father
Philip all Greece, and Caesar the Roman Empire. In every other case, it is
imprudence, temerity and injustice, in a head of an Army to esteem his own life
no more then that of a common Soldier. Yea it is greater courage to render
himself inflexible in the exact and rigorous maintaining of his orders then to
engage himself in fight. In doing which, he notoriously argues his conduct of
weakness, since it has suffered things to come to so ill a pass, that he is
reduced to this extremity of hazarding the loss of his victory, which
ordinarily follows the death of the General, and is much more prejudical to his
Army then the example is profitable which he gives to those few that are about
him, who are not always induced to imitate it. Like those Empiricks who employ
extreme remedies to common diseases, instead of reserving them only for the
desperate.

CONFERENCE LXII.
I. Of Time. II. Whether it is best to overcome by open force, or otherwise.

I. Of Time.
EVery thing that has existence has a duration. If this duration has neither
beginning nor end, such as that of God is, it is called Eternity: if it has a
beginning, but no end, as that of the Heavens, Angels and rational Souls, it is
called by the Latins Aevum; if it has both beginning and end, as the duration
of all material and sublunary things, it is called Time; which, although in the
mouth of every one, is nevertheless difficult to understand, the Vulgar
improperly attributing this name to the Heaven or the Air, saying, It Is a fair
Time (or Weather) when the Air and Heaven are serene and clear. For although
Time be inseparable from Heaven, yet it is as different from it as the effect is
from its cause: And Pythagoras was deceived when he thought that Time was the
Celestial Sphere; as well as Plato, who held it to be the conversion of that
Sphere; and Democritus, the motion of every thing. Nevertheless, Heaven and
Time may be conceived distinctly and a sunder, because Time is the duration of
the World, the noblest part whereof is Heaven; and the effects of Time are not
known to us but by the motion of the Heavens and the Stars, which make the
Seasons, Years, Weeks, Days and Hours, with the difference of day and night.

The Second said, That Time is a pure creature of our Fancy, and has no real
existence in Nature, since it has no parts. For time passed is no more, the
future is not yet; the present is but a moment, which cannot be part of time;
since it is common to every part that being taken several times it composes and
compleats its total; which agrees not to a moment, a hundred thousand moments
added together making but one moment, and therefore cannot make the least part
of time, no more then an infinite number of points can make the least line,
because it is not composed of points; as time is not composed of moments. For
if you say Time is the flux of a moment, as a line is the flux of a point, this
argues not the existence of Time, because a point leaves something behind it as
it moves, but a moment does not. Yea, if we believe Aristotle, a moment is not
in Time. For either it is one moment, or many. If one, it will follow that what
is done at present, and what a thousand years ago, were done at the same time,
because in the same moment. If there be many moments in time, they must succed
one another, one perishing as the next arises, just as of the parts of time,
the passed perishes to give birth to the future. But a moment cannot perish.
For it must perish either in time, or in an instant. Not in time, for this is
divisible, but an instant indivisible. Nor yet in an instant. For either that
instant would be it self, and so it should be, and not be, together: or it
would be the instant before it; which will not hold; because whilst that
preceding instant exists, this other is not yet in being; or, lastly, 'twould
be the instant after it, and then this instant would be gone before. Wherefore
either Time is nothing at all, or else but an imaginary thing. And indeed it
seems consentaneously called Number and Measure; because neither of these has
other existence then in the mind. For if you say, with some, that time is
essential to things, you may as well say that the Ell is of the essence of the
cloth which it measures, and number essential to the things numbered; so that,
by this reckoning, Measure and Number should be of all sorts of Natures,
because they are applied to all things.

The Third said, That amongst real things some are momentary, being made and
perishing in one and the same instant, which is the measure of their existence;
others are perdurable, amongst which as there is something that has always
been, and shall always be; others that have not always been, yet shall always
be; so there are some that have not been sometimes, and sometimes shall be no
more. Again, of these latter, some have all their parts together; others have
them one after another. The first are continuous, and their duration is their
age; the second are successive, whose duration is time. For duration follows
the existence of every thing as necessarily as existence follows essence.
Existence is the term of production. Duration is the term of conservation. So
that, to doubt whether there be such a real thing in Nature as Time, is to
doubt of the duration and existence of every thing; although the Scripture
should not assure us that God made the day and the night, which are parts of
time. Moreover, the contrary reasons prove nothing, saving that time is not of
the nature of continuous beings, but of successive, which consists in having no
parts really present. This Time is defined, by the Philosopher. The Number of
Motion according to its prior and posterior parts; that is to say, by means of
time we know how long the motion lasted, when it begun, and when it ended. For
being Number may serve for Measure, and Measure for number, therefore they are
both taken for one and the same thing. Indeed, when a thing is moved, it is over
some space; whose first parts answer to the first parts of motion, and the
latter parts of the space to the latter parts of the motion, and from this
succession of the latter parts of the motion to the former arises a duration,
which is time, long or short, according to the slowness or quickness of this
motion. And because by means of this duration we number and measure that of
motions, and of all our actions, therefore it is called Number or Measure;
although it be only a Propriety of Time to serve for a Measure, and no ways of
its essence.

The Fourth said, That to understand time, it is requisite to understand the
motion, and two moments, one whereof was at the beginning of that motion, and
the other at the end; and then to imagine the middle, or distance between those
two extremes, which middle is Time. Therefore man alone being able to make
comparison of those two extremes, only he of all animals understands and
computes time. Hence they who wake out of a deep and long sleep think it but a
small while since they first lay down to rest, because they took no notice of
the intermediate motions, and think the moment wherein they fell asleep and
that wherein they waked, is but one single moment. The same also happens to
those who are so intent upon any action or contemplation, that they heed not
the duration of motions. Now not only the motions of the body, but those of the
mind are measured by time. Therefore, in the dark, he that should perceive no
outward motion, not even in his own body, might yet conceive time by the
duration of his soul's actions, his thoughts, desires, and other spiritual
motion. And as Time is the Measure of Motion, so it is likewise of rest; since
the reason of contraries is the same. And, consequently, motion and rest being
the causes of all things, time, which is their duration, is also their
universal cause.

The Fifth said, That it is ordinary to men to attribute the effects whereof
they know not the causes, to other known causes, though indeed they be nothing
less; so they attribute misfortunes, losses, death, oblivion, and such other
things, to Heaven, to Time, or to place, although they cannot be the causes
thereof. Hence some certain days have been superstitiously accounted fortunate
or unfortunate, as by the Persians the third and sixth of August, in regard of
the losses which they had suffered upon those days; the first of April by
Darius and the Carthaginians, because upon the same day he had lost a Battle to
Alexander, and these were driven out of Sicily by Timoleon, who was always
observed to have had some good fortune upon his birth day. Moreover, the
Genethliacks affirm that the day of Nativity is always discriminated by some
remarkable accident: for which they allege the example of Charles V. whose
birth day, the 24th of February, was made remarkable to him by his election to
the Empire, and the taking of Francis I. before Pavia. Such was also that day
afterward solemnized, in which Philip of Macedon received his three good
tidings. But as there is no hour, much less day, but is signalized by some
strange accidents, so there is not any but has been both fortunate and
unfortunate. As was that of Alexander's birth, who saw Diana's Temple at
Ephesus burnt by Herostratus, and the Persians put wholly to the rout: Yet the
same Alexander, as likewise Attalus, Pompey, and many others, died upon the day
of their Nativity; so did Augustus upon that of his Inauguration. Wherefore
it is no less ridiculous to refer all these accidents to Time, then to attribute
to it the mutation, oblivion, and death of all things, whereof it is not the
cause; although for this purpose Saturn was painted with a sickle in his hand,
with which he hewed every thing down, and devoured his own children. For Time
as well as Place being quantities, which are no ways active, they cannot be the
causes of any things.

The Sixth said, Time is diversely taken and distinguished according to the
diversity of Professions. Historians divide it into the four Monarchies, of the
Medes, the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans, and the States and Empires
which have succeeded them: The Church into Working-days and Festivals: the
Lawyers into Terms and Vacations; the Naturalists consider them simply as a
property of natural body; Astronomers, as an effect of Heaven; Physicians, as
one of the principal circumstances of Diseases, which they divide into most
acute, acute, and chronical or long, which exceed 40 days; and each of them
into their beginning, augmentation, state and declination, as distinguished by
the common, indicatory and critical days.

II. Whether it is best to overcome by open force or otherwise.
Upon the second Point it was said, That Force being that which first caused
obedience and admiration in the world, the strongest having ever over-mastered
others; it cannot enter into comparison with a thing that passes for a Vice,
and even amongst Women, as slight and and subtlety does; and crafts in any
action otherwise glorious, greatly diminishes its luster. So Hercules is more
esteemed for having slain the Nemaean Lion with his club, then Lysimachus for
having taken away the life of another by dexterously thrusting his hand wrapped
up in a piece of cloth into his opened throat, and so strangling him; of which
no other reason can be given, but that the former killed him by his cunning, and
the other by plain strength. Moreover, General things are made of Particular;
duels and single fights, are little pictures of battles. Now every one knows
what difference there is between him that overcomes his Enemy without any foul
play, and another that makes use of some invention or artisice to get advantage
of him. For though Duels are justly odious to all good men, yet he that has
behaved himself gallantly therein, even when he is overcome gains more Honor
then he that by some fraud has gotten the life of his Enemy. Indeed, the word
Virtue coming from the Latin which, signifies Man, implies that to be
virtuous, it is required to overcome as a Man, and leave tricks, sleights, and
subtleties to Women, to supply their weakness; and yet Women too, when they see
the masculine vigorous deportment, and feats of Arms of a Cavalier, that has
won the victory over his Enemy, will prefer him before an other who has had
the same advantage without striking a blow. Whence it appears, that in all sort
of Minds, Generosity and Courage finds more favor then subtlety.

The Second said, That the Emblem of the Wind and the Sun, trying which should
make the Traveller quit his Cloak, (attributing the mastery to the Sun above
the Wind) shows that Force is not always the most efficacious. For he who
aims to overcome must accomplish it by the most facile way; which being
ordinarily the gentlest, because it finds least resistance, brings about its
designs more easily then violence, which giving the Alarm makes every one
stand upon his guard, and renders all enterprises dangerous. Therefore the wise
General who commits his affairs to Chance as little as he can, assayes all
other means before he comes to open force; imitating a discreet Master of a
Family, who never falls to blows either in his house, or out of it, so long as
he has any hope from ways of gentleness. Moreover, the means which peculiarly
belong to Man ought to be preferred before those which are common to him with
brutes; yea, in which they go beyond him. And you see that they are not the
most strong and robust that command in Monarchies and States, but the most wise
and prudent, whose bodies are commonly more weak through their great watchings
and toils; and because these delicate bodies are more easy to be governed by
the powers of the Soul, which consequently are more worthily exercised therein.

The Third said, That Philip of Macedon had reason to compare subtlety to the
Foxes skin, as force to the Lion's, saying, that the former was to be made use
of when the latter hapened to be too short. For he who employes subtlety in
war, thereby acknowledges his weakness which made an old Captain say, when he
was advised to set upon his Enemy in the night, That he would win, not steal a
Victory. For he that is vanquished only by stratagem does not acknowledge
himself worsted; and they who make use of wiles, when they think they have
done, they are always to begin again; as the Barretors who by some subtlety
have procured a Verdict are never secure against new Suits. So a little man,
skilled in wrestling, may happily trip up his more sturdy Antagonist, and so be
counted more dextrous or nimble, but not more strong then he. Moreover, since
all actions take their rule from Justice, which cannot consist with fraud, he
is not to be reputed a Conqueror that has gotten a Victory unjustly.

The Fourth said, That if we receive the judgment of the vanquished, the
Victors are always faulty. Therefore it matters not by what means we defeat
our Enemies, provided those means be lawful, and transgress not the maxim of
Divines; That evil is not to be done to the end good may come of it. This
premiz'd, it is not only lawful for the chief of an Army, but perfectly his
duty to deprive his Enemies of all advantages before the fight, in it, and
afterward besieging places, defending them, or giving them relief. So Joshuah,
to encourage the Israelites to make an invasion into the land of Canaan, caused
Grapes of prodigious greatness which grew in that Country to be showed them in
the Desert. Cato, to animate the Romans to the Carthaginian War, let fall in
the Senate some of the large African Figgs, crying, that there were but three
days sail from the place where they grew. An other, by letting loose a Hare
from the walls of Thebes, thereby assured his Soldiers that they had to do
only with cowards, since they suffered those Animals to come amongst them. M.
Antonius, to exasperate the Romans against the murderers of Caesar, displayed
his shirt to them all bloody. And Augustus, to convince them of ingratitude,
published his Testament, true or fictitious; whereby he made those very
murderers his heirs. Others, of whom Examples are infinite, by continual
Alarms oblige their Enemies to watch and stand for some days in arms before
the fight, to the end to tire them out by those toiles; they weaken them by
delights, cut off their provisions, hinder their relief, raise false reports,
and intercept Letters on purpose to abate their Courage, or that of their
Allies. In the fight, they strive to give their Enemies the disadvantage of the
wind, dust, smoke, and Sun in their faces; they possess the highest and most
advantageous places, and drive them upon precipices, ditches, bogs, and other
incommodious places; they let loose mad beasts upon them, as Elephants of old,
to break their ranks, and strike terror into them; which others do also by
their cries, words, arms, engines, and other uncouth inventions, the
strangeness whereof making a great impression in their Minds, puts them into
disorder. They make show of assailing them on one side, whilst on the other,
where they are weakest, they give an assault in good earnest. Some have
overcome them by their celerity, surprising them asleep, feasting, playing, or
wearied; others, by a contrary stratagem, get the better of them by patience,
undermining and consuming them by little and little. After the fight, when the
Enemies are defeated, they hinder them from getting together again in a body.
In brief, all the slight and artifice that humane invention can imagine, to
confound the counsels, and dissipate the forces of the Enemy, has been in all
times employed to that end; and they who have best practiced the same, have
gotten the name of great Captains. Therefore Virgil had reason to say, That it
was not to be considered, whether fraud or force were to be used against an
Enemy; but to conclude, both are succesfully joined together.

CONFERENCE LXIII.
I. Of Motion. II. Of Custom.

I. Of Motion.
MOtion is considered variously in the Sciences. By Metaphysics, inasmuch as
Entity is divided into Moveable and Immovable. By Natural Philosophy, as it is
an internal propriety of a Natural Body. By Logic, so far as it is inseparable
from Contrariety, whereof it treats amongst the Opposites. By Physic, as being
comprehended amongst the six things not-natural. By Astronomy, as it is annexed
to the Heavens, and by them is the cause of all those here below. By the
Mechanics, as it is the Agent of all their Engines. And 'twere to be wished for
the perfection of the Mathematics, that as some of them treat of continuous
Quantity permanent; (as Geometry) others, of discrete Quantity, (as
Arithmetic) considering them abstracted from their matter; so there were some
that treated purely of the nature and properties of continuous Quantity
successive, which is Motion. For the doctrine of Motion is so excellent, that
by its help Philosophers guided only by the light of Nature have come to the
knowledge of one Eternal God alone, and of the dependence that all beings have
upon one sole cause; because every thing that is moved is moved by something
else; otherwise, if it moved it self, it should make it self perfect; since
every thing that moves gives perfection, and that which is moved receives the
same. Now this cannot be, because then one and the same thing should at the
same time be both Agent and Patient, have and not have perfection, be and not
be; which is the greatest absurdity. Wherefore what ever is moved, it is moved
by some other thing, and this by some other, till you come to a First Mover,
who gives Motion to all things. For otherwise there would be a progress into
infinity, which cannot be admitted into causes. Likewise, that all things
depend upon a Supreme Cause is proved by Motion; because every thing that is
moved depends upon that which moves it: Whereupon the Naturalists say, that it
is united thereunto by a Contact either of the Suppositum, or of Virtue; and
therefore all things being moved by that First Cause, depend wholly upon it,
and are united to it. But as excellent things are most difficult, and commonly
the clearest are assaulted by the strongest objections; so there have been some
persons that have denied Motion, as Parmenides and Zeno, (although it has as
true existence as Nature which is the principle of it) because they could not
answer the objections brought against it. Others, on the contrary, as
Heraclitus, have conceived that all things are in continual Motion, although
the same be never perceived by our Senses. But Aristotle, according to his
wont, choosing the middle opinion, has affirmed, That there are some things
which always move; others, that always rest, and others that move and rest
alternately. That which always rests is the First Mover; That which always
moves, is the Heavens, whose never interrupted circular Motion comes very near
infinity. Things which move and rest at times, are all other simple or compound
bodies, in which the Motion is either natural, as in fire to mount upwards; or
in violent, as in the same fire to descend downwards. Both which kinds of
Motion admit of rest too; the natural, when the body has found its center; the
violent, at the point of reflection, or when the virtue impressed upon it by
the Agent ceases.

The Second said, The incessant mutation made in all things, argues that there
is no Rest; since Rest is the abiding of things in one and the same state, and
nothing does so. Nor is there any Motion, because if there were, it should be
made in an Instant. But Nothing is changed in an Instant, being all Mutation
presupposes two terms; one, From which, and another, To which; and there are
no terms without a middle, or medium; nor can any thing pass from one term to
another through a medium, but in time. That Motion must be made in an Instant,
appears, because there is nothing between the last point of that which is to be
changed, and the first of that which is changed. For in Local Motion, a stone
begins to be moved at the same instant wherein it ceases to rest. There is
therefore no intermediate space between its motion and its rest: And if two
extremes which have no medium between them be together, then things which are
together are in one and the same moment. This is yet further manifest in the
other kinds of Motion. For in Generation there is nothing between Not-Being;
and Being, and in Corruption nothing between Being and Not-Being. Otherwise,
there should be something that exists and exists not; which is contrary to the
first principle. In Alteration, as soon as the Air is illuminated the Darkness
cease, and there is nothing between them. In Accretion or Augmentation, the
Body is still in its first quantity till it receive a greater; as likewise in
Diminution it is always in the same magnitude, till it be reduced to a less.
For we must beware of taking the dispositions or preparations to all these
motions for the motions themselves.

The Third said, It Is easier to say what Motion is not, then what it is; since
the Philosopher tells us, that it has more of Nonentity then of Entity.
Wherefore being things cannot be known but so far as they are true, and they
are not true but so far as they have Being, it is no wonder if Motion be one of
the difficultest to be understood; and it is the more so, because we must not
confound with the other things that accompany it, which are the Agent and
Patient, their action and passion, its two terms, the extent of place, time,
and the subject wherein it is caused. Besides, every thing that is known, being
so either by it self when it is real, or by some other when it is not such;
Motion which partly is, and partly is not, can neither be known by it self, nor
by some thing else; for it cannot be known by the Senses, nor, without their
help, by the Intellect; there being in Motion a something before, and something
after; and consequenly, a correspondence which falls not within cognizance of
the Senses. Therefore, to supply this defect, the Philosophers have described
Motion, (of it self insensible) by things that fall under sense, saying, that
it is That which is included between the term From which, and the term To
which; as the Physicians render the motions of life sensible by Dentition,
Puberty, Stature, different colors of the Hair; in short, by the vigor and
inclination of actions, and by such other sensible signs which notify the
diversity of Ages: And the Astrologers, those of the Sun, and other Stars, by
the houses of the Zodiac, their Oppositions and different Aspects; as also by
the dispositions of the Air which make the diversity of our seasons; like those
Travelers which distinguish the number of miles by Cities, Villages, Crosses,
and other visible signs. Motion is therefore the passage from one term to the
other. And so, not only when my hand slides from one side of this paper to the
other, but also when of hot it becomes cold, there is made a Motion.

II. Of Custom.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Right is divided into written and not
written; the former is the Laws, the second is Custom, which is of Right used
of long time, established by little by the liking of every one, and approved by
the tacit consent of the whole people; and therefore more grateful then Law,
which never equally pleases all; and is oftimes formed in an instant: But
Custom, taking root by time, is not established, except after long
experiences. It Is of account among Physicians, that Hippocrates commands that
regard be had to it as well to the age, the disease, the country, and the
season; yea, he says, that all things accustomed, (although bad) are yet less
hurtful then those which are unusual, although better in themselves. Amongst
Lawyers nothing is so powerful as Custom, which makes us patiently endure
things contrary to the equity and nature it self; such is the exclusion of the
younger Children from a share of the inheritance, which amongst the Gentry of
most Nations descends to the eldest. The variety of Custom makes some Nations
prefer a supercilious gravity; others, familiarity and courtesy: Some are
commendable for sobriety, others are notorious for drunkenness. Some people,
as the Albanians, accounted it impious to speak of the dead; and amongst us,
it is impiety not to think of them. Amongst the first, Egyptians, women went to
the Tavern, and men spun at home; as amongst the Amazons, the women alone were
Soldiers. The Lacedaemonians permitted Theft, provided it were committed
dexterously. The Arrians, on the contrary, stoned the most pety Thieves. Amongst
the Babylonian Ladies she was held the most virtuous who prostituted her honor
to most people, whereas nothing is so tenderly regarded among all other
Nations. In brief, we are civil or uncivil, good or bad, foolish or wise, or
any thing else, according to custom, which Erasmus calls the Monosyllable
Tyrant, because it is termed Mos in Latin; a Tyrant, to whom he is so
distastful that does not dress himself, make his reverences, and do every thing
to obey it, that he passes for a fool in all the rest of his actions.

The Second said, Custom bears such a sway over all the actions of men, that it
renders all things familiar to them. The Understanding commonly embraces the
falsehoods which it first imbibed, and rejects the truth (its proper object)
whereunto it is not accustomed. The cause of which is, for that what the
Intellect apprehends it so familiarizes to it self as to become conformable
thereunto, and by the pattern thereof judges of all the rest thenceforward; yea
of it self, which being become like to the thing apprehended cannot approve the
contrary; every thing being pleased with its like. The Will, although free in
all its actions, yet undergoes some sort of constraint, when it finds it self
more inclined to persons of acquaintance then to unknown, though more
accomplished. Moreover, we love rather by custom then by reason. Hence Mothers
more tenderly affect their Children with whom they commonly converse more, then
Fathers do; and Nurses more then some Mothers. As the Memory decays through
want of being exercised, so experience shows us that the most certain Art of it
is to cultivate it. Custom has such a power over the Imagination, that those
who think frequently of any thing, dream of it likewise when they are asleep.
Amongst the outward Senses, is not the Sight dazzled when we come out of the
dark into a bright place? as, on the other side, we see not a jot when we go
out of the Sun into a very shady place; yet our eyes perform their office,
being accustomed to both. Those who live near the Cataracts of Nile, the
Artificers whose noise displeases us so much, and who dwell in Mills and
Forges, are not disgusted with those clatters, and rest as sweetly without
silence as others do with it. Neatherds, accustomed to breathe in Stables,
swoon at the smell of perfumes. The mischief arising to Infants by changing
their milk as well as the manner of living to all ages, and the diversity of
tolerating pains according as people are hardened to them, or not, justify the
power of custom over all our Senses. So that it is justly styled the Mistress
of Man, stronger then Nature, which it alters and destroys, and is so powerful
that it cannot be destroyed but by it self.

The Third said, That Custom is less strong then Nature, being difficult to
change only because it is some-ways like Nature. Hence it is easier to reclaim
one that is vicious by custom then by nature; for this custom being a habit,
the same actions which gave it being by their frequent repetition, destroy it
likewise by their interruption. But Nature being radicated within us may indeed
be encountered, but always holds out; yea, according to the Proverb, it returns
although you drive it away with a fork. The melancholy person cannot so well
play the Greek, and be jovial in company, as not to discover some token of that
sad humor, amidst his greatest rejoicing. On the contrary, you will see
sanguine humors which cannot counterfeit sadness even in matters that require
it most. The choleric sometimes governs his passion well by reason; but he can
never suppress the first motions of it, because they are not in our power; and
therefore Philosophy rather masks, then amends nature. In fine, the Phlegmatic
always appears slow and stupid in his most violent motions; on the contrary,
custom is easily altered by a good resolution; as we see in abundance of holy
and penitent souls, who forsaking the world, in an instant divest themselves of
all their evil habits, and put on those of piety. And Socrates could by the
precepts of Philosophy change his evil habits, not his natural inclinations,
but that there appeared sufficient tokens thereof in his countenance, to
justify the judgment of Zopyrus the Physiognomer.

The Fourth said, We are beholden to custom, that every one abides in his own
condition. It Is that which makes Seamen prefer the tempests at sea before rest
at land, and the laborer despise the treasures of the East, for his cart. It
made Caesar go bare-headed, although bald, in all the ardours of Africa, and
the coldest climates of the North. It arms the beggar to encounter with hunger,
cold, and the other incommodities of the air. It Is from hence that we see
slaves sell their liberty after they have received it from their Masters; they
are so accustomed to live in chains. It Is this and not nature which lays shame
upon the parts most necessary for conservation of the species: witness the
punishment of some Indians upon such as have abused them; for they condemn them
to cover them, whereas others wholly discover them; and these criminals account
not themselves less punished hereby then those that here are pillory'd or
carted; which also is not ignominious amongst us but by custom. It likewise
exercises dominion over ceremonies and civilities, most whereof are so contrary
to health and seemliness. It keeps the Mint where honor is coined; and that
which is not registered there passes for error and clownishness. It Is this
which causes men to kiss one another when they salute, whereas thirty years ago
they retired backward with many reverences which denoted respect; yea it bears
such an absolute rule over men's minds, that as the Greeks and Romans styled all
Barbarians who followed not their laws and fashions, all the world n^w does the
like still, judging ancient or foreign modes and usages ridiculous. We blame
the manners of the Aethiopians and Chinese as they do ours; the visages of the
people which most frighten us are best liked by them; and we fancy deformity
with the same lineaments and colors wherewith they paint beauty. Those
Americans who kill their old decrepit Parents, instead of believing themselves
parricides, call us cruel for letting ours continue so long in the miseries of
age. Infinite like instances have caused some to say, that it is another nature:
but I hold it stronger then nature, since by it Mithridates rendered poison
innoxious to himself, and some whole Nations of India live upon Toads, Lizards
and Spiders. Yea it has made death as lovely and desirable as life amongst
great Nations; whereas Philosophy with all its pompous discourses has labored
much to render the same indifferent to a few persons. It Is called by Pindar the
Emperess of the world, and caused Seneca to say, that we govern not our selves
by reason but by custom, accounting that most honest which is most practiced;
and error serves us for a law when it is become public. Lastly, it is stronger
then the laws themselves, since it gives them all the power and authority which
they have.

The Fifth said, That Virtue it self is nothing but a custom. For we have it
not by nature, as Plato holds in his Menander, because of those things which we
have by nature, the faculties are found in us before the actions. So the power
of seeing, hearing, and speaking, is in man before these acts; but we perform
virtuous actions before we have the habit of virtue. Moreover, these virtues
are for this reason called moral; because they are implanted by custom; and as
an Architect learns his Art by frequent building, so by constant performance of
acts of justice or courage men become just or courageous. Therefore the true
way to become virtuous is to be accustomed to virtue from one's infancy; and
hence Fathers are so careful to have their children well instructed, and to
give them good examples. For being nothing but difficulty keeps men off from
the practice of virtue; if this difficulty were removed by custom, which makes
the hardest things easy, virtue which seems so knotty would be delightful, and
pass into nature. And it is a token of perfect virtue when men take pleasure in
exercising it.

CONFERENCE LXIV.
I. Of the Imagination. II. Which is most powerful, Hope or Fear.

I. Of the Imagination.
BEcause the knowledge of the present sufficed not for the preservation of
animals, but required also that of the past and the future; therefore Nature
has made provision for the same, giving them not only five Outward Senses
whereby they know their objects present (for every sensation is a sort of
knowledge) but likewise a Common Sense to Distinguish those objects, an
Imagination to represent the same to it when they are absent, and a Memory to
preserve the Species. Now as, amongst the external Senses, those are exercised
most perfectly whose organs are best disposed; so, amongst the internal, those
are most vigorous which are found in a brain best tempered for their action. If
its constitution be humid, then the Common Sense acts most perfectly; if dry,
the Memory is most tenacious; if hot, the Fancy or Imagination is strongest.
But if the temper of the same Brain be cold and dry, then Prudence reigns in
it, as we see in old men, and melancholy persons. For it is more reasonable to
say, that the Organ of these faculties is the whole Brain then any one part of
it. And what is brought for proof of the contrary; that oftimes one of the
faculties is hurt while the rest are entire (some having a sound Memory when
their Imagination is depraved) argues not that they have different seats; but
as the natural faculty in the whole Liver sometimes attracts but cannot retain,
retains but cannot digest or separate excrements; so the animal faculty equally
dispersed through the whole substance of the Brain, sometimes judges well of
the difference of objects, acknowledges conveniences and disconveniences,
receives the true species, but yet cannot retain them; on the contrary, the
Memory will be sometimes entire although the Imagination be disordered, because
the constitution which is then found in the whole Brain is fit for the exercise
of one of those functions, not of the other. Moreover, it happens not unusually
that those faculties are wounded, although the Ventricles assigned for their
residence be not; as in the headache, or distemper of the Brain, and in
Phrensies caused only by inflammation of the Meninges without any laesion of
the Ventricles.

The Second said, That the Imagination is not distinct from the other
faculties; but our soul resembles the Sun, which in the continuity of the same
action has different effects, not acting in the diaphanous parts of Heaven,
refrigerating the middle region of the air, heating the lower, and again herein
corrupting some bodies, producing and giving life to others: The conservation
of the species and their reception not being two different actions; but rather
as the wax by one and the same action receives a figure and retains it, so the
Imagination which receives the species of objects must not be distinguished
from it self when it preserves and retains them, unless by reason or mental
discrimination, whereby we call Memory it self an action, although it be but
the continuation and preservation of the first.

The Third said, The effects of the Imagination are so mavelous, that most of
those are ascribed to it whereof we can find no other reason. As, the likeness
of Children to their Fathers, although they be only putatives; because the
apprehension of disloyal Wives of being surpised by their Husbands makes them
conceive them always present: the production of most Monsters, the marks
imprinted upon the Child in the Womb, and the like. But that it is the Mistress
of Reason and the Will, deserves most admiration. For the Soul imagining no
danger, or proposing to it self a good greater then the mischief of the danger,
carries the body upon the ridges of houses, upon ropes and breaches, even upon
the mouths of Canons; makes some swim cross rivers asleep, who destroy and
drown themselves, and are frighted where they have least cause; namely, when
they awake or find themselves alone in the dark, so soon as their Fancy
proposes some terrible object to them, how absurd soever it be. Wherefore they
who desire to encourage Soldiers heat their Brains with Wine, which keeps
their imagination from representing the danger to them: or raise some
extraordinary boldness in them by generous discourses, whose new impressions
drive their bodies upon dangers. Hence the Turks disorder the imagination of
their Soldiers by Opium, the effect whereof in the quantity wherein they take
it is contrary to that whereby it casts sick persons into a sleep in this
climate. Reason never acquiesces in the propositions which our Imagination has
not apprehended as true; and therefore weak minds are less capable of
relinquishing an error wherewith they have been imbued. Offenses are not such,
but so far as our fancy conceives them such. For a great hurt which we have
received, if an excuse follow it, offends us not; whereas an indifferent word,
a coldness, a gesture which we interpret for a scorn, even a privation of
action, as neglect of a salutation, makes men go to the field. Yea all the
professions of the world borrow their praise or their blame from Fancy. And
who is there amongst us but would account it a grievance, and make great
complaints, if that were imposed upon him by command which his fancy makes him
extremely approve. The studious person rises in the night, to study; the
amorous spends it in giving serenades; In brief, the Proverb, that says, None
are happy or unhappy but they who think themselves so, abundantly evidences the
power of Imagination.

The Fourth said, All Animals that have outward senses have also Imagination;
which is a faculty of the sensitive soul enabling them to discriminate things
agreeable from the contrary: Therefore those Philosophers who denied this power
to Worms, Flies, and other insects, which they affirmed to be carried toward
their good by chance, and not by any knowledge of it, besides their derogating
from divine providence, were ignorant that the smallest animals cease not to
have the same faculties as others, at least, confused, as their Organs are,
which contain the more marvels in that they serve to more several uses.
Moreover, Experience shows us, that they well distinguish what is fit for them
from what is not; yea they have their passions too; for choler leads the Be to
pursue the enemy that has pillaged its hive; their providence, or forecast,
since both that and the Pismire lay in their provisions, and observe a kind of
policy among them, the former acknowledging a King; which they could not do
without the help of Imagination, although the same be not so strong in them as
in perfect animals: among whom even such as have no eyes, or want the use of
them, as the Mole, are much inferior to others in Imagination, which is chiefly
employed about the Images (whence it takes its name) whereof the sight supplies
a greater quantity then all the other Senses. So that every animal, being
naturally lead to its own good, needs an Imagination to conceive it such; but
all have not Memory, which being given only to enable animals to find their
abode again which they are obliged to quit for some time in quest of food;
those who change not their residence, as Oysters, or which carry it with them,
as Snails and Tortoises, have no need of it.

The Fifth said, That the Imagination is a cognition different from that of
sense; for it knows that which is not, but the Sense does not; from Science and
Intelligence, because these are always true, but that is sometimes true,
sometimes false. Nevertheless, it is not opinion; because opinion produces a
belief in us, which presupposes persuasion, and this is an effect of Reason
whereof brutes are not possessed, although all of them have, more or less, some
Imagination. Its object is of so great latitude that it goes beyond that of
entity; since that which is not as well as that which is, the false as well as
the true, are under its jurisdiction; for it composes, divides and runs over,
all nature, and what is out of nature; herein almost like the Intellect, which
owes all its highest notions to it, since it can know nothing without the
phantasmes of the Imagination, which, on the contrary, depends not any ways
upon the Understanding in its operations.

The Sixth said, The Imagination, although very active, and carried in a moment
from the lowest stage of the world to its highest stories, and to those spaces
which it phansies above the heavens, yet cannot comprehend where it self is
lodged. But the quality of the Brain most proper for it, is heat. For besides
its great activity, whereby it is necessarily allied to fire, the phanciful
persons are most subject to burning Fevers, the choleric excel in this
faculty, of which, on the contrary, the phlegmatic are worst provided. Whence,
perhaps, Poets, who owe their best Verses to the Fancy, heighten the heat of
their Brain by drinking the best liquors. Moreover, it is the strongest of all
the Souls Faculties, and involves every thing here below. It disorders and
quiets Nations, making them undertake wars and desire peace; it awakens and
stills our passions; and as if nature were not powerful enough to produce all
things necessary to the perfection of the world, it daily frames new ideas, and
makes other worlds to its curiosity. It Is this that blinded him of whom Pliny
speaks, who having dreamed in the night that he had lost his sight, found
himself blind when he waked; it is this that gave a voice to Croesus's son which
nature had denied him; which changed L. Cossutius from a woman into a man;
which made horns grow out of the forehead of Cippus after his dreaming of the
Oxen whom he had seen fighting all the day before. In brief, it is this that
made Gallus Vibius become foolish, by having mused too much upon the causes of
folly. But it acts not only within both upon the body and the soul; it diffuses
its power beyond its own mansion. For to it is attributed that wonder of the
Tortoises and Estriches which hatch their eggs by the sight; as also that of
Hens, which breed Chickens according to the colors laid near their Nests, and
sometimes of the shape of a Kite if they have been frighted by that bird whilst
they were hatching. It Is also to the power of Imagination that what my Lord
Bacon affirms is to be referred, namely, That it is dangerous to be beheld by
our enviers in extreme joy, as it is reported that certain Scythian women
murdered only with a single aspect; and possibly to this cause better then to
any other the bleeding of a murdered body in the murderer's presence may be
imputed, as also that the most vigorous have been found cold and impotent; and
other effects, the cause whereof may be better referred to this Imagination,
and the connection and coherence of this cause with those effects demonstrated.

II. Which is most powerful Hope or Fear.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That fear being of two sorts, one filial,
mixed with respect proper to the ingenuous; the other servile, arising only
from the consideration of punishment; it appears hence that fear is more
effectual then hope; which is not often found but in good persons, whereas fear
is found both in the wicked and the good. The Laws seem also to decide this
question, there being none that encourages virtue to hope for any thing, but
all infuse an abhorrence of crimes by the fear of punishments. Moreover, both
the Indies would not suffice the least Commonwealth, if profitable rewards were
to be given to every good action performed in it; and honorable recompenses
being valued only for their rarity, would be no longer so if they came to be
common. Therefore there is but one Treasurer of the Exchequer in office, but
Judges, Counselors, Archers and Sergeants innumerable. Moreover, there is
always more to be feared then hoped. For he who has an estate and honor may
more easily lose them by the underminings of the wicked and envious, who are
the greatest number, then obtain new by performing as much good as he will;
either because they who are able to reward him are not always well informed
thereof, or because they want both the means, and the will to do it. Therefore
although God would have us hope for Paradise, yet he requires that we serve him
in fear, and draw near to him with trembling. So that the thing we most hope
for (eternal life) mixing our hope with fear, it is not credible that any other
thing is exempt from it: Yet there are some fears without any hope. Now the
passion which acts powerfully alone is stronger then that which acts only in
the company of another.

The Second said, That if the greatness of causes is to be judged by that of
their effects, that Passion must be strongest which leads us to the greatest
attempts. And so Hope will carry it above Fear, since it is that which makes a
Soldier run up a breach, and which has induced so many illustrious men, both
ancient and modern, to generous actions; whereas, Fear by its coldness chilling
the spirits, and penning them within, renders them incapable of any action. For
all our actions depending on the dispositions of the spirits, the instruments
of all motions both Internal and External; if these spirits be heated, active
and nimble, as they are rendered by Hope, then the Mind is boldly carried to
the most difficult actions. On the contrary, if they be cooled and fixed by
Fear, then the soul finding her self enfeebled, can do nothing but what is mean
and pusillanimous.

The Third said, To examine the power of Hope and Fear aright, we must look
upon them as two Champions, who are to encounter. But Fear already shows by the
paleness of its Countenance, that it wants Heart, and yields to Hope, which
animates it self to the pursuit of the good it aims at, by driving away all
sort of Fear, which would cause apprehension of obstacles and crosses, opposing
the enjoyment of that good. Moreover, Fear is contemptible, and not found but
in abject spirits; whereas Hope resides in sublime souls, where it produces
actions worthy of its grandeur and original, which is Heaven; toward which men
naturally lift their eyes in their adversities; as Fear derives its original
from below, toward which it depresses the bodies and minds of those whom it
possesses: So that to compare Hope with Fear, is to put Heaven in parallel with
Earth.

The Fourth said, That both these Passions belong to the Irascible Appetite,
both of them look to the future, and are employed to surmount the difficulties
which are presented to the Concupiscible Appetite. Hope is the expectation of a
good hard to be obtained, yet apprehended possible. It is found most frequently
in young men, because they live only upon the future; and it is the Anchor of
all unfortunate persons, none of which are out of Hope of being delivered from
their miseries. It Is Physic to all our evils, never abandoning the most
desperately sick so long as they breathe; Yea, it is the refuge of all mankind
of what sex, age, or condition soever; herein the more miserable, in that being
destitute of real good, there remains no more for them but imaginary and
fantastic. Hence the Hebrews denote Hope and Folly by the same word, Chesel.
The truth is, as if the evils that oppress us were not numerous enough, our
souls frame and fancy infinite more through Fear; which dreads as well that
which is not, as that which is; being properly the Expectation of an
approaching evil which gives horror to our senses, and cannot easily be
avoided. For men fear not the greatest evils, but those which are most contrary
to their nature. Whence it is that they more apprehend the halter, the galleys,
or infamy, then falling into vices, or losing the Grace of God. For although
these be the greatest evils of the world, yet men do not acknowledge them such,
but by a reflection of the Understanding. Hence also the wicked fear the wheel
more then Hell; because Gods punishments of sin are accounted slow, and those
of men speedy. But to judge of the strength of Hope, and Fear, by their proper
essence, we must consider that Good being much less delightful to Nature then
Evil is painful and sensible, (because Good only gives a better being, Evil
absolutely destroys being) Fear, which is the expectation of this Evil, is
much more powerful then Hope, which is the expectation of that Good. Which
appears further by its effects, far more violent then those of Hope; for it
makes the Hair stand an end, and has sometimes turned it white in one night;
it makes the Countenance pale, the whole body quake and tremble, the Heart
beat; and not only alters the whole habit of it, but perverts Reason,
abolishes Reason and Memory, intercepts the use of Speech, and of all the
Senses; so that it has caused sudden death to diverse persons. But Hope never
gave life to any. Fear adds wings wherewith to avoid an Evil; Hope barely
excites to move toward Good. In a word, Fear needs sometimes the whole
strength of all the Virtues to repress its violence, and check its disorders.

CONFERENCE LXV.
I. Of the Intellect. II. Whether the Husband and Wife should be of the same
humor.

I. Of the Intellect.
THe Intellect is a Faculty of the Soul, whereby we understand. For of the
Faculties, some are without knowledge, as the natural, common to man and
inanimate bodies, and the vegetative, which he has in common with plants,
namely, the powers of Nutrition, Accretion, and Generation; others are with the
knowledge. And these (again) are either exercised without the use of Reason, as
the Internal and External Senses; or else stand in need of Reason, as the
Intellect, and the Rational Appetite, which is the Will; the former, to
distinguish true from false; the latter, good from evil. Now as the
Understanding acquires its notions from the inferior powers, so it imitates
their manner of perception; and as sensible perception is passion, so is
intellectual; and the intelligible species are received in the Intellect, after
the same manner that the sensible are in the organs of the outward senses. For
as their organs must be free from all the qualities whereof they are to judge;
so must the Understanding which is to judge of every thing, be from all
intelligible species; yea, more then the organs of the Senses. For the
Crystalline humor of the Eye has tangible qualities, the hand visible,
because the former is not destinated to touch withal, nor the latter to see.
But the Intellect being to understand every thing, because every thing is
intelligible, must be wholly clear of all Anticipations; contrary to Plato's
opinion, who admitting a Transmigration of souls, conceived that entering into
other bodies, they carried with them the species of things which they had known
before, but darkn'd and veiled with the clouds and humidities of the bodies
which recloth'd them; and these being dissipated by age, the species put forth
themselves by little and little, as Characters engraven on wood or stone,
covered over with wax, appear proportionably as it melts off. And therefore he
termed all our knowledge a remembrance; but although he erred herein, yet
reasoned better then Aristotle, who admitted the Metempsychosis, but denied the
Reminiscence, both which are necessary consequents one of the other.

The Second said, That the operations of the Intellect are so divine that not
being able to believe the same could proceed from it self, it refers them to
superiors. For it invents, disposes, meditates, examines, and considers the
least differences; it compounds and divides every thing, apprehends simple
terms, conjoynes the subject and the attribute, affirms, denies, suspends its
judgments, and alone of all the Faculties reflects upon it self; yea, by an
action wholly divine produces a word. For as in speaking a word is produced by
the mouth, so in understanding is formed the word of the Mind. Yet with this
difference, that the former is a corporeal patible quality imprinted in the
Air, and not the latter; for intellection is an immanent operation. Hence some
have thought that all these divine actions were performed by God himself, whom
they affirmed to be that Agent Intellect, which irradiating the phantasmes,
produces out of them the intelligible species which it presents to our
Intellect. Others ascribed them to an Assisting Intelligence. Some to a
particular genius. But as I deny not, that in supernatural cognitions God gives
Faith, Hope, and Charity, and other supernatural gifts; in which case God may
be said to be an Agent Intellect: I conceive also, that in natural and ordinary
knowledge, of which alone we speak now, no concourse of God, other then
universal, is to be imagined, whereby he preserves natural causes in their
being, and does not desert them in their actions. 'This then the Understanding
it self which performs what ever it thinks, surpasses its strength which it
knows not sufficiently; and the Agent and Patient Intellect are but one, being
distinguished only by reason. As it forms that species, it is called Agent; as
it keeps and preserves them, Patient. For as the Light causes colors to be
actually visible by illuminating them together with the Air, with their medium,
so the Agent Intellect renders all things capable of being known, by
illustrating the phantasmes, separating them from the grosness of the matter,
whereof they have some what when they are in the Imagination, and forming
intelligible species of them. Otherwise, if these phantasmes remained still in
their materiality, the Understanding being spiritual could know nothing; since
that which is sensible and material, remaining such, cannot act upon what is
spiritual and immaterial. Besides, the species of the Fancy representing to us
only the accidents of things, it was requisite that the Intellect, by its
active virtue subliming and elevating those species to a more noble degree of
being, should make them representative species of their own essence. Which it
does by abstraction of the individual properties of their subject from which it
forms universal conceptions; which action is proper to the Intellect. This
supreme Faculty being so noble that it ennobles all beings, rendering them like
to it self.

The Third said, That the Intellect is to the Soul such as the Soul is to the
body which it perfectionates. And as it knows all corporeal things by the
senses, so it knows incorporeal by it self. This Faculty serves for a medium
and link, uniting all things to their first cause; and it is Homer's golden
chain, or Jacob's ladder which reaches from Earth to Heaven, by which the
Angels, that is, the species and most spiritual notions, ascend to the heaven
of man, which is his brain, to inform him, and cause the spirits to descend
from thence to reduce into practice the excellent inventions of the
Understanding. Now as Reason discriminates men from brutes, so does this
Intellect men amongst themselves. And if we believe Trismegistus in his
Pimander, God has given to all men ratiocination, but not Understanding, which
he proposes for a reward to his favorites. Aristotle says, it is the knowledge
of indemonstrable principles and immaterial forms. Plato calls it, Truth; Philo
the Jew, the chief part and torch of the Soul, the Master of the little world,
as God is of the great, both the one and the other being diffused through the
whole, without being mixed or comprehended in any part of it.

The fourth said, That the humane is a substance wholly divine and immortal,
since it has no principle of corruption in it self, being most simple, and
having no contrary out of it self: Eternal, since it is not in time but above
time: Infinite, since its nature is no-wise limited, and is every thing that it
understands, changing it self thereinto; not by a substantial mutation, but as
the First Matter is united with the forms, remaining always the same Matter;
the wax remaining entire receives all sort of figures: So the intellect is not
really turned into the things which it understands, but only receives their
species wherewith it is united so closely that it is therefore said to be like
to them. As likewise, though it be called Patient when it receives them, it is
not to be inferred that it is material, since these species are material, and
acting upon the Intellect alter it not, but perfectionate it. Moreover, it has
this peculiarity, that the more excellent these species are, the more perfect
it is rendered; whence after the highest things, it can as easily comprehend
the less. An assured token of its incorruptibility, and difference from the
senses, which are destroyed by the excellence of their objects. But as the soul
being freed from the body has nothing to do with sensitive knowledge, because
then it ratiocinates no more, but beholds effects in their proper causes,
commanding and obeying it self most perfectly, exempted from the importunity of
the sensitive appetite: so while it is entangled in the body it receives some
impressions resulting from the parts, humors and spirits destinated to its
service being in some sort rendered like to them. So the soul of one born blind
is ignorant of colors, the choleric are subject to frowardness, and the
melancholy timorous, by reason of the blackness of that humor.

The Fifth said, All actions of men depending on the temper; those of the
Understanding, so long as it is entangled in the bonds of the body, are not
free from it. For as that of Plants gives them the qualities proper to attract,
concoct, and convert their aliments, and generate their like; and beasts having
a temper suitable to their nature, are lead as soon as they come into the world
to what is convenient for them without instruction: So men are lead of their
own accord to diverse things, according as their souls meet dispositions proper
to certain actions; yea they are learned without ever having learned any thing,
as appears in many phrantick and distracted persons; amongst whom some,
although ignorant, have been seen to make good Verses, others to discourse
learnedly of the sublimest matters, some to speak languages, and tell things to
come. Which may naturally proceed from the souls being capable of it self to
know every thing (the past by help of the memory, the present by all the
senses, and the future by the Understanding;) and meeting with a brain whose
temperature is by disease rendered proper for such actions, the same being
possible to befall it by such accidents as happens by age, which changing the
temper of the body, is also the cause of the diversity of actions. Therefore
children cannot perform the functions of the reasonable soul, because they are
of a hot and moist temper, unapt for the actions of the actions of the
Understanding, as, on the contrary, very fit for the actions of the vegetative
and sensitive soul. So that if men were born cold and dry, they would come into
the world perfectly wise and judicious; but because they acquire this
temperature of brain only with time, therefore they are not knowing but with
time.

II. Whether the Husband and Wife should be of the same humor.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That it might be handled either physically
or morally. If it be demanded, upon the former principles, whether the Husband
and Wife should be of the same temper, it is answered, that as Nature has
distinguished the Sex, so she has assigned to either its peculiar temperament;
if a woman, which should be cold and moist, be hot and dry, she is unapt for
generation, as the husband also is when, being ill qualified with hot and dry,
he falls within the Law de Frigidis. But if it be questioned, morally, whether
conformity of manners be more requisite to Matrimony then their diversity and
difference; then, since diversity of actions is necessary in a family, the
office of the husband being other then that of the wife, it seems they ought to
be as different in manners as they are in the temper which produces such
manners, and these the inclinations and actions.

The Second said, Those Philosophers who held that the Male and Female were
each but one part of man, which name is common to both, would have concluded
for resemblance of humors and manners; for they said that either sought his
other half till they found it. Which made the friendships so boasted of in
passed ages, and so rare in this, and likewise marriages, of which they that
take more notice find that but few married couples have no resemblance even in
their countenance. Moreover, marriages being made in heaven, and the most
considerable accidents of life, the same influence which makes the marriage of
the husband must also make that of the wife: and if all actions here below
borrow their force from the heavens, as Astrologers hold, the husband and wife
having the same universal cause of so great and notable a change, whereon
depends almost all the welfare and misery of either, cannot but resemble one
another. And therefore those who resemble one another most will agree best with
their universal cause, and consequently, the Stars will find less resistance to
produce their effects upon them, and so they will live more sweetly then if by
contrariety of manners they should do as the Traveller at sea, who walks in the
ship contrary to its course, or who attempts to sail against wind and tide; or
rather like those that draw several ways, whereby the cord is sooner broken
then any advancement made of the load; so during this contrariety of manners
nothing can go forward in the management of domestic affairs. Hence the
Proverb, that we must eat many a bushel of Salt with a man before we choose him
for a friend, is interpreted that by semblance of food a similitude of manners
with him must be acquired: which if requisite between two friends, how much
more between two married persons who ought not to have greater friends then
they are one to the other; being in society of all the goods and all the evils
of this life. Imagine one of a pleasant, the other of a melancholy humor, one
loving company, the other solitude; the opposition of these contrary
inclinations will render the presence of the one as insupportable to the other,
as Music and Dancing are displeasing to a sad man, or tedious complaints for
one dead are to him that is disposed to mirth. For by this disproportion the
mind receives a check, which is very disagreeable to it. If one be young, and
the other old; one handsome, the other deformed; one of an amorous complexion,
and the other not; the mischiefs which follow thereupon are too common to be
enumerated. If one be nimble and the other slow, the actions of the one will
displease the other; whereas that which pleases being or appearing good, and
nothing (next our selves) being so acceptable to us as what resembles us; two
persons who shall agree to do something, or not to do it, shall have peace and
tranquillity of mind.

The Third said, That in Economy as well as Policy, there ought to be a
harmony, which consists in diversity, and not in unisonance or identity, which
is every where disagreeable and dull. This made Aristotle desire that the man
were, at least, ten years elder then the woman, the disparity of age causing
that of humors; and this makes the difference which is found between
individuals, one of the greatest wonders of the world. Therefore the husband
and wife ought to be unlike in their manners and actions, to the end either may
keep their station, the one above, the other below, one command, the other
obey. Moreover, the husband and wife that always agreed would have no matter to
talk of. Be the man a great talker, and the woman too, the house will be always
full of noise; on the contrary, the silence of the one will give place to the
other's talkativeness, and excuse it. If both be knowing or skilful, they will
not esteem one another; but if one admire the other, there will be greater love
between them. If both be prodigal, they will quickly see the bottom of the bag;
whereas the thriftiness of the one will make amends for the expensiveness of
the other. If one be sad, the other being pleasant will divert him: if not,
they will both fall into the excess either of sadness or joy. If one be
profane, the party that is devout will convert him by good example. In brief,
if one be severe, it is good that the other be gentle; if one be passionate,
that the other be patient; otherwise the house will be always in an uproar.

The Fourth said, If Justinian, or rather his Wife Theodora, had not abolished
the laudable custom of divorcing wives, introduced by Spurius Carrilius, to
abate their pride and malice; or, at least, if the wives of these times were of
the humor of those Roman women who having displeased their husbands asked them
pardon in the Temple of a Goddess, called for that reason Viriplaca, it would
not require so much care to consider the conditions requisite to a happy
wedlock. In which it is to be observed that both in nature and manners there are
tempers of body, and habits of soul, absolutely good; others absolutely evil;
and others indifferent, as the passions. The husband or wife whose body is of a
perfect temper should seek for the like. For temperate added to temperate
changes not its temperature: Otherwise, it is fit that the defect of the one be
amended by the excess of the other. For the production of man, being the
noblest of all actions, requires a most perfect temperature of the four
Elements in the seed of the two parents; which would not be, if both of them be
hot and dry, or cold and moist. The virtuous must seek his like, the vicious
his unlike, for there is no friendship among the wicked, the converse of Thieves
not deserving that name. As for the passions, and the manners commonly
following them, it is fit that the husband have such as nature has most commonly
given to men, and, consequently, that he be unlike to the wife, and she to her
husband.

CONFERENCE LXVI.
I. Of Drunkenness. II. Of Dancing.

I. Of Drunkenness.
THe common saying, That the more excellent a thing is the more pernicious is
its abuse, is verified, chiefly, in Wine, which is not only the best of all
aliments, turning soonest into our substance, making fewest excrements and most
spirits, with which it has great affinity; but also the most excellent and
benign of all medicaments. For it so cheers and fortifies the heart that so
long as a man is cup-shot he is never invaded by the Pestilence, the Wine being
his antidote and preservative. It tempers the natural coldness of the Brain,
helps digestion, begets laudable blood, opens obstructions, attenuates gross
humors, and gives a good habit to the whole body. But taken in excess it
produces mischiefs without number; as the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie,
Convulsions, Catarrhes, and such other cold Diseases; the natural heat being
unable to overcome the actual coldness of the Wine in regard of its great
quantity. Yet this were not much, if its disorders did not reach the soul,
subverting its government, and clouding its beauty, defacing the character
which it bears of the Deity, and hindering those excellent functions of the
Intellect and the Will. So that Mnesitheus the Physician, with good reason,
termed Wine the greatest benefit, and the greatest mischief of man. And
therefore, as the Philosopher counseled such as were apt to fall into choler,
to behold themselves in a Looking-glass, for so the deformity of their aspect
would avert them from that vice: so he that is subject to be overcome with Wine
must, like the Lacedaemonians, behold the turpitude of this vice in others, and
so abhor it; for behold it in himself he cannot, because drunkenness prohibits
him the use of the Senses.

The Second said, Man being the most intemperate of all creatures has need of
virtues to moderate his irregular appetites of nutrition and generation, which
nature has seasoned with pleasure, as well as the other animal actions, whereof
as the moderate use is agreeable to nature, so the excess is contrary to
reason; which not enduring those gross and material pleasures of the Touch and
Taste, employs Temperance to repress the former by Chastity, and the latter by
Abstinence and Sobriety; the one as the rule for the eating, and the other for
drinking; both of them placed between two extremes; although their defect be so
rare that it has not yet found a name amongst Philosophers. But the excess of
eating is called Gluttony; that of Wine, Drunkenness. Now habitual Drunkenness
(Ebriosity) is never to be tolerated; but Ebriety may sometimes, for health's
sake, be allowed; yea every month, according to the Arabian Physicians, who
maintain that it strengthens all the faculties, which a regular life renders
drooping and languid. Whence also Hippocrates pronounces, in the end of his
third Book of Diet, and elsewhere, that too exquisite a regiment of living is
most dangerous; those that are accustomed to it being less able to endure any
errors which they may occasionally commit in their course of Diet.

The Third said, Drunkenness is a Laesion of the Animal Faculty, caused by the
vapors of some alimentary liquor. For medicaments, or poisons swallowed down,
cannot be said the cause of drunkenness; none ever having conceived that
Socrates died drunk when he had taken the potion of Hemlock, though he had all
the same symptoms which a drunken person has: nor is every Laesion of the
nobler faculties* Drunkenness; otherwise, the Phrenetick, Vertiginous, and such
as are troubled with tremulation of their members, ought to be accounted drunk,
their Reason, Memory, Imagination and Motion, being either depraved or
abolished, like theirs who are intoxicated. But such Laesion is not caused by
the fumes of Wine, which alone properly cause drunkenness; it deserves rather
to be termed Alienation of the Mind, which may be caused by other vapors
either internal or external, as by the smoke of Tobacco, the steam of a Cellar,
or any place where new Wine is boiled, as also that of Char-coal, which killed
the Emperor Jovinian. The Oil of Henbane-seed, as Pliny reports, being dropped
into the ears causes the same trouble of judgment. Matslack and Opium cause
the same disorder in the Turks that Darnel mingled with bread does in our
Peasants; and Baume, Frankincense, and the fruit called Anacardium mingled with
food. Among Beasts, the Ass is inebriated with Hemlock; the Swine with Henbane
or the husks of Grapes; all Fish with baits made of Oak-bark, coque de Levant
(a small medicinal shell called Vnguis odoratus) yea, Aristotle says, that
Flies are inebriated with the smell of perfumes, which therefore they abhor so
much, that the laying of some near their resort is enough to drive them away.
Now drunkenness properly taken is caused by the hot and moist vapors of Wine,
raised by the natural heat into the Brain, whose temperature they destroy by
their heat (which renders the motions of the soul violent) spoil its structure
by repletion of the Ventricles, distention of the membranes, humectation and
obstruction of its Nerves. For Wine being hot and moist, and inebriating by
those two qualities, it is therefore more uneasily born by hot or moist Brains.
Hence, the choleric, children, women, and old men, are less able to withstand
its violence, and are sooner overcome with it then those whose Brain is of a
middle temper, between hot and moist; who are therefore said to have good
Brains. For which reason stout drinking has been so much esteemed by some
Nations; and Cyrus found no better argument to evince himself worthier of
command then his brother Artaxerxes, then that he was a better drinker.
Moreover, Philip, Alexander, and Mithridates, counted it a glory to drink well;
but Socrates, Plato, Xenocrates, and many other Sages of Antiquity, disdained
not to carouse sometimes. And Homer speaking of the wise Hector, seldom forgets
his great goblet. The Athenians had good drinking in such repute, that they
established Magistrates, called Oenoptae, to preside at feasts, and give order
that every one did reason to his companion.

The Fourth said, According as heat or moisture predominate in Wine, so they
imprint their footsteps upon our bodies. The signs of heat are nimbleness of
action, anger, boldness, talking, ruddiness of the countenance, a pimpled Nose,
Eyes twinkling and bordered about with scarlet. Those of humidity are
slothfulness* numness and heaviness of the head, tears without cause, softness
and humidation of the Nerves, which makes the Drunkard reel and lispe; which
effects nevertheless are different according to the qualities of the Wine and
the Drinker's Brain. For if the streams of the Wine be hot and dry, and they be
carried into a hot and dry Brain, or a small Head, they cause watchings, and
render the man raging and furious. If they be more humid, as those of Wine
tempered with water (which is held to intoxicate more then pure Wine, because
the water assisted by that vehicle stays longer in the Brain) and the Brain be
moist too, they cause sleep; and laughter, when the sanguine humor meets a
more temperate Wine. For which variety of the effects of Wine, the ancients
represented Bacchus mounted upon a Tiger, with a Lion, a Swine, and an Ape by
his side.

The Fifth said, That to drink fasting, or when one is hot, furthers
intoxication, because the passages being opened by heat, more speedily attract
the Wine, and its vapors are more easily lift up to the brain; as also when
the stomach is empty, and the fumes of the Wine are not allayed by those of
meat. But as drunkenness may be procured by several means, so there are others
that preserve from it. Some make Wine utterly abhorred; as the water that
distills from the Vine, the Eggs of an Owl, or Wine wherein Eels or green
Froggs have been suffocated. Others repress its violence; as the Amethyst,
(which derives its name from its effect) a sheep's lungs roasted, the powder of
swallow's bills mingled with Myrrh; Saffron, bitter Almonds, Wormwood, Peach
kernels, the Wine of Myrtle, Oil, Colworts and Cabbage; which preservatives
were more in use among the Ancients who needed them more then we; their Wines
being more vaporous and hurtful then ours: Witness Homer, who speaking of the
Wine which Maron, Apollo's Priest, gave Ulysses, says, he could not drink of
it without tempering it with twenty times as much water as the strongest of our
Wines can bear.

The Sixth said, That Drunkenness, as vicious as it is, wants not its benefits.
For besides, that it is the Anodyne wherewith all laborious people relieve their
pains; it dispels cares, and loosens the Tongue. Whence Wine is called Lyaeus.
Which made one of Philip's Soldiers say, when he was accused of having spoken
ill of his Prince, That he should have spoken far worse of him, if he had not
wanted more Wine. So that the Proverb may be more true, that Liberty (rather
then Verity) is in Wine: And therefore some Lawyers advise, rather to inebriate
such as are accused of a crime then put them to the rack; according to the
example of Josephus, who by this means discovered a conspiracy laid against
him by a Soldier, whom he distrusted indeed, but had not proof enough to
convict him.

II. Of Dancing.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Harmony has such power over the Soul,
that it forces it to imitation. Whence those that hear an Air which they like
cannot forbear to chant it softly, and sometimes it makes such impression in
their Minds, that they cannot be rid of it when they would; as they experiment
who fall asleep upon some pleasing song, for many times they awake repeating
it. And because its powers delight not to be idle, therefore the Soul being
moved stirs up the spirits, they the humors and the parts, constraining them
to follow their bent and motion, which is called Dancing. This Dancing
therefore is a part of Music, which leads our members according to the cadence
of the notes of a voice or instrument. It imitates the manners, passions, and
actions of men; and consequently, is of different species. But their principal
division was anciently taken from their place and use. For either it was
private, and served at marriages; or Theatral, which again was of three sorts;
the the first grave and serious, practiced in Tragedies; the other more free,
in Comedies; and the third lascivious and dishonest, f^^ Satyrs. The other
differences relate to the Countries where they were in request, as the Ionick;
to their Authors, as the Pyrrick, invented by Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles, or
by Pyrrichius the Lacedaemonian, to their subject; to the instrument whose
eadence they follow; to what they imitate, as that which was called the Crane;
lastly, to the habits and other things which were worn in dancing. The most
ancient, as the easiest of all, was that which took its name from a net,
whereto it resembles, which is our dance in round; of which Thesius is made the
Author, as well as of that in which the dancers intermix and pass under one
another arms, imitating by these turnings and windings those of the Labyrinth.
But the Theatral, which the Mimes and Pantomimes represented in the Orchesters,
were like those of our ballads, and expressed all gestures so well, that a King
of Pontus liked nothing so much in Rome as one of these Mimes which he obtained
of Nero to serve him for an interpreter to Ambassadors. For gestures have this
above voices, that they are understood by all Nations, because they are the
lively and natural images of things and actions; whereas the voice and writing
are but signs by institution. And hence Dancing is very dangerous when it
imitates dishonest things; for it makes the strongest impression upon the Mind.

The Second said* That the God of Wine, surnamed by the Ancients Chorius, which
signifies Dancer; argues the mutual relation of dancing and Wine. It has
always been in so great esteem amongst warlike people, that the Lacedaemonians
and Thebans went to charge their Enemies with the music of Flutes and Hoboys;
and the former had a solemn day in which the old, the young, the middle-ag'd,
danced in three companies, with this Ditty, We have been, we are, and we shall
be brave fellows. The Athenians went so far as to honor Andronicus Caristius
an excellent dancer with a statue, and to choose Phrynicus their King for
having gracefully danced the Pyrrhick measures, which Scaliger boasts he had
often danced before the Emperor Maximilian. Moreover, the Romans committed the
charge thereof to their most sacred Pontifs, whom they called Salij, that is,
Leapers. Lucian, in the Treatise which he writ of it, ascribes the original of
dancing to Heaven, since not only all the celestial bodies, but also the
ocean, the hearts of living creatures, and other sublunary bodies imitate them,
following the course of the first mover. And indeed, as if dancing had
something of divine, it has always been employed in Sacrifices and the
holiest mysteries of Religion, not only by the Delians, who accompanied all
their prayers with dancing; and the Indians who adored the Sun by dancing and
imitating the course of that luminary; but also by the Prophet David before the
Ark, and by Saul, who being full of the Spirit of God fell to dancing with the
Children of the Prophets; as also did Miriam the sister of Moses, Judith when
she had killed Holofernes, and infinite others, in testimony of their
thanksgiving to God. The Muses themselves are painted by the Poets dancing
about their fountain upon Mount Helicon; Apollo is called dancer by Pindar; and
the Graces are represented dancing. Proteus, so celebrated by the Poets, became
famous only by this Art, and which he so excelled, that his nimble in strange
postures gave occasion to the fable of turning himself into all kind of shapes,
because sometimes he counterfeited the fluidity of the water, sometimes the
lightness of fire, the bending of trees, the rage of the Leopard, the cruelty
of the Lion; and in brief, the nature of every sort of things.

The Third said, That Dancing is composed of three parts, Motion, Gesture, and
Indication. For there is first a stirring up and down, then a representing
things by the Gestures of the Body, chiefly by the Hand; which Art is called
Chironomy; and those which are expert in it, Chirosophers, that is, wise by the
Hands. Hence Dancing is defined a motion of the Body, according to rule and
number, imitating by gesture things or persons, either with singing or without.
As Motion it is very delightful to Nature, which is as much pleased therein, as
rest is disagreeable to it. Nor is it less so as it includes an harmonious
proportion of measure, having this correspondence with Music, Poetry,
Eloquence, Painting, Comedy, and all other Arts, whose end is the delight of
man. But as it is an imitation it delights marvellously, we loving nothing so
much as to imitate, or to see some thing imitated. Hence works of Art please us
more then those of Nature; because Art does nothing but imitate her. Besides
its delightfulness, it is also profitable and honest. Its usefulness is
sufficiently known to Physicians, who make it a part of their Gymnastick
Physic, which treats of the exercises and motions prescribed in order to
health, and is divided into Palestrical and Saltatory. Moreover, Galen affirms,
that he cured many Patients by appointing them to dance, which is an exercise
of all parts of the body; whereas walking exercises only the legs; riding, the
intestines; bowling, the reins; going by ship, the stomach and brain. It Is also
very honest or decorous, since it forms and fashions the body, giving it a
good grace, one of the principal points of handsomeness. For the Soul having
the Sciences to instruct the Understanding, and the Moral Virtues to rectify
the Will; the body, its dear partner, needs some habit to regulate its defects,
the rather because they have influence upon the Soul; it being very difficult
for the motions of the Soul to be regular so long as those of the body are not.
Therefore Plato, in the seventh book of his Laws, requires that the instructers
of youth have equally care of the body and the soul, and for this purpose teach
them Music to regulate the motions of the Soul, and dancing to frame those of
the body, and give it gracefulness, as wrestling gives it strength.

CONFERENCE LXVII.
I. Of Death. II. Of the Will.

I. Of Death.
AS Being is the first and greatest good, because the foundation of all other
goods, so (speaking absolutely upon a natural account) the first and greatest
of all evils is the privation of that Being, which is Death; so terrible, that
not only brutes abhor the sight of their dead fellows, through fear of the
same death of which they behold an image of their carcases; but men likewise,
although their name of Mortals be a token of the necessity of their dying, yet
use all the vain attempts they can to avoid that death which they fear as the
most terrible of terrble things. Yea, all their great and violent actions and
passions, take their source from this fear; which is so much greater as the
evil is phancy'd nearer: Whence old or sick persons have more apprehension of
it then then those that are young and in health. The vulgar commonly labors
only through fear of starving. A man that is decrepit, yet, is willing to part
with a limb if he may by the loss respite his death, apprehended so terrible by
some, that the fear of it has killed some criminals before execution, and
carried others to such madness as to kill themselves for fear of dying.
Nevertheless, he that shall consider Death more nearly, will find that, being
but a privation, it is nothing; and that what we fear so much is only the way
to this death, or the sequel of it; the former, in respect of irrational
animals, and both in reference to man, who apprehends in the other life the
judgment of the actions of this. Otherwise, Death being only a point and a
moment, which has neither quantity nor extent, but approaches to Nothing, has
therefore nothing in it self for which it ought to be feared. For so long as
the Animal has sense it is not dead; and so soon as it is dead, it has no
more. And because it is a motion and passage from Being to not Being, between
which two there is no medium or middle; therefore it is a pure nothing, and
consequently, has no foundation saving in the troubled Fancy: Since upon due
perpension of things, that which is not is no-wise to be feared, by those that
are insensible, yea, that exist no more.

The Second said, That to maintain Death to be nothing, is to accuse not only
all men of folly in fearing what exists not, and consequently, is not capable
of producing any effects or passions; but likewise, Nature of imprudence, in
having imprinted this apprehension in all creatures for their preservation. As
therefore Reason and Experience teach us that there are substantial
generations; so the same show us the true and substantial corruptions of all
compounds; which corruption, in a thing endu'd with life, is called Death,
which is the separation of the Soul from the Body. For the Platonists are
ridiculous when they make two kinds of this separation, namely, that of the
Soul from the Body, which they call Ecstasy, and that of the Body from the
Soul, which alone they say is to be called Death: For they are both one and the
same thing; and Ecstasy is not a separation of essence, but of power, happening
when the Soul is so glu'd to an object, in the contemplation whereof it
employes all its powers, that there remains none for corporeal functions; the
Eyes not perceiving what is then presented to them. Whence the Soul being more
where it loves then where it lives, is also more where it understands. Now
Death is either natural or violent. The former caused by the consumption of the
radical moisture of plants and animals. For they alone are capable of dying, as
they are of living; what they attribute to Fire, the Lodestone, and some other
inanimates, being purely Metaphorical. Violent death is produced either by
internal causes, as diseases, or by external. It Is caused by destroying the
harmony of the parts and humors, which constituted life; after which
destruction, the Soul not finding the organs longer meet for exercising its
functions, (as Fire that wants unctuous and combustible humidity) forsakes its
matter to retire into its own sphere. And though the corruption of one be the
generation of another, there being no matter but has always some form, as
Bees are generated out of dead Oxen; yet there is this distinction, that the
progress of a form less noble to one that is more, is called generation or
life, as when an Egg is made a chick; but when this progress is made from a
more noble form to a less, as from a man to a carcass, then it is called
Corruption and Death, if the form preceding were vital. Thus all are ways of
Death which lead to corruption. The first of these ways is life, for nothing
comes under its Laws but is subject to those of Death, considering the ways
that we dye as we are borne, and that our end depends on our original; as there
is no harmony but must end in discord, the latter note not being capable to
accord with the first rest, which is the end or death of harmony; whereunto our
life is not only compared, but may be fitly defined by it, that Galen,
enlightened by Reason alone, conceived the Soul to be nothing else.

The Third said, That only in the death of men there is a separation of the
Soul from the Body; seeing that after the death of animals and plants there
still remain faculties in their bodies which cannot depend on the sole mistion
of the Elements, but must be referred to some internal principle, which can be
no other then their Soul. Yet with this difference, that as during life these
faculties were as forms in their matter, so after death they are as substances
in their place, though without any activity, for want of necessary
dispositions; which return afterward by generation, or the action of the
celestial bodies, producing worms and other animals, which come of themselves,
and never but from a nature formerly animated, not receiving by this new
generation any substantial form, but only making the Soul appear; which was
kept as 'twere buried before this resuscitation. Thus the death of plants and
beasts is the privation of their vegetative and sensitive actions, the
principle of those actions always remaining, But that of men, besides this
privation of their actions, causes the dissolution of the Soul from the Body,
which is properly death. The inevitable necessity whereof is by Avicenna
derived from four chief causes I. From the Air, which alters and dryes us. II.
From our own heat, which by accident destroys it self. III. The continual
motion of our bodies furthers the dissipation of that heat. IV. The various
Inclination of the Elements, some of which are carried upwards, others
downwards, and so break the union which preserves our life. Albert the Great
assigns a fifth cause, namely, the contrariety of forms and qualities; death
happening when humidity has given place to dryness. But because this excess
of dryness might be corrected by its contrary, therefore the Moderns lay the
fault upon the radical moisture. Which some of them say we receive from our
Parents, and is continually impaired, without being at all recruited from the
birth. But this is absurd; for then the Son must have infinitely less then his
Father, because he receives but a very small portion, which (besides) cannot be
distributed through a great body, nor afford supply to so many actions. Others,
more probably, affirm, that the Humidum which is repaired is not of the same
purity with that which we derive from the principles of our birth, by reason of
reaction, and its being continually altered by our heat. But that which
indubitates this reason, is, that the Elements do not maintain themselves but
by reaction, notwithstanding which they cease not to be always in the same
state; Fire as hot, Air as moist as ever it was: Inasmuch as the substantial
forms expel all Qualities which are not suitable to themselves, and recover
their natural ones, without other assistance. Moreover, when old men beget
children, they communicate to them an excellent radical humidity, otherwise
there would be no generation; and consequently, they can do as well for
themselves as for their posterity. But if they give them such as is bad and
corrupt, it follows that their children who live after their death re-produce
much better by their nutrition then that which they had received; and,
consequently, the radical humidity may not only be repaired, but meliorated.
And there is no reason why an exact course of diet may not keep a man from
dying, as the Chemists promise. I had therefore rather say that as the union of
the Soul with the Body is unknown to humane wit, so is their disunion; which I
ascribe rather to the pleasure of the supreme Ruler, who causes us to abide
sentinel as long as he thinks meet, then to any natural thing; which is the
reason why those that deprive themselves of life are justly punished; because
they dispose of what is not their own, although it seems to the vulgar that
they do wrong to none but themselves, because it is by their own will and act.

The Fourth said, What is composed of contraries, between which there is
continual action, necessarily receives sundry changes and alterations in its
being, which by degrees bring it to a total corruption. This is conspicuously
seen in the life of man, the ages and all other mutations whereof are as so
many steps toward death. It Is the most worthy employment of a man to consider
that he dies every day. For, as Seneca says, that which deceives us is, that
we consider death as afar off; whereas a great part of it is already passed,
for it already possesses all the time that we have been; which is the cause,
that instead of employing our time profitably, we consume a great part of it in
doing nothing, a greater part in doing ill, and all in doing other things then
ought to be; which proceeds from not thinking often enough upon death; as which
no Preacher is so powerful. For the fear it imprints in the soul virtue it self
cannot wholly eradicate; the sole aspect of the shades of the dead, or their
voices imprinting paleness upon the countenance of the most resolute. Therefore
the Philosopher holds that the fear of death is not only competible with
courage, but that he who fears it not at all, rather deserves the name of mad
then valiant.

The Fifth said, That they who have had recourse to death to deliver themselves
from their miseries, as Brutus, Cato, his daughter Portia, and some others,
have showed thereby that death is not the most terrible thing, since they
embraced it as a remedy to their misfortunes. But that which renders our
experience as well as our reasoning weak in this matter, is, that none can give
account of it either before or after trial; for while we live, it is not yet,
and when it is, we are no longer. Nevertheless Plato, in his Timaeus, affirms
that violent death caused by diseases or wounds is painful, but not that which
comes of old age, which (he says happens by dissolution of the triangles which
retain the Soul in the Body. For the former being against nature is as
troublesome to it, as the other which following the course of nature is
agreeable to it; because the soul having finished its task begins now to resent
some foretastes of beatitude; and hence it begins also to have some knowledge
of future things. At least, this sort of death is very little sensible, being
caused slowly and equally, and by consequence without pain. Yea, if it be true
that the Heart is the last part that dies, the brain losing sense before the
Heart cannot communicate the same to the whole body; which consequently feels
not the pains of death, but those which lead to it, and which make their pangs
more felt by those that bear up against them; by reason of the resistance of
their strength, then when the strength is overcome and fails; whence those that
have Apoplexies endure no pain during the course of their malady. And such as
have been taken down half dead from the Gallows, agree that they endured
nothing but fear. For which cause this kind of death is accounted very easy
and without any sense; the brain being deprived thereof by compression of the
Carotides, Arteries which carry the spirits to it, and become apoplectical by
the quantity of blood which is included in it; as also the heart being stifled
falls into deliquium, and the principal parts are deprived of sense by the
constriction of the Nerves of the sixth pair. Those whom a Gangrene in the leg
or arm (parts more sensible then those within) brings to their end, affirm that
oftentimes death comes upon them without pain. Indeed, since life ends as it
begins, and the soul goes out of the body after the same manner that it entered
into it; therefore as, at its entrance, it first exercises the vegetative
operations, afterward the sensitive; so the vegetative faculty remains last,
subsists in the dying creature when all the rest are extinct, and is lost
without sense, in the same manner as in Plants. For the convulsive motions of
dying persons argue not their having of sense, since those that are in an
Epileptical fit suffer much greater without pain.

II. Of the Will.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That every created thing having a tendency
toward its chief natural good, has also faculties whereby to attain the same.
This chief good is the supreme perfection of its being. And because that of man
consists in knowing truth, loving good, and being united by enjoyment to both
the one and the other, he has been likewise furnished with powers for this
end; two, wherewith to know, and as many to love, according to the two sorts of
goods whereof he is capable, as composed of a sensitive part and an
intellectual. He knows sensible good by help of the Senses, which gust the same
in its whole latitude, and honest good by the Understanding. He loves sensible
good by the sensitive appetite, and honest good by the Will, which is a
rational desire of good. For it loves not any good which has not first been
judged such by reason, which serves it in stead of eyes, being a blind faculty
of it self, that is, without knowledge; whence they say, knowing must go before
loving. And it is not necessary that this good be truly such of its own nature;
if it be apprehended as such, this is sufficient to render it the object of our
will. Nevertheless being good but in appearance it only takes the will for a
while, but does not satiate it as honest good does, toward which we have a
natural inclination. Whence it is that such as have deviated from it, as soon
as their understanding is rectified, resent an inward grief thereupon, which is
that dictate of Reason called Synteresis.

The Second said, That the Will is the mistress of all the animal powers, which
it causes to operate and forbear as it pleases; exercising its dominion too
over the Understanding, which it commands to take notice of, and contemplate,
one object rather then another. Nevertheless as the pores subject to it are
disserent, so is the empire distinct which it exercises over them. For that
which it has over the loco-motive faculty is a despotical empire, such as a
Master has over his servant; that which it has over the sensitive appetite
and other faculties, is Political, like that of a Magistrate over his fellow
Citizens, who obey him so, that yet they forbear not to do many things without
him and even against his will. The motions of the sensitive appetite being
herein like those of the Celestial Spheres, which follow that of their superior
Sphere, and nevertheless have a contrary one of their own. And this Appetite is
carried not only to its particular object without the command of the Will; but
also toward things wholly contrary to it; and this, for punishment of the sin
whereby the will rebelling against God deserved that the appetite, at first
subject to it, should become rebellious to it, destroying the agreeable harmony
which appeared in the state of innocence. Which contrariety is the greater, in
as much as the object of the will is honest, which is commonly difficult; and
that of the sensitive appetite delectable: which two being opposite draw it
several ways; and hence arise the conflicts of the flesh against the spirit,
yea the same man at the same time, and for the same thing, feels contrary
motions in himself; a certain evidence of their real difference.

The Third said, It Is the Will alone that makes us happy or unhappy, since it
makes us good or bad; and nothing is such unless it be voluntary and free.
Hence it has so great a power that it alone overrules the Stars which govern
all; being capable of having inclinations contrary to theirs. It is known, as
other faculties are, by its actions, which are either extrinsecal, as
commanding the animal faculties, or within it self, as willing or not willing,
pursuing or aversion, joying or grieving. For the property of man being to know
his end as such, if this end be good, he wills it; if evil, he wills it not; if
absent, he pursues it; if present, he enjoys it: if the evil be absent, he
averts from it; if present, he is afflicted by it. But before the will attain
this end, it proposes, consults, and deliberates of the means to arrive
thereunto, which it compares together in order to find which is most expedient,
and is carried to the same with perfect freedom.

CONFERENCE LXVIII.
I. Of the Magnetical Cure of Diseases. II. Of Anger.

I. Of the Magnetical cure of Diseases.
It Is requisite to agree upon the Facts before inquiry into Right. Now many
Authors report that wounds have been cured by the sole application of a certain
Unguent (which for this reason they call Armarium) to the instrument or
offensive weapon that made it. And Goclenius, a German Physician, affirms that
he saw a Swedish Lady cure one of her servants so, that had been hurt by a blow
with a knife by his companion; and that this cure is very common, having been
practiced in presence of the Emperor Maximilian. Yea, that it is ordinary for
the Peasants of his Country to cure hurts in their feet, by sticking the nails
or thorns which made them in Lard or Bacon. Many Farriers cure pricked horses
by digging up as much ground as their foot covered. Behold the ordinary
composition of the aforesaid Ointment. Take an ounce of the unctuous matter
that sticks on the inside of the Scull of one hanged and left in the air; let
it be gathered when the Moon increases, and is in the Sign either of Pisces,
Taurus or Libra, and as near as may be to Venus, of Mummie and man's blood yet
warm, of each as much; of man's fat, two ounces; of Lin-seed-oyl, Turpentine,
and Bole Armenick, of each two drams; mingle altogether in a Mortar, and keep
the mixture in a long-neck'd glass well stopped. It must be made while the Sun
is in the Sign Livra; and the Weapon must be anointed with it, beginning from
that part which did the mischief; from the point to the hilt, if it be a
thrust; and from the edge, if it be a cut or blow. Every morning the Patient
must wash his hurt with his own Urine, or else with warm water, wiping away the
pus which would hinder unition. The weapon must be swathed (as the wound uses
to be) and kept in a temperate place. For otherwise, they say, the Patient will
feel pain. If you would hasten the cure, the weapon must be dressed often; and
if you doubt of the part which did the mischief, it must be dipped all over in
unguent. If the hurt be small, 'twill be enough to dress the weapon every other
day; washing the hurt every morning and evening. But this is not to be
practiced in wounds of the Arteries, Heart, Liver and Brain; because it would
be to no purpose. Now by the nature of the ingredients and their conformity
with us, their effect seems to be natural, and grounded upon the sympathy that
there is between the blood issued from the wound and remaining on the weapon,
and that which is left in the wounded body, so that the one communicates to the
other what good or evil it receives, although it be separated from the whole.
As they affirm that those whose leg or arm is cut off, endure great pains when
those parts that were lop'd off corrupt in the earth. Which happens not, if
they be carefully embalmed. So the Be, the Viper, and the Scorpion, heal the
hurts made by themselves. Of which no other reason is alleged, but this
correspondence and similitude of the parts to their whole; the bond of which is
very strong, although to us invisible.

The Second said, There Is no need of recurring to these superstitious remedies,
since Nature of her own accord heals wounds, provided they be not in the noble
parts, and be kept clean from the impurities generated in them through their
weakness, which hinder unition; which is an effect of the natural Balsam of the
blood; and therefore not to be attributed to those Chimerical inventions, which
have no affinity with the cure whereunto they are intitl'd. For every natural
agent is determined to a certain sphere of activity, beyond which it cannot
act; so the fire burns what it touches, heats what approaches it, but acts not
at any remote distance whatever. Moreover, time and place would in vain be
accounted inseparable accidents from natural motions, if this device held good;
considering that contact is requisite to every natural action, which is either
Mathematical, when surfaces and extremities are together; or Physical, when the
agents touch the Patients by some virtue that proceeds from them. Neither of
which can be, unless the body which heals touches that which is healed. For all
Medicinal effects being to be referred to Elementary qualities, there is none
of them more active then heat; which being circumscribed within its bounds,
even in the aliment of fire, can be no less elsewhere.

The Third said, That the doctrine of the common Philosophy which teaches that
natural agents always touch one the other is erroneous, or else ill explained
and dependent upon other false principles which attribute all actions to
elementary qualities, which are taken for univocal causes, whereas themselves
are but equivocal effects of other supreme causes, the first of which is
Heaven. For when God created the world immediately with his own hands, he was
pleased to commit the conduct of natural causes to the Heavens, that he might
not be obliged to make every day new miracles, as were those of the Creation.
For this end he filled them with spirits sufficient to inform all sorts of
matters, whose mixture required some new form and change. This made the
Philosopher say, that the Sun and Man beget Man; and Hermes, in his Smaragdine
Table, that the things which are below are as those which are on high. And the
Astrologers hold that there is nothing here below but has some proper and
peculiar Star, some of which appear, but far more appear not in the Heavens, in
regard of their disproportion to our sight, or their near conjunction as in the
milky way. But if the respective correspondencies of all the Celestial Bodies
be not so clearly evident in other sublunary bodies as that of the Pole Star is
with the Lodestone, of dew with the Sun, of this and the Moon with the
Heliotrope and Selenotrope, yet are they no less true. It Is credible therefore
that the Weapon-salve has such sympathy with the Constellation which is to
make the cure of the wound, that by its magnetic virtue it attracts its
influence from Heaven, and reunites it (as a Burningglass does the Sunbeams at
as great distance) by which means it is derived to the instrument that made the
wound, communicating its healing virtue to the same, as the Sun likewise
communicates his heat to the earth, which heats us afterward: and thus this
instrument being indu'd with a sanative virtue communicates the same to the
wound made by it; the cure of which, besides the form and connection of the
instrumental cause with the effect, is furthered by Nature, (which always tends
to preserve it self) and the imagination of the wounded person (which induces
Hippocrates to require that the Patient have hope and confidence in his
Physician) for this (as its contrary ruins many by dejecting their strength)
does miracles toward a recovery. The contact above spoken of has no
difficulty, nor yet the objection why other wounded persons residing in some
intermediate place between the anointed Instrument and the Patient are not
rather cured then he; considering that the same thing is observed in the
Lodestone, which draws not the wood or stone laid near it, but the Iron beyond
them; and the Sun heats not the Sphere of the Moon, and the other Heavens, nor
yet the two higher Regions of the air, but only ours cross that vast interval
of cold and humid air; because he finds no congruency thereunto, besides the
not reflection of his beams. Wherefore the contact of the anointed Javelin and
the Wound may as well be called Physical as that of the Sun and us, which never
stirs from his Sphere. Besides that we have examples of many contacts made
without manifest mediums, as those of pestilential and contagious Fevers, of
blear'd-eyes, of the Wolfes aspect causing hoarsness, and the killing looks of
the Basilisk. And indeed if you take away all cures that are wrought by occult
and inexplicable means, there will be nothing admirable in Physic.

The Fourth said, That in assigning the reason of effects, men ordinarily
mistake that for a cause which is not so. The Rose is not cold because it is
white, for the Red-rose is so too: Spurge is not hot because it has a milky
juice, for so have Lettice, Eudive, etc. which are cold: Aloes is not hot
because it is bitter, for Opium, which kills through its coldness, is of the
same taste. They also erroneously attribute the cure of diseases to sympathy,
to the power of characters, words, images, numbers, celestial figures, and such
other things which have no activity at all: and most extraordinary cures are
effects of the strength of the Mind, which is such that where it believes any
thing firmly, it operates what it believes, and that with efficacy, provided,
the subject on which it acts do not repugne. But if it comes to have a firm
belief of the effect, then it follows far more easily. For if the understanding
is identifi'd with what it knows, why shall it not make things like to it self?
To which firm belief I refer the magnetic cure of wounds, and not to that
sympathy of the blood on the weapon with that in the veins; since if two parts
of the same body be wounded, the healing of the one will not suffice to the
healing of the other; and yet there is more sympathy between the parts of the
same body animated with the same form then they have with a little extravasated
blood which has lost all the dispositions that it had like the whole mass.

II. Of Anger.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That Nature has so provided for the
contentment of animals that she has given them not only an appetite, to pursue
good and avoid evil, when both may be done without difficulty; but also a
different one, to give courage to the former, and to surmount the difficulties
occurring in the pursuit of that good, and the eschewance of that evil, termed
the Irascible appetite, from anger the strongest of its passions; which serves
to check the pungency of grief, as fear and boldness come to the assistance of
flight, and desire is guarded with hope and despair. This is the opinion of
Plato, who makes three sorts of souls; one which reasons, another which covets,
and the third which is displeased; the former of which he places in the Brain,
the second in the Liver, and the last in the Heart. Anger then is a passion of
the Irascible Appetite caused by the apprehension of a present evil which may
be repelled, but with some difficulty. Its principle is the soul; its
instrument the spirits; its matter the blood; its seat the heart, not the will,
as Cardan erroneously conceived; for the actions of the will, not being
organical, make no impressions or footsteps upon the body. It proceeds either
from a temper of body hot and dry, and easy to be inflamed, or from the
diversity of seasons, times, ages and sexes. Hence the choleric and young
persons are more inclined to it then the phlegmatic and aged; because they
have a temper more proper to this passion: Women and children are easily
displeased through weakness of spirit; as it is a sign of a sublime spirit not
to be troubled at any thing, but to believe that as every thing is below it
self, so nothing is capable to hurt it. Which reason Aristotle made use of to
appease the choler of Alexander, telling him that he ought never to be incensed
against his inferiors, but only against his equals or superiors; and there
being none that could equal, much less surpass him, he had no cause to fall
into anger.

The Second said, That the Faculties extending to contraries, the eye beholding
both white and black, and the ear hearing all sort, of sounds, only the
sensitive appetite is carried both to good and evil, whether accompanied with
difficulties or not, as the will alone is carried toward all kind of good and
evil. And as the same gravity inclines the stone toward its center, and makes
it divide the air and water which hinder it from arriving thither, so the
sensitive appetite by one and the same action is carried to good, flees evil,
and rises against the difficulties occurring in either. Thus anger and grief
are in one sole appetite; yea anger is nothing but grief for an evil which may
be repelled. For it has no place when the offender is so potent that there is
no hope of revenge upon him; although it is rare that a man esteems so low of
himself as not to be able to get reason for a wrong done him, or apprehended to
be done him; this passion, as all others, being excited by causes purely
imaginary. Thus a single gesture, interpreted a contempt, offends more then a
thrust with a sword by inadvertency. And this the more if the contemners be our
inferiors, or obliged to respect us upon other accounts. Which makes the
enmities between relations or friends irreconcilable. For as a good not
foreseen rejoices more, so the injury of a friend displeases us far above one
done us by our enemies, against whom he seemed to have some reason who implored
not so often the aid of Heaven, (because he said Nature taught him to beware of
them) as against his friends, because he did not distrust them.

The Third said, Anger may be considered two ways, either according to its
matter, or its form. In the former way it is defined an Ebullition of the blood
about the Heart. In the latter, a desire, with grief, to be revenged for an
injury done to himself, or his friends, whom a man is obliged to uphold;
especially if they be too weak to avenge themselves. Injury consists either in
deeds, or words, or gestures. The first is the most evident, and oftimes least
sensible; for words offend more; because, being the image of thoughts, they
show us the little esteem made of us. And as gesture is more expressive then
words, so a contempt signified by it touches more to the quick then any other;
because he that contemns us with a simple gesture accounts us unworthy of all
the rest. Now if this contempt be offered in the presence of those that honor
us, or by whom we desire to be valued and admired, it excites our choler the
more if it be truth, which always displeases us when it tells our defects,
especially by the mouth of our enemy. But none are so soon provoked as they
that are desirous of some good. For then the least things incense; because
desire being of an absent good cannot subsist with the least present evil (the
object of anger) because of their contrariety, importuning the actions of the
soul, which is troubled in the pursuit of good by the presence of evil. Whence,
says Aristotle, there needs but a small matter to anger Lovers, sick people,
indigent, those that miscarry in their affairs, and are excruciated with hunger
or thirst. It Is therefore an error to say, that choler is the cause of anger,
and it is vain to purge this humor in order to remedy this passion, since the
cause is external, not internal; and is formed first in the brain by the
imagination of an injury received; after which the Soul, desirous of revenge,
stirs the motive power; this the blood and spirits, which cause all the
disorders observed in angry persons.

The Fourth said, That disorders caused by Anger are not to be wondered at,
since it is composed of the most unruly passions, love, hatred, grief, pleasure,
hope and boldness. For the source of anger is self-love; we hate him that does
the injury, we are troubled at the offense, and receive contentment in the hope
of being revenged; and this hope gives boldness. Now Anger is one of the most
deformed and monstrous passions, so violent that it enervates not only the
contractive motion of the Heart by dilating it too much, and sending forth the
blood and spirits, (which cause an extraordinary heat, and force in all the
members, and sometimes a Fever;) but also that of dilation by shutting it too
much, in case the grief for the evil present be great, and there be hopes of
revenging it. The Countenance looks pale, afterward red, the Eye sparkles, the
Voice trembles, the Pulse beats with violence, the Hair becomes stiff, the
Mouth foams, the Teeth clash, the Hand cannot hold, the Mind is no longer in
its own power, but is besides it self for some time; Anger not differing from
Rage but in duration. Which made a Philosopher tell his servant, That he would
chastise him were he not in Anger: And the Emperor Theodosius commanded his
Officers never to execute any, by his command, till after three days; and the
Philosophers Xenodorus to counsel Augustus, not to execute any thing when he
found himself in choler, till after he had repeated softly the twenty four
letters of the Greek Alphabet. The truth is, if this passion be not repressed,
it transports a man so out of himself, that he is incensed not against men
only, but even against beasts, plants, and inanimate things; such was
Ctesiphon, who in great fury fell to kicking with a mule; and Xerxes, who
scourged the Sea. Yea, it reduces men to such brutality, that they fear not to
lose themselves for ever, so they may but be revenged of those that have
offended them; as Porphyrie and Tertullian did, the former renouncing
Christianity, and the other embracing Montanus's Heresy, to revenge themselves
of some wrong which they conceived they had received from the Catholics. And
our damnable Duels, caused by this passion, have oftentimes to satisfy the
revenge of one, destroyed two, Body and Soul.

CONFERENCE LXIX.
I. Of Life. II. Of Fasting.

I. Of Life.
THe more common a thing is, the more difficult it is to speak well of it;
witness sensible objects, the nature whereof is much in the dark to us,
although they always present themselves to our senses. Thus nothing is more
easy then to discern what is alive from what is not; and yet nothing is more
difficult then to explicate the nature of Life well, because it is the union of
a most perfect form with its matter, into which the mind of man sees not a jot;
even that of accidents with their subject being unknown, although it be not so
difficult to conceive as the first. Some have thought that the form which gives
life is not substantial but only accidental, because all (except the rational)
arise from the Elementary Qualities, and accidents can produce nothing but
accidents. But they are mistaken, since whereas nothing acts beyond its
strength, if those forms were accidents, they could not be the causes of such
mavelous and different effects, as to make the fruits of the Vine, Figtree,
etc. and blood in Animals; to attract, retain, concoct, expel, and exercise
all the functions of the Soul; which cannot proceed from heat alone, or any
other material quality. Besides, if the forms of animated bodies were
accidents, it will follow that substance (which is compounded of Form as well
as of Matter) is made of accidents; and consequently, of that which is not
substance, contrary to the received Axiom. Therefore Vital Forms are
substances, though incomplete, whose original is Heaven, the Author of Life and
all sublunary actions.

The Second said, That the Soul being the principle of Life; according to the
three sorts of Souls, there are three sorts of Life, namely, the Vegetative,
Sensitive, and Rational; differing according to several sublimations of the
matter. For the actions of attracting and assimilating food, and the others
belonging to Plants, being above those of stones and other inanimate things,
argue in them a principle of those actions, which is the Vegetative Soul. Those
of moving, perceiving, imagining, and remembering, yet nobler then the former,
flow from the Sensitive Soul. But because the actions of the Intellect and the
Will are not only above the matter, but are not so much as in the matter, (as
those of Plants and Animals) being immanent, and preserved by the same powers
that produced them, they acknowledge for their principle a form more noble then
the rest, which is the Rational Soul, the life of which is more perfect. And as
the Plantal Life is the first and commonest, so it gives the most infallible
vital tokens, which are nutrition, growth, and generation. Now that all three
be in all living bodies: For Mushrooms live but propagate not; as some things
propagate, yet are not alive; so bulls blood buried in a dunghill produces
worms; others are nourished but grow not, as most Animals when they have
attained their just stature; yea, not every thing that lives is nourished; for
House-leek continues a whole year in its verdure and vivacity being hung at the
seeling: Nor dos every thing grow alike, for we see Dodder, which resembles
Epithymum, clinging to a bunch of grapes, or other fruit hanging in the Air,
grows prodigiously without drawing any nourishment from it or elsewhere.
Whereby it appears that there is no Rule but has its exception, since Nature
which gives the same to all things, oftentimes dispenses with her self.

The Third said, The Soul is the act of an Organnical Body endu'd with Life,
and the principle of vegetation, sense, and motion; according to Aristotle, an
Intellective or continual motion; according to Plato, a Number moving it. And
consequently, Life is nothing but motion; and a thing may be said to be alive
when it is able to move it self by any kind of motion, whether of generation or
corruption, accretion or diminution, local motion or alteration. For the most
evident sign of Life is self-motion. Whence we call such, Living Waters, which
flow; and those dead, which stand still; although improperly, because this
motion is extrinsical to them, namely, from their source, and the declivity of
the earth. The Pythagoreans therefore believed the Heaven animated, because it
is moved according to all the differences of place; and that this Animal is
nourished with the Air which it draws out of the spaces which we call
Imaginary. Now as powers are known, so they are distinguished by their actions.
So that the perfecter the motion is which denotes Life, the perfecter the Life
is. Therefore, as Oysters and other imperfect Animals, endu'd with sense, enjoy
a nobler life then plants, which only vegetate; so they are inferior to other
perfect Animals, which besides sense have progressive motion; and these, again,
the slower and more impedite their motion is, the more they yield in dignity to
others; as the Snail to the Dog and Hare. In brief, these are less noble then
Man, whose Soul is moved after a more admirable manner; and who has the
faculty of Understanding, the most perfect of all; which being found in God in
a far higher degree, beause it constitutes his whole essence, being and
Understanding (being in him one and the same thing) he has the most perfect
life of all. Which is the cause why our Lord says, that he is the Life.
Moreover, as the First Matter, which is the lowest of all things that are, (if
it may be said to be) has need iof all; so the sublimest of all things, God,
has need of nothing, but includes in himself all perfections, the chiefest of
which is Life, which all Creatures enjoy only by participation from him.

The Fourth said, Life is a continual action of Heat upon humidity, the periods
whereof are distinguished by the several effects of this heat, to wit, the
alterations of temper, and diversity of ages. For it is Physically as well as
Morally true, which Job says, that our life is a warfare upon the earth, since
a thing is not accounted living unless so far as it acts, Death being the
privation of actions; and there is no action but between contrary qualities, of
which heat and moisture are the foundation of life, as cold and siccity are the
concomitants of death, old age which leads us thither being also cold and dry.
Hence they are the longest lived who have most heat, as Males then Females;
terrestrial animals then Fish, those which have blood then those which have
not. As also those that abound with this humidity live long, provided it have
the qualities requisite, namely, be fat, aerious, and not aqueous or
excrementitious, because otherwise it easily cools and congeals, and by that
means incongruous to life.

The Fifth said, That heat being the most noble and active of all qualities
executes all the functions of life, when it meets with organs and dispositions
suitable thereunto. This heat must be in act, and not only in power, such as
that of Lime and Pepper is. And though it be not so sensible in plants, yet it
ceases not to be actually in them so long as they are alive, and to digest and
assimilate the aliments which it draws for them out of the earth ready
prepared; whence they have no excrements as animals have. With whom
nevertheless they have so great resemblance that Plato, in his Timaeus, says,
that Plants are tanquam animala; and Pythagoras conceived them to be informed
with the souls of some men, who having lived in the world without exercising
other actions then those of the vegetative life, addicting themselves to
nothing but to feed and generate, are condemned to pass into the bodies of
Plants; as the souls of those who have lead a brutish life are relegated into
those of Swine, Tygres, Lions, and other brutes whose manners they had
imitated. Empedocles and Anaxagoras, as Aristotle reports, attributed to Plants
a perception of pain and pleasure. Moreover, they have not only their maladies,
old age and death, as animals have, but some too have differences of sex, and
local motion, as it is observed of certain Palms which bend toward one
another; and of diverse other Plants which recoil from those that are contrary
to them, and grow best near others.

The Sixth said, Life is nothing but the union of the soul with the body; which
requires a fitting temperature and conformation; from whence afterward proceed
all actions and motions both internal and external. Wherefore life is not an
action of an action; (which is absurd) but has its own actions. Nor is it the
action of the soul; for then the body could not be said to live. But it is the
act of the soul in the body; which being finite and terminated, as heat its
principal instrument is, this is the cause that all living bodies have the
terms or bounds of their quantity, both as to greatness and smallness; but
bodies inanimate have not so, because they acquire their quantity only by the
approximation and apposition of their matter, and not by receiving the same
inwardly; and because they have no organs which require a certain conformation
and magnitude which they never exceed.

II. Of Fasting.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That there are many sorts of corporal
Fasts (not to speak of the spiritual, which is abstinence from sin.) There is
one of necessity, and the most intolerable of all, which made the ancient Poets
declaim against Poverty, saying that it was to be cast into the sea against the
rocks; and which made so few Cynicks, in respect of so many other Sects of
Philosophers. Against which evil there is no other remedy, but to make that
voluntary which cannot be avoided. There are fasts of thrift for the Covetous;
and others of Policy* observed in many States to good purpose, lest the Country
be desolated of Cattle; and would be, should men eat eggs and flesh in the
beginning of the Spring, when Fowls hatch and Beasts engender, at which time
the flesh of animals is unwholesome because they begin then to enter into heat.
There is a fast of Health, ordained by Physicians to such as are full-bodied,
and abound with ill humors; this is the best liked of all; nothing being
undertaken so willingly as for health, whereunto moderate fasting greatly
conduces, as well to preserve it, (according to the Proverb, that Gormandise
has slain more then the Sword) as recover it, according to the advice of the
Arabians, and other Physicians, who all acknowledge intemperance for their best
friend, and are wont to prescribe Diet in the first place, to which belong
primarily Fasting, then Medicaments, and, lastly, Cauteries. There is also a
moral fast, which is a virtue which in eating observes a measure suitable to
nature, and right reason, for the taming of the sensual appetite, and
increasing the vigor of mind, which is enervated by plenty of meats. A virtue
which S. Austin calls the keeper of the memory and Judgment, Mistress of the
Mind, Nurse of Learning and Knowledge. But the Fast of Religion is the most
excellent of all, because it refers immediately to God, who by this means is
satisfied for sins; because it abates the lust of the flesh, and raises the
spirit to contemplation of sublime things, purifying the soul, and subduing the
flesh to the spirit; but particularly that of Lent, whose sutableness is
manifest, in that this time is the tenth part of the year, which we offer to
God, as from all antiquity the tenths of every thing were dedicated to him.
Moreover, it is observed that Moses and Elias who fasted forty days (the longest
fast mentioned in Scripture) merited to be present at our Lord's
Transfiguration.

The Second said, Fasting is an abstinence from food, as to quantity or
quality. As to the first, some have abstained long from all kind of food, as
Histories assure us; and Pliny tells of the Astomi, a people of India near the
River Ganges, who have no mouths, but live only upon smells. But it is
abstinence too when we eat little and soberly, and only so much as is needful
for support of life; such as were the abstinences of the Persians and the
Lacedaemonians, with whom it was a shameful thing to belch, or blow the Nose;
these being signs of having taken more food then nature is able to digest. The
Gymnosophists, Magi, and Brachmans, rigorously observed these fasts. In
quality, we abstain from some certain meats. Thus the Jews abstained from all
animals except such as chewed the Cud, and were cloven hoof'd. And amongst them
the Nazarites were forbidden by God to drink Wine or any inebriating liquor; as
the Essceans, a Sect of Monasticks, besides Wine, abstained from flesh and
women. Pythagoras abhorred Beans as much as he loved Figs, either because the
first were used in condemning criminals, or because they excited lust by their
flatuosity. None of this Sect touched fish, out of reverence to the silence of
this animal; and they made conscience of killing other creatures in regard of
their resemblance with us. which was also observed by the first men before the
Flood for 2000 years together; the Law of Nature, which then bore sway, making
the same abhorred. But this fast is much harder in our diversity of fare then
when only Acorns served for food to our first Fathers; when the Athenians lived
of Figs alone, the Argians and Tirynthians of pears, the Medes of Almonds, the
Aethiopians of Shrimps, and the fruits of Reeds, the Persians of Cardamomes,
the Babylonians of Dates, the Egyptians of Lote, as the Icthyophagi of Fish; of
which dried and ground to powder many Barbarians make bread at this day, and
their meat of the fresh. For in those days people lived not to eat, as many do
in these luxurious times, but eat to live.

The Third said, That fasting is as contrary to the health of the body as
conducive to that of the mind. The best temper, which is hot and moist, is an
enemy to the souls operations, which require a temper cold and dry; which is
acquired by fasting: hence choler, being hot and dry, gives dexterity and
vivacity; blood, hot and moist, renders men foolish and stupid; and the cold
and dry melancholy humor is the cause of prudence. But this is to be
understood of fasting, whereby less food is taken then nature is able to
assimilate, not of that which observes a mediocrity, always commendable, and
good for health. Moreover, the right end of fasting is to afflict and macerate
that body by abstaining from the aliments which it naturally desires. But as in
drinking and eating, so in abstinence from either there is no certain rule; but
regard must be had to the nature of the aliments, some of which are more
nutritive then others; to that of the body, to the season, custom, exercises,
and other circumstances; so they who eat plentifully of illnourishing meats, or
whose stomachs and livers are very large and hot, or who are accustomed to eat
much, will fast longer then those that eat little, but of good juice, or who
have not much heat, and use but little exercise. Growing persons, as children,
though plentiful feeders, yet oftentimes will fast more then those that eat
less. In Winter and Spring, when the bowels are hotter, and sleep longer,
fasting is more insupportable, because the natural heat being now stronger then
in Summer and Autumn, consumes more nourishment. Wherefore, only discretion can
prescribe rules for fasting. If it be for health, so much must be given Nature
as she requires, and no more; the first precept of Hippocrates for health,
being, Never to satiate one's self with food. If it is intended to purge the
soul, then it is requisite to deny something to nature; the sucking which is
felt in the stomach serving to admonish reason of the right use of abstinence.
For temperance must not be turned into murder, and fasting only macerate, not
destroy the body.

The Fourth said, That by fasting Socrates preserved himself from the Plague,
against which we are erroneously taught to make repletion an Antidote: when
it is manifest man's fasting spittle is found to be an enemy to poisons, to kill
Vipers, and mortify Quicksilver. Moreover, we may impute the false
consequence which is drawn from the true Aphorism of Hippocrates (That
Eunuchs, Women and Children, never have the Gout) and the production of so many
modern diseases to gluttony, and the frequency of meals; our forefathers being
so well satisfied with one, that Plato wondered how the Sicilians could eat
twice a day.

CONFERENCE LXX.
I. Of Climacterical Years. II. Of Shame.

I. Of Climacterical Years.
MAn's life is a Comedy, whereof the Theater or Stage is the World, Men the
Actors, and God the Moderator, who ends the Play, and draws the Curtain when it
seems good to him. When it is played to the end, it has five Acts, Infancy or
Childhood, Adolescence, Virility, or Manhood, consisting of middle age, and old
age; each of 14 years, which multiplied by 5 make 70 years, the term assigned
to humane life by the Royal Prophet. These acts are divided into two Scenes, of
as many septenaries, in either of which considerable alterations both in body,
goods and mind, also, are observed to come to pass. For seeing many persons
incur great accidents at one certain number of years rather then another; and
if they escape death, fall again into other dangers at certain times, and so
from one degree to another, till they be come to the last step of the Ladder
which is called Climax by the Greeks; hence the name of Climacterical comes to
be given to the years at which these changes are observed. The most general
opinion refers them to that number of seven; though some have attributed them
to the ninth, others, to every other second year; but especially to the product
of the one multiplied by the other, which is sixty three, composed of nine
times seven, or seven times nine; and therefore the most dangerous. For seven
and nine, as Fermicus Maternus says, being very pernicious of themselves,
their malignity is conjoined in that number of sixty three, called upon this
account the grand Climacterical; as 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 41, 49. (very
considerable amongst them for being the square of seven) and 56. are called
less Climactericals; but 126. the greatest Climacterical of all, because it
contains the grand one twice, being composed of eighteen Septenaries. Now all
these Climactericals are called Hebdomaticks, because they go upon seven, as
those which are counted by nine are called Enneaticks, amongst which the less
are 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, and 54, the grand one is again 63, made also of nine
multiplied by seven; the rest are 72, 81, (very notable too, for being the
square of nine) 90, 99, and so to the greatest Climaterical 126, made of twice
nine Septenaries. Amongst all which years it is further observed, that those are
the most dangerous which ascend either by three weeks, or three novenaries of
years, as, 21, 42, 63, in the Hebdomaticks; and 27, 54, 81, in the Ennecaticks.

The Second said, That as the Septenary is considerable, so is that of Nine,
for the number of the Hierarchies and Celestial Spheres, together with the
common number of months of women's pregnancy; the time between the conception
and the birth having a great resemblance with the remainder of Man's Life.
Likewise the Ternary, proper to the Deity, being multiplied by it self, must
contain what ever wonder and efficacy there can be found in numbers; since it
belongs to innumerable things; and nothing can be considered but with its three
dimensions, and its three parts, beginning, middle, and end; past, present, and
future; hence the assigning of three faces to Janus, three names and three
powers to the Moon, according to its own, that of Diana, and that of Hecate;
together with the fiction of three Graces. In brief, as the three greatest
changes came to pass in each of the three times of the world, before the Law,
under the Law, and after the Law; so it seems just that this ternary number
divide the actions of the less world, as it has done of the great.

The Third said, That he accounted it more reasonable to make this division by
the quaternary number, comprehended in the ineffable name of four Letters, the
Elements and Humors; to the contract or amity of which we owe our health, our
diseases, death, and all the accidents of our lives. And the slowest motion of
the dullest and most malignant of these humors is made in four days, the
reduplication whereof has given ground to the error which attributes the
Crises and indications of diseases to other numbers. The fourth day is
acknowledged the first of Natures motion, and serves for a measure and
foundation of all others. The Crises of diseases are unanimously attributed to
the Moon, which has but four quarters, distinguished by as many faces, which
being denominated from the quaternary, argue its power over that Planet; and
consequently, over every thing that depends upon it. And as there are four
noble parts in Man, (comprehending, with Galen, those which preserve the
species) so there are four in the world, East, West, North, and South; four
parts of the earth, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; and four Monarchies. But
the considerableness of this number appears, in that our Lord having been asked
five questions, namely, of the time of his Death, his Ascension, the Calling of
the Gentiles, and the destruction of Jerusalem, they were accomplished in the
number of four times ten. For he continued dead 40 hours, he ascended into
Heaven at the end of 40 days, the vocation of the Gentiles typifi'd by the
vision of unclean beasts, offered by the Angel to Saint Peter to eat, was at
the end of 40 months, which are about 3 years and a half, (so long also as
Antichrist is to continue) and the destruction of Jerusalem came to pass at the
end of 40 years. Whence some suspect that the end of the world (which was
another question made to him) will probably happen after 40 times 40 years;
which added to the preceding would fall about the year 1640. Moreover, the
quaternary is not only a square number, but causing all others to be
denominated such; the cause of the change which happens in this number, is, for
that a Cube cannot be vari'd and moved but with difficulty; so that great
causes are requisite to produce those changes, which producing great effects,
become more sensible and remarkable then the ordinary ones, which more easily
cause variation in other numbers remote from the cubick figure.

The Fourth said, That the Prince of Physicians having affirmed that the
Septenary is the dispenser of life, and author of all its changes, seven must
be the true Climacterical. For in seven hours the Geniture receives its first
disposition to conception; in seven days it is coagulated; in seven weeks it
is distinguished into members. The Infant cannot come forth alive sooner then
the seventh month, and anciently it was not named till after seven days;
being not accounted fully to have life till it had attaind that periodical day.
The Teeth spring out at the seventh month, they shed and are renewed in the
seventh year, at which time the Child begins to speak articulately, and to be
capable of Discipline. At twice seven years it is pubes. At twenty one the
beard sprouts forth. At twenty eight growing ceases. At thirty five a Man is
fit for marriage and the wars. At forty two he is wise, or never. At 49 he is
in his Apogee, or highest pitch; after which he grows old, and changes always
by Septenaries till he have accomplished the years of his life; which
Hippocrates, for this reason, distributes into seven Ages. The virtue of this
Number appears likewise in divine things; God having sanctified the seventh day
by his own rest and ours, and all Nations measuring their time by weeks. But
it is not without mystery, that Enoch the seventh after Adam, was translated
into Heaven; that Jesus Christ is the seventy seventh in a direct line from the
first Man; that he spoke seven times upon the Cross, on which he was seven
hours; that he appeared seven times; and after seven times seven days sent the
Holy Ghost. That in the Lords prayer there are seven Petitions, contained in
seven times seven words. The Apostles chose seven Deacons. All the mysteries of
the Apocalypse are within this number; mention being there made of seven seals
of the Book, of seven horns of the Lamb, and seven eyes which are the seven
Spirits of God sent throughout all the earth, of the seven heads and seven
questions of the Dragon; of the seven heads of the Woman, which are seven
hills; of seven Kings, seven Angels, seven Trumpets, seven vials, seven
plagues. The Scripture makes mention of seven resurrections to that of our
Saviors. The 1. of the Widows Son of Sarepta, by Elias. The 2. of the
Shunamite's Son, by Elisha. The 3. of the Soldier who touched the bones of
that Prophet. The 4. of the Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue. The 5. of
the Widows Son of Naim. The 6. of Lazarus. And the 7. of our Lord. The Rabbis
say that God employed the power of this Number to make Samuel so great as he
was; his name answering in value of the Letters to the Hebrew word which
signifies seven; whence Hannah his Mother, in her thanks to God, says, That
the barren had brought forth seven. Solomon spent seven years in building Gods
Temple. Jacob served seven years for Leah, and as many for Rachel. The wall of
Jericho fell down at the sound of Joshuah's seven Trumpets, after the
Israelites had gone seven times about it on the seventh day. Nabuchadononosor
did penance for his pride seven years amongst the beasts. Moreover, there are
seven Penitential Psalms. The Nile and the Danow have seven mouths. There are
seven hills at Rome, Prague, and Constantinople. Noah entered into the Ark with
seven persons, and seven pairs of all clean Animals. After seven days the
waters fell from Heaven during seven times seven days. On the seventh month
the Ark rested upon the Mountain of Ararat. The Ecclesiastes limits mourning to
seven days. There were seven years of plenty, and as many of famine, in
Egypt. There were seven Lamps in the Tabernacle, typifying seven gifts of the
Spirit. The Jews ate unleavened bread seven days; and as many celebrated the
Feast of Tabernacles. They let their land rest every seventh year, and after
seven times seven had their Jubilee. The strength of Sampson lay in seven locks
of his Hair. There are seven Sacraments in the Church, as in Heaven seven
Planets, seven Pleiades, seven Stars in the two Bears. The Periodical course of
the Moon is made in four times seven days, at each of which septenaries, it
changes its face. In brief, there were seven miracles of the World, and seven
Sages of Greece. There are seven Electors, seven liberal Arts, seven pairs of
Nerves, seven Orifices serving for gates to the Senses: Natural sleep is
limited to seven hours; and this Number is by some justly esteemed the knot, or
principal band of all things, and the symbol of Nature.

The Fifth said, It was not without cause that Augustus was so extremely
fearful of the Climactericals, that when he had passed his 63d year, he writ in
great joy to all his friends; but he died in the second Climacterick after, his
77th year, consisting of eleven septenaries, which was also fatal to Tiberius,
Severus, T. Livius, Empedocles, S. Augustine, Bessarion; as the sixty third was
to Aristotle, Cicero (who also was banished in his Climacterick of 49)
Demosthenes, Trajan, Adrian, Constantine, S. Bernard, the blessed Virgin, and
many others. And the next Climacterick of 70, to three of the Sages of Greece,
to Marius, Vespasian, Antoninus, Golienus, David, who was also driven from his
Kingdom by his Son, at his sixty third year; and committed his adultery and
homicide at his forty nineth; both climactericals. And as much might be
observed of the fates and actions of other men, were regard had of them. Our
first Father died at the age of 931 years, which was climacterical to him,
because it contains in it self seven times 133. Lamech died at 777 years,
climacterical likewise, as Abraham died at 175, which contains 25 times seven.
Jacob at 147, consisting of 21 times seven; Judas at 119, made of 17 times
seven; the power of which Climactericals many make to extend to the duration of
States, which Plato conceived not to be much above 70 weeks of years.

The Sixth said, That regular changes proceeding necessarily from a regular
cause, and no motion being exactly regular in all nature but that of the
Heavens; supposing there be climacterical years, and not so many deaths and
remarkable accidents in all the other numbers of days, months and years, had
they been all as carefully observed as some of them have been) their power of
alteration cannot but be ascribed to the celestial bodies. That which befalls
us every seventh year arises hence; as every Planet rules its hour, so it makes
every day, month, and year septenary; beginning by Saturn, and ending at the
Moon, which governs the seventh, and therein causes all mutations, which
acquire malignity by the approach of Saturn presiding again over the eighth;
which is the cause why births in the eighth month are seldom vital.

II. Of Shame.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That the Passions consider evil and good
not only absolutely, but also under certain differences. Desire has regard to
absent good, not in general, but in particular; sometimes under the respect of
Riches, and then it is called Covetousness; sometimes of Honor, and then it is
called Ambition; sometimes of Beauties, and then it is an amorous inclination.
So grief looks upon present evil; if it be in another, it causes compassion in
us; if in our selves, and apprehended prejudicial to our honor, it causes
shame, which is a grief for an evil which we judge brings ignominy to us; a
grief so much the greater, in that no offense goes more to the quick then that
which touches our reputation. It occasioned the death of a Sophist, because he
could not answer a question; and of Homer, because he could not resolve the
riddle of the Fishers; and of others also, upon their having been non-plus'd in
public. For as nothing is more honorable then virtue and knowledge; so nothing
is so ignominious as ignorance and vice, nor (consequently) that makes us so
much ashamed; being reproaches of our falling short of our end, (which is, to
understand and to will) and so of being less then men; but (as Plato said)
Monsters of nature. But amongst all the vices, Nature has rendered none so
shameful as that of lasciviousness, whereof not only the act, but also the
gestures and signs cause shame. Hence an immodest or ambiguous word, and a
fixed look, make women and children blush, whom shame becomes very well, being
the guard of chastity, and the color of virtue; as it ill becomes old men, and
persons confirmed in virtue, who ought not to commit any thing whereof they may
be ashamed.

The Second said, That shame is either before vice and the infamy which follows
it, or after both. In the first sense, shame is a fear of dishonor. In the
second, it is a grief for being fallen thereinto. Neither of the two is ever
wthout love of honesty, but lies between the two extremes, or sottish and
rustic bashfulness on the one side, and impudence on the other. The former is
found in those who are ashamed of virtue, or cannot deny any thing, although it
be contrary to honesty, good manners, and their own will; or in such who cannot
look a man in the face, which although frequently an obstacle to brave actions,
yet is a common token of a good soul, rather inclined to honesty then to vice;
like Edler and other wild herbs, which being good for nothing, and hindering the
growth of others, are yet signs of a good soil. On the contrary, impudence is
the symptom of a soul extremely depraved; the defect of inward grief, which
comes from the perversion of the Intellect, and the loss of Conscience,
rendering the maladies of the soul incurable, as insensibility makes those of
the body desperate. But modesty and true shame fears true dishonours, and is
grieved for them; having this of virtue, which the greater it is, the more it
fears things greatly formidable and infamous, such as vice, and its
concomitant, ignominy, are: but not much other things, which depend only on the
imagination, and are not any way dishonest of themselves; in which it is
poorness of mind to blush. Thus S. Paul says he was not ashamed of the Gospel.
And our Lord, that they who shall be ashamed of him before men, he will deny
them before his Father. For, to speak truth, we ought not to be ashamed of any
thing but vice and its effects. Before sin, our first Parents knew not what it
was to be ashamed; but after it they were ashamed of their nakedness, the same
sense whereof remains to all their posterity.

The Third said, As some things are of themselves shameful, because they are
vicious; so some are not shameful saving at certain times and places, to which
the customs of each Country, for the most part, give Law: others are always so,
although of themselves lawful, and far from being vicious; as those things
which civility and honesty forbid to do publicly; whence Diogenes merited the
name of Dog for transgressing those laws of seemliness. For as honor is drawn
not only from virtue, but from many other circumstances, which for the most
part depend upon the opinion of men who dispose of this honor, so does
dishonor and the shame which follows it.

The Fourth said, That shame is not a passion (as neither compassion nor
emulation) because it has no virtue which regulates its disorders; much less a
virtue, not being firm, and constant, but a simple motion to good, and a slight
impression of honesty in the will and affections, produced either by nature or
custom, and not yet so firmly rooted as virtue; whence it is very mutable and
uncertain. For we are ashamed of being too tall or too low, commended or
blamed, yea we blush no less for defects which cannot be imputed to us, as mean
extraction, or some corporal imperfection which we cannot mend, then we do for
being found liars or surpised in some other fault. To which inconstancy is the
agitation of the blood and spirits to be referred, whose tincture diffused in
the face betrays our dissimulation in spite of us.

CONFERENCE LXXI.
I. Why motion produces heat. II. Of Chastity.

I. Why motion produces heat.
LOcal motion is not only the most common, but likewise the most noble of all,
since it is not found in animals till they have acquired their perfection.
Besides, it produces heat, the noblest and most active of all qualities; upon
this account Physians enjoin exercise to discuss cold and phlegmatic humors;
because animal motion cannot be performed without spirits, and these being of
an igneous nature calefie all the parts toward which they flow. But being
motion produces heat in life-less things too, it is harder to render a reason of
this effect in them then in animals. Thus Arrows have been seen to become (...)
by the swiftness of their flight. Millers turn part of their (...) upon the
axle-tree of their wheel, otherwise it would be on fire* and Waggoners, as well
for this purpose as to facilitate their turning, grease their wheels, thereby
to remedy the dryness of the axle-tree which disposes the same to ignition.
Those that hold it for a Principle, That motion heats, account is as absurd to
inquire the cause thereof, as to ask why fire does so. But without ground,
since every motion heats not; that of inanimate bodies if slow, produces no
heat, but only when it is swift: it is requisite too that the bodies be solid;
otherwise we see motion cools water and air, and hinders their corruption,
which proceeds from heat. This argues that it cannot be a principle; for a
principle must hold good in all subjects, and be such as no instance can be
brought against it. Such heat therefore comes from the attrition of the air,
which being rarefi'd beyond what its nature permits, waxes hot, and sometimes
is turned into fire, wherewith it symbolizes upon the account of its heat; as,
on the contrary, when the same air is too much condensed, it is resolved into
water, wherewith also it symbolizes by it moisture. For as there are terms of
quantity in all mixed bodies; so in all simple bodies there are terms of rarity
and density, beyond which the Element cannot preserve it self, without
admitting vacuity, when it is more rare then its matter can endure; or without
penetration of dimension, when it has more matter then it needs.

The Second said, That to ascribe that heat caused by motion to the air
inflamed and turned into fire by attrition and attenuation of its parts, is to
explicate a manifest thing by one more obscure, and whereupon all are not
agreed; such is the transmutation of one element into another. It Is Therefore
more probable that this heat is not produced anew, but is the same which is in
all mixed bodies, wherein there is an elementary fire; which being buried, and
(as 'twere) entangled in the bonds of the other Elements, appears not unless it
be excited by motion. As in putrefaction the same heat being attracted by the
outward heat of the air, becomes perceptible by the sense. And as those that
have drawn a Landscape in distemper upon a table of oil, coming to wash the
table, make the first draught appear which before was hid; or as the earth of a
Mine which contains Gold or Silver, being washed, exhibites these Metals
visible, but produces them not anew, because they were there before: so motion
does not make, but discover heat, introducing a disposition in the subject by
friction, rarefying and drying the surfaces of two contiguous bodies; which two
qualities being proper to receive the impression of fire, are also more so to
make that appear which is in all bodies not only potentially, but likewise
actually. For if 'twere the air included between two bodies rubbed and moved
with violence, it would follow that every sort of body would be apt to produce
fire, and especially the most aerious, as being most inflammable. Moreover,
nothing hindering but that two Spheres may be so contiguous, as the Celestial
are, that there can be no air between them, yet they might nevertheless be
moved and heated, yea much more then if there were air interposed between them.

The Third said, As a form cannot be received into any subject without previous
dispositions, so when they are present they suddenly snatch the form to
themselves. Those of fire are rarity, lightness and dryness; of which the more
bodies partake, the more they will be susceptible of the nature of fire.
Therefore what is capable of being heated by motion must be dry not moist;
whence fire is never produced by water, any more then of air agitated, by
reason of their excessive humidity, perfectly contrary to the dryness of fire.
But that which is extremely dry is half fire, needing no more but to become
hot, as happens necessarily when it is rarefi'd and attenuated by motion, and
consequently inflamed; every substance extremely tenuious and dry being
igneous, since in the order of nature all matter necessarily receives the form
whereof it has all the dispositions. For there being a separation and
divulsion of parts made in every sort of motion, as is seen in water when it
falls from on high, it follows that they are rendered more rare, and capable of
being converted into fire.

The Fourth said, That motion, rarity, and heat ordinarily follow, and are the
causes one of another. Thus the Heavens by their rapid motion excite heat in
all sublunary bodies; and this heat, as it is its property, opening the parts,
rarefies the whole. Water receiving the rays of the Sun is moved and agitated
by them; this motion produces rarity; this, heat; which makes the subtilest
parts ascend upwards: as, on the contrary, heat being the most active quality,
is the cause of motion; this, of rarity, by collision attenuating the moved
parts. So that motion is not more the cause of heat, then this is of motion.

The Fifth said, That heat and fire (which is only an excess of heat) are
produced four ways; by propagation, union, putrefaction, and motion. In the
first way, one way generates another fire; a thing common to it with all other
bodies in nature, which is so fruitful that even the least things produce their
like. In the second manner, when the Sunbeams are reflected by bellow glasses,
they burn in the point of union, provided the matter be not white, because
whiteness takes away the reason upon which they burn, which is their uniting;
whereas white disunites and disgregates the rays. To which manner that of
antiperistasis is also to be referred, when external cold causes such a union
of the degrees of heat, that it becomes inflamed. The third cause of heat is
putrefaction proceeding from disunion of the Elements; amongst which fire being
the most active becomes becomes also more sensible to us. The last is motion,
by which bodies rubbed or clash'd one against another, take fire by reason of
the Sulphur contained in them, which alone is inflamable; as we see Marble and
Freestone yield not fire as Flints do, whose smell after the blew seems
sulphurous. For if only the air be fired, whence comes it, that in striking
the steel the sparkles of fire fall downwards, contrary to the nature of fire,
which ascends? besides, the air would be turned into flames, not into sparkles,
and two stones rubbed one against the other would cause as much fire as steel
and the flint, or other stones, out of whose substance these igneous particles
are struck. Whence, according to their differences, they make different
sparkles; If the stones be hard, and struck strongly, they render a sprightly
fire; if soft, they either render none at all, or such as is less vigorous.
Moreover, the observations of fire issuing forth upon the rubbing of a Lyon's
bones, as also Laurel and Ivy, and Crystal with Chalcedon; and that which comes
from stroking the back of a Cat in the dark, and from the casting a drop of
rectified oil of Vitriol into cold water, evidence that this fire is produced
out of the bosom of the matter which is more disposed thereunto then any other,
not from the encompassing air. But that which serves most to show that it is
from the matter this fire of motion comes, is the duration of the Heavens,
which being in all probability solid, would have been set on fire, were it not
that they are not of a combustible matter, nor apt to conceive fire; for how
little soever that heat were, there would be more near the Sphere of the Moon
then at the Center of the Earth; and nevertheless the air is frozen while heat
causes corruptions and generations upon the earth, and at the center of it; and
this heat having been always increasing, as is that of the motion, would be
insupportable.

II. Of Chastity.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That Reason regulates the inclinations of
the appetite by the virtues, amongst which temperance serves to moderate that
of eating by abstinence; and of drinking, by sobriety; as also the
concupiscence of the flesh by chastity, which is more excellent then the two
former, in that its business lies with more powerful adversaries which assail
it without as well as within, by so many avenues as there are senses; amongst
which the hearing and sight receiving the poison of glances, and words, cause
chastity to stagger and languish; but it receives the deadly blow when the
touch surrenders it self to the enchantment of kisses, and the other delights
which follow them. Moreover, the necessity of natural actions being the
standard of pleasure, and generation which concerns the general being more
necessary then nutrition which relates only to the particular, it has also
more pleasure; and, consequently, being more hard to withstand, chastity which
surmounts it, not only deserves Palms and Triumphs in the other world, but
also in this has been rewarded by God with the gift of Prophecy in the Sibyls,
and is honored by all, even the most wicked for its rarity; which made the
Poet say, that there was none in his time chaste but she that had not been
tempted. Now Chastity is of three sorts, Virgineal, Conjugal, and that of
Widows; to which the Fathers attribute what is said of the grains of Corn,
which brought forth, one a hundred; other, thirty; and other, sixty. For
Virgineal Chastity, in either sex, consisting in integrity of body, and purity
of soul, and in a firm purpose to abstain from all sort of carnal pleasures,
the better to attend divine service, is more worthy then the other two, and
preferred before any other condition by S. Paul, who counsels every one to
desire to be like him in this point. Hence the Church has chosen it, and is so
immutably affected to it, to the end souls freed from worldly care might be
more at leisure for divine things, from which Matrimony extremely diverts. The
chastity of Widows has, for pattern, the Turtle and the Raven, who having lost
their mates live nine ages of men without coupling with others; and the Apostle
says, Widows in deed are worthy of double honor. The Conjugal has also made
Penelope renowned, and has for example the Etnaean fish, of which the male and
female never part.

The Second said, Virgineal Chastity is not absolutely virtuous of it self,
having been practiced by Pagans and Idolaters, who devoted themselves to their
false gods, and being found in children newly born: which cannot be said of
virtues, which are acquired by precepts and good manners, not by nature.
Moreover, it may be lost without sin, as in Virgins violated, or those that are
married; yea sometimes with merit, as when Hosea the Prophet took a Harlot to
wife by God's express command. And being once lost, it cannot be repaired by
repentance as other virtues may. Whence S. Jerome writing to Eustochium, says,
that God who is able to do all things, yet cannot restore virginity. It Is
therefore commendable so far as it is referred to God: in which case it is a
most admirable thing, and the more because it is above nature, which by Marriage
peoples the Earth, but Virginity peoples Heaven, where there shall be no
marrying, but we shall be as the Angels of God, who being a pure Spirit, loves
purity above all things.

The Third said, That Virginity is wholly contrary to the nature of man, who
desires nothing so much as immortality, which being not attainable in his own
person he seeks in his successors, who are part of himself. Yea it seems to
have somewhat of insensibility, the vicious excess of temperance, since it
wholly abstains from all pleasures; some of which are lawful. Therefore Plato
sacrificed to Nature, as if to make her satisfaction for his having continued a
virgin all his life; and the Romans laid great fines upon such as would not
marry; as on the other side, they granted immunities to those that brought
children into the world; whence remains at this day the right of three, four
and five children, observed still amongst us, those that have five children
being exempted from Wardships. Yea, among the Jews it could not be without
reproach, since sterility was ignominious among them, and was accounted the
greatest curse. Moreover, Marriage not only supplies Laborers, Artisans,
Soldiers and Citizens to the State, but Kings and Princes to the People,
Prelates and Pastors to the Church, and a Nursery to Paradise, which would not
be peopled with Virgins, did not the married give them being. Whence S.
Austustin justly makes a Question, Who merited most before God, Abraham in
Marriage, or S. John Baptist in the Virgineal State.

The Fourth said, That being things are termed virtuous when they are according
to right reason, which requires that we make use of means proportionately to
their end; therefore Virginity is a virtue, and the more sublime in that it is
in order to the most excellent end, namely, the contemplation of Divine
Mysteries. For amongst the goods of men, some are external, as riches; others
of the body, as health; others of the soul, amongst which those of the
contemplative life are more excellent then those of the active. As therefore
it is according to right reason, that external goods are made subservient to
those of the body, and these to the goods of the soul; so is the denying the
pleasures of the body the better to intend the actions of the contemplative
life: as Virginity does, which freeing us from carnal thoughts affords us more
convenience to mind the things of God, and to be pure in body and spirit. It Is
therefore the end which makes Virginity to be virtuous. Whence those Roman
Vestals, and the Brachmans among the Indians, who abstained wholly from
Marriage, nevertheless deserve the name of Virgins. And Spurina, mentioned by
Valerius Maximus, so chaste that perceiving himself as much loved by the
Thuscan Ladies, as he was hated by their Husbands, disfigured his face with
voluntary wounds, had indeed some shadow, but not the body of this virtue. The
invention of Gaila and Papa, Daughters of Gisuphe Duke of Friuli, was much more
ingenious; who at the sacking of their City, beholding the chastity of their
sex prostituted to the lust of the Soldiers, filled their laps with stinking
flesh, whose bad smell kept those from them who would have attempted their
honor.

The fifth said, That the excellence of Virgineal Chastity is such, that it
has no vicious excess; for the more we abstain from pleasures, the more pure
we are. And as it is blemished many ways, so it is preserved by many others.
Amongst which, is first, Employment or Business; whence Cupid, in Lucian,
excuses himself to his Mother, that he could not wound Minerva, because he
never found her idle. Modesty is also the Guardian of it, as to appear seldom
in public; whence the Hebrews called their Virgins Almach, which signifies
Recluses. Moreover, dishonest gestures, words, and looks, are to be avoided.
And amongst corporeal means, Abstinence and Maceration of the body, are very
effectual; as amongst Aliments such as are cold, as Nenuphar, or Water-lilly,
(called therefore Nymphaea) and Lettice, which the Pythagoreans for this reason
Eunuch, and under which upon the same account the Poets feign Venus to have hid
Adonis. As likewise the leaves of Willows bruised, the ashes of Tamarisk, and
the flowers of Agnus Castus, which is a sort of Ozier, so called by the Greeks,
because the Athenian Ladies lay upon them during the festivals of Ceres, to
repress the ardour of Love, whereof, they say, such are not sensible as have
drunk wine wherein the fish named Trigla is suffocated, or who have eaten Rue.
But because these remedies are not infallible, Origin took another course,
making himself actually an Eunuch, for fear of losing that rare treasure of
Virginity, whose loss is both inestimable and irreparable.

CONFERENCE LXXII.
I. Of Thunder. II. Which of all the Arts is the most necessary.

I. Of Thunder.
AS Water and Earth are the grossest of the Elements, so they receive most
sensibly the actions of the Celestial Bodies, chiefly the Sun's heat; which
exhaling and drawing up their purer parts, vapors from the Water, and
exhalations from the Earth, forms meteors of them. And as the cold and moist
vapors make tempests, dew, and frost, in the lower Region; and in the middle,
clouds, rain, hail, snow. Exhalations, if fat and unctuous, cause Comets in the
higher Region, and in the lower the two Ignes Fatui; if dry and subtle, they
make Earthquakes in the bowels of the Earth; in its surface, winds and
tempests; in the middle Region of the Air, Lightning, Fulgur, or the
Thunderbolts and Thunder. For these three commonly follow and produce one
another. Lightning is the coruscation or flashing of the matter inflamed. And
though produced by Thunder, yet is sooner perceived then the other heard;
because the Sight is quicker then the Hearing, by reason its object, the
visible species, are moved in an instant; but sound successively, because of
the resistance of the Air, its medium. Thunder is the noise excited by the
shock and shattering of the cloud by the enclosed exhalation; whence rain
commonly follows it. Fulgur is the exhalation inflamed, which impetuously
breaks out at the sides of the cloud, wherein it is oftentimes turned into a
stone of the shape of a wedge; the celestial heat then working the same effect
in the cavities of the cloud that our common fire does in crucibles; in which
equal portions of Sulphur, Tartara, and Antimony inflamed, turn into a very
hard stone, of the color of the Thunderbolt, called Regulus Antimonii.

The Second said, As fire is sometimes produced in the Air without noise, and
noise without fire; so a great fire is made there with little noise, as when
what they call a Falling Star passes through a moist cloud, in which it makes a
hissing like that of hot Iron in cold water, whence Winds proceed; and
sometimes a great noise with little fire; as when an Exhalation inflamed
hollows and breaks the cloud which encloses it, or else impressing a violent
and rapid motion upon it, makes it clash impetuously against other clouds. For
impetuousness supplies for hardness, as is seen in Air which whistles when
beaten by Winds; there being some things which tension renders hard, as Wind
included in a football. And what is reported of the Cataracts of Nile, whose
waters make so vehement a noise, that it renders the people there abouts deaf,
is a sufficient evidence that two fluid bodies clashing violently together,
make as great a sound as two solid bodies moved with less violence.

The Third said, That what is done below being the figure of what is done on
high, the one may be clearly explicated by the other. Wherefore as Exhalation
with vapor makes metals in the entrails of the Earth; so in the Air it makes
Thunder, whither they ascend together, the vapor being blended with the
Exhalation; or severally, this latter being set on fire in the cold and
vaporous cloud; or being no longer containable there through its great rarity,
encountered by the coldness of the cloud and the Air, it seeks some outlet;
which not finding, it is necessitated to hollow the bollow the belly of the
cloud which obstructed it. This rarity proceeds from its heat and dryness,
which are commonly turned into fire by the sole motion of the Exhalation, or by
the rays of the Sun, or of some other Stars reflected by the smooth surface of
an opposite cloud; in the same manner as Burning-glasses set on fire such
things as are placed at some convenient distance. Which should be thought no
more strange then mock-suns and mock-moons, which are made in the same manner,
but in a flat or plain cloud, not parabolical, such as the figure of
Burning-glasses must be. Moreover, fire may be excited by the Antiperistasis of
the vehement cold in the middle Region of the Air, which causes the degrees of
heat to unite, (as those of other qualities strengthen one another in an enemy
country) and become flame. Hence Thunders are more frequent in Southern then in
Northern Countries, in hot seasons then in Winter, wherein the cold closing the
pores of the Earth, hinders the free issue of the Exhalations, and the middle
Region of the Air is found less cold. But the most sensible example of Thunder
is that of our Guns; the powder, being so suddenly inflamed that it cannot
reside in the barrel, where it takes up a thousand times more room then it did
whilst it remained in its terrene nature, according to the decuple proportion
of the Elements, violently breaks forth, and carries with it what ever resists
it, breaking the Gun (unless the mouth be open) though much stronger then a
cloud, whose spissitude nevertheless supplies for its rarity.

The Fourth said, That the Nature of Thunder and Thunderbolts is so occult that
all antiquity called them the weapons of Jupiter which he discharged upon the
wicked, as is testified by their fables of the Giants, Salmoneus, Phaeton, and
some others. Nor is there any so hardened in wickedness, but trembles at the
cracking of Thunder and Thunderbolts, which Socrates, in Xenophon, calls the
Invisible Ministers of God. And one Emperor acknowledged himself no God, by
going to hide himself in a cave while it thundered, because Thunderbolts are
conceived not to enter the Earth above five foot deep. Others have thought that
there is something supernatural in it, and that Demons have commonly a hand in
it; because its effects being unlike those of corporeal Agents seem to be
produced by spirits, who are able to move what ever there is in Nature; and
this the more easily, being not tied to the conditions of the matter, but moved
in an instant, and penetrating all bodies whatever. For Thunder has killed
many who had no appearance of hurt upon them; the Hair of some has been taken
off without other inconvenience; it has consumed the Tongues of some, or
turned them downwards; it has melted the money in the purse, and the sword in
the scabbard, without other mischief; it sowres Wine in the vessel, spoils Eggs
under a Hen, and makes Sheep abortive. Moreover, the Scripture tells us, that
God has many times used Thunder either to punish or terrify men, as he did in
Egypt by the rod of Moses, who calls Thunderbolts God's swords, as David does
his Arrows, and the Thunder his voice. The Law was given to the Israelites with
Thunders and Lightnings; and Saint John in his Revelation says, that Thunders
and Lightnings proceed from Gods Throne. Indeed nothing more visibly notifies
his presence, power, and justice; yet always accompanied with Clemency; for he
threatens by Lightning, and speaks by Thunder, before he strikes by the
Thunderbolt; and the rumbling of this Thunder menaces a whole Region, though
commonly it carries the blow but upon one person, or oftentimes none at all.

The Fifth said, Fear (which not only sometimes made the Romans worship Famine
and the Fever, but makes it self an Idol in the Minds of the Ignorant) has
persuaded men that there is something Divine in Thunder, because they dread the
dismal effects of it and know not the cause, although it be as natural as that
of all other Meteors. Hence some have had recourse to impertinent and
superstitious remedies; as, to pronounce certain barbarous words, to carry
certain figures or characters about them, and (according to Wierus) to lay a
Thunder-stone, called by the Greeks, Ceraunium, between two Eggs upon a Table
in the house which you would preserve, or hang an Egg laid on Ascension-day to
the roof of the House; and such other absurd and profane means. The Northern
people were much more ridiculous; who, as Olaus reports, shot Arrows up to
Heaven when it Thundered, thereby (as they said) to help their Gods who were
assailed by others. The Thracians fell a howling against Heaven, struck their
shields with their swords, and rung all their bells; which latter is practiced
at this day, to the end the vehement agitation of the Air may divert the
Thunderbolt from the steeples, upon which, as upon all other high places,
especially upon trees, it is wont to fall. It Is held also that strong smells
have the same virtue; as amongst Animals, the Sea-calf and Hyaena, and amongst
Plants, the Fig Tree and Laurel, of which Caesar commonly wore a wreath,
rather for this purpose then to cover his bald head. But it is little probable
what they relate of Zoroaster and Numa, as that they stilled Thunder when they
pleased, and that Tullus Hostilius attempting to do the same was Thunderstruck.

II. Which of all the Arts is the most necessary.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That if we take the judgment of each
Artist, there is none but thinks himself more necessary then his companion.
Whence commonly there is contention for dignity among those that profess
several Arts. Which made a Physician tell his Patient, who complained that his
Apothecary told him he needed a medicine, and his Chyrurgion that he wanted
nothing but blood-letting; that if he took the advice of his Shoemaker, 'twas
requisite for him to have a pair of boots. And even a seller of matches finding
himself in danger in a boat upon the Seine, embracing his merchandise, cried
out, Ville de Paris que tu perdes; O Paris, what a loss will thou have! But to
consider things in themselves, Agriculture (called by Cicero the most worthy
employment of an ingenuous mind; by Aristotle, the justest manner of
acquisition, and the Mother of all the Arts) seems to be most absolutely
necessary. No private person, much less Republics, ever thought of any thing
so carefully as their provision, which is the foundation upon which all the
other projects of Man depend; the hungry belly having no ears, and
consequently, being incapable of discipline. And good Architects always build
the kitching first. Our first Father exercised Tillage at his first going out
of Eden; and 'twas from the plough that Coriolanus, Seranus, Curious, and Cato,
and so many other great Roman Captains were taken. In brief, the styling of
Earth Man's Mother and Nurse, argues that it is not less necessary to us then a
Mother and Nurse to Children, and consequently, those that till it then Fathers.

The Second said, As the beauty of nature consists chiefly in the variety of
Natural Agents, determined each to a particular work; so that of a State
appears principally in the multitude of Workmen and Artisans. And as the
meanest of these Natural Agents, like small Simples, are more necessary, and
have more virtue then the tallest Cedars and Cypresses; so amongst the Arts,
the basest in appearance are the most noble and necessary, as Agriculture, and
keeping of Sheep, which was exercised by Apollo, Paris, Saul and David. Whence
the Greek Poet calls Kings, Pastors of the people; a name still retained by the
Prelates of the Church; and Plato conceived that the demons and happy spirits
were sometimes Shepherds; and Philo the Jew says, that the Pastoral Art was a
praelude to Royalty, as that of hunting is the apprentisage of war. Moreover,
hunting, its near sister, was much practiced by the Persians and all warlike
Nations; and Xenophon highly recommends it, but specially to Princes, in his
institution of Cyrus; as Julius Pollex did to the Emperor Commodus, for an
heroical recreation, serving to strengthen both body and mind, and rendering men
vigilant, laborious and indefatigable.

The Third said, That Man, suitable to his three principal Organs, the
Intellect, the Tongue and the Hand, spending his whole life in reasoning,
speaking, or doing, he therefore needs three sorts of Arts to serve him for
rules in all his operations. The first, to form his Reason, therefore called
Logic. The second, to regulate his words, and is either Grammar which
instructs him to speak rightly, or Rhetoric to speak handsomely, or History to
relate well, or Dialectick to speak of every thing probably. The third
comprehends all real Arts, whose number infinitely exceeds the two other; for
Men speak and reason after the same manner, because they do it naturally; but
they operate in several manners according to the several usages and Customs of
people and places. Amongst these real Arts, some are necessary to life, as
Agriculture, and keeping of Cattle, which supply us with Food and Raiment from
the Earth and Animals. Others are useful thereunto, as the Art of building
Houses, that of Tailors and Shoe-makers, and other manufactures which we cannot
want without inconvenience. Others are for ornament, as Painting, Embroidery,
Dancing. Others are only for pleasure; as the Art of Cookery, perfuming, and
all those which tickle the Ear by musical instruments. In brief, the scope of
some is only Truth, as the Art of measuring Heaven and the Stars, with some
others, which as the most excellent, having Truth the divinest and noblest
thing in the world for their object, so they are the least necessary; and
therefore were invented last. For the most necessary Arts are the most ancient.
The use of things (the measure of their necessity) having constrained Men to
make but rude Arts at the first, which they afterward polished and refined by
their industry, which is continually adding to former inventions.

The Fourth said, Since Divine Authority has commanded to honor Physic for
its necessity, it is no longer lawful to prefer any other Art before it.
Agriculture should in vain help the Earth's production of fruits, did not
Physic by preserving and restoring health enable Man to enjoy the same, It Is
not considerable what some allege, That Physicians may be spared, because
there were none in Rome for 600. together, after they had been expelled from
thence; since to be without Physicians, is not to be without Physic. For then
every one was his own Physician. As if the Magistrates be driven out of a
State, it does not follow that Justice is driven out too; because others
succeed into their places; and the greatest Thieves keep some form of justice
and laws among themselves.

The Fifth said, That the only means of keeping States being to get (since in
matters of Economy, the foundation of States, not to gain and advantage is to
go behind-hand) Merchandise both in gross and retail being the surest and
speediest means to enrich Cities, seems the most necessary of all Arts;
besides, it maintains society amongst Men, who could not supply one another
needs, if there were not an Art of trafficking by Exchange or sale, which makes
but one City of the whole world, both old and new.

The Sixth said, That the Military Art being the sword and buckler of a State,
is both the noblest and most necessary of all. It Is in vain that Men labor,
travel, plead, traffic, or heal themselves, if the Soldier hinders not the
Enemies invasion, and keep not the State in liberty, by securing it both from
the disturbances of Rebels, and incursiions of Forreiners. If one be the
weakest, his plump and sound body being taken by Pirates will serve only for
the Galleyes of his conqueror. There remains nothing to the conquered but
sorrow. Those goodly crops of Corn are for the Soldiers who are Masters of the
campaigne. War is the fair where wares are had best cheap; and in sacked Cities
commodities are taken without weighing, and Stuffs are not measured but with
the Pike instead of the Ell; if any complain, there needs no more but to
imitate Brennus's treating with the Romans besiedg'd in the Capitol, cast the
sword into the balance, it will carry it. Wherefore being Master of all Arts,
it is more necessary then they. For he that is strongest finds sufficient of
every thing.

The Seventh said, As amongst the Arts, some have others subservient to them,
as the Ephippians to the Military Art; Chyrurgery, Pharmacy, the Gymnastick,
and all that relate to Health, to Medicine or Physic; Carpentry, Masonry, and
others employed about building to Architecture; and these Master Arts are
called Architectonical: So there is one above all these which is Policy, the
Eye and Soul of the State, which governs all Arts, gives them their rewards,
and punishes their defects; sets what price it pleases upon things; affords
convenient place for the merit of every one, sends Armies into the field, and
calls them back according to the necessity of affairs; has care of Piety and
Justice, establishes Magistracy, appoints quarters to Soldiers, and gives free
exercise to all other Arts. All which considerations and accounts argue it the
most necessary of all.

CONFERENCE LXXIII.
I. Of the Earthquake. II. Of Envy.

I. Of the Earthquake.
IRregular motions are as strange as regular are agreeable; especially those of
bodies destinated to rest, as the Earth is, being the immovable center about
which the whole fabric of the world is turned. For though the whole Heaven
cannot rest, any more then the whole Earth move, yet the parts of them may; the
Scripture informing us, that Joshuah made the Sun stand still, that he might
have time to pursue the Amorites; and every Age having experiences of
Earthquakes. To which Aristotle ascribes the appearing of a new Island in the
Pontick Sea, called Heraclia, and of another called Sacrea. Many Geographers
affirm, that the Islands of Rhodes and Delos were produced by the like cause;
and that Sicily sometimes joined to Italy, was separated from it by an
Earthquake; whence the place of separation is still called by the Greek word
Rhegium, which signifies separation and fracture. Pliny affirms, that the
Island of Cyprus was by this means divided from Syria, and Euboea from Boeotia.
Histories tell of some Mountains that have clash'd together, contrary to the
Proverb, which says, that they never meet; of Towns transported to some
distance from their first situation, as happened by an Earthquake in Syria, in
the ninth year of Constantinus Copronomus; of others swallowed up, as sometimes
the greatest part of the City of Sparta, upon which at the same time fell a
part of Mount Taygetus, which completed its ruin; twenty thousand inhabitants
of which City were also overwhelmed by an other Earthquake, by the relation of
Diodorus, about the 78. Olympiade. Josephus reports, that thirty thousand Jews
were swallowed up by another. And Justin, that when Tigranes King of Armenia
became Master of Syria, there happened so dreadful an Earthquake, that a hundred
and thirty thousand Syrians perished by it. Four hundred years ago twelve
thousand houses were shaken down at Lisbon. Italy was much endamag'd in the
year 1116, by one which lasted forty days; principally, Tuscany, Puglia, the
Territory of Venice, and Campagnia, where twelve Cities perished; and that of
Pompey was swallowed up in Winter, which season, nevertheless, is accounted
free from it. Four years ago the City of Naples was horribly shaken,
especially the borders of Mount Visuvius. The common opinion, refers these
effects to a dry Exhalation, which makes the same concussion in the belly of
the Earth as in that of a cloud, shattering many times both the one and the
other, when it cannot otherwise get free from its confinement, how hard or
dense soever the bodies be that enclose it.

The Second said, That the causes of Earthquakes are either Divine, or
Astrological, or Physical. The first have no other foundation but the Will of
God, who thereby oftentimes manifests to Men his justice and power, and
sometimes contrary to the course of ordinary and natural causes. Such was that
at the death of our Savior, in the 18th year of Tiberius, which was universal,
and wherewith twelve Cities of Asia perished; and that mentioned by Sigonius,
happening in the year 343. under Constantine the Arrian Emperor, whereby the City
of Neocaesaria was wholly swallowed up, except the Catholic Church and its
Bishop. The Astrological causes are, if we may credit the professors of this
Art, the malignant influences of Jupiter and Mars in the Houses of Taurus,
Virgo, and Capricorn. But as the first are too general, so these are very
uncertain, being built for the most part, upon false principles; as also those
which suppose the Earth a great Animal, whose tremors are made in the same
manner as those which befall other Animals. Wherefore holding to the most
perceptible causes, I conceive, with Democritus, that torrents of rain coming
to fill the concavities of the Earth by their impetuousnesse drive out the
other waters, and that upon their motion and swaying from one side to another,
the Earth also reels this way, and by and by the other; or rather that these
Torrents drive out the winds impetuously, as Air issues out of a bottle when it
is filling; which wind repells and agitates the Earth till it find some issue;
whence also come the sounds and lowings which accompany Earthquakes. As is seen
in Hydraulick instruments, which by arificial mixing Air and Water when they
are impelled into pipes fit to receive the same, excite sounds like those
emitted by the windpipe of Animals, agitated with the wind of their lungs, and
moistened with the salivous liquor, or natural water.

The Third said, That he could not be of their mind, who, because water is
found by digging to a good depth in the Earth, therefore interpret that place
literally, where it is said, That God has founded the Earth upon the Water upon
which it floats; and that according to their agitation, the Earth is like a
Ship which fluctuates in a tempestuous Sea, and lies even and still in a calm;
since if this were so, then the whole Earth should tremble at the same time,
which is contrary to experience. The opinion of Anaximenes, is more probable,
that as part of the Earth, upon a droughth after a wet season, cleaves and
crackles, so the same happens to Regions and whole Countries.

The Fourth said, That if this opinion were true, then they would begin,
increase, diminish and cease by degrees, nor would they last long. Yet it is
observed, some have continued forty days, yea, six months, as that of
Constantinople, under Theodosius the younger, and miraculously ceased upon the
first singing of those words by all the people, Sanctus; Sanctus, etc.
Aristotle also makes mention of some that lasted two years; the cause whereof
depends either upon the quality or quantity of the Exhalations, which cannot
all get forth but in a long time, or are not strong enough to break the gates
of their prison.

The Fifth said, That to move the most ponderous Body, the Earth, requires the
most active of all Agents, which is fire; whose center the Pythagoreans
therefore placed in the middle of the Earth; because the noblest Element
deserves the noblest place, which is the middle, and for that it is necessary to
the generations which are made there. Hence Maritime places, where most
Vulcano's are observed, whose Fire is fed with the oily and unctuous humors
of the adjacent Sea, are more obnoxious to Earthquakes; and the last eruption
of Mount Vesuvius was preceded by a horrible Earthquake. As likewise the Island
Sacrea, above mentioned, being first lifted up with a great noise and
concussion, opened it self, and cast forth flame and ashes as far as the City
Lipara, and some others of Italy. Now according to the different matter of
these Fires, the concussions which they produce by attenuation of the inflamed
Air are different; if it be nitrous, they are very violent; because Salt Petre
being very Dry is suddenly fired in all its parts; and being of a terrestrial
nature takes up more room when inflamed, then Sulphur which is fat and aerious,
and consequently not so quickly inflameable in the whole, but only in its
surface, by reason of its extreme humidity which checks the Fire; and when it
is inflamed it takes not up so much room, being of it self aerious, and
consequently needing less space when it is rarifi'd to be converted into Fire,
whence the tremors caused by it are less: But when the matter which feeds those
Fires is bituminous, the tremors are moderate, because Bitumen is of a middle
nature between the two former. Now because these materials when they begin to
be inflamed have not strength enough to make the Earth tremble, till their Fire
be increased proportionately to the enormous weight of the load which they are
to move; their first effect reaches no farther then to trouble and infect by
their vapors the springs of Subterranean Waters, as most susceptible of
impression. Hence, according to the different taste, smell, and consistence of
the water of Fountains and Wells, some have foretold Earthquakes; as
Apollonius says, that Pherecides having tasted the water of a spring in
Scyros, foretold one which happened three days after. Moreover, if these vapors
infect the Air too, the Earthquakes are followed by contagions.

The Sixth said, That without determining the famous Question of the Earth's
Motion, it may be said that it moves about the Heaven as a stone in a circle,
it would have the same tremors and titubatious as those which Astronomers
attribute to the Bodies of the Planets, besides the regular motions of their
spheres; of which Agitations it is not strange if Men who are moved with it
discern not the differences so well as they do those of the Heavens; since they
who are in a Ship do not so well discern their own motion as that of others.

II. Of Envy.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That it is no wonder Man is so miserable,
since not only the evil but also the good of others render him equally
unhappy. For if we think them unworthy of it, it afflicts us, and raises
indignation. If it begets sadness in us for not having obtained as much, it
causes Emulation; but if this good disgusts us merely because we are sorry that
another enjoyes it, it produces Envy; and these several affections are not to
be confounded. For the two former are not any ways vicious, but oftentimes
virtuous* and signs of a Soul well disposed; whereas the last is a gross
vice, directly opposite to Charity, which is the life of the Soul, and to
Humane Society, violating virtue, which is the principal bond of it, and when
the same is so bright and manifest as not to fear its assaults; whose luster it
obscures, as much as possible, by its stinking breath, and black calumnies.
Pride is the Mother of it, Self-love the Father, Treachery, Dissimulation,
Detraction and Ruin, its Daughters. And as it is the eldest of all vices, so
it is the most enormous, having cast Lucifer, and millions of Angels, out of
Heaven, and by his snares caused the fall of Man through the persuasion of the
Woman, who was ambitious to become a Goddess, and who as more weak and proud is
more inclined to this passion then Man. Therefore Aristotle says, that the
Peacock, the proudest, is also the most envious of all Animals.

The Second said, Other Vices have always some sort of pretext; Covetousness,
the fear of want; and Ambition, doing service to the public; but Envy cannot
find any, because it malignes what ever is laudable and good out of it self;
herein much more pernicious then all other vices each of which is opposite but
to one good, as Lust to Continence, Pride to Humility. But this sets it self to
ruin, if it can, all the goods of the Body* of Forutne, and of the Mind; and
so is a sworn Enemy of Mankind. Such it was in extremity, in that Man-hater
Timon, who invited all his fellow Citizens to come and hang themselves upon his
Fig Tree before he cut it down to build with; in one Mutius a Roman, who being
very sad, it was said of him, Either some Evil is happened to Mutius, or some
good to some other. For the Envious looks only askew upon others prosperity,
the thought of which incessantly gnaws his heart, and consumes him by drying up
the blood in his veins. Which made the Poets represent Envy in the shape of a
squinting woman, with a dull dejected countenance, of a livid complexion; her
head wreathed with vipers, and all the rest of the body lean and ugly.
Physicians say, Melancholy persons are most subject to it, by reason of that
black humor which produces and is produced by it. 'Twas through envy that
Tyberius put to death an excellent Architect, being unable to behold with a
good eye a pendant Porch which he had built, and much less his invention of
malleable Glass; and it so tormented the spirit of Caligula, that he burnt all
he could of Virgil's Works; and he could not endure the sight of handsome
youths, but caused their goodly locks to be cut off that they might become
deformed.

The Third said, That envy, as vicious as it is, has nevertheless some
utility, not only amongst private persons to excite emulation amongst Artists,
and make them strive who shall sell the best peny-worths; but also for the
State, it being held a political maxim, to hinder as much as possible the
grandeur of neighboring States. And the Ostracism of Athens, although a
balance to preserve democratical equality, was nevertheless an effect of Envy
against such as had gotten most credit and authority in the City, whom they
banished for ten years. Yea had envy no other good in it, but to afford
occasion of exercising virtue, it were not unprofitable. The attempt to blemish
Cato's reputation by making him appear 46 times in full Senate to justify
himself from the accusations Envy had charged upon him, made him more famous.
And the poison which it made Socrates drink, killed his body indeed, but
rendered his memory immortal. The truth is, if the Greek Proverb hold good,
which calls a life without envy unhappy, Envy seems in some manner necessary to
beatitude it self. Whence Themistocles told one who would needs flatter him
with commendations of his brave actions, that he had yet done nothing
remarkable, since he had no enviers.

The Fourth said, It Is such an irregular passion that it seems to aim at
subverting the established order of nature, and making other laws after its own
fancy; yea so monstrous that it is not a bare grief for another's good, or a
hatred of choler, or such other passion; but a monster composed of all vicious
passions, and consequently the most mischievous and odious of all..

CONFERENCE LXXIV.
I. Whence comes trembling in men. II. Of Navigation and Longitudes.

I. Whence comes trembling in men.
THe correspondence of the great to the little world required that, after the
tremblings of the earth, those should be spoken which happen to men, some of
which seize but one part of the body, as the head, lips, hands or legs; some
the whole body, with such violence sometimes that Cardan relates of a woman
taken with such a trembling, that three strong persons could not hold her. It Is
a symptom of motion hurt, in which the part is otherwise moved then it ought,
being sometimes lifted up, and sometimes cast down. For in trembling there are
two contrary motions. One proceeds from the motive faculty, endeavoring to
lift up the member; which is done by retraction of the muscles toward their
original, which by shortning themselves draw their tail to the head, and at the
same time what is annexed thereunto. This motive power serves also to retain
the elevated member in the posture wherein we would have it continue; the
abbreviation of the Muscles not suffering it to return to its first situation.
The other motion is contrary to the will, and to that of the motive power, the
member being depressed by its own gravity. From which contrariety and perpetual
war of these two motions arises trembling; one of them carrying the part as the
will guides it, and the other resisting thereunto, which is done more speedily
then the pulse, and with such short intervals, that the senses cannot
distinguish any middle, and makes us doubt whether there be two motions or but
one; as a ball sometimes returns so suddenly toward him that struck it, that
the point of its reflection is not perceived. The causes are very different, as
amongst others, the debility of the part and of the animal faculty, as in
decrepit old men, impotent persons, and such as are recovering out of long and
dangerous diseases, or who have fasted long; the weakness of the Nerve (the
instrument of the animal spirits) its obstruction, contraction, or relaxation;
the coarctation of the Arteries which send the vital spirits to the Brain,
there to be made animal spirits, and proper for motion, as in fear which puts
the whole body into an involuntary trembling. An Ague also does the same; the
natural heat which resides in the arterial being carried to the relief of the
laboring heart, and so the outward parts, particularly the nerves, whose
nature is cold and dry, becoming refrigerated, and less capable of exercising
voluntary motion.

The Second said, That the actions of the motive faculty, as of all others, may
be hurt three ways; being either abolished, diminished, or depraved. They are
abolished in a Palsy which is a total privation of voluntary motion. They are
diminished in Lassitude, caused either by sharp humors within, or by tension of
the muscles and tendons, or by dissipation of the spirits. They are depraved in
trembling, convulsion, horror and rigor, or shivering. Convulsion is a
contraction of the muscles toward their original, caused either by repletion,
or inanition. Rigor, shaking and concussion of all the muscles of the body
accompanied with coldness and pain, is caused, according to Galen, by the
reciprocal motion of natural heat, and its encounter with cold in the parts
which it endeavors to expel; or, according to some others, by any sharp,
mordicant and troublesome matter, which incommoding the muscles and sensitive
parts, the expulsive faculty attempts to reject by this commotion. Horror
differs not from Rigor but in degrees, this being in the muscles, and that only
in the skin; produced by some matter less sharp, and in less quantity. But
trembling being a depravation and perversion of motion cannot be known but by
comparison with that which is regular. Now that voluntary motion may be rightly
performed, the brain must be of a due temper for supplying animal spirits, and
the nerves and parts rightly disposed. Hence the cause of tremblings is either
the distemper of the brain, or the defect of animal spirits, or the defect of
animal spirits, or the bad disposition of the nerves and parts. A fitting
temper being the first condition requisite to action; every intemperature of
the brain, but especially the cold, is the cause it cannot elaborate spirits
enough to move all the parts. But this defect of spirits comes not always from
such bad temper, but also from want of vital spirits, which are sent from the
heart to the brain by the arteries, to serve for matter to the animal spirits.
These vital spirits are deficient, either when they are not generated in the
ventricles of the heart through the fault either of matter, or of the
generative faculty; or are carried elsewhere then to the brain, by reason of
their concentration or effusion. As in all violent passions, these spirits are
either concentred in the heart* as in fear and grief; or diffused from the
center to the circumference, as in joy, and not sent to the brain; and in these
cases the motive faculty remains weakened, and incapable of well exercising its
motions. Lastly, the nerves being ill disposed by some distemper caused either
by external cold, or other internal causes, or else being shrunk or stopped by
some gross humors; not totally, for then there would be no motion at all; they
cause tremblings, which are imperfect motions, like those of Porters, who
endeavoring to move a greater burden then they are able to carry, the weight
which draws downwards, and the weakness of their faculty which supports it,
causes in them a motion like to those that tremble.

The Third said, That to these causes, Mercury, Hellebore, Henbane, Wine and
Women, must be added. For they who deal with Quicksilver, who have
super-purgations, use stupefactives and things extremely cold, and Venery in
excess, and Drunkards, have all these tremblings; according to the diversity of
which causes, the remedies are also different. Gold is an Antidote against
Mercury, which will adhere to it; Repletion against the second, Heat,
Continence, and Sobriety, against the rest. Galen says, that blood is
sometimes to be let, by Hippocrates's example, that is, to refrigerate in order
to cure trembling. Which if it come from the debility of the Brain and Nerves,
they must be strengthened; if from defect or dissipation of vital spirits, they
must be restored by good diet; if from plenitude, obstruction or compression of
the nerves, the humor and peccant cause must be evacuated. But above all the
rest the tremulation of old people is hardest to cure, in regard of the
weakness and paucity of spirits, as also those that are hereditary and happen
to the parts of the left side; because trembling denotes a deficiency of heat
and spirits, which yet ought to be more vigorous in the left side, then the
right, as being nearer the heart, the source of life.

II. Of Navigation, and Longitudes.
Upon the second Point, That the invention of Navigation, as of all other Arts,
is due to Chance. For men beholding great beams swim in the water, first
ventured to get upon them, then hollowed them, and joined a prow, rudder, and
sides, representing the head, tail, and fins of Fishes, as their back does the
keel of the Ship; and this according to the different natures of seas, and
diverse uses of Trade and War; both being equally necessary to render a State
potent and formidable. As Solomon sometimes by this means did, sending his
Ships to Ophir (which some imagine Peru) and Tarsis, to fetch Gold, Sweet-wood,
and other rarities. As likewise did the Tyrians, Phaenicians, Cretans,
Athenians, and in our days almost all Nations. Without the Art of Navigation we
should want Spices, and most Drugs which grow beyond the seas; and a great part
of the world would have been unknown had it not been for the long Voyages of
Columbus, Vesputius, Magellan, and Drake, who sailed round the world.

The Second said, 'Twas not without reason that Cato repented of three things;
of having told a secret to his Wife, of having spent a day without doing any
thing, and of having gone upon the sea; and that Anacharsis said people in
Ships are but a few inches distant from death, and therefore neither to be
reckoned among the living, nor the dead, in regard of the infidelity of that
Element. Hence Seneca says, there is nothing to which men may not be brought,
since they have been persuaded to Navigation; and Horace detests the first
inventor of Ships. Nor is it less rashness to invade this Element destinated to
Fish, then the Air which is appointed for Birds alone. Our forefathers had
good reason to make their wills, when they went to sea. But since the use of
the Compass it has as much surpassed the observation of Stars and Shores (the
sole guides of antiquity) in certainty, as the Compass would be surpassed by
the invention of Longitudes, which would teach how to hold a course perfectly
certain.

The Third said, That to seek Terrestrial Longitudes is nothing else but to
seek the difference of Meridians, that is, the difference between the Meridian
of an unknown and a known place; or to speak plainer, the Spherical Angle made
by the Meridian of an unknown place with that of a known place. To attain which
knowledge men have hitherto made use of four ways, which are all found
unprofitable.

The first is by an Instrument called a Contepas, or measure of Itinerary
distance, which would be infallible if it were exact. For whosoever has the true
distance between a known and an unknown place has infallibly the angle
comprehended by the Meridians of the two places. For let B be a known place,
and C an unknown place; let the distance between the place B, and the place C
be the arch B C; if the said arch B C be known, the difference of the Meridians
shall also be known. For let A be the Pole of the World, and draw the arches A
B, A C, which are the Meridians of the places B and C. Now since the place B is
known, the height of the Pole at the said place shall be also known, and
consequently its complement the arch A B. And although the place C be unknown,
yet it is easy by the ordinary methods to take the height of the Pole; and so
its complement, which is the arch A C, will be likewise known. Now the arch B C
is also known, since it is the distance of the places, and supposed known.
Therefore in the Triangle B A C three sides being known, the Spherical angle B
A C, contained by the said two Meridians, shall be also known. Which was to be
demonstrated. But being we have no way to understand the distance of B C
exactly, therefore neither have we the angle B A C exactly.



The second way were also infallible if it were practicable, and it is performed
by a most exquisite and exact Watch. For setting forth from a known place with
the said Watch, and having gone as far as you please, supposing the Watch to go
equally, if you would know the difference between the Meridian of the place
where you are and that whence you departed; you need only observe the hour at
the unknown place, and compare it with the hour noted by your Watch; which if
it be the same, then you are undoubtedly under the same Meridian. But if your
Watch says one a clock, and at the unknown place it be two; this signifies that
it is one a clock at the place whence you set forth; and so you are in a
Meridian differing fifteen degrees from that of the place whence you came: and
so in other cases.

The third way depends upon the Needle excited by the Lodestone; for if you
suppose a certain pole to which it is directed, and a regular declination,
there will (undoubtedly) be formed a Triangle of three known sides, and you
will have the difference of any two Meridians infallibly. But because the
variation of its declination is so great and uncertain that it is not possible
to assign a certain pole to it, this invention is found as faulty as the rest.

The fourth way is by the Moon. Which might be as well by the Sun, or any other
Planet. But because the Moon in like time makes more sensible differences of
change of place, therefore it may better afford the knowledge of longitudes.
Supposing then that we have Tables of the Moon which do not fail a minute; and
that it is possible to observe the place of the Moon's Center within a minute
where ever you be, you will, undoubtedly, have the longitude, by comparing the
time, that is, the hour and the minute at which the Moon is found in that same
place of Heaven in the Meridian for which the Tables are constructed, with the
time when you find her at the said place in the unknown Meridian; and then by
making the Aequation of the two times. But because the Moon's motion is swift,
and that of the primum mobile swifter, it is found that if you miss but two
minutes of the Moon's place, you will err a degree in terrestrial longitude,
which under the Equator makes sixty English miles; and so also if you err
four minutes of an hour either in the time of the Tables, or in the time of the
observations: and if the error of time be double, treble or quadruple, the
error in longitude will likewise be multiplied. Now the Tables neither are nor
can ever be exact, nor the observations made punctually enough for this
operation. The reason of which latter is, that it is not sufficient to observe
the Moon, but you must at the same time with her observe one or two fixed
Stars. And, which is most difficult, you must not only observe the body of the
Moon but her Center. Now to have the Moon's Center, you must have her Diametre;
which appears at the same time greater to some, and lesser to others, according
as the observer's sight is more or less acute. And the Parallaxes with the
Refractions interposing too render this practice unprofitable; for these
parallaxes and refractions are different in the very body of the Moon, the
inferior part having greater refraction and parallax then the superior. Whence
we never have any sure knowledge from the said refractions and parallaxes. For
as for Parallaxes, we have indeed very handsome Theories of them, but such as
cannot be reduced into practice with the preciseness requisite for Longitudes.
And, as for the refractions of the air, they are yet more uncertain;
considering that we neither have, nor ever can have, any theory of them, by
reason of the continual variation of the density and rarity of vapors. So that
'twere requisite to have Tables for every Horizon, made by the experience of
many years; and yet they would be very uncertain, because the mutations happening
in the air would render them unprofitable. Whence not only at sea but also at
land it is impossible to have exact observations of the Moon's Center; so that
Cespeda, a Spanish Author, had reason to say, that this operation required the
assistance of an Angel. From the defect of observations proceeds in part; the
defect of the Tables of the Moon's motion. I say, in part, for supposing the
observations were exact, yet we could not have exact Tables unless we had the
true Hypothesis of the Moon's motion and course. Whence the Tables will be
different among themselves, which are made upon the same observations, but
several Hypotheses. Thus we see Origanus and Kepler agree not in their
Ephemerides, but differ sometimes ten minutes, though both made them upon the
same observations of Tycho Brahe, but upon different Hypotheses. And thus,
there being no true Hypothesis of the Moon, we can never have exact Tables
though the observations should be such; and, consequently, since the ways of
finding Longitudes by the Moon are Observations and Tables, and neither the one
nor the other can be so exact as they ought; men can never find Longitudes this
way, unless God afford them some other light of which they have not hitherto
the least glimmering. Wherefore Appian, Veret, Kepler, Metius, and many others,
who have spoken of the means of ascertaining Navigation by the Moon, had reason
to judge the practice thereof impossible, as was remonstrated two years ago to
one that here made a proposal of it as his own; of which we are not likely to
see the execution. The most sure way we have to find these Longitudes is by
help of the Lunar Eclipses. For the beginning of them being observed in two
different places, the difference of the times of their beginnings will give the
difference of the Meridians. But this is an expedient more profitable to
rectify Geographical Charts, then serviceable to Navigation.

CONFERENCE LXXV.
I. Of the Leprosy, why it is not so common in this Age as formerly. II. Of
the ways to render a place populous.

I. Of the Leprosy.
FOr right understanding the nature of this disease, it is requisite to know,
that as the Brain is the source of cold diseases, so the Liver is the furnace
of hot, such as this is: although its debilitation of the faculties makes some
account it cold. For albeit the first qualities be rather the supposed then
true parents of diseases, yet being more perceptible to us then other causes,
and always accompanying them, therefore our reason more readily pitches upon
them. Now the Liver, either by its own fault, or that of the preceding
concoction, which it cannot correct, begets adust blood; and this by further
adustion in the Veins (through the same excess of heat which it derives into
them) becoming atrabilarious, is as such attracted, and retained by every part
of the body, yet not assimilated, as it ought to be, in color and consistence,
but turned into a scurfie, black and putri'd flesh. If that impure blood be
carried but to one part, and make a tumor in it, it makes a Cancer in it,
either open, or occult and not ulcerated; which Hippocrates accounted so
desperate an evil that he counsels not to meddle with it; whence it is vulgarly
called Noli me tangere. So that what a Cancer is in some part of the body) as
in the Paps or Breasts, by reason of their spungy substance more disposed
thereunto) that is a Leprosy in the whole body.

The Second said, No humors in the body are so malignant as to cause a
Leprosy, unless they be infected with some venomous quality. The melancholy
humor, in whatever quantity, causes only Quartan Agues; or if it degenerate
into black choler it causes that kind of folly which they call melancholy. The
bilious humor causes Frenzy, never the Leprosy, how adust soever it be,
without a pestilential and contagious quality: whence Fernelius defines it a
venomous disease in the earthy substance of the body, whose nature it wholly
alters. For the melancholy earthy humor having once conceived this poison
derives it to the bowels and all other parts; which being corrupted and
infected with it, by degrees, turn all food into a juice alike venomous;
wherewith the whole body being nourished acquires a like nature, and retains
the same till death; that gross humor being more apt then any other to retain
the qualities once imprinted on it. Now this disease comes either by birth, or
by contagion, or by the proper vitiosity of the body. As for the first, it is
certain, if the Parents be infected with this venomous disease, they transmit
the same to their children; the formative faculty not being able to make any
thing but sutably to the matter it works upon. Many hold (but groundlesly) that
women conceiving during their purgations bring forth leprous children. As for
the second, Leprosy has this common with all other contagious diseases, to
communicate it self not only by contact of bodies, but also by inspiration of
the air infected with the breath of the leprous, or the virulent smell of their
Ulcers. As for the third, which is the proper vitiosity of the body, it is
produced when a great quantity of black choler putrifies and becomes venomous.
And there are several species of Leprosy, according to the humor, by adustion
whereof that black choler is generated, whether blood, melancholy, yellow
choler and salt phlegm. The first being less malignant makes red Leprosy, and
the blood having acquired excessive acrimony by adustion, amongst other
effects, corrodes the root of the hair, and makes baldness; The second caused
by torrefying of melancholy makes black, green, or livid Leprosy, which is
called Elephantiasis, because it renders the skin rough like that of Elephants.
The third, produced of yellow choler burnt, makes yellow Lepers, and is called
Leonine, from the terrible aspect of those that are tainted with it, or from
the lips and forehead which it makes them elevate like Lions. The last, caused
by salt phlegm, makes white Lepers.

The Third said, That the material cause of Leprosy being any gross humor,
and the efficient a vehement heat; when both these causes meet in a sufficient
degree, Leprosy is contracted by the ill habit of the body. Hence men are more
obnoxious to it then women who have less heat; for want of which Eunuchs are
also free from it, and many have voluntarily made themselves such, to avoid it.
Men of perfect age, as between 35 and 48 years, hot and dry, fall most easily
into this disease. And of these Southern people more then Northern. Whence
Alexandria, yea all Egypt and Judea were most pestered with it; but especially
the latter, where even the walls and vessels contracted leprosy. Which
Interpreters more admire then comprehend, and gave occasion to Manetho the
Historian (who is refuted by Josephus) to say, that this Leprosy forced the
Egyptians to drive the Jews out of their Country. On the contrary, Germany knew
it not for a long time, nor Italy before Pompey, in whose time his Soldiers
brought it from Egypt; the Kings whereof, as Pliny relates, were wont to
assuage the malignity by an inhumane and abominable remedy, a bath of little
childrens blood. But the Scythians were always free from it, as well by reason
of the coldness of their climate, as the familiar use of milk, whose thin and
wheyie part hinders the generation of melancholy, and the other parts moisten
and temper heat. It Is also produced by food of gross and glutinous juice (as
Swines flesh, for this cause forbidden to the Jews) by the Hemorrhoids stopped,
and other suppressions of blood. Now it is not so frequent in these days as of
old; first because being brought hither by strangers, it appeared upon them and
some of their descents, but could not long consist with the mildness of our
air, and so became extinct of it self by the separation of such as were most
infected with it; as Peaches are poison in Persia, but delicious fruits amongst
us. Secondly, because it being ignominious to be separated from all society,
the few Lepers that remained would not appear, unless they were forced; whilst
in the mean time the revenues of Hospitals designed for their support have been
seized by such as favored their concealment the better to enjoy the same.

The Fourth said, The decreasing of this disease, as well as of other
Epidemical diseases, is to be attributed to certain Constellations. Besides,
perhaps the ignorance of former times took the Pox for the Leprosy; and so not
knowing how to cure the Pox so well as at this day, it was communicated to more
persons. The accidents of these two diseases are almost the same, both are
cured with Mercury, whose excessive coldness and humidity corrects the heat and
dryness of the Leprosy, and by its extreme tenuity penetrating the more solid
parts wherein the Leprosy lies more successfully encounters this atrabilarious
venom then Mithridate and Vipers do, although much commended by Galen, who
relates five stories of such as were cured therewith, but we have experiences
to the contrary in these latter ages, refrigerating and humecting Medecines
having been found more profitable then drying, as Vipers are; which, whether
our climate, or some other unknown cause, occasion the alteration, rather
increase then diminish this evil. Nevertheless, what is reported of the means
to cure the Leprosy, especially if hereditary or inveterate, must be
understood of a palliative or preservative, not of a perfect cure; which is
difficult in the beginning of this malady, when only the bowels are tainted;
very difficult in its increase, when the signs begin to appear outwardly;
impossible in its State when the members come to be ulcerated; and desperate in
its declination, when they begin to drop off. Although Paracelsus, by his great
work promises to cure not only men but also all imperfect metals, which he
terms leprous.

II. Of the ways to render a place populous.
Upon the Second Point it was said, All our great designs aim at Eternity, and
among the means of attaining thereunto, Princes have found none more
magnificient, and correspondent to their grandeur, then to build Cities after
their own names. Such was that of Alexander in the founding of Alexandria, of
Constantine in that of Constantinople, of the Caesar's in so many Cities of
their names; and in our time, of the King of Sweden in Gustavousburg, of the
King of Spain in Philippa, of the Duke of Nevers in Charle-ville, and of some
others. But to accomplish this great design, it is to be considered that the
business is to be done with men, who are drawn by as many ways as they consist
of parts, to wit, Body and Soul. And because most men are sensual, therefore
things relating to corporeal conveniences are most attractive. Amongst which,
regard is principally to be had to the Air, as that which we breathe
incessantly, to meat and drink, which are of daily necessity. Hence we see few
healthful and fertile places desert; whereas barren and desert places, what
ever care be taken, always return to their first nature. If those
conveniences be wanting in the place, they they must at least be near hand,
and attainable by commerce of Seas and Rivers; which also are advantageous for
the vent of homebred commodities. But the most necessary condition of all is
safety; which has rendered Holland, the Adriatic Gulf, and almost all
Islands populous, as it sometimes assembled many outlaws and miserable persons
at the first building of Rome; the same course being also practiced by Timoleon
to populate Syracuse. For Man being naturally a sociable creature, the cause of
their assembling together was not the casual concourse of atoms, as Epicurus
feigned, nor the wonder of fire, as Vitruvius says, nor their meeting near
pits and springs, much less Music, Eloquence, or Philosophy; but only their
natural inclination to preserve themselves, and be secure, first, against wild
beasts, and then against their enemies, who were kept off with walls. Yet as a
fortress needs a strong bulwark, so a frontier Town cannot easily become
populous, the guarding of it diverting its inhabitants from attending more
necessary Arts, as Agriculture, Manufacture, and Trade. For most Cities are
rendered populous by some Manufactures, both buyers and sellers resorting to
such places where there is most plenty and most vent. Wherefore it is one of the
best expedients to invite the most excellent Artists from all parts of the
world, by immunities, privilege, and rewards. As to the Soul, Religion bears a
great stroke in this matter, obliging men to Voyages, Pilgrimages, Offerings,
and other devotions, in some places rather then others. And next are Academies
and Universities, all sorts of Sciences and Disciplines.

The Second said, That a City being an assembly and union of many persons in
order to live happily, filling it with people is not so necessary as exact
observation of Laws; which consisting only in order, are commonly neglected in
places where multitude causes confusion. Hence Solon, Lycurgus, and most
ancient Legislators, limited the Inhabitants of their Cities to a certain
number, which Hippodamus the Milesian restrained to ten thousand men; and at
this day, in some Cities, as Lisbon and Naples, it is not lawful to erect new
buildings, which has also been frequently prohibited at Paris. For the same
reason many Nations have discharged themselves of their people by colonies, or
sending them to the conquest of other Territories, as did sometimes the Gauls
under Bremus; the Goths, Huns, Alans, Hernles, and Vandals, under Attila and
Alaric; and the Swisses are at this day in the service of most Princes and
States.

The Third said, That the true strength of a State, both for offense and
defense, consists in the number of men, and therefore a City flourishes
according to its populousness. The small number of inhabitants limited by
Legislators has sometimes been the loss of their Republics; that of Sparta
in the battle of Leuctra and Athens, in one single battle against Philip; as it
would also have been of the Roman Empire at the defeat of Cannae, where 50000.
Romans died upon the place, without the supply which they found in the almost
innumerable multitude of the Citizens of Rome, rendered populous by the
residence of Kings, Consuls, and Emperors, and the supreme Tribunal of Justice
which the Senate dispensed thence to all the world, with whose spoils it was
enriched. Whose increase was also promoted by the rigorous laws against
coelibacy, and the privileges granted to such as had many children; for
propagating which, before Christiauity, they permitted polygamy and divorce,
and authorized concubinage by legitimation of natural issues. Moreover, the
felicity of a City lying in the plenty and sufficiency of all things, which is
not found except amongst a great number of inhabitants who interchangeably
communicate their commodities; the most populous City is the most happy. And
experience manifests, that the Laws and Justice are better administered in great
Cities, then in hamblets and villages; especially when Concord, whereby small
things grow, is maintained therein.

CONFERENCE LXXVI.
I. Of Madness. II. Of Community of goods.

I. Of Madness.
SInce Man by his treason first destroyed the goodly order established by God
in nature, endeavoring to advance himself above his Creator, the beasts have,
also, in just punishment of his crime, shaken off his yoke; some offending him
by their breath, others by their sight, some with the voice, most with biting;
which if venomous, as that of Serpents and mad Dogs, imprints a malignant
quality in the whole habit of the Body, whose temper it destroys. That of
mad-dogs, although less painful then any, yet more horrible, and so much more
dangerous in that it oftentimes seizes upon the noble parts without being
perceived till the madness be at the height. The signs for knowing this Evil
in its birth, in order to prevent it, are not taken from the wound which is
altogether like other wounds, but from the dog that made it. For if he be mad,
he neither eats nor drinks, although he thirst extremely; he pants and blows,
hangs out his tongue, which is yellow and tinctured with choler, he casts forth
dry and clotted froth at the mouth and nose, hangs down his ears, looks wildly
with sparkling eyes, flies at known and unknown, and bites without barking; he
is lean, carries his tail between his legs clinging to his belly, he runs fast,
and stops suddenly, hits upon every obstacle without going out of his way, and
other dogs avoid him. But if the dog cannot be seen, then bruised nuts or hot
bread must for some hours be laid upon the wound, or else meal tempered with
the blood running from it, given to a hungry dog or hen, who will dye if the
wound were made by a mad dog.

The Second said, Madness is a malady oftentimes with deliration, caused in an
Animal by a particular poison, communicated to Man, with extreme aversion
against all liquors, especially water. It happens to Wolves, Oxen, Horses,
Cats, and almost all Animals, but most frequently to Dogs, either by reason of
their melancholy temper, or a particular inclination which they have to
madness, as the swine has to leprosy. For it is an Evil that is not known but
by its effects; it is a poison particularly apt to be communicated to Man by
biting, by the slaver, foam, or feeding of an enraged Animal, not depending on
the first qualities, but acting with its whole substance: As appears in that it
reigns in great colds and excessive heats, but is cured with medicines which
act not by their first qualities, but by their whole substance, as the ashes of
fresh water Crabs, and Mithridate; and, according to Dioscorides, it is
contracted by qualities altogether occult, as to sleep very long in the shadow
of a Service Tree; and he says, he saw a Carder of Wool become mad only by
having long beaten his wool with a wand of Cornel Tree. The same is affirmed of
a plant called Dog-berry Tree. Yet the most part, with Matthiolus and
Fernelius, hold, that these causes may awaken the hidden evil, and augment it,
but not produce it, unless in such as have been mad before. But how comes this
poison to lie hid so long, that Fracastorius says it seldom appears before
the one and twentieth day, commonly after the thirtieth, in many after four or
six months, and sometimes after diverse years; seeing all poisons being an
enemy to the Heart, should be carried thither suddenly by the Arteries. This
seems to proceed from the proportion of the Agent and Patient, and their
several resistance, differing according to the degrees of the poison, the
diversity of tempers or food, climates, or the part hurt. For poison being
contrary to our nature by particular malignity cannot be wholly subdued by our
natural heat, and so may preserve its malignity in the body a long while,
without manifesting it self till it have first introduced dispositions
requisite to its reception, which happens to be sooner or later according to
the good or bad temper of the body; whence in several persons bitten by the
same dog, madness appears in some sooner, in others later. As some have the
small pox when they are well in years, others in their infancy, though most
Physicians agree that it is an Ebullition of some venomous matter contracted by
every one in his mothers womb, by impurity of the menstruous blood retained
during the time of breeding. So the choleric are sooner tainted with madness
and all other poisons then the phlegmatic; such as are lean and have large
veins sooner then fat who have small. The skin, artery, vein, nerve and muscle,
variously communicate this poison. The power of Imagination also contributes
much to it. Whence Aetius relates, that a Philosopher having by his
Ratiocination concluded that the dog which appeared to him in the water of the
bath, and made him afraid, was nothing but an effect of his perverted Fancy,
there being no affinity between a bath and a dog, drunk largely of it and was
cured.

The Third said, That the signs of madness are anxiety, causeless anger and
fear, heaviness and griping of the stomach, the hiccock, and other convulsive
motion, hoarsness of the voice, sweating of the countenance, and contraction of
the whole body; but the most certain is the total aversion from water (although
the thirst be vehement) which is the certainest remedy in this case, whence
some have been cured by being unawares plunged into water, and so made to drink
whether they would or no. This Hydrophobia cannot be from the image of the dog
appearing in the water to the patient beholding his own terrible aspect. For
some have been possessed with aversion from water without the biting of a dog;
as Platerus tells of a woman who became Hydrophobous by having abode a whole
night near a river. Much less can it come from the dryness caused in them by
this poison; for then they would rather desire drink; but it proceeds from a
particular antipathy of this poison to water, so great, that if the fresh wound
of a dog's biting be with cold water, it becomes incurable; the poison flying
water so much, that at its approach it retires from the surface inwardly,
whence it cannot afterward be expelled.

The Fourth said, That the Fancy alone was capable to cause this aversion from
water, notwithstanding the natural inclination of the parts requiring
humectation. For that faculty is very strong in these Patients, having the
image of the dog always present, and so they imagine that they see it in the
water; as the Fool Antiphon thought he continually saw his own in the air. Yea,
possibly, as a little seed is so configurated by the formative virtue that it
becomes another animal, and in Plants a hundred grains are made of one: so this
poison containing the idea of the whole substance of the dog, by which alone it
acts, when received into the body, and assisted by natural heat produces new
species of the dog; which being carried by the spirits to the Brain are so
strongly imprinted in the imagination that reason can hardly rectify them; and
being again represented in the water by emission of the animal spirits, in
vision, make the patients abhor water, and all liquid things. Which will not be
thought so irrational by those that maintain that the foam of a mad dog hanging
on the hem of linen produces little animals of a dog-like shape; nor by those
who have observed the sediments of the Urines of these Patients to have the
same figure, as if the whole man became dog in this malady, as he becomes all
wolf in Lycanthropie.

The Fifth said, The mind and body being both disordered in this malady,
require each a distinct cure. The mind must be settled, and diverted from that
sad object of dogs, and the most usual way in France is to be bathed in
seawater. As for the body, the poison must be drawn out of the new wound by
Cupping-glasses, Scarifications, Suctions, Cauteries, and attractive
Cataplasms, such as that of pitch and Opopanax dissolved in Vinegar, which
Galen says is infallible; ligatures made upon the wound if the part admit
them, or else encompassed with defensatives, as Dragons blood, and Bole
Armenick mingled with the white of an egg; then some Antidotes or Alexiteries
to strengthen the principal parts, and alter the malignity of the poison; as
the Herb called Alyssum, because it extinguishes madness, the ashes of Crevish,
Mistletoe of the Oak, Scordium, Dittany, Angelica, and blessed Thistle. Of all
which remedies, as also of the purgatives, the dose must be double, and so
proportionate to the greatness of the evil; but they are unprofitable when the
Patient is already averse from water and liquid things, only two, of which
Themison the Physician is one, being recorded to have been cured by them.

II. Of Community of goods.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That a City is a society established in
order to living well; and amity being the foundation of society, what conduces
to preserve it in a City ought to be exactly observed. Such is community of
goods, so much desired by Plato, that in his Republic he could not suffer the
words Meum and Tuum, which he accounted the original of all disorders happening
in States; and, as they say, practiced by Pythagoras too amongst his disciples,
as by our Monasticks. As also by the Garamantes, a people of Africa, as Mela
reports, and by the Brachmans, Esteans, and Gymnosophists. Whilst the
Lacedaemonians observed it, their State was the most flourishing of Greece. The
example of the first Christians is express, who sold all that they had, and
laid the money at the Apostles feet; and Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, died
for having kept back part of the price of their inheritance sold to this end.
For the condemning of the Anabaptists of Westphalia under Munster, who
practiced this community, was for their Heresy which they covered with this
specious pretext. And Diodorus Siculus relates that among the Aethiopians
community of goods makes so perfect friendship, that friends not only will
conform to one another by the equality of the goods of fortune; but also when
one of them becomes blind, maimed or lame, they deprive themselves of the same
members, accounting it reasonable to have community not only of goods, but also
of evils, the burden being lessened by division, and more supportable by
example. But good is greater when communicated to more; communicativeness being
a quality which belongs to the best things in the world, as to Light and the
Sun, yea to God, who as he is goodness it self, so he is the most communicative
of all beings, having communicated himself not only, in eternity, by the
generation of the Word and procession of the Holy Ghost, but in time, by the
production of all his creatures.

The Second said, That indeed some goods are the more excellent by being
communicated, as the Virtues and Sciences are increased the more they are
exercised and taught. But it is not so with the goods of fortune, which diminish
by communication and use. Whence men are not sparing of the first, but very
much of the latter, restraining the use thereof wholly to themselves. Now
although community of goods seems founded in nature, all things having been
common at first, and appropriated afterward by the covetousness of the
occupants; yet it is directly contrary to the felicity of a City, which consists
not only in a society of Men, but of Men of different conditions, the meanest
of which being commonly most necessary in a State would not be exercised if all
were equally rich and powerful. And if the necessity of Hunger, which sometimes
taught Pies and Crows to speak at Rome, had not pressed most of the first
inventors of Arts, the same would be yet to discover. Nothing is more beautiful
in Nature then Variety, nor yet in Cities. Besides, Men being apt to neglect
the public, in comparison of their private interest, were goods common, they
would be careless of preserving or increasing them, and rely upon the industry
of others. Thus this equality would beget laziness, whilst they that labored
most could hope for no more then they that did nothing at all. Moreover, if
Wives and Children were common, as Socrates, in Plato, would have them, it
would be a great hindrance to propagation; Children would not own their
Parents, nor these their Children, and so there would be no paternal, filial,
nor conjugal love, which yet are the surest foundations of humane society.
Incests and Parricides would be frequent, and there would be no place for the
exercise of most virtues, as of Chastity and Friendship, (the most perfect of
all virtues) much less of Liberality and Magnificence, since nothing should be
given but what belongs alike to all; nor would any be capable of receiving.

The Third said, That in a City, which is a society of companions, some things
must be necessarily enjoyed in common, as Public Places, Havens, Fairs,
Privileges, Walls, Town-houses, Fortresses, and public charges. But not all
things, in regard of the inconveniences which would follow thereupon; and
therefore Plato was forced to reform his first imaginary Republic, and make
another more suitable to the humors of men; permitting every one the possession
of some goods, yet with this restriction, that he would not have any become too
unproportionably rich.

The Fourth said, That Plato's design, in his Republic, was, to conjoyn action
and contemplation; he would have a City first Mistress of her self, then of the
world; more venerable then formidable to its neighbors; less rich then just,
but sober, temperate, chaste, and, especially, religious. And to render it
such, he conceived, that by removing all impediments from within by equality of
goods, he traced out the way to contemplation, which is the supreme good
whereunto men aspire; and therefore community of goods which is conducive
thereunto, cannot be too highly esteemed. But in this Age it would deprive all
goods of that name, by rendering them common; and there would be no common good,
if there were none particular.

CONFERENCE LXXVII.
I. Of Sorcerers. II. Of Erotick, or Amorous Madness.

I. Of Sorcerers.
THe malignant Spirit's irreconcilable to humane nature exalted above his own,
is such, that he is not contented with doing all the mischief he can by
himself, but imployes his Ministers and Officers to that purpose; as God, whose
Ape he is, imployes his holy Spirits in his works. These Officers are Magicians
and Sorcerers. The former are such as being either immediately instructed by
the Devil, or by Books of Magic, use characters, figures, and conjurations,
which they accompany either with barbarous and insignificant words, or some
perversely taken out of the Holy Scripture; by which means they make the Devil
appear, or else give some answer by sound, word, figure, picture, or other
sign; making particular profession of Divination. Sorcerers are their servants,
aiming only to do mischief; and Sorcery is a species of Magic, by which one
hurts another by the Devils help. And as the operation of the Devil is
requisite thereunto, so is the consent of the Sorcerers and Gods permission,
without which one hair falls not from our heads. This consent is grounded upon
a compact, either express or tacit; the former whereof is made by rendering
homage, either immediately to the Evil Spirit, or to the Magician in his name,
or by addressing a request to him. Commonly they take an oath of fidelity in a
circle described upon the ground; the Devil herein, as in other things,
imitating the Deity, which is represented by a Circle. A tacit compact is when
one makes use of such means learned from a Magician or magical books, known to
be such, or sometimes ignorantly. But the most ordinary means which they use in
their witchcrafts, are powders, which they mingle with food, or else infect the
body, clothes, water, or air. Amongst which the black powders are designed to
procure death; the gray or red, to cause sickness; and the white to cure;
either when they are forced to it, or in order to some greater mischief;
although this virtue depend not any ways upon their color, nor always upon
their qualities. Sometimes they perform their witcheries with words, either
threatenings or praises. Not that these have any virtue in themselves, any more
then straws, herbs, and other things wherewith they bewitch people; but because
the Devil is by covenant to produce such or such effects by the presence of
these things; showing himself a faithful performer in certain things, to the
intent he may at last deceive them in all.

The Second said, That the charms of Sorcerers differ according to the end
whereunto they are designed; some cause sleep, and that by potions, charms,
and other enchantments; the most usual of which are pieces of a dead body
fastened to the house, enchanted candles made of a particular wiek and fat, or
of the feet and hands of dead persons anointed with Oil which the Devil gives
them; these they either light up, or place candles at each finger; and so long
as this dismal light lasts, they in the house remain in a deep sleep. Other
enchantments are to procure Love, some of which act either within or without
the body, consisting of what is most sacred in Religion, and most filthy in
Nature; (so abominable is this practice, and done in hatred of the Creator)
some likewise procure hatred, hinder generation, make women miscarry, increase
their pains of childbearing, dry up the milk, breed thorns, pieces of glass
and iron, knives, hair, and such other preternatural things, in the body. Of
all which magical effects some indeed are real, but the most part are
prestigious. The real are when the Devil makes use of natural causes for such
an effect, by applying actives to passives, according to the most perfect
knowledge which he has of every things essence and properties; having lost no
gifts of Nature by sin, but only those of Grace. But when the effect is above
his power, or God permits it not, then he makes use of delusions to cover his
impotence, making appearance of what is not, and hindering perception of what
really is. Such was Gyges's ring, which rendered him invisible when he pleased;
and Pasetus's feasts, from which the guests departed with intolerable hunger;
as also the money wherewith he paid his Merchants, who found nothing at night
in their bags. And that famous Simon Magus, as Saint Clement reports, seemed to
create a man in the Air, rendered himself invisible, appeared with several
faces, flew in the Air, penetrated rocks, turned himself into a sheep and a
goat, commanded a sickle to reap corn, as it did more alone then ten laborers,
and by this means deluded the eyes of all the world, except those of Saint
Peter. Such was also, in the days of our Fathers, one Trisulcan, who to defame
his Curate, made him think that he was playing at cards, whereas he was turning
over his breviary, whereupon he flung it upon the ground; and M. Gonin being
hanged on a gibbet, the first presidents mule was seen hanging in his place.
Their transports are sometimes real, sometimes imaginary, the Devil keeping
them in a deep sleep all the while.

The Third said, That the power of Evil Spirits, whose instruments Sorcerers
are, is so limited that they cannot either create or annihilate a straw, much
less produce any substantial form, or cause the real descent of the Moon, or
hinder the Stars motion, as Heathen Antiquity stupidly believed. Indeed, they
are able to move all sublunary things; so they cause Earthquakes, the Devil
either congregting Exhalations in its hollownesses, or agitating the Air
included therein: Sopater having been put to death for so tying up the winds
that no merchandise could be transported to Byzantium. And Philostratus
relates, that Apollonius saw two tubs or tuns among the Brachmans, which being
opened, there arose most vehement winds and rain; and shut again, the Air
became calm and serene. Olaus also testifies the like of the Laplanders and
Finlanders, who sold winds to Merchants. Moreover, the Devils are called by the
Apostle, Princes of the Air; they cause Hail, Thunder, Rain, and Fire, to fall
where they please; yet always conditionally that God lets the bridle loose to
them, as he did when he burnt Job's servants and flocks, and overthrew the
house wherein his children were, with a whirlwind. So in the year 1533. a
Sorcerer burnt the whole Town of Silthoc in Sweden to the ground. And as they
can obscure, so they can infect the Air, and more easily the waters, stopping
them and making them run backwards, which Pliny says himself saw in his time.
They kill Animals by infecting them or their pastures, or else suffocate them,
by entering into them; as they did the swine of the Gadarenes. They can also
extinguish the plenty of a Country, by transporting the fatness of it
elsewhere, not by virtue of the Sorcerers words; much less is it by those that
they introduce flies, grasshoppers, and catterpillars, or other insects, into a
place, either assembling them together, or producing them out of congruous
matter.

The Fourth said, That the effects of Nature and Art are to be distinguished
from those of enchantments; for want of which satisfaction some juglers pass
for Sorcerers among the vulgar, who are apt to apprehend supernatural means,
when they are ignorant of the natural or artificial causes. For removing of
which calumny, C. Furius Cresnius being accused of having bewitched his
neighbors fields, and transported all their fertility into his own, brought
his servants, his oxen, and plough, into the Senate, declaring that these were
all his charms. Moreover, many times the sterility imputed to Sorcerers
proceeds from Gods anger, who makes the Heaven iron, and the Earth brass, for
their wickedness. So when a private person arrives to great honor or estate
suddenly, though it be by his merit, yet the generality of people, the meanest
of which account themselves worthy of the same fortune, attribute such
extraordinary progresses to the Devil. And yet it is a rare thing, if ever heard
of, that any one was enriched by the Devil; either because he reserves his
riches for Antichrist wherewith to seduce the Nations; or because God does not
suffer it, lest men should forsake his service for that of Devils, and the good
should be too sorely afflicted by the wicked.

II. Of Amorous Madness.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That Love being not very wise of it self,
it is no hard matter for it to become extravagant; for it cares not for
mediocrity, and, consequently, is subject to most tragical accidents. Its
Excess is called Erotick, or Amorous Madness, which is a species of melancholy
deliration, caused by the continual representation of the thing loved, which
possesses the Fancy of the poor Lovers that they can think of nothing else,
and many times forget to eat, drink, and sleep, and the other necessary actions
of life. It Is different according to diversity of temper of brain and body, the
degree of the melancholy humor, and the profession of those that are
possessed with it. Hence melancholy persons are fullest of flatuosities and
Spirits, and the sanguine, as having most blood, are most subject to it. They
are known by their hollow and languishing eyes, inequality of pulse and visage,
especially when the party loved is spoken of or seen; by which means Galen
discovered the Lovesickness of a Roman Lady, and Erasistratus that of
Antiochus, Seleuous's Son, for his Mother in law Stratonice. This distemper is
the more dangerous, because it is pleasing to those that are tormented with it;
and hard to cure, because they fear nothing more then their cure, being fond of
their fetters. But being a disease of the Mind, the surest remedy is to divert
from the thought of what they love, and to avoid idleness, the mother of
lasciviousness. The body also must be conveniently purged from its predominant
humors, according to which these patients differ; the sanguine are merry, and
laugh continually, and oftentimes alone, love songs and dances; the choleric
are froward, and so furious that some have killed themselves through the
violence of their passions; and Romances are full of such persons. The
melancholy are pensive, solitary, and sad; that dull and cold humor hebitating
the souls motion. If this distemper proceed from abundance of geniture,
remedies must be used which extinguish it, as Rue, Purslane, Lettice,
Waterlilly, Willow-leaves, Coriander seeds, Agnus Castus, Camphir, and Mint.

The Second said, As Love is the original, so it is the Abridgement of all
Passions. You may see these poor Lovers in the same hour love and hate, fly and
desire, rejoice and sorrow, fear and dare, be angry without a cause, and be
pacified again with less reason; in brief, never to have their Minds settled,
any more then their bodies, in the same posture and complexion alike. Whence
many have thought this malady produced by enchanted Drinks or Philtres; which
may indeed make one amorous, but not determine him to a certain person; besides
that these Drinks cannot act upon our Will which is incorporeal, nor captivate
its liberty to a particular object; unless the Devil have a hand in the
business.

The Third said, That the famousest of all Philtres is Hippomenes, powdered and
taken knowingly by the Lover. It Is a little black and round piece of flesh,
about the bigness of a dry fig, found upon a Colt's forehead new foal'd;
whence it must be taken betimes, else the Mare bites it off, and if she be
deceived of it, never affects the foal afterward; and therefore it is called by
Virgil, Matri praereptus Amor. The same effect is attributed to the seed of
Mares, to a plant called Hippomanes, and, by Pliny, to the hair of a Wolfs
tail, the fish Remora, the brain of a Cat, and a Lizard; and by Wierus, to
Swallows starved to death in an earthen pot, the bones of a green Frog
excarnated by Pismires, the right parts of which, he says, conciliate Love,
and the left hatred. But to show the vanity and impurity of these inventions,
most Philtres are taken from Animals generated of corruption, excrements, and
other filthy and abominable things; and commonly, all rather excite Fury then
Love, as appears by many to whom Cantharides have been given; and Caligula, who
was rendered mad by a drink of his wife Cesonia; one Frederick of Austria, and
the Poet Lucretius, by a Philtre given him by his Wife Lucilia. Love is free,
and fixes not by constraint; it is not taken in at the mouth, but the eyes, the
graces of the body being the most powerful charm, as Olympia Wife of Philip of
Macedon acknowledged, when being jealous that her Husband loved a young Lady
that was said to have given him amorous potions, the Queen sent for her, and
having beheld her great Beauty, said that she had those Philtres in her self.
Now if these gifts of the body be accompanied with those of the mind, and the
party endu'd therewith testify Love to another, it is impossible but the
affection will become mutual, Love being the parent of Love; whence the Poets
feigned two Cupids, Eros, and Anteros; and Ovid, an intelligent person in this
matter, knew no surer course then this, Vt ameris amabilis esto.

The Fourth said, Love is a spiritual thing, and consequently produced by means
of the same nature. Hence an ill report, which is a thing not only
incorporeal, but commonly fantastical and imaginary, extinguishes all Love for
a person otherwise lovely as to the graces of the body. And the choice between
equal Beauties shows that Love is not founded upon the outside. Wherefore they
take the wisest course to get themselves loved who use inductions and
persuasions, which are the common means to make marriages. By all which it
appears, that Amorous Madness is a distemper of the mind, and as such to be
cured.

CONFERENCE LXXVIII.
I. Why the Sensitive Appetite rules over Reason. II. Whether Speech be
natural, and peculiar to Man.

I. Why the Sensitive Appetite rules over Reason.
APpetite is an inclination of every thing to what is good for it self. There
are three sorts in Man. First, the Natural, which is in plants who attract
their nourishment, and also in some inanimate things, as the Lodestone and
Iron; yea, in the Elements, as the dry earth covets water, and all heavy bodies
tend to their center. It Is without Knowledge and Will, even in Man, for all
natural actions are performed best in sleep. Secondly, the Sensitive, common to
Man and Beast, which some erroneously deny to be a humane faculty, because it is
the seat of the Passions, the enemies of Reason which constitutes Man. But the
encounter of it with Reason argues their distinction. Thirdly, the Rational,
called the Will, which is Mistress of the former two; and besides makes use of
Reason, for the knowing of one or more things. And because desire cannot be
without knowledge, therefore the Sensitive Appetite presupposes the knowledge
of the Imagination, and the Will that of the Understanding; but the Natural
Appetite depends on that of a First Cause, which directs every natural form to
its particular good, though it know not the same. Now it is demanded, how the
Mistress comes to obey the Servants, notwithstanding the Maxim, That the Will
tends to nothing but what is good, which cannot be without truth; and this is
not such, unless it be approved by the Intellect. It seems to me improper, to
say that the Sensitive Appetite prevails over Reason, but rather hinders it by
its disturbance from pronouncing sentence, as a brawling Lawyer does a Judge by
his noise.

The Second said, That Reason is always Mistress. For Men govern themselves
according to Nature (the universal rule of all things) and, this nature being
rational, they cannot be guided otherwise then the motions of Reason. But some
find Reason where other finds none. The Thief accounts riches ill divided, and
therefore he may justly possess himself of what he wants; and however he sees
evil in the action, yet he conceives more in his necessity, which his Reason
makes him account the greatest of all evils. So that comparing them together,
he concludes the less evil to be good, and wittingly attempts the crime, not
owning it for such whilst he commits it. The same may be said of all other
sins, wherein the present sweetness exceeds the fear of future punishment. If
Conscience interpose, they either extinguish it, or else wholly forbear the
action: Unless the Mind happen to be balanced, and then they are in confusion,
like the Ass which died of hunger between two measures of corn, not knowing
which to go to. For it is impossible for the Will to be carried to one thing
rather then another, unless it find the one better and more convenient.

The Third said, It Is congruous to nature for the Inferior to receive Law from
the Superior. So Man commands over beasts; and amongst Men, some are born
Masters, and others slaves; the Male has dominion over the Female, the Father
over his Children, the Prince over his Subjects; the Body receives Law from the
Soul, the Matter from its Form, the Angels of Inferior Hierarchies receive
their intelligence from the Superior; and the lower Heavens the rule of their
motions from the higher; the Elements are subject to the influences of those
celestial bodies; and in all mixts one quality predominates over the rest.
Since therefore the Sensitive Appetite is as much below Reason, as a beast
below a Man, and the Imagination below the Intellect; according to the same
order established in Nature, Reason ought always to have the command over it;
because having more knowledge it is capable to direct it to its end. But through
the perversity of our Nature, we more willingly follow the dictates of Sense
then Reason, of the Flesh then the Spirit; because the former, being more
familiar and ordinary, touch us nearer then Reason, whose wholesome counsels
move not our Will so much, which being Mistress of all the faculties, according
to its natural liberty, may sometimes command a virtuous action, of whose
goodness Reason has informed it; sometimes a vicious one by the suggestion of
the Sensitive Appetite, which makes it taste the present sweetness and delight,
whose attraction is greater then that of future rewards promised by virtue to
her followers. Hence the Law of the members so prevails over the law of the
mind, as sometimes wholly to eclipse the same, as in those who are blinded, and
hardened in vice; sometimes it forces it to come over to its own side, and back
it exorbitance with Reasons: In some others in whom Reason remains entire, and
there is a clear knowledge of the turpitude of an action, yet the Will is so
bound and charmed by the vehemence of the Passions of the Concupiscible and
Irascible Appetite, that it follows their motions inspight of the remonstrances
of Reason. Such was Medaea, who by reason saw the heinousness of her intended
murder of her Children; but rage and desire of revenge upon their Father Jason
transported her. So it was said of the Athenians, that they knew indeed what
was fit to be done, but did it not.

The Fourth said, They who hold that Virtues are not habits distinct from
Sciences would not be of this opinion, that we can know good and do evil; for
Divinity teaches us, that there is no sin without ignorance; and that as
'twould not be in our power to sin if we had perfect knowledge of the turpitude
of Vice, so it is impossible for a man to know the beauty of Virtue without
loving her; considering too, that we have in us the seeds of Virtue to which we
are naturally lead, inasmuch as it conducts us to the supreme good; seeds which
would grow of themselves, were it not for the depravation of our judgment,
which being imbued with the false maxims of the Imaginations which governs all
our actions, and judges not of the goodness of things but by sense and common
opinion, according to which glory follows vice, and contempt poor Virtue; this
is the cause that these seeds of Virtue are stifled in the birth. Whereunto
greatly conduces the example of other vicious persons, who are more numerous
then the virtuous. And as Vice is more sensible, so it easily passes into
habit, this habit into custom, which being another nature begets a kind of
necessity to Vice, which becoming familiar, by degrees seems most agreeable in
respect of the severe aspect of Virtue; men having in this condition Appetites
as irregular as those of Childbearing women, who prefer char-coal, chalk, and
ashes, before good Aliments.

The Fifth said, That the contest between the Sensitive Appetite and Reason
arises from the diversity of their objects, unto which either of them
endeavors to draw the Will. Hence if it happen that Honesty, the object of
Reason, be a sensible evil, as to fast, fight, or endure any thing contrary to
the sensitive Appetite, whose object is delectable and sensual good, there
arises a combat between these two Faculties, in which Reason is many times
worsted for want of being well seconded. But when the object of Reason and the
Appetite is the same, namely, a sensible good, there is no debate between them.
For Reason proposing it to the Will, it spontaneously tends to it, being also
lead thereunto by the Sensitive Appetite. Hence, in Indignation, Com-Passion,
and Emulation, which are rational motions accompanied with anger, grief, and
self-love, there is no fight between the Sensitive Appetite and Reason, since
in these virtuous motions Reason gives the bridle to those Passions which are
the Emissaries of the Appetite. As when the commands of a Master agree with the
inclinations of the Servant, he sets upon performing them cheerfully. But being
it very seldom happens that what is commanded by Reason agrees with the
Passions of the Appetite, but is commonly difficult and laborious; it is not to
be wondr'd if this intestine war be frequent, and the Appetite get the better
of Reason. Moreover, what is in the Intellect, being transmitted from the
Senses, equally revolted against this Faculty their Princess, it still retains
something of the grosness of Sensuality; so that these notions of the
Intellect, oftimes taking part with the Senses and Sensitive Appetite, Reason
cares not to prevail over them; it being also proper to inferiors to have some
contrariety to the commands of their Superiors, as is seen in the Celestial
Spheres which have a motion opposite to that of the First Mover. Besides that
the Empire of Reason over the Appetite is not despotical, or of a Master over a
Servant; but political, such as that of a Magistrate over the Citizens, and
consequently, half voluntary.

II. Whether Speech be natural and peculiar to Man.
Upon the Seond Point Plato's opinion was mentioned, that the Gods having by
Epimetheus produced all other Animals with some particular gift, made man naked
and weak, destitute of all natural aids, and subject to so many miseries that
they pitied him, and thereupon ordered Prometheus to give him Reason, Speech,
and Hands; the first, to know and contemplate the marvells of the world; the
second, to express his thoughts outwardly; the last, to put his words and
thoughts in execution. Reason not differing from Speech, saving that it is
internal; whence it is also called the word of the mind; and the other external.
This external Speech is so excellent, that though it consist but of wind, which
is Air striking against the Epiglottis, modifi'd and articulated by the tongue,
lips, palate, and teeth; yet it is the interpreter of the reasonable soul,
according to whose example it is equally received into all the ears of the
Auditors. When this Speech is true, it is a sign of the mind's conception, and
as natural and peculiar to man as Reason it self, one of whose goodliest
privileges it is. Besides, man being born to live in society needed not only
Reason to guide himself, but also Speech, to govern others, which likewise has
more power over Souls, inclining and turning them as it pleases.

The Second said, Some Animals are perfectly mute, as worms and Snails; others
render some sound, as Flies, Grasshoppers, though it is only that of their
wings; and some have voice, as all perfect animals, amongst whom man has the
particular advantage of Speech. For sound is a Collision of Air between two
solid bodies. Voice is a sound rendered by the mouth of an Animal to express
its affections. But Speech is a voice which signifies by institution, and is
called a verb if it signify time; otherwise a noun. As it signifies by
institution it is distinguished from the voice which is a natural sign, and has
some correspondence with the thing signified. So the hoarse voice of one angry
perfectly represents the inundation and tempest of the Spirits in this Passion.
The lowness and mildness of a sad and afflicted man's voice represents the
effect of sadness, which is to compress the Heart and Arteries; for these
organs being coarcted, the voice becomes more slender; as appears in Women, fat
people, children, and eunuchs. The Lover's interrupted speech betrays the
inequality of his mind. But words are signs without any reference to the thing
signified, depending only on the Will of those who first gave names to things.
For if they were natural signs, they would be understood by all the world, and
be every where the same. But though it is not natural, but acquired by precepts
and use, specially by the hearing, whnce people deaf by nature are also dumb;
yea, it is very peculiare to man. Wherefore Speech is improperly, figuratively,
artificially, or else miraculously ascribed to other things; as when The
Heavens are said to declare the glory of God, one deep to call on another, etc.
When Balaams Ass spoke, 'twas by Miracle. But when Simon Magus's dog spoke to
Saint Peter, 'twas by operation of the Devil; as also what is reported of the
two Pigeons, the Oak at Dodona, Achilles's Horse, the keel of Argo, and that
Elm of the Gymnosophists mentioned by Philostratus to have saluted Apollonius
at his arrival, as the River Causus bid Pythagoras good morrow. But Speech
properly belongs only to man; other creatures are incapable of it, both
because they want Reason (which is the principle of it) and organs, which are a
tongue, a palate, teeth, and lips, all rightly proportionated for the
articulation of voice; for man's tongue alone is soft, large, moveable and
loose; to which qualities those of Pies and Parrots come nearest.

The Third said, A natural thing is either born with us, as sense and motion;
or comes afterward of it self, as laughter, or whereof we are naturally
capable and inclined to, as Arts and Sciences. In the first and second
signification speech is not natural to man, who could not speak without
learning, whence the two children caused by Psammetichus, King of Egypt, to be
nursed in a Desert by two dumb Nurses pronounced no other word but Bec which
they had heard of the Goats. But in the last signification it is peculiar to
man, who is so inclined to it, that were children let alone from their Cradle
they would in time make some language by signs, or words. It Is to be understood
too, that it is articulate speech, such as may be written, that is peculiar to
man, not inarticulate, which though a natural sign of the affections within,
yet cannot properly be called speech, because found also in beasts, whose
jargon Apollonius and some others are said to have understood; for hearing the
chattering of a Swallow to her companions, he told those that were present that
this bird advertised the others of a sack of Wheat fallen off an Asse's back
near the City: which, upon trial, was found to be true.

CONFERENCE LXXIX.
I. What the Soul is. II. Of the apparition of Spirits.

I. What the Soul is.
THe difference of inanimate, living and dead bodies, manifestly evince the
existence of a soul. But its essence is so unknown that Philosophers doubt in
what degree of Category to put it. For it is of that kind of things which are
not known by themselves, but only by their effects; as local motion and
substance, which is not perceptible but by its accidents. So the outward shape
of animated bodies acquaints us with their inward form. For the soul shapes all
the external parts after the same manner; as Plants and Animals of the same
species have commonly their leaves and members of the same external figure;
whereas you scarce find two stones, or other inanimate bodies, of the same
shape.

The Second said, That the soul, according to Aristotle, is the first act of a
natural body organized, having life in power, or potentially. Meaning by act
perfection, which he expresses by the word Entellechie, which signifies to be
in its end and form, which two are the same in natural things. It Is called Form
upon account of its beauty; and divine, from heaven, its original; and it is the
first of all other second acts, which are produced by it, such as all vital
actions are. For as in the most imperfect of beings, Matter, there is a First
or remote power, as in water to become fire; another second or next, as in the
same water to become air by rarefaction: so in the nature of Forms, the noblest
created Beings, there is a First act, the source of all vital actions, and a
Second, comprehending the faculties and functions: Now this Soul is not a pure
act (as God and Angels are) but an act of the Body, on whom it depends either
in its being, and preservation, or else only in operation. Hence Sensitive and
Vegetable Souls cease to be upon the change of the dispositions which produced
and supported them. The reasonable Soul too in some manner depends upon the
Bodies disposition as to its operation, not as to its being and preservation,
being immaterial and immortal. It Is called an act of a natural Body, to
distinguish it from Machines or Engines which move artificial and inanimate
Bodies; organical, because Organs are requisite to its action. It must also
have life in power, that is, be able to exercise the vital functions. For want
of which a carcass, though organized, yet cannot be said to be animated, no
more then Eggs and Seed, for want of Organs, although they have life in power.

The Third said, He was of Pythagoras's opinion who called it a number, there
being nothing in the world wherewith it has more correspondence and
proportion. It Is one in its essence; it makes the binary, which is the first
number, by its conjunction with the body, and division of its Faculties into
the Intellect and Will; the ternary, by its three species of soul, Vegetative,
Sensitive, Rational; the quaternary, by the four qualities constituting the
temper requisite to its introduction into the body; of which four numbers put
together is formed the number ten, whence all others proceed; as from simple
Apprehension, Enuntiation, Argumentation and Method, which are the four
operations of the reasonable soul, whence all its notions proceed.

The Fourth said, It Is not enough to say, with the Philosopher, that the soul
is an act or perfection, or that by whose means we live; it must be shown what
this act is; whether Substance or Accident. Pythagoras by calling the soul a
number moving it self, reduces it under Quantity. According to Galen, who
acknowledges no other Soul but the Temper, it is a Quality; as also according to
Clearchus, who defines it harmony. Of those who believed the soul a substance,
some have called it the purest part of some Element; as Heraclitus, of fire;
Anaximenes, of air; and Thales, of water; none, of earth, in regard of its
gross matter. Critelaus said 'twas a Quintessence; Democritus, a substance
composed of round Atoms, and therefore easily movable. Now the soul is a
substance (not an accident) because it composes a substance, making with the
body a total by it self. Nor is it Quantity, because Quantity is not active;
much less a self-moving number, because number is an Entity of Reason, and
nothing is moved of it self, but of some other. Nor is it any of the four
qualities; which being indifferent of themselves must be determined by some
form; much less a temper, which is found in all mixts, of which some are
inanimate: nor a harmony, for this is composed of contrarieties, but the soul
is simple, and consequently not susceptible of contraries. It Is therefore an
incorporeal substance; otherwise, were the soul corporeal, there would be a
penetration of dimensions in its union with the body; consequently, it is no
Element, nor any Compound of them, as Empedocles and Plato phanci'd, upon this
ground, that the soul being to judge of all things should therefore have all
their principles and elements in it self. Which is absurd, for it knows diverse
things not composed of the Elements, as the Angels and Heavens. So that the
soul must be concluded in the number of those things which it is easier to
affirm what they are not then what they are.

The Fifth said, That the soul is a fire, whose center is Heaven, and God the
source, who is called by the name of fire, in the Holy Text. Hence life, an
effect of the soul, is nothing else but heat, and death cold. Moreover, as fire
makes bodies lighter, so living bodies are less heavy then dead. And the
Hebrews call man Isch, from the word Esch fire; as the Greeks do Phos, which
signifies light, which is a species of fire, lucid but not ardent; which light
appears upon bodies whilst living, and dis-aspears as soon as they are dead.
Now the different sorts of souls are produced of different lights. Those of
Plants are formed of that of the air; whence they have no sensible heat, as the
sensitive have, which are generated of the Sun, which also gives them local
motion: rational souls are beams diffused from God who inhabits light
inaccessible. And as waters ascend as high as their springs, so the souls of
Plants exalt themselves into the air, whose mutations they follow; those of
Beasts return into the Sun; and those of men are reflected toward God, having
this common with light, that they perish not, but return to the place of their
nativity. Agreeably whereunto, Solomon says, That there is nothing new under
the Sun; since even the forms of things are not new, but only appear in their
turn one after another; as when light forsakes our Hemisphere it no more
perishes then shadow, but they both make a continual circle, which follows that
of the Sun.

II. Of the Apparition of Spirits.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That the perfection of the Universe
requires the existence of Intellectual Creatures, such as Angels and Rational
Souls. A truth acknowledged by Aristotle, who assigns nine Spirits subservient
to the First Mover, according to the number of heavens which they are to move;
although Mercurius Trismegistus acknowledges but two which hold the Arctick and
Antarctick Poles. Which Avicenna also denoted by his Chain of Intelligences.
Amongst these Spirits some are destinated for the preservation of men, as
Guardian Angels, called by the Apostle ministering Spirits, which were the Genii
of the ancients, by which they made their greatest Oaths. Others have
continual war with mankind, as the Devils. Others animate bodies, as Rational
Souls, which after the bodies dissolution are happy or miserable, according as
they have done good or evil. As for Angels and Demons, History both sacred and
profane testifies their frequent apparition to men. Daily experience proves
the same of the souls of the dead, though some question it. But besides that
it is presumption to dis-believe all antiquity, which tells us of a Ghost which
spoke to Brutus, one which showed a Sceleton in chains to Athenodorus the
Philosopher; and that of Cleonice which tormented Pausanias (who had slain her)
as long as he lived; as also the Ghost of Agrippina did her son Nero. The
authority of Holy Scripture instructs us of the return of Samuel, Moses and
Elias; and the same reason which makes the soul loath to part from its body
argues it desirous to visit the same, or the places and persons wherewith it
was most delighted. Nor is it more difficult to conceive how a separated soul
can move it self, then how it moves the body which it animates, the one and the
other being equally incomprehensible.

The Second said, Specter exist not saving in the Fancy, those who think they
see them conceding that they are not palpable, nor beheld alike of all by
standers, and men being prone to acquiesce in their own imaginations though
misguided by the passions of fear, hope, love, desire; especially children and
women who are more susceptible of all impressions, because their phancies are
so weak as to be no less moved with its own fictions then real external
representations by the Senses. But strong minds are not subject to such
delusions.

The Third said, He is too sensual who believes naught but what he sees; for
according to this account nothing but accidents which alone fall under the
cognizance of sense should be admitted. So the Saduces and all Libertines deny
spirits, whilst they appeal only to Sense. Although it be an universal Doctrine
of all sober antiquity that there are spirits, and that they appear oftentimes
to men in cases of necessity, wherewith, according to Aristotle himself, the
souls of the dead friends are affected; a manifest argument of the soul's
immortality, which he believed only by the light of nature. As Apuleius
reports, the Platonists make three sorts of Spirits, First, Demons or Genii,
which are souls whilst they animate bodies; Second, Lares or Penates, the souls
of such as had lived well, and after death were accounted tutelary gods of the
houses which they had inhabited; Third, Lemures or Hobgoblins, the souls of the
wicked, given to do mischief or folly after death, as they did during their
life. Some others, especially the Poets, conceived man composed of three parts,
Body, Soul, and Shadow, which latter appeared after dissolution of the two
former, the body returning into its elements, and the soul going either to
Heaven or Hell, as the shadow did into the Elysian fields, from whence it had
no liberty to return, but only wandered up and down so long as the body wanted
burial.

The Fourth said, We must distinguish between Vision and Apparition. The former
is, when we think we behold a thing which afterward comes accordingly to pass
as it appeared; the latter is, when some visible forms present themselves to us
either waking or asleep; and it is of three sorts, intellectual, imaginary, and
corporeal. The intellectual is, when separated substances insinuate themselves
into the mind without borrowing any external shape. The imaginary is, when they
imprint some strange forms or species in the fancy, and by this means make
themselves known to us. The corporeal is, when they present themselves to our
outward senses. To omit the first, which is rare, and an image of the
Beatifical Vision, the imaginary apparition of souls is caused when Angels or
Demons, according to the quality of the souls, pourtray in our fancy the
species and signs of their countenance and personage which they had during
life, which appears sad, covered with black, whilst they yet endure the
punishments of their sins; but cheerful, and in white habit, when they are
delivered from the same. And although this apparition is imaginary, yet it is
real too. Thus Judas Maccabaeus knew Onias and Jeremy; Constantine saw S. Peter
and S. Paul, and according to the opinion of many Samuel appeared to Saul, and
foretold him of things which were to befall him; though others conceive 'twas a
corporeal apparition; which also is much more certain, because souls either
appear with their true bodies (although this is very rare too, yea and
unbecoming happy souls to rejoyn themselves to putrifi'd carcases) or most
commonly assume bodies of air. The cause of which apparitions is ascribed to
the union which is between the soul of the dead person and that of the
surviving to whom it appears, whether the same proceed from consanguinity, or
identity of manners, great familiarity and friendship, which seems to make but
one soul of those of two friends; so that the soul finding it self in pain
either through present or future evils, especially when it sees it self obliged
to the performance of some vow neglected during life, God for his own glory,
the ease of his creature, and the conversion of sinners, permits it to manifest
it self by ways most convenient.

CONFERENCE LXXX.
I. Of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness. II. Whether there be any Art of
Divination.

I. Of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness.
THe vulgar Maxim is not always true, That a disease thoroughly known is half
cured. For this disease, though known to the most ignorant, is of very
difficult cure, and therefore was called by antiquity the Herculean disease,
that is to say, unconquerable; the Sacred disease, because of its dreadful
symptoms; and Lunatic, because those who are born either in the Full or New
Moon, or during its Eclipse, are troubled with this malady, which has great
correspondence with the motions of the Planet; 'twas also called Morbus
caducus, or Falling Sickness, by reason that it makes the person fall to the
ground, and Comitialis, because it interrupted Assemblies; lastly, it is called
Epilepsie because it intercepts the functions of the mind and senses. It Is
defined, the cessation of the principal actions, and of sense and voluntary
motion, with convulsion, which is not continual, but by internals. The true and
proximate cause of it is either a vapor or an humor pricking the membranes of
the brain, which endeavoring to discharge the same contracts it self, attracts
the nerves to it, these the muscles and parts into which they are implanted;
causing hereby those convulsive and violent agitations of the Epilepticks.
Sneezing and the hickcock have some resemblance of it, the latter being caused
by a sharp vapor sent from the stomach or other place by sympathy to its upper
orifice which it goadeth with its acrimony, and thereby forces it to contract
it self in order to expel the same; the former called by Avicenna the lesser
Epilepsie, differing not from the greater, saving in duration, is also caused
by some vapors pricking the former part of the brain, which contracts it self
to expel the same by the nostrils.

The Second said, That the unexpectedness of this malady, and the Patient's
quick recovery, may justify the vulgar for thinking that there is something
divine in it. Since nothing amazes us more then sudden uncomprehended
alterations. Therefore in Hippocrates days they used to make expiations and
incantations for this disease, which he derides, saying that the bad Physicians
promoted this false conceit, that they might get the more honor for the cure,
or be more excusable for not effecting the same.

The Third said, That the Epilepsie and Apoplexy differ only in degree, both
having the same cause, namely, abundance of gross humors, either phlegmatic
or melancholy; which if it wholly fills the brains ventricles, and makes a
total obstruction; so that the Animal Spirits, the instruments of voluntary
motion and sense be obstructed, it causes an apoplexy, which is a total
abolition of sense and motion in the whole body, with laesion of the rational
faculty. The Heart continues its pulse for some time, till the consumption of
what Animal Spirits were in the Nerves, serving to the Muscles for respiration.
But if the obstruction be not perfect, and the crass humor over-loads the
ventricles, then they contract themselves and all the Nerves which depend upon
them; whence comes that universal contraction of the limbs, as one covered in
bed with too many clothes pulls up his legs, bends and lifts up his knees, to
have more air and room under the load which presses him.

The Fourth said, That as the brain is the moistest of all the parts, so it
abounds most in excrements, the thinnest of which transpire by the sutures and
pores, but the grosser meeting in great quantity in the brain melt its
substance into water, which coming to stop the Veins and Arteries hinder the
commerce of the spirits; whether this pituitous matter be derived from the
paternal or maternal geniture, or whether the part of seed which makes the
brain happen not to be well purged in the womb where the rudiments of this
malady are first laid; or whether the brain purge not it self afterward
sufficiently by its emunctories, and the scabs usual to Children. Hippocrates
says, this malady cannot begin after twenty years of age, when the
constitution of body is become more hot and dry; and many Children are cured of
it only by the desiccation caused by the alteration of age, seasons, and
manner of diet.

The Fifth said, That a gross humor cannot be the cause of those quick and
violent motions of the Epilepsie, nor be collected and dissipated in so short a
time as the duration of a Paroxisme. Therefore the cause of it must be some
biting and very subtle matter; for no such gross obstructive matter is found
in the brain of those that dye of this malady, but only some traces or signs
of some malignant vapor or acrimonious humor, as black spots, a swarthy
frothy liquor, an Impostume in the brain, some portion of the Meninx putrifi'd,
corrosion of the bone, and such other things evidencing rather the pricking of
the brain then stopping of its passages.

The Sixth said, That were the Epilepsie produced by obstruction, it would
follow that as a total one in an Apoplexy abolishes all sense and motion, so
the incomplete one of the Epilepsie should only diminish, not deprave motion
as it does. So that the Epilepsie should be a symptom like the Palsy or
Lethargy, from which nevertheless it is wholly different. Nor can it be simply
the mordacity or malignity of an humor, since malignant and pestilential
Fevers, hot and dry Aliments, as spices, mustard, salt, garlic, onyons, and
the lke biting things, cause not this Evil. The truth is, there is a specifical
occult quality of the humors particularly disposing to this disease; the
Chemists call it a Mercurial Vapor, (that is, an acid penetrating, and subtle
spirit) a Vitriolike Spirit, a biting and corrosive salt; which makes not men
only, but Quails, Dogs, Sheep, and Goats, subject to it. And as some things
beget this malady by an occult Epileptical quality, as Smallage, Parsley, a
goats liver roasted, and stinking smells, as horn, pitch and jet burnt, (whence
the Ancients being about to buy a slave, made him snuff up smoke of brimstone,
to try whether he were not subject to this disease) so many Antepileptical
remedies cure it; but that which proceeds by sympathy from the stomach, or
other parts, more easily then that which is idiopathical, and radicated in the
brain. As the shavings of man's skull not buried, drunk with water of Teile-tre
and Paeony, so contrary to this evil, that it cures the same by being hung
about the neck.

II. Whether there be any Art of Divination.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That Man, who alone understands the nature
and difference of Time, is more solicitous about the future then about the
present, which is but a moment; or the past, which concerns him only
historically. Hence arises his ardent desire of presaging to satisfy which, he
makes use of every thing in the world. Which is an infallible argument of the
vanity of this Art of Divination; because effects cannot be foretold by all
sorts of causes, but only by those wherewith they have connection, and wherein
they are potentially contained, as leaves and fruits are in the seeds; and it is
received a Maxim, that when an effect may be produced by sundry causes, none
of them is the true cause; since we cannot from such an effect proceed to the
knowledge of its cause. Now Divination is not taken here, as Hippocrates speaks
of it in his Prognostics, when he says, that nothing is makes Physicians more
resemble Gods, then the foretelling of what will befall, and has already
befallen their Patients. For there he speaks of the predictions of Physic; but
here to divine, is to affirm an event whereof we see not any cause or probable
sign. For if by seeing a Rainbow I prognosticate rain, or that a tree will
bear fruit when it is well blossomed, or that a sick person that rests ill the
night before the seventh day will have a Crisis, this is not Divination. But
if, not knowing a prisoner nor his affairs, I foretell that he will be set at
liberty or not; that an unknown person will be married, and how many Children
he will have, or such other things which have no necessary, nor yet contingent
causes known to me; this is properly to Divine. Whereby it appears, that there
is no Art of Divination: Art being a body of precepts tending to some
profitable end; whereas were Divination certain, it would cause nothing but
either despair or negligence; and precepts being of things happening necessarily
or most commonly; that whose cause we know not cannot be known by precepts. And
therefore all your Soothsayers, Augurs, Sorcerers, Fortune Tellers, and the
like, are but so many Impostors.

The Second said, That Divination, which is a prediction of future things
remote from our knowledge, is of three sorts. Either from God, as Prophecy;
from Devils, as Conjuring; or from causes purely natural, which is
Prognostication or Conjecture. Prophecy is a divine inspiration, whereby one
fore-sees and declares remote things infallibly. 'Twas exercised at first by
the Priests of the Law, with the Vrim and Thummim, which were twelve precious
stones in the high Priests Ephod; and afterward by the Prophets instructed in
dreams or visions, whence they were called seers. Diabolical Divination depends
upon some compact, either tacit or express, with the Devil; who being able to
declare such things as have appeared by some outward act, as the authors of
robberies, things lost, or such futurities as depend on natural and necessary
causes, but not such as proceed from causes purely free or contingent; the
Soothsayers his servants can know no more concerning the same then their
Master. This Divination is of two sorts. The first is called Daemonomancy, when
the Devils themselves give answers out of Caves or Images; sometimes by beasts,
men, or most frequently by women, rendering oracles by their mouths, stomachs,
or bellies, but for the most part ambiguous and doubtful, for fear of being
mistaken. The other is called Mangania, or Goetia, the most detestable species
of which is Necromancy, which draws answers from the mouths of the dead.
Others, more remarkable, are, 1. Hydromancy, or Divination by water, into which
they pour drops of oil, or cast three little stones, observing the sections of
the circles which they describe. 2. Lecanomancy, by a basin of water, at the
bottom of which the answers are heard, after casting thereinto some plates of
Gold and Silver, and precious stones, engraven with certain characters. 3.
Gastromancy, by glass bottles full of water, in which a big-belly'd woman, or
an innocent child, beholds images. 4. Catoptromancy, by Looking-glasses. 5.
Crystallomancy, by crystal cylinders. 6. Dactylomancy, by enchanted Rings, like
that of Gyges. 7. Onychomancy, by anointing the nail of a child with oil or
tallow, and holding it toward the Sun they see in it what they demand. 8.
Aeromancy, by conjurations of the Air. 9. Coscinomancy, by a sieve, and
sizzars. All which species of Divination presume either an express or tacit
compact with the Devil. But there were three without compact, 1. Aruspices, who
drew conjectures from the entrails and motions of beasts sacrificed, from the
figures made by melted wax cast into water, called Ceromantie, or Daphnomancy,
from the crackling of burning Laurel, Omphalomancy, when by the knots and
adhering to the navil and secundines, the Mid-wives foretell how many Children
the new delivered woman shall have afterward. Amniomancy, foretelling the
Child's fortune from the red or livid color of the coat Amnios. Parthenomancy,
to discover Virginity by measuring the neck, or drinking powdered Agat, which
she that is no Virgin vomits up again. 2. Augures, or Auspices who divined from
birds, beasts, prodigies, and accidents, as Pliny reports of the Servilii, that
they had a piece of brass money which they fed with Gold and Silver, and it
increased when any good was to befall their Family, and diminished upon some
approaching evil. 3. Unlawful Lots are Cleromancy, which comprehends Homer and
Virgil's Lots. Alectriomancy, by a Cock eating corns of wheat laid upon the
Letters of the Alphabet. Oniomancy, by names; Arithmancy, by numbers. Lastly,
Natural Divination, which is Conjecture, either taken from the Stars, as
Judiciary Astrology; the Air, and its several dispositions; the Sea, and Trees,
as when a Plague is foretold by the flourishing of Roses or Violets in Autumn.
Animals also supply some presages, as Mice running away from an house
presignifie its downfall or burning; and Sparrows delinquishing a Country
denote the Pestilence and infection of the Air.

The Third said, That the Soul, being immortal, is also capable of knowing
things after the manner of eternity, which being a total and simultaneous
possession of endless life, knows all things at once, things future and past as
present; which knowledge is like that of a man who beholds a whole Army at the
same time from the top of a Mountain; and that of time, in which things are
seen successively, is like that of him who through a hole sees every Soldier
of his Army pass by one after another. Wherefore it is no wonder if men who
affect nothing so much as eternity, and to be like God, desire to know things
as God does, to whom the future is present. Moreover, this inclination being
natural to all persons, they must have a power to exercise it in this life,
lest it be in vain. Which is done principally when the Soul is loosned from the
Body, as in sleep, ecstasy, deep contemplation, and the agonies of death, in
which dying persons commonly foretell things to come.

CONFERENCE LXXXI.
I. Of Chiromancy. II. Which is the noblest part of the Body.

I. Of Chiromancy.
CHiromancy is Divination by inspection of the hand, and consideration of its
substance, quantity, quality, and other accidents, whereby the same affords
indications of things past or to come. It was practiced by Sylla and Caesar,
this latter having by it discovered the false Alexander, who pretended himself
Herod's Son, from the true, And an old Chiromancer of Albert of Mirandola,
Cousin to the great Picus, foretold the Duke of Nevers, Nephew to Lewis XII.
being at Carpi in Italy, ready to fight with the Viceroy of Naples, that he
should win the battle, but lose his own life, as it came to pass. So Paulus
Jovius relates, that Antiochus Tibertus of Cesena, by this means, advertised
Guido Balneo of the death which befell him by one of his familiars; and that
Horatius Cocles foretold Lucas Gauricus that he should be put to death by John
Bontivoglio Prince of Bononia. Many having seen Criminals lead to the gallows
have observed that the two extremes of the line upon the last joint of the
thumb terminated at the root of the nail, which is taken for the sign of the
halter; as when this line reaches not the nail, but on one side, it presages
only danger of hanging. Now as diversity of outward shapes distinguishes
species, so it does also individuals, especially that of the hand, the
instrument of every one's fortune, and the most temperate part of the Body;
whence the hollow of it is accounted the organ of Touching.

The Second said, That the hand, the subject of Chiromancy, is composed, as all
other organical parts, of three dissimular parts, the wrist, palm, and fingers.
In the palm the Chiromancers consider the lines and eminences or hills. The
lines are those parts which variously divide the hand, the five chief of which
are, the line of the wrist, the line of life, the natural mean, the liver-line,
and the table-line. The wrist-line is that which divides the hand from the arm,
and is commonly double, sometimes trebble and quadruple. The line of life, or
of the heart, begins at the bottom of the tumor under the forefinger, and
ends at the wrist-line, having sometimes another line paralle, called the
sister of the line of life. The natural mean, or line of the head, begins near
the line of life under the forefinger, and passes over-thwart the hand to the
hill of the Moon, or pommel of the hand, which line is thwarted by another,
called the liver or stomack-line; and these two lines, with the line of life,
form a triangle, whose base is the liver line, called the triangle of Mars;
which appears not in their hands whose middle line terminates at the table
line, or line of fortune, which begins under the hill of Mercury, at the bottom
of the little finger, and ends under the forefinger with one, two, or three
branches. It Is called the table line, because the space between it and the
middle line represents the table; whence it is called the table of the hand, and
line of fortune, because it affords the certainest tokens of good or bad
fortune. The hills or risings of the hand are seven, according to the Planets
to which they are attributed, namely, the mount of Venus, under the thumb,
indicating Love; the mount of Jupiter, under the forefinger for Honors; that
of Saturn, under the third, or middle finger, for felicities or misfortunes;
that of the Sun, under the fourth, or ring-finger, for Riches; that of Mercury,
under the little finger, for Arts and Sciences; that of the Moon, which is in
the pommel of the hand, for afflictions and maladies of the mind; lastly, the
mount of Mars in the foresaid triangle, comprised under the lines of life, the
middle line, and the liver line, denotes warlike exploits. And because the
four principal fingers have twelve joints which make as many sinuosities;
therefore the Chiromancers attribute to each of them a sign of the Zodiac, and
to each finger a season of the year; as to the forefinger the Spring, and to
its three joints the three signs of that season, assigning the uppermost joint
to Aries, etc. By which signs it is known in what months the effects foretold
by the lines of the hand will happen.

The Third said, That Chiromancy is a Conjectural Art, not founded upon
indubitable principles of eternal truth, but upon many experiences, from which
the general precepts of this Art are deduced. The chief whereof are, that the
rectitude, continuity, and lively color of the lines, and the eminence of the
mounts are good signs, as also the branching of these lines upwards toward
the mounts of the fingers; on the contrary, their obliquity, intersection,
livid or blackish color, and branching downwards, are of ill augury. The
wideness of the table, and the angles of the triangle of Mars well shaped,
denote good. Many lines cutting the chief which are in the palm of the hand,
show a man entangled in affairs. The lines of the wrist signify that the
person is to live so many times twenty years. A double line of life is a sign
of one very fortunate. The lines which cross it are so many misfortunes, and
their breaking shows death or dangerous sickness. One o in it denotes the loss
of an Eye, and two oo total blindness, which Johannes de Indagine says he
found true in many, and by his own experience. Crooked lines upon the table
line threaten water. It Is an ill sign, when one of the chief lines, especially
the table line, is wanting; and when it has inci^ions, it is a mark of various
fortune. Lines between the table line and middle line are so many diseases, but
not mortal. And infinite such other rules. The nails also are considered by the
Chiromancers, as to their color, shape, largeness, and little spots, among
which the round and white denote friends, the others ill-willers.

The Fourth said, That it is requisite to prediction by the hands that nothing
be on them but what is natural. And if the lines of one hand suffice not,
recourse must be had to the other; and if both agree, the effects signified by
them are less doubtful. When they differ, these of the left hand are chiefly
taken notice of, both because it is nearest the heart, and because it is less
disfigured by working. Yet it is to be remembered, that as one sign evidences
not the constitution, and few diseases have one certain pathognomonical sign,
so neither is an effect to be inferred from one line so and so, but from many
together; although they are commonly fallacious too, unless the inclinations
likewise be known by Physiognomy and Astrology.

The Fifth said, All effects are either natural or free; those come from a
necessary and infallible, which has no affinity with the lines of the hand
erroneously alleged to signify the same; and these being from the Will cannot
be caused by a concurrence of lines, differing either fortuitously, or
according to the various situations of the bones, or several foldings of the
child's hands in his mothers belly, or by different exercises, and variety of
Climates; they of hot Countries having scorched skins, and more lines otherwise
configurated then Northern people; and Artisans, then Courtiers and idle
people. And so there would need different rules of Palmistry, according to
Countries and qualities, which is absurd. The truth is, if any thing may be
conjectured, it is from the parts, which contribute something to what they are
signs of. So a large forehead may be the note of good capacity, because it
shows that the Ventricles of the Brain are large; and a bony and sinewy man is
with reason judged strong. But the hand can afford no indication, if you except
its largeness or thickness, by proportion of which, with the other parts that
are not seen, one may judge of its strength. It Is therefore a fallacious Art
which takes that for a cause and a sign which is nothing less.

The sixth said, Chiromancy is of two sorts, Physical or Astrological. The
former is grounded upon the same principles with Physiognomy, and is a part of
it, discovering by the several accidents of the hand its own temper with that
of the whole body, and consequently, the manners and inclinations. Hence the
Chiromancers affirm, with great probability, that those that have thick hands
have the other parts which are unseen alike, and consequently, a dull wit; and
so on the contrary. But that which is purely Astrological, and is founded upon
imaginary principles, seems not only faulty* but very ridiculous, yea, and
pernicious too; and therefore is prohibited by Laws both Humane and Divine.

II. Which is the noblest part of the Body.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That man's body being a structure composed
of many parts, not only similary, as in plants and stones, but organical,
destinated to each action, which being their end, will also be the measure and
standard of their nobleness; as Officers and Ministers of State or Family are
esteemed according to their employment. Now an Animals noblest action is Life;
and therefore the Heart, the author thereof, and source of heat and spirits, is
the noblest of all parts. Moreover, Aristotle says, it lives first and dies
last, and is in the little world what the Sun is in the great, imparting light
and motion to all the parts of the body, as the Heavens do to all sublunary
things. Therefore many Animals want other parts, but none a heart, which is so
absolutely necessary that its least wound is mortal.

The Second said, Whether Nobility betaken from Antiquity or necessity, the
Liver is the noblest of all. For the Animal at first lives the life of a Plant,
and so needed nourishment first, the supplying of which, being the Livers
office, it is therefore formed before any of the entrails. Nor could we
exercise our senses or reasonable actions, if we were not nourished; the
functions of all faculties ceasing as soon as the Livers provision is spent.
Yea, no animal action can be performed without spirits, the matter of which is
blood elaborated in the Liver. Which as it is the cause of the four humors, and
consequently, of Health or Sickness; so it is the seat of Love, the noblest of
all the passions.

The Third said, As much nobler as the species is then the Individual
comprehended under it, so much are the parts serving to its conservation nobler
then others which conserve only the particular. Therefore Galen reckons them
among the principal parts. They serve to enliven the body, whose temper,
color, beauty, voice, and other qualities, their deprivation not only
destroys, but also changes the manners of the Mind, and extinguishes Courage,
as appears in cocks when castrated. Add hereunto, that they are hardest to be
tamed, and therefore most noble.

The Fourth said, That Generation being common to men, not only with beasts,
but also with plants, being an action of the natural faculty, it cannot be the
noblest action of man; but rather the Understanding, which being exercised in
the brain, the seat of the Rational Soul, this without dispute is the noblest
of all; whence it is called Heaven by Homer, a divine member by Plato, and
generally accounted the mansion of wisdom, and temple of divinity, which
appears chiefly in the structure of its rete mirabile, labyrinth, and
ventricles. Moreover, all the parts were made for the brain. For man was born
to understand, and the intellectual faculty holds its seat in the brain. To
understand well, it needed phantasmes and species, which were to be received by
the senses placed for that purpose in the head: and to judge of the diversity
of sensible objects, it ought to have local motion; and, in order thereunto,
muscles, tendons, nerves, and bones. These actions of the Understanding are
performed by help of the Animal Spirits, the matter whereof are the vital of
the Heart, as the matter of these are the natural; whence learned men are
commonly lean and unhealthy, because their natural spirits go to the brain,
instead of being carried to the parts, in order to nutrition.

The Fifth said, That (to omit Aesop's opinion, who preferred the tongue before
any other part, and found it most powerful to do either good or evil) the hand
seemed to him as much more excellent then the brain, as the active is to be
estimated above the contemplative. Therefore Aristotle calls it the Organ of
Organs, and it is the symbol of faith, strength, and civility; whence remain
still the terms of kissing the hands.

CONFERENCE LXXXII.
I. Which is most powerful, Art or Nature. II. Whether Wine is most to be
tempered in Winter, or in Summer.

I. Which is most powerful, Art or Nature.
THe power of Nature and Art cannot be better judged then by their opposition;
yet how should any be between them, whilst Art can do nothing without Nature?
For if the hand be off of Industry, 'twas Nature that made it a hand. If the
Sword be valued for the Art which fashioned it, and brought it into a condition
to give Law to him that has none; it is to the Iron produced by Nature in the
Mines that it owes its matter. And thus making the same induction through all
disciplines, 'twill be found that they cannot be imagined without Nature; not
Logic, without natural reason; nor Grammar, without speech; nor Speech,
without a tongue; nor writing, without ink and paper; nor these without the
matter whereof they are made, no more then a building without stones, mortar,
or other materials. Therefore when Art offers to compare with Nature, it is as
if a child upon a Gyant's neck should therefore think it self taller then he;
whereas it has no advantage but what it borrows from the Giant which upholds
it.

The Second said, That actions being the rule whereby to measure the excellence
of the Agents, and being themselves determined by their end, which alone sets
value upon them; Nature is therefore more excellent then Art in that it has a
nobler end in its actions, and ordinarily attains the same which Art can never
do. For Nature, as the internal principle of motion and rest of that wherein it
is, produces all substantial forms, and is the cause of all generations and
natural motions; in the continual revolution of which is seen an unparalled
order, illustriously testifying the wisdom of Nature who governs them, and who
never fails to produce a plant or an animal when the matter is rightly
disposed. Whereas Art is only an external cause, giving nothing but shape and
outward show to its works, which indeed in some manner imitate those of Nature,
which is the end of Art, but are never so perfect, no Painter having ever made
a bunch of grapes, or a man, so well as Nature, because he represents only the
surface and some few other external accidents, but is far from being able to
express the essence and substantial forms of these natural bodies which it
attempts to imitate. Moreover, Nature frames all parts of her works together
(as in the formation of man) though grossly and in a small volume, and
afterward makes the same augment and move together; but Art makes the parts of
its work successively, the foundation before the walls, these before the roof,
the rough hewing before the last hand; and motion excited by artifice is
violent, yea more in some parts of the Engine then in others.

The Third said, That to doubt whether Art be more powerful then Nature, is to
doubt whether two be more then one, or three then two. For Art presupposes
Nature perfected. And as that is the strongest animal which can bring others
under its laws, so being Art always subdues Nature, it must be the more potent.
Our nature is inclined to evil, but the precepts of Divinity, yea, and of moral
Philosophy too, have no other aim but to correct its defects, and overcome its
perverseness, both which are so happily effected, that not only S. Paul
professes, I live, yet not I, but Christ in me; but also the most excellent
Physiognomist was mistaken in his judgment of Socrates from his aspect. Nature
leads man to follow his brutish and sensual appetite, and to make use of every
thing which complies therewith; but Art coming to rectify it civilizes him,
and teaches him to restrain his concupiscences, to fast rather, for conscience
or health, then incur eternal damnation in the other life, and diseases in
this. And experience shows how far Art gets the mastery of Nature, when a
little man dextrous at his weapons easily overcomes a stronger who has only
the help of nature. The horse, dog, birds of prey, and other animals capable of
discipline, do every thing which man teaches them much better then they would
do of themselves. Compare but the discourse of an ignorant with that of a
learned person, the carriage of a Clown with that of a Courtier, the heaviness
of a strong Lubber with the dexterity of a practiced Champion. In the
Mechanics, a Child with an artificial Screw will lift up a greater burden then
two Oxen can carry, and these two Oxen will draw a load by the common artifice
of Carts, which ten other Oxen cannot bear upon their backs. An Army of 20000
naked Savages has been often defeated by 200 men armed with Swords and
Arquebushes. In brief, compare the weakness of all things at their beginning,
and before time has brought them to perfection by a series of new precepts,
whereof Arts are composed; and you will see that Art as much surpasses Nature
as Bread does Acorns, or Wheat it self, before Art has fitted it to our use.

The Fourth said, That duration is the measure of every thing's excellence;
whence the Proverb teaches us to consider the end. Bubbles of water and soap
blown into the air look very handsome; wait but a little and they are nothing.
So are all artificial things compared to natural. As this gave them beginning,
so it sees them end, overcomes and survives them; that a thing perishes it has
from art; that it lasts more or less, it has from nature; as writing engraven
in Marble is of longer continuance then that which is traced upon sand, and yet
it is one and the same writing. But sooner or later, every thing returns to its
first principles; and what was borrowed of nature must be paid back to her
again. We raisepalaces up to the clouds; Nature endures it with some violence,
their gravity resisting the most it can, till at length she seems to yield, and
to be tamed by art. But inquire news of them in future ages, and they will tell
you that Nature never rests till she has returned that to the ground which was
taken out of it, and this without Tools or Instruments. Art squares trees which
were round, whence a Spartan Lady asked, whether trees grew square: leave them
to the air, they become round, their corners rotting first of all. Physicians
observe, that simple medicaments, as the most natural, are the most effectual,
and such as have least artifice are most active. Whence the most expert laugh
at that hotch-potch of herbs, and other ingredients, wherewith quack-salvers
fill their receipts, acknowledging that the more you have in compounding a
medicine, the less intentions you obtain the same, one quality resisting and
abating the edge of another. And, in removing of diseases, they hold for a
Maxim, that it is Nature alone which does the cure. Moreover, the birth of a
child is a pure work of Nature, and she that leaves her to do the business is
the most expert to bring Women to bed. In brief, all good Crises must be
natural, every thing that is artificial is directly contrary thereunto. What
adoptive Son has so tender an affection to his parents as a natural one? or
what nurse suckles another with so good a heart as her own child? which was
the reason of the Gardener to the Philosopher, who asked him, why bad herbs
grew better of themselves, then others transplanted, and cultivated by Art.
When we would signify an honest man, we say he is of a good nature; when a
knave, that he is full of artifice. Men may disguise their manners and
inclinations, but cannot dissemble Nature; a sanguine, choleric, or melancholy
person, always discover their nature through all the artifices and hypocrisies
of art. Preach to an intemperate, ambitious, or otherwise tainted with some
vice as natural to him as to the lame to halt, he will possibly restrain
himself for some time, but presently return to his first habit.

The Fifth said, Nature being taken for every thing compounded of matter and
form, and Art for Humane Wit, which applies them to its own use, this must be
so much more excellent then that, as it gives perfection to the same, by
introduction of an artificial form besides its natural. Marble, of no price in
the mine, yet turned into the statue of an old woman becomes highly valuable.
The Dragon in the Tapistry is as agreeable to behold as the natural one would
be terrible. And even of things profitable, a dish of fruits well drawn is more
esteemed then a hundred natural. And who prizes not a Table, Cabinet, or other
movables, more then so much wood, a glass then the ashes it is made of.
'Twere to accuse all Antiquity of error, and unprofitably inventing and
increasing Arts, to prefer the rudeness and simplicity of Nature before them;
which teaching us from the birth to defend our selves by arts against all
defects of the body, therefore tacitly yields them the pre-eminence.

The sixth said, That the meaness and imperfection of the matter sets off the
excellence of the workman, when his work borrows all its nobleness from its
form which he gives it, and not from its matter. Hence God, the most perfect of
all Agents, needed no matter wherewith to make all his works; Nothing being a
sufficient material object of his Omnipotence. Nature, a subordinate and less
perfect Agent then God, makes all her works of the First Matter, which is not a
pure nothing; nor yet a perfect Entity, but on Entity in power, and as
Aristotle says, almost nothing. But Art can make nothing but by the help of
natural and perfect bodies, composed of matter and form, which it only divides
or conjoyns; as when the Architect builds a House he joins many stones, pieces
of wood, and other perfect bodies together; and the Statuary pares off the
gross pieces of Marble till he brings forth the resemblance of what he would
represent. Wherefore as much as God is above Nature, so much is Nature above
Art.

II. Whether Wine is most to be tempered in Winter or in Summer.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, They who impute most diseases to the use of
Wine, because the Eastern people who use it not are, free or less troubled with
maladies, will conclude (as he did who married a very little Woman, as the
least Evil) that Wine most qualifid is best, in case it cannot be wholly let
alone. But the Question will still remain, in which season, Winter or Summer,
it is most to be mixed. Now there being less heat, and more humidity in the
body during Winter, by reason of the outward cold, and closing of the pores, it
seems that Wine should be taken unmixt in this season. For being heat consists
in a proportion of the qualities, that which exceds must be corrected by its
contrary, and the weak strengthened; as they that would walk upright on a rope,
must turn their counterpoize to the side opposite to that whereunto they
incline.

The Second said, That in Summer the Wine should be more tempered, because then
the natural heat is least, as Caves are cold in Summer and hot in Winter.
Whence Hippocrates said, that the bowels are hotter in Winter and Spring,
whence people have then better stomachs; the capacities being enlarged by the
dilatation of heat, and sleep likewise longer, through the abundance of vapors
rising from the blood, which is made in greater quantity when the natural is
strong then when it is weak. Moreover, bodies are more healthy in cold weather
then in hot, which causing great dissipation of heat and spirits, the loss
cannot be better repaired then by unmixt Wine, whose actual coldness being
overcome by our Nature, its potential heat is reduced into act, and fortifies
ours, adding also its volatile spirits to our spirits, as old regiments are
recruited by new levies.

The Third said, That the best food being assimilated and least
excrementitious, as Wine is in all seasons, it ought not to be mixed either in
Summer or Winter, aqueous Wine making many serous excrements which cause
obstructions; whereas pure Wine is good in Winter to assist the natural heat,
assaulted by the outward cold, and to digest the crudities commonly generated
during this season; and in Summer to support the languishing spirits by
supplying new matter. But if the necessity of a hot distemper require mixture
of water, I would have it poured into the wine two hours before it be drunk,
that so fermentation may in some measure turn the water into the nature of the
wine, and the encounter of these two enemies may be rather in a strange Country
then in ours.

The Fourth said, 'Twas not without mystery that the Poets feigned Bacchus new
come forth out of Jupiter's thigh with an inflamed countenance, to have been
delivered to the Nymphs to wash him, and that the seven Pleiades, whose rising
denounces rain, had the principal charge of him; and that the Mythologists
represent this God of Wine followed by a company of mischievous demons called
Cabals, the chief of which they name Acrat, which signifies pure wine; hereby
intimating the disorders it causes when its fumes are not abated with water.
Moreover, when Amplychion, King of Athens, had first put water into his wine,
and every one by his example, a Temple was built in the City to Bacchus erect
or standing; intimating that as mere wine causes reeling, so tempered makes one
walk upright. The truth is, unmixed wine is always dangerous, filling the brain
with hot and pungent vapors, which water allays and gives a temper to, suitable
to our natural heat, which is mild and gentle; whereas these spirits are of
themselves igneous, as the burning of Aqua-vitae testifies. But it is less
hurtful to drink pure wine in Winter then in Summer, when the natural heat
being igneous and increased by the outward would turn into a distemper by the
adventitious heat of wine, which, on the contrary, in Winter counter-checks the
outward coldness of the air.

The Fifth said, If we believe the Poet Orpheus, who advises to drink unmixed
wine twenty days before the rising of the Dogstar, and as many after, then wine
must not be tempered in Summer; a custom practiced still in Italy, where in the
heats of Summers they drink the strongest and most delicious wines without
water. Moreover, people eating less in this hot season should therefore drink
the more pure wine, as more nourishing. Besides that the aqueous crudities of
fruits eaten in Summer is corrected by the heat of wine.

The Sixth said, That regard is herein to be had to every one's constitution;
phlegmatic, old men, and such as have cold stomachs, may drink wine without
water, as also those that have Fames Canina: but the choleric and young must
temper it if they do not wholly abstain, yet always having regard to custom,
and the nature of wines; amongst which, if we believe the Germans, their wine
cannot endure water, no more then the water of the Island of Tenos can endure
wine.

CONFERENCE LXXXIII.
I. Of Baths. II. Whether the Wife has more love for her Husband, or the
Husband for his Wife.

I. Of Baths.
It Is not in vain that Physicians examine the nature of the places wherein
man's body is contained. For the ambient air, water, or earth (as in Dropsies)
has great influence upon the same. Now Baths are either total, for the whole
body, or partial, for some members, such as the Half-bath, where the head,
breast, and arms, are remaining out of the water; fomentations, pumpings, and
the like. This Bath was in such request among the Romans, that their Emperors
were at great care and charge in building them, not only at Rome, but even in
this City of Paris, where the Emperor Julian made one. Its benefits are great
when used in due time and place, and its effects different according to its
diverse composition. For it always moistens, more or less; but it heats, cools
or tempers, according as it is hot, cold, or temperate. It opens the pores, by
removing the scurfe which stopped them, and dilating them by its heat, whereby
it insinuates into the inward parts, especially the muscles, which by this
means it swells up, and by colliquating the humor corrects their dryness, and
repairs the emptiness introduced thereinto by lassitude. Whence used moderately
it takes away weariness, and repairs strength; but continued too long, and
being hot, it draws forth the strength of the party too much, and causes
faintings; a cold Bath cools the parts it touches, but by accident and
consequence heats them, by obstructing the pores and passages of the spirits.
Hence they that come out of this Bath are very hungry; and Hippocrates says,
that the Convulsion is cured by casting cold water upon the shoulders, which
moves nature to expel its enemy. So in fainting nothing recovers the spirits
and revives the heart more then cold water cast on the face where the skin is
thinnest, and the spirits abound most.

The Second said, That those at Rome anciently passed through three places. In
the first, where the air was well warmed, like the Stoves of Germany, they put
off their clothes. In the second, a little more heated by fire underneath or on
the sides, they sweat; the water which steam'd from the heated vessels sticking
to their naked bodies, and being thence gently wiped off, all the filth was
brought* off with Curry-combs of Ivory. Here also they were anointed with Oil,
either before the Bath of warm water (when they would not relax the pores, nor
evaporate the spirits, as in those that newly recover a sickness, or are
exhausted by labor) or after the Bath, to hinder the sweat which follows. For
the oil stops the pores of the skin, and so hinders transpiration. In the third
place was the water lukewarm, or something more, where they bathed themselves,
afterward plunged into cold water or a little less hot, which was on the side
of the same place, to fortify the relaxed members. Lastly, they returned to
the second place, there to sweat and be rubbed, repassing by the first, to avoid
the sudden mutation from hot air to cold; the danger of which Alexander found
when being too hot he went into a river, falling into shiverings and
convulsions, wherewith he had perished had it not been for his Physician
Philip. Whereby it appears that a Bath profits or hurts, according as it is
well or ill administered, and that our wise Ancestors were more circumspect in
it then we; which possibly is the cause why it was in so frequent use, that
Galen speaks of diverse of his time who commonly bathed themselves twice a day;
the good which we receive from any thing being the inducement to the frequent
practice of it.

The Third said, That unless upon urgent necessity and a medicinal account,
bathing is not only superfluous but very hurtful to men. For besides that it is
unnatural (not water but air being man's element) it opens the body, and makes
it susceptible of any bad qualities of the air; for which reason it is forbidden
in time of pestilence. For as Oak lasts longer then Fig Tree, because it is more
solid, so soft bodies are more unhealthy and short-lived then firm, as those
of peasants are, who arrive to ages, without experience of any of those
delicacies. For so many conditions are requisite to a Bath, that it is commonly
more hurtful then profitable. It must be vari'd according to the diversity of
seasons, and complexions, which Galen confesses he understood not. And one and
the same day will be of different temper, as it happens in Autumn; so that one
and the same Bath will be proper and not proper. Besides, it is prescribed to be
as hot as milk from the Cow, which it cannot be for two moments, but is
immediately altered by the ambient air. If it be said that the body suffers
well the same variations of the air. I answer that it is not exposed naked to
the air, whose excessive qualities are abated by our clothes. Otherwise, every
one would be inconvenienc'd therewith, unless he were accustomed to it from his
birth, as the Savages are. Besides, the air adheres not to the skin, and so
makes but a transient impression. It must be used after digestion, and we know
not when this is ended; the body being purged, which it seldom is as it ought;
otherwise it excites fluxions in such as are full-bodied, and subject to
catarrhs. It fills the head with vapors; it relaxes the nerves and ligaments,
so that some have never felt the Gout but after bathing, It kills the infant in
the womb, even when it is too hot. It Is an enemy to those that have Tetters or
Erysipelas, to fat and full bodi'd persons, and generally to all that are not
accustomed to it; as if this element were not innocent, but as the most
mischievous things are when made familiar by custom. As for bathing in rivers,
those that swim therein, as most do, strain themselves more then does them
good, besides the incommodities which they receive from the air whereunto they
are exposed. So that if you add the loss of time to the rich, the charge to the
poor, and incommodity to all, you will not wonder that most men abstain from
them, and that Seneca chose no fitter place to dye in then a Bath.

The Fourth said, That a Bath being one of the things called by the Physicians
not-natural, that is, whose right or ill use hurts or does good, no more
distinction need be used in it then there is in eating, drinking, sleeping,
waking, and such other things. But the advantages of a Bath rightly used have
none equal to them. First it cleanses the body, and gives a man a new skin;
opens the pores, to let out the fumes and steams of the vessels, which also are
tempered by the water's sweet and mild quality. It corrects dryness, the enemy
of life, which consists in humidity, reducing the same to a just temper; whence
lean and hectical persons receive more benefit from it then any others.
Moreover, Nature has provided for other habits and complexions by the various
mixtures of mineral-waters, having composed hot baths of Salt, Bitumen,
Sulphur, and other Minerals, through which they pass; which strengthen the
nerves and joints, cure Palsies, as seawater does scabs: But bathing chiefly
regards fresh water. It takes away weariness, tempers the heat of weather,
causes sleep, and is one of the most innocent pleasures of life. But he that
would know all the commodities of it must have tried what ease it gives in the
greatest pains, especially in Colicks of all sorts, whence it is called Paradise
by those that are tormented therewith. Wherefore to take away bathing, is to
reject one of the best remedies in Physic, and one of the greatest benefits of
life.

The Fifth said, That the Ancients, having not yet the use of linen to free
themselves from the soil contracted upon their bodies, chiefly in wrestling and
exercising naked upon the sand, were obliged to the use of Bathes, which became
so easy and of so little cost to the multitude, that they paid but a farthing
a time; whence Seneca calls the Bath rem quadrantariam. And it cost them
nothing after Antoninus Pius had caused a stately Bath to be built for the
public, as Capitolinus reports. But at length their use grew into abuse; after
women came to bathe themselves with men, the Censors were fain to forbid them,
under penalty of Divorce, and loss of Dowry.

II. Whether the Wife has more love for her Husband, or the Husband for his
Wife.
Upon the second Point, it was said, That the Poet of our time who said, that
he would marry his Mistress that so he might love her less, implied thereby
that we less love what is already obtained. But he determines not the Question,
who is soonest weary of loving, or who loves most, the Husband or the Wife;
where love must be distinguished from friendship, being a passion of the
Concupiscible appetite tending toward sensible good, apprehended such by the
Fancy, whereas friendship is a most perfect virtue leading the will to honest
good, known such by the Understanding; the former many times being opposite to
the latter, inasmuch as the Passions of the Appetite disturb Reason, and by
excess rise up to jealousy; whereas the latter can have no excess; for the
more it is excessive the more it deserves the name of friendship. It Is
therefore necessary that the woman, whose fancy is stronger and intellect less
perfect, have more love and less friendship; the husband, on the contrary, more
friendship and less love. Which extends also to children, whom the mothers love
with more passion and tendernss, but the fathers more solidly; which affection
may serve for a proof and evidence of that in question.

The Second said, That the praise of constancy in love is due to man, whose
mind is more perfect, and consequently less mutable. And whereas love proceeds
from knowledge, it will follow that men who understand more do also love more.
And want of affection would be more blameable in the man then in the woman, as
presupposing his defect of judgment in being mistaken in his choice; men
usually choosing their wives, and the wives only accepting of the husbands who
address to them. For there is great difference between the liberty our will has
to be carried to what object it pleases, and only the turn of approving or
rejecting what is offered to it. So that the woman who loves not her husband
may say, that she was mistaken but in one point, namely, in accepting what she
should have refused; but the husband in as many as he had objects in the world
capable of his friendship. Besides, 'twould be shameful to the husband, the
head and master of the family, to be inferior to his wife in the essential
point which renders their marriage happy or unfortunate. And Gracchus's
choosing death that his wife Cornelia might live, (having slain the male of two
Serpents whom he found together, upon the Augur's assuring him of the said
effect, as it came to pass) shows that we want not examples for proof of this
truth; as that of Semiramis, who having the supreme authority committed to her
but for one day, caused her husband who had granted the same, and been
indulgent to her all his life, to be put to death; and the 49 daughters of
Danaus, who all slew their husbands in one night, prove the same.

The Third said, That amity being begotten and increased by necessity, the
woman, as the weaker, has more need of support and protection from the man,
and so is more obliged to love him; and therefore nature has providently
implanted in her a greater tenderness and inclination to love, because all her
happiness depends on her husbands good or ill treatment of her, which is
commonly according to her love to him. To which end also the woman is endu'd
with beauty and a more delicate body, and consequently more apt to give and
receive love then men, whose exercises require a temper more hot and dry,
whereby to undergo the travels of life. And if examples be needful, the contest
of the Indian wives who should cast her self into her husband's funeral fire,
together with whatever most precious thing she has, in testimony of greatest
love, suffices to prove this conclusion; no men having ever been seen to burn
for love of their wives. Yea, when anciently one man had abundance of wives (a
custom still practiced amongst the Turks) 'twas impossible for the husband to
have as much love for his wives as they had for him, being in all ages
contented with one alone, and consecrating to him their whole affection; which
the more common it is, is so much the less strong.

CONFERENCE LXXXIV.
I. Of Respiration. II. Whether there be any certainty in humane Sciences.

I. Of Respiration.
ALthough our natural heat be of a degree more eminent then the elementary, yet
it is preserved after the same manner, namely, by addition of new matter, and
emission of fuliginous vapors, ever resulting from the action of heat upon
humidity: both which are done by the means of respiration, which is the
attraction of air by the mouth or nostrils into the Lungs, and from thence into
the Heart, where the purest part of this air is changed into vital spirits,
which are also refreshed and ventilated by it. For though as much goes forth by
exspiration as is taken in by inspirations, yet the air we breathe is
nevertheless turned into our spirits; for that which issues forth is not air
alone, but it is accompanied with hot gross vapors streaming from the heart,
the furnace of our heat. And as respiration is proper to perfect animals, so
the imperfect have only transpiration, which is when the same air is attracted
by the imperceptible pores of the body. Which is sufficient for animals whose
heat is languid, as Insects, the Child in the womb, and hysterical women, in
whom also (hereupon) the pulse ceases for a good while. And whereas the air
kills fishes when they are long exposed to it, it cannot serve for the support
of their natural heat which is very small. Wherefore they respire with water
which is more natural and familiar to them, causing the same effects in them
that the air does in land-animals.

The Second said, As the aliments ought to be suitable to the parts of the body
which they nourish, the soft and spungy Lungs attracting the thin bilious
blood, the spleen the gross and melancholy; so the spirits of the animal must
be repaired by others proportionate thereunto and of suitable matter, for
recruiting the continual loss of that spiritual substance, the seat of the
natural heat and radical moisture. Wherefore animals which have aqueous
spirits, as fishes, repair the same by water which they respire by the mouth,
the purest part of which water is turned into their spirits, and the more gross
omitted by their gills. But land-animals, whose spirits are aerious and more
subtle, and whose heat is more sensible, have need of air to serve for suitable
matter to such spirits, for which end nature has given them Lungs. Yet with
this difference, that as some fish attract a more subtle and tenuious water,
to wit, that of Rivers, and some again a more gross, as those which live in
Lakes and Mud: So according as animals have different spirits, some breathe a
thin air, as Birds, others more gross, as Men and most Beasts; others an air
almost terrestrial and material, as Moles; and amongst those which have only
transpiration, flies attract a thin air, and Worms a thick.

The Second said, That our natural heat, being celestial and divine, may indeed
be refreshed by the air, but not fed and supported as the parts of our body are
by solid and liquid food. For food must be in some manner like the thing
nourished, because it is to be converted into its substance. Now there is no
proportion between the gross and impure air which we breathe, and that
celestial and incorporeal substance. Nor can nutrition be effected, unless the
part to be nourished retain the aliment for some time, to prepare and
assimilate it; but, on the contrary, the air attracted by respiration is
expelled as soon as it has acquired heat within, and is become unprofitable to
refresh and cool. This respiration is an action purely animal and voluntary,
since it is in our power to increase, diminish, or wholly interrupt it, as
appears by Licinius, Macer, and Coma, who, by the report of Valerius Maximus,
killed themselves by holding their breath.

The Fourth said, That Respiration being absolutely necessary to life is not
subject to the command of the will, but is regulated by nature, because it does
its actions better then all humane deliberations. Nor is it ever weary, as the
animal faculty is, whose action is not continual as this of respiration is,
even during sleep, which is the cessation of all animal actions, and wherein
there is no election or apprehension of objects (a necessary condition to
animal actions) yea in the lethargy, apoplexy, and other symptoms, wherein the
brain being hurt, the animal actions are interrupted, yet respiration always
remains unprejudiced.

The Fifth said, That respiration is neither purely natural (as concoction and
distribution of the blood are; nor yet simply animal, (as speaking and walking
are) but partly animal, partly natural, as the retaining or letting go of urine
is. It Is natural in regard of its end and absolute necessity, and its being
instituted for the vital faculty of the heart, which is purely natural; animal
and voluntary, inasmuch as it is performed by means of 65 intercostal muscles,
the organs of voluntary motion, whereby it may be made faster or slower.

II. Whether there be any certainty in humane Sciences.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That all our knowledge seems to be false.
First, on the part of the object, there being but one true of it self, namely
God, whom we know not, and cannot know; because to know adaequately is to
comprehend, and to comprehend is to contain; and the thing contained must be
less then that which contains it. To know a thing inadaequately, is not to know
it. Secondly, on the part of our Intellect, which must be made like to what it
knows, or rather turned into its nature; whence he that thinks of a serious
thing becomes serious himself; he that conceives some ridiculous thing laughs
without design, and all the longings of Childbearing-women end where they
begun. But it is impossible for us to become perfectly like to what we would
know. Thirdly, this impossibility proceeds from our manner of knowing, which
being by some inference or consequence from what is already known, we can never
know any thing, because we know nothing at all when we come into the world. And
should we acquire any knowledge, it would be only by our internal and external
senses. Both both are fallacious, and consequently, cannot afford certain
knowledge. For, as for the external, the eye which seems the surest of all the
senses, apprehends things at distance to be less then they really are, a
straight stick in the water to be crooked, the Moon to be of the bigness of a
Cheese, though it is near that of the Earth; the Sun greater at rising and
setting then at noon, the Shore to move and the Ship to stand still, square
things to be round at distance, an erect Pillar to be less at the top. Nor is
the hearing less subject to mistake, as the Echo, and a Trumpet sounded in a
valley, makes the sound seem before us when it is far behind us. Pronuntiation
alters the sense of words; besides, that both these senses are erroneous in the
time of their perception, as is seen in felling of woods and thunder. The Smell
and Taste, yea the Touch it self, how gross soever it be, are deceived every
day in sound persons as well as in sick; and what do our drinkers in rubbing
their palates with Salt and Spice but wittingly beguile it, grating the skin
thereof that so the wine may punge it more sensibly. But the great fallacy is
in the operation of the inward Senses. For the Fancy oftentimes is persuaded
that it hears and sees what it does not; and our reasoning is so weak, that in
many disciplines scarce one Demonstration is found, though this alone produces
Science. Wherefore 'twas Democritus's opinion that Truth is hidden in a well,
that she may not be found by men.

The Second said, That to know, is to understand the cause whereby a thing is,
and to be certain that there can be no other but that; the word cause being
taken for principle. Therefore when men know by the Senses, by effects, by
external accidents, or such other things which are not the cause, they cannot
be said to know by Science; which requires that the understanding be fully
satisfied in its knowledge, wherein if there be any doubt it has not Science,
but Opinion. This scientifical knowledge is found in no other discipline but
Logic and Geometry, in regard of the certainty of their principles, which are
so clear that they are alike known by all, even the most ignorant, who need
only understand their terms to assent to their truth. Such as these are; every
thing which is said of the Genus is also said of the Species; and what is not
said of the Genus, is not said of the Species; which they call Dictum de omni,
and de nulle. If to equal things you add equal things, the remainder will be
equal. And if to unequal things you add unequal things, the remainder will be
unequal. For whereas beasts have a natural faculty which is the common sense,
or estimative faculty, whereby they judge of the convenience or inconvenience
of objects the first time the same are presented to them: Man, beyond this
natural power, enabling him to judge of sensible objects, has a peculiar one,
which is the Intellectual, by means whereof he is said to be every thing in
power, because it enables him to know every thing, and to judge of the truth or
falsehood of universal things, which are Principles. And as the eye beholding
white or black judges sufficiently what color it is, without seeking reasons
thereof elsewhere then within it self; so the Intellect discerns the truth of
principles by it self, without the help of any other faculty, yea without the
habit of any Science, because these principles being before the Science whereof
they are principles must be more clear and known then it; whence Intelligence
is defined the habit or knowledge of such first Principles. Thus, ask a
Geometrician why the whole is greater then its part, he can give you no other
reason but that it is a principle known of its own nature.

The Third said, That Geometry, being the knowledge of eternal truths by
infallible principles, is most certain. And it is an evidence of its certainty
that it neither proposes nor demonstrates why a thing is such, but only that it
is such. As it is proposed and demonstrated that in the same segment of a circle
all the angles are equal, but not why they are so, because it is a truth which
comes to our knowledge by certain principles, and propositions formerly
demonstrated, as certain as the principles themselves. Hence this truth is
demonstrated, which nevertheless has not any cause of its existence, as frail
and perishing things have; no material being abstracted from all matter; nor
efficient, for the agent* is not any way considered therein; nor formal, an
angle being of its own nature only the inclination of lines; nor yet final,
this being not made to any intention. In like manner it is demonstrated that
four numbers or four lines being proportional (that is, when there is such
reason of the first to the second, as of the third to the fourth) the square of
the two extremes is equal to the square of the two middlemost; but not why it is
so, this question occurring only in dubious things.

The Fourth said, That knowledge being desired by all men, who for this end are
endu'd with an Intellect capable of all sorts of notions, it must needs be
found in some subjects, otherwise nature should have given us a general desire
of a thing which is not. And since there are causes of every thing, there must
be a Science of those causes. But the multitude of apparent causes is the
reason that we are oftentimes ignorant of the right, and take one for another,
the shadow for the body, and appearance for truth. Which argues not that there
is no knowledge, but rather few knowing persons. For Socrates who said he knew
nothing but that he knew nothing; and the Pyrrhonians who doubted of every
thing had even a knowledge of their ignorance. Moreover, the exact knowledge
men have by the senses of particular things necessarily carries them to that of
universals, wherein Science consists. As he that often experienced in diverse
persons that Sena purged their melancholy, acquires of himself this general
Notion, that all Sena purges melancholy. And, on the contrary, he who
understands a general proportion in gross, may of himself apply the same to all
particulars; so great a connection there is between things universal and
particular, in which the fruit of Science consists.

The Fifth said, Since all knowledge depends upon another prenotion, which is
what they call principles, those which compose the Sciences must also
distinguish the same. Wherefore Sciences are to be termed certain or uncertain
according as the preexistent notions whereupon they are founded are certain or
not. Now amongst those principles some are universal, common to all Sciences;
as those of Metaphysics; in all things either the affirmative or the negative
is true; that which is not has no propriety. Besides which it is necessary to
have particular one's proper to the Science, which are true, first, immediate,
causes of the Conclusion, preceding and more known then it. The six conditions
requisite to principles in order to a demonstration. They must be true, not
false; for that which is false exists not; that which exists not cannot be a
cause of that which exists, nor consequently a false principle be the cause of
a true demonstration: First, that is not proveable by others: immediate, so
enjoined with the attribute that there is nothing between them two to join them
more nearly: causes of the conclusion, that is, this principle must be the
necessary cause of this truth; and consequently precede and be more known then
it. As taking this for a principle, that the interposition of an opake body
between light and a body illuminated causes a shadow upon this body; we
conclude, that as often as the earth is found interposed between the Sun, which
is the light, and the Moon which is the body illuminated, it will necessarily
come to pass that there will be a shadow upon the body of the Moon, which is
its Eclipse.

The Sixth said, 'Twas the error of Socrates, that observing our Sciences
depending on other preceding notions, he apprehended that we learned nothing
new, but that Science was nothing but the remembrance of what the soul formerly
knew before its being enclosed in this body: not considering that the knowledge
of principles and notions is confused and not distinct; and that the knowledge
of them in gross is not sufficient to denominate a person knowing; but that we
must first draw universal conclusions from them, then apply the same to
particulars, without which application those principles would be unprofitable,
and not produce any Science. Thus the Divine applies this general principle,
that that which is contrary to the Law of God is evil, to particular
conclusions, as to murder, theft and perjury. The Physician, who holds for a
Principle that Contraries are cured by their Contraries, draws these other
conclusions from it, that a cold distemper is cured by hot medicaments, a hot
by refrigerating; obstruction, by openers; which he applies again to particular
subjects. The Statesman, from this general Principle, That every thing that
disturbs the public quiet is to be repressed, concludes that the Seditious are
to be punished. So, it is not enough for a Mathematician to know that equal
things added to equal things are likewise equal, unless he apply this universal
principle to particular lines, surfaces and bodies. Which is done either by the
Synthetical, or by the Analytical way (which nevertheless must be followed by
the Synthetical.) Now it is in the application of these general rules to
particulars, that error is committed even in the most certain Sciences.

The Seventh said, That there are few Sciences, because there are few
Principles and Proposition's demonstrable: as the contingent and the absolute
are not. Whence it is that the future is not demonstrable, and hence follows
the incertainty of Politics. Wherefore only necessary Propositions, whereof
(the truth is) permanent and eternal are demonstrable; and all these are
necessarily demonstrable because they have infallible principles: yet only such
of these whose principles are known by men are demonstrable by men. So it is
certain that the Inundation of Nilus, and the flux and reflux of the Sea are
not demonstrable; because men know not, the principles are not known. Whereby
it appears how ridiculous they are who undertake to demonstrate every thing.

CONFERENCE LXXXV.
I. Whether the manners of the Soul follow the temperament of the Body. II. Of
Sights or Shows.

I. Whether the manners of the Soul follow the temperament of the Body.
THe extreme variety of men's actions and manners cannot proceed from the
diversity of their souls, which are accounted all equal, but from that of the
bodies; wherein according to the various tempers thereof the soul produces that
variety of manners. And as, in natural and animal actions, one and the same
Soul digests in the stomach, makes blood in the Liver and Veins, sees by the
Eyes, and reasons in the Brain; so, likewise, it is sometimes sad, when the
melancholy humor predominates in the body; sometimes cheerful, when blood
abounds; and sometimes also froward or angry, when the choler is agitated.

The Second said, That the soul being the form, as the body is the matter, it
must be the cause of all humane actions; not the body, which receives them,
since the soul informs and perfectionates the body, and begets in it the habit
which produces the manners and actions. As the horse governs not the rider, but
the contrary; and it is to the rider that the honor or blame of the course is
to be imputed. And were the soul but a quality, as the most profane have
ventured to affirm, yet the same privilege must be reserved to it which is
allowed to the predominant quality in every compound, which gives it not only
the denomination but also the action: as in compound medicaments the most
active simple carries the credit from the rest. Besides, if the body and the
humors thereof were the author and cause of manners, an ignorant person could
never become learned, and a single Lecture of Xenocrates had never made a
Drunkard cast off his chaplet of flowers, and turn a Philosopher. The examples
of many grand personages sufficiently ill furnished with graces of the body,
evidence what certainty there is in arguing from the outside of the corporeal
structure to the furniture of the soul; and that the signs of malice, remarked
in some, as in Zoilus, from his having a red beard, a black mouth, and being
lame, and one-ey'd; of Thersites, and Irus, from their having sharp heads,
rather show the malice or ignorance of such as make these remarks, then prove
that these dispositions of body are the true cause of malice; we see people of
the same temper, hair, stature, features, and other circumstances, very
different in their manners and inclinations. And the same is observed in
horses. For since the Stars, the most powerful agents, do not constrain, but
only incline, certainly the humors cannot do more. True it is, their
inclination is so strong, that no less grace of Heaven is needful to resist the
same, then strength to retain a man that is rolling down the declivity of a
hill: Yet Socrates remaining unmoved by the embraces of a Curtezan, whom his
Scholars contrived into his bed, to try him, although he was naturally very
prone to vice, justifies that how hard soever it be to stop the slipping foot
when it is once going, yet it is not impossible; and therefore the manners of
the soul do not always follow the constitution of the body. Not considering the
power which the fear of God has over our wills, the effects whereof I here
meddle not with, as being supernatural, since they have sometimes destroyed all
the maxims of nature; witness those that give themselves to be burnt for the
faith.

The Third said, That the body must needs contribute to the soul's actions, as
being its instrument. But it contributes only what it has, namely, its
temperament, and other proprieties. Therefore it is from this temperament that
the same are diversifi'd. The soul sees no longer when the eyes are shut or
blinded: it is wise in a well tempered brain (not only in a dry, as Plato, in
his Timaeus, conceived, because he saw children grow more prudent as their
brain was desiccated) it is stupid in a too moist brain, and foolish or furious
in one inflamed, as in deliration or madness. It Is also forced to leave its
body when a violent Fever has so depraved the humors thereof that there
remains not the temper necessary to its reception. Therefore it follows the
temper of the humors. Thus, because we see fire introduced into any
combustible subject, and extinguished when the same is consumed, we say fire
follows combustible matter, and becomes of the same nature, quantity, and other
qualities. Moreover, Hippocrates says, Nations are warlike or cowardly,
laborious or not, of good or bad nature, according to the diversity of climates
and soils they inhabit, which render them diversely tempered. Hence, in Asia,
where the air is temperate, and less subject to changes then Europe and Africa,
men are more healthy and handsome, their manners more equal and laudable: on
the contrary, in Countries more cold or hot, the inhabitants are either more
cruel or more boisterous, more hardy or more timorous; and Mountaineers are
more industrious, as, on the contrary, those who live in a fertile soil are
commonly more slothful. Hence, amongst the Greeks, the Thebans and all the
Baeotians, whose Country was rich, and the air very thick, were very dull, and
the Athenians very subtle: which was the cause that 'twas said, people were
born Philosophers at Athens: on the contrary, 'twas a prodigious thing to see
one wise Anacharsis among the Scythians. Hippocrates adds the seasons too,
according to the change whereof men's manners are also found diverse. But all
these cannot act upon the soul but by the organ of the body, changing its
humors, and introducing new qualities into the parts thereof.

The Fourth said, Even sucking children give some tokens to what their
constitution inclines them, before the contraction of any habit, virtuous or
vicious; some of courage; others of timidity; some of modesty, others of
impudence; and as soon as they begin to speak, some are liars, others love
truth. And of two children taught by the same Master, the hardest student is
many times a less prosicient then the other, who has a temper proper for
learning, and is as inclined to it as another is to Merchandise, Mechanics,
Travel, War; or this will be quarrelsome, the other respectful and discreet;
one is born to servitude, and the other prefers his liberty before a Kingdom.
So that not only the moral actions of the will, but also those of the
understanding absolutely depend on the body, the soul being of a spiritual
nature which of it self can never produce any sensible effect without the
mediation of some body, not so much as exercise its proper actions of Willing
and Understanding; both which depend on the phantasms, which are intellectual
species fabricated by the agent intellect in the Patient, upon the model of
those that were brought by the senses into the imagination: hence, if these be
altered or depraved by the spirits or humous flowing to the brain, reasoning
becomes either diminished or depraved, or else wholly abolished, the spirits so
confounding these phantasms that the intellect cannot make its reviews, nor
compose or divide them in order to elicite its conclusions, and frame its
notions. For souls differ only by the spirits, the tenuity and lucidity whereof
is proper for contemplation, their abundance makes a man bold, their
inflammation renders him frantic, their defect causes sloth and cowardice:
and being designed to serve equally to the actions of the soul and body they
were made of a middle nature between body and spirit; whence they are called
spiritual bodies, and are the cause of union between them, and mutual
communication of their passions and affections. So the bodies diseases affect
the soul, and disturb its operations, the spirits abandoning the brain to
succor the grieved parts: the bilious humor in the ventricles of the brain,
or a tumor and a Sphacelus cause madness, the blood overheated causes simple
folly accompanied with laughter; melancholy produces serious folly. In like
manner, the body resents the passions of the soul; fear causes trembling and
paleness, shame, blushing, anger, foaming: and all this by the spirits.

The Fifth said, If manners depended on tempers, virtues might be easily
acquired by the course of diet; which seems ridiculous. For then the divine
faculties of the soul should depend not only upon meats but upon all other
things not natural; which would be to subject the Queen to her servants, to
enslave the will and take away its liberty which makes it to be what it is.
Besides, Theology cannot consist with this conclusion, which would acquit
persons of blame, and lay it upon nature as its author. For he that should
commit some evil choleric action or other sin, could not avoid it, being lead
thereunto by the bilious humor produced by nature, whereunto it is almost
impossible to resist, and so he would seem innocent, and unjustly punished for
what he committed not voluntarily; though without the will there is no sin.
Moreover, men would not be variable, but always the same, the bilious always
angry, the sanguine ever in love, etc. and yet we see men exercise all sorts of
virtues, and capable of all vices. Many beasts have not only the same
constitution of brain, but also external shape like that of man, as Apes,
(whose bones are so like those of men, that in Galen's time Anatomists
considered only their Sceletons) yea, the same temper, and all internal parts
alike, as Swine; and there is little or no difference between the brain of man
and a calf; and yet none of these animals have actions like those of men; which
being purely spiritual and intellectual must depend upon another cause, the
rational soul, whose actions are not any way organical; for then it should be
corporeal, because proceeding from the body, and consequently mortal.

II. Of Sights or Shows.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That the communication of the ills and goods
of the soul and body has put men upon searching what may relieve the
languishing strength of either. And as the soul is delighted by bodily
pleasures, so it also, in gratitude, returns the like pleasure to the body, by
the contentment which it receives in acquiring knowledge, the least laborious
of which is that most recreative, as that is which is conveyed by the sight.
For the hearing makes us know things only one after another; but the sight
showing them all at once, more fully satisfies our natural desire of knowing.
Hence all people, from the highest to the lowest, are so delighted with shows
or spectacles, that the Romans kept Actors and Comedians with public pensions;
and Cicero publicly commended Roscius, who alone had 12000 crowns for a
stipend from the Roman people. They employed the incomes of the woods about
Rome, dedicated to their gods, for the maintaining of Theaters, Amphitheatres,
Cirques, and other places destinated to shows, wherein the Senators and Knights
had the fourteen first ranks or seats; for whose convenience Q. Catulus covered
the Scene with veils of sine linen; Lucius and Cinna made a versatile or
shifting Scene; P. Claudius was the first that adorned it with pictures and
tables; C. Antonius covered it with silver; Murena made one of pure silver;
Trebonius one gilded; others, inlay'd with Ivory: Nero sprinkled all the place
of the Cirque where the horses run, with gold-sand, and covered it with veils
beset with stars, in form of a sky: Heliogabalus made an Euripus of wine at the
Circensian plays, in which he caused a Naval Battle to be represented; as if
the wickedest Princes could not have covered their enormities with a more
specious liberality or more agreeable to the people. These spectacles were
likewise used at the funerals of great Princes, and made part of their service
of the gods. They divert the great, make the miserable forget their affliction,
are the true physic of the soul, the book of the ignorant, and the only way
truly to revive the transactions of former ages.

The Second said, Nothing is so destructive to good manners as the
frequentation of Theaters and most other spectacles: which is the most
dangerous, for that things represented to the eyes make deeper impression in
the mind then by any other sense. Which made Aristotle advise the prohibiting
of Comedies, and S. Augustine declare them contrary to piety and honesty. The
same is the opinion of all the Fathers, particularly Tertullian, who in an
express treatise blames all sort of spectacles, as proceeding from the
superstition of Paganism, causing troubles and quarrels; yea rendering men
capable of all sort of wickedness by the impression of their examples. For the
sights of Mimes and Pantomimes are ridiculous; Rope-dancers unprofitable;
Farces or Enterludes dangerous, and enemies to purity; Comedy, the least
dangerous of all sights, besides loss of time, renders men's minds soft and
effeminate, and more susceptible of the passions represented therein; Tragedy
is too sad to serve for divertisement to the soul. If you proceed to
Gladiators, is any thing more inhumane, and that renders men more barbarous
then to see our fellow-men kill one another in cold blood, and expose
themselves to wild beasts? and it is always a dangerous practice to accustom the
eyes to murders and bloody spectacles; nature being easily perverted by custom.
Moreover, all these Mimes, Actors, Sword-players, and the like, were always
held infamous, and incapable of public charges; insomuch that the Emperor
Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius, in L. 4. C. de Spectaculis Scenicis, and
Lenonibus, forbid to defile their sacred images by the society of those people
who act upon the Theater, ranking them with the corrupters of chastity. And the
Romans, who practiced the same more then any Nation, felt the inconvenience of
them when the most potent became masters of the Commonwealth, by means of the
spectacles wherewith they allured the people to their party; as Julius Caesar,
who being Aedile, and having given Gladiators, Huntings, Sports, Races, and
sumptuous Feasts to the people of Rome, they created him Chief Pontife,
although Q. Catulus, and Servilius Isauricus, two great personages, were his
competitors: which was his first step to Sovereignty; and Suetonius observes,
that the conflux of people was so numerous, that many, and, amongst the rest,
two Senators were smothered in the throng.

The Third said, That Spectacles or Shows are good or bad according to the
things which they represent. But absolutely speaking, they ought to be
permitted, not only for the diversion of men, but also for the exercising of
youth, and animating them to courage by rewards for their fortitude; as the
Greeks sometimes appointed Statues, Crowns of gold, Olive, Palm, Smallage, and
other such guerdons, to those who overcame in Running, Wrestling, Caestus or
fighting with Whorlbats, and such exercises, carrying them in a triumphal
Chariot to the Town of their Birth; showing themselves so careful of the
Olympic Games, that they committed the charge thereof to the Sicyonians, after
Corinth, the place where they were formerly celebrated, had been razed by the
Romans, who transferred those Plays into their own City by the persuasion of
Cato, for the same end of educating their youth. For as profit delights some
spirits, so pleasure allures all; and of pleasures none is more innocent and
communicable then that of the sight.

CONFERENCE LXXXVI.
I. Of the Dog Days. II. Of the Mechanics.

I. Of the Dogdays.
THat the Stars act upon sublunary bodies is agreed upon, but not the manner:
some holding that they impress some qualities by motion, others by light,
others by their influence, others by both together, producing heat by the two
first, and other more extraordinary effects by influences. For every thing that
is moved heats; as also all sort of light united, even that of the Moon, whose
rays may be made to burn with glasses as well as those of the Sun. But because
natural agents cannot act beyond the natural bounds of their power, therefore
heat produced of light and motion here below can produce only its like, heat,
or such other alteration in inferior bodies, not those strange and irregular
changes not only in the temper of the air, but of every other body. As that it
is sometimes hotter, and sometimes colder, in the same elevation of the Sun,
cannot be attributed to his approach or remotion, or to the incidence of his
perpendicular or oblique rays, but it must proceed from the conjunction,
opposition, or several aspects of other Stars. Amongst which the Canicula or
Dog Star has very extraordinary effects; as to weaken men's bodies, to make
dogs run mad, to turn the wine in the vessel, to make the sea boil, to move
lakes, to heat the air so much that Pliny affirms that Dolphins keep themselves
hid during the 30 Dog Days: at which he wonders the more because they can
respire neither in the water nor upon the earth, but partly in the air, partly
in the water. Moreover, Experience shows, that the Hyades or Pleiades (stars in
the back of the Bull) have such a moist quality that they always cause rain at
their rising, which happens in November; as Arcturus never rises without
bringing hail or tempest; the Moon being full, Oysters, Muscles, and the sap of
Trees, are so too, and therefore being cut at this time they soon rot; and
Pliny counsels to cut them during the Dog-dayes, when the heat of the season
has dried up all their aqueous moisture, which is the cause of their
corrupting.

The Second said, That the vanity of Astrologers, who have phancy'd monsters
and sundry figures in Heaven, and attributed imaginary effects to them, the
better to amuse men's minds with some resemblance of the truth, has also
feigned two dogs there; one less, consisting of two stars; and another of
eighteen, the the greatest of which is the brightest in our Hemisphere, and is
in the tongue of this Dog, whom the Greeks and Latins call Sirius, and ascribe
so much power to him, that they conceive his conjunction with the Sun in the
East causes the scorching heat of Summer; yea, the people of the Isle of Cea,
near Negropont, as Cicero reports, took their presages of the whole year from
the rising of this star, determining the same to be rainie, in case this star
appeared obscure and and cloudy; and the contrary. But this cannot be true, as
well in regard of the great distance of the fixed stars, which also being of
the same substance cannot have contrary qualities; as also by reason of the
retrogradation of their sphere, which has a motion contrary to that of the
First Mover, namely, from West to East; which motion, though insensible in few
years, yet amounts to much at the end of many Ages. As is justified by the
Dog Star, which Ptolomy in the tables of his time places at 18. degr. 10. min.
of Gemini; Alphonsus, King of Castile, at the 4. degr. of Cancer; and now it is
found at 9. degr. 54. min. according to Tycho, and at 9. degr. 30. min.
according to Copernicus. Whereby it appears, that after many years this star
will be in the winter signs, and that at the Creation it was in Aries at the
Vernal Equinox, and that, consequently, the Dog-dayes will be in the time of
the greatest cold. In brief, were there such power in this conjunction, the
Dog-dayes would be hot and burning; and yet in some years they are cold and
rainie: Which the Astrologers attributing to the several Aspects of Saturn, or
other cold stars, see not that by weakening the force of some by others, they
subvert all. Wherefore the Dog Star is at present the sign, but not the cause
of hot days; that is, the happening of this Constellation in the Summer signs,
and its conjunction with the Sun during hot weather, has been erroniously
believed the principal cause thereof, which, in my judgment, is to be sought
only in the continuance of the Suns action during the Spring and half the
Summer, whereby the Air is hotter then when he was nearer us. So it is hotter at
two a clock in the afternoon then at ten in the morning, although the Sun be at
the same distance, yea, then at noon, although he be then nearest of all; and
we read that an Ambassador of Presbyter John died with heat as he landed at
Lisbone, although the heat be not so great there as in his Country, but of
louger continuance. If it rains sometimes during the said season, it is by
reason of too great attraction of Vapors by the heat of the Sun; as is seen in
the torrid Zone, where when the Sun is in the greatest Apogaeum it rains
continually.

The Second said, That the Longitude of the Dog Star (called by the Arabians
Athabor) is at this day about the 9. degr. of Cancer, and its meridional
latitude 39. degr. and a half. Now the Ancients observing the greatest heat of
the whole year to be commonly when the Sun is at the end of Cancer and
beginning of Leo, and at the same the Dog Star to rise with the Sun, (which the
Astronomers call the Cosmical Rising) named those days Dog-dayes, which begin
with us about the two and twentieth of July: whether they believed the cause of
this heat to be that star assisting the Sun; or else, according to their order
of distinguishing seasons before years and months were regulated by the course
of the Sun, they denoted those days by the rising of this star, conceiving
that it did not change place any more then the other stars of the Firmament. As
not only the Poets, but also Hippocrates, distinguishes the four Seasons of
the year by the rising and setting of the Pleiades and Arcturus. And thus the
name of the day has remained to these days, although the star be not in the
same place, following Ages observing that besides the eight motions admitted by
the Ancients in the Heavens, namely, of the seven Planets, and the First Mover,
there is another peculiar to the starry Heaven, which is finished, according to
some, in 36000 years, whereby it comes to pass that the Dog Star is no longer
in the same place where it was at the first observation of these Dog-dayes. For
it is about two thousand years since this star arose exactly with the Sun in the
days which we call Canicular; the heat whereof has always continued; and yet
the star has passed forward, and at this day rises not with the Sun till about
the eighth of August, when the Dogdayes and strength of heat begins to expire.
Since therefore the effect continues, and the pretended cause exists not at
that time, as the Astronomical Tables justify, it follows that it is not the
cause of that effect. Wherefore some have conceived, that the star which made
the Dog-dayes, was another star, in the little Dog called Procyon. But this
Procyon did not rise with the Sun, in the days of the Ancients, till about the
beginning of July, which is three weeks before the Dog-dayes; which
consequently cannot be attributed to the fixed stars, by reason of their
particular motion, which causes them to vary situation; the Dog Star by its
proper motion proceeding 52. min. every year, which make about 1. degr. in 70.
years, 3. degr. in 200. years, and one sign in 2000. Besides, if the stars had
any force, the same would be sensible at their coming to the meridian of the
place with the Sun, then when they rise with him, because their greatest
strength is when they are under the meridian, being then in their greatest
elevation above the Horizon and nearest the Zenith, and consequently, most
active as experience shows in the Sun. Therefore the true cause of the heat of
Dog-dayes, is, because the Sun being toward the end of Cancer and the
beginning of Leo, we have more causes concurring together to produce heat then
in any other season of the year, namely, the elevation of the Sun above the
horizon, the length of the days, and shortness of the nights. For then the
days are not sensibly diminished, nor the nights sensibly increased; the Sun
has not yet suffered any considerable change in his altitude above the
Horizon; but above all the preparation of the earth, which has been heated
during the three months of the Spring, and a month and half of the Summer,
whereby all the aqueous humidity which refrigerates is dissipated, and the heat
so far impacted into the earth that the night it self is less cold then in any
other season.

The Fourth said, As it is absurd to seek in the stars for causes of effects
when we see them manifest in the qualities of inferior bodies, and the various
concourse of so many different natural causes: So it is stupidity to deny all
virtue to those great superior orbs, rejecting wise Antiquity and all the most
learned judiciary Astrologers, who ascribe a particular virtue to each star, as
to the Dog Star to heat and scorch the Air. Moreover, the Divine Hippocrates,
lib. de Affect. inter Sect. 5. affirms, that the disease called Typhos happens
commonly in Summer and in these Dogdayes, because it has a power to stir the
choler through the whole Body. And in his book De Aere, locis, and aquis, he
adds, that the rising of the stars is diligently to be observed, especially
that of the Dog Star and some few others, at which times diseases turn into
other kinds; for which reason he says, Aph. 5. Sect. 4. That purging is
dangerous when the Dog Star rises, and some while before.

The Fifth said, That all purging medicaments being hot, it is no wonder if they
are carefully to be managed during very hot weather, in which there is a great
dissipation of the spirits and strength; so that our Bodies, being then
languid, cannot be moved and agitated without danger. Not that the Dog Star
contributes any thing thereunto, but only the heat of the season caused by the
Sun, which attracting from the center to the circumference, and purging from
the circumference to the center, there are made two contrary motions, enemies
to Nature; which is the cause that many fall then into fevers and fainting fits.

II. Of the Mechanics.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That as the object of the Mathematics is
twofold, either intellectual or sensible, so there are two sorts of
Mathematics. Some consider their object simply, and abstracted from all kind
of matter, namely, Geometry and Arithmetic; others consider it as conjoined to
some matter, and they are six, Astrology, Perspective, Geodaesie, Canonick or
Music, the Logistick and the Mechanic Art, which is nothing less then what
its name imports, being otherwise the most admirable of all; because it
communicates motion, which is the most exquisite effect of Nature. It Is divided
into Organical, which composes all instruments and engines of war; sordid,
which makes utensils necessary to the uses of life; and miraculous, which
performs strange and extraordinary things. It Is this which makes water ascend
in the Pneumaticks, whereof Hero writ a Treatise rendering the same melodious,
and resembling the singing of birds in the Hydraulicks. It makes use of the
four Elements, which are the causes of the motions of engines, as of Fire in
Grenades, Air in Artificial Fountains, both Fire and Air by their compression,
which water not admitting* (since we see a vessel full of water can contain
nothing more) its violence consists in its gravity when it descends from high
places. The Earth is also the cause of motion by its gravity, when it is out of
Aequilibrium, as also of rest when it is equally poised, as is seen in weights.

The Second said, The wit of Man could never preserve the dominion given him by
God over other creatures without help of the Mechanics, but by this art he
has brought the most savage and rebellious Animals to his service. Moreover,
by help of mechanical inventions the four Elements are his slaves, and as it
were at his pay to do his works. Thus we see, by means of the Hydraulicks or
engines moving by water, wheels, and pumps, are set continually at work; the
Wind is made to turn a Mill, managed by the admirable Art of Navigation, or
employed to other uses by Aealipila's; Fire, the noblest of all Elements,
becomes the vassal of the meanest Artisans, or serves to delight the sight by
the pleasant inventions of some Ingineer, or employes its violence to arm our
thunders more powerfully then the ancient machines of Demetrius. The Earth is
the Theater of all these inventions, and Archimedes boasted he could move that
too, had he place where to fix his engine. By its means the Sun descends to the
Earth, and by the artificial union of his rays is enabled to effect more then
he can do in his own sphere. The curiosity of man has carried him even to
Heaven by his Astrological Instrumens; so that nothing is now done in that
republic of the stars, but what he knows and keeps in record.

The Third said, That since Arts need Instruments to perform their works, they
owe all they can do to the Mechanics which supply them with utensils and
inventions. 'Twas the Mechanics which furnished the Smith with a hammer and an
anvil, the Carpenter with a saw and a wedge, the Architect with a rule, the
Mason with a square, the Geometrician with a compass, the Astronomer with an
astrolabe, the Soldier with sword and musket; in brief, they have in a manner
given man other hands. Hence came paper, writing, printing, the mariner's box,
the gun in these latter ages; and in the preceding, the Helepoles, or
takecities, flying bridges, ambulatory towers, rams, and other engines of war,
which gives law to the world. Hence Archimedes easily drew a ship to him which
all the strength of Sicily could not stir, framed a heaven of glass in which
all the celestial motions were to be seen; according to which model, the
representation of the sphere remains to us at this day. Hence he burnt the
Roman ships even in their harbor, defended the City of Syracuse for a long
time against the Roman Army, conducted by the brave Marcellus. And, indeed, I
wonder not that this great Archimedes was in so high in Reputaion. For if men
be valued according to their strength, is it not a miracle that one single man
by help of mechanics could lift as much as ten, a hundred, yea, a thousand
others? And his pretension to move the whole Earth, were a point given him out
of it where to stand, will not seem presumptuous, though the supposition be
impossible, to such as know his screw without-end, or of wheels placed one
above another; for by addition of new wheels the strength of the same might be
so multiplied, that no humane power could resist it; yea, a child might by this
means displace the whole City of Paris, and France it self, were it upon a
moveable plane. But the greatest wonder is the simplicity of the means,
employed by this Queen of Arts to produce such excellent effects. For
Aristotle, who writ a book of mechanics, assigns no other principles thereof,
but the Lever, its Hypomoclion, or Support, and a balance, it being certain
that of these three multiplied, proceed all Machines, both Automata, and such
as are moved by force of wind, fire, water, or animals, as wind-mills,
water-mills, horse-mills, a turn-broch by smoke, and as many other inventions
as things in the world.

CONFERENCE LXXXVII.
I. Whether the Soul's Immortality is demonstrable by Natural Reasons. II.
Whether Travel be necessary to an Ingenuous Man.

I. Whether the Soul's Immortality is demonstrable by Natural Reasons.
NAtural Philosophy considers natural bodies as they are subject to alteration,
and treats not of the Soul but so far as it informs the Body, and either
partakes, or is the cause of such alteration. And therefore they are injust who
require this Science to prove supernatural things, as the Soul's Immortality
is. Although its admirable effects, the vast extent of its thoughts, even
beyond the imaginary spaces, its manner of acting, and vigor in old age, the
terrors of future judgment, the satisfaction or remorse of Conscience, and
Gods Justice, which not punishing all sins in this life presupposes another,
are sufficiently valid testimonies thereof; should not the universal consent of
heathens themselves, (some of which have hastened their deaths to enjoy this
immortality) and man's particular external shape, infer the particular
excellence of his internal form. So that by the Philosophical Maxim, which
requires that there be contraries in every species of things, if the souls of
beasts joined to bodies die, there must be others joined to other bodies, free
from death when separated from the same. And the Harmony of the world which
permits not things to pass from on extreme to another without some mean,
requires as that there are pure spirits and intelligences which are immortal,
and substances corporeal and mortal, so there be a middle nature between these
two, Man, called by the Platonists upon this account, the horizon of the
Universe, because he serves for a link and medium uniting the hemisphere of the
Angelical Nature with the inferior hemisphere of corporeal nature. But there is
difference between that which is, and that which may be demonstrated by Humane
Reason, which falls short in proving the most sensible things, as the
specifical proprieties of things; and much less can it prove what it sees not,
or demonstrate the attribute of a subject which it sees not. For to prove the
Immortality of the Soul, it is requisite, at least, to know the two terms of
this proportion, The Soul is immortal. But neither of them is known to natural
reason; not immortality, for it denotes a thing which shall never have end; but
infinity surpasses the reach of humane wit which is finite. And the term,
Soul, is so obscure that no Philosophy has yet been able to determine truly,
whether it be a Spirit, or something corporeal, a substance or an accident,
single or triple.

The Second said, That every thing that is mortal and corruptible, is such, in
that it has in it self some cause of this corruption. All mortal bodies, being
composed of contrary ingredients, have in themselves the principle of
corruption, from which as well simple bodies, as the Elements and Heavens, as
Spirits and separate intelligences, are free; because a thing simple in its own
nature cannot act upon it self by a destructive action, though even those
Spirits have but an arbitrary existence from their first cause on whom they
depend. But in the first sense, and of their own nature they are absolutely
incorruptible; for were they corruptible, then must some new substance be
generated out of that which is corrupted, which is absurd; because they are
simple and free from composition, and, consequently, from corruption. Now were
reasonable Souls, which are part of man (who is compounded of matter and form)
again compounded of matter and form, there would be a progression to infinity
in causes, which is contrary to natural reason. Moreover, nothing is corrupted
but by its contrary, and therefore that which has no contrary is free from
corruption. But such is the rational soul which is so far from having any
contrary, that the most contrary things in Nature, as habits and their
privations, being received in the Understanding, are no longer opposites or
enemies, but friends and of the same nature; whence the reason of contraries is
alike, and there is but one Science of them.

The Third said, That such as a thing is, such is its action. A corporeal and
material substance cannot produce an action which is not corporeal; and an
immaterial action owns no other principle but what is immaterial and
incorruptible. Hence the same reasons which prove the souls of brutes mortal,
because their operations exceed not the bounds of the body, and tend only to
self-preservation and sensible good, conclude also, though by a contrary sense,
for the immortality of the rational soul, whose operations are spiritual and
abstracted from the body. For, nutrition, concoction, assimilation, sense,
motion, and other such actions, being corporeal, because terminated upon
sensible and corporeal objects, must consequently be produced by a faculty of
the same nature corporeal and material. But the reasonable soul, besides those
actions which are common to it with those of beasts, has some peculiar and
much more sublime, as by the Intellect to understand eternal truths, to affirm,
deny, suspend its judgment, compare things together, abstract them from
matter, time, place, and all other sensible accidents; by the will to love and
embrace virtue in spite of the contrary inclinations of the sensitive
appetite, to do good actions though difficult, to avoid the evil which flatters
the senses, and the like; which actions being above the body and material
objects cannot be produced but by an immaterial and incorruptible substance,
such as the reasonable soul is. Moreover, since the soul can know all sorts of
bodies, it must (consequently) be exempt from all corporeal entity, as the
tongue to judge aright of sapours must have none, and the eye to discern
colors well.

The Fourth said, That Nature, which makes nothing in vain, has imprinted in
every thing a desire of its end whereof it is capable, as appears by induction
of all created Beings. Now the greatest desire of man is immortality, whereunto
he directs all his actions and intentions; and therefore he must be capable of
it. But since he cannot accomplish this end in this life, as all other things
do, it must be in another; without which not only good men would be more
unhappy then wicked, but, in general, the condition of men would be worse then
that of beasts: if after having endured so many infelicities which brutes
experience not, the haven of our miseries were the annihilation of the noblest
part of our selves. Yea, if the soul could not subsist without the body, its
supreme good should be in this life, and in the pleasures of the body, and its
chiefest misery in afflictions and the exercises of virtue; which is absurd.
For whereas it is commonly objected, that the soul cannot exercise its noblest
functions but by help of corporeal organs rightly disposed; and that when it is
separated from those organs it can act no longer, and consequently shall exist
no more, action and subsistence being convertible; this is to take that for
granted which is in controversy, namely, that the soul cannot act without the
organs of the body, when it is separated from the same; since it operates
sometimes more perfectly when it is freest from the senses, as in Ecstasies,
burning Fevers, in the night time, and in old age.

The Fifth said, As in Architecture the principal piece of a building is the
Foundation; so the most necessary of a Science, is to lay good Principles;
without which first established, all our Sciences are but conjectures, and our
knowledge but opinion. Now in order to judge whether the souls immortality be
demonstrable by natural reasons, it is to be inquired whether we can find the
principles of this truth, whose terms being known may be naturally clear and
granted by all. The most ordinary are these. 1. Every thing which is spiritual
is incorruptible. 2. That which is material is mortal. 3. That which is
immaterial is immortal. 4. That which God will preserve eternally is immortal.
5. A thing acts inasmuch as it exists; and some other principles, by which this
so important verity seems but ill supported. For, the first is not absolutely
true, since habits of grace, and natural habits, which are spiritual, are
annihilated and corrupted, those by sin, these by intermission of the actions
which produced them. Then for the second, it is notoriously false, since not
only the forms of the Elements which are material, and the Elements themselves
considered according to their whole extent, but also the first matter, are
incorruptible and eternal; and according to the opinion of many Doctors of the
Church it is not an article of faith that the Angels are incorporeal, although
it be de fide that they are immortal; to say nothing of igneous, aerious
demons, and other corporeal genii of the Platonists. As for the third, the
actions of the understanding and the will are immaterial, and nevertheless
perish as soon as they are conceived; and the intentional species are not
incorruptible, though not composed either of matter or form: on the contrary,
the Heavens which are so composed, are yet incorruptible. Whereby it appears
that immortality depends on something else. As for the fourth, it is as
difficult to prove that God will eternally preserve reasonable souls, as that
they are immortal. And for the last, it is certain that many things act above
their reach and the condition of their nature; since that which exists not, as
the end, nevertheless acts by exciting the efficient cause; motion begets heat
which it self has not; and light, a corporeal quality, is moved in an instant
which is the property of incorporeal substances; as also the Sun, which is
inanimate, produces animals more excellent then it self. Whereby it appears
that the Principle which says, that the essence of every thing is discovered
by its operations, is not universally true, no more then all the rest, which
are proposed without explication and before defining the terms under which they
are comprised. For as 'twere ridiculous in a Geometrician to require any one to
grant to him that a right line may be drawn from a point given to another
point, and a circle described from any center at any distance whatsoever, or to
receive for a principle that all right angles are equal; unless he have
beforehand explicated what he means by these terms of point, line, center,
circle, right angle and distance. So they are ridiculous who propose it for a
principle, that every spiritual or immaterial thing is incorruptible and
immortal, before having defined (as they cannot do) what is spiritual,
immaterial and immortal. Yea, should these principles be granted to them,
'twould lie upon them to show by natural reasons that the rational soul is
spiritual, immaterial, independent on the body in essence, and not to suppose
these things as true. And though it were granted them (which is very
questionable) that the actions of men are of a higher degree then those of
brutes, it would not follow from thence, that the reasonable soul is immortal
and wholly abstracted from matter, but only that it is of a superior and more
sublime order; as the fancy is a corporeal power as well as the sight, though
its actions are much more excellent in comparison of this external sense, then
the actions of the reasonable soul are in respect of the fancy which yields
not much to it in its manner of acting. And yet they who write of the
immortality of the soul, take this for a ground, and prove it by handsome
congruities and probabilities, but do not demonstrate it, because it is a truth
which though most certain is withal very obscure, and may indeed be
comprehended by faith which has revealed it to us, but is too remote from our
senses to be demonstrated by natural and sensible reasons.

II. Whether Travel be necessary to an ingenuous man.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That man is naturally as much delighted with
motion, as he is an enemy to rest: Because Being, which he most desires,
consists in action, which is a motion; whereas rest is the cessation of
actions, and consequently an enemy of Being. It Is no wonder then that men are
so desirous to travel, which is a sort of motion, since they are lead thereunto
not only by the principles of their Being, which they have common with other
animals (amongst which the most disciplined, as Elephants, Storks, Cranes,
Swallows and Bees, change their climate from time to time) but also by the
reason of their end and supreme good which they find in travels. For since
man's felicity in this life consists in knowledge, as appears by the desire
every one has to know and to appear knowing; and since the sight alone
supplies more notions to the understanding then all the senses together, which
were all given to man in order to knowledge; there is no more sure means of
acquiring this supreme good then by furnishing the sight continually with
various species, as travels do, wherein new objects always occur, which
recreate the mind as much as like things disgust those that stir not from the
same place; the understanding, like a consuming fire, languishing when it wants
new objects for its food. Hence the sight of the same place wearies us, and the
Civilians reckon it the first degree of servitude, to hinder one's neighbor
the sight of one's house. Indeed the soul is a perpetual motion; as the
heavenly intelligences are never in the same place; but the earth, the most
worthless element, remaining unmovable is the emblem of souls, like plants,
fastened to the same spot of ground where they took birth. Wherein they seem to
derogate from the advantage attributed by the Stoics to man, when they say
that he is a Citizen of the world; whence Seneca says, Epist. 28. I was not
born to abide in one corner of the earth, the whole world is my Country. The
holy Scripture calls man's life a Pilgrimage, whereas he who stirs not from one
place sets up his habitation in it, whom he ought to seek elsewhere. God would
not have so much recommended strangers and travelers, in the old Law, which he
not only forbids to use ill, but also enjoins to love as one's self. Exodus 22.
21. Levit. 19. 33. Nor would the Church have reckoned the entertaining of
Pilgrims and travelers among works of mercy, but only the more to animate men
to this honest and holy exercise. Wherefore not only, with Pythagoras,
Travelers are in the guard of some God, and amongst the most barbarous Nations
under the public faith and protection; but also all Pagan Antiquity put them
in the safeguard of Jupiter the greatest of their Gods, whom they call
Hospitable.

The Second said, That travels are necessary, either because they improve our
knowledge or our virtues. But both these are very rare. Man's life is short,
objects of knowledge are many; and we must rely upon the unanimous testimony of
others for many things. And if men became more virtuous by frequenting with
sundry Nations; then the ancient Hermits took a wrong course in hiding
themselves in Deserts and Cloisters, to find virtue there. For as for moral
Prudence, motion and change of place is wholly contrary to it, as rest is the
cause of it, and the cube was sometimes the Hieroglyphick of it. Moreover,
since the inclinations follow the temper (which is also diversifi'd by various
climates) they who never stay in one Country, but continually change climates,
acquire habits and manners, become inconstant, flitting and imprudent: were
they not obliged to live after the fashion of the Country they reside in, at
Rome as they do at Rome; and because our nature is more inclinable to evil then
to good, they suffer themselves more easily to be carried to vice then to
virtue, of which they meet but few examples: Which moved Lycurgus to forbid his
Citizens to travel or retain strangers above 24 hours in their City, for fear
the contagion of vice should come to corrupt the good manners of the
Lacedaemonians, as happened a long time after, when forgetting his precepts they
gave entrance to barbarians, and other Nations, who infected and corrupted
their City. And the Laws deny strangers the power of making wills and bequests,
and such other privileges, which they seem also to have renounced, by
separating themselves from the community of their Countrymen. Yea, if we
believe the Philosopher they are no longer men being separated from humane
society, as a part separated from the body is no longer a part of it. And the
ingratitude of these wanderers to their own Country is justly punishable, since
they frustrate it of those services which they are obliged by right of their
birth to pay to it: but in requital for the same they have a Proverb against
them, That a rolling stone gathers no moss, they little improve their fortunes.

The Third said, Every Nation produces not every thing; and all climates have
inhabitants excelling in some particulars. Since therefore there is no such
learning as by examples, and travels afford the most, it follows that it is
necessary for an ingenuous man to survey foreign manners, institutions,
customs, laws, religions, and such other things upon which moral prudence is
superstructed. Whence Homer calls his wise Ulysses, the Traveller, and Visiter
of Cities. Moreover, 'twas practiced in all ages not only by our ancient
Nobility under the name of Knights errant, but also by the greatest personages
of antiquity, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Pliny, Hippocrates: and we ow to the
Voyages of Columbus, Vesputius, Magellane, and some others, the discovery of
America, and other new Lands formerly unknown; and abundance of Drugs and
Medicaments, especially Gold and Silver, before so rare; not to mention the
commodities of commerce which cannot be had without Voyages.

The Fourth said, That for seven vagabond errant Stars all the rest of the
firmament are fixed and stable, sending no malignant influence upon the earth
as the Planets do. And the Scripture represents Satan to us as a Traveller,
when he answers God in Job to the question whence he came, I come from going to
and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.

The Fifth said, We must distinguish persons, places, times, and other
circumstances pertaining to voyages. For if you except Embassies, in which the
good of the State drowns all other considerations, those that would travel must
be young and strong, rich, and well born, to get any good by their travels;
otherwise they will be but like sick persons who receive no ease, but rather
inconvenience, by tumbling and stirring; the injudicious and imprudent
returning commonly worse then they went, because they distract their minds here
and there. Of which one troubled with the same disease of traveling, asking
Socrates the reason, he answered him that 'twas because he did not leave
himself behind when he changed place, and that he ought to change his mind and
not the air in order to become wise; it being impossible but he that is a fool
in one Country, can become wise by passing Seas and running from one Province
to another. As for places, it is certain, that before the voyages of Italy, and
some other climates, the disease of Naples and other worse things were not only
not so much as heard; but most contagious diseases have by this means been
transferred into the remotest Countries. So that if ever it were reasonable for
a man to be wise at another's cost, it is in the matter of travels; in which
those that have performed most, commonly bring home no other fruit but a
troublesome talkativeness, wherewith they tire peoples ears, and a sad
remembrance of what they have suffered.

CONFERENCE LXXXVIII.
I. Which is the best sect of Philosophers. II. Whence comes the diversity of
proper names.

I. Which is the best Sect of Philosophers.
ONe of the greatest signs of the defects of the humane mind, is that he seldom
accomplishes his designs, and often mistakes false for true. Hence arises the
incertainty and variety in his judgments. For as there is but one straight
line from one point to another, so if our judgments were certain they would be
always alike, because Truth is one, and conformable to it self; whereas, on the
contrary, Error is always various. This variety is of two sorts, one of the
thing, the other of the way to attain it. For men were no sooner secured from
the injuries of the air, and provided for the most urgent necessities of the
body, but they divided themselves into two bands. Some following outward sense
contented themselves with the present. Others would seek the causes of effects
which they admired, that is to say, Philosophize. But in this inquisition they
became of different judgments; some conceiving the truth already found, others
thinking it could never be found, and others laboring in search of it, who
seem to have most right to the name of Philosophers. The diversity of the way
to arrive to this truth is no less. For according as any one was prone to vice
or virtue, humility or pride (the probable cause of diversity of Sects) he
established one suitable to his own inclination, to judge well of which, a man
must be of no party, or, at least, must love the interest of truth most of all.
But the question is, which is Truth; no doubt that which comes nearest the
Judge's sentiment, and has gained his favor, as Venus did the good will of
Paris. And because the goodness of a thing consists in its sutableness, the
contemplative man will judge Plato's Philosophy better then that of Socrates,
which one delighted with action and the exercise of virtues will prefer before
all others; the indifferent will give the preeminence to that of the
Peripateticks who have conjoined contemplation with action. And yet, speaking
absolutely, it is impossible to resolve which is the best of all. For as we
cannot know which is the greatest of two lines but by comparing them to some
known magnitude; So neither can we judge which is the best Sect of
Philosophers, unless it be agreed wherein the goodness of Philosophy considered
absolutely consists. Now it is hard to know what this goodness is, unless we
will say it is God himself, who as he is the measure of all beings, so he is the
rule of their goodness. So that the best Philosophy will be that which comes
nearest that Supreme Goodness, as Christian Philosophy does, which consists in
the knowledge of one's self and the solid practice of virtues, which also was
that of S. Paul who desired to nothing but Jesus, and him crucified; which he
calls the highest wisdom, although it appear folly in the eyes of men.

The Second said, That the first and ancientest Philosophy is that of the
Hebrews, called Cabala, which they divided into that of Names or Schemot, and
of things called by them Sephiroth. Whose excellency Josephus, against Appion,
proves, because all other Philosophies have had Sects, but this always remained
the same, and would lose its name if it were not transmitted from Father to Son
in its integrity. 'Twas from this Cabala that Pythagoras, and Plato surnamed
Moses Atticus, took their Philosophy, which they brought into Greece; as 'twas
from the Indian Brachmans and Gymnosophists that Pythagoras took his
Metempsychosis and abstinence from women and animals; and learned weights and
measures formerly unknown in Greece. Some of these Indian Philosophers use to
stand upon one foot all day beholding the Sun, and had so great respect for
every thing indu'd with a soul, that they bought birds and other animals, and
if any were sick kept them in hospitals till they were cured, and then set them
free. The Persians likewise had their Magi, the Egyptians their Priests, the
Chaldeans and Babylonians their Astrologers and Soothsayers; the Gauls their
Druyds and Bards. But the Greeks had more plenty and variety then any. Their
ancientest Philosophy was that of Musaeus, Linus, Orpheus, Hesiod, Homer, who
covered the Science of natural and supernatural things under the veil of Poetry
and Fiction, till the time of Pherecydes, the master of Pythagoras, who first
writ the same in Prose. Their Philosophers may be distinguished according to
the diversity of subjects whereof they treat, whence they who amuz'd themselves
about ratiocination were named Logicians, the first of whom was Zeno. They who
contemplated Nature, Naturalists, the first of whom was Thales; they who soared
to supernatural speculations, Metaphysitians, wherein Aristotle excelled; those
who regulated manners, Moralists, of whom Socrates was the principal, who was
the son of a Sculptor and a Midwise. But their principal division is of their
different Sects, which, though in great number, may be reduced to these
following I. The Academick, so called of the place where 'twas taught, so
famous, that all places destinated to instruction in Liberal Sciences retain
the same name at this day. 'Twas divided into three, namely, the old Academy,
whereof Socrates and Plato were authors; the middle, which owed its institution
to Archesilaus, author of the famous Epoche, or suspension of judgment
concerning all things, whom for that reason Tertullian calls Master of
Ignorance; and the new founded by Carneades and Lacides, who held that there is
something true, but 'twas incomprehensible, which was almost the same Sect with
the Scepticks and Pyrrhoneans. II. The Cyrenaick introduced by Aristippus the
Cyrenian, disciple of Socrates, who first took money for teaching others, and
held it as one of his principal maxims, not to refuse any pleasure which
presented it self to him, yet not to seek it. III. The Magarian, established by
Euclides of Magara, which proceeded by interrogations. IV. The Cynick, founded
by Antisthenes, Master to Diogenes, and Menippus. V. The Stoic, whereof Zeno
Cyttiensis, Auditor of Crates the Cynick, was author. VI. The Epicurean, of
Epicurus the Athenian, who conceived that every thing was made by chance, and
that the chief good consisted in pleasure, some say of the body, others of the
mind. VII. The Peripatetick, instituted by Aristotle. 'Twould be endless to
relate the extravagances of all particular persons. But I conceive that of the
Cynicks was the most dishonest; that of the Stoics, most majestical; that of
the Epicureans, most blameable; that of Aristotle, most honorable; that of the
Academicks most safe; that of the Pyrrhoneans or Scepticks the most easy. For
as it is not very creditable; so nothing is easier when any thing is asked of us
then to say that we are uncertain of it, instead of answering with certainty,
or else to say that we know nothing of it; since to know our ignorance of a
thing is not to be wholly ignorant of it.

The Third said, That the Sect of the Scepticks had more followers then any
other, (doubters being incomparably more numerous then Doctors) and is the more
likely to be true. For compare a Gorgias Leontinus, or other Sophister of old
time, or one of the most versed in Philosophy in this age, who glory of knowing
all, and of resolving all questions propounded, with a Pyrrhonean; the first
will torture his wit into a thousand postures, to feigen and persuade to the
hearers what himself knows not, and by distinctions cast dust in their eyes, as
the Cuttle-fish vomits Ink to soil the water when it finds it self caught. On
the contrary, the Sceptick will freely confess the debt, and whether you
convince him or not, will always show that he has reason to doubt.
Nevertheless, though this Sect be the easiest, it is not in every thing the
truest. For as it is temerity and intolerable arrogance to pronounce sentence
confidently upon things which are hid to us, and whereof we have not any
certain knowledge, as the quadrature of the circle, the duplication of the
cube, the perpetual motion, the Philosophers Stone; so it is too gross stupidity
to doubt of the existence of things, to judge whereof we need no other help but
perfect senses; as that it is this day when the Sun shines, that the fire
burns, and that the whole is greater then its parts.

The Fourth said, That Philosophy being the desire of Wisdom, or rather Wisdom
it self, which is nothing else but a store of all the virtues Intellectual and
Moral; that is the perfectest Philophy which renders those addicted to it, most
sure in their knowledge, and inclined to virtue. And because there was never
sect but had some defect, neither in the theory or the practice, the best of
all is not to be any, but to imitate the Be, and gather what is good of each
sort, without espousing it; which was the way of Potamon of Alexandria, who, as
Diogenes Laertius records, founded a Sect called Elective, which allowed every
one to choose what was best in all Philosophies. It Is also the way that
Aristotle held in all his Philosophy, especially, in his Physics and
Politics, which are nothing but a collection of opinions of the Ancients;
amongst whom he has often taken whole pages out of Hippocrates, though he name
him not. Nor are we more obliged to embrace Aristotle's Philosophy then he did
that of his Predecessors; it being free for us to frame one out of his
precepts, those of Raimond Lully, Ramus, and all others.

The Fifth said, That amongst all sects the most excellent, as also the most
severe, is that of the Stoics, whom Seneca ranks as much above other
Philosophers, as men above women. Their manner of discoursing and arguing was
so exquisite, that if the Gods, said one, would reason with men, they would
make use of the Logic of Chrysippus the Stoic. Their Physics treated partly
of bodies, partly of incorporeal Beings, Bodies, according to them, are either
principles or elements, which are ours. Their principles are two, God and
Matter, which are the same with the Unity and Binary of Pythagoras, the fire
and water of Thales. They call God the cause and reason of all things, and say
that he is fire, not the common and elementary, but that which gives all things
their being, life, and motion. And they believed that there is one God
supremely good, bountiful and provident, but that he is single in his essence;
herein following Pythagoras, who said that God is not so much one as Unity it
self. Seneca says, that he is all that thou see, all entire in every part of
the world which he sustaines by his power. Briefly, they conclude their natural
knowledge of God as the sovereign cause, by his Providence, by Destiny, which
he has established in all things, and by the Genii, Heroes and Lares, whom
they constitute Angels and Ministers of this Supreme Providence. The Second
Principle, Matter, they make coeternal to God, grounding their doctrine upon
the Maxim of Democritus, that as nothing can be annihilated, so nothing can be
made of nothing. Which was likewise the error of Aristotle, who is more
intricate then the Stoics, in his explication of the first matter, which he
desines to be almost nothing. True it is, they believed that every thing really
existent was corporeal, and that there were but four things incorporeal, Time,
Place, Vacuum, and the Accident of some thing; whence it follows, that not
only Souls, and God himself, but also the Passions, Virtues, and Vices, are
Bodies; yea Animals, since according to their supposition the mind of man is a
living animal, inasmuch as it is the cause that we are such; but Virtues and
Vices, say they, are nothing else but the mind so disposed. But because
knowledge of sublime things is commonly more pleasant then profitable, and
that, according to them, Philosophy is the Physic of the Soul, they study
chiefly to eradicate their Vices and Passions. Nor do they call any wise but
him that is free from all fear, hope, love, hatred, and such other passions,
which they term the diseases of the Soul. Moreover, 'twas their Maxim, that
Virtue was sufficient to Happiness, that it consisted in things not in words,
that the sage is absolute master not only of his own will, but also of all
men; that the supreme good consisted in living according to nature, and such
other conclusions, to which being modifi'd by faith, I willingly subscribe,
although Paradoxes to the vulgar.

II. Whence comes the diversity of proper names.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That a name is an artificial voice
representing a thing by humane institution, who being unable to conceive all
things at once, distinguish the same by their differences either specifical or
individual; the former by appellative names, and the other by proper, as those
of Cities, Rivers, Mountains, and particularly those of men, who also give the
like to Horses, Dogs, and other domestic creatures. Now since conceptions of
the Mind, which represent things, have affinity with them, and words with
conceptions, it follows that words have also affinity with things, by the
Maxim of Agreement in the same third. Therefore, the wise, to whom alone it
belongs to assign names, have made them most conformable to the nature of
things. For example, when we pronounce the word Nous, we make an attraction
inwards. On the contrary, in pronouncing Vous, we make an expulsion outward.
The same holds in the voices of Animals, and those arising from the sounds of
inanimate things. But it is particularly observed, that proper names have been
tokens of good or bad success arriving to the bearers of them, whence arose the
reasoning of the Nominal Philosophers, and the Art of Divination, by names
called Onomatomancy; and whence Socrates advises Fathers to give their Children
good names, whereby they may be excited to Virtue; and the Athenians forbad
their slaves to take the names of Harmodius and Aristogiton, whom they had in
reverence. Lawyers enjoin heed to be taken to the name of the accused, in whom
it is capital to disguise it; and Catholics affect those of the Law of Grace,
as Sectaries do those of the old Law, the originals whereof were taken from
circumstances of the Body; as from its color the Romans took those of Albus,
Niger, Nigidius, Fulvius, Ruffus, Flavius; we, those of white, black, gray,
red-man, etc. from its habit, Crassus, Macer, Macrinus, Longus, Longinus,
Curtius; we, le Gros, long, tall, etc, From its other accidents, the Latins
took Caesar, Claudius, Cocles, Varus, Naso; we, le Gouteux, (gowty,) le Camus,
(flat-nos'd,) from Virtues or Vices, Tranquillus, Severus; we, hardy, bold,
sharp; from Profession, Parson, Sergeant, Marshal, and infinite others. But
chiefly, the names of places have been much affected even to this day, even
since the taking of the name of the family for a surname. And if we cannot find
the reason of all names and sirnames, it is because of the confusion of
languages, and alteration happening therein upon frequent occasions.

The Fourth said, That the cause of names is casual, at least in most things,
as appears by equivocal words, and the common observation of worthless persons,
bearing the most glorious names; as amongst us, a family whose males are the
tallest in France, bears the name of Petit. Nor can there be any affinity
between a thing and a word, either pronounced or written; and the Rabbis
endeavor to find in Hebrew names, (which, if any, must be capable of this
correspondence, in regard of Adam's great knowledge, who imposed them) is no
less an extravagance then that of matters of Anagrams. In brief, if Nero
signified an execrable Tyrant, why was he so good an Emperor the first five
years? And of that name import any token of a good Prince, why was he so
execrable in all the rest of his life?

CONFERENCE LXXXIX.
I. Of Genii. II. Whether the Suicide of the Pagans be justifiable.

I. Of Genii.
PLato held three sorts of reasonable natures; the Gods in Heaven, Men on
Earth, and a third middle nature between those two, whose mansion is from the
sphere of the Moon to the Earth; he calls them Genii, from their being the
causes of Generations here below, and Demons from their great knowledge. These
Genii, whom his followers accounted to be subtle bodies, and the instruments
of Divine Providence, are, according to them, of three sorts, Igneous, Aereous,
and Aqueous; the first excite to contemplation, the second to action, the third
to pleasure. And 'twas the belief of all Antiquity, that every person had two
Genii; one good, which excited to honesty and virtue, (as the good Genius of
Socrates) whom they reckoned in order of the Igneous; and the other bad, who
incited to evil, such as that was which appeard to Brutus, and told him he
should see him at Philippi. Yet none can perceive the assistance of their
Genius, but only such whose Souls are calm and free from passions and
perturbations of life. Whence Avicenna says, that only Prophets and other
holy Personages have found their aid, in reference to the knowledge of future
things, and government of life. For my part, I think these Genii are nothing
else but our reasonable souls, whose intellectual and superior part, which
inclines us to honest good, and to virtue, is the good Genius; and the
sensitive inferior part which aims only to sensible and delightful good, is
the evil genius which incessantly sollicites us to evil. Or if the Genii be any
thing without us, they are no other then our good and evil Angels, constituted,
the former to guard us, the second to make us stand upon our guard. Moreover,
'twas expedient that since inferior bodies receive their motion from the
superior, so spiritual substances inherent in bodies should be assisted in
their operations by superior spirits free from matter; as it is an ordinary
thing in Nature for the more perfect to give law to such as are less in the
same kind. And not only men, but also all other parts of the world, have
Angels deputed to their conservation; tutelary Angels being nothing but the
organs of Divine Providence, which embraces all things.

The Second said, That the Genii produce in us those effects whereof we know
not the cause; every one finding motions in himself to good or evil, proceeding
from some external power; yea, otherwise then he had resolved. Simonides was no
sooner gone out of a house but it fell upon all the company; and it is said,
that as Socrates was going in the fields he caused his friends who were gone
before him to be recalled, saying, that his familiar spirit forbad him to go
that way; which those that would not listen to were all mired, and some torn
and hurt by a herd of swine. Two persons, formerly unknown, love at the first
sight; allies, not knowing one another, oftimes feel themselves seized with
unusual joy; one man is always unfortunate, to another every thing succeeds
well; which cannot proceed but from the favor or opposition of some Genii.
Hence also some Genii are of greater power then others, and give men such
authority over other men that they are respected and feared by them. Such was
the Genius of Augustus, in comparison of Mark Antonie, and that of J. Caesar
against Pompey. But though nothing is more common then the word Genius, yet
it is not easy to understand the true meaning of it. Plato says, it is the
guardian of our lives. Epictetus, the over-seer and sentinel of the Soul. The
Greeks call it the Mystagogue, or imitator of life, which is our guardian
Angel. The Stoics made two sorts; one singular, the Soul of every one; the
other universal, the Soul of the world. Varro, as Saint Augustine reports, in
his eighth book of the City of God, having divided the immortal Souls which are
in the Air, and mortal which are in the Water and Earth, says, that between
the Moon and the middle region of the Air, there are aerious Souls called
Heroes, Lares, and Genii, of which an Ancient said, it is as full as the Air is
full of flies in Summer; as Pythagoras said, that the Air is full of Souls,
which is not dissonant from the Catholic Faith, which holds, that Spirits are
infinitely more numerous then corporeal substances; because as celestial bodies
are incomparably more excellent and ample then sublunary, so pure Spirits,
being the noblest works of God, ought to be in greater number then other
creatures. What the Poets say of the Genius which they feign to be the Son of
Jupiter and the earth, representing him sometimes in the figure of a serpent
(as Virgil does that which appeared to Aenaeas,) sometimes of a horn of plenty,
which was principally the representation of the Genius of the Prince, by which
his flatterers used to swear, and their sacrificing Wine and Flowers to him, is
as mysterious as all the rest.

The Third said, That the Genius is nothing but the temperament of every thing,
which consists in a certain harmonious mixture of the four qualities, and being
never altogether alike, but more perfect in some then in others, is the cause
of the diversity of actions. The Genius of a place is its temperature, which
being seconded with celestial influences, called by some the superior Genii, is
the cause of all productions herein. Prepensed crimes proceed from the
melancholy humor; the Genius of anger and murders is the bilious humor; that
of idleness, and the vices it draws after it, is phlegm; and the Genius of
love is the sanguine humor. Whence to follow one's Genius is to follow one's
natural inclinations, either to good or to evil.

II. Whether the Suicide of the Pagans be justifiable.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That evil appears such only by comparison,
and he that sees himself threatened with greater evils then that of death, ought
not only to attend it without fear, but seek it as the only sovereign
medicine of a desperate malady. What then, if death be nothing, as the Pagans
believed, and leave nothing after it. For we must distinguish Paganism, and
Man considered in his pure state of nature, from Christianity and the state of
Grace. In the former, I think Diogenes had reason, when meeting Speusippus
languishing with an incurable disease who gave him the good day, he answered, I
wish not you the like, since thou suffer an evil from which thou may
deliver thy self; as accordingly he did when he returned home. For all that
they feared in their Religion after death, was, Not-Being what their Fasti
taught them of the state of souls in the other life being so little believed
that they reckoned it amongst the Fables of the Poets. Or if they thought they
left any thing behind them, 'twas only their renown, of which a courageous man
that killed himself had more hope then the soft and effeminate. The same is
still the custom of those great Sea Captains, who blow themselves up with
Gunpowder to avoid falling into the enemies hands. Yet there is none but more
esteems their resolution, then the demeanor of cowards who yield at mercy. This
is the sole means of making great Captains and good Soldiers by their example,
to teach them not to fear death, not to hold it, with poltron Philosophers, the
most terrible of terribles. And to judge well of both, compare we the
abjectness of a Perseus, a slave led in triumph, with the generosity of a
Brutus, or a Cato Vticensis. For 'twere more generous to endure patiently the
incommodities of the body, the injuries of an enemy, and the infamy of death,
if man had a spirit proof against the strokes of fortune. But he though he may
ward himself with his courage, yet he can never surmount all sort of evils; and
according to the opinion of the same Philosopher, all fear is not to be
rejected. Some evils are so vehement that they cannot be disposed without
stupidity, as torments of the body, fire, the wheel, the loss of honor, and
the like, which it is oftentimes better to abandon then vainly to strive to
overcome them. Wherefore, as it is weakness to have recourse to death for any
pain whatsoever, so 'twas an ignominious cowardice amongst the Pagans to live
only for grief.

The Second said, That nature having given all individuals a particular
instinct for self-preservation, their design is unnatural who commit homicide
upon themselves. And if civil intestine wars are worse then foreign, then the
most dangerous of all is that which we make to our selves. Wherefore the
ancients, who would have this brutality pass for a virtue, were ridiculous,
because acknowledging the tenure of their lives from some Deity, 'twas temerity
in them to believe they could dispose thereof to any then the donor, and before
he demanded it. In which they were as culpable as a Soldier that should quit
his rank without his Captain's leave, or depart from his station where he was
placed Sentinel. And did not virtue, which is a habit, require many reiterated
acts, which cannot be found in Suicide, since we have but one life to lose; yet
this action could not pass for a virtue, since Fortitude appears principally in
sufferings and miseries; which to avoid by death is rather cowardice and
madness then true courage. Wherefore the Poet justly blames Ajax, for that,
after he had overcome Hector, despised fire and flames, yet he could not subdue
his own choler, to which he sacrificed himself. And Lucretia much blemished the
luster of her chastity by her own murder; for if she was not consenting to
Tarquin's crime, why did she pollute her hands with the blood of an innocent,
and for the fault which another had committed; punishments as well as offenses
being personal. He who kills himself only through weariness of living is
ungrateful for the benefits of nature, of which life is the chief: if he be a
good man, he wrongs his Country by depriving it of one, and of the services
which he owes to it; as he wrongs Justice, if he be a wicked person that has
committed some crime, making himself his own witness, Judge, and Executioner.
Therefore the Prince of Poets places those in hell who killed themselves, and
all Laws have established punishments against them, depriving them of
sepulture, because, says Egesippus, he that goes out of the world without his
father's leave deserves not to be received into the bosom of his mother, the
earth. I conclude therefore, that the ignorant dreads death, the timorous fears
it, the fool procures it to himself, and the mad man executes it, but the wise
attends it.

The Third said, That the generous resolution of those great men of antiquity
ought rather to have the approbation then the scorn of a reasonable mind; and
it is proper to low spirits to censure the examples which they cannot imitate.
It Is not meet, because we are soft, to blame the courage of a Cato, who as he
was tearing his own bowels could not forbear laughing even while his soul was
upon his lips, for joy of his approaching deliverance; nor the constancy of a
Socrates, who to show with what contentedness he received death, conversed with
it, and digested what others call its bitterness, without any trouble, the
space of forty days. Sextius and Cleanthes the Philosopher followed almost the
same course. Only they had the more honor, for that their deaths were purely
voluntary. For the will forced by an extrinsecal cause, performs nothing above
the vulgar who can obey the laws of necessity: but when nothing forces us to
dye but our selves, and we have good cause for it, this death is the most
gallant and glorious. Nor is it injust, as is pretended, any more then the Laws
which suffer a man to cut off his leg for avoiding a Gangrene. Why should not
the Jugular Vein be as well at our choice as the Median? For as I transgress
not the Laws against Thieves when I cut my own Purse, nor those against
Incendiaries when I burn my own wood; so neither am I within the Laws made
against murderers, by depriving my self of life: it is my own good which I
abandon, the thread which I cut is my own. And what is said, that we are more
the publick's then our own, has no ground but in our pride, which makes us
take our selves for such necessary pieces of the world as not to be dismembered
from it without a noble loss to that great body. Besides, were we so useful to
the world, yet our own turn must be first served. Let us live then, first for
our selves, if it be expedient; next, for others: but when life becomes worse
then death, let us quit it as we do an inconvenient or unbecoming garment. Is
it not a sign of generosity to make Gouts, Stones, Aches and all other Plagues
of life yield to the stroke of a victorious hand, which alone blow puts an end
to more maladies then all the simples of Galen, and the Antidotes of Avicenna.

The Fourth said, He could not approve the determination of the Stoics, who
say that vulgar souls live as long as they can; those of the wise, as long as
it is fit, departing out of life as we do from the table, or from play when we
are weary. That the examples of Priseia who accompanied her husband in death;
of Piso, who died to save his children; of Sextus's daughter who killed her
self for her father; of Zeno who did as much, to avoid the incommodities of old
age (which made it pass for piety at Rome, a long time, to cast decrepit old
men headlong from a Bridge into Tiber) are as culpable as he who surrenders a
place when he is able to defend it. For whereas Plato exempts such from the
punishment against sui-cides who committed it to avoid infamy or intolerable
necessity; and what Pliny says, that nature has for this end produced so many
poisonous Plants for five or six sorts of Corn, that there is but one way to
enter into the world, but infinite to go out of it; the imputing it to
stupidity not to go out of a prison when one has the key, adding that it is
lawful to execute that which it is lawful to desire, as S. Paul did his own
death; yea the example which is alleged of Sampson, of Razias, and of eleven
thousand Virgins who precipitated themselves into the sea to save their
chastity; in the Church are effects of a particular inspiration, not to be
drawn into consequence, and out of it examples of rage and despair disguised
with the mask of true fortitude and magnanimity, which consists chiefly in
supporting evils, as the presidents of so many religious souls attest to us.

CONFERENCE XC.
I. Of Hunting. II. Which is to be preferred, the weeping of Heraclitus, or the
laughing of Democritus.

I. Of Hunting.
IF the least of goods has its attractions, it is no wonder if Hunting (wherein
are comprehended the three sorts of good, honest, profitable, and delightful)
have a great interest in our affection; being undoubtely preferrable before any
other exercise either of body or mind. For Play, Women, Wine, and all the
pleasure which Luxury can fancy in superfluity of Clothes, Pictures, Flowers,
Medals, and such other passions, not unfitly named diseases of the soul, are
divertisements either so shameful, or so weak, that they cannot enter into
comparison with hunting, so honest that it has been always the recreation of
great persons, whose martial courage used to be judged of by their inclination
to this sport, which Xenophon calls the apprentisage of War, and recommends so
much to Cyrus in his Institution, as Julius Pollux does to the Emperor
Commodus. Its profitableness is chiefly discerned in that it renders the body
dextrous and active, preserves health, and by inuring it to labor makes a firm
constitution, hindering it from being delicate, consumes the superfluous
humors, the seeds of most diseases. Lastly, the pleasure of Hunting must needs
be great, since it makes the Hunters think light of all their pains and
incommodities. The mind has its pleasure in it by hope of the prey in such as
hunt for profit, and by the contentment of possessing what they sought: besides
the consideration of the subtilty of the Fox and Wolf, the trouble which the
Hare gives her displeased pursuers.

The Second said, It Is the only pleasure which does wrong to no person, but
delivers Countries from the injuries and depredations of beasts. And though
it is the most laborious of all pleasures, yet it is least followed by
repentance, and instead of wearying those that are once addicted to it, makes
them love it in excess, for which reason it is prohibited to the meaner sort of
people. All the Heroes are represented under the form of Hunters; as Perseus
who first hunted the wild Goat; Castor who taught the management of the horse,
before wild, to chase the Stag; Pollux who first traced beasts with
Lime-hounds; Meleager who invented the Spears to assault the Boar; Hyppolytus,
Toils, Hayes, and Nets; Orion, Kennels and Leashes; which were so admired in
his age, that the Poets translated him into Heaven, where he makes a glorious
sign, as they put Castor and Pollux among the Gods, and feigned a Diana the
Goddess of Hunters. Moreover, the holy Scripture gives Nimrod, the first King
in the world, no greater title then that of Mighty Hunter. And the good man
Isaac would not give his blessing to his son Esau, till after he had brought
him of his Venison.

The Third said, That Man being since the loss of his dominion over the beasts,
by his sin, obliged to defend himself against their invasion, this gave rise to
hunting, which is consequently as ancient as the world. There are three sorts
of it, according to the three sorts of animals which it pursues, in the air, on
the earth, and in the waters; namely, Hawking, Hunting properly so called, and
Fishing. Hawking is the pursuit of Birds by Birds, and its of diverse kinds
according to the diversity of Hawks and quarries. Hunting is the chase of
four-footed beasts, which are either great, as Lions, Bears, Stags, Boars; or
small, as Wolves, Foxes, Badgers and Hares. Both the one and the other is
performed by Dogs, of which there are good of all sizes and colors, and some
peculiar to one sort of Game. Fishing is the venation of Fishes, whereof Plato
makes two kinds; one by the Line, and the other by Nets, the more recommendable
in that 'twas practiced by the Apostles, and our Lord himself, who was figured
by the first Christians under the Hieroglyphics of a Fish, with the Greek word
(...), which they explicated thus by the first Letters of that Language, Jesus
Christ, God, our Savior.

The Fourth said, That Hunting being as various as men's conditions, its
variety makes it as agreeable as necessary; gunning, which is the least,
instructs the Soldier to shoot exactly, to be patient, and fits him for war,
especially the hunting of the Badger, who makes head in his entries, then
fights from trench to trench; and at length retreats to his last fort, where he
practices all the sleights of war usual in besieged Cities, till he be taken by
the undermining of the Pioneers. For Pythagoras his prohibition to kill
animals, is no less light then his Metempsychosis; or his reason to forbear
fishing, or eating of fish, out of respect to their silence. The objection,
that God permitted our first Parents to eat the fruits of the earth, not the
flesh of animals, and that during two thousand years none was eaten, concludes
nothing from a Negative Authority; and Abel spared not the life of the Lamb of
his flock, which he offered to God, then God had done that of the beasts, of
whose skins he made Coats for Adam and Eve. And God's prohibition to the Jews
to eat any thing taken by a beast, as Dogs or Birds, being abolished together
with other ceremonies. Moreover, all animals being made for man, they have no
reason to complain, if they be applied to that end, but especially the hunting
of mischievous beasts is profitable.

II. Which is to be preferred, the weeping of Heraclitus, or the laughing of
Democritus.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That in this Question, to justify weeping,
we have the example of our Lord, whom we read not ever to have been seen
laughing, not even at the marriage feast whereat he was present; but he
lamented the death of Lazarus, though he knew that himself was going to raise
him up again. And he compares the entrance into Paradise to the gate of a
Judge, which a good woman cannot get open, nor move the Judge to do her
justice, but by many complaints and tears: and he pronounces the house of
mourning blessed, saying, that GOD abides there: on the contrary, laughter and
rejoicing not only were the forerunners of the Deluge, but at present occasion
a thousand offenses against God, our Neighbor, and our Selves. Moreover, all
the Exhortations and Sermons of Preachers tend only to move tears of
contrition; and some observe, in the trial of Witches and Conjurers, that they
never weep, which is a certain argument of an ill nature, especially in women
and children. And Dido, speaking of the ungrateful Aeneas, more resents his not
weeping when he bid her adieu, then all the rest. For we are naturally inclined
to weeping, as being the most humid of all animals; and nature seems to have
made the brain only for the eyes, which being always moist have also a glandule
in the greater corner, called (from its office) Lachrymalis, which is a spungy
flesh full of little holes, serving to attract the moisture of the brain which
furnishes the matter of tears, and disperses it drop by drop, lest falling too
much together, the brain should be left dry, which is a temper contrary to its
natural one. Now as for objects without us, it is evident there is more cause of
weeping then of laughter. For if we look under our feet, there the ground
presents it self, which sooner then every one hopes is to bury every on's
ambition, and afford him but six foot of earth; if on each side of us, there
appear so many miseries, that the Spaniards, who are accustomed thereunto, say
proverbially that they who are afflicted with the miseries of others bear the
whole world upon their shoulders. If upwards, what a cause of sadness is it to
see that so great and vast a Kingdom is at this day in less esteem then the
meanest part of this valley of tears, the earth, and to see God dishonored so
many ways. Come we down to our selves; the infirmities of the body, the
afflictions of the mind, all the passions of the soul and the crosses of
fortune, have made those that have most tasted the pleasures of this life,
acknowledge that it is nothing but thorns and miseries, and with the wise man,
nothing but vanity: of which not to speak a word, were to be insensible; to
laugh, impiety; and to imitate Aesop's Snails who laughed at their cost. It
remains, therefore, that it is wisdom to bewail them.

The Second said, There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, as the Wiseman
testifies; so that to do either continually is equally vicious: Yet laughter
being most suitable to man who is defined by the faculty he has to laugh, and
not by that of weeping, which is common to Hearts and Crocodiles, who shed true
tears, and other beasts weep after their manner, but none laughs: I conceive
that the laughter of Democritus was less blameable then the weeping of
Heraclitus; whose tears rendered him odious and iusupportable to all the world,
which, on the contrary, is greatly pleased with the company of laughers, and
easily side with them. Moreover, their Jovial and sanguine humor is always to
be preferred before the Saturnine and melancholy humor of weepers, who are
their own greatest enemies, exhausting their moisture, and by concentration of
the spirits hindering the free functions of reason. Whereas laughter which is a
sign of joy and contentment dilates the spirits, and causes all the actions of
life to be performed better. And the laughter of Democritus exciting the like
motion of joy in the spectators; their joy dilated their spirits, and rendered
them more docible and capable to receive his counsels.

The Third said, That as a Physician were no less impertinent in laughing at
his Patient, then imprudent in weeping for the malady which he sees him endure:
So Democritus and Heraclitus were as ridiculous, the one as the other, in
laughing at, or lamenting the misery of men. Moreover, it seems to be a sign of
repentance, that he put out his own eyes, and not to Philosophize the better:
otherwise he should have done as one that cut off his own legs that he might
leap the better; since the eyes are the windows of the soul, whereby it admits
almost all its informations. Heraclitus therefore was more excusable; because
tears proceed from charity and compassion, but laughter is an effect of
contempt, and procures us as much hatred as the other does affection. Besides,
Democritus's laughter could neither make others better, nor himself; for what
profit can be made by the ironies and gibes of a mocker. On the contrary, tears
are so persuasive, that Augustus, as subtle as he was, suffered himself to be
deceived by those of Cleopatra, and believed her willing to live when she had
resolved to dye.

The Fourth said, That both of them had reason, considering the vanity of the
things of the world, which are equally ridiculous and deplorable. For though
laughter and weeping seem contraries, yet they may proceed from the same cause.
Some Nations have wept at the birth of their children, whereas we make
exultations. Many have laughed at Alexander who wept because he had no more
worlds to conquer. Xerxes wept when he beheld his goodly Army, of which not one
person was to be left after a hundred years, whilst a Philosopher of his train
laughed at it. And in both passions there is a retraction of the nerves; whence
the features of the countenance of one that laughs are like those of him that
weeps. Moreover, the three subjects which may oblige men to laughter, namely,
the crosses of furtune, and what they call Virtue and Science, afford equal
matter of laughing and weeping. When fortune casts down such as she had
advanced to the top of her wheel, are not they as worthy of commiseration as of
derision, for having trusted to her inconstancy? When our Gentry cut one
another's throats for an ambiguous word, lest they should seem cowards, are
they not as deplorable as ridiculous, in taking the shadow of virtue for it
self? And as for Science, should these two Philosophers come from the dead, and
behold our youth spend ten years in learning to speak, and all our Philosophy
reduced to a bundle of obscure distinctions, would not they dye once more with
equal reason, the one with weeping, and the other with laughing?

CONFERENCE XCI.
I. Whether heat or cold be more tolerable. II. Who are most happy in this
World, Wise Men or Fools.

I. Whether heat or cold be more tolerable.
COmparison moves us more then any other thing. And though no sense be less
fallacious then the Touch, yet it is guided by comparison as well as the rest.
Thus Caves seem cold in the Summer, because we come out of the hot air; and hot
in Winter, because the same air which we forsake is cold, the Cave remaining
always in the same temper, without recurring to those Antiperistases which have
no foundation in the thing; the organs of the Touch being the sole competent
judges of the several degrees of tangible qualities; the first of which are
heat and cold, provided those Organs be neither too obtuse, as in the
Paralytical, nor too exquisite as when the nerve lies naked. It Is requisite
also that the man who judges be in health, for he that has an Ague thinks
nothing too cold in his hot fit, and nothing too hot or so much as temperate
during the cold fit; so the phlegmatic and melancholy bear heat better then
cold, the bilious and sanguine the latter better then the former, as correcting
the excess of their own temper. Now at first sight heat seems more supportable,
because more congruous to life, which consists in heat (by which Galen defines
the soul) as death in its contrary, cold. Moreover nature has made the hot
Climates more large and capacious then the cold, which are two very straight
ones, although she has supplied those Regions with the remedy of Furs: all the
rest of the world is either hot or temperate, and always more hot then cold.
Nevertheless, I conclude for cold, because heat joined to our heat renders it
excessive, whereas cold being encountered by it, there results a temperate
third. Besides, the opposition of cold redoubles the natural heat; whence we
have greater appetite in Winter then in Summer, sleep longer, and perform all
natural functions better, and are more cheerful in mind: whereas in Summer our
bodies and minds are languid, and less capable of labor; and it is more
dangerous, in reference to health, to cool our selves in Summer then to heat
our selves in in Winter; the first occasioning, the latter preventing most
diseases.

The Second said, That cold being an enemy to nature, it excess must be more
hurtful, and consequently more insupportable then that of heat, particularly
that of the Sun. For this grand Luminary, the soul of the Universe, and whose
heat is the cause of all generations, must also be that of their preservation
not of their destruction. Whence the excess of his heat is much more tolerable
then that of cold. Moreover, hot Countries are more fertile, and the Scripture
teaches us that the first Colonies came from the South: Yea, some Doctors place
the Terrestrial Paradise under the Aequinoctial: whence it follows that hot
Regions having been first inhabited, have also been most habitable: even the
Torrid Zone, thought unhabitable by all antiquity, experience has found very
populous; whereas the cold are but very little habitable, and not at all,
beyond the 78 degree.

The Third said, That the heat which preserves our lives is natural, gentle,
and agreeable, not extraneous, as that meant in the question is. Therefore
external cold must be compared with heat, likewise external and extraneous, not
with the vital heat, which is of a more sublime order then these elementary
qualities. Now it is certain external heat is more powerful and active then
external cold, since it consumes and dissolves Metals, which cold cannot, and
is more hurtful because it dries up humidity which is the foundation of life.
It Is also less tolerable; for we can bear the touch of the coldest body in the
world, namely Ice, yea eat it without harm; but none could ever resist flames.
Whence fire is the cruellest of punishments, not cold, from which, besides, we
may more easily defend our selves then from excessive heat, which may be abated
a little by winds, shadows, or other artifices, but not wholly, as cold is by
help of fire, clothes, and motion.

The Fourth said, If it be true which Cardan says, that cold is nothing but a
privation of heat, Nature, which dreads nothing so much as nonentity, must
abhor it most; nor can it be any way active, since that which exists not cannot
act. But I will suppose, as it is most probable, that both the one and the other
are positive entities, since cold enters into the composition of bodies as well
as heat, the bones, membranes, skin, nerves, and all but the fleshy parts,
being cold, as also the brain, the noblest part of man. And I conceive that
heat and cold, considered either as internal principles of a living body, or as
two external agents, enemies of life, cold is always more hurtful then heat. On
the one side hot distempers alter the functions, but cold abolish them,
depriving us of sense, motion and life, as in the Lethargy, Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, and other cold diseases. And on the other, external heat indeed
draws forth part of our spirits, and thereby weakens us, whence come faintings
after too hot a bath, or too great a fire: but it never wholly quenches and
destroys them; as the light of the Sun drowns that of a Candle at noon, but
does not extinguish it.

The Fifth said, Because, as Hippocrates says, in his Aphorisms, some natures
are best in Winter, others in Summer; as old men are not much inconvenienc'd by
the most vehement heats, whereas cold kills them; on the contrary, young people
of hot tempers endure heat more impatiently then cold; and there is no
temperament ad pondus or exact; Reason must be called to the aid of our senses,
not only to judge of moist and dry, as Galen thinks, but also of hot and cold:
which being absolutely considered in their own nature, without respect to us, I
conceive heat much more active then cold, and consequently, less supportable:
because the more a thing has of form, and less of matter, it is the more
active; the one of these principles being purely active, and the cause of all
natural actions, the other simply passive. Thus the earth and water are dull
and heavy elements, in comparison of the air and fire, which are less dense and
material: Heaven, the universal cause of all sublunary things, is a form
without matter, as Averroes affirms. Now heat rarifies and dilates its subject,
and seems to make it more spiritual, and so is more active then cold, which
condenses and stops all the pores and passages. Which also appears, in that the
hottest diseases are the most acute; and if cold diseases kill sometimes, they
charm and dull the senses, and so render death more gentle and supportable. On
the contrary, the cruellest deaths, great pains, and the most violent diseases,
are ordinarily caused by some hot humor. Hence it is that no person dies
without a Fever; and Hippocrates affirms that the same heat which generates us
kills us. In fine, God, who is the prime Reason, has judged heat more active,
and less supportable then cold, since he appoints fire to torment the devils
and damned souls.

II. Who are most happy in this world, Wise Men or Fools.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, As there is but one right line, and infinite
crooked, so there is but one wisdom, and one way to attain it, namely, to
follow right reason; but follies are of all sorts, and of as many fashions as
there are different minds which conceive things under diverse apparences of
goodness. So that the number of fools being greater then that of wise, men,
these will always lose their cause. Moreover, if happiness be well defined by
contentment, who is there but accounts fools more happy then the wise? Witness
he, who otherwise intelligent enough, was a fool in this only point, that he
would diligently repair alone to the Theater, and fancy that he saw and heard
the Actors, and applauded them, although no body was there besides himself: but
being cured of his folly, he complained of his friends in stead of thanking
them, for having been too careful to render him miserable, being a happy man
before. Besides, folly has this privilege, that we bear with that truth from
the mouth of a fool which would be odious in another: and the tribe of fools is
indeed exceeding great, since we are born such; for a child is agreeable upon
no other account but its simplicity, which is nothing else but folly; by which
many faults are excusable in youth, which are not to be endured in other ages.
And those whom we account happiest, and that dye of old age, end thus; and are
therefore called twice children; and folly serves to take away the sense of all
the discontents and incommodities of old age. Yea he that more nearly considers
the course of our life will find more of folly in it then of wisdom. For if
self-conceit, play, love, and the other passions, be so many follies, who is
free from it?

The Second said, That wise men alone are happy, is justly accounted a Stoical
Paradox, since it is contrary to true natural sentiments, which show us that the
happiness of this life consists only in two points, namely, in the privation of
grief, and the possession of good. As for the first, not to speak of bodily
pains, from which the wise are no more exempt then fools, the strongest minds
are more intelligent by their more vigorous reasoning, and (consequently) more
susceptible of inward grief and affliction, of hope, fear, desire, and as other
passions; besides that they are ordinary of a melancholy temper, and more fixed
upon their objects then fools, who are more inconstant: to say nothing of the
scruples of conscience, which many times rack their spirits, of the points of
honor, of civilities, nor of the knotty questions in the Sciences. As for the
latter, the possession of good, fools have a better share then the wise,
because there is no absolute, but only relative, good in this world; whence
proceeded the many different opinions touching the chief good, and the saying,
that none is truly happy unless he thinks himself so. And therefore there are
more fools then wise happy. For the latter discerning the meaness and vanity of
the goods of the world, account it no happiness to possess them, but strain
their wits to find others more solid, which they will never find in this world:
whereas the former live contented and happy in the quiet enjoyment of their
present goods, beyond which they wish no others. Moreover, our happiness and
contentment depends upon our selves, that is, upon our own imagination, as
appears in the Hospitals of fools, who are so far from resenting the horror and
misery wherein they really are, that, on the contrary, they flatter themselves
with their agreeable phancies of being Kings, Emperors, and very gods; from
which they take more pleasure then they give to others. As also in that
Athenian, who imagining all the ships in the Piraean Haven to be his, rejoiced
for their return, and su'd his friends at Law for curing him of this agreeable
folly. In fine, according to the mere sentiments of nature, the people of the
world addicting themselves to all sorts of pleasures, are more happy then those
who deny the same to themselves, in obedience to the counsels of the Gospel;
and yet in the judgment of God, who is the rule of true wisdom, these are
wise, and the other fools. Lastly, the Law is favorable to fools in the
perpetration of great crimes, their defect of will being their security. For
which reason we call them Innocents.

The Third said, This Question is the harder to be determined, because there is
no judge but is a party. But if we refer our selves to the wise, as it belongs
to them to determine things, they will judge it to their own advantage. And
indeed, to place felicity of the mind in the total alienation of the mind, or
in the several degrees of the same, is no less preposterous then to place the
pleasure of the body in pain or diseases. For man's felicity or chief good
consists not in opinion; otherwise it were not true, but only imaginary, and so
man alone, amongst all the creatures, could not be truly happy. But this
beatitude of man consists in his end; this end is his action; the action of
man, as man, is that which renders him like to God by contemplation and virtue,
the two most perfect operations of the understanding and the will, proceeding
from principles to conclusions in the theory, and from the means to the end in
the practice of moral virtues, which are not without prudence and reason,
because they consist in mediocrity, which cannot be understood but by the
comparison of the two extremes; which is an action of the understanding. Since
therefore folly is a Laesion of the rational faculty, whether this Reason be
abolished, depraved or diminished (which are the several degrees of folly)
fools cannot be happy, because they cannot live according to right reason: in
which the essence of this life's felicity consists. As they are exempt from
vices, so they are incapable of virtues. And if it be true, that no man is
happy but he that is contented, and that contentment consists in the
satisfaction we have in the enjoyment of some good, which gives us rest; fools
cannot be happy, since satisfaction of mind proceeds from its reflection upon
the excellence or goodness of the thing which we possess. Now reflection is a
most perfect act of the Intellect, which returns upon its objects and it self.
So that what Civilians say of slaves, that they cannot be happy in this world,
because they are not their own, nor counted for any thing, but reputed in the
number of the dead; the same may with much more reason be affirmed of fools.

CONFERENCE XCII.
I. Which is most healthful, moisture or dryness. II. Which is to be preferred,
the contemplative life, or the active.

I. Which is most healthful, moisture or dryness.
THe Philosopher Thales had reason in affirming water to be the principle of
all things; whether he had learned out of the books of Moses, that in the
beginning the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, and so the water
appeared first of the Elements; or else had observed in nature that no
sublunary forms can subsist without moisture, which Chemistry teaches us to
extract out of the most acid bodies, which neither can subsist without humidity
tying and uniting their parts, otherwise likely to fall into dust; as it also
serves to all generations, those of Plants and Animals beginning always by
humidity, which is the cause why the Sea is more fruitful in Fish (which
likewise are more sound) then the earth in its Animals, of less bulk then the
Marine. For humidity is the food of their natural heat; it also causes Leaves,
Flowers and Fruits, to grow forth in Plants upon the earth, and in the entrals
thereof it forms Minerals; the noblest of which are the most ductile and
fusible, which is a sign of their abundant humidity, as the dryest and most
earthy are the worst. The dews of Heaven fertilize the earth, whence God
threatens his people to give them a heaven of brass, and an earth of iron; and
when he promises great blessings, he says, he will give dew in abundance,
which also was the blessing which Isaac gave his son Esau. The inundation of
Nilus fattens the possessions of Egypt. The Spring, the most healthful and
agreeable of all Seasons, is moist; Autumn, on the contrary, is the producer of
diseases, by reason of its dryness. Pearls are generated in the humidity of
the Sea, wherein also Venus was born. Moisture is also the cause of plumpness
and beauty, which is never found in a lean face and a dry body; and it has so
great an influence in our nature, that we call a good one a good or pleasing
humor. The Moon governs all things by moisture upon which she has a
particular influence; and the Planets are more benign in moist Signs then in
dry, amongst which that of Virgo spoils the earth of all its beauties; and of
the Planets Mars and Saturn are the destroyers of nature by their dryness. In
sine, Humidity renders the Seasons, Winds, Places, Ages more agreeable, and
Women more beautiful then Men. As Children, who abound in humidity, are more
agreeable then dry old men. And there is no person but had rather live in a
climate tempered with humidity, as between 40 and 50 degrees, then in the sands
and deserts of Libia, more proper for the generation of Monsters then the
habitation of men.

The Second said, Although dry weather, being the fairest and pleasantest, has
more patrons then moist, yet it is more unhealthy. The temperate Zones are
pluvious; and that Autumn which is commonly rainey, is yet most unhealthy, this
proceeds from the inequality of its temperature, and some other extraneous
causes, as the abundance of fruits which fill our bodies with crudities. The
Spring, whose temperature is hot and moist, is according to Hippocrates, most
healthy, not subject to great diseases, the matter whereof is evacuated by
expulsion of the noxious humors. Moreover, humidity revives Plants and
Animals, and Man, Nature's perfectest work, abounds most with it; to which
cause Cardan refers his greater sagacity. And being life is nothing else but
the Prime Humidity, thence thirst comes to be the greatest bodily
inconvenience; and diseases caused by a dry intemperature are generally
incurable. Rheum is not so dangerous as an Hectic Fever, and experience shows
us that land too moist may be rendered fertile, but there is no remedy for the
droughts of Africa; humane Art being puzzled to preserve a Garden during those
of Summer. Lastly, Physic takes the opportunity of moist weather for
purgations, as most convenient for health.

The Third said, That all the first qualities are active, but heat and moisture
more then the other two, whence the air being imbued with humidity alters our
bodies more sensibly then when it is charged with dry exhalations. For our
radical moisture is aerious, oily, and benign, and the extraneous moisture is
aqueous, malign and pernicious; a capital enemy to that balsame of life, as
extraneous heat is to our vital heat, which is suffocated by abundance of
excrements collected by humidity which stops the pores, but dissipated by
dryness which opens them. Which made the Prince of Physic say, Aph. 15. Sect.
3. that of the seasons of the year droughts are more healthy, and less fatal,
then rainy and moist weather, in which happen long Fevers, Fluxes, Epilepsies,
Apoplexies, and diverse others putrid maladies. Though it is impossible to
determine the question absolutely, because 'twould be requisite to consider
siccity and humidity separate from other qualities and in their own nature,
wherein they are not to be found, being never separated from cold or heat,
which render their natures, and (consequently) their effects various.

The Fourth said, That the pleasure we take in a thing is the surest evidence
of the good or hurt it does us. Hence rain is always more grateful to us in
droughts, then the contrary. Besides, Death, and old age which leads to it, is
nothing but a desiccation; and dry diseases are most perilous, because they
are either conjoined with heat which increases them and makes them very acute,
or with cold which generates Schirrusses, and other maladies accompanied with
obstruction, which are not cured but by humectation. Summer and Autumn are the
sickliest and dryest seasons of the year, but we are more healthy in Winter and
the Spring. And does not the humidity of the night repair the loss caused by
the siccity and actions of the day? as in the morning, the most humid part of
the day, our minds are more serene then all the rest of the day, whence it was
called the friend of the Muses. The Brain, the mansion of the soul and its
divinest faculties, is not only most humid, but the seat of humidity; as
choler, melancholy, fear, and all other passions common to us with beasts have
their seat in the Gall, the Spleen, and the heart, which are dry parts. But
although humidity seems more a friend to nature, then siccity, yet the question
must be voided by the distinction of temperaments, of which the melancholy and
the bilious especially receive very great incommodity from droughts, and
benefit from moist seasons, which, on the contrary, much torment the
phlegmatic.

II. Which is to be preferred the contemplative life, or the active.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That man being born to live in society and
employment, the contemplative life seems incongruous to this end; and our first
Parent was placed in the earth to Till it, and eat his bread in the sweat of
his countenance, not to live idly, and look about him. Moreover, the end is
more noble then the means which tend to it; but we, generally, contemplate only
in order to act. In Divinity we consider God's Commandments, in order to
perform them; In Mathematics, Lines, Surfaces, Solids, Numbers and Motions, to
make use thereof for Fortifications, Carpentry, and the Mechanics; In Natural
Philosophy, its Principles and Causes, to refer the same to Medicine; In Law,
Right, to apply it to Fact; In Morality, the Virtues, in order to exercise
them. Consider what difference there is between the contemplation of an empty
brain and solid action, that is to say, between theory and practice; you will
find the former only a chimera, and the other a reality, as excellent and
profitable as the first is useless, except to feed the fancy with vain
imaginations, and fill the mind with presumption; there being none but thinks
himself a greater master then others, before he has set his hand to the work;
and yet it is by their works that our Lord tells us we shall know every one, and
not by their discourses, which are as much below them as effects and things are
more then words.

The Second said, Contemplation is as much more excellent then action, as the
soul is then the body; and to compare them together is to equal the servant
with her mistress. For, not to speak of the raptures of an extasi'd soul, nor
of eternal bliss, which consisting in contemplation, that of this world must
do the like in reference to natural things: Nature alone teaches us that things
which are for themselves are more excellent then those which are for others.
But the contemplation and knowledge of truth, has no other end but it self;
action, the common uses of life. Whence contemplation less needs external
things then action, which requires the help of Riches, Honors, Friends, and a
thousand other circumstances, which hinder a contemplative person more then
they help him, who therefore delights most in Deserts and Solitudes. Moreover,
the end is to be preferred before the means, and the end of active life is to
bring us rest, as the military life is in order to establish, and the civil to
preserve peace; therefore the rest of the contemplative life being the end of
the turbulent active life, it is much more noble then its means. As appears
also by its duration, which is greater then that of transient and transitory
action; but contemplation is durable and permanent, which is a sign of the
Divinity of the Intellect that produces it, infinitely more excellent then all
the other inferior powers, the principles of actions. Contemplation being
abstracted from matter and earthly things wearies not the body as actions do,
which require corporeal organs; and therefore the pleasure of it is most pure
and simple, and constant, in regard of its object, those sublime things which
wisdom contemplates; whereas that of action is never entire, by reason of the
inconstancy of its object, which are political things continually mutable. The
contemplative man finds full satisfaction in himself, without going abroad to
beg approbation and rewards from men, without which virtues languish and are
imperfect. Moreover, the pleasure of contemplation is peculiar to men, and not
competent to brutes, who have not only external actions as well as we, as
Speaking, Singing, Dancing, Fighting, Spinning, Building, and other Works of
Art, which we learned from them, for the most part; but they have also virtues,
as Chastity, Simplicity, Prudence, Piety. On the contrary, God, as the
Philosopher teaches, exercises neither virtues, nor any external actions, but
contemplation is his sole employment, and, consequently, the most divine of
all, though it were not calm, agreeable, permanent, sufficient, proper to man,
and independent of others, which are the tokens of beatitude, and the chief
good.

The Third said, since it is true, which Plato says, that while we are in this
world we do nothing but behold, by the favor of a glimmering light, the
phantasms and shadows of things, which custom makes us to take for truths and
bodies; they who amuse themselves in contemplation, in this life, cannot be
said contented, unless after the manner of Tantalus, who could not drink in the
midst of the water; because they cannot satisfy that general inclination of
nature (who suffers nothing idle in all her precincts) to reduce powers into
act, and dead notions into living actions. If they receive any pleasure in the
knowledge of some truths, it is much less then that which is afforded by action,
and the exercise of the moral virtues, of the active life, the more excellent
in that they are profitable to many, since the most excellent good is the most
communicable. Moreover, all men have given the pre-eminence to civil Prudence
and active life, by proposing rewards and honors thereunto; but they have
punished the ingratitude and pride of speculative persons, abandoning them to
contempt, poverty, and all incommodities of life. And since the Vice which is
opposite to active life is worse then ignorance, which is opposed to the
contemplative, by the reason of contraries action must be better then
contemplation; and the rather, because virtuous action without contemplation is
always laudable, and many times meritorious for its simplicity: on the
contrary, contemplation without virtuous acts is more criminal and pernicious.
In fine, if it be true, that he who withdraws himself from active life, to
intend contemplation, is either a god or a beast, as Aristotle says; it is more
likely that he is the latter, since man can hardly become like to God.

The Fourth said, That to separate active life from contemplative is to cut off
the stream from the fountain, the fruit from the tree, and the effect from its
cause: as likewise, contemplation without the virtues of the active life is
impossible: rest and tranquillity, which are not found in vice, being necessary
to contemplate and know. Wherefore, as the active life is most necessary during
this life, so the contemplative is more noble and divine, if this present life
be considered as the end, and not as the means and way to attain to the other
life, in which actions not contemplations shall be put to account.
Contemplation is the Sun, Action the Moon of this little World, receiving its
directions from contemplation, as the Moon of the great World borrows its light
from the Sun: the former presides in the day of contemplative life; the second,
which is nearer to us, as the Moon is, presides in the darkness of our
passions. Both of them represented in Pallas the Goddess of Wisdom and War,
being joined together, make the double-fronted Janus, or Hermaphrodite of
Plato, square of all sides, composed of Contemplation which is the Male, and
Action which is the Female.

CONFERENCE XCIII.
I. Of the spots in the Moon and the Sun. II. Whether it is best to use severity
or gentleness toward our dependents.

I. Of the spots in the Moon and the Sun.
THere is nothing perfect in the world, spots being observed in the brightest
bodies of Nature. And not to speak of those in the Sun, which seem to proceed
from the same cause with those observed in our flame according as it is
condensed or rarifi'd; we may well give account of those in the Moon, by
saying, with the Pythagoreans, and some later excellent Mathematicians, that
the Moon is an earthly habitable Globe, as the eminences and inequalities,
observed therein by the Telescope, the great communications of the Moon with
our earth, depriving one another of the Sun, by the opacity, rotundity and
solidty of both; and the cold and moist qualities which it transmits hither,
like those of this terr-aqueous Globe; since the same apparences and
illumination of the Earth would be seen from the Heaven of the Moon, if a man
were carried thither. And because solid massy bodies, as wood and stone,
reflect light most strongly, therefore the brightest parts of the Moon answer
the terrestrial dense parts, and the dark the water, which being rarer, and
liker the air is also more transparent, and, consequently, less apt to stop and
reflect light. This we experience in the prospect of high Mountains very
remote, or the points of Rocks in the open Sea, which reflect a light, and have
a color like that of the Moon, when the Sun is still above the Horizon with
her: whereas the Sea and great Lakes being less capable of remitting this
light, seem dark and like clouds. So that were this Globe of Ocean and Earth
seen from far, it would appear illuminated and spotted like the Moon. For the
opinion of Plurality of Worlds (which can be no way dangerous of it self, but
only in the consequences the weakness of humane wit would draw from it; much
less is it contrary to the faith, as some imagine) is rather an argument of
Gods Omnipotence, and more abundant communication of his goodness in the
production of more creatures; whereas his immense goodness seems to be
restrained in the creation of but one world, and of but one kind. Nor is it
impossible but that, as we see about some Planets, namely, Jupiter and Saturn,
some other Stars which move in Epicycles, and in respect of their stations, and
those Planets, seem like Moons to them, and are of the same substance: so that
which shines to us, here below, may be of the same substance with our earth,
and placed as a bound to this elementary Globe.

The Second said, That the spots of the Sun and Moon cannot be explicated
without some Optical presuppositions. And first, it is to be known that Vision
is performed three ways; directly, by reflection, and by refraction. Direct
Vision, which is the most ordinary, is when an object sends its species to the
eye by a direct way, that is, when all the points of one and the same object
make themselves seen by so many right lines. Reflective Vision is when the
species of an object falling upon the surface of an opake body, is remitted
back to the sight, as it is in our Looking-glasses. Vision by refraction, is,
when the species of an object having passed through a medium diaphanous to a
certain degree, enters obliquely into another medium more or less diaphanous;
for then it is broken and continues not its way directly: but with this
diversity, that coming from a thicker medium into a thinner, as from water into
air, the species in breaking recedes from a perpendicular falling upon the
common surface of the two mediums; as, on the contrary, entering into a less
diaphanous medium out of one more diaphanous, it breaks, and Cones nearer a
perpendicular then it would have done had it continued directly. Secondly, It Is
to be observed, that bodies which cause reflection or refraction are either
smooth or unequal and rough. Smooth bodies make reflection and refraction with
order; and the reflected or refracted image resembles its object, although it
may be altered by the various figures of the reflecting or refracting bodies,
as unequal Looking-glasses diminish it, hollow enlarge it; whereas, on the
contrary, unequal Perspective Glasses enlarge and concave lessen the object: but
both the Looking-glasses, and the other represent the Image perfect. Unequal
and scabrous bodies reflect or refract confusedly without distinct
representation of the Image; because these Bodies being terminated with
infinite little imperceptible surfaces looking every way, they also reflect
every way, as is seen in stones, wood, and other bodies of different
ruggedness, and so causing different reflections and refractions. in the third
place, we must observe some prime properties of Looking-glasses; as, That if a
species fall perpendicularly upon the surface, it is likewise perpendicularly
reflected, and consequently, upon its own object; as when the Eye beholds it
self in the glass. But if the species fall obliquely upon the glass, it will be
reflected as obliquely the other way, making the angles of the incidence equal
to those of reflection; as when the Eye beholds something else then it self in
the glass. And an Eye constituted in the place where it may receive the
reflection shall see the image of the object by help of the glass. But if the
mirror reflect no species to the place where the Eye is, then the surface of
the mirror shall appear so much more dark as the mirror is exact, that is,
smooth; and more opake, the greater the light is. As the Eye being in the place
of reflection cannot bear the Sunbeams reflected from the mirror no more then
the Sun it self; but being in another place, it shall see nothing but darkness,
and take the glass for a hole, especially if it lie upon the ground. Moreover,
a Unequal Spherical glass has this property, that it represents the image very
small, and more small when the Eye and object are remote from the mirror which
is small, or appears such. In which glasses also the Image never takes up the
whole plane of the glass, but a very small part of it. Lastly, Every object
which appears lucid, and not by its own light, transmits light to us either by
reflection or refraction, after having received the same from some other
luminous object. From these truths here supposed, but clearly demonstrated in
the Catoptricks, I conclude necessarily, That the body of the Moon is not
smooth, but rough or scabrous. For it is manifest by its various faces, that it
borrows from the Sun the greater light of the two which appear in her, (the
least whereof, namely, that which appears in the part which the Sun enlightens
not, (in the increase and decrease) many think to be her own:) which borrowed
light increases or diminishes according as she removes farther from, or comes
nearer to the Sun; whence the diversity of her faces. From which diversity of
faces it is concluded further, that the figure of the face toward us is
spherical, unequal, either rough or smooth. But smooth it cannot be, because
then it would represent the very Image of the Sun to us very small, and in a
small part of its face, the rest remaining dark, by the aforesaid observations
of Looking-glasses; wherefore it must be rough or unequal, because the whole
face appears lucid when it is beheld by the Sun at the full, and no image of the
Sun appears distinctly in it. For it is certain, that the Moon sends her
borrowed light by reflection, and not by refraction; otherwise she should be
diaphanous, and would appear most illuminated when near the Sun, and be full in
her conjunction, and obscure in her full; because she is lower then the Sun, and
so in conjunction his light would appear through her; and in her full, which is
her opposition, the Sun's light would pass through her toward Heaven, not
toward us. Wherefore, as to the spots of the Moon, it may be said, in general,
that she is unequally seabrous, and the dark parts are nearest smoothness, and
so make a more orderly reflection, but another way then to the Earth, the
Angles of Incidence and Reflection being not disposed thereunto. But they are
not perfectly smooth, because they transmit a little light to us; which they
could not do being perfectly smooth, unless at a certain time when the Sun were
so disposed, as that his Image might be seen in those parts, as in a Spherical
Mirror. The other more scabrous parts making a disorderly and irregular
reflection, are seen on all parts; as if you fasten pieces of glass, marble, or
the like smooth bodies, to a wall enlightened by the Sun, the rough parts of
the wall will appear very bright, and the smooth obscure. But because we know
not truly what is the matter of the Heavenly Bodies, we can only say, for
proof of this unevenness in the Moon's body, that the rougher parts are more
hard, and the less rough are liquid; for then the liquor surrounding the center
of the Moon, as the water does about that of the earth, will have a surface
more approaching to smoothness as the water has; and this, without inferring
it composed of earth and water, but of some celestial matter like to our
elementary, and whose fluidity or hardness does not prejudice its
incorruptibility; those who hold the Heavens solid or liquid, holding them
equally incorruptible. Unless we had rather say, that the body of the Moon
being all of the same hardness, may nevertheless have parts unequally rough and
smooth.

The Third said, That he apprehended two causes of these spots. First, the
diverse conformation of these celestial bodies, which being no more perfectly
round then the earth (which nevertheless would appear spherical to us if it
were luminous) make shadows inseparable from bodies of other figure then the
plain. Secondly, from the weakness of our Sight, which as it phancies colors
in the clouds which are not in them, (no more then the Air is blew, though it
appear to us, and we paint it such;) so being dazzled by a luminous body, and
the visual ray being disgregated, it makes sundry appearances therein, which
can be only dark and obscure in a thing which is lucid. For I would not
attribute these spots, which represent the lineaments of a face, to such a
fancy as that of Antiphon, who saw his own picture in the Air, since they are
observed by all people after the same manner: but the weakness of our Sight may
contribute something thereunto. For if we say that every celestial body is an
earth, and that the bright part is the terrestrial mass, and the dark the
water, or the contrary; it will be necessary that this earth also have its
Heaven, that its stars, and so to infinity.

The Fourth said, That they who have imagined spots in the Sun, had them in
their Eyes, it being improbable that there is any defect of light in that Star
which is the fountain of it; but they are produced by the vapors between the
Sun and the Eye, and therefore appear not at full noon, and change with the
vapors and clouds. As for those which appear in the Moon's face, there is
great diversity of opinions; as of the Rabbines and Mahometans, of the ancient
Philosophers reported by Plutarch in his treatise thereof, and of the moderns.
The first are ridiculous, in believing that Lucifer, by his fall, and the
beating of his wings, struck down part of the light of this great Luminary, or
that the same was taken away to frame the Spirits of the Prophets. Those
Philosophers who attributed the cause to the violence of the Sunbeams
reflected from the Moon to our Eyes, would conclude well if the like spots
appeared in the Sun as do in the Moon; because the rays coming directly from
the Sun to the Eyes have more brightness, and dazzle more, then those reflected
by the Moon. Nor can these spots be the Images of the Sea and its Streights;
for the Ocean surrounding the Terrestrial Globe, that part of it which remains
in the lower part of the Globe cannot send its species so far as the Moon,
whilst she enlightens the upper part; the Moon being able to receive only the
species of that part which she enlightens, according to the principles of
Theodosius, who teaches us that from the Zenith of one Hemisphere right lines
cannot be drawn to the other Hemisphere, by reason of the solidity of the
Globe; the caliginous fire, the wind, the condensation of the Air, and the like
opinions of the Stoics, and other ancient Philosophers, though erroneous, yet
seem to me more probable then those of some Moderns, who will have the Moon
inhabited, not considering that it is too small to make an habitable earth, her
body being the fortieth part of the Terrestrial Globe, and its surface the
thirteenth of that of the Earth, or thereabouts; besides, that she comes too
near the Sun, whose Eclipse her interposition causes, They who make the Moon
and the Earth to move about the Sun, may indeed, with Copernicus, explicate the
most signal motions and phenomenon: But the stability of the Pole, and the
Stars about it, requires a fixed point in the Earth, with which the inequality
of the days and seasons could not consist, if the Sun were stable and in one
place. Moreover, the difference of days proceeds from the obliquity of the
Ecliptic, which is the cause that the parallels of the Solstice are nearer one
to another, and the days then less unequal then at the Equinoxes, which cannot
hold good in this Scheme. But it is less reasonable to say, that the hollow
places in the Moon seem dark; for by the rules of perspective, they should
remit the Sun's rays redoubled by their reflection, by reason of the cone
which is formed in hollow parts; nor can they be eminences, which appear
obscure, because in this case the spots should not appear so great, or not come
at all to us, being surpassed by the dilatation of the rays redoubled by the
conical figure of the cavities of the Moon. It Is therefore more probable that
as a Star is the thicker part of its Orb, so the Moon has some dense then
others which are the most luminous; as those which are more diaphanous, letting
those beams of the Sun pass through them, which they are not able to reflect
for want of sufficient density, seem more obscure, and make the spots.

The fifth said, The spots of the Sun cannot be from the same causes with those
of the Moon, which experience shows us changes place and figure, those of the
Sun remaining always alike, and in the same figure; whereby we may also
understand the validity of what is alleged by some, That the Sun moving upon
his own Center carries his spots about with him: For granting this motion, yet
if these spots interred in the Sun, they would always appear in the same
manner, and at regular times, by reason of the Sun's equal and uniform
revolution. Nevertheless, the most diligent observers find that some of them
are generated, and disappear at the same time in the Solar face. Which would
incline me to their opinion who hold those spots to be generated out of the
body of the Sun, in the same manner that exhalations are out of the bosom of
the earth; did not this derogate from the received incorruptibility of the
Heavens. For it cannot be any defect of our sight, mistaking the vapors
between the eye and the Sun for spots inherent in his body, since they are seen
by all, almost in the same number and figure; which should alter with the
medium if this were the cause of them; and it is impossible that vapors should
follow the Sun in his course for so many days together as one of these spots
appears; for it must move above 6000 leagues a day, though it were not much
elevated above the earth. Nor do our Telescopes deceive us, since without them
we behold these spots in a Basin of water, or upon a white paper in a close
Chamber, whereinto the Sun is admitted only by a small hole. Nor, Lastly, are
they small Stars, called by some Borboneae and Mediceae, because we perceive
both their nativity and their end.

II. Whether it is best to use ^^verity or gentleness toward our dependents.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That he who said a man has as many
domestic enemies as servants, implied that we are to use them as such,
converse with them as in an Enemy-Country, and according to the Counsel of good
Captains build some Fort therein for our security. Which Fort is severity, and
its Bastions the reasons obliging us to this rigor. The first of which is
drawn from the contempt ensuing upon gentleness and familiarity, and from the
respect arising from severity and gravity, especially in low and servile souls,
which being ill educated would easily fall into vice; to which men are more
inclined then to virtue, if they be not restrained by fear of punishment, which
makes deeper impression upon their minds then the sweetness and love of virtue
wherewith they are not acquainted. Besides that servants are apt to grow slack
and lukewarm in their duties, unless they be spurred up by severity. And it is
a great disorder when a servant becomes equal to his master, as it happens by
mildness; nor was Paganism ever more ridiculous then in the Saturnalia, when
the servants played the masters. It must likewise be confessed that severity
has a certain majesty which exacts such honor and service as gentleness
cannot obtain. By this virtue Germanicus became so considerable, and was so
well obeyed, as, on the contrary, Nerva's mildness weakened and enervated the
Roman Commonwealth. Was ever King more severe, and better obeyed then
Tamberlane, or any family more powerfully established then that of the
Ottamans, which owes all its grandeur to severity and rigor, the sole upholder
of Military Discipline, a good Captain never pardoning any in war. For the
misery of inferiors, whether true or imaginary, joined with the natural desire
of liberty, easily carries them to rebellion, if fear and rigor tie not their
hands. Thus the war undertaken by the Servants against their Masters at Rome
was the effect of mildness; nor was there any other means to repress it but by
blood and slaughter; as another Nation once routed an Army of their Slaves with
Whips and Stirrup-leathers; the sight of which reviving the memory of their
former scars was more effectual then ordinary weapons. Therefore when the Law
gave power of life and death over slaves, it intended not to authorize
homicide, being sufficiently careful of men's lives; but judged it expedient to
retain these persons in their duty by the apprehension of death. The reason
which once obliged the Senate to put 600 innocent slaves to death, for an
example to others.

The Second said, whatever security there may be in severity, it has effects
too violent to be durable. Man's mind is too delicate a piece; and whatever
difference fortune has put between men, their spirit, which is the same in
all, is too noble to be curbed with a cudgel and biting of brutish severity;
which on the other side causes hatred, as mildness does love, and is therefore
to be preferred; there being none but had rather be loved then hated, and no way
to be beloved but by loving. For the same Proverb which reckons servants
amongst necessary evils, reckons a wife so too; and the tyrannical Aphorism, So
many servants so many enemies, is not true but in those who have cause given
them to be so. And indeed, a Master's condition would be the worst of all, if
he must live always at home upon his guard, as in a den of Lions or Tygres.
For, what is alleged, that servants are ill bred and ill-natured, and seldom
acknowledge the obligations they have to their Masters, is indeed too true in
the most eminent conditions: but that which we call ingratitude in them, comes
especially from the rigor of our deportments, which offuscate the benefits and
commodities they receive from us. Their low fortune is unpleasant enough,
without making them desperate to our prejudice. And indeed, the Laws which have
allowed most severity to Masters over their slaves, have sometimes been
insufficient to secure them from the fatal strokes of their discontent; as many
Histories of Roman Masters murdered by their slaves (notwithstanding that
rigor of Silanus's Law) and the dangerous revolts of Spartacus, and others in
the Provinces, sufficiently testify. Whence it appears, that a man must be in
as much fear of his servants as he would be feared by them; and that suspicion
and diffidence is as well the mother of treacheries as of safety, since it
seems to leave those whom we distrust to do all the mischief they can. For to
pretend severity, for avoidance of contempt and too great familiarity, in my
judgment speaks great weakness of mind; and as if dominion and majesty could
not be more agreeably maintained by clemency: and gravity affected by rigor is
as ridiculous as odious; yea it is to fall into an extremity too vicious, to
make one's self hated for fear of being slighted, and to appear cruel to avoid
being familiar.

The Third said, That although gentleness be more acceptable then severity, yet
it is also more dangerous: witness that of Lewis the Debonnaire, and Eli the
chief Priest, toward their children, for whom the Wiseman recommends the rod,
as Aristotle does discipline for servants and slaves: and the indulgence of
good husbands to their wives is the most apparent cause of the luxury reigning
in that Sex, to say no worse. A family is a kind of Republic, and the
principles of Occonomy and Policy are much alike. Now we see States are
preserved by the exact severity of Laws, signified by the Rods, Axes, Maces and
naked Swords, born by Magistrates, and the Scepters of Kings. But no
Magistrates have Ensigns of gentleness, as being more dangerous, because
directly opposed to justice, all whose rights and privileges are preserved by
severity. And hence clemency is not permitted to be used by inferior Judges,
but that it may be more rare, it is reserved to Princes themselves who are above
Laws and Customs.

The Fourth said, It belongs to Prudence to determine when, how, where and why,
ways of gentleness or severity are to be used; some minds being exasperated by
severity, like those tempers on which violent medicines work least; and others
turning sweetness into bitterness, whilst they think it to proceed from
timerousness or impotence, and so take license to do any thing, whom benign
medicines act not. But, to speak absolutely, the way of gentleness must always
precede and be found unprofitable before coming to rigor, according to the
precept of the Physicians, who use fire and cauteries only when the malignity
of the malady will not yield to ordinary remedies, which the ancient Arabians
never used till having first tried a diet and regiment of living. Nor does wise
Nature ever use violence till she is forced to it by some potent cause, as the
fear of Vacuity, or the penetration of Dimensions. In all the rest of her
actions she proceeds with sweetness, wherewith she has so endowed man, that
the same humor which gives and preserves his being, namely, Blood, is the
cause of Clemency and Gentleness, called for this reason Humanity. Wherefore
it is more suitable to our nature then to lean toward its contrary; and the way
from gentleness to rigor is more rational and natural then from rigor to
gentleness. For when a rough master speaks flatteringly to his servants, they
are no more moved therewith then a Horse accustomed to the spur is with the
voice alone. Yea, a Horse that will not stir for words will go for the spur;
and Masters who incessantly rate and beat their servants, are like those ill
Horsemen who have always their spurs in the Horses sides, where they make by
this means a callous scar, insensible to the most quick stimulations.

CONFERENCE XCIV.
I. Of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. II. Whether all Sciences may be
profitably reduced to one.

I. Of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
*It Is an ancient saying, that the Luminaries have never more spectators then
when some Languishment befalls them; because ordinary effects, how excellent
soever, affect us less then such as are not common, whose novelty raises
admiration in our minds, otherwise much delighted in considering others defects
and imperfections. Those of the Celestial Bodies are deficiencies of light,
called Eclipses, which happen by the diametrical interposition of some opake
body. To speak only of those of the Sun and Moon; the former is caused by the
shadow of the Moon upon the Earth, and the latter, by that of the Earth upon
the Moon, by reason of their vicinity. For the Sun's course being always in
the Ecliptic of the Zodiac, which they ordinarily, but improperly, call a
line, being rather a plane superficies, and a great circle, cutting the sphere
into two equal parts, in which the Sun ascends in his Apogaeum, and descends in
his Perigaeum. The Moon likewise, according to her proper motion, is found
every month in the same sign with the Sun; which is called her Conjunction,
and makes the New Moon. Yet with this difference, that she is either in the
South or the North, in respect of the Sun in the same sign, unless when passing
from one to another she crosses the Ecliptic, wherein the Sun makes his course
in the middle of such sign; in which intersection is made the Eclipse of the
Sun, the Moon being then directly between the Sun and our sight. This point of
intersection is called the Dragon's head, when she moves from the South to the
North, and the Dragon's tail when from the North to the South. Now forasmuch
as the Lunar Body is less then that of the Earth, and much less then that of
the Sun, scarce taking up the latitude of the pyramide formed by the visual
rays; hence the Suns Eclipse is never either total or universal, the Moon not
being capable to hide the body of the Sun from those who behold him from the
Earth in another situation. After her conjunction with the Sun, she with-draws
from him by little and little, increasing in roundness and light, till she
become fully opposite to the Sun, at which time half of her Globe is perfectly
enlightened; and then it is Full Moon. Now because in this perfect opposition the
Earth casts its shadow upon that part of the Ecliptic which is opposite to the
Sun, if in this opposition the Moon happen to cut the Ecliptic, she enters
into the Earths shadow, and becomes darkened by privation of the Suns light. So
that the Moon is never eclipsed but in her opposition when she is at the Full,
nor the Sun but at New Moon when she is in conjunction. Whence that eclipse of
the Sun which appeared at our Lords death was miraculous, the Moon being then
naturally unable to eclipse the Sun by her interposition, because she was
directly opposite to him, and at the Full.

The Second said, That in this common explication of Eclipses, the Parallaxes
of the Sun and Moon cause many difficulties in their calculations, being the
cause that the same Eclipse is total to some, partial to others, none to
others, and to some sooner and longer then to others; besides, that it is
requisite to have as many new calculations as there are different places. But a
general way whereby to explicate Eclipses so perfectly, that one single
calculation may suffice for the whole Earth, and oftentimes for several
Eclipses, cannot be had without knowledge of the distances, magnitudes and
shadows of the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon, which are these; the Sun is
distant from the Earth about 1200. semidiametres of the Earth, which amount to
almost 2000000. of our leagues. The Moon is distant from the Earth near 56.
semidiametres of the Earth, making about 90000. leagues, or the two and
twentieth part of the Sun's distance: Whence at New Moon the distance of the
Moon from the Sun is 109000. leagues; and so the Sun is distant from the Earth
twenty one times more then the Moon. As for the magnitude of these bodies, the
Diametre of the Sun is about six times as big as that of the Earth, and twenty
one times as great as that of the Moon; and consequently exceeds the one five,
and the other twenty times. Whence it follows, that the length of the shadows
of the Earth and the Moon being proportionate to their distances from the Sun,
as their Diametres are to that Excess, the shadow of the Earth shall have in
length the fifth part of its distance from the Sun, namely, 400000. leagues,
and the shadow of the Moon the twentieth part of her distance from the Sun,
namely, 95500. leagues. These shadows of the Earth and the Moon are of a
conical figure, the base whereof is one of the circles of the Earth or the
Moon, and the cusp is the point removed from their bases, according to the
abovesaid distances. Which figure proceeds from the Sun's being greater then
the Moon or the Earth, and all three of a round or spherical figure; and the
conical shadow is a perfect shadow admitting no direct ray from the Sun; but
there is an imperfect shadow about the same, admitting rays from some parts of
the Sun, but not from all. And as the imperfect shadow diminishes conically, so
the imperfect increases conically; so that the Moons imperfect shadow reaches
90000. leagues, which is the distance of the Moon from the Earth, occupying
round about the perfect shadow near 1000. leagues on each side; because it is in
proportion to the Diametre of the Sun, as the distance of the Earth from the
Moon is to the distance of the Moon from the Sun. Now since the shadow of the
Moon, which is 95500. leagues, reaches further then the Moons distance from the
Earth, which is but 90000. leagues, it follows that at New Moon when she is
directly between the Sun and the Earth, (which happens when the Moon is twenty
degrees before or after, either the head or the tail of the Dragon) the point
of her shadow reaches to the Earth, covering sometimes near 30. leagues round
of Earth with perfect shadow, which is surrounded with another imperfect one of
a thousand leagues. And as the Moon by her proper motion passes beneath the Sun
from West to East, so her shadow traverses the Earth from the West part to the
East; so that wherever the point of the perfect shadow passes, there is a
total Eclipse of the Sun; and where the imperfect shadow passes, the Eclipse is
only partial, but greater according as you are nearer the perfect shadow. From
these consequences may be drawn, That the Eclipse of the Sun is seen sooner in
the West part of the Earth then in the East, by almost five hours; which is the
time that the shadow of the Moon is crossing the plane of the Earth. That one
and the same Eclipse of the Sun cannot be seen in all parts of the Earth,
because, though as the shadow moves, it crosses from West to East; yet it is
not large enough to cover the whole Earth from North to South. That in one and
the same year there are at least two Eclipses of the Sun visible in some parts
of the Earth, sometimes three, and four at most. For every half year in which
the Sun passes by the Dragon's head, if the New Moon be made at the same head,
there will be an Eclipse, which will be total in the torrid zone, and partial
in the temperate zones, a thousand leagues or more on either side; and this
will be the sole Eclipse for this half year. If the New Moon be made within ten
degrees before the Dragon's head, there will be only this Eclipse in this half
year, which which will be total, sometimes in the torrid zone, sometimes in the
southern temperate zone, and partial, a thousand leagues or more every way. The
like will happen if the New Moon be made within ten degrees after the Dragon's
head, but a total Eclipse will be seen in the torrid zone, or else in northern
temperate. But if in the same half year the New Moon be made between ten and
twenty degrees before the head, there will be an Eclipse in the cold zone, and
at the extremity of the temperate southern zone: But then the New Moon
immediately following will be made between ten and twenty degrees after the
head, and there will be another Eclipse seen in the frigid zone, and at the
extremity of the northern temperate zone; which two Eclipses, most commonly,
are but partial. The same must be said of the other half year in which the Sun
passes by the Dragons tail, saving that the parts which precede the tail
regard the northern part of the Earth; and those which follow, the southern;
which happens quite contrary at the head. Which we must observe, is
diametrically opposite to the tail, and that they remain not always in the
same place, but move round the Heaven regularly in about nineteen years,
contrary to the order of the signs from Aries to Pisces, and from thence to
Aquarius, backwards. As for the Eclipse of the Moon, we must consider the
shadow of the Earth, which is cast into the Ecliptic in the part opposite to
the Sun; and because the same is 400000. leagues long, it follows that it
crosses the Heaven of the Moon, and beyond; so that although it be diminished
at the Heaven of the Moon, yet in that place it has near one degree a half
diametre, the Moon not having much more then one degree. And consequently, if
the Moon be at the Full, either in the head or the tail of the Dragon, or else
in thirty degrees before or after, the Moon will pass into the shadow of the
Earth, and be either wholly eclipsed or in part, according as she shall enter
wholly into the perfect shadow. For here the imperfect shadow is not
considerable, the Moon not being eclipsed so long as she receives the rays of
any part of the Sun; whence it follows that the Moon naturally loses her light,
but not the Sun, which the inposition of the Moon only keeps from our Eyes;
that the Eclipse of the Moon is seen at the same time by all those who can see
it. And that there can be but two in one year, namely, one in every six
months; sometimes but one in a year, and sometimes none at all; namely, when
the Full Moon happens between thirteen and seventeen degrees, before or after
the head or the tail of the Dragon.

II. Whether all Sciences may be profitably reduced to one.
Upon the Second Point it was said, That the desire of knowing is very
charming; but man's life is too short to satisfy the same, unless the great
number of Sciences be reduced into one, their multitude requiring a volumn to
contain their names alone, and this with their length being the principal
causes of the little fruit gathered from them, and the distaste which they
beget. The way of abridgment would be to retrench out of each all matters
unprofitable, or not pertaining to the Science, as are most Metaphysical
Questions which are treated of in Logic; Natural, in Medicine; Moral, Natural,
and Juridical, in Divinity, to avoid repetitions: And thus the fifth and sixth
Books of Euclid might be reduced into one, since in the latter he demonstrates
by number what before he had demonstrated by lines; yea, the 117 Propositions
of his tenth Book might be demonstrated in another order, and comprised in less
then thirty; as the five following Books, the three of Candalus, the Sphericks
of Theodosius, the Conicks of Apollonius, the Principles of Archimedes, and
others, which make above 500 Propositions, might be reduced profitably to less
then a hundred. But above all, 'twould be requisite to be careful of laying
down good Principles, and teaching these Sciences with order; and for this
purpose to retrench all unprofitable Books, whose numerousness causes
confusion, and is now more hurtful then their scarcity was heretofore;
according to Justinian's example, who reduced all the Law Books of his time
into two Volumns, the Digests and the Code; and that of the Jews, who comprised
all things that can be known in one single Science called Cabbala, as the
Druids did their Disciplines under certain Maxims and Aphorisms; and Raimond
Lullie's Art teaches to know and speak of all things; which might be done, if
instead of spending the fittest time of our Age (as we do unprofitably) in
learning to speak Latin and Greek, we employed it, by the example of the
Ancients, upon the Mathematics, History, and all Sciences depending more upon
memory and fancy then solidity of Judgment, which might afterward be formed
in a short time by Logic, in order to its being exercised in the knowledge of
things natural, supernatural, and moral; which might easily be obtained in less
then five years, if all superfluities were retrenched.

The Second said, Because the possibility of a thing must first be understood,
before the means of attaining it sought, it is requisite first to agree whether
all Sciences are reducible into one, before the ways to do it be inquired. And
although at first sight it seem possible, because they presuppose one another,
and there is such a connection in their principles that some depend upon the
demonstration of others; yet I conceive this reunion of all into one would
seem rather a monster, or a thing like the confusion and disorder of the
ancient Chaos, then a true and legitimate Discipline. For it is easier to
destroy the present method then to establish a better. Moreover, how is this
union possible, since the foundations and principles of Sciences are
controverted by the Masters who profess them? For setting aside those
indemonstrable principles which are very few, and need only be heard that they
may be granted, and may be learned in less then an hour; if we make an
induction through all the Sciences, we shall find nothing certain in them. Has
Morality, whose chief object is Beatitude, found one sole point wherein to
establish it? Are not part of Aristotle's opinions overthrown by Galen? who on
the other side is counter-check'd by Paracelsus and all the Chemists, who
pretend to cure diseases by their likes, as the former does by their
contraries? Law, being founded upon the instability of humane will, has as
little certainty: And Divinity it self, which is the Science of Verities, is
divided by the Sects of the Nominals, of Scotus, and Thomas; not to speak of
the Heresies which incessantly assault it. And if we compare it to other
Sciences, it overthrows most of their Principles, by establishing the Mysteries
of Faith. This is it which made the wisest of men, and who perfectly understood
all Sciences, to say, That they were but vanity: And were this union possible,
he has so highly recommended sobriety of knowing, that 'twould be a kind of
intemperance to desire to know every thing, no less presumptuous by exceeding
the bounds set by God to each of our capacities, then ridiculous, by attempting
to make a necessary and infallible thing of many contingent and uncertain, and
not yet agreed upon.

The Third said, That Unity, which is one of the Transcendents, coeternal and
co-essential to Good, ought to be the attribute of all good things, and
consequently of Discipline, which likewise being the good of the Understanding,
which is one, cannot be comprehended by it, but by their becoming conformable
the one to the other. If any reply, That it is enough that things enter into it
successively, and so need not be one, (which would be inconsistent with their
nature); I answer, That the series and order which is found in those things
belongs to one single Science; otherwise they would have no conection together,
and by this means could not be made use of to purpose. And since all our
Notions depend one of another, our Discourse being but a continual Syllogism,
whose Conclusions depend upon the Premises, it follows, That the Syllogism
being the subject but of one Science, they all pertain but to one Science;
whence Philosophy is defined the knowledge of things divine and humane; that is
to say, of every thing. Indeed, since all moral Virtues are so connected
together, that it is impossible to possess one without possessing all; the
Sciences (which are the intellectual virtues) must be straightly united
likewise; and the more, for that they have but one most simple subject, to wit,
the Uderstanding. And since the means of Being are the same with those of
Knowing, every thing that is in the world having the same Principles of
existence must also have the same principles of knowledge, and so make one sole
Science; because Sciences differ only by reason of their principle; all which
too depend upon one Metaphysical principle, namely, That one and the same thing
cannot be and not be; which proves all others; and therefore it follows, That
there must be one sole Science general, comprehending all the rest. For to say,
That every several manner of handling a thing makes a distinct Science, is to
imitate him who would make an Art of every Simple. Lastly, Nature would not
have given us a desire of knowing every thing, if this desire could not be
accomplished: But it is impossible to be so, whilst the Sciences remain so
diffuse as they are at present.

CONFERENCE XCV.
I. Of the diversity of Wits. II. Of New Years Gifts.

I. Of the diversity of Wits.
DIversity is found in all things, but no where more remarkably then in man;
for, not to speak now of Bodies, that of Minds is so great that none have been
ever found to have the same inclinations or motions, or that have been so much
as like to themselves; the Mind being an indefatigable Agent, varying postures
every moment, according to the several occurrences of new objects, to which it
becomes like. But though the division of Wits be so unequal and disadvantageous
to some, that there is observed as great difference between one man and another
as between some men and a brute, yet all are well pleased with their lot, and
every one thinks he has enough to spare, and to govern and instruct others; so
conceited are we of what belongs to our selves. Now the cause of this diversity
of Spirits and Inclinations seems to be the various constitution of bodies,
whose temper the motions and inclinations of the Soul follow; and this temper
being incessantly mutable by causes internal and external, not only in the four
seasons of the year, but also in the four parts of the day, hence arises the
diversity of the actions and inclinations of the Mind, which is so great, that
the same thing pleases and displeases us in a little space of time.

The Second said, That the Faculty which they call Ingenium or Genius, cannot
proceed merely from the temperament of the four qualities: For we see those
that come nearest the temperament of man are the most stupid; and Ages,
Seasons, and Aliments changing those qualities continually, should also
incessantly change man's wits. But it is a quality or ray of the Reasonable Soul,
which finding the four qualities variously mixed in every one, makes use
thereof in different operations; and so this difference is only accidental, not
essential. Moreover, we see, that whatever difference be conceived in Minds,
yet their fundamental inclinations are alike, the hatred and aversion of evil
things, and the desire and prosecution of good; if the means employed to these
purposes be different, this proceeds from a particular imagination caused by
the constitution of the humors, which makes this difference appear, as through
a colored glass. So the choler of the Soldier puts him upon seeking honor
and profit in Arms; the Advocate is moved to seek them in the Sciences, either
by his more moderate temper, or by the example and pleasure of his Ancestors.
Yet this Proportion cannot change the essence of Wits, but only the appearance;
as a Painter out of the mixture of four or five colors makes infinite others,
which differ only in show.

The Third said, There are many partial causes of this variety, and they may be
various to infinity, according to the various haps they meet with, like the
letters of the Alphabet diversely combined; yet they may be referred to three
principal, Nature, Art, and Fortune. The Nature of Man is the Soul and the
Body. Souls cannot differ specifically, as some hold; for then a species should
be part of an individual, since the Soul makes a part of man; which is absurd,
because the species must be predicated of many individuals. Yet I think there
is some individual difference between our Souls, not wholly depending upon the
conformation of the organs, or the temper of humors, because excellent Souls
have been found to lodge in ill-made Bodies, as those of Socrates and Aesop; and
the contrary. Art may also contribute much to this diversity, especially in
Youth, when wits are more flexible; some very dull ones having been incredibly
improved by study. So also may Fortune and Occasion; amongst others, the place
of residence; as the fertility of Palestine in Pasturage made the Jews
Shepherds; and the plains of Egypt, fitted for tillage by the inundation of
Nilus, made the Egyptians Plow-men. Those that inhabit the coasts of the Sea
are Merchants, in regard of the convenience of transportation. And necessity,
which forces our wits upon sundry things, makes the Arabians, who live in an
unfertile soil, for the most part Thieves; as sterility has constrained others
to make war upon their neighbors. The diversity of Climates, Winds, Waters,
Diets, Exercises, and generally all external and internal things, making some
impression upon the temper, makes likewise some diversity in Wits.

The Fourth said, That diversity of actions cannot proceed but from diversity
of forms; and therefore those of men must be unequal. It Is likely the Souls of
Aristotle, Socrates, and the like great Philosophers, were of another stamp
then those of people so stupid that they cannot reckon above five. And who
dares say that the Soul of Judas was as perfect as that of our Lord? Moreover
the Wise man says, Wisd. c. 8. that he received a good Soul. Plato
distinguishes Wits into as many Classes as there are Metals. And experience
shows us three sorts in the world; some few are transcendent and heroical,
being raised above the rest: others are weak and of the lowest rank, such as we
commonly say have not common sense; others are of an indifferent reach, of
which too there are sundry degrees, which to attribute wholly to the various
mixture of elementary material qualities, is to make a spiritual effect, as the
action of the Understanding is, depend upon a corporeal cause, between which
there is no proportion. And 'twere less absurd to ascribe these effects to the
diverse aspects of the stars, whose influences and celestial qualities are never
altogether alike.

The Fifth said, That wit is a dexterity or power of the soul, seated in the
Cognoscitive rational faculty, not in the Appetitive or Sensitive. It Is a
certain capacity of the Understanding to know things, which is done either by
invention or instruction of others. Invention requires acuteness of wit and
judgment. Learning, docility, and likewise judgment. Memory serves as well to
invent as to learn. And thus three things are requisite to Wit, namely, Memory,
Acuteness, and Judgment. The first furnishes matter and sundry things, without
supply whereof it is impossible to have a good wit. The Judgment disposes
things in order, resolving the whole into its parts when it is requisite to
learn or teach, and reducing the parts to their whole when it is required to
invent, which is the more difficult; our mind finding it of more facility to
divide things then to compound them. Whence Inventors of Arts, and things
necessary to life, have been placed in the number of the gods. But, because
each of these three faculties require a contrary temperature; Memory a hot and
moist, as in children; Acuteness of wit, a temper hot and dry, as that of Poets
and Magicians; Judgment, a cold and dry, proper to old men; hence it is that a
perfect Wit which excells in all three is rarely found.

II. Of Newyears Gifts.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That the Poet who said, that he who begins a
work well has already done half of it, spoke no less judiciously of humane
actions then those who advise to have regard to the end. For, as this crowns
the work, so it is not to be doubted but a good beginning makes half of this
wreath, and that both joined together perfect the circle, the Hieroglyphick of
the revolution of years. Hence we see antiquity contrived to begin them with
some festival solemnities, with intent thereby to consecrate their first
actions to the Deity. The Hebrews had their most remarkable feasts in the
month Nisan, the first of the year, answering to our March; and amongst others
that solemn Passover, when they invited their Neighbors to the feast of the
Lamb. The Greeks began their Olympiads with Games and Sacrifices to Jupiter;
and the superstitious Egyptians not only took omens from what they first met
every day, but made it their god for that day. And being next the divine
assistance men value nothing more then the favor and good will of their
friends, it is no wonder if after sacrifices and public ceremonies they have
been so careful to continue this mutual friendship by feasts and presents at
the beginning of the year, which some extended to the beginnings of months,
which are Lunar years, as the Turks do at the beginning of each Moon, of which
they then adore the Croissant. And if they who make great Voyages, after having
doubled the Cape of Good Hope, or some other notable passage, have reason to
make feasts and merriment, for joy of the happy advancement of their
Navigation; those who are embarked together in the course of this life, and
whom the series of years (which may be called so many Capes and Points marked
in the Chart of our Navigation) transports into new Countries, ought to rejoice
with their friends for the dangers which they have escaped, and felicitate them
for the future by presents, and wishes, in the continuation of this journey. Or
else considering the difference of years as great as that of Countries, we
renew our correspondencies by presents, as hospitalities were anciently by
those which they called Xenia, which is still the name of our New Years Gifts;
since in respect of the great alterations happening in those years, we may be
said to be new Guests, or Hospites of a New-year.

The Second said, That this laudable custom was founded upon reason and
example, our Druides being wont to gather with great ceremonies the Misletoe of
the Oak, which they consecrated to their great Tutates, and then distributed to
the people, as of great virtue. Whence our New Years Presents are still called
in many places Guy, fig. Misletoe.
Guy-l'an-neuf. But the first day of the year was not the same with all
Nations; some of our first Kings began it at S. Martin's day, as appears by the
dates of some old Ordinances, and the yet continued openings of our
Parliaments; whence possibly remains the fashion of making good cheer on this
day. The Romans used this custom, sometimes in March, which was the first
month of the year, when the year had but ten months, each of 36 days; and
afterward on the Calends and first day of January, which was added with
February to the other ten by Numa. And ever from the foundation of Rome, Tatius
and Romulus appointed a bundle of Verven to be offered with other presents for
a good augury of the beginning year. Tacitus mentions an Edict of Tiberius,
forbidding to give or demand New Years Gifts, saving at the Calends of January,
when as well the Senators and Knights, as all other Orders brought presents to
the Emperor, and in his absence to the Capitol. Of which I observe another rise
in the cense or numeration of the people, which was made in the beginning of
the Lustres or every five years, and began under Ancus Martius; at which time
money was cast amongst the people, as the Emperors did afterward when they
reviewed their Armies at the beginning of each year, honoring the most eminent
Soldiers with presents. Now reason too is joined with this practice; for as we
take presages from the first occurrences of a day, week, or year, so none are
more acceptable then gifts, which gratify the more because they come without
pains or expense.

The Third said, That the three sorts of goods being found in the reception of
presents sent us by friends; (for they testify the honor which they do us;
the least present brings some profit to the receiver; and no benefit is
received without some pleasure) it is no wonder if men who have from all time
assigned some day to every thing which they esteemed good, have also thought
fit to solemnize the Feast of Presents or Benefits, and to testify their
esteem thereof have made the Year begin by it, for good augury. Indeed, nothing
is so powerful as Presents, because they make and reconcile amity, the greatest
Gift which God has given to men. They pierce the best-guarded Gates, as Philip
of Macedon said; and Jupiter found nothing so fitting as a Golden-showre
whereby to convey himself into Danae's lap. Homer with his Muses is thrust out
by the shoulders if he brings nothing with him; whereas a course Varlet laden
with booty is admitted even into the Closet. Whereof men are so persuaded, that
there was never a Religion but had its offerings. And God forbids any to come
before him with empty hands. Especially, gifts are agreeable, when the
proportion of the receiver with the giver is observed. So the poverty of the
Greek Epigrammatist made Augustus well pleased with the penny which he presented
to him. But the price of a thing, or (in defect thereof) its novelty, or the
excellence of the work-man-ship, the place and time is most considerable, this
latter making such things as would have no acceptance at another season, pass
for courtesies in the beginning of the year.

CONFERENCE XCVI.
I. Of Place. II. Of Hieroglyphics.

I. Of Place.
ALL created things having a finite and circumscribed essence, have also a
proper place which serves for a bound to their nature, which is the principle
of their motions and actions, which cannot be but in some place; the six
differences whereof, namely, above, below, before, behind, the right side and
the left, sufficiently prove its existence, since differences presuppose a
genus. But its nature and essence is no less hard to be known, then its
existence is plain. To omit the sundry considerations of its several Sciences,
here we understand, by place, that which contains things placed; and it is
either common to more, or proper to one alone; this, either external or
internal: and generally, it is either Physical or Mathematical, or rather the
same sometimes, provided, and sometimes divested of accidents in its pure
dimensions. This place cannot be the space of every body, because space is
nothing else but a vacuum, which is wholly opposite to place, which being an
affection 'of body must be something of reality. It Is therefore well defined
the first internal and unmovable surface of the ambient body. First, that is,
immediate and proximate, because it must be equal to the body which it
contains; internal, for if it were the external surface, it would be greater;
as vessels are larger then what they contain: Lastly, it must be immovable;
which is not to be understood of the real place or real surface environing the
body (because this surface changes when the body changes place, or whilst the
body remains unmoved the ambient air is changed every moment) but of that place
or imaginary surface which encompasses the body on all sides, remaining always
immovable. Which is more satisfactory then to say, as some do, that the place
of bodies is immovable; although they and their surfaces change place; because
from thence to the center and principal parts of the world there is always the
same distance and respect.

The Second said, That Aristotle showed more subtilety then truth, when in
stead of defining place internally corresponding to the extension of the parts,
he defined it by an outward circumference; by which account, Souls, Angels, and
other spiritual substances should not be contained in a place, as it is certain
they are (though definitively, not circumscriptively) in regard they move from
one place to another. Yea the whole world should not have a place, since it
cannot be contained by any thing, but contains all. It Is also incongruous to
say, with some, that the place of the world is its center, which is too small
to design the place of so great a body; and if a point were the place of the
world, the place of a Pismire should be greater then that of the world. What
others say, That place is only the extension of things, cannot consist with the
place of spiritual forms, which yet have a distinct extension as other
corporeal forms have; and we change place every moment, although we have always
the same extension. I conceive therefore, the place being relative to the thing
placed ought to be defined by it, according to the nature of relatives; and so
place is nothing but the space occupi'd by the body placed, which is that long,
broad and deep interval which receives the same. Moreover, space which would be
void if one body did not succeed another, has all the conditions requisite to
the nature of place. For first, it is nothing of the thing placed, being a pure
nothing. 2. It Is immovable, being of it self incapable of motion. 3. It Is
equal to the body placed, the whole space answering to the whole body, and
every part to every part. 4. It receives sometimes one body, and sometimes
another. And lastly, two equal spaces contain as much the one as the other.

The Third said, That place, defined the immovable surface of an ambient body,
cannot agree to the air, because its surface is not immovable. But if this
immobility be meant of the whole body of the air, this inconvenience will
follow, that the external surface of the air is not proportionate to the
quantity of the particular body which it encompasseth. The defining of place to
be the space occupi'd by the body placed, explicates the place of bodies, but
not of incorporeal things, as the Soul and Angels, which having no extension
should have no space, and, consequently, be in no place. Wherefore I conceive
that place being an external affection of figure and quantity, must not be
taken in the concave superficies of the body which touches, it but in the
unequal of that which is contained. And so this superficies will be immovable,
since the quantity of the body remains the same) and always equal to the body
contained without penetration, because it has no profundity. Likewise, every
body will be likewise in its own place. And as for things incorruptible and
incorporeal, the Angels and the Heavens, their place will be always the
extremity of their substance.

The Fourth said, That if there were any place in nature which receives bodies,
it must either be a body it self, or a vacuum. A body it cannot be, for then
two absurdities will follow, namely, penetration of dimensions (one body being
within another) and a progress to infinity: for place being a body, it must be
in another place, this in a third, this third in a fourth, and so to infinity.
Nor can it be a vacuum which receives bodies. For either this vacuum remains
after the admission of a body, and so the same place will be full and empty
both together; or this vacuum recedes to make place for supervening bodies;
which cannot be; for then it will be capable of local motion, which is an
affection and property of body. Or else, lastly, this vacuum perishes and is
annihilated; which is impossible too; for then it should be subject to
generation and corruption, which are found only in bodies. Wherefore if ever
the Scepticks had reason to suspend their judgment, it is in the nature of
place, which they justly doubted whether it were something or nothing.

The Fifth said, That to doubt of place is to doubt of the clearest thing in
the world, nothing being so certain as the existence of things, which cannot be
but in some place. And we see a thing no sooner exists in nature but it has
its place and its station, which alone made the distinction of the parts of the
world from their ancient Chaos, in which things were confused and without
order, which is not found saving when every entity occupies the place due to
its nature, which is preserved therein. Amongst simple bodies, Heaven has the
highest place, Fire and Air the next, Water and Earth the lowest: amongst
mixts, Minerals and Metals are formed in the Entrails of the Earth; Plants and
Animals are preserved upon the earth and in the air; and the center of every
thing is nothing else but its place. Wherefore as God contains in himself all
the perfections of his creatures, so he is in all places by his presence, his
essence, and his power.

II. Of Hieroglyphics.
Upon the second Point it was said, That the Ancient Sages were always curious
to hide the mysteries of their learning under some obscure things; the Poets
under the shell of Fables, (whom Plato and Aesop imitated;) the Pythagoreans
under their Riddles; Solomon under Parables, the Chaldeans in the sacred
Letters of their Cabala. But especially the Egyptians have observed this
mystery. For having learned from the Jews and the Chaldeans the principal
notions of the Sciences and the Deity, (the Principles whereof were taken from
those famous Columns which preserved the Characters thereof after the Deluge)
they transmitted the same to posterity by the figures and images of things
engraven upon Pyramids and Obeliscks, whereof we still see some fragments in
their Hieroglyphics, which signifies sacred and mysterious figures or
sculpture, not so much for the things employed to that purpose, which
oftentimes were common and natural, as for the mystical and hidden sense which
they attributed to the same. The use of these figures was the more profitable,
in that having some similitude and correspondence to the quality of the thing
signified, they not only denoted the same, but also its nature and property.
So, painting an Eye upon a Scepter, which signified God, they intimated also
his properties, by the Scepter his Omnipotence, and by the Eye his Providence.
Another advantage of these Hieroglyphics, is, that they were equally
understood by all Nations of several Languages, as at this day the Chinese and
Japoneses make use of some Letters like Hieroglyphics, which signify rather
things then words. Which would be a good way to reduce all Tongues into one,
and so to facilitate all Sciences, were not this Hieroglyphical writing too
diffuse. For there must be as many Characters as there are things in the World,
which being almost infinite, and every day new, would render this Art endless;
which has made the use of it laid aside, as it would also be among the
Chinese, were not honor which supports and feeds all other Arts annexed to
this knowledge of Characters, which advances those alone who are skilled in
their Letters to Magistracies and the chief charges of that great State.

The Second said, That the signs for representing things are either Natural or
Artificial. Amongst the natural, employed by men to express their conceptions,
are the pictures and images of thigns; as to represent a Man or a Tree, they
paint a man and a Tree; by which way Philomela described the wrong which had
been done her. The Egyptians had the same design in their Hieroglyphics; but
finding that it would never have an end, they in this imitated the Hebrews, who
make the same Root serve to produce a great number of words, and employed one
figure to signify first one thing, namely, that whose image it is, and
afterward many others wherewith it has some affinity. So the figure of a
Serpent signifies a Serpent, and the Prudence which is attributed to that
animal; and because they observed, that the last day of the year joynd to the
first, and made a continual circle, they represented the year by a Serpent with
his tail in his mouth. Upon the same ground Emblems were invented. So Alciate,
to represent Fortitude and Wisdom, gives the pourtraicts of Ajax and Ulysses;
to signify a good Merchant, who trusts only to what he holds, he paints a hand
with an eye in the middle of it; the Fox signifies cunning; the Pismire
Providence; the Be, Policy; an earthen pot joined to an iron pot, dangerous
Alliance. In brief, so many fables and phancies are so many writings after this
manner; from which, to speak truth, if you abstract the reverence which is due
to Antiquity, I see nothing that comes near the marvel of our Letters, which,
in respect of other inventions, I cannot but compare to the Philosophers Stone
so much talked of, which whosoever possesses may by its projection make as much
gold as he needs to travel over the world; and those other inventions to the
money, or, if you please, the provisions, which a Traveller carries with him.
For these are incommodious, and serve but to one or few uses; whereas writing,
by combination of sixteen several characters, (the rest being found
superfluous) is sufficient to represent what ever has been, is, may or may not
be.

The Third said, That no doubt 'twas necessity which put the Egyptians first
upon the invention of Hieroglyphics, then which our Letters are much less
significative, because they express not the nature of natural things, as their
figures do, but only words. Yet the use of Hieroglyphics was very pernicious
to the vulgar, who seeing the Attributes of God represented under the shapes of
Animals and Plants, took occasion to adore those corporeal things, and became
the most superstitious of all Nations, going so far as to deifie garlic,
onyons, rats and toads. Moreover, Man's life is too short for this Art; his wit
too weak to invent figures suitable to all the parts of speech diversifi'd by
numbers, cases, persons, tenses, and other Grammatical differences of words;
and his memory too slippery, to retain all those figures, because they
represented not one single thing, but many different; and for that one and the
same thing was diversely figured; as God was expressed by an Eye, a Circle, and
an Unite; Prudence by a double head, a Gorgon's head, a Crane, a Dragon, a
Serpent, a fish called Scarus, or the Gilt-head, a Mulberrytree, a Hiacynth;
Royalty, by the reins of a bridle, an Elephant and a Dog; Wisdom, by the
breast, or the wand of Pallas; Concord, by a Crow, a Caduceus, or Mercurius's
rod, a Peacock, a Be, and a Lute; Fear by waves, a Dove, a Heart, a Hare, and a
Wolf. All which figures signified other things besides, yea, oftentimes
contraries; as the Ass is the Hieroglyphick of wisdom with the Cabalists, and
with us of stupidity; and the same wisdom was denoted among the Egyptians by a
sieve, which with us is the emblem of a loose-tongu'd person that can retain
nothing. In fine, this Hieroglyphical invention is good for nothing but to make
the ignorant admire what they must reverence without knowing it. For that which
secures all professions from contempt, is, the use of terms not understood by
the vulgar.

CONFERENCE XCVII.
I. Of Weights, and the causes of Gravity. II. Of Coat Armor.

I. Of Weights, and the causes of Gravity.
THe World is Man's Palace, whereof God is the Architect, sustaining the same
with the three fingers, of his Power, Goodness, and Wisdom. And the Scripture
says, He has hung the Earth in the midst of the Air, and ordained all things
in number, weight, and Measure, which are the three pillars of this stately
Edifice. Number is the cause of Beauty; Measure, of Goodness; and Weight, of
Order; which is not found but in the place toward which bodies are carried by
their Gravity. A quality depending upon the four first, which by their
rarefaction or condensation of things cause more or less ponderosity. For light
signifies nothing but less heavy; it being certain, that as the Earth
gravitates in the Water, and this in the Air, so would the Air in the sphere of
Fire, Fire in the Heaven of the Moon, this in the mixed, and so forwards till
you come to nothing, which has no weight because it has no corporeity.

The Second said, That gravity and the descent of natural bodies to the center,
cannot proceed from the predominance of terrestrial parts in mixts; since Gold,
the heaviest of metals, and Mercury, which is next it, have more humidity then
siccity, that is to say, more Water then Earth, in comparison of other
metallic bodies; God being the most ductile, and Mercury the most fluid. So
also Salt, which is heavier then wood or stone, is nothing but water cogeal'd,
and dissolving again in a moist place. Wherefore Gravity seems rather to
proceed from these three things, namely, place, comparison, and figure. Place
is so considerable herein, that bodies gravitate not in their proper places,
but only when they are removed from the same, and more or less proportionally
to their distance. Comparison makes us judge a body light, because it is less
heavy then an other. On the contrary, Figure makes heavy bodies light, causing
Leaf-gold to swim, which in the same quantity reduced into a Globe would sink;
and an expanded body weighs less in a balance, then when it is in a less
volumn. Which is also observed of the thinner parts of the Air, which being of
a more moveable figure are seen to play therein when the Sun shines clear.

The Third said, That the cause why a broader figure swims, or is upheld in the
Air more easily then if it were in a Globe or other closer figure, is not, for
that figure makes a thing lighter, but from the resistance of the medium, which
has more hold in one then in the other. Nor does gravity proceed from the
inclination of a thing to its Center; since the Center is but a Point, wherein
nothing can lodge. And if the Center of the world were the Center of heavy
things, the stars which are the denser and solider parts of their orbs, and
consequently, have more gravity, which necessarily follows the density of
corporeal matter, especially the Moon which is demonstrated to be solid and
massy, because it reflects the light of the Sun, should not remain suspended
above the Air, which is lighter, but descend to this Center of the Universe.
For, to believe, with some, that the Moon is kept up like a stone in a sling by
the rapid motion of the First Mover, is, to hold the Stars, the greatest and
noblest part of the Universe, in a violent state, only to give rest and a
natural state to the least and meanest, which is the Earth. Wherefore the
descent of bodies is not because of themselves they affect the Center of the
Earth, but for that they are upon a body lighter then themselves; order
obliging every thing to take its own place, and till it be so, every body being
necessitated to move it self, the heaviest downwards, and the less heavy
upwards. Hence water gravitates not in its channel, although it be not in its
Center; because the upper part of the water is not heavier then the lower.

The Fourth said, That Gravity is a certain quality which carries all bodies
toward a common point, continuing the union of the parts of the world,
hindering Vacuity by the concentration of all bodies which press one another,
the heavy having more matter in less quantity. For when we see Air mount above
Water, and Fire above Air, they yield and give place to heavier bodies; as Oil
being in the bottom of Water ascends to the top, not by its lightness, but by
the weight of the water which thrusts it up. So Lead, and all other metals,
except Gold, swim in Mercury, to which they yield in gravity. For in equal
quantities Gold weighs 19, Mercury 13, Lead 11 and, Silver 10 and, Copper 9,
Iron 8, and Tin 7 and. As for the cause of this gravity (which, some say, is in
heavy bodies, others in their Center, to which they attribute a magnetical
virtue) I conceive, it consists in a reciprocal attraction of the same bodies,
which draw and are drawn, and others are drawn to the inferior body which
attracts with all its parts; so that bodies are carried toward the Earth, and
the Earth attracts them reciprocally, as the Lodestone attracts Iron, and is
attracted by it. For it is evident that the Lodestone draws Iron; and to prove
that it is drawn by Iron; lay a Lodestone in one scale, and in the other an
equal weight to it. If you apply Iron to the bottom of the scale where the
Lodestone is, this scale will raise up the other, the Iron attracting the
Lodestone to it self. On the contrary, if you approach with the Iron over the
Lodestone, the scale wherein it is will ascend toward the Iron which attracts
it. For whereas it is objected, that if the Earth attracted things with all its
parts, then it would follow that things let down in some hollow of the Earth,
being attracted by the parts above, and those below, would not descend by
reason of contrary attractions; I answer, that those bodies being out of their
Centres, the greatest and strongest part of the Earth, which is toward the
Center, would attract them to it; the stronger prevailing over the weaker.

II. Of Coat Armor.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That all Nations have been curious in
inquiring into their own Antiquities, and particulars, to preserve the tokens
of their Genealogy; some by Histories, others by the Images of their Ancestors,
as the Romans; and others by conjoyning of Hieroglyphics and Ensigns, which
are our Arms, which have had the same fate as other things of the world, and
from very small and plain beginnings, by increasing of Alliances, have at
length composed those variegated Scutcheons, so variously quartered and
counter-quarter'd, that it has been needful to make an Art, called by the
Latins Heraldica, and to invent new words, with particular Officers, called
Kings, and Heralds of Arms, to regulate and display them: And so many races and
marriages are crowded together in the narrow extent of these Scutcheons, that
great rolls and long Histories can scarce explicate them at length. The
Scutcheon which we first blazon has six Fields, namely, two metals, and four
colors. The metals are, Or and Argent; the colors, Azure, (which is blew)
Gules, (which is red) Verd, (which is green) and Sable, (which is black) some
add a fifth, Purpure, being mixed of Azure and Gules, but it is little or not at
all used in France. The English introduce two others, Ten which they call
Orange, and Sanguine, which also are unsuall in France. Besides these colors,
thereare two Furs or sorts of Fells, which adorn the Scutcheon, Ermine, of
Sable upon Argent; and Vair, or Verry, of Azure upon Argent; and when these
Colors are altered, then the Scutcheon must be blazoned Verry of such colors.
Some Scuctheons have neither metals nor colors, and are called Whiteshields,
(like those of new Knights before they have done any memorable achievement; of
which Virgil speaks -- Plamaque inglorius alba) wherewith the Arms of our
Maidens dying unmarry'd are quarterd. Others have only a small Scutcheon in
the middle, and this Scutcheon is said to be in the fesse point. The principal
parts of these Scutcheons are nine, answering to the parts of a man's face,
which may be called every one's natural Scutcheon, whereinto are collected in
several quarters all the titles of the nobility, and qualities, of the Soul.
These parts are termed, 1. The Dexter Chief, which answers to the right Temple.
2. The Middle Chief, to the middle of the forehead. And 3. the Sinister Chief,
to the left Temple. 4. The Honor point, to the root of the Nose. 5. The Fesse
point, to the place of the Nose. 6. The Nombril point, to the Mouth. 7. The
Dexter Base, to the right Muchato. 8. The Sinister Base, to the left. And 9.
The precise middle Base, to the Chin. This Scutcheon is divided sometimes into
sundry sorts of colors, or metals. If it be divided in pale, or
perpendicularly, it is called party per pale; if in fesse, or athwart, it is said
party per fesse; if slopingly, it is said party per bend. Lastly, it is
quartered either by crosses or gyrons, or by a Salture, which is a S. Andrews
Cross; or else counter quartered, when one of its quarters is again quartered.
Next are to be considered the Ordinaries, which are, 1. The Chief, which is the
highest part of the Scutcheon. 2. The Pale, which divides it from the Chief to
the Base perpendicularly. 3. The Fesse, which cuts it athwart the Pale. 4. The
Bend, which cuts from the right Angle to the Base, and is a Cotize if it be a
third part less then the Bend, and a Battoon if it be two thirds less then a
Cotize. 5. The Cheveron. 6. The Cross. 7. The Saltyre. 8. The Gyrons, which
form eight Triangles terminating in the Center. There are other less principal
parts, as the Flanks which divide it by the sides; the Emancheures with one or
more points; the Pyle, which is a great Isosceles Triangle reversed; the Perle,
which is a kind of Y, taking up sometimes the whole Shield; the Gussets,
Lozanges, Frets, and such other things as are better represented by figures
then by words. These Armories are sometimes indented, invecked, and embattail'd
at their sides; and sometimes they are either charged or bruised with sundry
figures; the former, when there is but one in the middle; charged, when they
are seem all over. A Border is any thing which surrounds the Scutcheon. Some
Shields are covered with diverse things, diaper'd in form of broidery, leaves,
and morisques, and fretted in fashion of Lozanges and other things. The Changes
are almost infinite, there being amongst others above thirty fashions of
Crosses; the Patee, which is that of Maltha; the Potencee, that of Jerusalem;
the fleury, or flory; the bottony, pommettie, etc. The other more common pieces
are Mascles, a sort of Lozange voided, whereof the middle is of the color of
the field; Rustres, which are Lozanges pierced round; Billets or
Parallelograms, Fusils, Bezants, which are figures of ancient Money; Torteuxes,
which are like Bezants, but differ from them, inasmuch as Torteuxes are always
of a color, and Bezants always of Or or Argent. As for others, every thing in
Nature fills the Shield, and has its different blazons, if the color of one
of their parts be different from the whole. Amongst Fishes, the Whale with his
tail and teeth different is said to be fierte; the Dolphin is said to be
hauriant. Amongst Trees the Oak, for example, whose parts have different
colors, is blazoned fuste, or branchless for the wood; accolle, or embraced,
for the Ivy, foliated and fructed. The middle of Flowers is called bottonie.
Amongst Birds the Eagle and Gryphon are almost alone said to be armed, that is
to say, beak'd and ungulated; others are said to be displayed. The Cock is said
to be crested and jelloped. Lions, amongst Animals, are alone rampant; Horses
in that posture are said to be fray'd; Bulls, furious or mad. The Lion shows
but one eye and one ear; the Leopard two, and is always passant; if he be
rampant he is called Leopard Lyonne; if a Lion be passant he is called Lion
Leoparde. There are Lions Naissant, which show only the head and the two
fore-paws; Issuant, which show only the hinder part; Brochant, or spreading
over all the field; Couped, when one body is of two colors; armed, are those
whose claws are of another color; and langued, when the tongue is so. Blazon
begins always from the dexter side of the Chief; in those that are quartered
saltyrewise, by the chief. If the first and last quarter be alike, they are
blazoned together, beginning always with the field. There are little Scutcheons
upon the principle armories; those which are upon the fesse point are said to
be over all; in the chief and the base, they are said to be entez or graffed;
and if there be any upon animals, as Eagles or Lions, they are said to be
charged; and all Inescutcheons are always blazoned last.

The second said, That as Nobility is the more esteemed the more obscure its
original is; so the first Inventors of Arms, which are the Badges of it, seem
to have affected obscurity in their terms, to render the same more
recommendable to the vulgar by being less understood. Arms are composed of
Images portrayed upon a ground called the Field, into which men's ambition has
introduced every thing in Nature; the Heaven, the Stars, the Air with its
Birds, the Sea and its Fishes, the Earth, and whatever rarity it has upon its
surface and in its bowels; all the parts of man, and all the instruments of
Arts, especially those of War, to which Armories owe their birth: Whence the
Shield or Buckler has been chosen to receive the same, and to serve as a badge
of Nobility, for the distinction of Families. And as all Nations have preferred
Valor before the other Virtues, because it is most useful for the preservation
of States; so they have destinated to it Palms, Crowns, Triumphs, and such
other badges of Honor; amongst which all Nations have apprehended something of
Divinity in their Shields. The Getes made their solemnest Oaths upon them; the
ancient Germans adored every one his Shield and the Moon. The Poets relate,
that the fate of Troy lay in a Buckler which was kept in the Temple of their
Goddess. A Buckler sent from Heaven kept the fortune of the Romans, like to
which one of their Kings caused 400 to be made. Two Grecian Captains disputed
the possession of Achilles's Buckler. That of Aenaeas had graven upon it all
the destiny of Rome. In brief, our ancient Kings were carried upon a great
Target or Shield to the solemnity of their Coronation. The highest of our Coins
bears the name and figure of an Escu or Shield; and true gentry amongst us is
that of Esquiers, a title drawn from Escu or a Shield. Which hinders not but
that learning, and management of affairs, being ways of ennobling men, though
less frequent and more difficult, deserve also to bear Arms; as we read that
Charles IV. granted to Bartolus, the famous Civilian, a Lion gules, with two
tails, in a field Or.

The Third said, That some Armories are commonly conceived to have been sent
from heaven, as the Cross of Constantinople, and the Flowers de lys of France.
Others are taken from memorable qualities and actions of Ancestors, as those of
Austria, a Prince whereof returning out of battle covered all over with blood
except his Belt, gave occasion to his descendants to bear a Fesse Argent on a
Shield gules. Such is the Cross of Savoy, which the Christian Princes granted
to one of the Amadei, for having driven away the enemies from behind the Island
of Rhodes; and the three Wings of Lorrain, because a Duke pierced three Birds
flying with one arrow. Others have some correspondence or allusion to the name
of the bearer; as those of Castile, Leon, Galicia, and Granada, which have a
Castle, a Lion, a Chalice, and a Pomegranate. Others have distinctions for
younger brothers, as a Battoon in the middle, or a Label with 2, 3, or more
pendants in the Chief. Bastards commonly bear a Battoon in contrebende, that
is, coming from the sinister point of the Chief to the dexter of the Base.
Likewise other pieces distinguish younger brothers, as Mullets, Cressants, etc.
placed in the middle of the Chief, or else at the first Quarter. But it is
remarkable in blazoning of Arms, that Metal must always be put upon Color, or
Color upon Metal; only Godfry of Bouillon made his Shield of argent charged
with a Cross potence Or, and four other Corslets of the same Metal.

The Fourth said, That being the injury of times consumes all things, the Arms
or Devises of Families has been found the best monuments to preserve their
memory through many ages. This gave occasion to our Gauls (for they brought
Coat Armor into greatest use, it being yet unknown to diverse Nations) to
engrave upon their Gates the same badges which distinguished them whilst they
fought armed cap-a-pe, and could not otherwise be known: and if it happened that
two Cavaliers bare the same Shield, the one would either have the life of the
other, or make him alter his devise. Such an expedient as once agreed two
Gentlemen, who were ready to fight because both of them bore a Bulls head, not
always occurring; for they were contented with this decision, that one of them
should Blazon his Coat with the head of a Bull, and the other with the head of
an Ox or Cow, at his choice. Because every one was suffered, as they are at
this day abusively, to choose Arms to himself; which is the cause that the
handsomest Arms are the worst, as being the newest; because they are invented
according to fancy. Whereas anciently, to give Arms was one of the chief
rights of Sovereignty, and joined with the power of conferring Knighthood; and
the advices of the noblest and ancientest Families were taken concerning the
blazoning of them, as being interessed in this novelty. And as for Sovereigns,
they chose the most ancient Arms they could. Those of France are found in the
brain of a Cock, the Imperial Eagle in the root of Fern cut athwart. So the
figure of Cheverons, Torteuxes, Lozenges, Macles, Fusils, and most other things
which enter into the Field of Scutcheons, occur at every turn, and in most
Trees, Stones, Fishes, and other animals: their design being that their
Families should appear not less ancient then nature. It remains to give some
examples of particular Blazons.

The King of France bears two Scutcheons, The first is Azure, three Flowers de
lys Or, two in chief and one in point; which is France. The second is Gules,
two Chains Or, placed in orle, pale, fesse, bend and bar, which is Navarre.
The Supporters are two Angels, one on the right side clothed with a Coat of
Arms azure, seem with Flowers de lys Or,; the other on the left, clad with the
Arms of Navarre. The Crest is a double Flowers de lys.

And to speak something of strangers, without observing any order, which would
be too troublesome; Presbyter John bears azure, a Crucifix argent. The Turk
bears Vert, a Crescent argent. England bears gules, three Leopards Or, armed
and langued azure. Hungary bears barry, argent and gules, of eight pieces.
Arragon, Or, four pales gules. Rhodes, Malta and Savoy, bear gules, a Cross
argent. Flanders, Or, a Lion sables, langued gules. Artois seem of France, a
lable of three pendants, chastellated with Chasteaux Or. Leon, argent, a Lion
gules. Saxony, barry, Or and sable, of eight pieces, a Demi Crown or Crancelin
Vert placed bend-wise. Bohemia, argent, a Lion gules, his tail nowed and passed
in saltyre. Lombardy, gules a Lion Or, armed and langued sable. Florence,
argent, a Flower de lys expansed gules. The great Cham of Tartary bears Or, an
Owl sables. Parma, Or, six Flowers de lys azure. Sweden, azure, three Crowns
Or, two in chief, and one in base. Denmark, Or, seem of Hearts gules, three
Lions Leopardez azure, langued, and armed Or. Poland, gules, an Eagle argent,
beaked, membred and crowned Or. Holland, Or a Lion gules. Bavaria, fusele
argent and azure, of twenty one pieces placed bendwise. Ireland, gules, a Harp
Or.

CONFERENCE XCVIII.
I. Of the causes of Contagion. II. Of the ways of occult Writing.

I. Of the causes of Contagion.
DIseases, being accidents, must be divided, as other accidents, by their first
subjects, which are the solid parts, the humors, and the spirits; and by their
several causes; some of which are manifest, others unknown; the malignity of
the causes which produce them, and the manner whereby they act, being
inexplicable. Which diversity of causes depends upon those of mixtions, which
are of two sorts; one, of the qualities of the elements, which makes the
difference of temperaments; the other of the elementary forms, which being
contrary only upon the account of their qualities, when these put off their
contrariety by alteration, the forms easily become united; and as amongst
qualities, so amongst forms, one becomes predominant, the actions whereof are
said to proceed from an occult property, because the form which produces them
is unknown to us. So Arsenick and Hemlock, besides the power which the first
has to heat, and the second to refrigerate, have a particular virtue of
assaulting the heart, and killing speedily, by a property hitherto unknown.
Such also are contagious and venomous diseases, some whereof are caused by the
inspired air, as the Pestilence, because air being absolutely necessary to the
support of our natural heat, if when it is infected with malignant and mortal
vapors, it be attracted by the mouth, or the pores of the skin, it corrupts
the mass of the spirits, as a crum of bread or other extraneous bodies makes
milk or wine become sour. Others infect by bodily contact, as the Itch, the
Pox, the Measles, and the Leprosy. A third sort proceed from a venomous
matter, either communicated outwardly, as by poison and the biting of venomous
beasts, or generated in the body, as it may happen to the blood, black choler,
and the other humors being extravasated.

The Second said, That diseases proceed either from the corruption and
vitiosity of particular bodies, some of which are disposed to the Pleurisy,
others to the Flux, others to the Colic; called therefore sporadical, or
dispersed and promiscuous diseases; or else from some common vitiosity, as of
the air, aliments, waters, winds, or other such common cause, whereby many come
to be seized upon by the same disease at the same time: so, after Famines, bad
nourishment gives a great disposition to the Pestilence. These maladies are
fixed to a certain Country, seldom extending beyond it; as the Leprosy to the
Jews, the Kings Evil to the Spaniards, Burstenness to Narbon, the Colic to
Poitou, the Phthisick to the Portugals, the Pox to the Indians called by them
Apua, and brought by the Spaniards into Europe; and such other diseases
familiar to some particular Country, and called Endemial. Or else they are
Epidemical, and not tied to a certain region, but produced by other external
causes, as pestilential and contagious diseases; which (again) are either
extraordinary, as the Sweating-sickness of England, the Coqueluche, which was a
sort of destillation; or ordinary, which manifest themselves by purple spots,
carbuncles, and buboes. But as the causes of the Smallpox and Measles are
chiefly born within us, being produced of the maternal blood attracted in the
womb, and cast forth by nature when become more strong, so though the seeds of
contagious diseases may come from without, yet they are commonly within our
selves.

The Third said, That Contagion is the communication of a disease from one body
to another; the most violent so communicable is the Pestilence, which is
defined a most acute, contagious, venomous and mortal Fever, accompanied with
purple spots, Buboes and Carbuncles. It Is properly a species of a Fever, being
a venomous and contra-natural heat kindled in the heart, manifesting it self by
a high, frequent, and unequal pulse, except when nature yields at first to the
violence and malignity of the disease, and then the pulse is slow, small and
languishing, but always unequal and irregular. Oftentimes it kills the first or
second day; scarce passes to the seventh, if it be simple and legitimate; but
when it is accompanied with putrefaction, it reaches sometimes to the
fourteenth. Its malignity appears in its not yielding to ordinary remedies
which operate by their first qualities, but only to medicaments which act by
occult properties; an argument that the cause of these diseases is so too. Now
four things are here to be considered, 1. That which is communicated. 2. The
body which communicates the same. 3. That to which it is communicated. 4. The
medium through which the same is done. A thing communicated against nature, is
either the disease, or the cause of the disease, or the symptom. Here it is the
cause of the disease, which is either corporeal or incorporeal. The
incorporeal, in my opinion, are the malignant influences of the Stars, as of
Mars and Saturn* and during Comets and Eclipses. For since their benign
influences preserve motion and life in all things of the world; by the reason
of contraries, the malignity of the same aspects may be the cause of the
diseases and irregularities which we behold in it. The corporeal cause must be
moveable, an humor, a vapor, or a spirit; which malignant evaporations kill
oftentimes without any sign of putrefaction; or if there be any, it proceeds
not from the corruption of the humors, but from the oppression and suffocation
of the natural heat by those malignant vapors; and then the humors being
destitute of the natural heat, and of that of the spirits which preserved them,
turn into poison. There must be some proportion between the body which
communicates this vapor and that which receives it; but the same is unknown to
us; and this proportion is the cause that some Contagions seize only upon some
animals, as Horses* Dogs, and Cattle; others upon Men alone, Children, Women,
old Men, Women with Child and their burdens; others seize only upon certain
parts, as the Itch is communicated only to the skin, the Phthisick to the
Lungs, the Ophthalmia to the eyes, and not to the other parts. The medium of
this communication is the air, which being rare and spongy is very susceptible
of such qualities, which it easily transmits by its mobility. And these
qualities happen to it, either extrinsecally, as from faetid and venomous
vapors and fumes exhaled from carrion, marshes, impurities, and openings of
the ground by Earthquakes, which are frequently followed by the Pestilence; or
else they arise in the Air it self, in which vapors may acquire a pestilential
malignity, of which a hot and moist intemperature is very susceptible.

The Fourth said, That the Pestilence is found indifferently in all seasons,
climates, sexes, ages, and persons; which argues that its proximate cause is
not the corruption of the humors, and intemperature of the first qualities.
Otherwise the Pestilence should be as other diseases, whereof some are hot,
others cold, and be cured likewise by contrary qualities. Besides, the Spirits
being igneous cannot be corrupted, and the corruption observed sometimes in the
humors is not essential to the Pestilence, but only accidental, and however
but an antecedent cause. For if putrefaction were the conjunct cause, then
putrid Fevers and the Gangrene, which is a total putrefaction, should be
contagious. Wherefore it appears that the cause of this diseases are as occult
as its effects are sensible; and that it is chiefly in this kind of malady that
it is to be inquired, as Hippocrates speaks, whether there be not something
divine. Which we are not to understand, as he does, concerning what proceeds
from the Air; seeing God threatens, in Ezechiel, to cause the third part of his
people to dye of the Pestilence; as in one night he caused all the first born
of Egypt to perish; and in three days, under David, seventy thousand
Israelites.

The Fifth said, That to attribute the cause of the Pestilence to putrefaction,
without assigning the degree of it, is to say nothing more then to recur to the
properties of substance, and less then to seek it in the divine Divine Justice;
these terms manifesting our ignorance, rather then the thing inquired.
Moreover, the signs of this malady are all equivocal, and common to other
diseases, yea, oftentimes contrary one to another; in some a pulse is violent,
bleeding at the nose, thirst, the tongue dry and black, delirations, purple
spots, and buboes; in others* a small pulse, vomiting, tongue yellow, livid,
and sleepiness. And some sick are cured by remedies which kill others, as by
Vomits, Purges, and bleeding. Even of Sudorificks, the most suitable to this
disease, some are temperate, and others hor. So that it is no wonder if a
disease so irregular, being known to us only by the relation of people,
oftimes ignorant, the skilful being unwilling to venture themselves, makes such
havoc, since the small pox and other diseases would make no less, though
possibly in longer time, if they were as little understood.

II. Of the ways of occult writing.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That the Ancients deservedly reckoned
secrecy amongst their fabulous Deities, under the name of Harpocrates the God
of silence, since it is not only, as the Poet says, the God of the master of
Gods, that is, Love, but the Governor of the mysteries of Religion, the
Guardian of Civil Society; and, as the Philosopher speaks, the God of the
public and private Fortune, which is maintained by secrecy, the Soul of the
state and business; whence ciphers, and occult ways of writing took their
birth. The Hebrews were the first that practiced ciphers, of which they had six
sorts; L'Etbah, by transposition of Letters; Themurah, by their commutation;
Ziruph, by combination and changing of their power; Ghilgal, by changing of
their numeral quotitie; Notariaszon, putting one Letter or one Syllable for a
word; and Gematry, which is an equivalence of measures and proportions. But
these sorts of ciphers have been found too troublesome and equivocal, and
besides, more recreative then solid. The truncheon encompassed with a thong,
which was the Laconick Scytale, the cipher of the Lacedaemonians; that of
Julius Caesar* who put D for A, and E for B, and so of the other Letters, and
the odd figures given by others to the twenty four Letters, are too gross to be
well concealed. The Dactylogie of Beda is pretty, whereby we speak as nimbly
with the fingers as with the tongue, taking the five fingers of one hand for
Vowels, and the several positions of the other for Consonants. But it can be
used only in presence. They talk also of the same way by bells, trumpets,
arquebuses, fires, torches, and other such means; but because they depend on
the sight and the hearing, which act at a certain distance, they cannot be
useful in all cases. The transmission of thoughts and spirits contrived by
Trithemius and Agrippa, and that invention of quadrants, whereby some have
phancy'd it possible to speak at any distance by help of a Lodestone, are as
ridiculous as that of Pythagoras, to write with blood on a Looking-glass, and
reflect the same upon the face of the Moon. For besides, that the Moon is not
always in a fit position, could a fit glass be found; the writing would not be
secret, because that Luminary is exposed to the Eyes of all the world. No
cipher is comparable to that of writing when it is well contrived; to which
purpose they make use of keys to cipher upon the Alphabets, which are infinite,
depending upon every one's fancy; being sometimes either one Letter, or one
word, or altering in the same discourse and at every word. Sometimes they
divide the discourse, and one half serves for a key to the other; sometimes
they put key upon key, and cipher the key it self with other keys. They put
Naughts at the end of words to distinguish them, or every where amongst the
Letters to deceive the Decypherer, and under these they cipher another hidden
sense by other keys; yea, they insert other Naughts amongst them for a third
sense, or to cause more difficulty. Some make use of numbers, abridge or
multiply the Alphabet, and prepare tables wherein they put three Letters for
one. In fine, humane wit has left nothing unattempted for the concealment of
thoughts under the veil of ciphers; of which, the most perfect are those which
seem not to be such, hiding under a known sense, and an intelligible discourse,
an other sense unknown to all others besides the correspondents; such is that
of Trithemius, by those three hundred seventy five Alphabets of significative
words, each expressing one single Letter.

The Second said, All the several ways of occult writing depend either upon
the matter or the form. To the first belong the sending of Swallows, Pigeons,
or other birds, as also the inventions of writing with Salt Armoniack, Alumn,
Camphire, and Onyon, which appear only at the fire. The formal depends upon
ciphers, which are framed either by the fiction of Characters, or by their
commutation, using three or four Letters to write every thing, with some dashes
or aspirations, which yet may be easily decypher'd, by reason of the frequent
repetition of the Vowels; and those which are thought impossible to be
discovered, are commonly subject to great ambiguities, and so are dangerous.

The Third said, Of the three Authors which have writ concerning this matter,
Baptista Porta teaches rather to decypher then to cipher, and all his
inventions are little secrets, as to write with Alumn. Those of Trithemius are
very gross, of which nevertheless he has composed three Books, the two first
intelligible enough, but the third so obscure, and promising so many miracles,
that Bellarmine, and many others thought it full of Sorceries, which yet are
nothing but the same secrets mentioned in the two foregoing Books, but hid
under more suspicious words; amongst which that of the Spirit, which is very
frequent, signifies the Alphabet or the Key of the Secret, and to look under a
stone and take thence a charm which the Spirit left there, or to invoke the
same Spirit, signifies that you must go and take from under a stone agreed upon
the cypher'd letter, and decipher it by the same alphabet upon which it was
cypher'd. Vigenarius spends half his Book in speaking of the Cabala of the
Jews, and the Caldeans, and the other half in many Alphabets of all sorts, with
Key and without: he has indeed abundance of Ciphers which seem undecypherable,
which he makes to depend on three differences. 1. On the form of Characters,
which comprehends several figures, lines, and colors. 2. On their order and
situation; but changing the Alphabet almost infinite ways. 3. On their value
and power, giving such signification to one letter or character as you please:
All which are easily known for ciphers. The second condition of a cipher, and
which follows that of secrecy, being not to appear such; the least suspicion
causing the stopping of the paper, and so rendering it unprofitable to the
writer; which has given occasion to some to cover characters drawn in oil with
something that might be washed off, besides other such inventions to take away
suspicion; such as that of having two Books of the same impression, and under
pretext of sending Tables of Astrology, or Merchants Bills, to design by
ciphers the letter of the Book which you mean to express, the first cipher
signifying the fourth page, the second the fourth line, and the third the
fourth letter of that line, which you would denote.

CONFERENCE XCIX.
I. Of Ignes fatui. II. Of Eunuchs.

I. Of Ignes fatui.
It Is a question whether 'twould be more advantageous to man's contentment to be
ignorant of nothing, since then he would admire nothing, which is one of his
greatest pleasures. Hence a Peasant beholding a flake of fire following him, or
going before him in the night time, will be otherwise ravished with it then a
Philosopher, who knows or thinks he knows the cause of it; there being little
difference herein, as to our satisfaction. They conceive it to be an unctuous
exhalation, apt to be inflamed, like the fatty steam of a Candle newly put out,
which instantly conveighs down the neighboring light to seek its aliment: But
the same example shows us, that fire very suddenly devours its aliment when it
is subtle and thin: So that if a fire of straw, which is much more material
then an exhalation, vanishes so quickly that we express the most transient
momentary things thereby, how can a far thinner exhalation keep this foolish
fire so long? which, besides, burns not, as appears by its sticking innoxiously
upon the hair of men and manes of horses; and yet Aqua-vitae never so well
rectified will singe the hair, as was sometimes verified to the great prejudice
of one of our Kings; which would make me think, that as all fire is not
luminous (as a hot dunghill burns your finger, and fire excited by motion burns
much more without blazing) so there are some lights which are not igneous, as
in Heaven the Stars, and in Earth some rotten woods, certain fishes, worms,
eyes, flesh of animals, and other more such subjects, which cannot be more
susceptible of those lights which burn not, then the Air which is the prime
diaphanous body, and consequently most capable of receiving them; although
possibly we cannot truly know what temper the Air must acquire to become
luminous, no more then what is fit for it in other subjects, For to attribute
the cause thereof to purity or simplicity, signifies little; for earth and
ashes are more simple then the flesh, or other part, dead or living, of an
Animal; and yet this shines, and those not.

The Second said, That these fires may be referred to four sorts. The first
resemble falling Stars or lighted Torches, which Plutarch says were seen to
fall upon Pompey's Camp the eve before the Battle of Pharsalia. The second is
that kind of flame which has appeared upon the heads of some, as of Ascanius in
Virgil, and of Servius Hostilius; which was an omen to them of Royalty. The
third are those which appear at Sea about the Masts and Shrouds of the Ships,
named by the Ancient, Castor and Pollux when they are two, and when but one,
Helena; and by the Moderns, the fire of S. Elm. The last are those which are
seen in the Country in the night time, and are thought to drive or draw
Travelers into precipices. As for the first, it is certain that the same
exhalation which makes Comets in the highest Region of the Air, and Thunders in
the middlemost, is also the matter of these falling Stars, and being raised in
small quantity from the earth is condensed by the cold of the middle Region,
where finding no cloud strong enough to uphold it, it is inflamed by the
antiperistasis of its contrary, or the swift motion of its fall, by reason of
its great heat and siccity. And as they proceed from the same cause as dry
winds do, so they presage winds and drought* especially in that quarter from
whence they fall. But as for the other sorts, I conceive they are only lights,
and not fires: For the Air being transparent, and the first subject of
Whiteness, as Aristotle says, has likewise in it self some radical light,
which is sustein'd by that of the Stars which shine in the night. And this
whiteness of the Air is proved by the appearance of it when it is enclosed in
moist bodies, as in froth, snow, and crystal; which whitness is very symbolical
to light, which it preserves and congregates, as is seen by the same snow in a
very dark night: Yea, to speak plainly, whiteness is nothing else but light
extinct, luminous bodies appearing white near a greater light, and white
luminous in darkness. So it is possible that the thinner parts of the Air being
enclosed in these unctuous vapors, they appear enlightened and shining, as well
by reason of the condensation of its body as the inequality of its surfaces;
like a diamond cut into several facets; or as the Stars appear luminous only by
being the denser parts of their Orbs. And this kind of light has been seen upon
the heads of children, whose moister brain exhaled a vapor proper for it; such
also as that is which forms the Will-i'th'-Wisp, which may also proceed from
the reflection of the Starlight from the Sea, or Rocks: For, That two of these
fires bode good to Seamen, and one ill, is but one of the superstitions of
Antiquity; unless you think that the greater number of fires argues greater
purity of the Air, and consequently less fear of tempest.

The Third said, He accounted the common opinion more solid, which teaches two
material principles of all Meteors, Vapor and Exhalation; but one and the same
efficient, the heat of the Sun, which lifts the thinner parts of the water in a
vapor, and those of the earth in an exhalation; the former hot and moist, the
latter hot and dry, borrowing their heat from an extraneous heat; but vapor
has humidity from the water, and exhalation siccity from the earth; yet this
siccity must be joined with some unctuosity to admit the heat, which acts not
upon bodies destitute of all humidity, as the driest ashes are not altered by
the hottest fire. The driest and least unctuous of these Exhalations are in the
middle Region transformed into winds and tempests, in the entrails of the earth
they cause Earthquakes; and if they be somewhat more unctuous they make
subterranean fires; in the upper Region they form Comets, and in the lower our
Ignes fatui, which are different, according to the diverse coition of their
matter, in length, breadth, or circularly; whence comes the difference of these
Meteors called falling Stars, Flames, leaping Goats, flying Dragons, Beams,
Lances, Javelins, and other like names, from the figure of their matter. Yet
all these differences are chiefly taken from the magnitude, figure, color,
time, motion, and place of these fires. Magnitude, because some are large and
spacious, others very small. Their figure comes from chance; their color from
the mixture, rarity, or density of the matter. Their time is chiefly the night,
being then most visible. Their place, from the Heaven of the Moon to the center
of the Earth. Their motion according to the six differences of place, and the
situation of their subject: Hence they pursue those that fly them, and on the
contrary fly before those that pursue them; whereupon the ignorant vulgar takes
them for evil spirits, because they drive and lead them into precipices and
bogs, which is from their following the unctuous matters which they exhale from
those places; whence also they commonly appear near places of execution, and
Churchyards.

II. Of Eunuchs.
Upon the Second Point 'twas said, That the Canons make three sorts of Eunuchs;
the natural, the factitious, and the voluntary; congruously to our Lords
division in the Gospel, that some are born, others are made by men, and others
make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven; which is no more to be taken
literally then the plucking out of the eyes, or the cutting off of the hands
when they offend us; but mystically, for those who voluntarily renounce the
pleasures of the flesh. Their original is as ancient as the Law of Nations,
whereby the Conquerors giving law to the conquered changed the punishment of
killing them into mutilation of some members, and amongst the rest of these, to
make them more faithful and affectionate by depriving them of the means of
getting children, and more trusty in keeping of their goods and wives. Hence
they have come to be so highly esteemed, that not only the Emperors of
Constantinople, the Kings of Egypt, Persia and Chaldea, have entrusted them
with the management of all their affairs; but also, in the Roman Empire, an
Eunuch Slave was valued at five times as much as another. Besides that their
purity has qualified them amongst the Heathen for Priests of their Deities;
amongst which the Goddesses Isis and Cybele admitted no other, which possibly,
by antiphrasis, were called Galli. Even in Christianity, the Eunuch of the
Queen Candace was the first Gentile called to the light of the Gospel; the
expressions whereof Origin understanding literally castrated himself, by an
example so singular that St. Jerome chose rather to admire, then to blame the
greatness of his courage.

The Second said, If it be true, that good consists in the perfection of all
parts, and evil in their least defect, the deficiency of those necessary to the
conservation of the species is the greatest of all, since it devests us of the
noble quality and character of man, which an Eunuch is no longer, nor yet a
Woman, but something less then both. And as the propagation of men is an effect
of the divine benediction at the beginning of the World, so the barrenness and
impotence of Eunuchs, contrary to that fruitfulness, is abhorred by all the
world, and was taken by the Jews for a curse. Moreover, Nature which is the
principle of motions and generations, seems to disown those who want the parts
requisite to this action. The Laws forbid them the privilege of adoption, and
most Offices and Dignities. God himself, in the old Law, prohibited them
entrance into his Church; and in the New the Church forbids them the use of her
Sacraments, namely, Orders and Marriage. Nor is it any wonder, since every
thing in nature is fruitful, even accidents reproducing their species, which
are so many generations. Wherefore finding no place among natural things, nor
in the Categories, it follows that they are monsters. The Emperor Adrian
extended the penalty of the Law Cornelia against those who make Eunuchs, or
consent any way thereunto, L. 4. S. ad. L. Corn. And before him the Pretors had
introduced diverse actions touching this matter; as the action of Injuries, of
the Edict of the Aediles, and of Quadruple in the Law, 27. S. ad leg. Aquil.
And, lastly, the Emperor Constantine expressly interdicted Castration in all the
Empire, under pain of life, and others contained in two Laws, De Eunuchis, in
the Code.

The Third said, That whether you consider Eunuchs in reference to the body or
the mind, they are happier then others. They are out of danger of being gouty
and bald, two maladies, whereof the one extremely torments a man, and the other
dishonours him; and it cures the most horrible of all maladies, the Leprosy.
On the other side, it puts the same difference between the manners of men as it
does between untractable horses and others. Hence the Castrated are more
pleasant company; and to contribute thereunto Nature has afforded them the
grace of a delicate voice all their lives, which forsakes children as soon as
they come to puberty: and being exempted from the diseases which the excess of
Venery brings to others they are longer-liv'd, and more easily bear the excess
of wine. They are delivered from the cruel servitude of lust, and all the other
passions which attend it. And in recompense of those parts wherewith Asses and
Mules are better provided then men, they are early furnished with wisdom and
continence, which (as the example of Susanna's old Lovers shows) happens later
to man then gray hairs. Moreover, Eunuchs have a fit temper for goodness of
wit, which, according to some, occasioned the Greek name Eunuch, and not their
charge of guarding the bed, and observing the deportments of Wives; whole
subtilty and infidelity may delude their Husbands, but could never deceive the
vigilance of these Argusses; who in this alone show what they can do, since
they have the skill to govern that sex which is indisciplinable by all other.

CONFERENCE C.
I. Of the Green Sickness. II. Of Hermaphrodites.

I. Of the Green Sickness.
AS women have commonly more defects in mind, so their bodies are subject to
more diseases then those of men; amongst which this is called Love-sickness,
because it ordinarily happens to marriageable Virgins, and the Green Sickness
(by Hippocrates, Chlorosis) from a color between green and livid, which it
imprints upon the countenance. Yet, besides this change of the natural color,
which is red, it has diverse other symptoms, whereof the chief are a perverse
appetite, called Malacia or Pica, Nauseousness, Tension of the Hypochondres,
faintings and palpitations of the heart, difficulty of breathing, sadness,
fear, languishing, weakness, and heaviness of all the members, an oedematous
humor, or bloatiness of the feet and the whole face: of which accidents those
of the alteration of color being the most perceptible, and the pathognomonical
signs of this disease have with the vulgar given the denomination to it. This
malady is not to be slighted, as people imagine; being sometimes so violent,
that the peccant humors being carried to the head render the Maidens
distracted and mad; yea sometimes they dye suddenly of it, the heart and its
vital faculty being stifled and oppressed by it. For this symptom hurts not
only the functions of one part or faculty, but invades the whole economy,
causing an evil habit, which degenerates into a Dropsy; especially, that which
the Physicians call Leucophlegmatia or Anasarca, when the flesh like a sponge
imbibes and attracts all the aqueous and excrementitious humidities. The
antecedent and prime cause of this malady is the suppression of the menstrual
blood; the conjunct and proximate is the collection of crude and vicious
humors in all the parts of the body which they discolor. Now when the blood
which serves in women for the principle of generation becomes burdensome to
nature, either by its quantity, or its quality (which happens commonly at the
age of puberty) she expells it by the vessels of the womb; which if they be
stopped, that blood mingled for the most part with many other excrementitious
humors which it carries along with it, as torrents do mud, returns the same
into the trunk of the hollow Vein, from thence into the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, and other Entrails, whose natural heat it impairs, and hinders their
natural functions, as concoction and sanguification, and so is the cause of the
generating of crude humors; which being carried into all the parts of the
body, are nevertheless assimilated and so change their natural color. Of which
causes which beget those obstructions in the Vessels of the Matrix, the chief
are, a phlegmatic and viscous blood commonly produced by bad food, as Lime,
Chalk, Ashes, Coals, Vinegar, Corn, and Earth, which young Girls purposely eat
to procure that complexion, out of a false persuasion that it makes them
handsomer. Yet this malady may happen too from a natural conformation, the
smalness and closeness of the aforesaid Vessels; whence the fat and phlegmatic
(as the pale are) are more subject to it then the lean and brown.

The Second said, It Is an opinion so universally received that the
Green-sickess comes from Love, that those who fight under his Standards affect
this color, as his liveries. But it is most appropriate to Maidens, as if
nature meant to write in their faces what they so artificially conceal, and
supply for their bashfulness by this dumb language. Whereunto their natural
Constitution conduecs much, being much colder then that of men; which is the
cause that they beget abundance of superfluous blood, which easily corrupts,
either by the mixture of some humor, or for want of free motion (like standing
waters, and enclosed air) and infects the skin, the universal Emunctory of all
the parts, but especially that of the face, by reason of its thinness and
softness. And as obstructions are the cause, so opening things are the remedies
of this malady; as the filings of Steel prepared, Sena, Aloes, Myrrh, Safron,
Cinnamon, roots of Bryony and Birth-worth, Hysope, wild Mecury, the leaves and
flowers of Marigold, Broom flowers, Capers, etc.

The Third said, That the vulgar opinion, that all Greensickness is from Love,
is a vulgar error. For though the Poet writes that every Lover is pale, yet
hatred causes paleness too; and the consequence cannot be well made from a
passion to a habit. Besides, little Girls of seven and eight years old are
troubled with this disease, and you cannot think them capable of love; no more
then that it is through want of natural purgation in others after the age of
puberty; for women above fifty years old, when that purgation ceases, have
something of this malady. Yea men too have some spices of it sometimes; and yet
the structure of their parts, being wholly different from that of females,
allows not the assigning of the same cause in both. Yea did the common conceit
hold good that those who have small vessels, and (as such) capable of
obstruction, are most subject to it; yet the contrary will follow to what is
inferred to their prejudice. For they will be the less amorous, because the
lesser vessels have the lesser blood, which is the material cause of Love, to
which we see sanguine complexions are most inclined.

II. Of Hermaphrodites.
Upon the second Point 'twas said, That if Arguments taken from the name of the
thing be of good augury, Hermaphrodites must have great advantage from theirs,
as being compounded of the two most agreeable Deities of Antiquity, Mercury or
Hermes, the Courtier of the Gods, and Venus or Aphrodite, the Goddess of Love;
to signify the perfection of both sexes united in one subject. And though it is
a fiction of the Poets that the Son begotten of the Adultery of Mercury and
Venus was both male and female; (as well as that of the Nymph Salmacis, who
embraced a young man who was bathing with her so closely that they became one
body) yet we see in Nature some truth under the veil of these Fables. For the
greatest part of insects and many perfect animals have the use of either sex.
As the Hyaena, by the report of Appian, one year does the office of a male, and
the next of a female; as the Serpent also does, by the testimony of Aelian; and
as Aristotle says, the Fish named Trochus; and it is commonly said that the
Hare impregnates it self. Pliny mentions some Nations who are born
Hermaphrodites, having the right breast of a Man, and the left of a Woman.
Plato says, that Mankind began by Hermaphrodites, our first Parents being both
Male and Female, and that having then nothing to desire out of themselves, the
Gods became jealous of them, and divided them into two; which is the reason
that they seek their first union so passionately, and that the sacred tie of
Marriage was first instituted. All which Plato undoubtedly learned out of
Genesis; For he had read where it is said, (before Eves formation, or separation
from Adam is mentioned) That God created Man, and that he created Male and
Female.

The Second said, That Natural Reason admits not Hermaphrodites; for we
consider not those who have only the appearances of genital parts which Nature
may give them, as to Monsters two Heads, four Arms, and so of the other parts,
through the copiousness of matter; but those who have the use and perfection of
the same, which consists in Generation. For Nature having never put into the
same subject an internal and radical principal of two contrary desires, as that
of Man is to that of Woman, (the one consisting in action, the other in
passion; the one in giving, the other in receiving) they cannot belong to one
single individual; which should also be both Agent and Patient, contrary to the
common Axiom founded upon the first Principle, that a thing cannot be and not
be at the same time. Moreover, the qualities of the Genitures being contrary,
that of the Woman cold and moist, and that of the Man hot and dry, they cannot
meet in the same subject in so excellent a degree as is required to generation.
For the strength divided is never so vigorous as united, especially when its
subjects are different. No Hermaphrodites ever used both sexes perfectly, but
at least one of them weakly and abusively; and consequently, they are justly
punished by the Laws. For were both parts equally fit for Generation, 'twere
contrary to policy to hinder them from using the same, propagations being the
chief Nerves of a State. But these people are obliged to make choice of one
Sex, that by this election it may be konwn which they exercise best, and may be
prohibited the abuse of the other.

The Third said, There Is nothing in Nature so disunited, but is rejoined by
some medium. As there are Spirits apart, and Bodies apart, so there are
animated Bodies consisting of both. Amongst beasts, Leopards, Mules, Dogs, and
many others, partake of two different Natures; the Bat is between a beast and a
bird, as Frogs, Ducks, and other amphibious creatures, partly Fish, and partly
Terrestial Animals. The Bonaretz is a plant and an animal; the Mushrome is
between earth and a plant. So since there is Man and Woman, there may also be
some nature containing both. As to the cause of them, besides nature's general
inclination to reunite different things, it seems that the same which produces
monsters produces also Hermaprodites, especially when the matter is more then
needs a single Man or Woman, and too little for two. Nature herein imitating a
Founder, who casting his metal in a mould, if there be any overplus, it sticks
to the Piece which he intended to form. Unless you had rather say, that if both
the seeds be of equal power, and neither predominant over the other, the
Formative Virtue then produces both sexes, which it would have distinguished
into two Twins, had there been matter sufficient for two Twins. Whereunto also
the Imagination of the Mother may also contribute. For since some have been
born with Virilities sticking at the end of their Nose, and other places of the
Countenance, Nature seems less extravagant when she places them in their true
situation; there being no likelihood, in the Astrologers account, that the
conjunction of Mercury and Venus in the eight house (which they assign to
births) is the cause hereof.

The Fourth said, That Hermaphrodites being of those rare and extraordinary
effects, which fall no more under Law then under Reason, it is very difficult to
assign the true natural causes of them. Yea, if there be nothing less known
then forms, and their original, even when Nature acts regularly, we cannot but
be more at a loss in the combinations of forms and species, and coupling of
sexes, which are deviations from the rule of Nature. Hermaphrodites, who have
both sexes, are of four sorts; for they have Virilities in the ordinary place,
and muliebrities either in the perinaeum, or the scrotum; or else the feminine
parts being in their right place, the masculine appear above them, as is seen
many times in Goats; or lastly, the Virilities lying hid in the middle of the
other, at length come forth, as has happened to many Girls and Women turned into
Men; as to Marie Germain, by the relation of Montagne; to Arescon, a Native of
Argos, who was sirnam'd Arescusa, according to Martianus. And Hippocrates
affirms, in 6. Epid. that a Woman named Phaetusa, who after she had had
Children by her Husband Pytheus the Abderite, this her Husband being long
absent from her, she came to have a beard, and the other badges of virility.
The same he also testifies to have happened to Namysia, the wife of Gorippus, in
the Isle of Thasus. Of which effects we shall easily find the reason, if we
say, with Galen, that Woman is an imperfect Animal, and a fragment of Mankind;
and so 'twill be no wonder to see a Woman become a Man, then to see all other
things acquire the perfection due to their Nature, which they ought to attain,
lest their inclination thereunto be in vain. Moreover, it is certain, that a
Woman desires a Man, as Matter does Form; Power, Act; Imperfection, Perfection;
Deformity, Beauty; in a word, the Female the Male; Nature affording us many
examples of these changes of sexes, and metamorphoses. So Metals and Elements
are turned one into another; Wheat into Cockle; Rye into Wheat; Barley into
Oats; Origanum into Wild Thyme; Sisymbrium into Mint. Which caused Anaxagoras
to say, That every thing is in every thing. According to which principle, the
Male is actually in his Female; and Hermaphrodites are no more, saving it is
more conspicuous. So that the Ancients left us some truths under the figures of
a god Lunus and the Moon, and of a bearded Venus, to whom the Dames of Athens
sacrificed in men's clothes.

The Fifth said, That the transmutation of sexes is impossible by reason of the
diversity of the Genitories in Men and Women, which is greater then is here fit
to be displayed. But those Maidens who have been thought to change their Sex,
were Hermaphrodites, who retained the marks of the Feminine sex only till a
certain age, as that of Puberty, when the increased heat driving the Virilities
forth did the same thing as it does in Children, whom it enables to speak at a
certain age. Unless you will say, that the Clitoris caused the mistake by its
resemblance; as it happens in that symptom called by Aegineta, Cereosis, or
Cauda, which makes Tribades pass for Hermaprodites. The change of Men into
Women, (not like that of Nero, and Sardanapalus) but of Tiresias mentioned by
the Poets, is more impossible; unless they supposed that some causes
destroying the heat of the Genital parts, and weakening the strength, the
Virilities came to wither and retire inwards, as the Umbilical vessels do after
the faetus is born; and that Nature conformed to the cold temper superven'd in
the whole body.

FINIS.

