I R
DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE



A JOURNAL Of the SIEGE and TAKING of BUDA, BY THE IMPERIAL ARMY, (Under the
Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain, and his Electoral Highness the Duke of
Bavaria,) Anno Dom. 1686.

By Jacob Richards, One of His Majesty's Engineers, who was appointed by the
Right Honorable the Lord Dartmouth, Master-General of His Majesty's Ordnance,
etc. to serve in the said Army, and who is now in the Service of the Venetians
in the Morea.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

Printed for M. Gilliflower at the Black Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall, and
J. Partridge at the Post House at Charing Cross. 1687.

TO THE Illustrious and Highborn PRINCE James Fitz-James, DUKE of BERWICK,
EARL of TINMOVTH, BARON of BOSWORTH, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
AS a True Relation of so Famous an Action as the Taking of BUDA, with a
Journal and Faithful Account of the various Attaques and Successes of the
Impetial Armies in each day during the Siege of that ancient City, must needs
divert and surprise the Understanding of such as are curious in Heroic Story,
so, my Lord, I cannot help my own Presumption in thinking, that amongst all
Mankind this Piece, collected with Study and Observation, only ought to throw
itself at Your Grace's Feet, who, persuing the Noble Chase of Glory, were
pleased to be Eyewitness of all the ensuing Passages, and can best defend my
Assertions from the Ridiculous Malice of such as envy me, either for being
present at so Glorious an Action, or for addressing its History to so
Extraordinary a Patron.

Amongst all those, that through a Noble Thirst of Fame voluntarily offered
themselves to share the danger that must inevitably attend so difficult an
Enterprise, the English Hero was still most Obvious; for Your Grace was so far
from securing Your Person and Observations by a distant Remarque, that the
Royalty of Your Courage would often precipitate You to the common Accidents of
the Mercenary Vulgar, not valuing the Hazard of Your Person amongst the Hated
Trunks of Pagans and Infidels, nor the trembling Hearts of such as honored You
too much not to fear the fatal consequence of so many dangerous, though brave,
Adventures.

No Attacque was ever made, to Mine sprung, no Battery mounted, nor no
extraordinary Exploit designed, but still Your Grace, either in Person, or in
Will, was present, not confidering how uncommonly eager each Barbarian would
have been, to have picked out the Flower of all the Christian Cavalry, the
Blooming Genius of England, the very Soul of Valor, Royalty, and Honor, and by
one hallowed Shot to have sacrificed him to his Moody Prophet, the ridiculous
Impostor, Mahomet: But Your Guardian Angel, my Lord, that well knew the
unvalued Treasure committed to his Charge, and the glorious Character You were
hereafter designed by Providence to have in the mighty Records of eternal Fame,
made the impartial Destinies stand aloof, encouraged by the Martial Fire still
glittering in Your Eyes, and the Resolure Efforts of a Courage, that bravely
showed the difference between the Sacred Blood of Monarchs, and the subjected
Cement of the grovelling Vulgar, alluding, comparatively, Your Behavior with
that of Your Mighty Father, when the Poet addressing himself to Him, amongst
the rest of his Lines, relating His Character, said thus: Bravest in Danger,
Valiant, but not Rash,
For when the Belgian Streamers braved the British Cross,
Then on the bloody Deck. He seemed to grow,
Whilst Fate affrighted, and the Shot too low,
Awed with the Terror of His dauntless Brow, etc.
This, my Lord, without Flattery, I say, I may very well allude to Your Grace's
Behavior at the Siege of BUDA, for whoever had seen with what a blushing
Constancy, and presence of Mind, You faced the worst of Dangers, which
Thousands about Your Person could not remarque without the severest
apprehensions of Fear, would have thought there must be some Divinity about
You, as well as Natural Courage, to support the Distress of so many Eminent
Hazards to which You daily exposed Your Person.

Nor does Your Grace's excellent Character only extend itself to Arms and
Glory, but branches into the Confines of Industry and Ingenuity: And You are
equally Renowned for Your love to Arts as well as the other, thus proving the
Royal Nature of Your most August and Invincible Father, who has ever smiled
upon the Endeavors of such as study the Mathematics, or any other Science
conducing to the Benefit of His Kingdoms and Covemment, and has likewise shown
the greatest Encouragement to them of any of His Royal Predecessors. And as, my
Lord, I am extremely sensible of the Virtues that clearly shine through all
Your Actions, so now I cannot doubt a Pardon for my Ambition in Dedicating to
Your Grace this my Labor, and humbly begging to be received amongst the Number
of Your Admirers, and a Toleration to subscribe my self,

MY LORD, YOUR GRACES, most Humble, most Devoted, and most Obedient Servant,
JACOB RICHARDS.

A JOURNAL Of the Siege and Taking of BUDA, BY THE Imperial Army, (Under the
Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain, and his Electoral Highness the Duke of Bavaria,
etc.) Anno Dom. 1686.
FIeld Marshal Count Staremberg with the Imperial Foot, and a Party of Horse,
Wehel on the Danube, where the Duke of Lorrain was Encamped with the Horse. We
continued in this Place all Night in sight of Buda, the Horse with a small Body
of Foot ever keeping One days March before the Foot and Baggage.

The Horse and Foot decamped and marched by favor of the Hills within reach of
the Cannon of Buda. Count Staremherg halted here: But the Duke of Lorrain
marched over the Hills to the Valley of St. Paul, where there is a a Way that
leads to Alba Regalis. Here his Highness left a party of Horse to hinder the
Turks Intelligence from abroad.

The Bavarians with about 16 or 17000 Horse were encamped on the East Side of
the Danube; Turks who were in Pest made a Sally, but immediately retired with
the loss of 8 Men, and fled into Buda. In their Retreat they broke the Bridge,
leaving Pest to us undamag'd.

Nothing remarkable occurred, Turks firing only a few random Shot at some
Baggage that passed over the Hills, but without Effect. The 20th, arrived
several Boats down the River with Ammunition. The Bavarians have now finished
their Bridge of Boats over the Danube, which they have passed, and marched over
the Hills where the Duke of Lorrain was. It is concluded, that the Duke of
Lorrain's Attack should be at the North-End of the Town, and the Duke of
Bavaria's at the South, and accordingly the Army is divided, the Duke of
Lorrain having 3000 Horse, and 9000 Foot, 16 pieces of Cannon, 12 Mortars, with
15000 Bombs, Carcasses, etc.

Early this Morning the Imperialists began their Approaches at about 500 Yards
distance from the Wall of Lower Buda, Old Buda, and continued parallel with the
Town to the top of the Hill, where they return with a small Espaulment, etc. as
in the Plan. All this Day and Night they continued their Works. In some places
the Earth is so bad, that they are forced to make the Parapet of their Trenches
with Fassines and Baskets filled with Earth. The Enemy fired at us continually,
but without damage. This Morning, about 8 of the Clock, our Foragers returned
without Forage, and brought News, that a Body of Turks appeared on the Hills
that lead to Alba Regalis, and that they could not Forage without a good Body
of Horse to cover them; upon which, General Palfie was commanded out with a
Body of 12000 Horse, and marched toward Alba Regalis, to face the Turks. About
10 of the Clock, a Pole, who was taken at the Siege of Vienna, made his Escape
with the Bassa's Horse, Two Cemiters, and his Commanding Staff. He reports,
that our Arrival before Buda was very surprising. That the Garrison is not half
so strong, as when the Christians laid Siege to it in the Year 1684. when it
consisted of 15000 Men, and now not above 7000. viz. 3000 Janisaries, 1000
Horse, 1000 Jews, and about 2000 Inhabitants. That the Turks had Intelligence,
the Christians designed to besiege Alba Regalis and Erla, which was true, it
not being concluded to attempt Buda till the 10th of June, when at a General
Council of War, held at Comorra, it was Resolved.

The Approaches were continued with Success, No. Port. The Turks killed 8
Horsemen that were placed behind a Hill, to sustain the Pioneers in case of
Sallies.

At Break of Day the Battery was finished, No. Port. About 7 in the Morning a
Janisary made his Escape out of the Town, and surrendered himself upon a Dream
the last Night, that the Christians would become Masters of the Place, and put
all to the Sword, as they had done the last Year at New-Heusel, and that if he
should fly to the Christians, he might find Mercy. He said, the Garrison was
not above 6000 strong. The Battery aforesaid, consisting of 6 Pieces of Cannon,
was so well Plied, as to make a Breach in the Wall of the Lower Town about 15
Paces broad, the Wall being about 5 Foot thick. This day two Turks appeared on
the side of Pest, and attempted to swim over to Buda, which they could not
perform, but returned toward Erla, (the supposed Place they came from.)
Several of the Garrison defiled out of the No. Port, in expectation of our
giving the Assault this Night. A Party likewise came to defend the Breach, upon
which a Detachement of Granadiers were sent to molest them. We continue our
Approaches all this Night, without Impediment from the Enemy.

We had Intelligence, Turkish Women embarked from Buda, with a design to pass
down the Danube toward Belgrade, upon which 400 Hussars were sent after them
in two Boats, who Boarded and Took them: They were of the Bassa's Family, who
had sent them with his Treasure toward Belgrade. The Booty amounted to 10000
l. besides what the Women and Children will sell for. This day a Party of
Granadiers were commanded to discover the Breach if it were Accessible, who
reported it was, upon which Orders were given for the Storm in the manner
following: viz. Fifty Granadiers and a Captain, to beat the Enemy from an
Espaulment they had made to flank the Breach; After them a Lieutenant, and 50
Musketeers, to sustain the Granadiers. Then followed an Engineer with 100
Pioneers, to make the Lodgment on the other side of the Breach, after which
followed a Captain and 100 Musketeers to sustain the Pioneers, and last of all
a Major and 300 Men as a Rear-guard, and to face the Enemy in case of a Sally.
This was executed about 10 of the Clock at Night, but with that Confusion, that
had the Turks kept their Post, they might have cut them all off, but they
retired into the Town, and killed only 2, and wounded 30 of our Men. We found
nothing at all of Pillage, but 40 or 50 poor Horses. The Engineer made his Work
in Form of a Horse-shoe, the two sides of which were flanked from the Town. We
expected the Turks would have sallied upon us, but they were so far from that,
as by their proceeding they thought themselves scarce safe in Buda, making a
great Fire over against the No. Port, that they might see if we attempted any
thing by Petard. They were very diligent at Night by shooting from their
Batteries and Walls, but with little or no Effect.

We continued Masters of the Breach,

We cut a Line of Communication behind the Blinds, St. Paul, to hinder the
Enemy from attempting any thing on that side. About 4 in the Afternoon, a Body
of about 200 Turks defiled out of the Town, and attempted to disturb our
Pioneers; upon which Count Auxburgh, (a very gallant Gentleman,) with about 100
Musketeers attacqu'd them, who immediately retired with the loss of 20 Men; on
our side there were 3 killed, and 4 wounded. This Night Orders were given out
for carrying on a Line of Communication with the Tower on the Old Wall looking
into St. Paul's Valley, and the Lodgment before the Breach. It was ordered
likewise, that a Battery should be raised Parallel to the Tower, capable of 12
Pieces of Cannon. About 10 of the Clock, Cannon-Baskets and Faggots were
brought to the Tower, in order to the raising a Battery. The Turks attempted
nothing more this Night, but firing both Cannon and Small-shot on our Workmen,
without any effect. This day my Lord Mountjoy was hurt in the Eye by a Cannon
shot from the Town, which grazed amongst Stones.

We prosecuted our Battery. Turkish Horse sallied out into St. Paul's Valley,
and galloped toward the Hills, to intercept some Baggage that was going to the
Bavarian Camp, but a Party of about 50 Horse belonging to Count Taaff's
Regiment, who had the Avant-Guard, and being very well posted by favor of a
little Hill, (under the Covert of which, the Turks came briskly on) continued
at their Post, and waited their coming, and as the Turks came within
Pistol-shot of the top of the Hill, advanced, and gave them a whole discharge
of their Carbines, killed and wounded about 50 Turks, who, nevertheless,
pressed on, but, a Party of 100 Musketeers hastening from our Traverse by the
Old Wall into the Valley, they retired, and at the same time about 400
Janissaries came out of the East Port, and posted themselves under the Cannon,
to make good their Retreat, and killed and wounded about 16 of our Men.

This day, St. Paul's Valley was finished, and another Line prolonged from the
Angle and Side of the Old Wall, so as to flank and discover any Sallies, that
may be made out of the West Port, or Port of St. Paul's Valley. Nothing more
occurred, saving that the Turks shot great quantities of Pebble-stones on our
Pioneers, which wounded some.

The abovesaid Line was finished, Bavarians attempted the taking some Sheep
that were feeding in the Valley; upon which the Turks made a Sally, which the
Volunteers observing, advanced against them, and Engaged so far, that the Duke
of Lorrain in Person, with his own Guards, went to succor and bring them off.
The Bavarians lost a Lieutenants Colonel, two Lieutenants, and an Ensign, with
about 20 or 30 of our Troopers. This Action of the Volunteers has by the
Generals been greatly censured, and positive Orders given, that no Volunteers
should offer to picqueer. This Night our 4 Mortars began to play, which set
Fire to a Church, but it was soon put out. The Turks continue to shoot Stones
at us.

Four Grecians, who were Slaves in the Town, St. Paul's Valley, and being near
the Bavarians fled to them, the whole Flock, which consisted of 800 Sheep,
following them. These People could inform us of nothing, but that the Turks
were very hard at work in making Retrenchments. They likewise say, there was a
Mutiny of the Janisaries against the Bassa. The Janisaries in the last days
Skirmish carried in two Christians, for which they demanded 10 Ducats each as
their due, but the Bassa gave them but 10 Grosses per Head, which is 18 d.
sterling. We continued working in our Trenches, and are now Halfway between
the Old Wall and that of Buda.

Our Battery was finished, St. Paul's Valley. At the same time the four Mortars
played, and with so good success, as to dismount the Guns on that Tower, and
our Cannon dismantled the Wall for about 6 Paces. About 10 of the clock in the
morning, a Turkish Boy made his Escape. He said, that Provisions began to be
searee, and that our Bombs had killed many of the Turks, and had dismounted the
Cannon on the Great Tower. We observed the Enemy at work on the East-Port, to
which place they had advanced a Spurr, and brought Gabions, as if they designed
to make a Battery there, expecting we would attacque them on that side.

Our Battery consisting, St. Paul's corner Tower, and the Tower next the North
Port, making considerable Breaches in both of them, though not accessible, yet
so, as to take the Defense wholly from them. Several Carcasses have been sho^
to set Fire on the Town, but as yet we have not learn^ with what success. Last
Night two Boats came up the Danube and got into the Town, they are supposed to
be Engineers and Gunners that were in Erla, which we have reason to believe,
forasmuch as this day we received more Bombs than ordinary from them, and very
nigh our Battery, one of which fell into our Trenches and killed two of our
Men. This Evening the Duke of Lorrain went over to Pest-side, and gave Orders
for making 2 Redoubts on the shore, and left a Flying Camp consisting of 600
Hussars, to hinder the Enemy from succor by Boat.

We carried on our Trenches, Turkish Mosque, from whence we returned with an
Angle and Parallel Line with Buda, till we came to the Right Hand way going to
North Port, at which 3 Lines met by savor of a Wall and deep Road, under which
our Men were Covered. We mounted 4 Mortars more just by the former, which
Played continually into the Town. Our Cannon have now made a considerable
Breach. This day a Janisarie deserted, who informed us, that their Garrison was
weak, consisting of not above 2500 Janisaries, 1000 Spahis, 1000 Jews, and
about 3000 Inhabitants, Men, Women, and Children: That Provisions were very
scarce, that our Bombs and Carcasses had ruined many of their Buildings, one of
which killed 12 Janissaries, as they were Relieving the Guard. We have advice,
that the Brandenburgs were within 4 hours March of us.

Orders were given to advance a Line, Paul's Valley, which was accordingly
done, and a Place of Arms made of a Building capable to hold about 2 or 300
Men. Behind and Parallel to the Line, which went from the Building, and home to
the Wall, was made a Covered Place for a Battery of 4 Mortars. The Turks Fired
more this Night than ordinary. We are now within 50 Paces of the Breach, which
with the Light of the Moon encouraged the Enemy, not to spare either Musket
Ball or Stones, tho with no great Effect, we not losing above 3 or 4 Men, and 5
or 6 wounded. About 3 in the Morning we were under ground, well Covered from
the Enemies Fire and capable of maintaining our Works, if they should attempt
to molest us. We now discovered, that the Turks were making a kind of a
Faussebray just before the Breach, whereof the Generals being acquainted, did
not however think it worth the while to disturb them. About 8 of the Clock the
finishing of the Banquets and enlarging of the Trenches was left to the
Officers and Soldiers, who were Posted there according to their method. About 3
in the afternoon, the Brandenburgs arrived on Post side, whither the Duke of
Lorrain went to see them. They Received his Highness with 3 Salutes of
Ordnance, small Arms, and several Bombs and Carcasses. His Highness immediately
allotted them their Quarters, and in what place they should carry on their
Attacque, Viz. on our Left, which was accordingly done, they Posting themselves
by favor of the ground, where they were well covered from the Town. About 8 at
Night a Sergeant and 10 Granadiers were sent to the Breach to discover what the
Turks were doing, whom they found Mining toward us, upon which Orders were
given to advance a Counter-Mine from the 2d Traverse and inside of the Old
Wall, looking into St. Paul's Valley, toward the Turks, with directions that
if the Miners should meet with the Turks Mine, to Vent it, otherwise to advance
under the foot of the Wall, and then make the best use we could of ours.

About 8 of the clock in the Morning, Brandenburgs have advanced 2 Parallel
Lines, Communicating with ours on the Left; They lost a Captain, 2 Lieutenants,
and 10 Men, besides their General's Son, who was sitting in their Trenches, and
discovered by 2 Janisaries to be a Man of Note, who approaching by the
advantage of some ruins shot him dead. We continue Plying our Artillery, which
about 9 at Night set Fire to the N: W: part of the Town, which continued very
great till toward Morning. It Is believed, we burnt at this time near half the
Town.

Brandenburgers have joined us with these 2 last days Trenches. We are now
within 30 Paces of the foot of the Wall. The first Mine is quitted, and 2 more
begun in the last approaches. We have added 2 more Mortars to the Batterye in
the Lower Town. For these 2 days past nothing Extraordinary has happened, except
a Bomb of the Turks which fell into our Battery of Twelve 24 Pounders, which
set fire to a Barrel of Powder, killed 2 Gunners and 4 Matrosses, which was
repaid them, by setting their Town on fire in several places, and killing with
our Bombs and Carcasses above 500 of the Enemy, (as a Deserter reports,) the
Turks having dismounted the Bavarians Battery, which has been silent these 24
hours.

We found, Swabish Hill did not the Execution was proposed, the Cannon not
carrying home, upon which it was ordered, that 5 Guns of the Spanish
Fire-Master's invention should be placed on the same Hill, and the other taken
away, which accordingly was done; they played into the Breach, and between the
two Walls, incommoding the Turks very much, the Town lying open to the Hill. It
rained very hard all this Night.

Turks sprang one of their Mines, which choked ours, in which were seven
Miners, after which they Sallied out in great numbers; About 400 fell in
between the Imperialists, and Brandenburgers, the later of which retired before
we had the Alarm, so that we came by the worst on it; We lost in this Action
above 150 Men, a Lieutenant Colonel and several other Officers. The Turks
retired without doing harm to our Works with the loss of Ten Men, whose Heads
were set on the top of the Breach. It was expected, they would have made
another Sally, for which every body was prepared, and matters so ordered, that
they should have been cut off in their Retreat. This Night, the Spanish Mortars
were fixed on the Left, and somewhat behind our Battery looking into St. Paul's
Valley. Our Bridge is broken down by a storm.

News was brought, Turks was seen off of Erla, and were within 4 Hungarian
Miles of us, upon which the Duke of Lorrain Ordered General Commercy with a
party of 3500 Horse to March that way to face the Enemy, and cover our
Foragers; Likewise 1000 Foot and 500 Horse were Posted on Pest-side to cover
and secure our Bridge, at the Head whereof they are now Encamped. Ours and the
Brandenburghers Trenches are advanced home, and joined toward the Left, in
which the Brandenburgers have placed a Battery of six 24 Pounders, likewise
toward the Left have raised one of three 24 Pounders, both which play
cross-ways on the Palisadoes.

Turks and Tartars toward Erla retired upon our advancing. The Spanish
Fire-Master has shot several Bombs out of his Mortars, which threw them
extraordinary high. We observe, that the Bombs flung out of his Mortars very
rarely brake, which is imputed to the depth the shell sinks into the Earth,
which stifles the Fuze. We are now completing our Trenches, and advancing our
2 Mines. That under the middle Tower is 8 foot under the Wall, and will be
ready to be charged in 24 hours. The Brandenburgers have now completed their
Battery of 22 small Guns for the shooting of Red-hot Iron Bullets. It is behind
and somewhat to the Left of our Platform of Twelve 24 Pounders. It has played
all this day, but we don't yet perceive any Effect thereof. They have likewise
erected a Battery of Howits, on the Left of their other Battery, but more under
the Wall of the Lower Town: These Howitts are mounted on Carriages somewhat
resembling those of Cannon, the body has the form of a Mortar's, but a much
longer Chamber and Chase, and is more fortifyed by the Trunions, than at the
Breech and Muzzle. They shoot out of them a Bomb filled with Combustible
Composition, which I believe may be of good effect.

Early this Morning, the Enemy sprang another Mine, Paul's Valley. I am off
opinion, they do not sink their Sap deep enough, and that the Turks in Counter
mining have a great advantage, by being always undermost, which they certainly
have been, otherwise they would have weakened their own Wall, and made passage
for us.

Lorrain resolved, that a Lodgment should be made thereon, and every thing was
ordered accordingly. The Cannon and Mortars play very smartly all day to break
the Palisadoes on the Top of the Breach; The time appointed was 8 at Night, and
the Assault to be on this manner, viz. a Captain and 50 Granadiers were to
mount the Tower on the Right, and a Captain and 50 Granadiers to mount the
middle Tower on the Left; After that, each Barty was to be followed with a
Captain and 50 Musketeers, then 2 Engineers, a Sub-Engineer, and an
Undertaker, accompanied by 100 Pioneers each, to go to the Right and Left of
the Breach, and these to make two Lodgments; Then were 2 Lieutenant Colonels
and 500 Men to sustain these, and as many more ready, and under Arms to sustain
them. The Sign was to be the Quick Discharge of Artillery, which being given,
the Granadiers mounted, but the Turks, having some intelligence of our purpose,
received us with great Fire of Muskets and Grenades, and an infinite quantity
of Stones. The English Volunteers, accompanied by the Spaniards, and a few
French, were in this Action; Those that went to the Left were, after a small
Dispute, beaten off, by the springing of a Fugade. The Engineers and Pioneers,
instead of going to the Right and Left, fixed in the middle of the Breach
between the Fires of the two Towers, they had neither Sand-Sacks, Gabions, nor
Cask, nor above 40 Fagots to make this Lodgment, and in this Confusion
continued there in number about 3 or 400, for the space of three quarters of an
hour, without being able to gain the Palisadoes. The Turks seemed once to give
way, but finding we did not advance, returned upon us more vigorously, and
spared neither Musket Ball, Grenades, Lances, Arrows, nor Stones. These flew
like Hail, and killed us more Men than any thing else. At last we retired,
which the Turks seeing, sallied out at the Port where the Brandenburgers were
entrenched, who received them so well, that they retired with the loss of 18
Men, whose Heads were put up on their uppermost Line: What Men we lost is not
yet known; Among the English there was Captain Rupert, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Moore,
and Captain Talbot killed; Colonel Forbes, Captain St. George, Captain
Bellasis, and my Lord Savile, wounded by Musket shot, besides several others
hurt with Stones.

After our Dead were carried off, Lorrain of the killed and wounded, viz. 1000
Soldiers, besides Officers, 50 Volunteers, most of which are Noblemen, the rest
of the day was employed in burying the Dead. The Turks continued their Colors
flying on the top of the Breach.

Orders were given for enlarging the Trenches next the Breach, they being found
in the Assault too straight, Hamet Bassa to the Bassa of Buda, bidding him be
of Courage, for that he would certainly come to his Relief. About 4 in the
Afternoon, we heard the Turks at work, just on the Right of our Left Gallery,
going from the Mosque, upon which we began another on the Right of the Mosque,
with intention to obstruct them if upon a Level with us, and continued the
other also. The Brandenburgers have played so hard on the Left of the Round
Tower, that it is quite demolished.

We pierced the Wall of the Lower Town looking into St. Paul's Valley, and
carried on a 3d Angle Salliant, Spanish Guns on that side which regards the
Round Tower, which have been well plied, and with so good Success, as to have
ruined its Defense looking into the Valley, which annoyed our Men in the Line
of Contravallation, and Communication, which we are carrying on in the said
Valley to join the Bavarians on the other end of the Town, who have now lodged
themselves on the top of the Breach by the advantage of two Mines which they
sprang, in which Action they lost but 12 Men.

Early this morning, or 15 Hand-Granadoes at once out of a Mortar. This day a
Turk fled to us, and reports, that they lost above 500 Men in the last Assault;
Likewise that their Vaults could not resist the Force of the Spanish Bombs, one
of which falling through an Arch, killed and wounded 80 Men, Women and
Children. Our greatest Talk now, is of a speedy Battle with the Turks, who
advance toward us apace. We have about 6000 Horse on Pest side, encamped there
for the Security of our Bridge, and to hinder Succors to the Town by Boats.
This Night the Bavarians sprung a Mine, and made themselves Masters of the
Faussebray the Enemy had made at the foot of the Rondel.

Early this morning, Bavarians posted themselves at the Foot of the Breach,
with the loss of a Lieutenant Colonel, and 30 or 40 Men. News came to the Duke
of Lorrain, that an Army of Turks appeared on this side the Danube, upon which
our Guards were doubled, but it proved false. The Horse the next day were
ordered to march that way. The Enemy was expected, upon advice that the Grand
Vizier was marching toward us with an Army of 40000 Men. This day Mr. Kerr, a
Scotch Gentleman, was killed in the Trenches.

We added more Cannon to our Batteries,

About break of day the Turks sallied on the Bavarian side so vigorously, Saxon
Colonel, the Colonel of the Artillery, and above 150 Men; Nailed up a Battery
of Cannon and 2 Mortars, and so retired, overturning their Gabions, and all
without any considerable loss. About an hour after the Enemies principal
Magazine blew up, which stood near the Castle looking toward Pest; The Danube
is here above 500 Paces over, beyond which flew Stones of very great size. By
this Accident a great part of the Wall was demolished. The Duke of Lorrain,
with several other Generals, went over to Pest side to observe the Damage,
which seemed so great, that several were of Opinion we should immediately storm
the Town in that place, but many difficulties arise, viz. That at that distance
we could not discern, whether the Breach were accessible or not, and that our
men would be greatly exposed to the Cannon there. This Night a Deserter came
out of the Town, and reported they had lost by the blowing up of the Magazine
1500 men.

This day the Duke of Lorrain sent a Letter to the Governor of Buda, Turks hung
out a white Flag on the top of the Breach, which caused a Rumor in the Army
that they would Captiulate. There was a Cessation of Arms on both sides for the
space of 2 hours, during which time several of our men discoursed with the
Turks in the Breach; This time being expired, 4 men were desired to advance
toward the Gate that leads to Alba Regalis, at which 4 Horsemen came out, one
of them delivering the Visier's Answer wrapped up in Satin; at parting, one of
the Turks presented the Interpretation with an embroidered Handkerchief. The
Letter his Highness sent imported, That he thought them not in a state much
longer to resist, that he was ready to give a General Assault, in which if they
succeeded, they would be all put to the Sword, Man, Woman and Child, as at
New-Heusel; And that in Charity to save the effusion of so much Blood, he gave
them that Notice, that they might timely deliberate for their Safety. This
Letter the Turks answered in three lines, viz. That they thought his Highness
would justify them, that they had hitherto done like brave Men, that they were
resolved to continue in so doing, that God punished the Vainglorious.

This day was designed for a General Assault, Bavarians not ready, it was
deferred. To day arrived about 2000 Heydukes and Hussars, who encamped at the
Head of Count Taaff's Quarters on the Danube side.

Early in the morning, Bavarians had battered at the Foot, fell, and the way
into the Town or rather Castle made very passable. In the afternoon the Turks
sprang a Mine at the Foot of the Rondel, looking into St. Paul's Valley, and
sallied out with about 50 Men, on that side, upon which our Men that were
nearest quitted their Line, and pushed them very bravely back. In the mean time
they made another Sally on the Left, in a much greater number, falling upon the
Brandenburgers, and cut several of them in pieces, who immediately rallying
repulsed them very smartly with equal loss. A party likewise attacqu'd the
Heydukes that were nigh the River, encamped under the Wall of the Old Town,
sometimes the Turks with great Cries of Allah, Allah; Then the Heydukes
rallying, pushed the Turks with great Cries of Hida, Hida, and would be
sometimes so mixed, as one could scarce distinguish them. Thus the Skirmish
continued for two hours, with the loss of about 100 Men on each side.
Lieutenant Colonel Arty was shot in the Leg.

News came, Fire, in order to an Assault the next day. The Wind was favorable
on the Bavarian's side, and burnt the Palisadoes to the Ground, but on the
Lorrain side the Fire would not fix, but did rather incommode ourselves, both
Fire and Smoke coming on our Lines.

The Duke of Lorrain, Swabes Hill by Cannon. The Imperialists went on first,
attacquing the middle of the Courtain, and the great Tower on the Right, where
they were twice beaten off, before they could reach the Palisadoes on the top
of the Breach. At the same time the Brandenburgers and Heydukes attacqu'd the
Tower on the Left, with a slow, but very firm pace, marching in Battalion,
mounted the Breach, and fixed themselves on the top of the Palisadoes, and
maintained them, which the Imperialists seeing, mounted the third time to the
Palisadoes, which many of them passed, and having lodged themselves on the
Tower on the Right, manned it with their own Men, where they were no sooner
entered, but a Fugade overturned the whole surface of the Rondel Men and all,
which did not so discourage us but a second Battalion took the Post, who were
treated in the same manner with the first by a lower degree of Fugades or
Jorneaux, a third followed when a large Mine sprung, which beat them off again,
however this Post was repossess'd by the Imperialists who maintained it with
great bravery, the Duke of Lorrain all this while at the Foot of the Breach
encouraging his Soldiers. The Bavarians likewise lodging themselves in a
Rondel, entered into a Court of the Castle, where was a Battery of 9 Guns and 4
Mortars; It was a Saxon Captain who first entered by a small Embrazure, and
finding the place very open, and overlooked by the Castle, nayl'd up the Cannon
and Mortars, and so retired to the Lodgment on the Breach.

Our Lodgment on the top of the Breach was now better secured, Turks had made
upon the quitting of it, which gave us no small trouble. This day the Miners
were fixed to the 2d Wall.

We sprung 3 Mines with no great success, Turks planted 2 pieces of Cannon in a
high Steeple, which overlooked all our Works, and killed many of our Men, upon
which 3 Guns were pointed upon them, which were plied so well, that they were
soon dismounted, and the Tower almost beaten down. This day likewise a Scaffold
was erected on the top of the Breach for a Platform of Guns. Two Mines more are
begun.

Provisions of Cask and Sand-Sacks are ordered to be made and thrown into the
Ditch. Lorrain, with the concurrence of the Duke of Bavaria, sent a second
Summons to the Town, by the Count de Lomberg, to whom the Turks replied, that
an Answer should be sent the next day, it being too late then. Notice was given
us by some Boors of Hungaria, that the Grand Vizier was to pass the Bridge of
Effecke the 28th Instant, and that 6000 Men were marched before, whom they left
18 Hungarian Miles off. Three Cannon are mounted on our new Lodgment, and begin
to fire.

In the Morning, about 9 of the Clock, Turks returned an Answer to the
General's Letter, letting him know, That the Town was in the hands of God, and
that they could not give it up, but if they would receive another Place in lieu
of it, they would Treat thereupon. But the General's Reply was, That his
Imperial Majesty had commanded him forthwith to Surrender, or never more to
expect Offers of Capitulation. After this, the Duke of Lorrain ordered two
Mines to be sprung, which were ready under the second Wall; That toward the
Right destroyed the Wall very much, but made little or no Breach through, but
endamaged our new Battery on the top of the Breach. In the Evening, the Enemy
sent two Messengers to the Duke of Bavaria, whereupon his Highness sent two
Hostages, and there was a Cessation of Fire for about two hours. The Bassa then
proposed to deliver the Town, if we would conclude a Peace on its Surrendry,
which he said he had power to do, urging the Advantage it would be to the
Emperor. This was answered by the Duke of Bavaria, that he would do them what
Service he could, but had no Commission to conclude a Peace; upon this, the
Turks returned, and we renewed our Fire. This day Count Staremberg was shot in
the Hand and Neck, as he was looking through the Sand-Sacks on the top of the
Breach.

Two Cannon more were added to the Battery on the Lodgment, Alba Regalis, and
the Bridge of Essecke, are returned, bringing News of the Turks Approach.

We prosecuted the filling of the Ditch,

Early this Morning, Bavarians side, who, after a small time, retired, finding
the Turks too well barricado'd and prepared for them, who were no ways fitted
for the Enterprise, so they made their Retreat to their Lodgment with the loss
of about 50 Men; At the same time, a Mine was sprung on the Lorrain side, which
did nothing but shake the second Wall, and throw a few Stones into St. Paul's
Valley. The ill success of this Mine had altered the Duke of Lorrain's purpose
of making the Assault this day, but, upon the arrival of a Messenger from the
Duke of Bavaria, who brought word that they had begun and could not go back,
his Highness the Duke of Lorrain ordered a Party of Dragoons to quit their
Horses, and pass the Ditch, which they very bravely performed, accompanied with
some Foot, in all to the number of 300 Men. The Descent and Ascent was very
difficult, so that the Turks had time to receive them very smartly. The Duke of
Lorrain perceiving that this Attempt would not succeed without a necessity of
still relieving them by fresh Men, and being loath to expose so many, in so open
and large a Ditch, to Stones, Grenades, Arrows, Bullets, and Fire-Trunks, and
at the same time receiving advice that the Bavarians were retired, his Highness
ordered likewise a Retreat, but not half our Men came back. We lost in this
Action two Lieutenant Colonels, and two Majors; General Megrett was wounded in
the Foot by an Arrow, and my Lord Mountjoy in the Face with a Musket Shot.

We advanced our Lodgment to the Tower on the Right, St. Paul's Valley, and
continued our Line of Circumvallation.

We had News, Essecke, and that it was thought he would hardly leave that Post,
being very apprehensive, that General Schultz, who commanded in Croatia, might
fall upon it, and burn it, as General Leslie had done formerly. We are likewise
informed, that 6000 Turks are marching toward us, to endeavor the putting
Succor into the Town. In the Evening, the Bavarians discovered a Gallery of the
Turks, which they possessed.

This Morning, Hussars brought in five Turkish Prisoners, who told us, that the
Serasquier was at Alba Regalis with about 20000 Men, and that by this time the
Grand Vizier must have passed the Bridge of Essecke with a much greater Force.
This News made us work very hard to complete our Lines, that the whole Army
might be encamped within them.

We continued working on our Lines,

Early this Morning, Turks and Tartars appeared on the Hill, having surpised
and cut off our advanced Guard of 100 Hussars, upon which we sounded to Horse
to receive them. They continued there about two hours skirmishing with some of
our Hungarians, and so retired, and we returned to our Camp. This day our
Bridge above the Town was removed, being thought too far from our Camp, and
another was made below the Town where the Bavarians were encamped.

Early this Morning, Turks: It continued for a time, which made the Duke of
Lorrain hasten thither, where his Highness was told, that the Turks had thrown
a Bomb amongst a parcel of Hand-Granadoes, in number about Four thousand, which
made that Noise, killed two Men, and slightly wounded Count Archinto, who then
commanded in the Trenches. Toward Noon, the Turks appeared upon the Hills
where they were the day before.

Little of Moment occurred.

Our Miners reported to his Highness,

Every thing was in good order by break of Day, Lorrain was greatly displeased,
saying aloud, 'Twas well Field-Battels depended not on Miners, and so ordered
the Soldiers that were commanded to the Trenches, to retire to their Camp. The
whole Army was ordered to march at eight of the Clock at Night to get over the
Valley, and gain the Brows of the Hills which lie betwixt us and the Enemy, (on
which the Turks were encamped,) and to fall on them at break of Day, but as we
were ready to advance, News was brought that the Grand Vizier was arrived, and
at the same time we perceived their Camp to advance, and Fires kindled on the
Descent of those Hills we designed to gain, so that we were all ordered back to
our Tents.

This Morning at eight of the Clock, Turks Army began to march down the said
Hills, as if they intended to attacque our Lines; The Duke of Lorrain observed
a Party to march toward our Right, as if they designed to gain some Hills
which commanded a great part of our Lines, and at that time the Right Wing of
our Army; the Duke of Lorrain, apprehensive of this, commanded the Army tor
march out of the Lines, and made the Right Wing stretch to the very top of the
said Hills, making an even Front with the rest, and so we continued in this
Order, the Enemy still advancing but very slowly. The Left Wing, commanded by
the Duke of Bavaria, stood in their Lines which joined the Danube, the whole
Line was well furnished with Cannon and Bombs under ground about 50 Paces from
it. This Line is very complete, reaching from the Danube side in a very strait
Line cross the Plain to some steep Hills, that are at this time covered with
the Brandenburgh and other Auxiliaries, our Right Wing consisting of old
Imperial Regiments which reached to the top of the said Mountains, the general
Form was one Squadron, and two Battalions, which Order was observed likewise in
their Encamping, as may be seen in the Plan of Buda. The Battalions took up a
great deal of ground to make a great Show, though very weak in number at this
time.

About five in the Morning, Lorrain perceiving their design, ordered seven
Regiments of Horse, and some Hungarians, under the Command of General Dunewalt,
Taaffe and Palfie, to march up the Hills, and possess the top of them, facing
the Enemy. We were no sooner up, but immediately the Turks appeared on our
Left, who still made toward us, there being a deep Valley between; presently
appeared others on our Right where the Valley ended, their Body not being come
up, kept skirmishing for the space of an hour with some Hungarians, when of a
sudden the Hills were covered with the Enemy, who immediately gave us a
discharge of eight pieces of Cannon, and with terrible Cries fell most
furiously on the Hungarians, who immediately gave way, whereupon Count Taaffe,
etc. advanced, Mr. Fitz-James and the English Volunteers being in the first
Rank. This Charge was performed with that Gallantry, that the Enemy could not
endure it, but immediately fled as fast as they came on. We persu'd them about
a League, the way being so very bad for the Foot, that most of the Janisaries
were cut off, the rest fled into the Plains, Bushes and deep Hollows which lead
into the Valley, where they had a great Reserve, which made us halt, till the
rest of the Party were come up, who had made a great Circuit in persuing those,
who fled into the Plains that lay between our Camp. From hence we observed the
rest of the Turks Army scattered like Flocks of sheep. As soon as the seven
Regiments had beaten the Turks on the Hills, his Highness advanced his Right
Wing from the Heights toward the Plain, the Brandenburgers and Auxiliaries
quitting their Lines, and marching in good Order toward the Enemy, before the
Bavarians (who were the Left Wing,) had got half over the Plain. The Turks
Right Wing retires to the top of their Hills, which were very difficult of
Access, and there left a Party, and sends the rest to the Left Wing, which now
is very hard pressed by General Taaffe and Dunewalt, which, with the Duke of
Lorrain's motion on the same side, gave the Turks some Apprehensions, they not
stirring from the Foot of their Hills, we continued in our aforesaid Order,
galling them as much as possibly we could with our Fieldpieces, at which time
a Party of Turks attacqu'd very briskly the Left of our Right Wing, where a
Party of Hungarians were posted, who soon gave way, and had not General Taaffe
with two or three Squadrons of Dragoons come up to sustain them, (the Enemy
having already forced our Line,) it is believed they would have endangered the
putting Succor into the Town; shortly after, a Party was seen to detach from
their Left toward the Right Flank of our Right Wing, which General Taaffe by a
great Presence of Mind perceiving, immediately commanded about four Squadrons
of light Horse to post themselves at the Foot of those Hills, which the Turks
seemed to press for, and by that means to have got into the Town. This Order of
Count Taaff's was performed with so much Expedition, that not above 20 or 30
Turks gained the Hill, who were cut to pieces. Our General now seemed under
some uncertainty, whether to attacque the Enemy on the Hills, and push for an
entire Victory, or return to our Lines, and prosecute the Siege, but the Turks
seeming to retire, and considering how difficult the Ascent was, and drow
uneasy to Horse, (already so much harassed,) how weak his Wing was, and how
liable to be forced by an Enemy that charged with so much Fury, who had a Town
in their view, and would be content to sacrifice their whole Army to its
preservation, it was therefore thought most advisable to return into our
Lines, and press on the Siege. The Turks lost in this Mornings Action about
3000 of their best Janisaries, being all picked men to attempt our Line, and
get into the Town by that unexpected and difficult passage. We took about 500
Prisoners, 58 Standards, and 8 pieces of Cannon. The Bassa that commanded them
was killed, and the Aga of the Janisaries wounded; Mr. Fitz-James was in all
this Action with Count Taaffe, behaving himself with Remarkable Gallantry. It
pleased God, that neither he nor any of the English Volunteers had any hurt.

This Morning, Alba Regalis; he strangled the Bassa who brought him News of
their Defeat, and told him, That they charged us like Lions, but were received
by Devils; upon which the Grand Vizier spit in his Face, and commanded him to
be dispatched.

Early this Morning, Turkish Standards were placed on the top of our Breach, at
the putting up of which the Enemy shot very warmly upon them, and killed
several of our Men. This Night, his Highness ordered a burning-Comp^sition of
Father Gabriel's to be fixed to the Palisadoes, which burnt several of them,
but before Morning the Turks, by unspeakable Diligence and Industry, had placed
new ones.

Turks Retrenchments, but we were beaten off with loss.

St. Paul's Valley, which incommoded us much in passing and repassing from the
Danube side.

At break of day, Tartars and Janisaries on Horseback, appeared near our Lines
in St. Paul's Valley, upon which the Trumpet sounded to Horse, but before our
Men could mount, about 150 forced through, and got into the Town. Our ordinary
Guards, which were about 500, entertained them for some time, till others came
to their assistance, when they were repulsed with the loss of 200 upon the
place, besides the taking of several Prisoners, who told us that 2000 of these
were Janisaries, to whom the Grand Vizier had promised 20 Aspers a day, during
life, to all who entered the Town.

St. Paul's Valley, against which the Turks raised another of seven heavy
Cannon upon the Courtine betwixt the two said Towers, which much incommoded us.

Bavarians lodged themselves on the top of the Castle which they had ruined
with their Cannon: That part of the Line of Contravallation was doubled, and a
large Redoubt built at the Foot of the Swabes Hill, all which was well
palisado'd; likewise two Squadrons of Dragoons, viz. Mercy and Seraucte were
posted on the other side of the Hill, so as to give Check to the Enemy in case
of a second Attempt that way. This Night we had great storms of Wind and Rain,
which forced the Bavarians from their last Lodgment, which lay very high, and
exposed to the weather.

Bavarians repossess'd themselves of their former Lodgment. The Duke of Lorrain
ordered a large Sap to be made into the Ditch which lay between our Lodgment
and the two Walls, by that means intending to fill it up with Sand-sacks and
Barrels of earth. This Night we had Notice that the Enemy was to fall upon us,
upon which we kept our Horses all sadled, and our Men alert, but nothing happened.

About 10 in the Morning,

A Deserter came from the Turks, Bavarians from their Post, which they regained
that Night with the loss of 18 Men.

Transylvania with great Impatience. A Battery of 8 Guns was placed to flank
the Breach on the Lorrain side.

A Boom was made cross the River with pieces of Timber, to prevent swimming
into the Town. Scherffenberg left Zolnock but that day, (having stayed there
five days,) which was no small trouble to us, and the more, because a Deserter
assured us, that the Vizier had settled the attacquing us that very Night. That
3000 Janisaries had 20 Crowns apiece to come behind us, and throw themselves
into the Town, while with the Army he attacqu'd us that Night. All our Men kept
their Post, and the General sent 200 Wagons to meet General Scherffenberg's
Foot, to bring them forward with the more Expedition.

We yet see no Enemy, nor any Succor,

At Daybreak, Janisaries on Horseback advanced along the Danube side by the
hot Baths, to throw themselves into the Town, by the way of the lower Town, to
which purpose they brought with them some Engines like Ladders, made with
Boards, which they applied to the Wall, and about six Turks passed, who were
cut off by those on the inside. About 400 rid along the Wall of the lower Town,
till they came to St. Paul's Valley, receiving the Fire of our Lines, which was
there doubled upon them; and a little further, they met some Squadrons of
Horse, who cut them all off except four or five, who got into the Town. They
were so confounded with our Lines and Redoubt, and by seeing Enemies on all
sides, they knew not whither to turn; some run into the General's Quarters, and
thought to save themselves in the Tents, the rest of the Party seeing this ill
Success retreated. We took some Prisoners, and 18 Standards. General Mercy was
in this Action dangerously cut in the Head and Shoulders, which was our
greatest loss. About an hour after this Action, the Duke of Lorrain had News,
that the Enemy descended into the Plain, and that a strong Party appeared
behind the Hills, where we beat them the 14th. While they were giving this
Account to his Highness, we discovered 25 Squadrons of Scherffenberg's Men
ready to pass the Bridge, upon which a Messenger was dispatched to hasten their
march, while we prepared to meet the Grand Vizier; but whether the accession of
those new Troops discouraged them, or that they designed only to amuse us, they
returned to their Post on the Hills, and we lay that Night with less
apprehension than we had for several days before. Most of the Turks that were
killed this day, had about them a Paper from the Grand Vizier to the Bassa, to
give a certain Sum of money to every one that should get into the Town.

The rest of Count Scherffenberg's Troops arrived, Hungarians. They encamped
with their Body on our Right upon the Hills which overlook the lower Town. A
great Council of War was now held, where it was debated, Whether we should
advance toward the Enemy, leaving a sufficient Number to defend our Trenches,
or attend them in our Lines, and continue the Siege? The later was at length
resolved, and our Guards in the Trenches were strengthened out of the new Men.

We continued our Preparations for the general Assault, and wrought at a
Gallery in the Ditch that was to guide to the Breach. That Night the Camp was
alarmed with the Enemies advancing, and all were on Horseback, but it proved
but a Rumor.

All things continued quiet in the Camp,

The Duke of Lorrain before Daybreak, S^abe's Hill; It begun about 3 in the
Afternoon under the direction of Duke of Croy and Thenock the Brandenburgh
General, the Soldiers going on with great courage and in good order, soon
reached the Palisadoes, and took a Post on the Flank of the Enemy which Raked
the inside of them, and chased the Turks from thence, where finding no
Retrenchments as was expected, persued their advantage, making great slaughter
as they went. Such as escaped fled to the Castle, where they put out a White
Flag. This is the Account of our success on this side; But the Bavarians (who
somewhat later began their Attaque,) met with different Fortune, for they were
repulsed with loss; Nor was it indeed possible to have entered that way;
However the Duke of Lorrain would not permit the Duke of Croy to treat with
those who Fled into the Castle. Leaving them to his Electoral Highness's
disposal, (it being his Attacque,) who gave them Quarter. They were in number
about 200, amongst which was a Bassa who was a Sub-Governor, his name was Abdi
Bassa, the Vizier or Principal Governor dying gallantly upon the Breach. On the
Lorrain side the Aga of the Janisaries fought bravely. There were taken of all
sorts betwixt 4 and 5000, and killed about 3000. The slaughter was less than
expected, for though both Women and Children were killed in the heat, yet there
was more Quarter than usual from the severity of the Germans, especially in
places taken by Storm.

It Is remarkable, that this Glorious Success of the Christian Arms was attended
with a singular Circumstance of Divine Providence, namely, that while our Army
marched with doubtful success to the Assault of the most important Frontier
Post of the Ottoman Empire, the Grand Vizier should with a greater Body of Men
stand a tame Spectator of the issue of this Action, and then retire, which they
did with great Precipitation.

JACOB RICHARDS.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Plan herein-mentioned, being large, could not possibly be finished with
the Journal, but being now under the Engravers hands, you may expect it, when
perfected.


