Remarks upon the NAVY. The Second Part. CONTAINING A REPLY to the Observations
on the First Part.

WITH A Discourse on the DISCIPLINE of the Navy, showing that the Abuses of the
Seamen are the highest Violation of Magna Charta, and the Rights and Liberties
of English Men.

In a Letter from a Sailor to a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.

Haec nisi inde aberunt, centuplex murus rebus servandis parum est. Plaut. in
Persa. London, Printed in the Year 1700.

The Second Part OF THE REMARKS on the NAVY.
SIR,
I Thank you for sending me the Observations upon the first part of my Remarks
on the Navy, because it came while I was writing something upon the Discipline
of the Navy; so that at the same time I have an opportunity to correct the
Insolence of that insignificant Scribler. I can assure you, Sir, I am as well
acquainted with the Gentleman he scandalizes, as the Author himself is with the
Secretary of the Admiralty; and tho I much prefer Argument before Reviling, I
must spare a few Paragraphs in vindication of one that bears a better Character
in the world than this trifling Observator can pretend to. This Author says,
that what he has sent into the World, is the Effect of Ale and Brandy: Now I
know that Gentleman never drinks one of those Liquors, and very seldom of the
other; so that beginning his Book with a Lie, you have little reason to believe
him afterward. There was, Sir, in our Time, one Captain Fudge Commander of a
Merchant-man, who upon his Return from a Voyage, how ill fraught soever his
Ship was, always brought home his Owners a good Cargo of Lies, insomuch that
now aboard Ship the Sailors, when they hear a great Lie told, cry out, you
fudge it. Now, Sir, I must give you to understand that this memorable Captain
Fudge got diverse and sundry Sons, some for the Admiralty, some for the Navy,
and some for Merchants Service; and this Author's Talent of Lying coming up to
the Standard of the Sire, we can believe him to be no other than young Fudge of
the Admiralty, and by his Multiplication of Lies, may be admitted to Seniority,
and take place as elder Brother.

Young Fudge tells you, page 4. that the Party he scandalizes turned his back
upon an Office wherein he was employed; but if he were restored to the Bread
and Cheese he is fallen from, he dares answer for it that his Mouth would be
stopped, and never opened again on the like Subject: and this place, he says,
page 6. was Clerk of the Cutting-house at 40 l. per Ann. Do but mark the reason
of the empty Creature; A Place of 40 l. per Ann. did not stop his Mouth, and
therefore the same place of 40 l. per Ann. will stop his Mouth. Such
consequences as these, are the natural Product of the Brains employed in the
Navy; where a wonderful Stupidity, joined with a good stock of Impudence, never
fails of Preferment. But I can assure him that Gentleman is so far from
desiring such an Employ, or scandalizing himself by serving the Navy under such
an Administration, that he would not tell those men his name for such an Office.

He tells us in the same Page, that he has a deserved Poverty. Now it is no
Crime nor Sin to be poor. But it is very hard for a man to be cheated of his
Right, and then reflected upon for his Poverty. His Poverty indeed is deserved
on the account of his Services to this Government and his Country: Young Fudge
is in the right on it here; for great care has been taken to keep those down,
that rose most early in the Service of their Country. These Reflections are but
so many Arrows shot at themselves; for there was never a man in that Office to
which this Gentleman belonged besides himself, that ever ventured a Hair of his
Head in the Service of his Country; yet at the same time, a parcel of poor
insignificant Mortals, as foolish as fortunate, enjoyed places of 400 l. per
Ann. in that Office. Now the reason why this Gentleman took this mean Employ in
that Office, was upon the account of an Uncle of his, then a Commissioner
there, who brought him into that, in prospect of another much better, likely
then to be vacant; for which he had the promise of a certain Person, who deals
so much in Religion, that he cannot afford us any of his Morals, or so much as
once be true to his word.

This Observator fudges on, and tells you p. 5. That this Gentleman some years
ago could not prove his Allegations before a Committee of the House of Commons.
How he came to have more sense than the whole House of Commons, I cannot tell:
for upon the report of that Affair to the House, they were not of such an
Opinion. He tells you in the same Page, that he is Poet Laureat to the
Calves-head Club: but if young Fudge were to be hanged, or make good this
Assertion, he would be in a fine Condition. In p. 6. he magnifies his Knowledge,
by acquainting the world he has served two Apprenticeships in the Naval School
of England. I have known one that served two Apprenticeships in a University,
and yet as great a Fool as if he had never been there. He tells you abundance
of Stories of his good Services, of his Honesty, etc. p. 7. which we may
believe to be even as true as what went before; for if it be true, he is a
Nonsuch. He would make us believe, that he has not enriched himself by his
Employment, and that he gets not one 4th part of what his Predecessors got
before him. One Reason of this may be an Order put up in their Office, that no
Officers thereunto belonging should take any Bribes or Rewards; and I could
wish another Article had been tacked to that Order, viz. That the Commissioners
should receive no Presents of Prize Wines from the Commanders.

Page 7th he says that he holds his Accuser in the greatest Contempt. Not so
fast good Fudge: the Accuser you pretend, is a Gentleman born and bred; but you
have skip'd to a high pitch of Insolence, since you were Pip's Footboy, and
your good Lady Mother kept an Apple-stall in Westminster, with a little Net
over it, lest some unlucky Boy should rob her of a Pennyworth of Apples and a
halfpennyworth of Ginger-bread, and so break her at once. Tho you are skip'd up
to Preferment, you must not undervalue men of Birth and Education, especially
one that has forgot more Learning than ever you were capable of remembering.

Page 8. he tells you that this Person did sometime since by Letter acquaint
the Lords of the Admiralty with several Abuses in the Navy, but especially in
the managing of the Victualling: their Lordships did thereupon signify their
desire to speak with him; but when he attended them, he excused himself by
saying, That he had formerly laid those Matters before other Persons without
Success, and had little hopes of faring better from them. Now here is young
Fudg again. For the Gentleman tells me that he never writ a Line to the Lords,
before their Lordships sent a Letter to him, requiring him to attend them. He
came to the Office according to their Lordships Order, and enquiring of the
Doorkeeper whether their Lordships were sitting, the Doorkeeper gave him a
surly answer, and slap'd to the Door; however he knocked again, when Mr.
Doorkeeper looking out, saluted him with a what does the Fellow want? At which
the Gentleman gave him some hard Language, and told him their Lordships had
sent for him; but if they had nothing to say to him, he had nothing to say to
them. Soon after this he was admitted to their Lordships, who indeed received
him with a Civility answerable to their Characters, and gave him all the Reason
in the World to imagine they were real in their Intentions to redress those
Grievances they were willing to be acquainted with. But the Secretary
acquainted their Lordships, that this Gentleman had printed a scandalous Libel,
reflecting upon the late Commissioners, which was confirmed to their Lordships
by another Scribe there, tho, I believe, neither of them saw that Gentleman's
face before that time; which, together with some other scurvy Reflections,
without any Reprimand from the Board, was discouragement enough for him not to
lay any thing before them.

He says, page 11. That this Gentleman, when the Board called before them the
Commissioners for Victualling, upon a Complaint of Mr. Kelly, did not so far
show his Zeal to the Public, as to appear face to face with those Gentlemen.
Truly it is no wonder he did not appear, when he knew nothing of the Business:
Did their Lordships give him any notice? or did they order him to attend at
that time? He prints a Letter from Mr. Burchett, page 10. to the Author of the
Remarks, which he says may sufficiently testify he had an Opportunity offered
him to bring to light what he knew upon Mr. Kelly's hearing. Well said young
Fudge. The Letter to the Author is dated September 11. and Mr. Kelly's hearing
was the 6th of the same Month, five days before. This is Admiralty Reason all
over. He says, at that time the Management of the Victualling was solemnly
examined into, when Mr. Kelly summoned about 50 Witnesses, and but about a
fifth part of them were called in and examined; this was a solemn Hearing
indeed. It Is true, he was no stranger to Mr. Kelly's Complaint, but encouraged
him to lay it before that Board, in order to judge by their Management of a
piece, what they would do with the whole.

Upon this Hearing Captain Boult, the Purveyor for Corn, a Gentleman that knows
more of the business of the Victualling than all the rest concerned therein,
was discharged from his Employment by their Lordships. I know not the Merits of
Captain Boult's Discharge, but am fully assured that Mismanagement lay at the
door of another Person. However this Gentleman hearing it buzzed about the
Victualling Office, that Capt. Boult was discharged for accusing one of the
Commissioners, and knowing it to be the constant practice of the Victuallers to
discharge all such as made Complaints, thought it would be in vain to bring any
more Persons before their Lordships to testify any thing against the
Commissioners, they being assured of a discharge by one Board or the other. But
this Gentleman being unwilling to believe a thing upon a bare Report or
Surmise, went up to the Lords to know of them whether Captain Boult was
discharged upon the said Account or no: But there being not a full Board, their
Lordships declined giving him any answer to his Question. And this is the true
Account of the matter, however Fudg with his Billingsgate Rhetoric has been
pleased to misrepresent it.

Our empty-brain'd Author in the same Page, reflects on my Folly, in being
concerned that the Lords of the Admiralty, upon receiving a Letter signed A. B.
offering to make Discoveries, do cause to be inserted in the Gazet the subject
Matter of A. B's Letter; and would be gladly informed, if two Letters should
come at the same time, signed A. B. to the very same purpose, and with the same
Date, how he could satisfy either the one or the other A. B. their respective
Letters were received, without hinting something of the Contents of them.
Certainly this cannot puzzle the boasted Wisdom of the Admiralty. If both
Letters are signed A. B. and both of them contain the same matter; if one of
the A. B's appear, it may be sufficient. And if after one A. B. has appeared,
if they are desirous to hear what the other A. B. can say, it is but Gazetting
again, and they will be acquainted with both: or otherwise, suppose their
Lordships in one Advertisement should require both the A. B's to appear, may not
this be done without telling the subject matter of their Letters, which are
both to the same purport?

It is observable this Admiralty Officer, always in his Scribble, loads
Complainers with the infamous name of Informers. Is this Character the mighty
Encouragement they give to Complainers? It Is well they have not all their Throats
cut, as one lately had at Portsmouth upon such an Account; for those who have
served their Country after this manner, have for the generality met with such
Treatment, or the recompense of starving or losing their Employments. It Is a
hard Case that such as complain of Grievances, should undergo the scandal of
Informers, when such as informed against Conventicles in the late Reigns, meet
with such Encouragement in this, as a Journeyman Apothecary, a common Informer
and Persecutor, was made Commissioner of the Victualling. I could mention many
more such that have got good Employments, when such as complain of Grievances
get only the abusive title of Informers from our Admiralty folk.

Young Fudge says, page 12. of his Railery, That I am angry that the Fleet was
not sent from the Downs before the 15th of July last, in order to prevent a
supposed Invasion. And indeed, says he, I cannot wonder at his having so deep a
sense of an Invasion, since (if I am not very much misinformed) his showing an
early good will to an Attempt of that kind in the late Reign, procured him such
Treatment as will always stick in his Stomach; and perhaps his meaning is, That
then he ventured his Life for the preservation of his Country: and that you may
know what Invasion he means, he tells you in the Margin 'twas the Duke of
Monmouths. I could tell you a pretty Story, were it convenient, concerning the
Methods of destroying that unfortunate Duke; but as for the Invasion I know
nothing of it: when a People are robbed of their Liberty, and are brought into
perfect Slavery, they may come to the recovery of their Rights either by Land
or by Water. And it is justifiable in any Person, tho never so obscure, to head
an armed Company in defense of their Rights, much more a Person of that Duke's
Quality, however unfortunate. That our Rights were then Invaded is beyond
dispute, when at that very time the late King was collecting the Customs and
Excise without Act of Parliament. I make no question but this Admiralty Tool,
who in this Reign calls the Duke of Monmouth's Disembarkment an Invasion, will
in the next say as much of the Prince of Orange's Descent; for I dare engage,
like the Vicar of Bray, he will hold in under all Governments, if fawning,
sneaking, and lying will effect it. But prithee Fudg, according to the
Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, the avowed Principles of thy
Party; how can thou hold an Office under a Government built upon the Ruins
of those Doctrines? but thy Conscience is a State Weathercock, turned about by
the wind of any Revolution. The treatment I met with in the late Reigns was
indeed severe enough, and none but an ill-bred Skipkennel would reflect upon a
Man for his Misfortunes, which he has undergone with so much Reputation and
Credit; nor are my Hardships under this Government much less, only with this
difference, that I was as early to bring this King in as I was to drive the
other out: nor am I alone in these Misfortunes, there are many beside my self
that are discouraged by this Government, when many are enabled to buy
themselves into Offices with the Money they got for Pardons of the D. of
Monmouth's followers: and if the Recovery of our Rights be not justifiable, I
shall with this Author conclude, that I did not then venture my Life for the
preservation of my Country.

Page 13. concerning the Fleet's lying in the Downs till July, he says, He
cannot foresee that they might not have been as ready from thence as any other
place to prevent an Invasion: For, supposing a Neighbor of ours had put to Sea
with any such Design, and with a greater Strength, and that our Ships by being
far Westward had been cut off from Succor, I would gladly know whether we had
not then been in a hopeful Condition to defend our Country? For in such a Case
it would have been next to an impossibility to have sent an additional Strength
to their Relief, a greater Force being between them and such Succor; so might
they upon any Alarm, when in the Downs, either have gone from thence, and
attacked the Enemy with the Strength they had, or have continued there some
time till more Ships could have joined them from the River.

I can see no Reason why our Ships should be too far Westward, or so far
Eastward as the Downs, unless we pursue the old Methods of sending them
farthest out of the way, when they should do us most Service. If a Neighbor of
ours had a design to invade us, I think it a very improper Station to prevent
it, to ride with our Ships at one end of his Country; when I stand in the
middle of a Thing, I can see more of that Thing than if I stood at either end.
Now in submission to the Admiralty Politics, I suppose the Downs the worst
Station for our Shipping to obstruct an Invasion; in the first place it is a
great way off any of the Enemies Ports, where their Ships of War are laid up;
and then the Winds hanging Westerly for at least two thirds of the Year, the
Enemy have an Opportunity of invading us when our Ships are Windbound; and they
have all the Coast of England clear from the Downs to the Lands-end. I should
rather imagine St. Helens, Spithead, and Stokes-Bay, a proper Station for our
Ships at such a juncture. If we are not strong enough in shipping, they are
more readily supplied with an additional force from Portsmouth, from whence
they may be joined in a few Hours. When our Author says, in the Downs they may
be joined from the River in a little time, he says he knows not what; suppose
the Winds are contrary, it blows a Storm, or our great Ships are beneapt. It Is
true, there are not so many Ships laid up at Portsmouth, as in Chatham River;
but I hope they may be fitting out on such an Occasion, both at Chatham and
Plymouth at the same time. We are in no danger from the Eastward, the Enemy has
but few Ports that way, and all that Coast is a Lee-shoar above half the Year;
and all the other Ports of our Enemy being to the Westward of St. Helens, if
the Wind should spring up to the Eastward, and bring any of the Enemies Ships
from an Eastern Port, they cannot join their other Ships without obstruction
from our Fleet. But I shall go too far upon this Subject; for young Fudg, a
little lower in this Page, tells me I am but a fresh Water Sailor, and
consequently can have no knowledge in Naval Affairs: perhaps I have seen as much
of the Sea as young Fudg himself; I think I saw more of it in the great Storm
in February last, than ever I shall desire to see again: yet suppose I am no
Sailor, but a mere Landman, why may not one Landman talk of Ships Stations, as
well as another Landman appoint them?

Now we must allow our Fudg to say something in defense of an Office, in which
he possesses so eminent a Post: he that will lie, will without doubt swear for
his Masters; he says the Royal Navy of England is not fallen to decay, but on
the contrary, That instead of such a Misfortune, our Royal Navy is at this time
in a much better Condition than it was at the entrance into the War. Thank you
for nothing, good Sir, after so many Millions spent. I hope the Navy Officers
han't embezeled all the Money appointed for that Service; it is a hard case if
we have not more Ships built, and our Dock-Yards fuller of Stores: but this is
not the Question, Are our Ships as well Officer'd? are they as well manned, are
they as well paid? have they as good a Discipline? Yes, he says, As to the
Economy and Discipline, there is no Man who is a proper Judge thereof, but will
readily own very many Embelishments have been added thereunto by the Care and
Pains of those worthy Persons who commanded both at Home and at Sea, since the
aforesaid War commenced. The Embelishments added to the Discipline of the Navy,
he inserts in five Rules or Directions, p. 17. appointed to be observed in
order to the returning to their Majesty's Service, such Men as shall be put on
shore sick or hurt, from their Majesty's Ships. He tells you nothing how these
Rules and Directions were observed, how the Complaints upon breach of these
Directions have been redressed, not one word of this matter. Now to these five
Rules and Directions of Navy Discipline, I shall at the end of this Paper add
twelve more, which Mr. Dennis in his Paper presents the World, under the name
of Grievances; and in the mean time, Sir, shall discourse something concerning
the Discipline of the Navy.

The Sailors are the only People of the English Nation, that are left to the
discretionary Power of their Commanders, a Power indeed which belongs only to a
Being which is always Wise, and ever Just. When Men execute such a Power, it
can be called no otherwise than Arbitrary, for all Men are born to some Rights,
and those Rights are secured to them by some Laws. Now to take away from them
those Rights in defiance of those Laws, is an action in it self Arbitrary. No
Court of Justice in England can give a Sentence so definitive, that the
Defendant shall have no Appeal to any other Court. If I am cast at Common Law,
I can appeal to Chancery; if in Chancery I have a Decree against me, which I
esteem extrajudicial, I can appeal to the highest Court of Parliament: but the
poor Sailors Case comes not under the Cognizance of any of our Courts, they are
oppressed by the Discretionary Power of their Commanders, without any equitable
Relief, according to the Constitution of their Country. I shall here therefore
endeavor to show that the Discipline of our Navy has been directly contrary to
our Constitution, and then leave any one to judge of that Discipline, whether it
has not been matter of just Complaint, and an abominable Abuse upon the Sailors.

The 29th Chapter of Magna Charta says, No Freeman shall be taken or
Imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or Free Customs, or
be Outlawed or Exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor We will not pass upon
him, nor condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land. These words per Legem Terrae, in the end of this Chapter, do refer to all
the precedent matter contained in it. Now I give any one leave to judge whether
the Impressing Seamen for the Service, be not a violation of Magna Charta, when
Men are taken and imprisoned a Shipboard six or seven Years together. To say we
are a free People when any of us are in effectual Slavery, is mere Nonsense;
for the same Power that deprives one part of the People of their Liberty, may
enslave the whole People. And yet how many Press-Warrants have we had granted
from the Admiralty to Men that are no Officers? For none are such, but those
that are under the Cognizance of the Laws of the Land: Where do our Laws make
mention of a Pressmaster? Whom do our Laws commissionate to constitute such
Officers? Now when a Freeman is taken and imprisoned by an Officer not known to
our Laws, such an Act is a downright Piracy upon the Liberty of the People.

If they object, That without this Discipline the Ships of War cannot be manned
for the security of the Realm: if it be Necessary, make it Legal; we had as
good lose our Country, as lose our Rights. But how have Navys been supplied
with Men in former Ages? When the Nation's Service was accounted the best at
Sea, and Men made Interest to get before the Mast; this proceeded from the good
Discipline of those times, the good Usage of the Seamen by their Commanders;
they were not then poisoned with bad Provisions, Pease-Bread, and stinking Beef
and Pork; they were not then kept out of their Pay by Q's and R's: Such Men as
General Blake, the Earl of Sandwich, Dean, Lawson, Bourn, Minns, etc. were
familiar with their Sailors, and instead of calling them damned Dogs, or Sons
of Whores, called 'em Brethren. The Abuses of Seamen in this point, during this
War, have been very considerable, but without Redress, as their other
Grievances have; and some have been commissionated in this Affair, too big for
me to mention, and have received Salaries for this piece of Service, tho I
could never hear of any Service they did, save only a Customer's impressing a
great many Masters of Ships at Brighthelmstone. They were not only Seamen they
pressed, but many times Landmen, when the press Smacks coming into small Creeks
took such Men away, and carrying them 40 or 50 Miles from their own homes, have
left them to beg their way to their own Country; many thus have had their Limbs
starved by lying upon the Ballast, being unaccustomed to such hardships; and
when any of the Landmen thus pressed have been discharged, they have paid 12 d.
per day to the Master of the Smack for Diet, and no doubt but the King paid
near as much. Now I perceive the main Reason of want of men, is our want of
good Commanders. Capt. Jumper, nor any of those Commanders during the War that
used their men honestly and civilly, ever wanted their Complement of men: But
our Beau Commanders, the Sir Courtlys of the Sea, if they were forced to man
their Ships upon their own Credit and Reputation amongst the Sailors, would not
be able to bring them from the River to the Downs in a twelve Month. And to
keep these Creatures in Commission, we must it seems make a rent in our
Constitution.

No man shall be disseised, i. e. put out of Seisin, or dispossessed of his
Freehold, i. e. Lands or Livelihood, Liberties or Free Customs, which belong to
him as his free Birthright. Now to say that a Seaman has not as good a Right
as any to the Free Customs, Franchises, and Liberties of the Country he is born
in, is very absurd. If a Landman has a liberty to go on Foot, or Horseback, or
by Coach, to follow that Employ whereby he gets his livelihood; has not a
Seaman the same Right, to sail in what Ship and to what Port he pleases?

No man shall be outlawed, made an Exlex, i. e. debarred of the Benefit of the
Law of the Land, unless it be done according to Law. Now according to the
Discipline of the Navy, are not all our Sailors Outlaws, and deprived of the
Benefit of the Law, when they are not their own men, but liable to be taken
into Custody, and deprived of their Liberty by every rapacious Press-master?

No man shall be exiled, banished from the Place of his Nativity. Nemo perdet
Patriam. By the Laws of our Land, no man can be banished from his Native
Country, but upon two Accounts. 1st. Either by the Power or Authority of
Parliament; or 2dly. In case of Abjuration for Felony by the Common Law. The
King himself cannot send any Subject of England against his Will to serve him
out of this Realm, so that he should be an Exile, and that he should perdere
Patriam. But it seems the Officers of the Navy have a greater Power than the
King, who can force Freemen from their Country, and send them to serve in the
most remote Regions of the World.

No man shall be destroyed (Destruere id est quod prius structum and factum
fuit, penitus Evertere and Destruere) unless by a Legal Verdict. By destroying
is meant forejudging of Life and Limb, or putting to Torture or Death; every
oppression against Law by color of any usurped Authority, being a kind of
Destruction. Now to apply this to the Discipline of the Navy. What dee' think
of whipping our Seamen at the Gears, and then basting their flayed Backs with
as many Canns of Pickle as the Commander by his discretionary Power pleases to
order? Are not our Ships thus become mere Bridewells, and our Sailors as bad or
worse than Gally Slaves? nay, I have known a Boy of 2 or 3 and twenty years of
age lashed to a Gun and whipped, a punishment given to the youngest Boys on board
Ship. Had our Commanders any Religion, our Seamen might stand in fear of the
Inquisition. If a stop be not put to their Barbarous and Inhumane Cruelties,
they will in time borrow the Rack from the French, and the Boot and Thumb Screws
from the Scots. Can you blame the Sailors for running from such Tortures, and
shall they be punished for complaining of their Miseries. It Is this, Sir, that
dastardizes and effeminates the noble Spirits of your Seamen: It Is this makes
them desert the Service of their Country: It Is this peoples Colonys of Pirates
abroad: And it is this will in time be the Ruin of the most Glorious Navy of the
Universe. Nor are Pecuniary Mulcts a less Crime. How this came to be a part of
the Discipline of the Navy, I cannot tell; but when men govern by their Will,
and not by Law, we must every day expect new punishments. But if it is
reasonable that the Sailors should be punished after this manner, is it not as
reasonable that the Mulct should be answerable to the Crime? If a Sailor be
absent from his Ship a Week, is not that Week's pay sufficient to be stopped for
that Week's Crime? The Fines in our Courts of Justice are laid according to the
Worth of the Criminal, exorbitant Fines having in all Ages been esteemed
extrajudicial: no man can be fined more than he is capable of paying; and to
fine a Person to the full Value of his Estate, is giving away all a man has
been gathering for many Years for one Piccadillo.

By lawful Judgment of his Peers, and by the Law of the Land. Peers, that is
his Equals, men of the same Rank and Quality with himself. But the Sailors are
not tried after this manner, the same Person is Accuser, Judge and Jury: they
have no Indictment, no Jury empannel'd, no Counsel to plead for them; strip
they must, and to the Gears; the Cat of nine-Tails, and the Pickle Cann must be
exercised upon the Back, as long as the Whipping-Tom upon the Quarter Deck is
pleased with the sport. It Is pity young Fudge's dearly beloved Friend Jefferies
is dead; he exercised his Talent so well in the late Reign in the West, that he
would have made an excellent Navy Officer now. They are to be tried too by the
Law of the Land, i. e. by due Process of Law, for so the words are expressly
expounded by the Stat. of 37 Ed. 3. Chap. 8. But instead of this Trial, they
are punished by the Law of the Admiralty without any Trial at all. So that the
poor Tarrs are a sort of People that have no Right at all to any thing but ill
Usage and barbarous unmanly Punishments; Punishments that are superior to Death
it self, because ignominious and shameful; malim mori quam vapulari. But our
Navy Officers, like the Sicilian Tyrants, employ their Brains more in
contriving new sorts of Punishments, than in finding out good and wholesome Laws
to maintain a Discipline in the Navy.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a short view of the Inconsistence of the Navy
Discipline with the fundamental Laws of our Realm; a Discipline not only
contrary to the Laws of our Country, but even to the Laws of Nature, and the
practice of the most uncivilized part of the world. And upon the whole I must
conclude, that they being warranted by no Law in the Execution of these
Severities, have assumed to, and vested themselves with a Legislative Power, a
Power I shall never own to be lodged any where but in Parliament. But if the
People of England are so far willing to part with their Constitution, as to
suffer the Navy Officers to make Laws penal, 'een let 'em allow the Lords of
the Treasury Power to raise Money, and then our Business is brought into a very
narrow Compass; 'twill be a great ease to you Members of Parliament, you may
retire into the Country, walk over your pleasant Fields, and sit under your own
Vines; but I can tell you in a short time who will eat your Grapes. Pray, Sir, do
but call to mind the days of old, the years of your Forefathers; look into the
Chronicles of former Ages: did any of your worthy Progenitors suffer their
Rights thus to be invaded by men that are their Servants, and receive their
Pay? Have they not left you Copies of your Freedom, sealed with their own
blood? What Hazards have they run? what Dangers have they attempted? what
Battles have they fought to secure to Posterity those Liberties they valued
before their Lives? Are not our Liberties the same? Has envious Time devoured
any part of them? Are they less amiable because they are old? Did they bring
Kings to distress, shatter Crowns, and humble Tyrannical Princes, who invaded
their Birthrights? And will you suffer your Freedoms, your Ancient
Constitution thus to be rent and torn by men of inferior Quality? Whom your
Forefathers would have impeached in the name of the good People of England, and
made them answer for assuming to themselves a Legislative Power. If you read an
excellent Book lately published, entitled, A Vindication of Magna Charta,
you will there see how valuable those Rights were, and what Toil and Labor our
Forefathers underwent to keep them entire, and transmit them to Posterity.

I shall in the next place prove, that the Commissioners for executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral of England during the War, have assumed to
themselves a Dispensing Power.

By an Act, Anno Gulielmi and Mariae 4 to, and 5 to. entitled, An Act for
continuing the Acts for prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with France, and for
the Encouragement of Privateers, p. 505. it is enacted, That if any Captain or
Officer, or any other Person by his Command or Direction, or any Seaman, or
Soldier, or other Person serving in their Majestys Navy, or in any Privateer,
shall take to him or themselves, or imbezle any Money, Plate, Goods, Lading or
Tackle, or any things upon, or above the Gun Deck, or any other part or place
whatsoever, in any Ship taken or seized on for Prize, or retaken from the
Enemy, the party offending shall lose and forfeit the Shares, Proportions and
Rewards to him allowed by this Act. And also in case such Person be an Officer,
he shall forfeit the Sum of five hundred Pounds; and such Officer shall be
incapable of any Office or Employment under their Majestys during the space of
seven Years.

Many Commanders of Ships, guilty of embezling Prize Goods, and of running of
Wines, etc. contrary to Law, have notwithstanding this been either continued or
restored to their Commands. If your Honorable House pleases to send for a List
of such Commanders as have been discharged, and afterward restored to their
Commands, and examine into the merits of the Cause for which they were
discharged, you will find this a manifest Truth. To have the Kings ships become
Owlers, is far worse: as lately a parcel of Wool was seized on board the
Isabella Yacht, that has the station betwixt Southampton and Jersey. I know not
how her Pilot Mr. Peter de St. Croix (whom I have known much averse to things
of that nature) was prevailed on to take the Matter upon himself; But this I
know very well, that if your Honorable House would enquire into this single
thing, it would be of great Advantage. I am sure the Judges took the Case right
enough, whatever the Opinion of the Admiralty might be concerning it. If a
Merchant makes a mistake in entering of Goods, the King's Officers are sharp
enough upon him; but when Officers themselves, or Commanders of the Navy are
guilty of these Crimes, they have Friends to bring them off, tho contrary to
the Laws of the Land.

Now, Sir, for these very Practices, for the Dispensing with Laws, did we
depose the late King James: Upon this Account had this very Government its
Being. And shall we suffer Men in Commission under the Government, not only to
make new Laws, but dispense with old ones? Their Power is indeed very great,
who can make Laws, inflicting Punishments upon others, when no Laws are binding
upon themselves. They are self-holders of the Admiralty, supported by an
uncontrollable Power, and Sovereign Will. What a miserable Condition are those
Men in, that are under the Command of such whose unlimited Rage always roars,
and where Laws are always silent? This is the Economy of the savage Beasts of
the Earth, and thus our Offices become mere Deserts.

I shall next show you how these makers of new Laws are Repealers of the old,
good, and wholesome Practices and Customs of the Navy. Their Fudge tells you of
the Embelishments they have added, but not of the Ornaments they have taken
away. It has been the constant practice of the Admiralty in the days of yore,
to prefer Men according to their Merit and Demeanor on Shipboard: the Navy of
England was in those times a School, wherein the young Gentlemen of the Nation
were educated and instructed in the Military Arts of the Sea, and became
greatly serviceable to their Country. These Men being descended from generous
Stocks, valued their Reputation, and scorned to do any thing that might blot or
stain their Pedigree. The Sailors of the Navy had then better Treatment, abuses
being beneath the Character of Gentlemen: Cruelties and Barbarities are
inconsistent with the nature of generous and noble Spirits; Whipping and
Pickling was then a Punishment unknown. Cruelty and Cowardice are things
inseparable, and practiced only by Men of a servil Education. If a Footboy or
Page be made a Commander, he remembers the Flaps of the Cookmaids Dishclout,
the Basting and Caning of his Master's Steward; and now it comes to his turn to
domineer, he tyrannizes with a resistless Fury. Those Gentlemen that were
Reformades, or King's Letter-men, were sure of being Lieutenants in former
times, and as sure of being Captains in their turn; no Foot-boys or Pages then
skip'd over their Heads. But now you may find Lieutenants of many Years
standing in the Navy, while Masters of Merchantmen, etc. are made Commanders
of 3d Rates, a Post in former Ages not beneath the Dignity of Noblemen; as for
instance, the Earl of Ossory in the Resolution, and the Lord Mulgrave in the
Royal Katherine. Our Ships were then thronged with Noblemen, their Sons, and
the Sons of our Gentry. But how many of Quality have served in the Fleet during
this War? And is not the loss of Discipline the apparent Cause thereof? For
it is contrary to the very being of generous Spirits to serve under the Command
of the Riffraff of their Country, and to do Homage to Men of more inferior
Qualities than their Servants. And what encouragement is thus given to those
Gentlemen that have served a long time in the Navy as Lieutenants or otherwise,
when those that never served the King one hour are preferred over their Heads?
It is farther observable, that the Masters of such Merchant-ships as have been
hired into the Service during the War, by the Interest of the Owners, have been
made Commanders of them, to the Discouragement of such as have served in the
Navy: such Commanders in an Engagement were more likely to save the
Merchantships from blows than hazard them in the King's Service. But for all
this they boast of the Discipline of the Navy, as a thing excelling that of
former Ages, in defiance to public Opinion, and the Results of the mature
Debates of the Wisdom of the Nation. Yet upon this Account have the Enemies of
the Government no occasion to reflect upon it, no more than the Husbandman is
to be blamed for the numerous quantities of Weeds that spring up among his
Wheat. The King never gave his Commission to the Officers of the Navy to
oppress his Subjects, to silence old Laws, and enact new Ones. And it is much to
be feared, methods are taken to prevent the Complaints and Cries of the Subject
from reaching his Majesty's Ears; otherwise we cannot imagine a Prince that has
experienced so much of their tender Affection, of their Bravery in War, and the
generous Supplies they have given him to preserve his Person and Government,
would suffer them to languish under such intolerable and illegal Evils. If they
had Commissions granted upon such an Account, we should know whereabouts we
are. Yet tho such Commissions, being out of the Verge of the Executive Power,
are to be accounted for, the Persons executing them are not excusable, however
it fared with the Ministers of the late King James. But we have no room for
Imaginations of this kind under this Government. And I may farther add, that
were his Majesty truly sensible of the Condition of his Sailors, he would not
suffer such Abuses upon them; he would not withhold from them their Wages, upon
the Account of pretended and illegal Forfeitures: his wonted and manifest
Clemency must create in us better Thoughts, than that he who has pardoned
Assassins, such as have conspired to take away his Life, that has eased Newgate
so often of its burden of Criminals of all sorts, by Acts of Grace and Free
Pardons, will suffer his Sailors to lose their Pay, and starve for innocent
Crimes, without extending his Mercy toward them.

Now, Sir, having given you a true account of the nature of our Naval
Discipline, I shall spend a little more time in considering what young Fudge,
the Admiralty Author, has to say for his Masters. P. 21. he says, Care has been
always taken to do Justice to the Sailors; for when any one produced reasonable
Testimonials that he did not designedly desert the Service, but after Recovery
endeavored to return to his proper Ship, if in the way, or entered himself in
any other Ship or Vessel within reach, or that he was Impressed when
endeavoring so to do, the Q has been taken off, and he restored to his Pay.
Now the question is, what those reasonable Testimonials are; a few Guineas to
young Fudge, I believe as good a Testimonial as can be. But what do
Testimonials, Certificates, or things of that nature signify, if they will not
receive them?

He tells you, p. 21. That the Lords of the Admiralty did in less than six
months time, relieve at least 750 of the seventeen hundred Persons that made
Application. How long was it before their Cause was heard? How long had their
Petitions lain at the Board? It was near six months before the seven hundred
and fifty were relieved; and before the seventeen hundred can be relieved, it
will make it up eighteen months, or thereabouts. Now suppose before they were
heard, their Petitions lay but 6 Months, this added to the 18 Months makes two
Years; and suppose some of these Men have but six or twelve Months pay due to
them, is it worth while to attend two Years to solicit for six Months Wages,
which they are not certain of getting at the two Years end?

He tells us, page 22. That the Seamen have been much wanting to themselves and
Families, as to forfeit their Pay by turning their Back upon their Duty. When
Men have been five or six Years in the Service without one penny of Wages, can
you blame them? Who would not turn their Backs upon such a Service? Are a
Servant's Wages forfeited, because he deserts his Master's Service? Are not his
Wages as recoverable by Law, as they were before he deserted? It Is much to be
feared that Men are thus kept out of their Pay, on purpose to make them desert
the Service; for the Money for their Service is without doubt brought into the
Pay Office, and the longer it lies there, the better it is for the Cashiers:
The very Interest thereof comes to something; they may lend it the Government
at 8 per Cent. I rather think the Sailors are more wanting to themselves and
Familys, by entering into the Service, than by leaving it: For in a
Merchant-man they might meet with good Usage and good Pay. And suppose the
major part of the Sailors of the English Navy are impressed into the Service,
must they be made Prisoners, and lose their due for giving themselves that
Liberty, wherein the Laws of their Country, of God and Nature have set them
free? I believe if young Fudg were to be whipped and pickled for 22 i. 6 d. per
mensem, he would near hand desert the Service. These Men do not run away from
their Pay, but they run away because they are not paid; but young Fudg is like
the Fellow that beat his Dog till he stank, and then beat him for stinking.

Now our Naval Politics are quite spent, the whole Store of Admiralty sense
and railery is at an end: for Fudg repeats in page 23. the very same dull stuff
that preceded in page 22. And upon the whole, Sir, have you not here a very
fine Account of the Management of your Navy? This is an entire System of our
Naval Politics, written no doubt permissu and emendationibus Superiorum. If we
are to be invaded, you see our Ships Stations at that time must be in the
Downs; this is but a sample of their wonderful Sagacity, and what we must
expect from their Conduct. And as for their Naval Discipline, I hope I have set
you right in that Point; for tho I must needs acknowledge a Discipline in the
Navy to be very necessary, yet there is difference betwixt staring and stark
mad. Men ought to be kept to their Duty, but not by such severe and inhumane
Methods as shall frighten them from the Service. By such a Discipline we shall
have no Men to exercise our Discipline upon, but shall act like the wise
Commander, who sunk his Ship to drown the Rats. By such a Discipline we shall
not only bring upon us the Curses of the Sailors, but the Curses of God
Almighty, who hears the Cries of the Oppressed, and punishes Kingdoms for such
acts of Violence. These Men that impose such strict Discipline on others, have
none among themselves. If their Attendance at their respective Offices were
enquired into, you will find as much reason to prick them Run, as the poor
Sailors. Some of them can be absent three or four Months together, and yet
receive their Pay without any Q or R. We are not, you know, Sir, in Debt, and
therefore can allow one of the Victuallers to look after his Oxen in the
Country at Summer, to sell them a good pennyworth to the King at Winter. Bring
but our Sailors upon the same foot with the Commissioners of the Navy, and
Victualling; let their Ships be double manned, as those Offices are double
Commissioner'd, that one half may do Duty while the the other half is absent, and
we'll no more complain of Q's and R's.

I am sure, Sir, I have not misspent my Time, if these few Pages prove any ways
serviceable to the common good of my Country: Tho indeed I should have taken no
notice of my trifling railing Observator, had I not before resolved to publish
my Thoughts on the Discipline of the Navy. How considerable soever he may think
himself, because he occupies an immerited Office under the Government, he
thinks himself unanswerable, as you may see in the very first Paragraph of his
Book, with which I shall conclude; says he, It might have been reasonably
believed, that the Author of a late Pamphlet, relating to Mismanagements in the
Navy, would have left of Scribbling, since the Answer to his last Year's
Politics left him so little Reputation. Now you must know, Sir, that young
Fudg last Year printed an Answer to my State of the Navy: It contained about as
much stuff as a halfpenny Ballad, tho not half so much sense. But because no
body took any notice of him, he thought every Body acquiesc'd with his Opinion,
and that his Nonsense passed as current with Mankind, as a Seaman's Ticket does
for 7 s. and 6 d. in the Pound. It is impossible for a Man that has no
Reputation to blast the Credit of another in the Opinion of good and just Men,
the only Persons whose Favor Iesteem; and I can assure young Fudg, if he adds
a dung Cart full of Lies to the Wheelbarrow he has filled already, I should not
stain my Reputation to rake in his Dirt. The reproaches of Fools, the scandals
of the Rabble, are no cause of Resentment to Men that know better how to employ
their Thoughts; nor am I any more concerned at things of this nature, than the
Moon, who keeps on her steady and constant Course, while all the little Dogs in
the Parish are barking at her.

FINIS.
The First Grievance is Queries.
THE Nature and Effect of those Queries are, That every Man set on Shore sick,
and not returning to his proper Ship or some other in one Month, or immediately
after discharged from sick Quarters, thereby forfeits his Wages.

The Second Grievance is R's.
And those R's have of late been strenuously observed, if not improved to the
Seaman's Prejudice. The Nature or Effect of those R's as now practiced, is,
That the Persons who by accident or otherwise, do leave or are left by their
proper Ships, are by those R's noted to be Run, and forfeit all the Wages due
to them, not only in the Ships they leave, but in all former Ships as far as
the same is unpaid, notwithstanding Tickets long before delivered them for
their former service; by what new Rules or Orders this is practiced I cannot
say, but am well assured it is contrary to the former Practice and Rules of the
Navy.

The Third Grievance is,
The deferring or non-payment of the Wages of such as are dead or absent,
notwithstanding others have attended with sufficient Power to receive the same,
and no color of Objection, and those to whom it is due ready to perish for
want: to such there are several 100000 l. now due and in Arrears, which should
have been long since paid.

The Fourth Grievance is, the unusual and irregular manner of Payment lately
practiced, viz.
Some Ships that have three or four Years Pay due, have been paid only ten or
twelve Months, the latter time, and the former left unpaid upon account of
their Companies being turned over into other Ships.

2dly. Some Ships paid for the whole time, yet many People left unpaid.

The Fifth Grievance is,
Turning Men over from Ship to Ship, lending them, and bearing them by List,
that they know not in what Ship, nor by what means they may obtain their Wages.

The Sixth Grievance is the Alteration of Officers Qualities.
By this their Wages have been retrenched, some from 3l. to 36 s. others from
36 to 23 s. etc.

The Seventh Grievance is,
Non-payment of Powers (or Letters of Attorney) made to Officers; that is, if
any Officer's Father, Brother, Relation, or any other Friend has served in the
Navy, and has made a Letter of Attorney to such Officer to receive the Wages,
he is denied Payment of the same.

The Eighth (tho not a positive) Grievance;
Yet as Matter worthy Consideration, I shall hint something touching the
smallness of the able Seaman's Pay, and would not omit the Gunners, Boatswains,
and Carpenters herein.

As for the able Seamans Pay, it is 24 s. per Month, the Deduction from the
Registered Seamen 1 s. and from those that are not Registered 1 s. 6d. per Month,
so that their Pay is but 22 s. and 6 d. The Warrant-Officers beforementioned,
have Pay according to the respective Rates they are in.

The Ninth Grievance is,
The Difficulty of obtaining His Majesty's gracious Bounty allowed the Widows
and Children of such as are slain in His Majesty's Service, and the Moneys due
for the Clothes of such as die; which Clothes are generally sold at the Mast;
such Seamens Families and Relations being at a distance, and not knowing where
to find the proper Officers to sign such Certificates as required for the
Payment of such Bounty and Clothe-Money, it has been long delayed, and
oftentimes entirely lost.

The Tenth Grievance is,
The Non-payment of the Registered Seamen, (not to insist on 40 s. per Annum
hitherto unpaid) I shall only mention the Case of the Widows, Friends, and
Relations of such as have died in the Service, with respect to their Wages.

1. Such as die on Voyages to Holland, France, the Narrow-Seas, etc. their
Wages are refused to be paid according to the Act, it being alleged that such
are not Foreign Voyages.

2. Such as have been bound out on Foreign Voyages, and died before the Ships
departure from England, their Wages are also refused.

3. Such as have been on Foreign Voyages so accounted, and in such Voyages have
contracted Sickness, whereof they have died immediately after the Ships Return
to England; their Wages are also refused, as not intended by the said Act to be
paid.

4. Such as have gone out in one Ship, and served a considerable time in her,
and afterward turned over into another, and there in a few Months died; the
Widows of such are paid for the Ships only wherein they died, and not for the
former.

5. Such Commission and Warrant Officers as are Registered who die on Foreign
Voyages, their Wages are refused, as not intended to be paid by the said Act.

The Eleventh Grievance is,
The Government and Discipline used in the Navy; but there being already good
and wholesome Laws provided, both for suppressing Vice, and encouraging Virtue,
I have little to say, only that the Epidemical abounding of Vice and Debauchery
through the whole Fleet, too evidently demonstrates the Neglect, if not the
Contempt of the said Laws: And it would be well if the Practice and Example of
superior Officers did not so much contribute to the same; and whether this
(with a sordid and slavish Punishment, viz. Whipping and Pickling, much used of
late, and that on frivolous Occasions) do not tend to the dastardizing of the
Spirits of our English Seamen, and the animating and emboldening our Enemies,
and consequently to the Nations Prejudice, 'twill do well to consider; and if
found to be so, to redress the same.

The Twelfth Grievance is,
The fraudulent Dealing of many that pretend to solicit Business, and receive
Wages in the Navy, by which the Seamen are also prejudiced; but the Particulars
hereof being too long to insert herein, shall at present omit the same.

Errat. Page 16. line 15. for destruere read obruere.


