PROCLAMATION PROCLAIMED Throughout the Kingdom of Scotland: August 24. 1643
Commanding all Persons in the said Kingdom of whatsoever Quality, Rank, or
Degree betwixt sixty and sixteen years of Age, to provide themselves with
forty days provision, with Ammunition, Arms, and all other warlicke
provision; for the safety of his Majesty's Person, the defense of Religion in
both Kirks and of the rights and privileges of Parl. of both Kingdoms
respectively. Under the penalty of Confiscation of their whole Estates and to
be punished as enemies to Religion, King, and Kingdoms.

First Printed at Edinborough, and now reprinted at London, for Peter Cole
near the Royal Exchange. Anno Dom. 1643.

(...) ^ent danger, of the true Protestant reformed Religion, and of the peace
of thi^ our Kingdoms from malignants: and their Adherents; Have after mature
deliberation thought expedient to enter into a solemn and mutual Covenant
with our Kingdom of England, for the defense of the true Protestant reformed
Religion in the Kirk of Scotland; and the Reformation of Religion in the Kirk
of England according to the Word of God, the example of (...) Reformed Kirkes;

And such as may bring the Kirk of God in both Kingdoms to the nearest
Conjunction, and uniformity in Religion and Church Government. And siclicke to
preserve and defend the Rights and Privileges of our Parliaments, and Liberties
of our Kingdoms respective. And to preserve and defend our Person and
Authority, in the preservation of the said true Religion: and Liberties of our
said Kingdoms*

And to observe the Articles of the late Treaty and Peace betwixt the two
Natitions. And to assist, and do send all that shall enter into this Covenant,
in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, as the same more fully proports.

Which as it will be a comfort, and encouragement to all Christians who fear
God, and love true Religion, to all good loyal Subjects, who truly honor Us,
and to all true Patriots, who tender the Liberte of their Country:

So doubtless it will exasperate and en, rage the said Papists, Prelates,
Malignants, and their Adherents, to practice and execute all the mischeife and
cruelty they can against Kirk and Kingdom, as they have done in our Kingdoms
of England and Ireland.

For preventing thereof, the Estates of this our Kingdom (according to the
practtise of our Council, Convention of our Estates, and of our Parliaments in
former Times of the like exigence) have resolved to put this our said Kingdom*
with all possible speed in a present posture of defense.

And for the better safety and security thereof have Statute and Ordained, and
hereby Statutes and Ordaines, that immediately after publication hereof, all the
fencible persons within this our Kingdom of Scotland betwixt sixetie and
sixteen years of Age, of whatsoever quality, rank or degree, shall provide
themselves with forty days provision, and with Ammunition, Arms, and other
Warlike provition of all sorts, in the most substanstions manner, for Horse
and Foot, with Tents, and all other furnishing requisite.

And that the Horsemen be Armed with Pistols, broad Swords and steell Caps.

And where these Arms cannot be had that they provide ^ankes, or Secrets,
Lances, and steel bonnets:

And that the Foots men be armed with Musket and Sword, or Pike and Sword, And
where these cannot be had, that they be furnished with Halberts, Loquhaber
axes, or Jedda^^-Staves, and Swords.

OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And we charge you straightly, and Commands, That
incontinent their OUR, Letters sedue, you pass to the Market Cross at
Edingborough, and several Burrowes of this our Kingdom, and Parish Kirkes
thereof and there by open Proclamation make publication hereof, where through
none pretend ignorance of the same.

And that you Command and charge all and sundery our Subjects foresaid being
sensible persons, betwixt sixty and sixteen years, to provide themselves in
manner foresaid, and to be in readiness to make their Randevous thus Armed, at
the places to be appointed by our said Estates or Committees having power from
them within eight and forty hours after they shall be lawfully warned from
them to that effect, as they will testify their affections to the true
Protestant Religion, the Liberties of our Kingdoms, our own Honor and the
Peace, and Safety of that their native Country, and under the pain to be
esteemed and punished, as enemies to Religion, Us, and our Kingdoms, and their
whole goods to be confiscate to the use of the Public.

Given under our Signet at Edingbrough, the eighteenth of August, and of our
Reign the Nineteenth Year. 1643. Per Actum Dominorum Conventionis. Arch.
Pri^rose Cler. Conven.

August 29. 1643.
Imprimatur

JOHN WHITE.


