A VISITATION OF Tender LOVE (Once more) from the LORD UNTO CHARLES the II.
KING OF England, Scotland and Ireland.
LEt the consideration of these following Lines deeply sink into thy heart, for
they are things of great moment to thee at this day. There is a People within
thy Dominions, called QUAKERS, whom the God of Heaven highly esteems, in
whose hearts he has placed his holy Law, according to his promise by the
mouths of his Prophets, which is (and has been) their Schoolmaster and Leader
unto Christ, according to the testimony of Paul his servant. For their
obedience to which Law, this people has under one many and great trials and
tribulations, both before, and since thy coming into this Nation to Rule as
King, which they have patiently born without avenging their own Cause, till the
Lord did arise and plead with their Enemies, which he has done to their
confusion and overthrow, even without remedy. And this poor people were never
known to provoke the worst of their Enemies to wrath against them, unless by
their honest conversation before them, coupled with Gods fear and reverence,
which is of great price in his sight, though not valued in the sight of men;
for which they have suffered deaths often, long and sore imprisonments, and
great spoil of their goods, stoning, stocking, whipping, and cruel mockings,
and much more, which is too tedious to mention, for their due obedience to the
Royal Law of God, and the weighty Commands of Christ; nay, they have been
denied the liberty of Thieves and Mnrderers, for their Loyalty thereunto, by
them who were in Authority besore thy coming in; which God took occasion
against to destroy with remediless misery., as a just reward of their ungodly
deeds: Then he remembered thee whom he had suffered to be oppressed by the
aforementioned Task Masters, and did raise thee from a low estate, in which estate
when thou were low, and in the sense thereof, thou promisedst much liberty to
these harmless Lambs of God's Fold, saying, They should not suffer for their
Religion, so long as they did live peaceably; and much more, which may be seen
abroad in public view: Yet notwithstanding, their sufferings are much more
encrease'd under thee, than before, and thou have broken thy Word and Promises
to them, though they have kept faithful and true unto thee, and have not broken
the peace of the Kingdoms under thee, nor any of thy just Laws, but have
labored by all lawful means to live a peaceable and quiet life under thee, in
all godliness and honesty; yet how great is the cry of their oppression in this
Nation at this day, from the one end thereof to the other? They are appointed
as sheep for the slaughter, even while they who work Wickedness are set up in
high estimation. All which the righteous God has regarded, and his soul is
greatly grieved every day; and if these things be not speedily amended, he will
visit thee and and the whole Nation in his hot displeasure; these and such like
evils was the overthrow of many great Kings in the days of old, which when
they forgot God and his Cause, and oppressed and persecuted his people, then
did lie blast them in their chieselt glory, and laid their honor in the dust.

So in all love and tenderness of heart consider what thou have done, and art
doing, and remember thy Covenants which God and man in thy low estate, and let
it be in no man's power further to charge thee with the breach of thy Word and
Promise. Suffer none to be oppressed for Conscience Sake in thy Dominions, that
does not disturb the peace of the Kingdom, as thou will answer the contrary
before the righteous God: This can never be a good ingredient to thy future
security with God nor man, neither will God ever bless thee, or prosper thy way
in any thing of this nature; for his people is his portion which he has called
and chosen, and woe to all their enemies. He that offends one of them, it were
better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he in the midst
of the Sea. And if any counsel thee to vex and scourge the aforementioned Lambs,
such are thy mortal Enemies; and if thou do hearken and obey them, 'twil
bring shame, reproach, confusion and desolation unto thy Crown and Dignity.

Therefore be wise, O King, and recollect thy memory while thou have a day and
time, and consider thy former Engagements, and also thy Father's and
Grandfather's Charges laid upon thee concerning these things, and let Love and
Mercy establish thy Throne, that thy days may be prolonged; and be not
high-minded nor stout-hearted against any; that will never draw the hearts of
thy subjects to love thee; and so long as thou suffer est the Wicked to tread
down the Heritage of God, thou shall never have his countenance upon thee, but
his displeasure shall attend thee in thy most secret Chamber, and at last he
will give thee up to be a prey to thy Enemies, even as he has done many
before, which rejected his Counsel, till his wrath sealed the truth of it in
their bosoms: Oh the Cry of Cruelty and Oppression that is every where! What
will be the end thereof? None is now esteemed, but such as can run greedily
into iniquity, and drink it up as the Ox drinks water. The Nations are in a
flame, the fire of God's jealousy is kindled in every City and Town, even
prepared to burn up all his Enemies; and the iniquity of Rulers, Priests and
People, does blow it up day and night, that it cannot long be stayed, unless it
be speedily quenched by tears of unfeigned repentance, for the hour of Gods
Judgment approaches, and the execution will speedily follow, if not prevented.

This in short, I was moved to write unto thee in true love, who am, and have
been a sufferer under thee for the Testimony of Jesus, being no Enemy, nor
never was to thee, that thou may not run upon that which will be thy final
destruction; but if thou do reject the day of God's visitation in mercy to
thee, he will take thee off in his hot displeasure, So the Lord open thy eyes
to see the things that belong to thy peace, before they be hid from thee.

This was written the 2d. of the 7th. Mo...62. This was laid upon me once more
to lay before thee without flattering titles, who am one of thy suffering
subjects, known by the name of A. K.

OH King Charles, stay the hand of persecution, which is now listed up against
the people of God (which thing is in thy hand to do (or else God will cut thee
off, and rend thy Kingdom from thee; for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has
spoken it, even the King of Kings; and this is the word of the living God unto
thee, to be fullfilled by his own power.

Wherefore, oh King, consider, The sufferings, and the persecutions of the
people of God, is (and has been) exceeding great since thou came to sit upon
the throne of thy Father: And many good people (thy peaceable Subjects) have
suffered the spoiling of their goods, and cruel torturing; as whippings,
banishments, yea, and death it self; and these things, oh King, have been done
in thy Dominions, and thou have not been acquainted therewith, for often have the
servants of the Lord laid these things before thee, to the end that by thy
power these cruel sufferings might be removed, and the persecutors restrained:
But have thou rightly considered it, or laid it to heart, so as to ease them
thoroughly of their sufferings (or have thou had a sensible feeling of the deep
afflictions which many of the Lords people have undergone) as thou ought, being
see up as chief ruler over them in these nations (I speak concerning the
despised people called Quakers.) And ought not oppression to be removed; and
evil doers terrified; and those that do well encouraged; But alas, how is
justice and true judgment perverted and turned backward, and those that work
wickedness set up; And those that depart from iniquity become a prey unto the
wicked, and ungodly: And these things oh King the Lord sees with his invisible
eye which goes through the earth, and his good spirit is grieved therewith; And
thereby he is greatly provoked to wrath: And assuredly for this cause his
controversy is very great, and his jealousy and fierce indignation is kindled,
and burns exceeding hot: And really oh King, this I say unto thee, that nothing
will appease the fierce indignation, wrath, and fury of the Almighty, but a
true reformation of these things; For that is the thing which the Lord
requires, and has long called unto thee for; even from time to time, as he did
unto those that were in authority before thee; but how did they harden their
hearts, and refuse to hear, until their overthrow came at unawares, which their
stiff-neckedness, and refusing to answer the requirings of the Lord was the
very ground of. Wherefore, oh King, consider how many tender visitations of
love the Lord has given thee, since thou came upon the throne, and how many
cautions thou have had to beware of that great evil, which was the cause of the
ruin and overthrow of them that are gone before thee; For this I testfie unto
thee, that if they had been faithful to the trust which God committed unto
them, thou had never com upon the throne to rule as King in these Nations;
and this is the testimony of God unto thee: Wherefore believe not, oh King,
that God will now justify thee in that which he overthrew them for that went
before thee, no verily; for our God is no respecter of persons; and this I once
more and further say unto thee, that except thou answer his requirings, that
is, to stay the hand of persecution, and break the heavy yoke from off the
necks of Gods people (which they suffer for conscience sake) and leave their
consciences free in matters of worship and faith toward him, even as he
overthrew them that went before thee, (by his own secret hand of power) so will
he overturn thee also, and rend thy Kingdom from thee; and then shall thou
know, that the Most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he pleases.

Wherefore consider this, oh King, and know, and understand that the Decree of
the Almighty (the King of Kings) is to exalt everlasting Righteousness, to
reign, and Justice, and Equity, and true Judgment shall be set up in the Earth;
and a full Reformation of all things he will have, and not in part only; and
this work he has already begun (though many see it not) and he does and will
carry it on by his own secret hand of power, and none shall be able to
withstand him, nor to stop or hinder him in his way; For the hearts of Kings
are in his hand, and all Nations before him is but as a drop of a bucket:
Therefore let not the King believe, that the Lord, who has brought so great
things to pass, which have been so evidently seen, to the glory of his name,
will now let his work fall: For verily and assuredly he will not, but will
carry it on by his own secret hand of power in despite of his soes, and will
dash in pieces the potsherds of the earth; and all that oppose or would
withstand him, they shall be even as chaff driven of a mighty wind, and the
Nations shall know the stroke of the hand of the Almighty; and upon some it
will assuredly and shall certainly fall exceeding heavy; insomuch, that
exceeding faintness of heart shall seize and take hold on them, because they
have despised the day of their visitation, and have let it slip: Wherefore oh
King, this is my Counsel unto thee, let not this the day of thy visitation,
which has been long upon thee, slip or pass over; but in the light of Christ
wait to receive wisdom from God, that thou may be instrumental for the
working of a Reformation in these Nations, by making void, and disanulling all
unjust and unrighteous cruel Laws, which have been made, as snares, thereby to
cause the just to suffer, especially in this New England, who contrary to thy
Order, which thou did well in sending amongst them, do proceed in their cruel
dealings toward us, who are called Quakers; as finning, prisoning, whipping,
and threatening to take away our lives, thereby evidently manifesting their
rebellion against thee; And one of their Magistrates said to a Friend of ours
in my hearing, as he was peaceably passing on the way, that he would lay him
neck and heels for all the Kings Letter: So if thou take some speedy course for
the repealing and making void these cruel Laws by which they exercise this
cruelty, both in these, and all other thy Dominions, happily thou may be as
Moses, to stand in the gap, betwixt God and thy people, that his wrath and fury
may be turned back, and appeased, lest his long-suffering com to an end, whose
spirit has not yet ceased to strive; Therefore incline thine ear, and give
attention thereunto, and answer the requirings thereof, and leave the
consciences of all people free in matter of worship and faith toward God,
whilst they live peaceably and quietly under thy Dominion, according to thy
former Declarations and promises: and let them perform the same in such a way
and manner as they themselves shall be persuaded in their own Consciences; and
let none be compelled to any way or form of worship; neither let any law be
made for any such end; and let not any suffer imprisonment, because for
conscience sake they cannot pay to maintain a company of hireling Priests, but
in these things let all be left free; and let the evil doer be punished and
terrified, and the (now wrongfully) oppressed go free; for this the Lord
requires of thee, and only this is the way to appease his wrath, which
otherwise cannot he, for the Cries of the oppressed have entered into the ears
of the Righteous God, and he has regard thereunto, and he will not long endure
to see the hard usage of his people, and the wrongs done unto his servants;
especially by that generation of covetous Hirelings, whom the Lord God never
sent, but will assuredly owerturn them root and branch in one day: oh how have
they hurried, and labored to destroy, the flock of Christ these ten years
past, and how have they wasted, and made spoil of their goods, and prisoned
their bodies until death: Its indeed even hard to utter, and still they thirst
after blood; and the people of God suffers by them, and are still in bonds and
prisons, because for conscience sake they cannot put into their mouths, nor
give them wages that do no work for them: And this great oppression oh King the
Lord the Lord will have his people eased of, and freed from, either one way or
another; For it has been long born already, and assuredly the long-suffering
of his spirit will come to an end; and he will be avenged on the Adversaries of
his people, who has no other helper in the Earth, and in him our trust is, and
not in man: And it is not because we do rely upon the arm of flesh, that we
thus write unto thee, but to clear and discharge our Consciences to thee in the
sight of the Lord, because he requires it of us, and at our hands, and that, if
possible, thou may take warning so as to escape the evil to come.

So in plainness, and in the fear of the Lord, and in obedience to the movings
of the spirit of the Lord, I have discharged my Conscience to thee at present,
and have faithfully declared to thee (the Counsel of the Lord, and) in short
the things which must come to pass, which is and may serve for a sufficient
warning to thee from the Lord; which if thou have regard thereunto, it may, and
will be well with thee, but, if otherwise I am clear in my Conscience, and the
will of God be done.

Written in New England, this 25th of the 3rd Month, 1662. By one who truly
desires the settlement and establishment of of the Kingdom of Pence, truth and
righteousness, throughout thy Dominions, and all other places of the Earth, and
that all oppressions may cease in all places, and tho oppressed be sat free,
JOSIAH COAL.
The Copies of those two Papers were delivered to the King, the last 7th Month.




