Mr. Read's CASE: Published for Prevention of Scandal to his Brethren and
People, For Encouragement to Suffering Protestant Dissenters, For a Rebuke to
their Lawless Adversaryes:

BEING A Leading-Case how to deal with Such Men; And a Practical Answer to Dr.
Stillingfleet, and others, who Object against the Non-conformists. Why will you
not do what you Confess to be Lawful?

Humbly presented to Our Governors, in hopes of their Forbearance toward Us,
in such things as we Account Sinful.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1682.

Mr. Read's Case.
THe general Mistake of People concerning Conformity and Nonconformity, and the
mischievous consequence thereof, especially in regard to my own Case, does
necessiate me to give the world some account of it, that I may thereby
endeavor to cure the Prejudice, and remove the Stumblingblocks that at present
^ie in their way: And the late rigorous execution of the penal Statutes upon
Dissenters, contrary to ^he last Vote of the House of Commons at Westminster,
^ath put me upon many serious thoughts of heart, what may be done at such a
time as this, to op^ose the Popish design of introducing Popery, and invading
of our Property.

As the destroying of Religion and Property is their ^^nd; so the reproaching,
impoverishing, imprisoning, and ruining of Protestants by railing Pamphlets,
forging of Lies, suborning of Witnesses, encouraging mercenary Informers,
presenting ^o Bishops Courts, Excommunicating, etc. are the ^eans for the
attaining of these Ends.

But if People did consider, that as Dividing and Destroying is the work of
Papists; so Uniting and Healing of breaches is OUR work, and would act
accordingly in their several places, THIS would prevent our Popish adversaries
in their Designs against us. Let us do what we can without Sin in Obedience to
Authority, and then when it comes to the Trial, that we must either Sin or
Suffer, it will be a great comfort to us, when we can truly say, that we have
chosen to Suffer, either than to Sin.

But if there be no Sin in the case, we must not expose our selves or people to
sufferings Causlesly. We cannot suffer joyfully the spoiling our Goods, the
confinement of our Persons, or the ruin of our Families; unless Conscience be
able truly to say, I would have done any thing but Sin against GOD, that I
might have avoided these Sufferings from men.

It was the saying of a Reverend Minister Mr. J. B. of Worcester, when he lay
upon his Deathbed, and was asked what thoughts he had of his Nonconformity? I
would have done any thing but Sin, says he, that I might have continued in the
exercise of my Ministry: but when it came to that, there was no remedy.

This Minister read the Common Prayer in his Church, when the KING desired that
the Ministers would read so much of it as they were satisfied in their
consciences was lawful to be read, and a while after (on Bartholomew day,
1662.) turned out with the rest of his Brethren.

Many more read the Common Prayer before, and yet proved Nonconformists after;
and if that had been all that had been required of the Non-conformists, to read
the Ordinary Lords-dayes-Service according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, the most of the Nonconformists had continued in the exercise
of their Ministry in Public as well as others.

Whereas therefore the Ignorant among us know not what Conformity or
Nonconformity is, but account it offensive, if a Minister read the
Common Prayer, or go to the Public Church, and join with those that do read
it, and are ready to refuse Communion with those Ministers or Churches who use
it: it is high time to rectify this mistake, and teach them better; lest by
silence in these matters, the People run into the sin of Schism indeed. Not
only to separate from those in the public Churches, but from their own
Pastors, when once they reduce their Principles into Practice, by reading so
much of the Service as they approve of, and will satisfy the Law.

I shall therefore desire All to take notice of three Laws made within these
Twenty Years past, which the Nonconformists are sufferers by.

The first is the Act of Uniformity requiring not only the Reading of the
Common Prayer (which in the Ordinary Service I believe most of us do account
lawful) but it requires also, that openly and publicly we declare before the
Congregation, Our unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained
and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies of the Church, according to the use
of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, and the Form or Manner of
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests; and Deacons. And in
the same Act it is required, that we Declare and Subscribe, that we will
Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law
Established, besides what concerns the Renouncing of the Covenant, and
Reordination.

There is a great deal of difference (let us note here) between All and Some;
between Reading the ordinary Lords-Days-Service, and Approving the Book, and
all that is in it. Mr. Baxter in his Plea for Peace, gives no less than Thirty
particular Instances of several things in the Common Prayer Book, which the
Non-conformists cannot declare their Assent and Consent unto. Such as will be
at the pains to read them, may thereby understand that we are far from a full
Conformity Throughout, notwithstanding the Censures and Reproaches of some
against us as too Conformable, because we declare by our Principles, and
Practices, that we can lawfully not only Hear Common Prayer, but Read it our
selves: And yet though we cannot Conform to the Law by doing all it commands,
we have manifested by our Peaceable Submission, that we can patiently suffer
the Penalty it inflicts, ^iz. The casting us out of our Livings, and rendering
us incapable of Church-Preferments for the time to come, with other Penalties
there mentioned) until the King and Parliament shall see cause to relieve us.

Most of the Nonconforming Ministers who can with a good Conscience read
Common Prayer, and thereby secure themselves from the Penalty of the
Conventicle-Act, cannot declare their unfeigned Assent and Consent to the Book
and all that is in it, (...) they might have the greatest Preferments of
Hundreds or Thousands Per annum for their pains.

Another Law against Non-Conformists is that made at Oxford, (by some called
the Five miles Act) for restraining Non-Conformists from Inhabiting in
Corporations: the penalty whereof is six months Imprisonment, unless upon or
before such Commitments, such Offenders shall before the Justices of the Peace,
Swear and Subscribe this Oath following: I A. B. do swear, that it is not
lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And that I
do abhor that traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his
Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him in pursuance of such
Commissions: And I will not at any time endeavor any alteration of Government
in Church or State.

Many of the Non-Conformists have taken this Oath, being satisfied in the sense
which all Lawyers that have discoursed do give of it, viz. that by
Commissionated by him, we are to understand Legally Commissionated; and by
Endeavoring any alteration of Government we are to understand it thus, that I
will not endeavor it by any Seditious way, or Unlawful means.

In this sense I offered the Judges in open Court to take it (having before
made the like offer to the Justices), but being tied up to the Words of the
Oath, and not having then advised with Lawyers and others about the Sense, as
since I have done, I did therefore refuse to take it, and suffered six months
Imprisonment upon that account.

But being better satisfied about these things by a Paper called The Sheriffs
Case, printed 1680. and again reprinted 1681: And being further satisfied of
the true sense of this Oath, by Mr. Corbets account of the Non-conformists
Principles and Practices p. 11, 14. and other writings of his not yet
published: And especially being fully satisfied of the lawfulness of taking the
said Oath, by particular Advice from Council learned in the Law, who better
understand the meaning of Laws than we Ministers do, who have told me, that an
Illegal Commission in law-sense is no Commission; and that the Parliament
cannot be understood to prohibit Legal endeavors to make any alteration of
Government, but only such as are Illegal (for if so they should by their
practice contradict themselves in the many endeavors that since they have made
in a legal way): And lastly, having received Instructions from the
forementioned Sheriffs Case, how to declare our Sense of the said Oath, before,
or at the time of taking it, in as public a manner as we take it, that hereby
we may avoid giving of scandal to others: And also being encouraged herein by
Mr. Baxters words in the life of Mr. Ashurst (quoted also in the said Sheriffs
Case printed 81.) owning those as worthy Men who did what he refused (speaking
of All in the Corporation Act, which is much more to be scrupled than this Oath
alone) supposing that they in words or writing declared as openly as they
swear, that they take it in such or such a lawful Sense, p. 48: I say, upon
these several Considerations I can Now with as good a Conscience take the said
Oath, as formerly I did refuse it. And therefore in the sense as before
explained, and no other, (Delivering hereby my own Soul) I shall be ready, when
called thereto by the Magistrate, to take the same in the words of the Act.

A Third Law made against Non-conformists is the Conventicle Act, made to
prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles: By the rigorous execution whereof,
the People as well as the Ministers have bin great sufferers, though never any
thing of Sedition could be Charged, much less proved against Me, or my Brethren
that I can hear of.

Whether our many and great troubles upon this account are not self-made
Troubles, or long of our selves, has many times been disquieting to my mind.

About four or five years past, when the Informers and Officers were very
troublesome to us, and had taken away the Goods of some of the Congregation, I
told my People at a Meeting of two or three Hundred of them, that I saw how
unable they were to bear such Troubles and Losses, and that I could not be
faithful to them, or to my own Conscience, without telling them, that though I
were not fond of the Common Prayer, having never read it in my life, yet it was
my judgment, and most of our Ministers, that it was lawful to read it; and that
by the reading of it they might be free from the penalty of this Law for the
time to come, and therefore if they met with further troubles for want of
reading it, they should blame themselves, and not me.

Some few were so weak, that for speaking those words, they never came within
the Meeting Place since that I can hear of: Some more (twenty or there about)
were so much prejudiced against the using a Form of Prayer, that I found there
was danger of making a preach amongst us; and that a new-gathered Congregation
could not bear so great a shaking, till they were a little better settled. I did
therefore for the sake of those ^^w, forbear to use it, contenting my self
only, with ^eading the Scriptures, the Creed, Commandments, and the use of the
Lords-Prayer.

And now at last, having first advised with my Bre^ren in the Ministry, who
acknowledge the lawful^ess of using of the Liturgy in the
Ordinary-Lords-Days-^ervice, and with Lawyers, who tell me, that the reading ^f
it will prove the Lawfulness of our Meeting, and secure us from any further
trouble: I have therefore begun to read it, and upon proof thereof, by several
Witnesses to the Grand Jury at Westmimster this last Term, I brought in a Bill
of Indictment against Justice Parry, Richard Toovey Distiller, John Pollard in
Parkers Lane Informer, and several others for a Riot, in breaking open the
doors of my Meeting Place, when our Worship was not in other manner than
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England; And another
Bill of Indictment for a Riot against the said Justice Parry, Thomas Harris
Cheesemonger, John Pollard, Stephen Leucas the Smith, and others, for breaking
open the door of my Dwelling House the Lords day before, where there was
nothing of any Worship or Company to ground any pretense of an Unlawful Meeting
upon.

The said Jury have found both the Bills, and in due time I shall make further
trial of this poin^ at Common Law, whether They or I are the transgressors of
it.

I am sensible that these things make a great noise, and the mouths of many are
opened against me. The railings and threatenings of prophan^ Drunken Damme's I
matter not: I do not Arre^ them and Indict them, for doing their Office, as
the^ are the Kings Officers, but for doing more than the^^ Office: If they have
done well, they shall have prais^ (...) the same. Possibly they may have the
repeated ^anks of a Middlesex Court of Justices: But we know that no Law is
made for a Righteous Man, but ^or the Lawless and Disobedient; for the Ungodly,
and for Sinners; for the unholy and profane; For Murderers ^ Fathers, and
Murderers of Mothers; for Manslayers, for Whoremongers; I may add, for
House-breakers, and Sabbath Breakers; for Profane Swearers and Drunk^ards; for
idle prodigal spend-thrifts that care not to pay their debts. Such persons as
these, may find some others perhaps as Zealous for the execution of the KING'S
Laws as themselves, and Time will discover who are the KING'S best Subjects.

But there is another sort, whom I am concerned to give all due satisfaction
to; that is, to my Brethren the Ministers, who are not under the like
circumstances with me, and therefore may not think fit to do what I have done;
and to my People among whom I have labored near seven Years, not without good
encouragement and success, and therefore I a^ very tender lest I should justly
offend the one or the other. If there be any one then that shakes the head,
and says, I wonder that Mr. Read should read the Common Prayer? I answer,
which of you convinces me of Sin? If I have done Iniquity, I will do so no
more; or If I have done evil, (in reading the Liturgy) bear witness of the
evil; but if well, why judge thou thy Brother?

I confess my Practice, is yet Singular, and perhap^ the first public instance
of this nature in England, so far as I can understand: But the Principles on
which it is grounded, are undeniable, and far from the imputation of
Singularity. Yea, and the Practice too of using a Public Liturgy, or form of
Prayer in Public assemblyes for the Worship of God, is of such universal
extent, that there are few Churches in the World without it, so far as I can
understand.

The principles I go upon are such as these, viz. That obedience to the
Magistrate in things lawful, is a duty. That a form of Prayer is Lawful. That
it is the Pastors work upon good advice, to judge of the expediency of useing
such a form of Prayer, by the general rules of doing all to the Glory of God,
edification of his People, and the public good. That Communion with such
Churches who use a form of Prayer is lawful also, supposing they do not make
any thing that is Sinful the Terms of their Communion.

Whether these Principles are not ackowledged as sound by the Brethren of all
persuasions, and whether my practice be not agreeable to these Principles, I
submit to the Judgment of others.

Mr. Nigh, a leading Man among our Brethren the Independents, has proved it
lawful to hear a Parish Mini^r; And Mr. Tombs, as eminent among the
Anabaptists, ^^e a Book to prove it lawful both to hear and com^^nicate with
them; And his Practice at Salisbury was ^nformable thereto. Many of our
Brethren here a^^t London go to the Parish Churches, and hear Com^^-Prayer
there, and some of them communicate with ^m sometimes. The Non-Conformists both
Ministers ^^ People in many places, through the Land, go to their ^rish
Churches, and maintain Peace and Love by ^ccasional Communion with them.

Many of our Brethren did read the Common Prayer, ^fore they turned out of
their Livings as I before ^ed; and would they not be glad to read it again,
^hereby they might have the exercise of their Mini^y, and their Maintenance
restored? And if upon ^se terms they could read it at the Church (suppose ^ St.
Gile ^) then why may not I read it in the Chapel ^re at Bloomsbury)? If I may
Judge of the Non-Con^^^ists in other Countries by those in Worcester^e where I
lived, I do verily believe there is ^ one in ten, but would be thankful to GOD
^ Man, if they might be restored to their Livings ^ doing only what I have
done. Therefore thou ^ ^nexcusable O Man, whoever thou art that Judge ^
Brother. For that which thou judge law^ to be done by another, thou
forbearest thy ^: and because thou forbearest doing it thy self, thou
condemnest him. I will repeat this wor^ only to my Brethren, If there be Sin
in the Cas^ I shall choose to Suffer rather than Sin, as foot a^ I am convinced
of it.

As for satisfaction to the Scrupulous and well meaning Christians among us,
whose minds ar^ so much prejudiced against the Public Ministry and the Way of
their Worship, and therefore wi^ not bear the use of the Liturgy of the Church
in the Unexceptionable part of the ordinary Service but cry out against it as
Will Worship, Antichristian, Idolatry and the like, I shall in General only say
the^ much. If they will go to the Ministers of Christ ^ little Children, that
is, as humble learners, willing to b^ taught; and by converse with them, and
other unde^standing Christians, as also by searching into the Scri^tures, and
reading of good Books, will endeavor the Cure, or at leastwise the Abating, of
their Prejudice; ^ doubt not but we shall quickly be more like mind in these
things. And if then they will lay aside An^mosities, and be so humble as to
think soberly ^ themselves, and weigh the Judgment of those wi^^ whom they
Consult, who better understand the ^ things than they, it is like they will be
more read^ to Judge, or be Ashamed, of themselves, than t^ Censure me, and such
as join with me.

In particular, next I must refer them to such Godly, Learned, Judicious, and
peaceable Authors, as these hereafter mentioned, viz. Mr. Nigh, Dr. Owen, Mr.
Ball, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Corbett, supposing they will be satisfied by what
they have Published, when they will not by any thing I can say or write on this
Subject.

Mr. Ney, in his Case considered, Whether (...) may lawfully hear the now
Conforming Ministers, who are Re-ordain'd, and have renounced the Covenant, and
some of them supposed to be scandalous in their lives? answers affirmatively,
page 4. That it is a Duty that we and our Families frequent (as we have liberty
and opportunity) the more public and national Ministry, and gives us this as
one Reason, page 5. As we are Members of Churches, so we are Subjects and
Members of this Commonwealth, and are obliged thereby to observe the lawful
Commands of our Governors, and to be Examples therein to others.

And again, p. 6. If Church Members, or any one Godly Man, has a Warrant to
forbear hearing such Ministers upon this account of unlawfulness, then all
Godly Men ought at all times so to do; and if so, the Examples of the Godly to
the generality being very leading in the Matters of God, this Ordinance thereby
will be little frequented, and of less Efficacy to those that do come to it;
and by asserting it unlawful to hear such Ministers, we imply it were better
for the Nation, there were no Preaching but in particular Churches; and if so,
what can we expect will become of many thousands, in an ordinary way of
Salvation, that have no benefit at all by our Church-instructions? We are to
walk wisely, yea mercifully toward them that are without.

And toward the conclusion, p. 24. he tells us, That this is one of the
misperswasions of these latter Times, by which Men's Minds have been corrupted,
that it is unlawful to hear in Public, which I am persuaded (says he) is one
constant design of Satan, in the variety of ways in Religion he has set on
foot by Jesuits among us. Let us therefore be the more aware of whatever tends
that way.

Even Dr. Owen, who in his Discourse of the work of the Spirit in Prayer,
writes against the making or composing of Forms of Prayer for our selves to be
used privately, desires the Reader, p. 220. to observe that he does not argue
against Forms of Prayer as unlawful to be used; and, p. 222. he grants, that
Men or Churches may agree upon a prescribed Form by common consent, as judging
and avowing it best for their own Edification.

Again, p. 228. Whether they are approved or disapproved of God, whether they
are lawful or unlawful, we do not consider, but only whether they are for
Spiritual benefit and advantage for the good of our own Souls, and the
Edification of others, as set up in competition with the Gift before described.
So that it seems the Dr. does not judge such Forms of Prayer unlawful which are
for the good of our own Souls, and the Edification of others, and which are not
in competition with the Gift before described.

And therefore (p. 231, and 232.) supposing that those who make use of, and
plead for Forms of Prayer, especially in public, do in a due manner prepare
themselves for it by holy meditation, with an endeavor to bring their Souls
into a holy frame of fear, delight and reverence of God; let it also be
supposed that they have a good end and design in the Worship they address
themselves unto, namely the Glory of God, and their own Spiritual advantage;
the Prayers themselves, though they should be in some things irregular, may
give occasion to exercise those acts of Grace which they were otherwise
prepared for: And I say yet further, that whilst these Forms of Prayer are
clothed with the general notions of Prayer, that is, are esteemed as such in
the minds of them that use them, are accompanied in their use with the motives
and ends of Prayer, express no matter unlawful to be insisted on in Prayer,
directing the Souls of Men to none but lawful Objects of Divine Worship and
Prayer, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and whilst men make use of them with
the true design of Prayer, looking after due assistance unto Prayer, I do not
judge there is any such evil in them, as that God will not Communicate his
Spirit to any in the use of them, so as that they should have no holy Communion
with him in and under them. Much less will I say, that God never therein
regards their Persons, or rejects their praying as unlawful: For the Persons
and Duties of Men may be accepted with God, when they walk and act in sincerity
according to their light, though in many things, and those of no small
importance, sundry irregularities are found both in what they do, and in the
manner of doing it. Where Persons walk before God in their Integrity, and
practice nothing contrary to their light and conviction in his Worship, God is
merciful unto them, although they order not every thing according to the Rule
and Measure of the Word. So was it with them who came to the Passover in the
days of Hezekiah, they had not cleansed themselves, but did eat the Passover
otherwise than it was written, 2 Chronicles. 30.18.

And, p. 235. He grants that such Forms of Prayer have not any intrinsical evil
in the composition of them; but argues against the setting up and prescribing
such Forms of Prayer Universally, in opposition, and unto the exclusion of free
Prayer.

And, p. 236. If they appear not contrary unto, or inconsistent with, or are
not used in a way exclusive of that work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer which we
have described from the Scripture, nor are reducible to any divine prohibition,
I shall not contend with any about them.

Mr. Baxters Cure of Church-divisions, I recommend to the reading of such as
lie under the temptation of unwarrantable Separation, as also Mr. Ball of that
Subject at large. The whole of them is so useful, that I do not think fit to
Transcribe any thing of either of them: But I will give you a little of what
Mr. Baxter has written, not only as his own judgment, but other Ministers of
his converse and acquaintance, in his Second Plea for Peace, showing what
Nonconformity is not.

Page 100. We are far from condemning all Forms of Prayer and public Liturgies
as unlawful, of which we have His Majesty's Testimony in his Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, much more are we far from condemning all the Ancient
and present Churches of Christ that have used such, or yet use them, throughout
the Christian World; and yet further are we from Separating from them on that
account (for using Liturgies) and from encouraging such a Separation.

And, p. 101. We think it not unlawful to use as much of the English Liturgy as
we consented to use, when by His Majesty's Commission some of us treated about
the Reformation or Alteration of it, viz. in such Assemblies where the Peoples
incapacity makes not such use of it more hurtful then helpful to their
Edification. And we join with Mr. Ball, and others of the old Non-conformists,
in thanking God that England has a more reformed Liturgy than most of the
Churches in the World. We are far from judging the Parish-Ministers to be no
true Ministers of Christ, or the Parish-Churches no true Churches, or judging
it unlawful to hold Communion with them.

Mr. Corbett, in his Account of the Principles and Practices of the
Non-conformists, Page 4. says, We acknowledge the lawfulness of a Set Form of
Liturgy, for matter agreeable to Gods Word, and suited to the nature of the
several Ordinances, and to the necessities of the Church. Yet the Minister
should not be so confined to it, as not to make use of his own Gifts of Prayer
and Exhortation.

Page 8. Moreover we hold not our selves obliged to forsake a true Church, as
no Church, for the corruptions and disorders found therein; or to Separate from
its Worship, for the tolerable fauls thereof, while our personal profession of
some Error, or Practice of some Evil, is not required as the Terms of our
Communinion. Howbeit we are not so indifferent in this matter, as to make no
difference between Churches, and Pastors: The more pure and powerful
Administration of Gods Ordinances, is to be preferred before that which is more
faulty and less effectual: And here again we acknowledge, that in this
preference due caution must be used: We must not respect our own particular
benefit, before public Peace and Order, and the general good.

Page 9. It is our Principle, That Humane Laws bind the Conscience, or (to
speak more properly) the Subjects in point of Conscience, not by a primary
Obligation, as the Laws of God do, but by a secondary and subordinate, as from
a power derived from God. As it is an evident and important Truth, That
Inferiors ought to obey their Superiors for Conscience sake; so it is as
evident and important, That when Men's Commands contradict the Commands of God,
it is God and not Man that must have the pre-eminence in our Obedience.

Page 21. We renounce not Communion in the public Worship of the
Parish-Churches, though for its outward Form and Order, in some respects, it be
not that which is most desirable by us.

Page 26. We have not forsaken the Parochial Assemblies, but have joined in the
Service of God there performed, and some of us do it in our ordinary course,
and others of us have not declined it of set purpose, but as our absence is
caused by that necessary Work of the Ministry, whereunto we are called: Some of
us have Communicated with the said Assemblies in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: Yet we would not have our Charity and Peaceableness mistaken for an
indifferency unto Communion with all Parochial Churches and Ministers
whatsoever, or for a full satisfaction or acquiescence in the whole, and all
particulars of the Liturgy, so as to be able to declare our unfeigned Assent
and Consent to all and every thing therein contained.

Page. 30. Whereas a remarkable Writer has published these words, ( We should
be reconciled, if the Presbyterian Ministers would persuade their People to do
what they can do themselves.) We declare to the World that we heartily embrace
these Terms of Reconciliation; and as we have done already, we will not cease
to do our uttermost to persuade them, upon whom we have any influence; and we
would gladly come to the Trial, to see which Party should outvie the other in
forwardness in allaying the present Distempers, and lessening the Differences,
and drawing on toward Peace and Union. We have here done our part to remove
the Offenses taken at us, by testifying to all Men, that conscientious
dissatisfaction, and not Carnal Interest, or a Spirit of opposition, is the
ground of our Nonconformity: And to bring such as differ from us to be in more
Charity with us, than to judge that we are utterly unworthy or incapable of the
public Ministry, or that such Persons as for ignorance and lewdness are
scandalous and contemptible among their Neighbors, are more tolerable in
Sacred Office than we are, or that gross Insufficiency, Non-residence, and
other hanious negligence, should be made less Criminal than our dissent about
the Ceremonies, Subscriptions, Renunciations, and such like Injunctions. We
submit what we have done to the Wisdom, Piety, and Clemency of our Governors;
we acquiesce in Gods Wise and Holy Determinations concerning us: And we resolve
through his Grace to abide steadfast and unmovable in our Subjection and
Loyalty to our Sovereign, in our due Obedience to those that are put in
Authority under him, in our earnest endeavor of Holiness, Unity, and Peace in
the Church, in Brotherly love to all Faithful Christians, in Charity to all
men, and in the Faith and Patience of the Disciples and Servants of Jesus
Christ.

I will only add his Sense of the Oxford Oath, which I heartily subscribe to,
p. 11. When the higher Powers command what God forbids, though we are bound not
to perform it, yet we must be subject, and not resist, but patiently submit to
Suffering. The Cause of Religion does not warrant Subjects to take Arms against
their lawful Prince, nor may they by armed Violence against Authority, attempt
the public Reformation thereof. We hold, that it is unlawful, by the
Constitutions and Laws of this Kingdom, for any Subjects to take Arms against
the King, his Office, Authority, or Person, or by force of Arms to resist any
Magistrate or Officer legally Commissionated or Authorized by him; yea,
Subjects are bound not only not to resist, but to assist and defend their
Sovereign with their Estates, and Lives; and the Preachers of the Gospel ought
to teach the People Obedience and Loyalty, and to endeavor to root out all
Principles of Sedition, Rebellion, and Disobedience. We believe that we are
under no Bond or Obligation to act any thing contrary to these our avowed
Principles. And we further make known our detestation of all the Indignity and
Violence offered to the Person of our late Sovereign, and especially that most
horrid execrable Fact of taking away his Life, as also the Usurpations and
violent change of the Government that did accompany the same, against which
Crimes, while they were carried on, the Brethren of our Persuasion openly
protested, even to the Faces of the Actors.

And. p. 14. We declare, That we will not endeavor any alteration of the
Government in Church or State, as it is in the King, whose Civil and
Ecclesiastical Supremacy we have before acknowledged; nor the alteration of the
true Episcopal Office which Christ has settled in his Church; nor will we
endeavor any alteration in the Church, by any Seditious or unlawful means, but
only by Prayer to God, by humbly petitioning our Superiors, or obeying the
King if he Command it, or such like lawful means as belong to us in our Places
and Callings.

If the names of Ball, Baxter and Corbet, sound harsh with some of you methinks
however the names of Tombs, Nigh and Owen, should make a greater figure among
you, and be of greater Authority with such as have not patience to hear the
Name, much less the Thing called Com-Prayer.

If at the mouth of two or three witnesses the matter shall be established,
Deuteronomy. 19.15. Here is the testimony of three of your own, as well as three more
of the other side, against such as refuse Communion, with such Ministers and
Churches who do much more than I have done.

Will you not hear Mr. Nigh tel^ing you your duty, That you and your Families
should frequent the public Ministry, That you are obliged to observe the
lawful Commands of your Governors, That this principle, That it is unlawful to
hear in public, is a mispersuasion of these latter times set on foot by the
Jesuits? Will you not hear Dr. Owen telling you that he does not argue against
forms of Prayer as unlawful to be used; That, whilst you make use of them with
the true design of Prayer, looking after due assistance unto Prayer, he does
not jude there is any such evil in them, as that God will not Communicate his
Spirit to any in the use of them, etc. Will you let me add one more passage in
his Preface? I do not say the fatal Consequence of the introduction of human
devised set forms of Prayer in the worship of the Church, by the horrible abuse
of it, is sufficient to condemn them as absolutely unlawful. Will you have no
regard to the Ministers of all persuasions, who tell you by their principles
and practices the lawfulness of what I do? Behold a greater than Dr. Owen, etc.
is here, the Apostle of the Gentiles, great Saint Paul, telling you, that unto
the Jews he became as a Jew that he might gain the Jews, etc. To the weak he
became as weak that he might gain the weak: I am made all things says he, to
all men, that I might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.20. etc. And he was so
zealous for the saving of Souls that he could condescend to any thing that
might be done with a good Conscience. His own practice was the best comment on
this Text, in taking Timothy to him as his Assistant or fellow laborer in the
Gospel, and Circumcising him because of the Jews that were in those quarters,
for they knew all that his Father was a Greek, Acts 16.3. Here is a piece of
condescension indeed; a far greater piece of Conformity than the reading of a
form of Prayer. Timothy had the repute of a Gentile, but becomes a Jew, that he
might gain the Jews: And Paul chooses to make use of him as his partner in his
Ministry, that his Preaching might be the more acceptable to the Jews in those
quarters. See also the advice of James and the other Elders to Paul, Acts
21.18. etc. when he came to Jerusalem. Thou see Brother how many thousands of
Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the Law, ver. 20. and
they are informed of thee that thou teach all the Jews which are among the
Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to Circumcise their
Children, etc. Do therefore this that we say to thee: We have four Men which
have a vow on them; them take, and purify thy self with them, that they may
shave their heads, and all may know that those things whereof they were
informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thy self walk orderly,
and keep the Law, ver, 24. etc. And should not I and other Ministers walk as
we have Paul for our example? Give me leave to apply this piece of Conformity
in him to our present case. You see how many thousands in this Parish and many
others are as zealous for Common Prayer (as some very few are zealous against
it) and they are misinformed that I and other Nonconformists teach the people
Rebellion, and that we instill into them the principles of Schism, and draw
them away from the Public Ministry and Ordinances; Therefore that we may
convince gainsayers that these things whereof the people are informed against
us are nothing, but that we also walk orderly and keep the Law, I have thought
fit to do what I have done in obedience to the Law of the Land, that hereby I
may be instrumental of gaining some Souls to Christ of these many thousands
that are ready to Perish for lack of knowledge. Remember Mr. Nyes words, that
we are to walk wisely yea, mercifully toward them that are without.

Object. If these be your Principles that it is lawful to read and hear Common
Prayer, why did you not do it at first and conform as the rest of the Ministers
in the Parish Churches?

Answ. I have told you already, if that only had been required of us, we had
done it; but other things being required which we account sinful, we rather
chose the pleasing of God and the peace of our Consciences in a way of duty,
than honors and preferments from men in a way of sin.

Object. If the Common Prayer be read at your meeting place, we will rather go
to the Parish Church and hear it there.

Answ. If you think you have not enough of it with us, you may go to Church and
have more: But if you account what I read too much, you argue perversely in
talking of going to them who do more than I have done. But I answer further, I
have not, I will not in the least discourage your going to the Public
Assemblies. The same Gospel is Preached with them as with us, and with some of
them, I doubt not, more judiciously, and perhaps more profitably than by such
as I, and whether may be more prosperous this or that we know not: So be it
Christ be Preached here or there, we rejoice and will rejoice.

Again, our Assemblies are not set up in opposition to, but in conjunction
with, or in subordination to those in Public; and therefore to such as charge
us with setting up Altars and Churches in a way of Rebellion against the
Government, and to turn away the people from following the Lord in the way of
his Worship in the Parish Churches, I answer as the Tribes of the Children of
Ruben and the Children of Gad and half Tribe of Manasseth answered and said
(upon a like occasion) unto the heads of the thousands of Israel Josh. 22. The
Lord God of Gods, The Lord God of Gods he knows and Israel he shall know, if
it be in Rebellion or in transgression against the Lord -- let the Lord himself
require it: And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying,
in time to come your Children might say unto our Children, saying, what have
you to do with the Lord God of Israel? Our Governors have made the Act of
Uniformity, a Border, a Wall of Separation between us and the Conformists, who
are ready to say, ye have no part with us in the Ministerial work or in the
Parish Assemblies for the Worship of God; If therefore we may not keep up our
own Meetings, when we may not have liberty to Preach in the Churches, they
shall make us to Cease from fearing the Lord.

And again I answer, The Harvest is great, the Laborers few, and Souls are
precious; Go therefore where you will, it shall not offend, but please me, if
the Net of the Gospel may be spread, and bring you into Christ by their
Ministry or ours. But take heed of this dividing principle which some I see are
acted by, of forsaking the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ, and the Communion
of Saints, as soon as a form of prayer is used in any part of their worship: If
God accept such worship and worshippers, (as no doubt but he does where they
lift up holy hands with pure hearts to him) he will not be very well pleased
with such as reject them: And let me entreat you to consider whether this
dividing principle will lead you: As soon as our Governors shall be pleased to
open the Church doors a little wider, and the Non-Conformists shall generally
do the same thing that now I have done, you will then either repent of your
Error, or if you persist in it, you will forsake their Assemblies also, as soon
as a form of Prayer (according to your fancy) has polluted them, and then I
dread to think where I may quickly find you. Either among the deluded Quakers,
to cast off all Ministers and Ordinances; or among the Papists or Atheists, (of
the Roman Religion or no Religion, for they are much alike) and so to lay aside
the common principles of Morality, and act contrary to the very light of Nature
as well as Scripture. But I hope better things of you (whom especially and
particularly I write this to) even things that accompany Salvation: And
therefore as a means for that end I warn you, yea, in the words of the Apostle,
Romans 16.17.18. I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and
by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

What may be the result of this leading example, God only knows, and time must
discover: Be it what it will, I am not much concerned, having I trust a good
Conscience (in this matter,) in all things willingly to live honestly. Duty is
our part, the Issues or Events of things belong unto God: But something apepars
above board already.

On the one side the wrathful and profane, finding me out of the reach of the
Conventicle Act, that they cannot hurt me, no nor hinder my work that way, have
this last week put me into the Bishops Court; from whom nothing less than
Excommunication, yea, and a Goal, if possible, can be expected. Though we yield
as far as we can in things lawful, there is no Union, no Peace nor agreement to
be had with such men.

On the other side, there are some among our selves of dividing and unpeaceable
Principles and Spirits; who seem to be so incurably prejudiced as to resolve
they will have no Communion with such Ministers or Churches, who in some little
things cross their humor, and do therefore begin to excommunicate themselves,
before they have so much as heard what is to be said in the Case. These are
people, who are wiser in their own conceit then seven men that can render a
Reason. I have given you the names of six already ( Nigh, Owen, Tombs, Ball,
Baxter, and Corbet) I will add a seventh, Dr. Thomas Goodwin (one among the
first three of the Independents) who in his Works lately printed in Folio on
the Ephesians Sermon. 36. page 488. has these Words. Whereas now in some of the
Parishes of this Kingdom there are many godly men, that do constantly give
themselves up to the worship of God, and meet together in one place to that
end, in a constant way, under a godly Minister, whom they themselves have
chosen to cleave to (though they did not choose him at first,) These,
notwithstand- their mixture and want of discipline, I never thought for my
part, but that they were true Churches of Christ. Again, page 489. So that I
profess my self as zealous in this point, as in any other I know: And for my
part this I say, and I say it with much integrity, I never took up Religion by
Parties in the lump: I have found by trial of all things, that there is some
Truth on all sides; I have found holiness, where you would little think it, and
so likewise Truth: And I have learned this principle, which, I hope, I shall
never lay down till I am swallowed up in immortality, and that is, to
acknowledge every good thing, and hold communion with it in men, in Churches or
whatsoever else. My Brethren, This Rule (which I profess I have lived by and
shall do while I live) I know I shall never please men in: For this is the
Nature and condition of all Mankind; if a man dissent from others in one thing,
he crosses the in all the rest: and therefore if a man take what ^ good of all
sides he is apt to cross them all, but he please^ Christ by it: and so I will
for this particular.

To return and to conclude you see how the Church ^ Christ is divided and broke
to pieces by one and the oth^ party abovementioned: I stand alone in the front,
and am in danger on both sides: Give me leave to speak i^ Jehosophats words, O
my God, will thou not judge tho^ for I have no might against this great Company
that comet^ against me, neither know I what to do, but mine eyes ar^ upon thee.

I will yet take heart and further encourage my se^^ from the words of a
Soldier, whose valor I see I (...) need in this case. When Joab saw that the
front of the Ba^tle was against him, before and behind, he put the cho^^ men in
array; and said be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people,
and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good.

Febr. 23. 1681. From my Study in great Russel Street, Bloomsbury.
FINIS.

