A SERMON PREACHED before the KING and QUEEN AT WHITE HALL APRIL XVI. 1690.

BEING THE FAST DAY.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON Lord Bishop of Chichester.

Published by their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

THE BISHOP of CHICHESTER's FAST-SERMON Before the KING and QUEEN APRIL xvi.
1690.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, April 16. 1690.
BEING THE FAST DAY.
PROVE. xiv. 34. Righteousness exalts a nation: but Sin is a reproach to any
people.
IF we enlarge our thoughts beyond our own narrow particular beings, and look
upon our selves as Members of a Community; we cannot but think it our interest
to endeavor its safety, no less than the preservation of our natural body:
Whose health ought not to be dearer to us, than the prosperous and flourishing
estate of the Country where we live.

Which if we heartily wish (as we seem to do by our assembling here together to
implore the Blessing of Heaven upon their Majestres, and the Forces they employ
for our preservation) it concerns us to apply our selves unto the serious use
of all those means, which we see to be necessary for the making our Prayers
successful.

Now there is no Book in the Holy Scriptures, which gives us fuller directions,
in the way to make, not only private Persons, and Families, but whole Kingdoms
and States happy, than this of Solomon: who comprises them all in this general
Maxim here in my Text, Righteousness exalts a nation, etc.

I will not vex our Translation, nor examine the exactness of it in the latter
part of the Verse, which may be otherwise rendered: But consider the words as an
ancient Proverb; grounded on great reason, constant observation, and long
experience; which assured King Solomon of these two things. First, Of the
certain way and means to make a Nation Great, Honorable and Famous: Secondly
on the contrary, of the no less certain way and means to lay it low, and make
it base and vile in the eyes of all the World.

These are the two parts of my Text, the first of which is expressed in the
beginning of the words; Righteousness exalts a nation: That Is the way to make
it great and glorious. The second, in the latter part of the Verse, sin is a
reproach to any people: That Is the way to lay them low, were they never so
high, in riches, reputation and all other things, before.

The first of these being evidently proved, will necessary infer the second:
And therefore, after a brief explication of what is meant here by
Righteousness, I shall endeavor, in the rest of my Discourse, to make good the
truth of what Solomon asserts concerning it; by showing, how a Nation is raised
and advanced by Righteousness.

It is certain that Righteousness has a threefold signification in Scripture;
yea, in this very Book of the Proverbs.

1. Where first, it signifies that particular virtue, which we call Justice and
honest dealing: which consists, in giving to every one, that which properly
belongs to him. Thus the Wise Man uses the word in Prove. XVI. 8. Better is a
little with righteousness, than great Revenues without right. i. e. A small
Estate honestly gotten, is to be preferred before a great one, gotten by fraud
and doing wrong to others.

2. Sometimes the signification is enlarged, to include in it another virtue
also, viz. Mercy and Charity. In which sense the Wise man seems to use it (to
omit other places) Prove. XI. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath (i. e. in
a calamitous time) but righteousness (i. e. doing good with our riches)
delivers from death; may preserve us in he greatest dangers.

3. But there is another acceptance of these words, which is more
comprehensive: Wherein it signifies not only these; but all other virtues
whatsoever: Universal obedience to the Laws of God. And thus it is commonly
taken in this Book; particularly, here in my Text, as appears from that which
is opposed to it, in the latter part of the words, viz. Sin. Which most
certainly signifies all sorts of wickedness; and therefore by righteousness we
ought to understand all manner of Virtue: Piety and Holiness; as well as
Justice and Mercy. In one word, true Religion: Which I may safely use instead
of the word Righteousness; as comprehending under it whatsoever is good and
virtuous; which springs from true Religion and the fear of God.

Now these things being premised, I shall address my self to the proof of this
Proposition: That true Religion and Piety (which is the Mother of Justice,
Mercy, Moderation, and all other virtues) exalts a Nation: That is, makes it
truly great and honorable; of great power, and in great esteem in the World.

Which it does (1.) in it self; and (2.) by virtue of its own natural fruits
and Consequences: And (3.) by procuring the Blessing of Divine Providence upon
that Country where it flourishes.

I.
First, I say, Righteousness, that is, true Religion, in it self, promotes and
advances the glory of a Nation: being, in its own Nature, a truly great, noble,
and honorable thing: Which every Man praises and commends in others, though
perhaps he does not love to practice it himself. For who is there, for
instance, that does not rather love and honor a People, that* are just, holy,
and devout; than a Nation that is merely rich, powerful, and mighty? It is
possible a Nation may be so for a time, though it do not stand upon the
Foundations of Truth, Justice and Piety; but it is impossible it should last so
long: and while it does continue so, what is its Power, without Piety, but an
ability to do Mischief, and to destroy; which is hateful to all the World?

The greatest Monarchs have sometimes been the greatest Spoilers: Who, though
they were feared, yet were never truly honored. Though they acquired some
fame, they never had any Reputation, or Esteem. Though they were cried up,
because dreaded, while alive; yet they were always scorned, because hated, when
they were dead.

Whereas, on the contrary, Religious Princes, such as are Holy toward God, and
Merciful toward Men; sober in their Counsels and Conduct: firm to their
Compacts and Promises; faithful to their Aliances, have always gained the Love
and Honor of all those that read their Story.

II.
But as Righteousness and True Religion, is in it self noble and honorable,
highly esteemed by all Men; and thereby a means to make a Nation glorious: so
it does much more promote the glory and interest of it, by its natural
Consequences; on which I shall longer insist.

I. And that, first of all, because True Religion and Virtue, promotes
industry: which is the very Nerves and Sinews of every Commonwealth. It puts
every Man into some Calling and Employment (not suffering Princes to live idly)
and makes every Calling active and industrious; and Industry gains Wealth and
Riches; and Riches gained by honest industry procure Power, Interest, and
Reputation in the World. For in all labor (says this wise Man, ver. 23. of
this Chapter) there is profit: but the talk of the lips tends only to penury.
Industry and Labor are always beneficial, and bring many advantages along with
them: but where time is spent in vain Company and frivolous Discourses, in
hearing what every one will tell, and telling again what has been heard; there
follows Poverty, upon such mis-spence of time; and shame and misery follow
that. According to that which we read in XII. Chapter 11. He that tilleth his
land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that follows vain persons, is void
of understanding. As if he said, He that minds the business, unto which God and
the nature of his Station calls* him, shall want nothing convenient for him:
but he who abandons himself to the company of those, who lead vain, idle, and
useless lives, shall live in shame, and die in beggary; and so betray himself
to be a Man void of all understanding.

Idle and extravagant persons, are the very pests of the Commonwealth: who lie
as an heavy burden upon the Shoulders of others; because they live wholly to
waste and spend, devour and consume. They eat the fruit of other Men's labors,
and drink the Sweat of their Neighbors Brows. Every thing is but a prey to
them: who are little better than those that rob and spoil; for they live by the
Consumption of other People. Which, by the way, should excite all that have any
authority, to correct this Vice, according to the wholesome Laws provided
against it: which would be a part of that Reformation, on which it is the very
business of this day to resolve, as the means to make us an happy Nation.

For, on the other hand, the laborious and industrious Man maintains that
Station wherein God has placed him, though never so mean, against the invasion
of want and poverty; and against those dreadful effects of Poverty, which
frequently throw a Nation into terrible Convulsions, by producing in it
Sedition and Confusion.

Is not a Nation then beholden to Religion, more than to any thing else, even
upon this account; that by putting Men upon Industry and Labor; and making it
a piece of Conscience not to waste ones time vainly, it prevents those
insufferable mischiefs, which grow out of idleness, sloth and luxury?

Which might be further demonstrated from a known effect of true Religion and
the fear of God; which is Sobriety, Moderation, and Frugality: which are both
the Parent, and the product of Industry. Which Industry, I might also show, is
not only the Mother of Riches, but of Wisdom also, Learning, Knowledge, and
Understanding of all manner of things; whether Natural, Moral, Political, or
Divine. Which are not gotten by idleness; but constantly procured, in some
measure, by labor and pains. That is, some men by their Industry get Wisdom
and Knowledge; Others, whose genius lies not that way, get Riches and Wealth;
and there are those who get both: and are all highly serviceable unto the
Nation; to advance the greatness, the power, the credit, and the glory of it.

But having many things to say, I omit all further Discourse of these
Considerations; and desire you,

II. Secondly, To consider, that as Righteousness, that is, True Religion
promotes private Industry, and by that means tends to the advancement of a
Nation; so it also disposes Men (which is a far greater thing) to mind the
public good and honor of the Nation, where they live.

There is no good Man, who has a true sense of Religion and Virtue, who does
not consider that he was not born merely for himself; but to help forward the
good of others also, even of the whole Country whereof he is a Member. For next
to the duty we owe unto God who made us all, and unto our Parents who brought
us into the World, all Virtuous Men have always placed the duty we owe out
Country. And the more any Man minds the first of these, his duty toward God;
the more religiously will he mind the last, the safety and honor of his
Country. Which ought to be so dear unto us, that no private Friendships, no,
nor the duty our Natural Parents challenge from us, ought in some Cases, to
come in competition with it. Thus Men of worth in the several Ages and Nations
of the World, have ever thought.

Which makes our shame here in England the greater, who of late years have had
so little regard to this, which of all other things ought to have been most
affectionately tendered. And what was the reason of it, but an inundation of
all manner of Vice and Wickedness upon us? This was the general cause of it.
And more particularly, Sensuality, Avarice, Ambition, Atheism and Infidelity
(which are the Fountain of all Vice) are very base and poor spirited things.

For a vicious Man is, at the best, but a crafty and subtle Beast; and the
Beasts mind nothing but themselves; or that which they look upon as a part of
themselves, their young ones; and that only, while they are young.

Who ever knew an Atheist truly useful, or serviceable to his Country? Who can
name one that ever looked much beyond himself and his own private interests and
pleasures? And, indeed, how should he do any thing noble and generous for his
Country (when it will expose him to any danger or trouble) who cannot hope for
a reward from God for what he does?

How should an idle Companion, and a sensual Person, a Man abandoned to his
ease, his lust, and bodily pleasure, a Man that loves no body but himself; be
concerned for the good of his Country? No, let the Laws and Liberties of it,
sink or swim; it is alike to him. For let his Relations, Friends, and Family
beg or starve; Nay, let his Heir be in danger to ask a morsel of Bread at his
Neighbor's Door (for some of these Men are not so good as the Beasts, who have
a care of their young ones) he will have his pleasure, when his Lusts have
besotted him. They must be fed, and his Vanity must be gratified; as long as he
is able to make provision for them. Let shame and infamy, the hatred and ill
will of the whole Nation fall upon him, he regards it not: for his whole care
is for his own Carcass, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Which is the nature also of Covetous and Ambitious men; who, to raise
themselves, will not stick to ruin their Country. This is most manifestly a
very great Plague to the Commonwealth: Where there are many of this sort of
men in it.

But now, on the contrary, that holy Religion, which teaches us to love our
Neighbors as our selves, and not revengefully, or maliciously to hurt our
Enemies; teaches us much more to love our Country: for the sake of which, the
better sort of Heathens did not grudge to deny, nay to hazard themselves, to
preserve it in safety. And therefore he who is a good Christian; that is, lives
according to the Laws of our Religion, is of a free, generous, and public
Spirit: willing to lay out himself, nay to suffer for the Common good.

If there be an occasion to serve himself, by disserving the Public, he will
keep his hands clear and pure from such foolish baseness; and serve his Country
faithfully and justly: knowing that therein he most effectually serves himself,
and shall gain by it both in this World and in the next.

Thus is that again verified which the man here affirms, as he had done before
XI. 11. By the blessing of the Upright the City is exalted. Upright Piety
highly tends to the advancement of a peoples happiness; both as it puts men
upon labor and industry; and as it makes them labor for the public good.

III. Unto which add, in the third place, that Religion and Virtue, makes a
Nation strong and powerful: And that, not only by the means before mentioned;
but by procuring likewise Unity, Concord, and Agreement among fellow-Citizens
and Countrymen: who are preserved by being knit together in Love, but undone by
Discord and Dissension.

Now true Religion combines men together, and so makes them mighty and
formidable; First, by removing the Causes of division; and Secondly, by making
them feel the happy effects of peace and quietness.

The causes of division are Pride, Conceitedness, Self-will, Covetousness,
Ambition, Self-love, Hatred, Revenge, and such like Lusts; from whence, as St.
James observes, come Quarrelings, and Fightings: That is, from want of true
Religion, which would cure men of all these evil qualities: and make them feel
themselves happy, in mutual Love, and humble Charity; as well as by the
practice of justice and truth.

For no man is either oppressed himself, or has any inclination to oppress
others, when he does as he would be done by: not only, by abstaining from doing
injury to others, because he would not be injured by them; but by relieving,
assisting, and doing good to others, because he would be so dealt withal, were
he in need of their succor. That is, when true Charity and Brotherly kindness
is added unto justice and truth (as it is, where true Religion prevails) in
what an happy Condition is that Nation? where every one finds his Neighbors
easy and kind to him; and he himself is easy to himself. For when is a Man more
at ease, than when he has no difference with any Body; no Quarrels, no
Contention, no Heartburnings, nor evil Surmises: but his Soul is full of Love
and Good Will toward others, being knit to them in sincere Affection, not only
as his Neighbor, but as his Brethren and Friends.

This is the Effect of True Religion; and the Effect of this is great Peace,
and consequently, Prosperity at Home. Where, as Nothing more dishonours a
Nation, and indangers it, than Domestic Broils, or opposite Factions; which
are always bandying one against the other, to the great damage, as well as
disgrace of all: So these are all prevented, or presently quieted by Religion
and Virtue; to the great Honor and Glory, both of Religion, and of the Nation,
which is so happy as to be under the blessed Influences thereof.

The best Men indeed are liable to great Infirmities; which may sometimes make
them troublesome unto themselves, and unto others: through Misinformation,
through Mistake, through Surprise, through Passion, and the like. But these not
being wilful Evils, cannot prove very hurtful, nor be of long continuance. And
besides, where true Religion possesses the Heart, it makes Men, on one hand, so
charitable, as to bear and to pardon such Infirmities; and, on the other hand,
so humble, as to make the best amends they can for any Harm they have done by
their Mistake or Passion, and to be more careful and kind for the time to come.
For that commonly is the Effect of little Quarrels among good Men: who are so
much the faster Friends, when they see their Errors, and have begged Pardon,
and obtained and granted mutual Forgiveness.

Would to God it might be the Effect of our lamentable Differences and
Contentions, in later Years (as in all Reason it ought to be) to make us very
fearful how we fall into the like again; at least to correct that Sharpness,
that Acrimony and Hatred wherewith those Differences were managed; to the great
scandal of our Religion, and the exposing us all to be a Prey unto our Common
Enemy.

There will be still Occasions of Quarrelling, if we be so foolish as to lay
hold on them and improve them. For we shall never be all of one Opinion in
every thing; which will occasion Disputes; and they may occasion Heats; and
they may beget Estrangements one from another; and thence may arise
Animosities, and open Breaches: Unless we moderate our selves, and religiously
consider what we are a doing, what Mischiefs we are drawing upon our selves,
when we engage so fiercely in Contests; about things perhaps of small moment,
or things in which Men will never be agreed, but there will be different
Judgments concerning them.

Let us, as was said before, be touched with such a lively sense, that we are
Members of one and the very same Body, and prefer the Public Good, before our
own Private Opinions and Interests; and this will have a greater Power to knit
us faster together, than any thing else can have to divide us one from another.
If we have any regard to this, to the Safety of our Nation, to the Safety of
our Religion, not only here, but in all other Protestant Countries abroad; We
cannot but be inclined thereby to join our Counsels, our Studies and
Endeavors, as well as our Prayers, for the preventing or quieting of all new
Quarrels among us. That, as we had almost undone our selves by our Hatreds and
bitter Contentions; so we may be preserved by a firm Union, in sincere Love and
brotherly Affection.

Which is a Virtue, that our Holy Religion commends unto us above all other
things. Put on (as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) Bowels of Mercy,
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering; forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any Man have a quarrel against any. And above all
these things, put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness. And let the
Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to the which also ye are called in one Body.
Col. 3. 12, 13, etc. Which the same Apostle presses upon the Philippians, in
the most passionate and moving manner imaginable; ( Phil. 2. 1, 2.) If there be
any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort in Love, (which we cannot but feel to
be exceeding great, if we be under the Power of it) if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind.

This is sufficient to show, that if Christian Religion have taken possession
of our Hearts, and bear any sway there, we shall be strongly knit together as
one Man, for the common Good of the whole Body to which we belong. And if we
be, I have demonstrated how much this will contribute to the Exaltation of our
Nation, by Unity and Peace at Home.

IV. But suppose a Nation be assaulted from abroad, true Religion will make
them courageous and undaunted, being the Mother of Fortitude and Valor; which
raises the Power, Glory, and Reputation of a Nation to the greatest height.

1. And this it does, because it unites them, as you have heard, in Bands of
mutual Love and Kindness; which gives them confidence in each other, as well as
moves them to join their common Counsels and joint Endeavors, for the Public
Good and Safety.

2. And then it makes all these Counsels and Enterprises go on smoothly and
cheerfully, without those Rubs and Impediments which are wont to be raised by
Fears, and Jealousies, and Distrusts one of another.

3. And, thirdly, by increasing their Treasure, as I have said, and giving them
Public Spirits to incline them to part with it for the Public Good, it
enables them to make such Preparations for mutual Defense, as Wisdom and
Counsel shall direct.

4. Which Preparations also are managed by Religion, with that Industry,
Diligence, and Frugality beforementioned: Upon which depends great likelihood
of good Success. For that Religion which makes a Man industrious in his private
Calling, will much more engage him to the diligent and conscientious discharge
of any Public Trust committed to him.

All which tends to inspire a People with Courage, when they see they want
Nothing that is necessary for their Defense; but only the Divine Aid and
Succor* Which, as you shall hear anon, they cannot reasonably suspect, will
withdraw it self from a People, fearing God, and working Righteousness. No,
quite contrary, they ought to be confident of his Presence with them,
especially in all Straits and Difficulties: Which Confidence will marvelously
heighten and raise their Courage and Resolution. For as it naturally makes a
Man very undaunted and valiant, when he is not conscious to himself of any base
Design or vile Practice: So Confidence in God, and full persuasion that he will
be with us in an Undertaking, does exceedingly increase and exalt that Courage
which a good Conscience breeds in us. And of this we ought not to doubt, when
we are a truly Religious, Just and Holy People; devoted to the love of God, and
of one another.

And as this mightily inspires a Nation with Confidence; so this unanimous
Courage and Confidence in a Nation, no less daunts their Enemies; and either
deters them from Invasion, or disheartens them in the Attempt: For who is able
to stand before a great People, united among themselves; that fight, not with
divided Affections, nor to serve particular Interests and Factions, but for the
Common Preservation, and the Public Good?

And now that I mention, a Great People, it puts me in mind of another thing,
which I will briefly touch.

V. True Religion exalts a Nation, by increasing it into a multitude of
People: Which evidently gives it Renown, by making a People Powerful, and
Formidable to its Neighbors; especially, when it abounds with People, not of a
feeble, but of an able and strong Constitution of Body, as well as of virtuous
Minds. For so this wise Man has observed, a little before my Text, Verse. 28.
In the multitude of People is the King's Honor; but in the want of People, is
the destruction of the Prince. Who is Nothing, if he have no Subjects: but the
more numerous they are, the greater is his Force and his Splendour at Home, and
his Fame and Reputation Abroad; which very much depends upon the populousness
of his Country, when it is stored with such worthy Persons as I have described.

Now, True Religion increases a People into a Multitude, by chaste Marriages,
and banishing Fornication and vagrant Lusts: and also by that healthful state
of Body, wherein Temperance, Soberness, Chastity and Industry, preserves
Mankind. This is so plain, that it needs no Proof; and is one Argument against
that Impurity, Filthiness, and Debauchery, which has exceedingly abounded
among us: That it not only shuts Men out of the Happiness of the other World,
(as St. Paul shows, 1 Cor. vi. 9.) but hastens them also out of this; weakens
and destroys their Bodies; shortens their Life, dispeoples their Country; and
makes a Nation feeble and pusilanimous, when it is generally infected with this
Disease. Upon which account, it is the interest of all Princes, to punish the
Vices of this sort, very severely: not only as displeasing to God, but as
extremely dis-serviceable to themselves.

VI. From all which I might show how, Righteousness exalts a Nation, by
inviting other People to resort unto it, and increase its Numbers: Either for
their Education, or their Improvement, among those who have gained a great
Reputation in the World, for their Wisdom, or their Sobriety and Purity, or
their Unity and good Government, their Industry, their Courage, etc. and all
those excellent Qualities from whence these things are derived.

But I need not add any thing more for the proof of what I undertook. Lay all
these Considerations together, and if Wealth, if Wisdom and Knowledge, if
unanimous Affection to the Public Good, if Peace and Concord, if great numbers
of People in Health and Strength, if Fame and Reputation, if Fortitude and
Courage, if Counsel and Conduct, if confidence of Success in all their
Enterprises can raise and exalt the Glory of a Nation; then true Religion and
Virtue, (serious Obedience to all the Laws of Christ) is the Exaltation of a
Nation. For all these are the Fruits of Righteousness, as I have plainly
demonstrated, when it is generally practiced.

For so this Proposition is to be understood; Righteousness exalts a Nation,
when that Nation (that is) becomes Righteous. The sole Virtue indeed of the
Princes that govern it, may do much toward it. For a King that sits in the
Throne of Judgment, (says this wise Man) scatters away all Evil with his
Eyes, xx. 8. and again, verse. 26. A wise King scatters the Wicked, and
brings the Wheel over them; that is, punishes them severely. Righteous Lips
are the delight of Kings, (i. e. of such wise Kings) and they love him that
speaks right, xvi. 13. They promote, that is, virtuous Men, not Flatterers,
such as speak what is true, not what they think will please, unto places of
Trust and Authority. And when the Righteous are in Authority, the People
rejoice: But when the wicked bear Rule, the People mourn, xxix. 2.

But though all this be true, yet it is because such Princes are the blessed
Instruments of reforming a Nation, (which begins in reforming the Court, and
those who are in Authority) by whose general Amendment, by the Peoples becoming
truly Religious and Virtuous, this Observation of the wise Man is completely
fulfilled, that Righteousness exalts a Nation; by the very natural Effects of
it, when it is heartily and universally practiced.

III.
But these, though very great Advantages in themselves, are small in comparison
with that which follows, viz. The singular Favor and Blessing of the Divine
Providence, which is procured by the Righteousness of a Nation.

For the understanding of which, it must be considered, that the Providence of
God is the great and first Mover, which turns about all the Wheels of Humane
Affairs, and orders how and whither they shall go: Whereby they are many times
carried far otherwise than we design and contrive. This is a Truth so often
noted in this Book, that from thence we may conclude it is a Matter of very
great Moment: for it is not easy to number all the Places. xvi. ^. The
Preparations of the Heart in Man, and the answer of the Tongue, is from the
Lord; who gives, that is, what Success he pleases to Men's Deliberations and
Discourses. And, Ver. 9. A Man's Heart devises his Way, (i. e. designs and
End, and the Means to it) but the Lord directs his steps; to such an issue,
perhaps, as he never thought of* And again, ver. 33. of the same Chapter, The
Lot is cast into the Lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. The
same we read, xlx. 21. There are many Devices in a Man's Heart; nevertheless
the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. And, XX. 24. Man's goings are of the
Lord; how can a Man then understand his own way? That is, as no Man can take
one step toward any thing he designs, without permission from above: So it is
impossible for him to know what the Success will be of that which he projects.
xxi. 1. The King's Heart (on whose motions, we know, the Fate of Kingdoms
depend) is in the Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water: he turns it
whithersoever he will. Once more, Verse. 30, 31. of the same Chapter; There is
no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. The Horse is
prepared against the Day of Battle; but safety is of the Lord; i. e. Whatsoever
warlike Preparations any Prince shall make, though never so great, and never so
well conducted and managed, all is to no purpose, unless the LORD favor his
Arms, and give good success to his Counsels and Designs.

Which is the very Ground and Reason of our meeting here this day, to implore
his Blessing upon their Majesty's and their Forces, by Sea and Land: Whereby we
make a solemn acknowledgment of the Truth of what I have now said, that the
disposal of all Events depends upon the Providence of God: Which we ought,
therefore, by all means to engage to be on our Side. Particularly, by humble,
and fervent, and frequent Prayer to him: Which the Holy Scripture calls seeking
the Face, that is, the Favor of God; who alone can make our way prosperous;
and in whose fear (as this wise Man speaks, xiv. 26.) is strong Confidence, of
good Success, that is, in all Enterprises, and Protection in all Dangers.

But if we have any serious belief of God, and of his Providence, we cannot
imagine that it can be engaged to favor us, by our Prayers alone. They must
never be omitted; but if we address our selves to God, with no resolutions of
amendment, this very wise Man has told us our Doom, in the xv. 8. The
Sacrifice of the Wicked is an abomination to the Lord; He will reject it,
especially when he brings it with a wicked Mind, (xxi. 27.) as if he thought,
by his Sacrifices, to bribe the Divine Majesty, and persuade him to wink at his
Sins. But, on the other side, he tells us in the very same Breath, The Prayer
of the Upright is his delight: Which he repeats in the 29th Verse, The Lord is
far from the Wicked; but he hears the Prayer of the Righteous. Who devoutly
acknowledging the Divine Providence, and also studying sincerely to observe his
Commands; prevail with him to give them what they desire; his Favor,
Protection, and Blessing, to prosper them in all their Undertakings.

The Wicked works a deceitful Work; but to him that sows Righteousness,
shall be a sure Reward. He deceives himself, that is, who thinks to raise
himself to Greatness by wicked Devices; in which he may prosper a while, but
the Event at last will disappoint his Expectations: When truly religious Men
shall infallibly reap the Fruit of their pious, just, and charitable Labors
for the good of others. The like we read, xii. 3. A Man shall not be
established by Wickedness: but the Root of the Righteous shall not be moved.
And here in this Chapter, Verse. 11. The House of the Wicked shall be
overthrown; but the Tabernacle of the Righteous shall flourish. There was a
great difference between an House and a Tabernacle; the former being built
strong and firm, to endure for an Age or several Generations: but the other (a
Tabernacle) was reared up only for a Time, slightly jointed and put together,
to be taken down and carried, on a sudden, any whither. And such is the
Providence of God, the wise Man observes, over the Righteous, that he makes his
weak Tabernacle abide and flourish; when the very House of the Wicked not only
decays, but is overturned. Thus the World has seen many Potent Princes put
down from their Seat, and small ones raised up in their stead; according to the
discourse of the pious Father of this wise Man, who bids us mark what he says*
Psalm. xxxiii. where, after he had said, Verse. 16. 17. There is no King saved
by the multitude of an Host: a mighty Man is not delivered by much strength. An
Horse is a vain thing thing to save a Man, etc. He adds immediately, Verse. 18.
Behold, take notice of this, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
(of such he will take a special care, and exercise a most tender and watchful
Providence over them) upon them that hope in his Mercy: to deliver their Soul
from Death, and to keep them alive in time of Famine: To preserve them, that
is, in the greatest Dangers, and deliver them out of the greatest Straits.

And truly the Providence of God is in justice engaged to give Countenance and
Encouragement to true Piety and Virtue in the World. And though it do not move
always so swiftly as we expect and desire, yet we may observe there have been
such Revolutions of Providence in all Nations, in one Age or other, as have
sufficiently demonstrated how much God concerns himself, to bless those who
live in observance of him, and to punish those who do otherwise.

I will not presume, now that it is time to draw toward a Conclusion, to lay
before you the story of the Jews, over whom this wise King reigned; but only
say, that as God had chosen them, from among all Nations, to be his People,
planted them in a chosen Land, and blessed them with wise and holy Laws,
promised them all manner of Felicity, upon condition of their Obedience: So,
notwithstanding this peculiar relation to him, the same Providence which
promised them Protection, Safety and Prosperity, if they obeyed him, threatened
to abandon them unto inevitable Ruin, if they forsook him and rebelled against
him. Whence those remarkable words, Deuteronomy. v. 29. O that there were such an
Heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, that
it might be well with them, etc. Where he speaks as if it were not in his own
Power to bless them, unless they would fear and obey him always; because God
cannot do that at all, which he cannot do consistently with his Wisdom,
Justice, and Honor.

And however Divine Providence may please to order things in those Nations who
are not so nearly related to him; yet we cannot but think he will deal with us
Christians, who are now become what they were, his peculiar People, by the very
same Measures he dealt with them; that is, Bless us, or Curse us* according as
we observe or break his Holy Laws.

But I see no reason to question his making this distinction even among
Infidels, who know not the Laws of Jesus Christ: if we may judge of what he
does now, by what he did in ancient times. When the Heathens themselves
observed this difference, as appears by the Writers of the Roman Story: who
take notice, that while they were strict observers of the Law of Nations, and
continued Religious, frugal, industrious, sober, and moderate, (as they were in
their beginning) God's Blessing rested upon them, and they prospered
wonderfully, whithersoever they went* But when they grew impious, luxurious,
broke their Faith, abounded with all manner of Vice, they soon dwindled, grew
weak, and lost their large Dominions they had in the World. And had they been
at the first rise of their Empire, as vain as the Greeks, (to use the Words of
a great Divine of our own, in the days before us) Dr. Jackson.
as Luxurious as the Asiaticks, as Perfidious as the Carthaginians, as uncivil
and Barbarous as many other Nations, whom they conquered; they could not have
been so constantly fortunate in their* Enterprises, at home and abroad, as they
were for many years.

God, indeed, is a debtor to no body: but such is his Bounty, such his love to
Righteousness, of whatsoever sort it be, That he will not suffer moral Virtue,
civil Justice, Honesty and Truth, and constant execution of Laws, which in
their kind and degree are good, to be wholly unrewarded: But by such means any
Nation in the World may be exalted above those who are otherways disposed.

How much more then may Christian People expect this Favor from the Lord, in
the faithful observance of his holy Laws? Did true Righteousness, for instance,
prevail in this Christian Kingdom, what an happy People might we be? As happy,
as we have made our selves notorious to all the World, for the Punishments God
has inflicted on us.

What were the late Civil Wars, and the woeful Effects of them, but the
Calamities which God sent upon a sinful People, for our disobedience to him?
And since the wonderful Restoration of the Royal Family and the Monarchy, What
were the Pestilence, the Fire, and other Judgments, which presently ensued, but
tokens of God's continued displeasure against us, for our abuse of his
loving kindness? We rioted upon his Mercies; We waxed fat and kicked against
him; we abandoned our selves to Lust, Pride, and Idleness, and to all manner of
Debauchery; nay, to Irreligion, Atheism and Infidelity: for which cause those
heavy Calamities fell upon us. And what was the effect of them? After we had
felt the smart of so many terrible Judgments, we fell into such implacable
Animosities, and deadly Hatreds one against another, that we drew upon our
selves the greatest Plague of all, that of Popery. Which had set up its
Chapels, Schools, and Convents among us; and, had not God's Mercy prevented by
our late mavelous Deliverance, would have brought in those, Whipps, and
Gibbets, and Racks, and Fires, and other Instruments of Crueity, wherewith we
have seen it, torturing the Bodies and Souls of innumerable good Men and Women,
in France, and in other places. And shall we still adventure to continue an
unreformed Nation, because God has spared us from utter ruin? After all this
is come upon us, for our evil Deeds, as Ezra speaks, and for our great
Trespass, and after he has given us such a Deliverance as this, which we have
lately received, shall we again break his Commandments?

What a strange thing will it be, not to believe our own Experience, though we
would not believe God's Holy Word? Which now, one would think, should have
greater credit with us, when we have seen it so fully verified in our selves,
that Sin is a reproach to any People. Which, in reason, should move us to try
the Truth of the other part of my Text, of which I have now treated; and by
working Righteousness, satisfy our selves how it will exalt us. As I have
proved it will, not only by its own natural Consequences (there being no
Virtue, which tends not to greaten a Nation that lives in the practice of it)
but by the special Blessing of the Almighty; whose Method this is, which he
constantly observes, to bless the righteous, and compass him with his favor as
with a shield.

Hear this Wiseman once more, Prove. x. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to
the upright; but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity. The way of
the Lord, that is, this is the divine Method to give strength and power to
upright men: or the very observance of the Rules of virtue (which may be meant
here by the way of the Lord) the keeping close to God's Laws, and walking in
his ways, inspires the Upright with courage and resolution, when any evil
threatens them: but the workers of iniquity are seeble and poor spirited; and
shall be broken in pieces by that destruction, which is coming upon them. His
Father gives the reason of it, Psalm. xii. ult. The righteous Lord loves
righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. Let us love
righteousness then, that we may be beloved of the Lord. And if we have any
Authority, let upright men have our countenance and favor (as the glory and
strength of the Nation, the Chariots and Horsemen for the safeguard of their
Country) that the righteous Lord may countenance us in all our ways and
proceedings, and we may find him propitious to us on all occasions.

That Is the use we ought to make of what has been said.

1. First, Let every one of us, being convinced of these Truths, and seriously
reflecting on them, resolve to consult the safety and happiness of the Kingdom,
of which we are Members; by betaking our selves hereafter to a religious course
of life, in all holiness and righteousness all our days. Let us begin it this
day; by making it a day, not only of humiliation, but of serious and unfeigned
repentance. Let it conclude in solemn Resolutions of amendment of life. That,
as by Wickedness this Nation has been laid low, and made despicable in the
eyes of all our Neighbors; who neither loved nor feared us, because we had
forsaken both our own, and their true Interest: so we may raise the Reputation
of it, and make it great, eminent and illustrious, by the faithful practice of
true Religion and Virtue.

2. And let us not only make this Resolution, but make it good: by calling it
often to mind; by representing to our selves the advantages of sincere piety,
even in this present life; by settling this persuasion in our mind, that it is
the Interest of the Nation to be religious. Which cannot fail to sway our
affection to it: and what we love, we always pursue till we have attained it.
If we love then our selves, if we love our Nation, if we love their Majesty's,
our Government, our Country; we shall love righteousness.

3. And since Righteousness exalts a Nation, it is our interest to do all we
can to exalt righteousness, and advance it to the greatest height; by being
zealous of good works. We have been very zealous for things of little moment,
in comparison with the weighty matters of God's Laws; very zealous to undo one
another, and to ruin our Country: Let us now be as zealous for our common
safety and preservation, by bending our most earnest endeavors, to provoke one
another to love and to good works; to be sincerely good our selves, and to make
others so likewise, as much as lies in our power: That is, devoutly pious;
strictly just and merciful; temperate and sober; diligent and industrious in
our several Callings and Offices; public spirited; zealously concerned for the
common good; kindly affectioned one to another in brotherly love; forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against any; as earnest against revenge, as
perhaps we have been for it; studying the things that make for peace; laboring
to convince men of their errors, with the meekness of wisdom; bearing with
those whom we cannot convince; by no means quarrelling one with another about
different Opinions: but joining with one heart, and one Soul, for the defense
of our Religion, and our Country; our Laws and Liberties.

Then we may promise to our selves the Divine Protection and Blessing: God will
make us great and powerful: and we shall tread upon the necks of our Enemies.
He will hear our Prayers which we have now made unto him (and I hope will
continue to make every day, because nothing, as you have heard, can prosper
without his Blessing) for the safety of Their Majesty's, and the Success of
Their Arms, in Their present great Undertaking for the necessary defense of
Their People. We need not fear what man can do unto us; no, nor fear the arrows
of the Almighty, I mean the raging Pestilence; nor devouring Fire; nor that
Flood neither, which St. John saw the Dragon pour out of his mouth, to drown
the Church; that is, Popish Persecution.

That grand Oppressor, who has raised himself by methods, quite contrary to
this of Solomon; and, as if he intended to disprove the truth of God's word,
has endeavored to exalt his Nation, by nothing but Fraud and Forgery,
Perfidiousness and Perjury, by breaking his Faith, and violating Leagues and
Solemn Treaties, by Wrong and Robbery, nay, by the utmost degree of Cruelty and
Barbarity; this haughty Oppressor, I say, who has ruined many other Countries
as well as his own, shall not be able to hurt us: But God will succeed their
Majesty's in the War wherein we are now engaged against him, and make them go
on prosperously, because of truth, meekness and righteousness.

For since that Nation has so highly affronted the Divine Majesty (as well as
abused all Mankind with whom they have had to do) as sure as God is in Heaven,
he will lay them low: because they have been so Atheistical, as to advance
themselves by all manner of Falsehood and Treachery, Injustice and Cruelty;
having mocked at those Virtues (Truth and Honesty, etc.) without which the World
cannot subsist, but must be turned into a Wilderness.

We cannot appoint Times and Seasons unto the Almighty Wisdom: but if the
universal desire of all Nations could prevail with God, we might be confident
the time is come, wherein he will bring down the high looks of the proud (if I
may apply the words of the Psalmist to this matter) and save the poor afflicted
people, upon whom he has trampled with scornful pride and cruelty.

He and his Adherents cannot long prosper, one would think, by such impious
Politics, as they have practiced: but the righteous Lord, who sits in the
Throne, judging right; will make all the World see by the judgment he will
execute upon them, that he loves the righteous; but the wicked and him that
loves violence, his soul hates. Upon the wicked he will rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be their portion to drink.

But suppose God should defer this Vengeance for some time, and suffer him to
be a further scourge to a sinful World; nay, should let him be the rod of his
anger to chastise us for our ingratitude to him: yet these three things are
certainly true.

1. First, That he will not always bear with impious Oppressors: but though
hand join in hand (as Solomon speaks, xi. 21. though one oppressor join to help
another) the wicked shall not go unpunished.

2. And that Punishment will be very terrible when it comes. For though mercy
will soon pardon the meanest (as it is in the Book of Wisdom, vi. 4.) yet
mighty men shall be mightily tormented; because being Ministers of his Kingdom,
they abused his Power, and that wantonly; having abundant means to please
themselves, without doing the least hurt unto others.

3. And this Comfort, in the mean time, may be administered unto all those who
have amended their lives, and grown better by God's former Judgments, or by our
late Deliverance; that they will find God favorable unto them, to protect and
deliver them, in the needful time of trouble, should it please him to let it
come again to try them. So we are assured by this Wiseman; who has left us
Instructions of this kind also. You may find a great many together in the
beginning of the Eleventh Chapter, v. 3, 4, 5, 6. which are all I shall
mention: The integrity of the upright shall guide them; but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of wrath; but
righteousness delivers from death. The righteousness of the perfect shall
direct his way; but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness. The
righteousness of the upright shall deliver them; but transgressors shall be
taken in their own naughtiness. The Sense of all which is this, That the
highest Wisdom, is to be sincerely good. There is no Policy, comparable to
perfect Integrity: Which in difficult times will guide and direct a man unto
the surest way for his preservation: When nothing else will secure him; but
contrary Courses inevitably lead him unto his ruin.

God, of his Infinite Mercy, grant, That as we understand these things, so we
may consider them, and lay them to heart; yea, lay them up in our heart, and
reflect upon them as frequently as they are repeated in this Book; that we may
make them the rule of our actions, and trust to them as the most certain way to
Safety and Security (if not Prosperity) in this World; as well as to Eternal
Felicity in a better Life.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 1, 2. r. this word. Page 13. l. 10. r. Neighbors.

Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted, by several London Divines, 4o. With a Table to the whole, and the
Authors Names. An Exposition of the Ten Commandments, by Dr. Simon Patrick, now
Lord Bishop of Chichester. The Lay Christian's Obligation to read the Holy
Scriptures: By Dr. Stratford, now Lord Bishop of Chester. The Texts which the
Papists cite out of the Bible for proof of the Points of their Religion,
examined, and showed to be alleged without ground. In twenty five distinct
Discourses; by several London Divines, with a Table to the whole, and the
Authors Names. The Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered;
in a Letter from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o. Two
Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Simon Patrick,
D. D. now Lord Bishop of Chichester. Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before
the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689. An Examination of the Scruples of those who
refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England. A
Dialogue between two Friends, a Jacobite, and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance. The Case of Oaths
Stated, 4o. Mr. Strypes Sermon at the Assizes at Hertford, July 8. 1689. A
Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the present
Revolution. 4o. The Advantages of the Present Settlement, and the great danger
of a Relapse. The Interest of England in the preservation of Ireland. A short
View of the Unfortunate Reigns of these Kings, William the 2d. Henry the 2d.
Edward the 2d. Richard the 2d. Charles the 2d. and James the 2d. Dr. Sherlock's
Summary of the Controversies between the Church of England and Church of Rome.
The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. Dr. Wake's Proparation for
Death. -- His Tracts and Discourses against Popery, in two Vol. 4o. -- His
twelve Sermons and Discourses, on several Occasions. 8o. The Devout
Communicant, assisted with Rules for the worthy Receiving: Together with
Meditations, Prayers, Anthems, for every Day in the Holy Week. Valentine's
private Devotions, digested into fix Litanies, with Directions and Prayers for
the Lord's Day, Sacrament, day of Death and judgment. Bishop Burnet's Sermon
before the King and Queen on Christmasday, 1689. -- His Sermon of Peace and
Union, Nov. 26. 1689. -- His Fast-Sermon at (...) Church, March 12. (...). Some
Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont. By
P. Allix, D. D. 4o. Geologia Or, A Discourse concerning the Earth before the
Deluge, wherein the Form and Properties aserihed to it, in a Book entitled [
The Theory of the Earth] are excepred against. And it is made appear, That the
Dissolution of that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new
Explication of that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Worlington
in Suffolk A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times A Thanksgiving for
our late wonderful Deliverance: [recommended chiefly to those who have made use
of the Prayer in the late difficult Times] A Prayer for perfecting our late
Deliverance by the happy Success of their Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land. A
Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity, chifley to be used in Lant. Dr. Tenison's
Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms, 12o. -- His Fast-Sermon before the House
of Commons June 5 1689. -- His Sermon concerning doing Good to Postery.
Preached before Their Majesty's at Whitehall, on Feb. 16. 1689 / 90. Dr. Wake's
Lent-Sermon before the Queen, April 2. 1690.
An Advertisement.
THere is newly Printed, A Large Folio Bible of a fair new Roman Letter, with
Annotations, and Parallel Scriptures or References (some Thousands more than
are in the Cambridge, Oxford, or any London Bibles yer Extant) To which is
annexed, The Harmony of the Gospels: As also a Reduction of the Jewish Weights,
Coins and Measures, to our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in
Scripture.

In One entire Volume, containing Three hundred twenty five Shoets in Good Demi
Paper. Proposed by the Booksellers undermentioned on these Terms, viz.

I. He that Buys only one Book, to pay Twenty five Stillings Unbound.

II He that Buys Six Books, shall have a Seventh Gratis; which reduces the
Price to a Guinea Unbound.

Which Terms are to continue until the First of July next: But after that, no
seventh Book will be allowed, nor a single Book fold under Twenty seven
Shillings Unbound.

Richard Chiswell, Jonathan Robinson, both in St. Paul's Churchyard* Brabazon
Aylmer against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.


