THE DECLARATION OR, MANIFESTO OF George Racokzkie, Prince of Transylvania, to
the STATES and PEERS of HVNGARIE;

Together With the reasons added thereunto of his modern taking up of Arms the
17. of February, Anno 1644.

George Racokzkie by the Grace of God, Prince of Transylvania, Lord of a part
of the Kingdom of HVNGARIE, and Count of ZEKELLA.

London Printed for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Angel, May 28. 1644.

The Declaration or Manifesto OF George Racokzkie, Prince of Transylvania, to
the States and Peers of Hungary: George Racokzkie by the grace of God, Prince
of Transylvania, Lord of a part of the Kingdom of Hungary, and Count of
ZEKELLA;
To the right Honorable and right Worshipful; Our well-beloved LORDS and
GENTRY, Greeting.

HOw precious, and of what high esteem there be with every one the liberty of
the soul and body, hereof we need not to seek afar off many examples, nor to
write thereof to your Lordships in many words. The modern state and condition
of the Occidentall Provinces, does sufficiently testify it; which, to reduce
the aforesaid inestimable good to it is ancient State and condition, have
counted for nothing all other Temporal and precious goods; yea with hazarding,
and quite losing their own lives, do not cease as yet to fight for it. How
seriously also the Countries of Portugal and Catalonia, who sat under the
Spanish power, and taken up A^mes not in defense of the liberty of their
souls, but only in defense of their temporal liberty do labor and endeavor
to settle the same in the former condition of liberty, is not unknown to your
Lordships, especially my Countryman, the Hungarian, how much blood they have
shed for it, yea how many of them have suffered death so^it, We have sufficient
examples thereof. What troubles and miseries O^ Nation* especially sinc^ ^he
year 1619. has suffered in this case, hereof whole bundles of letters full of
complaints are to be found with us. How often also* We have not only been
admonished, but also quite forced, as well by the Protestants, as by the Roman
Catholics, that We at last would awaken, and remedy the grievances, because
otherwise, if the oppression of the privileges and liberties should further
increase and enlarge it self, Our Children and Posterity would be forced to
possess a Kingdom hereafter, that had lost all Liberty. We have been desired
also by some of the high Officers and Ministers of the Crown which have
discovered unto Us, that the Clergy intends to make the Kingdom of Hungary
hereditarie Subject to the House of Austria, and withal strives to domineer
both Spiritually and Temporally over the fellow Members of their Religion, and
to keep them under. It is not unknown to your Lordships, how many complaints
there have bin made against those last Wills and Testament, that have bin forced
from some, and thereby the lands and goods of the right natuall heir been
alienated? The Clergy has begun also to impropriate unto it self the chiefest
Offices and places in the Frontier Towns of the Kingdom, and thus to pull
fully out of the hands of the Temporal States and Peers, that small
Prerogative which they had left unto them: But what shall I say of the washing
of the common Revenues of the whole Kingdom, and then the ruin following
thereupon, which however must concern also the Clergy it self.

With what swiftness or tricks also the Jesuits are crept into the Kingdom to
the utmost ruin of the liberty thereof, and of the Protestant Religion (which
by all means and ways is expressed) and with what unjustnesse also in the
Frontier Towns themselves, those, that have Iura Pa^r^natus in the Churches,
are troubled: hereof your Lordships have sufficiently been informed.

One of the Spiritual Prelates also, who is yet living with His Imperial
Majesty's knowledge, has desired Us also by a confiding person, and in His
Imperial Majesty's name, promised unto Us to turn over also all Our lands and
goods situated in the Kingdom of Hungary, to Our Heirs and Successors (which
are as yet pawned to Us till they are redeemed) (...) to show unto Us yet
greater and more graces and favor if We (...) o^^y give Our assent unto it,
that Hungary might be an Hereditary Kingdom to the house of Austria, but
whereas neither* Our Conscience nor also the zeal and love we bear to Our
Hungarian nation could give way to it, We returned unto him that answer, as
has been see m^g to an Hungarian Prince loving his native Country, and
desining the liberty of his Country.

Concerning the authority of the Palatine, it was laid thus, that nothing but
the mere name was left to that office; though He do solicit something for the
good of the Country, yet he labors in vain, yea withal is prohibited to do
it. How zealous the Protestant States and Peers as well in particular as in
general have been in the Diet, Anno 1638. to solicit that their grievances
might be redressed, but what effect after diverse great charges and expenses
your Lordships have seen thereof, and enjoyed indeed, is sufficiently manifest
unto every one.

The decree which His Imperial Majesty caused to be imparted to the Protestant
States and Peers, is in Sp^ci^ in Our hands* but that notwithstanding hereupon
diverse Churches and Ministers houses have bin taken away, and the Ministers
driven out of them; to repeat all would require a great deal more of time.

If we now consider the violation of Our corporal liberties, We find it, that
the offices and places are conferred upon no Protestant fellow-Member of the
Country, neither are they preserred to any higher dignity, and if by chance
one or other attains thereunto, yet he has no honor, trust and credit with
them. Moreover also though the Protestants have good right or claim to some
requisition, yet they labor to hinder therein in one or other way: Yea it
happened also, that one that pretended a just cause to his Lands,
notwithstanding by reason of a pretended contrad^ction, went in extreme danger
of his life about it.

When the 13 Counties in General in the year 1640. 641. 643. petitioned his
Imperial Majesty and the Lord Palatine for the redressing of their
Grievances, what benefit and profit got your Lordships by it? yea what unkind
entertainment your Lordships Deputies had for demanding of their just cause,
and with what sharp and bitter words they have been sent away again* your
Lordships have still in fresh memory; all which, how justly We took it to
heart, so as well Our conscience, as also our duty ^o the glory and serv^ce of
God, and the love and zeal to the Liberty of Our native Country and Nation
required Us, yea by some of the Protestant States and Peers also, and not
less by some of the Roman Catholics, We have been exhorted upon Our souls
salvation, and in a manner been forced, that for defense of their Liberties We
would rise.

Wherefore We could suffer this no longer, nor see the apparent ruin and
perdition of Our native Country and the oppression of Our Nation, which before
had tried all means how these inconveniences by fair means might have been
remedied: What answer also have We lately returned to the Lord Keri Ianosh upon
the request made unto Us in His Imperial Majesty's name: How earnestly We have
entreated and desired, and what We have offered, your Lordships have
sufficiently understood by the said answer, whereof a true Copy We have
already here before sent to your Lordships.

We take God the Lord the sea^cher of all hearts to Our witness, and We dare
write it also to your Lordships in very truth, that We have taken up Arms not
for Our own profit, nor out of a desire of revenge, neither also for those
manifold wrongs and injuries done unto Us not lastly out of an intention to
reform or persecute Religion much less to extirpate (...): But that We only
intend to Erect again the Statutes and (...) of ^he Kingdom, to Reestablish
the same, and to proceed accor^i^g (...) same, insomuch that every one without
fear, trouble let or (...)* openly may profess and exercise that same wherein
his (...) appeased, and thereby also safely to enjoy the corporal Lib^r^^,
be^a^^e ^o Domineere and Rule over Consciences does not belong to (...), bu^ ^o
God alone.

But being our dear God has already graciously turned off from us many
hindrances, which herein principally have hitherto stood in our way, yea also
drawn to Us the Outlandish hearts; We must needs conceive thereby that i^ is
Gods will ^^d providence, that to the service of his glory We shall proce^^ the
Liberty of Our Native Country, whereof the glory ^ill be ^endered ^o God and
not to men. And We believe therefore firmly* that his divine Majesty without
all doubt will grace this Design with happy desired issue, and ^^o^ne it with
a joyful end.

Wherefore We de^^e and exhort your Lordships friendly, that you will be
pleased in a zealous consideration, that for your Lordships good, and upon the
desire and request of many amongst you We are risen from Our peaceable
Government and wholly quiet Native Country, and taken up Arms, to afford your
helping hands to the furtherance of this Work, being in it self well pleasing
to God Almighty, that will tend to the benefit and profit not only of your
Lordships, but also of the whole Country, and of all the grieved Inhabitants
thereof. And withal in this case to show their love and zeal as well toward
God, as toward the Protestant Religion and the Liberty of their Native
Country; and as soon as you have received these letters, to send unto Us one
of your good Friends and Fellow-Brethren, and thus to join with Us unanimously
in the commendable furtherance and expedition of this work.

We assure all persons, of what degree or quality soever they be, by Our true
Christian Faith and Truth, that in no way We will disturb or oppress
Religion, nor also that We have any intention to offend or trouble in the least
way Our dear Native Country and Nation, and so all and every one of you in
General either now or in suture time in any R^ght, Liberty, or Immunitie, but
rather that your Lordships according to your pleasure may safely live, and yet
further rejoice in those precious Privileges which have been obtained long
ago with much blood.

No man shall also think, that if perhaps one or other has done and showed
here before any wrong to Us, or committed any thing against Us whatsoever it
be, We would revenge Our self on him, and thus bear an ill will in Our heart
for a future punishment; but rather that all and every the like wrong shall be
buried in a perpetual oblivion as if it had never happened or been done. We
admonish therefore all and every one of what degree or quality soever he be,
that no man retire out of the Country to another place, or forsake his Lands or
Goods: for if by chance such (which We do not hope) should be found, and We
should be forced to seize upon their Goods, they may attribute the fault and
loss which thereby they may receive to no man else, but to themselves.

But in case your Lordships (against all hope and expectation) should offer to
do contrary to that what has been said above, We will protest hereby before
God and his holy Angels, that We are not the cause of the ruin and destruction
which thereby will fall upon them; for otherwise We should be forced also to
draw to Us so much the more stronger Aid, and the greater number of Soldiers
from Our High and Mighty Emperor, if your Lordships should oppose Us in the
defense of Our Native Country, and not accommodate your selves unto Us, which
We will not hope.

The God Almighty who rules and governes all the hearts, do thus rule and
direct the hearts and minds of your Lordships that you do unanimously every
one, putting in the mean time out of his mind all other respects, afford unto
Us your helping hands, for the obtaining of that wherein consists every ones
true proper benefit and profit, that, after that We have finished this happy
work, and every one of Us attained to His intention, both you and your whole
Posterity may safely and peaceably enjoy both spiritual and corporal liberty
till unto the end of the World, Amen. Given at Our Castle Calow the 17th of
February, Anno 1644.

Georgius Racokzkio

This is Printed according to Order.


