C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by the
English lion and Scottish unicorn
A PROCLAMATION
Declaring Mr. Richard Cameron, and others, Rebels and Traitors, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren, Heralds, Macers, Pursevants and
Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly, and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as Mr. Richard Cameron, (...) Cameron his Brother, Mr. Thomas
Douglas, Mr. Donald Cargill, and others their Accomplices, Have now at last
shaken off all respect to Our Laws, and their Allegiance it self to Us their
undoubted Sovereign, and have entered into express and open Combinates and
Covenants, wherein they most Sacrilegiously do by a solemn Oath, Engage
themselves to disown Us and Our Authority, and declare it not only lawful,
but a Christian duty upon all Our Subjects to rise in Arms against Us, and to
Murder such as are in any Trust or Employment under Us, declaring Us an
Usurper, and that none should obey them who are in Authority under Us, but such
as would obey the Devil and his Vicegerents; and that they will choose and set
up Magistrates, who shall govern them according to the Judicial Law of Moses,
and not according to the Laws made by Us or any of Our Predecessors. Which
Covenant, with several most Impious, Scandalous, and Seditious Pamphlets, were
taken from the said Mr. Donald Cargil, (one of their Preachers) at the Queens
Ferry, upon the Third day of June instant. Likeas, the said Mr. Richard
Cameron, and his Brother, and Mr. Thomas Douglas, accompanied with several
Russians, and particularly John Vallang, Brother-in-Law to Robert Park, one of
the Bailiffs of Sanquhar, Daniel Mackmitchel in Lorgfoot, Thomas Campbel, Son
to (...) Campbel late of Dalblair in Auchinleck Paroch, John Moodie, Brother to
the Miller at Cubs-Milne in the same Paroch, John Fowller, sometimes servant to
the deceast (...) Lindsay of Covingtown, Patrick Gemill, Son-in law to Charles
Logan, Messenger at Cumnock maines, James Stewart, Son to Archibald Stewart at
Calsey-end, near to the Earl of Galloway's House, Alexander Gordown, called of
Kilsture, Francis Johnstoun Merchant in Clidsdale, (...) Creichtown, Son to
Robert Creichtown of Achtitinch, now in Water-head, and others to the number of
twenty one persons, did upon the twenty two of June, enter within the Burgh of
Sanquhar, with drawn Swords and Pistols in their hands, and after a solemn
procession through the Town, did draw up at the Cross, and published and
affixed upon the Cross, and other public places thereof: a most Treasonable
and unparralelled Paper, disowning Us to be their King, and defaming Us with
the very same Names and Designations used by the Usurpers in their greatest
rage after they had Murdered the King, our Royal and blessed Father of eternal
memory, and overturned all the Fundamental Laws and Rights belonging to Us and
Our Subjects, whose Principles and Footsteps they exactly renew and follow: The
reading and affixing of which Proclamation by these Traitors and Rebels, being
clearly proved to Our Privy Council by Witnesses upon Oath; and it being notour
and undeniable, that these Traitors, to the number of seventy, or thereby,
continue in Arms, committing all manner of Outrages and Insolences. We have
therefore, with Advice of our Privy Council, thought fit, as use is in such
cases, to declare the said Mr. Richard Cameron, (...) Cameron his Brother, Mr.
Thomas Douglas, Mr. Donald Cargill, John Vallang, Daniel Mackmitchel, Thomas
Campbel, John Mudy, Patrick Gemill, James Stewart, Alexander Gordown, Francis
Johnstown, and (...) Creichtown, open and notorious Tratiors and Rebels against
Us and Our Authority, impowering and requiring all Our good Subjects to treat
them as such. And particularly, We hereby require and command all Our good
Subjects, as they will be answerable upon their Allegiance, to do their utmost
diligence to discover the said Traitors, and to give timous Intimation with all
possible speed, in case they be not able to seize and apprehend them
themselves, to the nearest Officer of Our standing Forces, (if any be within
twelve Miles) and if none be within the said distance, to the next Magistrate,
commanding all persons to concur with Our Forces for apprehending the said
Traitors. And to the effect, the Harbourers and Resetters, or those who neglect
to discover them, may be known and punished, We do require the hail Heretors,
or their Bailiffs or Chamberlands, in case of the Heretors absence, to cause
call and cite before them in a Court, all persons living upon their respective
Lands, Men or Women, above the age of sixteen years, in all the Paroches
underwritten, viz. Carsfern, Balmaclellan, Dalry, Kells, Bar in Carrick, the
Moor Kirk of Kyle, Galstown, Lowdon, Tindergarth, Streven, Lesmehago, Sanquher,
Irongray, Glencairn, Cumnock, Monigaff, and Penningham, upon the second and
last Tuesdays of July and August next. And to take the Oaths of all the said
persons living upon the respective Lands, whether any of these Traitors
foresaid were in that Paroch, and where and when: and lest they may pretend not
to know the said Traitors, that they discover upon Oath any skulking or
lurking persons which they have known to have been in that Paroch, after the
Publication hereof in the respective shires; and the Heretors or their Bailiffs
and Chamberlands in their absence, to give an account of their diligence in
Writing, within eight days after each Diet foresaid, to the Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Bailiffs of Regalities, Magistrates of Burghs, and shall adjoyn thereto the
following Declaration upon Oath.

I (...) do solemnly swear by the Eternal God, that I have truly and faithfully
examined upon Oath, the whole Persons Men and Women living upon my Lands who
compeared, who are above the age of sixteen Years, whereof I am Heretor,
Bailiff, or Chamberlain, within the Paroch of and that I caused my Officers
give Execution upon Oath, that he did cite all the said Persons to the
foresaids Diets, and have given an account of the Persons who compeared not, or
compearing, refused to give Oath. And in case the said Traitors should leave
and dishaunt the abovenamed Paro^hes, and repair to other Parochs or places,
that immediately upon notice from the Lieutenant General, or any authorized by
him to the Sheriffs and other Magistrates of the respective Burghs, where from
time to time they resort, the said Magistrates are ordained to make intimation
of the Hereots of their Bailiffs, or their Chamberlains in their absence, to
the end they may make the same enquiry after the same way and method, and to
return an account of their diligence within two Months after such Intimation
from the Lieutenant General as aforesaid; with certification to such as compear
not and Depone, shall be holden and repute as connivers at, and concealers, of
the said Traitors; and that the Heretors, or in their absence their Bailiffs
and Chamberlains who shall not return their accounts to the said respective
Magistrates as aforesaid, or their Deputs, and the said Magistrates who shall not
return their accounts to our Council the first Council day in August, for their
diligence in July, and the first Council day of September for their diligence
in August, shall be proceeded against with all rigor, as connivers at, and
concealers of the said Traitors. And further, We do hereby require and command
all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities, and Magistrates of Burghs where
the said Traitors use to haunt or resort, to raise such persons in their
respective Jurisdictions, as they shall find necessar for that Service, for
whom they will be answerable; and that the Sheriffs and other Magistrates
foresaids, require the assistance of the Commissioners of the Militia, in their
respective Jurisdictions: And to search for, take and apprehend the said
Traitors in their respective bounds; and in case they fly forth thereof, to
advertise the Neighboring, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates who are appointed to
do the like diligence, conform to the 144. Act 12. Par. K. Ja. 6. And if in
pursuit of the said Traitors they resisting to be taken, any of Our said
Magistrates, or other Our good Subjects shall happen to kill or mutilat them, or
any of them, We do hereby declare that they nor none assisting them shall ever
be called in question, or pursued Civilly or Criminally therefore in time
coming; but that these Presents shall be as sufficient for their exoneration,
as if they had Our special Remission, and that their doing thereof shall be
repute good and acceptable service done to Us. And for the better encouragement
of such as shall apprehend and bring in the said Traitors dead or alive, the
Apprehender of Mr. Richard Cameron shall, as a Reward, have five thousand
Merks; and for Mr. Thomas Douglas, M. Donald Cargil, and for the said (...)
Cameron, brother to M. Richard, who read and affixt the said Traitorous
Declaration at Sanqhuar, three thousand Merks for each of them, and one
thousand Merks for each one of the rest of the Traitors abovementioned, to be
instantly paid to them by the Commissioners of our Thesaurary. And ordains
these Presents to be Printed, and published at the Market Crosses of Edinburg,
and Market Crosses of the remnant head Burghs of the several Shires of this
Kingdom on the South Side of the Water of Tay, and other places needful, by the
Sheriffs of the respective Shires foresaid, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under our Signet at Edinburg, the last day of June, One thousand six
hundred and eighty, and of our Reign the thirty two Year. Per Actum Dominorum
Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Council.

Reprinted at London, for Andrew Forrester in Kingstreet, Westminster, Anno
Dom. 1680.


