portrait of Count Gondamor The right honorable Diego Sarmiento de Acna Earl
of Gondomor Extraordinary Ambassador From the Catholic king of Spain to his
Majesty the king of great Britannie.

Ao. 1622. jusculptum a Simone Passeo eidemque Comin DD. Are to be sold by
Thomas Jennier



A CHOICE NARRATIVE OF Count Gondamor's TRANSACTONS DURING HIS EMBASSY IN
ENGLAND.

By that Renowned Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet.

Exposed to public Light, for the Benefit of the whole NATION.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for John Garfield, at the Printing Press for Pictures, near
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, over against Pope's Head Alley, 1659.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir William Pastons, Knight, and Baronet.
SIR,
THe general Voice is, That You are a great Lover of Rarities, whence it is
that I Dedicate this to You, and I hope You will make my Apology Your self,
with that of Seneca, Non male meruit, sed been judicavit: The Age is full of
voluminous Books that are able to make the Reader nauseate, were he not
recreated by diversion; This I present You with, is but small, yet were it
wyer*drawn to its full length, it would make a huge Volume: For it includes the
Actions of King James, Earl Gondamor, Bishop Bancroft, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
some other Famous Men, of whom several Histories might be compiled: I may
compare it to Gold, that in a small quantity is of more worth than a great deal
of base Coin, for it comprehends much Matter in a few Words. And for the
farther Commendation, it bears in the Frontispiece the Name of that ever Famous
Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton, who was never wont to treasure up any thing but
what was Rare; nor can I certainly say, whether it were Penned by Himself or
not. I insist the more upon Him, because it was my chance to be one whom he
vouchsafed to take by the Hand a little before his Death, I being sent to him
by my Lord Privy Seal, to acquaint him that by my Lords Mediation, the King
was Reconciled to him: but his Answer was, That his Heart was broken, and that
it was now too late: Whereby it appears that Princes are sometimes abused, and
misinformed, to the Ruin of the best Men. Sir Walter Rawleighs unfortunate
end proves the same, who was circumvented by the cunning Practices of Earl
Gondamor, whereby to the unspeakable detriment of Posterity, he was prevented
from setting forth the Second Part to complete the Worlds History, which he
had made ready for the Press. Gondamor is yet fresh in Memory of many Men, who
knew him when he lay Leiger here from the King of Spain; and I never heard or
read of any Ambassador that acted his part with more dexterity for his Masters
glory and advantage than he did, for however he had to deal with a very wise
Prince (as he says) yet like another Mercury he could soon with his facetious
words and gestures pipe King James a sleep, and did sometimes take hold of the
Helm himself, and was very near to have run the Ship a ground, or to have split
her upon the Rocks, the influence of his ill Aspect, and Eclipsing the
Sunbeams is hardly over unto this present Age. Don Caro Columbus who was sent
hither, was thought by many judicious Men, to be the more Prudent, and that
Gondamor was but a Buffon compared with him: yet when he departed, he was fain
to leave this Motto behind him, Revertar, emplying, That he had not
accomplished what he came about: but Gondamor put a Period to what he had
Designed; and perhaps it had been better for our Nation if that Politic
Spaniard had never tr^d upon English ground. I should be injurious to Your
Patience if I should detain You longer in the Suburbs: Therefore I hasten to
subscribe my self,

Your Worships very humble Servant, John Rowland.

A CHOICE NARRATIVE OF Count Gondamor's TRANSACTIONS During his Embassy in
ENGLAND.
HIs Catholic Majesty had given Commandment, that presently upon the return
of Signior Gondamor, his Leiger Ambassador from England, (1618.) a special
Meeting of all the principal States of Spain, (who were of his Council)
together with the Presidents of the Council of Castile, of Aragon, of Italy, of
Portugal, of the Indies, of the Treasure, of War, and especially of the holy
Inquisition, should be held at Mouson in Aragon, the Duke of Lerma being
appointed President, who should make declaration of his Masters pleasure, take
account of the Ambassadors service, and consult touching the State and
Religion respectively, to give satisfaction to his Holiness Nuncio, who was
desired to make one in this Assembly, concerning certain Overtures of Peace and
Amity with the English, and other Catholic Projects which might engender
suspicion and jealousy betwixt the Pope and his Majesty, if the mystery were
not unfolded and the ground of these Counsels discovered aforehand.

This made all men expect the Ambassadors return, with a kind of longing that
they might behold the issue of this meeting, and see what good for the
Catholic cause the Ambassadors employment had effected in England, answerable
to the general opinion conceaved of his wisdom, and what further project would
be set on foot to become matter for public discourse; At length he arrived and
had present notice given him from his Majesty, that before he came to the Court
he should give up his account to this Assembly, which Command he gladly
received as an earnest of his acceptable service, and gave thanks that for his
honor he might publish himself in so judicious a presence; he came first on the
day appointed to the Council Chamber, (except the Secretaries) not long after
all the Council of State and their Presidents met, there wanted only the Duke
of Lerma, and the Popes Nuncio, who were the head and feet of all the Assembly.

These two stayed long away for diverse respects, the Nuncio, that he might
express the greatness of his Master, and lose the Sea of Rome, no respect by
his oversight, but that the Benches might be full to observe him at his
approach. The Duke of Lerma to express the authority and dignity of his own
person, and to show how a servant put in place of his Master, exacts more duty
of his fellow servants then the Master himself; these two stayed till all the
rest were weary of waiting, but at length the Nuncio supposing all the Council
set, lanched forth and came to road in the Council chamber, where after mutual
discharge of duty from the Company, and blessing upon it from him, he sat down
in sollemn silence grieving at his oversight, when he saw the Duke of Lerma
absent, with whom he strove as a Competitor for pomp and glory.

The Duke had sent before, and understood of the Nuncio's being there, and
stayed something the longer that his boldness might be observed, wherein he had
his desire, for the Nuncio having a while patiently driven away the time with
several complements, to several persons, had now almost run his Court-ship out
of breath, but that the Duke of Villa Hermosa, President of the Council of
Aragon, fed his humor by the discharge of his own coffeehouse, upon
occasion of the Duke of Lerma his absence, and beckned Signior Gondomor to him,
using this speech in the hea^ing of the Nuncio, after a sporting manner; how
unhappy are the people where you have been, first for their souls, being
Heretics, then for their estates, where the name of a Favorite is so
familiar; how happy is our state where the Keys of life and death are so
easily come by, (pointing at the Nuncio) hanging at every Religious girdle, and
where the doors of Justice and Mercy, stand equally open to all men without
respect of persons; The Ambassador knew his Ironical stroke to be intended
only as a by-blow at the Nuncio, but fully at the Duke of Lerma, (whose
greatness begun now to wax heavy toward declension) and therefore he returns
this answer.

Your Excellency knows, the estate is happy where wise Favorites govern
Kings, if the Kings themselves be foolish, or where wise Kings are, who having
Favorites, either foolish, or the wiser sort, will not yet be governed by
them. The State of England (howsoever you hear of it in Spain or Rome) is too
happy in the last kind, they need not care what the Favorite be, though for
the most part he prevent all kind of suspicion in that kind, being chosen
rather as a Scholar to be taught* and trained up, then as a Tutor to teach: Of
this they are sure no Prince exceeds theirs in personal abilities; so that
nothing could be added to him in my wish, but this one, that he were our vassal
and a Catholic. With that the noise without gave notice of the Duke of Lerma's
entrance, at whose first approach the whole house arose, though some later then
other, as envy had hung Plummets on them to keep them down; the Nuncio only
sat unmoved, the Duke cherished the observance of the rest with a familiar
kind of carriage, too high for courtesy as not neglecting their demeanors, but
expecting it, and after a filial obeisance to the Pope his Nuncio, sat down as
President under the cloth of Estate, but somewhat lower, then after a space
given for admiration, preparation, and attention, he began to speak in this
manner.

The King my Master (holding it more honor to do, then to discourse, to take
from you the expectation of Oratory, used rather in Pulpits and Schools then in
Councils,) has appointed me President in this holy, wise, learned, and noble
assembly, a man naturally of a slow speech, and not desirous to quicken it, by
Art or Industry; as holding action only proper to a Spaniard as I am by birth,
to a Soldier as I am by profession, to a King, as I am by representation; take
this therefore briefly, for declaration both of the cause of this meeting, and
my Master his further pleasure.

There has been in all times since the worlds foundation, one chief Commander
or Monarch upon the earth, this needs no further proof then a back looking into
our own memories and Histories of the world; neither now is there any question
(except with Infidels and Heretics,) of their own chief Commander in
Spirituals, in the unity of whose person, the members of the visible Church are
included. But there is some doubt of the chief Commander in Temporals, who as
the Moon to the Sun might govern by night, as this by day, and by the Sword of
Justice, compel to come in, or cut off, such as infringe the authority of the
Keys: This has been so well understood long since by the infallible Chair, as
that thereby upon the declension of the Roman Empire, and the increase of Romes
Spiritual splendour, (who thought it unnatural that their Sun should be
sublunary) our Nation was by the Bishop of Rome, selected before other People,
to conquer and rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. And our King to that end
adorned with the Title of Catholic King, as a name above all names under the
Sun (which is) under Gods Vicar General himself, the Catholic Bishop of souls;
to instance this point by comparison; look first upon the grand Signior, the
great Turk, who has a large Title but not universal, for besides that he is an
Infidel, his command is confined within his own Territories, and he styled not
Emperor of the World, but of the Turk and their Vassals only. Amongst
Christians, the Defender of the Faith, was a glorious Style, whilst the King,
to whom it was given by his Holiness, continued worthy of it, but he stood not
in the Truth, neither yet those that succeed him, and beside it was no great
thing to be called, what every Christian ought to be, Defender of the Faith, no
more then to be styled with France, the most Christian King, wherein he has
the greatest part of his Title common with most Christians; the Emperor of
Rome, Russia, Germany, extend not their limits further than their styles which
are local, only my Master the most Catholic King, is for dominion of bodies,
as the universal Bishop for dominion of souls, over that part of the World
which we call America (except where the English intruders usurp) and the
greatest part of Europe, with some part of Asia, and Africa, by actual
possession, and over all the rest by real and indubitable right, yet
acknowledges this right to be derived from the free and Fatherly donation of
his Holiness, who as the Sun to the Moon lends luster by reflection to this
Kingdom, to this King, to this King of Kings my Master, what therefore he has
howsoever gotten, he may keep and hold, what he can get from any other King, or
Commander, by any Stratagem of War, or pretense of Peace, he may take, for it
is theirs only by usurpation, except they held of him from whom all civil power
is derived, as ecclesiastical, from his Holiness; what the Ignorant call
Treason, if it be on his behalf is truth, and what they call Truth, if it be
against him is Treason; and thus all our Peace or War, our Treatises,
Marriages, and whatsoever intendment else of ours, aims at this principal end,
to get the whole possession of the World, and to reduce all to unity under one
temporal Head, that our King may truly be what he is styled, the Catholic and
Universal King; as Faith is therefore universal, and the Church is universal,
yet so as it is under one Head the Pope, whose seat is and must necessarily be
at Rome, where Saint Peter sat; So must all men be Subject to our and their
Catholic King, whose particular seat is here in Spain, his universal every
where. This point of State, or rather of Faith, we see the Catholic Roman
Religion has taught every where, and almost made natural; so that by a Key of
Gold, by intelligence, or by way of confession, my Master is able to unlock the
secrets of every Prince, and to withdraw their subjects allegiance, as if they
knew themselves rather my Master his subjects in truth, then theirs, whom their
birth has taught to miscal Sovereign; we see this in France, and in England
especially, where at once they learn both to obey the Church of Rome, as their
Mother, to acknowledge the catholic King as their Father, and to hate their own
King as an Heretic and an Usurper; so we see Religion, and the State are
coupled together; laugh and weep, flourish, and fade, and participate of
eithers fortune growing upon one stock of Policy: I speak this the more boldly
here in this presence, because I speak here before none but Natives, persons
who are partakers both in themselves and issues, of these Triumphs of ancient
Rome, and therefore such as besides their oaths it concerns to be secret;
Neither need we restrain this freedom of speech from the Nuncio his presence,
because besides that, he is a Spaniard by birth, he is a Jessuit by profession
and order, devised by the providence of Gods Vicar, to accomplish this Monarchy
the better, all of them being approriate thereunto* and as public Agents, and
privy Counselors to this end, whereas the wisdom of this state is to be
beheld with admiration, that in temporal Wars, it imployes, or at least trusts
none but Natives; so in Castile, Portugal, or Aragon: so in Spirituals, it
imployes none but the Jesuits, and so imployes them that they be generally
reputed* how remote soever they be from us, how much soever obliged to others,
yet still to be ours, and to be of the Spanish Faction, though they be
Polonians, English, French, and residing in these Countries and Courts; the
penitents therefore, and all with whom they deal and converse in their
spiritual traffic, must needs be so too, and so our Catholic King must needs
have an invisible Kingdom and an unknown number of subjects in all Dominions,
who will show themselves and their Faiths, by their works of disobedience,
whenever we shall have occasion to use that Jesuitical virtue of theirs; this
therefore being the principal end of all our Councils, according to those holy
directions of our late pious King Phillip, the second, to his son now
surviving, to advance the Catholic Roman Religion, and the Catholic Spanish
Dominion together, we are now met by his Majesty's Command, to take an account
of you ( Signior Gondomor) who have been Ambassador for England, to see what
good you have effected there, toward the advancement of this work, and what
further project shall be thought fit to be set on foot to this end, and this is
briefly the occasion of our meeting.

Then the Embassdour who attended bare-headed all the time, with a low
obeisance began thus; this most laudable custom of our Kings, in bringing all
Officers to such an account, where a review and notice is taken of good and bad
service upon the determination of their Employments, resembles those Roman
Triumphs, appointed for the Soldiers, and as in them it provoked to courage,
so in us it stirs up to diligence; our Master converseth by his Agents with all
the World, yet with none of more regard then the English, where matter of much
diversity is often presented through the several humors of the State, and those
of our Religion and Faction, that no instruction can be sufficient for such
negotiations, but much must be left in trust to the discretion, Judgment, and
diligence of the Incumbent: I speak not this for my own glory, I having been
restrained, and therefore deserved meanly, but to forewarn on the behalf of
others, that there may be more scope allowed them to deal in, as occasion shall
require. Briefly this rule delivered by his Excellency, was the Card and
compass, by which I scaled to make profit of all humors, and by all means to
advance the State of the Romish Religion, and the Spanish Faction together,
upon all advantage either of oath or the breach of them, for this an old
observation but a true, that for our piety to Rome, his Holiness did not only
give, but also bless us in the Conquest of the new World; and thus in our pious
perseverance, we hope still to be Conquerors of the old. And to this end
whereas his Excellency, in his excellent discourse, seems to extend our outward
Forces, and private Aims, only against Heretics, and restrain them in true
amity with those of the Romish Religion: This I affirm sure, because there can
be no security, but such Princes as are now Romish Catholics, may turn
Heretics hereafter, my aims have ever been to make profit of all, and to make
my Master, Master of all, who is a faithful and constant son of his Mother
Rome: And to this end I beheld the endeavors of our Kings of happy memory, how
they have archeived Kingdoms and Conquests by this policy, rather then by open
Hostility, and that without difference, as well from their Allies and
Kinsfolks, men of the same Religion and profession, such as were those of
Naples, France, and Navarr, though I do not mention Portugal now united to us,
and Savoy that hardly stepped from us, as of an adverse and Heretical Faith;
Neither is this rule left off, as the present Kingdom of France, the State of
Venice, the low Countries, Bo^emia, now all laboring for life under our plots,
apparently manifest this way; therefore I bend my Engines in England, as your
honors shall particularly hear; Neither should I need to repeat a Catalogue of
all the service I have there done, because this State has been acquainted with
many of them heretofore by the intercourse so wrought, that the State should be
rather robbed and weakened (which is our aim) then strengthened, as the English
vainly hope; Besides in a small time, they should work so far into the body of
the State, by buying Offices, and the like, whether by Sea or Land, of Justice
Civil or Ecclesiastical, in Church or State, all being for Money exposed to
sale, that with the help of the Jesuits, they would undermine them with mere
wit, without gunpowder, and leave the King but a few Subjects, whose Faiths he
might rely upon, whilst they were of a Faith adverse to his, for what
Catholic body that is sound at the heart, can abide a Corrupt and Heretical
head.

With that the Duke of Medina dell Rio secco, President of their Council of
War, and one of the Council of State, rose up and said, his Predecessors had
felt the Force and Wit of the English in Eighty eight; and he had cause to
doubt, that the Catholics themselves that were English, and not fully
Jesuited, upon any Foreign Invasion, would rather take part with their own
King, though an Heretic; than with his Catholic Majesty, a Stranger.

The Ambassador desired him to be of another mind; since first, for the
persons, generally their bodies by long disuse of Arms were disabled, and their
Minds effeminated by Peace and Luxury, far from that they were in 88, when they
were daily fleshed in our Blood, and made hearty by customary Conquests: And
for the affections of those whom they call Recusants, (quoth he) I know the
bitterness of their inveterate Malice, and have seen so far into their Natures,
as I dare say they will be for Spain against all the World: yea (quoth he) I
assure your Honors I could not imagine so basely, of their King and State as I
have heard them speak, nay their rage has so perverted their Judgments, that
what I my self have seen and heard proceed from their King beyond admiration
even to astonishment, they have slighted, misreported, scorned and perverted
to his disgrace, and my rejoicing, magnifying in the mean time our Defects for
Graces.

Here the Duke Pastrana, President of the Council of Italy, steps up and said,
He had lately read a Book of one Cambdens, called his Annals, where writing of
a treaty of Marriage long since, betwixt the English Elizabeth, and the French
Duke of Anjowe; he there observes, that the Marriage was not seriously intended
on either side, but politickly pretended by both States counterchangably, that
each might effect their own ends: There (quoth he) the English had the better,
and I have some cause to doubt, since they can Dissemble as well as we, that
they may have their aims under*hand as we have, and intend the Match as little
as we do: And this (quoth he) I believe the rather, because their King as he is
wise to consult and consider, so he is a constant Master of his Word, and has
Written and given strong Reasons against Matches made with Persons of contrary
Religion; which Reasons no other man can Answer, and therefore doubtless he
will not go from, nor counsel his Son to forsake these Rules, laid down so
deliberately.

Your Excellency mistakes (quoth the Ambassador) the advantage was then on the
side of the English, because the French sought the Match; now it must be on
ours, because the English seek it, who will grant any thing rather than break
off; and besides have no patience to temporize or dissemble in this or any
other Design, as the French have long since well observed; for their
Necessities will give them neither time, nor rest, nor hope elsewhere to be
supplied: As for their King I cannot search into his Heart, I must believe
others that presume to know his Mind, hear his Words, and read his Writings,
and these relate what I have delivered: But for the rest of the People, as the
number of those that are truly Religious are ever the least, and for the most
part of least account, so it is there; where if an equal opposition be made
betwixt their truly Religious and ours, the remainder which will be the greater
number, will stand indifferent, and fall to the stronger side where there is
most hope of gain and glory, for those two are the gods of the magnitude and
multitude; now these see apparently no certain supplies of their Wants, but
from us.

Yes (quoth the Duke) for even now you said, the general State loathing the
Match, would redeem the fear thereof with half their Estates; it is therefore
but Calling a Parliament, and the business were soon effected.

A Parliament! (says the Ambassador) Nay, therein lies one of the chiefest
Services I have done, in working such a dislike between the King and the Lower
House, by the endeavors of that honorable Earl, and admirable Engine, a sure
Servant to us, and the Catholic Cause whilst he lived, as that the King will
never endure Parliament again, but rather suffer absolute Want, than receive
conditional Relief from his Subjects; besides, the Matter was so cunningly
carried the last Parliament, that as in the Powder Plot the fact effected
should have been imputed to the Puritans, the gteatest Zealots of that
Calvinian Sect; so the Propositions which damned up the Proceedings of this
Parliament, howsoever they were invented by Romish Catholics, and by them
intended to disturb that Session, and yet were propounded in favor of the
Puritans, as if they had been hammered in their Forge, which very Name and
Shadow the King hates, being a sufficient Aspersion to disgrace any Person to
say he is such, and a sufficient bar to stay any suit, and utterly to cross it,
to say it smells of, or enclines to that Party: Moreover, there are so many
about him who blow this Coal, fireing their own Stakes; if a Parliament should
enquire into their Actions, that they use all their Art and Industry to
withstand such a Council, persuading the King he may Rule by his absolute
Prerogative without a Parliament, and thus furnish himself by Marriage with us,
and other Domestic Projects without Subsidies, when Levying of Subsidies and
Taxes have been the only use Princes have made of such Assemblies: And whereas
some free Minds amongst them resembling our Nobility, who preserve the
Privilege of Subjects against Sovereign Invasion, call for the Course of the
Common Law, (a Law proper to their Nation) these other Time-se^vers cry the
Laws down, and up the Prerogative; whereby they prey upon the Subjects by Suits
and Exactions, milk the State and keep it bare, procure themselves much
Suspicion amongst the better and more judicious sort* and Have amongst the
oppressed Commons; and yet if there should be a Parliament, such a course is
taken, as they shall never Choose their Shire Knights and Burgesses freely, who
make the greater half of the Body thereof; for these being to be Elected by
most Voices of the Freeholders in these Countries where such Elections are to
be made, are carried which way the great Persons, who have Lands in these
Countries, please; who by their Letters command their Tennants, Followers, and
Friends, to Nominate such as adhere to them* and for the most part are of our
Faction, and respect their own Benefit or Grace, rather than their Countries
good; yea, the Country People themselves, will every one stand by the great
Man, their Lord, or Neighbor, or Master, without regard of his Honesty,
Wisdom, or Religion, that which they aim at (as I am assured by faithful
Intelligence, is to please their Landlord) and so to renew their Lease; in
which regard they will betray their Country and Religion too, and Elect any
man, that may most profit their particular: Therefore it is unlikely there
should ever be a Parliament, and impossible the Kings Debts should be paid, his
Wants sufficiently repaired, and Himself left full-handed by such a course; and
indeed, as it is generally thought, by any course but by a Marriage with us;
For which cause, whatsoever Project we list to attempt, enter safely at the
Door, whilst their Policy lies asleep, and will not see the Danger: I have made
trial of these Particulars, and find few Exceptions in this general Rule.

Thereby I and their own Wants together, have kept them from Furnishing their
Navy, which being the Wall of their Island, and once the strongest in
Christendom, lies now at Road, unarmed, and fit for Ruin; If ever we doubted
their Strength by Sea, now we need not; there are but few Ships or Men able to
look abroad, or live in a Storm, much less in a Sea Fight; this I effected by
bearing them in hand, the Furnishing of their Navy bred suspicion in my
Master, and so would avert him from the Match, the Hope of which, rather than
they would lose, they would lose almost their Hope of Heaven.

Secondly, All their Voyages to the East Indies, I permit rather with a
colorable Resistance than a serious, because I see them not helpful but
hurtful to the State in general, carrying out Gold and Treasure, bringing home
Spice, Silks, Feathers, and the like Toys, and insensibly wasting the Common
Stock of Coin and Bullion, while it fills the Custom-house, and some private
Purses, who thereby are enabled to keep this discommodity on foot by Bribes,
especially so many great Persons (even Statesmen) being adventurers and
sharers in the Gain; besides this, wastes their Mariners, not One of Ten
returning, which I am glad to hear, for they are the Men we stand in fear of.

Thirdly, Their West Indian Voyages, I withstand them in earnest, because they
begin to Inhabit there, and Fortify themselves, and may in time perhaps raise
another England, to withstand our new Spain in America; as this old England
opposes our present State, and clouds the glorious extents thereof in Europe:
Besides, there they trade for commodities without waste of their Treasure, and
often return Gold for Knives, Glasses, and the like trifles, and that without
such loss of their Mariners, as in other places; therefore I crossed
whatsoever Intendments were projected for Virginia, or the Bermudoes, because I
see they may be hereafter really helpful unto them, as now they serve for
Drains to unload their populous State, which else would overflow its own
Banks, by continuance of Peace, and turn Head upon it self, or make a Body fit
for any Rebellion.

And so far I prevailed herein, as I caused most of the Recusants, who were
sharers, to withdraw their Ventures and discourage the Work; so that besides
private Persons unable to effect much, nothing was done by the public Purse:
And we know by experience, that such Voyages and Plantations are not effected
without great Means to sustain great Difficulties, and with an unwearied
Resolution and Power to meet all Hazards and Disasters with strong Helps and
continual Supplies, or else the Undertaking prove idle.

Fourthly, By this means likewise, I kept the voluntary Forces from Venice,
till it was almost too late to set out, and had a hope that work of secrecy,
should have broken forth to action, before those could have arived to succor
them.

Fifthly, I put hard for the cautionary Towns, which our late King Philip, of
happy memory so aimed at, accounting them the Keys of the Low Countries, that
they might be delivered to his Catholic Majesty, as to the proper owner; and
had perhaps prevailed, but that professed Enemy to our State and Church who dyed
shortly after, gave Council to restore them to the Rebellious States, as one
that knew popular Commonwealths to be better Neighbors, surer Friends, and
less dangerous enemies, than Monarchs; and so by this practice rescued them
from my hands, and furnished the Exchequer from thence for that time; neither
was I much grieved at this, because the dependancy they had before of the
English, seemed now to be cut off, and the interest the English had in them and
their cause, to be taken away, which must be fully and finally effected, before
we can hope either to Conquer them, or England, who holding together are too
strong for the World at Sea; and therefore must be disunited before they can be
overcome. This point of State is acknowledged by our most experienced
Pentioner, and sure Friend, Mounsier Barnevel^, whose succeeding plots for this
end, shall bear witness for the depth of his Judgment.

Sixthly, But the last service I did for the State, was not the least, when I
underwrought that admirable Engine, Rawleigh, and so was the cause, his voyage
threatening much danger and damage to us was overthrown, and himself returning
in disgrace, I pursued almost to death; Neither (I hope) need I say almost, if
all things hit right, and all strings hold; But the determination of my
commission would not permit me longer to stay to follow him to execution, which
I desired the rather, that by concession I might have wrung from the
inconsiderate English, an acknowledgment of my Masters right in those places,
punishing him for attempting there, though they might prescribe for the first
foot; And this I did to stop their mouths hereafter, and because I would quench
the heat and valor of that Nation, that none should dare hereafter to
undertake the like, or be so hardy as to look out at Sea, or breath upon our
coasts; and lastly, because I would bring to an ignominious death, that old
Pirate, who is one of the last now living, bread under that deceased English
Virago, and by her flesht in our blood and ruin: To do this I had many Agents,
first, diverse Courtiers who were hungry and gaped wide for Spanish Gold;
Secondly, some that bare him at the heart for inveterate quarrels; Thirdly,
some forraigners, who having in vain sought the Elixer hitherto, hope to find
it in his head; Fourthly, all men of the Romish Faith, who are of the Spanish
Faction, and would have been my Bloodhounds to hunt him or any such to death
willingly, as persons hating the prosperity of their Country, and the valor,
worlh, and wit of their own Nation; in respect of us and our Catholic cause;
Lastly, I left behind me such an instrument composed artificially, of a secular
understanding, and a Religious profession, as he is every way adopted to scrue
himself into the Closet of the heart, and to work upon feminine Levity, who in
that Country, have masculine Spirits, to command and pursue their Plots unto
death. This therefore I account as done, and rejoice in it, knowing it will be
very profitable to us, grateful to our Faction there, and what though it be
cross to the People, or the Clergy, we that only negotiate for our gain, and
treat about this marriage for their own ends, can conclude or break off when we
see our time, without respect of such, as can neither profit us, nor hurt us;
for I have certain knowledge, that the Commons generally are so effeminate and
cowardly, that they at their Musters, which are seldom and slight, only for
the benefit of their Muster Masters of a 1000 Soldiers, scarce a hundred dares
discharge a Musket, and of that hundred, scarce one can use it like a Soldier;
And for their Arms they are so ill provided, that one Corslet serves many men,
when such as show their Armor one day in one place, lend them to their friends
in other places to show, when they have use; And this if it be spied, is only
punished by a mulct in the purse, which is the Officers aim, who for his
advantage, winks at the rest, and is glad to find and cherish by Connivance
profitable faults, that increase his Revenues; Thus stands the state of that
poor miserable Country, which had never more people and fewer men; So that if
my Master should resolve upon an invasion, the time never fits as at this
present, security of this marriage, and the disuse of Arms having cast them
into a dead sleep, a strong and wakning Faction being ever amongst them ready
to asist us, and they being unprovided of Ships, or Arms, or hearts to fight,
an universal coffeehouse following all men: This I have from their Muster
Masters, and Captains, who are many of them of our Religion, or of none, and so
ours ready to be bought and sold, and desirous to be my Masters servants in Fee.

Thus much for the State particularly, wherein I have bent my self to weaken
them and strengthen us, and in all these have advanced the Catholic cause, but
especially in procuring favors for all such as favor that side, and crossing
the other by all means; And this I practice my self, and give out to be
generally practiced by others, that whatsoever success I find, I still boast of
the victory, which I do to dishearten the Heretics, and to make them
suspicious one of another, especially of their Princes best Statesmen, and to
keep our own in courage, who by this means increase, otherwise would be in
danger to decay.

Now for Religion, and such designs as fetch their pretense from thence, I
beheld the policy of that late Bishop of theirs, Bancroft, who stirred up and
maintained a dangerous Schism, betwixt our secular Priests and Jesuits, by
which he discovered much weakness to the dishonor of our Clergy, and prejudice
of our cause; This taught me as it did Barnevelt in the Low Countries, to work
secretly and insensibly betwixt their Conformists, and Non-conformists, and to
cast an eye as far as the Orcades, knowing that business might be stirred up
there that might hinder proceedings in England, as the French ever used
Scotland to call home the Forces of England, and so to prevent their Conquests,
the effect you have partly seen in the Earl of Argile, who sometimes was
Captain for the King and Church, against the great Marq. Huntley, and now
fights under our banner at Bruxels, leaving the Crosses of St. George, and St.
Andrew, for the Cross of St. James: Neither do our hopes end here, but we daily
expect more Revolters, or at least such a disunion as will never admit solid
reconcilement, but will send some to us, and some to Amsterdam, for the King (a
wise and vigilant Prince) laboring for a perfect union betwixt both the
Kingdoms which he sees cannot be effected; where the least Ceremony in
Religion is continued diverse, sharp and bitter brambles from thence arising,
whilst some striving for honor more then for truth, prefers their own way and
will before the general peace of the Church, and the edification of souls, he I
say seeks to work both Churches to uniformity, and to this end made a Journey
into Scotland, but with no such success as he expected, for diverse of ours
attended the train, who stirred up humors and factions, and cast in scruples
and doubts to hinder and cross the proceedings, yea those that seem most
adverse to us, and averse to our opinions by their disobedience and example,
help forward our plots, and these are encouraged by a factious and heady
multitude, by a faint and Irresolute Clergy, many false Brethren being amongst
their Bishops, and the prodigal Nobility, who maintain these stirs in the
Church, and that thereby they may safely keep their Church livings in their
hands, which they have most Sacrilegiously seized upon in the time of the first
Deformation, and which they fear would be recovered by the Clergy, if they
could be brought to a brotherly peace and agreement, for they have seen the
King very bountiful in this kind, having lately increased their pentions, and
settled the Clergy a Competent Maintenance, and besides out of his own Means
which in that Kingdom is none of the greatest, having brought in and restored
whole Bishoprics to the Church, which were before in Laymens hands, a great
part of the Nobilities estate consisting of spiritual Lands, which makes them
cherish the Puritanical Faction, who will be content to be trencher fed with
Scraps and Crumbs, and contributions, and arbitrary benevolence, from their
Lords, and Lairds, and Ladies and their adherents and followers.

But (quoth the Inquisitor General) how if this act of the Kings, wherein he is
most earnest and constant, should so far thrive, as it should effect a perfect
union in the Church and Commonwealth, I tell you it would in my conceit, be a
great blow to us, if by a General meeting, a general peace should be concluded,
and all their Forces bent against Rome, and we see their politic King aims at
this.

True (quoth Gondamor) but he takes his mark amiss howsoever he understands the
People and their inclination better then any man, and better knows how to
temper their passions and affections, for besides that he is hindered, there in
Scotland underhand, by some for the reasons above recited, and by the other
great ones of ours, who are in great place and authority amongst them, he is
likewise deluded in this point, even by his own Clergy at home in England, who
pretend to be most forward in the cause, for they considering if a general
uniformity were wrought, what an Inundation would follow, whilst all or most of
theirs would flock thither for preferment, (as men pressing toward the Sun for
light and heat) and so their own should be unprovided; these therefore I say,
howsoever they bear the King fairly in hand, are under hand against it, and
stand stiff for all Ceremonies, to be obtruded with a kind of absolute
necessity upon them, when the other will not be almost drawn to receive any,
when if an abatement were made, doubtless they might be drawn to meet in the
amidst; but there is no hope of this with them, where neither party deals
seriously, but only for the present to satisfy the King, and so there no fear
on either side, that affections and opinions, so diverse, will ever be
reconciled and made one, Their Bishop of St. Andrews stands almost alone in the
Cause, and pulls upon himself the labor, the loss and envy, of all with little
proficiency, whilst the adverse Faction have as sure friends, and good
intelligence about the King, as he has; and the same Post, perhaps, that
brings a packet from the King to him, brings another from their abettors to
them, acquainting them with the whole proceedings and Councils, and preparing
them aforehand for opposition, this I know for truth, and this I rejoice in as
conducing much to the Catholic good.

But (quoth the Nuncio) are there none of the Heretical Preachers busy about
this Match, me thinks their fingers should itch to be Writing, and their
tongues burn to be Prating about this Business, especially the Puritanical
sort, howsoever the most temperate, and indifferent, carry themselves.

The truth is my Lord, (quoth the Ambassador) that privately what they can,
and publicly what they dare, both in England and Scotland, all for the most
part, except such as be of our Faith, oppose this Match to the uttermost, by
Prayers, Counsels, Speeches, and Wishes; but if any be found longer tongued
than his Fellows, we have still Means to charm their sauciness, and to silence
them, to expel them the Court, to disgrace them, and cross their Preferments,
with the imputation of pragmatick Puritanism: For instance, I will Relate this
one particular; A Doctor of theirs, and Chapline in Ordinary to the King, gave
many Reasons, in a Letter, against this Marriage; and Propounded a Way how to
supply the Kings Wants otherwise: which I understanding, so wrought underhand,
that the Doctor was committed, and hardly escaped the Danger of this
presumptious Admonition; though the State knew his Intent was honest, and his
Reasons good: Wherein we on the other-side (both here, and with the Archduke)
have had Books penned, and Pictures printed directly against their King and
State, for which their Ambassadors have sought satisfaction of us in vain, not
being able to stay the Prince, or so much as to touch the Hem of the Authors
Garment. But we have an evasion which Heretics miss, our Clergy being freed
from the Temporal Sword, and so not included in our Treaties and Conditions of
Peace, but at liberty to give any Heretical Prince the Mate when they list,
whereas they are liable to account and hazard, and are muzled for barking, when
ours may both Bark, and Bite too: The Council Table, and the Star Chamber, do
so terrify them as they dare not Riot, but run at the stirrup in excellent
command, and come in at the least Rebuke; they call their Preaching in many
places standing up, but they crowch and dare not, stand not up, nor Quest,
behave themselves like Setters, silent, and creeping upon their Bellies, lick
the dust which our Priests shake off from their beautiful feet.

Now (quoth the Duke of Lerma) satisfy me about our own Clergy how they fare;
for there were here Petitions made to the King, in the Name of the Distressed,
Afflicted, Persecuted, and Imprisoned Priests, that his Majesty would intercede
for them, to free them from the intolerable burdens they groan under, and to
procure their Liberties; and Letters were directed from us to this end, That
you should Negotiate this Demand with all speed, and diligence.

Most Excellent Prince, (replied Gondamor) I did your Command, with a kind of
Command my self, not thinking it fit to make it a Suit in your Name, and my
Masters; I obtained them liberty to walk up and down, to face, and outface
their Accusers, Judges, Magistrates, and Bishops, and to exercise their
Functions, almost as freely, altogether as safely as at Rome: Here the Nuncio
objected, That he did not well in procuring their liberty, since they might do
more good in Prison, than abroad; because in Prison, they seemed to be under
Persecution* and so were pitied of others, and pity of the person prepares the
affection further; besides, then they were careful of their own Lives to give
no offense, but abroad they might be scandalous in their Lives, as they use to
be in Rome, and Spain, and other Catholic Countries; and so the Opinion of
their Holiness* which upholds their Credit, and Cause, against the Married
Clergy, would soon decay.

But the Ambassador Replied, He considered these inconveniences, and besides a
superior Command, he saw the profit of their liberty, more than of their
restraint; for now they might freely confer, and were ever practicing, and
would doubtless produce some work of Wonder* and besides, the reason of their
Authority, and Means to change places* did apply themselves to many persons,
whereas in Prison they could only deal with such as came to be taught, were
their own before; And this (quoth he) I added as a Secret, that as before they
were maintained by private Contributions from Devout Catholics, even to
excess; so much more now shall they be able to gather great Sums to weaken the
State, and furnishing them for some high attempt, by the example of Cardinal
Wolsey, barrelling up Gold for Rome; and this they may easily do, since all
Catholics rob the Heretical Priests, and withold Tithes from them by fraud
or force, to give to these of their own, to whom it is properly due: And if
this be spied, its an easy matter to lay all upon the Hollander; and say, He
carries the Coin out of the Land (who is forward enough indeed in these
practices) and so ours shall not only be excused, but a flaw made betwixt them
to weaken their Amities, and beget suspicion betwixt them, of each others Love.

But amongst all these Priests, (quoth the Inquisitor) did you remember that
old Reverend Father, Bauldwin, who had a finger in that admirable attempt made
on our behalf against the Parliament House; such as he, deserving so highly,
and ventering their Liv^s so resolutely for the Catholic Cause, must not be
neglected, but extraordinarily Regarded, thereby to encourage others to the
like Holy Undertakings.

Holy Father, (quoth Gondamor) My principal care was of him, whose Life and
Liberty, when I had with much difficulty, obtained of the King, I solemnly went
in person, atended with all my Train, and diverse other well-willers, to fetch
him out of the Tower, where he was in durance: as soon as I came in his sight,
I behaved my self after so lowly and humble a manner, that our Adversaries
stood amazed to see the Reverence we give to our Ghostly Fathers; and this I
did to confound them and their contemptuous Clergy, and to beget an
extraordinary Opinion of Holiness in the person, and Piety in us; and also to
provoke the English Catholics to the like devout Obedience, that thereby at
any time these Jesuits whose authority was somewhat weakened since the Schism
betwixt them and the Seculars, and the succeeding Powder Plot, may work them to
our ends, as Masters their servants, Tutors their Scholars, Fathers their
Children, Kings their Subjests, and that they may do this the more boldly and
securely, I have somewhat dashed the authority of their high Commissioners; upon
which, whereas there are diverse Pursevants, men of the worst kind, and
condition, resembling our Flies, and Familiars, attending upon the Holy
Inquisition; whose office and employment is to disturb the Catholics, search
their Houses for Priests holy Vestments, Books, Beads, Crucifixes, and the like
Religious appurtenances; I have caused the Execution of their Offices to be
slackened, so that an open way may be given to our Spiritual Instruments, for
the free Exercise of their Faculties; and yet when these Pursevants were in
greatest authority, a small Bribe, in the Country, would blind their eyes, or a
little greater at the Court, or in the Exchequer frustrate and cross all their
actions, so that their malice went off like Squibs, making a great Crack to
fright Children, and new born Babes, but hurt no old men of Catholic spirits;
and this is the effect of all other their Courses of proceedings in this kind,
in all their judicial Courts, whither known Catholics (Convicted, as they term
them) are often summoned and cited, threatened and bound over, but the danger is
past so soon as the Officer has his Fee paid to him, then the Execution goes
no further; nay, upon my Conscience, they are glad when there are Offenders in
that kind, because they are bountiful, and the Officers do their best to
succor them, that they may increase, and so their benefit and gain come in
freely.

And if they should be sent to prison, even that place for the most part is
made a Sanctuary to them, as the old Romans were wont to shut up such by way of
restraint, whom they meant to preserve from the peoples fury; so they live safe
in prison till we have time to work their liberty, and assure their lives, and
in the mean time, their place of restraint is as a study unto them, where they
have opportunity to confer together as in a College, and to arm themselves in
unity against their single adversaries abroad, (but quoth the Inquisitor
General) how do they for Books when they have occasion either to write or
dispute*

My Lord replies, Gondamor, all the Libraries belonging to the Romish
Catholics, through the land, are at their Command, from whence they have all
such Collections as they can require, gathered to their hands, as well from
thence, as from all the Libraries of both Universities, and even the Books
themselves if that be requisite.

Besides I have made it a principal part of my employment, to buy all the
Manuscripts and other ancient and rare Authors, out of the hands of the
Heretics; So that there is no great Scholar dies in the Land, but my Agents
are dealing with his Books; In so much as even their learned, Isaac Causabons
Library was in Election without question to be ours, had not their Vigilant
King (who foresees all dangers, and has his eyes busy in every place)
prevented my plots* for after the death of that great Scholar, I sent to
request a view and Catalogue of his Books, with their price, intending not to
be out-bid by any man, if money would fetch them, because (Besides the damage
that that side should have received by their loss, persecuting the same story
against Cardinal Baronius) we might have made good advantage of his Notes,
Collections, Castigations, Censures, and Criticismes for our own party, and
framed and put out other under his name at our pleasure; But that was foreseen
by their Prometheus, who sent that torturer of ours, the Bishop of Winchester,
to search and sort the Papers, and to seal up the study, giving a large and
Princely Allowance for them* to the Relict of Causabon, together with a
bountiful pention, and provision for her and hers, but this plot failing at
that time, has not ever done, nor had the University of Oxford so Triumphed in
their many Manuscripts given by that famous Knight Sir Thomas Bodly, if either
I had been then employed, or this course of mine then thought upon; For I would
labor what I might this way or any other way, to disarm them, and either to
translate their ^est Authors hither, or at least to leave none in the hands of
any, but Roman Catholics, who are assuredly ours; and to this end, an especial
eye should be had upon the Libraries of one Sir Robert Cotton an Ingrosser of
Antiquities, that whenever it comes to be broken up either before his death
or after, the most choice and singular Pieces might be gleaned or gathered up;
Neither let any m^n think that descending thus low to petty particulars is
unworthy an Ambassador, or of small avail for the ends we aim at, since we see
every mountain consists of several sands, and there is not more profitable
conversing for Statesmen, then amongst Scholars and their Books, especially
where the King for whom we watch is the King of Scholars, and loves to live
almost altogether in their Element.

Besides, if by any means we can continue difference in their Church, or make
them wider, or beget distaste betwixt their Clergy and common Lawyers, who are
men of greatest power in their Land, the benefit will be ours, the consequence
great, opening a way for us to come in between, for personal quarrels produce
real questions.

As he was further prosecuting this Discourse, one of the Secretaries, who
waited in the Chamber without desired entrance, and being admitted, delivered
Letters which he had newly received of a Post, directed to the President, and
the rest of the Council, from his Catholic Master; the Contents whereof were
to this effect.

Right trusty and wel-beloved Cousins and Counselors, we Greet you well;
Whereas we had a hope by our Agents in England, and Germany,to effect the great
Work of the Western Empire, and like on the other side to surprise Venice, and
so incircling Europe at one instant, and enfolding it into our arms, make the
easier Road upon the Turk in Asia* and at length reduce all the World to our
Catholic Command: And whereas to these holy ends, we had secret and sure Plots
and Projects on foot in all these places, and good intelligence in all Courts;
Know we that, we have received late and sad News of the apprehension of our
most trusty and able Pentioner, Barnevelt, and of the discovery of other our
intendments; so that our hopes are for the present adjourned, till some other
more convenient and auspicuous time; We therefore will you presently* upon
sight hereof, to break off your Consultation, and repair straight to our
Presence, there to take further directions, and proceed as necessity of the
time, and cause, shall require.


With that his Excellency and the whole House, struck with amazement, crossed
their foreheads, rose up in sad silence, and brake off this Treaty abruptly,
and without tarriance took Horse and Posted to the Court, from whence expect
news the next fair wind.

In the mean time, let not those be secure whom it concerns to be rouzed up,
knowing that this aspiring Nebuchadnezzar, will not lose the glory of his
Greatness, who continues still to magnify himself in this great Babel, until
it be spoken,

Thy Kingdom is departed from thee, Dan. 4.

FINIS.

