THE ANATOMY OF A PROJECT For raising Two Millions.
BEfore I enter upon the Project I will premise three things. First, That the
Consumption amongst our selves of the wrought Silks, Bengals, and Painted
Callico's of India is prejudicial to this Nation, and not only carries out our
Money, but hinders our Silk and Woolen Manufactures at home. And here I shall
not enter into a Dispute, whether the Indian Trade in general is beneficial to
the Kingdom or not? for in my Opinion that ought to be made no part of the
Question; but, whether, if those Manufactures were prohibited here, the Trade
would not be more beneficial, or less destructive than it is?

I never heard but of two Objections against such a Prohibition that weighed
with any body.

First, That the Trade cannot be carried on without these Manufactures, which
is as much as to say, that the Kings of China and Japan will not sell us their
Commodities unless we buy the Emperor of Persia's and the Great Mogul's; or
that the Great Mogul will not sell us for ready Money raw Silks, Pepper,
Muslins, white Callico's, Fans, Saltpeter, nor even these Manufactures unless
we take as many as he pleases to impose upon us, and spend them in England too.
If they say that the Trade will not turn to account without these Manufactures,
they speak against matter of Fact; for they all know we carried on the Trade
many years with great Success before they were thought on, this Mischief being
but of a few years date.

The second Objection is, That it is our Interest to spend the East India
Manufactures our selves, which cost but little, and so send our own to other
Countries to a greater advantage. Now I would ask of these Gentlemen, Whether
it is not full as reasonable to let Corn come in from Dantzick and Poland,
Cattle and Cloth from Ireland, Silks, Stuffs and Salt from France, etc. at a
low Price, that we may sell our Corn, Cattle, Cloth, Stuffs and Salt to other
Countries at a high one, as to say we must wear East India Silks, Bengals and
Callico's at home, that we may send our own Silks and Stuffs to Foreign Parts?
as if the same reason which makes the East India Commodities beat us out of our
own Markets, will not beat us out of Foreign; and then we shall neither wear
any of our own Manufactures at home, nor send them any where else: besides, we
all know that many thousands of both Woolen and Silk Manufacturers are ready to
starve in England for want of Work; and that we do already sell as much Woolen
Drapery abroad as we can have vent for, notwithstanding all that is spent at
home, and could make as much more if we could dispose of it.

The second thing I shall premise is, That we have sent formerly as many of
these Commodities to the other Parts of Europe as we are like to do hereafter:
France that took off a great part of them having already prohibited them
entirely, and other Nations may do the same. Besides, France as well as
Holland, Denmark and Scotland, have East India Companies, and other Countries
in probability in time will have the like, who all will share in that Trade,
which we formerly in a great measure engrossed; so that if we increase much in
it, it must be by our own Consumption.

The third thing is, That there never was a Million per Annum (I believe not
two thirds of it) spent in this Trade, (I mean original Stock outward bound)
and there is no reason to believe this Project will enlarge the Trade; for no
Person will have any liberty or advantage by it more than he has at this time:
for now every Man may trade for as much as he pleases without any limitation;
whereas, if this Project takes, all that are not Subscribers will be
restrained. When they talk of discovering new Trades, I say, this Restraint
will rather discourage than promote such a Discovery, for the Reasons before
given; nor is there any probability of such an Attempt, whilst they can make so
great Advantage by these Commodities.

I am not positive in any thing I have here said; but as I am more or less
mistaken in these Principles, so I shall be proportionably in all the
Deductions I make from them.

These things being premised, let us examine this Project, which runs thus,
viz. Any Persons whatsoever that will subscribe 2000000 l. of Money to his
Majesty's use, shall have 8 per Cent. perpetual Interest, redeemable by
Parliament, issuing out of a double Duty upon Salt; and shall besides have a
liberty of trading to the East Indies for as much more; and if they will not
trade themselves, may sell or rent that Liberty to any others, in the nature of
Licenses to Hackny-Coachmen: so that here is 4000000 l. of Money to be raised,
two for his Majesty, and two to trade with.

I do not pretend here to recite the Project offered to the House of Commons,
for that I know nothing of; but this is a Project talked and cried up in
Coffee-houses. Now I say, the Encouragement offered to the Subscribers is not
sufficient to bring in the Money; and if it was, it would bring utter Ruin to
the Kingdom. To dissect it, let us enquire what the 8 per Cent. is worth as
Exchequer Credit goes now. We may remember not many Months ago, that
Salt-Tallies which had 7 per Cent. Interest, were sold for fifty per Cent. and
now will not sell for above sixty four, tho it is the best Fund in England (it
having paid off already near 80000 l. of the principal Money) and much better
than it can be when the Tax is doubled. I believe the Projectors will agree
with me, that they are not like to sell better for increasing our Funds;
nothing being more certain than that the more Tallies or Stock we have, they
will sell the cheaper: besides, when two Millions worth of Stock is to be sold
together, it will not bear the same Price as when there is not above two or
three thousand Pounds worth; for where lumping Sums are to be raised, there
must be lumping Penniworths.

Therefore taking it for granted, that the 8 per Cent. will not be
Encouragement enough, then this Defect must be supplied by Licenses to trade to
the East Indies, to the value of 2000000 l.

Now I have supposed before that a Million of Money is as much as can be
turned, especially for a great many years, in this Trade; which, if true, then
here are twice as many Licenses as can be made use of. Now it is certain that
every Man will rather make something of his License than nothing, and then of
consequence they will beat down one another so low, that some of them may be
bought upon very reasonable terms to put under Tarts and Cheescakes. I would
ask of our Projectors, whether, if there were twice or thrice as many Licenses
for Hackny-Coaches as could be employed about the Town, some of them would not
be used for Bumfodder?

To avoid this necessary Consequence, perhaps they will say that 2000000 l. per
Annum may be employed in the Trade: then let us see what consequence that will
be to the Kingdom.

Dr. Davenant says in his Essay upon the East India Trade, that we usually send
forth 500000 l. per Annum in value to the East Indies, whereof I believe he
will allow that not above 200000 l. was in Commodities: now I do not see any
probability of more than that quantity in Commodities being ever sent
hereafter; for if they could have disposed of more, the East India Company and
Interlopers would rather have carried it out, tho they got but two per Cent. by
it, than have sent empty Ships. Indeed all parts of the East Indies are so hot
that our Cloth is of little use to them; and that which is sent is a Clog on
the East India Company, and little Benefit to us, for they send most of it up
the Persian Gulf, which prevents the Sale of as much from Turkey: then the
other 1800000 l. must be sent out in Silver and Gold. Now if what the
East India Company says be true, the Returns for this Money will be five times
as much, which will make 9000000 l. but because we will be sure to be within
compass, we will take it to be but six; and if what I have said in my second
Proposition be true, all Europe besides England will not take off above 500000
l. of this Sum, according to the Computations of Dr. Davenant, who without
doubt makes the most it: then there must be the value of 5500000 l. per Annum
of these Commodities spent in England, which must put an end to every
Manufacture we have, and in a few years not leave one Penny of Money in the
Nation. It is not material whether my Computations are exactly right; for I
intend only to show, that if 2000000 l. can be turned in the Trade, then much
the greatest part of it (if not nine parts in ten) will be carried out in ready
Money; and we have no assurance of ever seeing any Proportion of it again, that
depending upon the Fashions, and uncertain Humors of other Countries.

If I am answered, That the Parliament designs to keep the Trade within their
own Power, and to lay what Impositions or Restraints upon it they please; I
reply, That destroys the very Project: for nothing is more certain than that
these Inconveniences will happen, and it is very probable the Cries of the
People will at last prevail upon the Parliament to prevent them, as has been
attempted four Sessions together, and twice Bills have passed the House of
Commons to that purpose: and can it be conceived that the Merchants will
subscribe a vast Sum of Money at such Uncertainties, when every Year they will
be in pain about losing the most beneficial part of the Trade? The same
Objection lies against its being made redeemable by Parliament; for tho that is
never likely to be done, yet the very mentioning it may spoil the Proposal: for
it is telling the Subscribers after they have stood the brunt of the day, if
another Set of Men hereafter, when Money is more plenty, shall offer to raise
the same Sum upon easier Terms, then they shall be laid aside.

From all this I infer, That if 2000000 l. is not employed in the Trade, the
Licenses will be worth little or nothing; for no body will be restrained when
there are more Licenses than can be used: and if the whole 2000000 l. is
employed in the Trade, the Kingdom is undone. Besides, the East India Company
that now is must either be abolished, or continued; if the former, it seems to
be great Injustice to them, when the King has granted them a Patent pursuant
to the Votes and Address of the House of Commons; if the latter, then there
will be a great Stock without limitation employed in the Trade over and above
this 2000000 l. and so consequently much more Money will be carried out, and
these Licenses of much less value.

We may add to this, That nothing can be more fatal to the Nation than settling
perpetual Funds; for they maim the Public, and in effect cut off so many
Counties from the Government, by diverting more Supplies than they contribute
toward the National Charge to private Uses. It Is a most miserable thing to
consider, besides the Funds that will expire in about 8 years time, that we
shall pay, if this Project goes on, near 800000 l. per Ann. for Perpetuities or
long Tracts of years; which will make the Public as much weaker, as if the 6
Northern Counties, with all the People in them, were sunk in the Sea. This it
is that has brought Spain to so low an ebb, notwithstanding their great
Territories in Europe, and the Riches of the East and West Indies. Besides,
these long Funds strike at the very Foundation of our Government; for if in a
future Reign the Court should shut up the Exchequer, what will become of our
Constitution, and the Power of Parliaments, for which, in my Opinion, we have
no Security but their Power of giving Money? and therefore unless I was a
Minister of State, I would never consent to a Project that seems so pernicious
to me.

They tell us this Fund shall be made redeemable by Parliament; which is a
Chimera, when there is the united Interest of such a number of People to
continue it, and 2000000 l. of Money must be raised to redeem it: and whoever
doubts this, let him consider not only what the East India Company has done to
preserve themselves, but what Interest the African, Russia, Hamborough, and
other Companies, have always made when they have been in danger, and he will be
satisfied that so great a body of Men armed with such a Revenue and such
Privileges, will not only preserve themselves, but almost govern the Kingdom.

But farther, if this takes, in all probability it will destroy the Bank of
England, not only by lessening the Price of their Stock, but by making such
Demands upon them as it is impossible they should pay; and if they should be
broke a second time, they must not expect another Resurrection; the consequence
of which must be the destroying the Credit, and depretiating all the Tallies in
England, which have advanced or decreased always with the Bank-Stock: nay, even
this very Stock will have the same fate.

Besides, the doubling the Salt Fund in all likelihood will not double the
Income, as we have experimented already in the Excise upon Beer and Ale; and
then it will lessen the Security of the Salt Tallies, which now pays off every
year part of the Principal Money, and then perhaps will not pay off the
Interest, and by that means make that Fund perpetual, which otherwise would
clear it self in less than 20 years.

Before I have done, I will take notice of a Saying that is in almost every
ones mouth, viz. That we must settle the East India Trade one way or other, or
else it will be lost; tho, by the way, this cannot be such a settling it; for
this Project gives no Man any Advantage, Benefit, or Facility in Trading that
he had not before, but only says, No Man shall trade that is not so qualified.

Now let us consider what Trades we are in possession of, and that we are
likely to lose. We have little or no Trade but to Persia, India, China, or
Japan, for the Commodities of those Countries, most of which we buy with our
ready Money. Now I would ask, whether if we should discontinue this Trade for
20 years (which cannot be the case) they would not sell us their Commodities
for ready Money whenever we offered it. The English and Dutch East India
Companies know this by woeful Experience; for tho they have had the Monopoly of
these Trades for many years, yet now the Interlopers beat them both out of them.

There is one part of the Trade to the East Indies which would be beneficial to
us if we could get it, which perhaps requires joint Counsels, Stock, and Forts
to manage, which is the Trade for Spices to the Molucca and Philippine Islands.
The reason that Forts may be necessary here is, because they are small Islands
inhabited by few People, and may be seized by the Dutch and other Nations, if
we do not protect both them and our selves: but this Reason will not hold in
those vast Dominions where Forts cannot defend us against the Natives, and the
Natives will protect us against other Nations: so that nothing can be more
ridiculous than to have Forts there to secure the Trade of the Coasts of 10000
Miles; as if we should have a Fort at Archangel to secure the Trade to Turkey.

This Trade for Spices would be a prodigious Advantage to the Kingdom, tho not
so great Profit to the East India Company as the Manufactures they now trade
in; which is the reason they have never yet applied themselves to get it, as
might be easily done if Dampeir tells us true, who says, that many of the
Philippine Islands have Spices which the Dutch know nothing of; and some of
them have made Overtures to the Company, but without success: so that upon the
whole matter it appears to me, the prejudicial part of the Trade we cannot lose,
and the other we either will not, or cannot get.

But after all, if we are resolved to encourage these Manufactures, in my
Opinion the best way will be to establish the East India Company, not for the
Reasons they give, but because it will discourage the Trade; for as they would
manage a beneficial Trade to least Advantage, so they will a destructive one to
least Disadvantage.

I do not pretend here to have recited the Project exactly, nor am I positive
in any of my Computations, but have endeavored to take them the strongest
against my self; and if I am mistaken in them, there must be proportionable
Allowances made: and yet I believe the Substance of what I have said will hold
true. Besides, I have not entered into the Practicableness of the Project, as
how it will be possible to confine Men to trade for no more than they ought to
do, when Gold, Silver, or Jewels, may be carried out privately, and Money may
be transmitted by Bills of Exchange; and then what will become of the Licenses?
but this I will leave till I know more of it, and then I will either own my
self in the wrong, or show it to be a senseless Project.

It cannot be doubted but those whose business it was, considered of all the
Proposals for raising of Money before the Parliament sat; and since they
thought this a good one, they would have done their Country great Service if
they could have offered it sooner: for by that means they might have saved the
great Discounts we have paid; they might have discharged a great many thousand
Seamen, which we have kept in constant Pay for want of Money to clear them;
they might have disbanded all the Army which the Parliament have not allowed,
and have been kept up since at the expense of that Money which is and must be
given to maintain those that were allowed, because a few thousand Pounds could
not be got to disband them; besides the great Inconvenience it has been to the
Country-Gentlemen, who have been kept from their Affairs at home, and at last
may be under a necessity to leave the whole Business of Parliament to those
whose Occasions require them to be about Westminster.

I will conclude, with my hearty Wishes for raising the Money by the most
effectual means, for his Majesty's and the King of Spain's Life, and a
Triennial Parliament.

F. S.

THE Militia Reformed, or an easy Scheme of furnishing England with a constant
Land-Force capable to prevent or subdue any Foreign Power, and to maintain
perpetual Quiet at home without endangering the public Liberty. Price stitched
1 s. Sold by A. Bell at the Cross keys and Bible in Cornhill.


