SOME ^^^^ous Reflections On that Part of ^^BVNIONS ^^^^^^sion of Faith:
^OUCHING (...) Communion ^ITH (...) Persons: (...) ALSO ^rguments against the
(...), and Seven Queries (...) the Author.

(...) of Christ and the Church.

(...) that is first in his own cause (...) just, but his Neighbor comes and
sercheth him.

Psalm 55. 12, 13 14. For it was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could
have born it, etc.

London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, and at the same sign the first Shop without Temple Bar,
1673.

^^^teous Reader,
HEre is presented to thy serious Consideration, some observations upon a late
Book, ^ti^^led, The Confession of Faith, of I. B. Wherein that Author declares
his Faith conserning Church Fellowship, and the way of entrance therein:
Endeavoring, after his manner, to prove that Men and Women that believe in
Jesus Christ, although not Baptized with water, may be Members of any
particular Church of Christ (...) ought to be admitted to (...) Lords Supper,
and all oth^^ Church Ordinances; A Doctri^^ not known or practiced in the first
Gospel Churches, or by any others of what persuasion (...) ever, that have
professed (...) Christian Faith, since that ti^^ to this very age: as for (...)
practice of the Churches (...) Primative times, the Scripture is in no one
thing plainer then in this, that all Persons before they were added to the
Church, were Baptized with Water, which appears both by the Commission given
by Jesus Christ, Mat. 28. 19. and the Practice of the Apostles, Acts 2. 38, 39.
Which is more at large showed in this Treatise: I suppose the Author who
himself is against ^he Baptizing of Children, and or the Baptizing of
Believers, (...) their profession of Faith in ^^ist, makes it none of the least
^his Arguments, why he is a^^^^st Childrens Baptism, then (...). that there
being no (...) ^resident, or example in (...) ^^^iptures for Childrens (...),
therefore Children ought not to be Baptized. If this Argument be good (as I
believe it is) that causes him to forsake the practice of Baptizing Children;
why should it not be as good at least to him in the case in hand? but to cause
in him the same belief, that none ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper, but
such as a^e Baptized with Water, seeing there cannot be shown any Precept (...)
or Example in the Scriptures that any Unbaptized-person (...) ever admitted to
the Lords (...) per; for the Scriptures alle^ (...) by him, and some
Consequen^^ drawn therefrom to the (...), if they be seriously (...) by the
Reader, they (...) a great deal of bold (...) confidence of his own, but not
any thing to the matter, to prove what they are brought for, but it is very
usual for such persons who have not the truth with them, to fill their Writings
with their own confidences, that so they may induce a belief in others, of the
things they assert from their own Authority. The severe Charges laid by him
against those that are contrary minded, if true, would be suffi^^^nt to
frighten them into his persuasion, but we pass not for man's judgment, knowing
that he which judges us is the Lord, who will bring the hidden things of
darkness to light, all we plead for is, that all that profess themselves to be
Christians, should walk according to the Primative pattern, and in this matter
we are sure we follow none other but the footsteps of the Flock of Christ in
all ages.

We would appeal to the conscience of this Apposer, whether the Arguments
published by many for Baptizing of children, have not more force in them, and
of greater Antiquity (although in our judgments short of proof) then any (...)
that is Writ by him, to (...) the lawfulness of any to rec^^^ the Lords Supper
that is not fir^^ Baptized with Water. I shall say nothing of the great
contempt cast by him upon Water Baptism, but desire the Lord may humble him for
it; Wisdom is justified of her children.

I desire to Honor and Reverence those many faithful Christians that differ
from us, who notwithstanding value this Ordinance of Christ, only mistake in
the subject, and are far from placing Religion only in this or any other
institution of Christ; but finding the Scriptures show no other Rule in the
Order of instituted Worship, then upon believing, to be first Baptized, then
added to the Church, we dare not be wise above what is Written.

Communion with all Saints, i^ all things, is a desirable thing, and not the
least part of that Glory which will for ever ^e enjoyed in Heaven, and it would
be a blessed thing, if while Christians differ in their light, the best knowing
but in part, it might be maid up by an increase of love, this would convince
the World they were Christ's Disciples indeed; but care must be had in the first
place, to observe the Rules given by our great Lord, and to walk according to
them, and not for Communion sake to leap over the Order Jesus Christ has
Prescribed in his Word; I shall not trouble thee any longer, but commend the
consideration of the matter Ensuing to thy serious Thoughts, and the blessing
of that God who i^ able to cause all Grace and Truth to abound in thy Sou^*

Thine in the Lord, W. K.

Sir,
YOur Confession of Faith I have viewed, and have reviewed that part which
respects Church Communion with Unbaptized persons: should all of your rank,
take occasion to tell the World what they do, and do not believe or practice,
it might give them more employment then they can or need to attend: I should
little have troubled my self, to take notice of the rest of your offers, in
your Confession, had you not under the head before expressed, showed your self
so bold to assert that which is yet unproved; neither should I have meddled with
the controversy at all, had I found any, of parts, that would divert
themselves from more weighty occasions, to take notice of you; but since you
are so willing to be known in the World, by you. Singular Faith, it is my
liberty, as well as others, into whose hands it falls, to weigh what you have
said, in truths balance: and if it be found too light, to reject it whether
you will or no. Though I love not Controversies, yet Truth must not be lost.

Now Sir, for your Ten Arguments, for your practice; with the Eighteen
Absurdities, drawn from the Principle or Practice of them that are contrary
minded; wherein you insult over them, as Babes foolish, yea Beasts, if not Men,
as you seem proudly and imperiously to assert: You by your fixing of these
absurdities upon this innocent Principle and Practice, do not content your self
to degrade all the Baptized Brethren, of this persuasion; but with too much
impudence, do Render them amongst the worst of men, meddling with the very
Secrets of the most High, which are so much out of your reach, that you have
rendered them that oppose your Principle; to be the cause of the Deaths of those
Hundreds of Thousands that have fallen by Gods Judgments in these late years;
one of the most Prodigiousest Sentence that ever I heard pass from the Mouth,
or fall under the Pen of the worst of Truths Enemies, as though nothing short,
in your rage, would serve you then to defy all the Brethren of the Baptized
way, and Blaspheam them that dwell in Heaven. I shall orderly touch at these
things as I go along.

Your great noise about an Initiating Ordinance, wherein you spend time enough,
I shall take no notice of, I know none that assert it to be the Inlet into
particular Churches, though it prepares them for Reception: It Is consent ON all
hands, and nothing else, that makes them Members of this or that particular
Church, and not Faith and Baptism.

You are pleased in the general, before you come to your Arguments, to call in
several Scriptures to support your practice, which your self do acknowledge are
not direct to the purpose, as Acts 9. 25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 16. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 23.
Which you confess respects the receiving them as Officers: is there no
difference between the receiving of the one, and of the other? must Phebees
case, and others of the like nature, be brought in to patronize your Practice,
when there is nothing in them that respects the matter in Controversy. Were
any of these Unbaptized persons? say it if you dare. Sure it is a bad Cause,
that must be upheld by such foreign and remote shifts: besides, what need Paul
plead for the Vindication of himself, or others? that he was Baptized, when
your self acknowledge that Baptism immediately after Conversion, was the known
practice of the first Christians; which none in those times did so much as
question, therefore no need to plead that, but his Conversation in those
things, about which the false Apostles, or other, might injustly tax him.

You start a Question, Page 70. by what rule Persons are to be received. And
Answer, by a discovery of their Faith and Holiness, and Willingness to subject
to all Christ's Laws. And pray you tell me, is obeying Baptism, no part of a
Christians Holiness? is Baptism none of the Laws of Christ, the Lawgiver? must
this, with others have no place of discovery? but must it altogether be shut
out from being a witness to the truth of Faith: if it must, lets know by what
rule, for we shall not take your word, but by holiness. I perceive you mean
only a walking, according to the Moral precept, which with Faith in Christ is
sufficient to make a Churchmember, so that I perceive Moses is more beholden
to you then Christ; the Servant then the Son, if Moses Law in his Moral
precepts, be the only bounds of a Christians Holiness or Sanctification, under
the Gospel, for what end, then are all those Gospel-Commands, especially in
instituted Worship, they are in your cense of little use to us: obedience to
them does not add to our Holiness, therefore a breach of them, by that rule,
must be no part of our sin.

But you tell us, Page 93. None ever received Baptism, without light in it: I
grant it, they never received it aright, which is a clear Argument, that the
persons you plead for, for Church Fellowship, never received it at all, because
they could not then have light in it when they were sprinkled, and therefore
ought to repent and be ashamed of that abomination, before they come to have a
sight of the pattern of the House of God, the goings in, and comings out
thereof, Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11.

2. Is it a Persons light, that gives being to a Precept? is it not his sin,
though he want light? he that knew not his Masters will was beaten, because it
is like he had means to know it, though he was ignorant.

3. Suppose men plead want of light in other Commands, must they be excused?
what if a man want light in the Supper after he is in the Church, or in
Church Government, and therefore thinks not himself accountable for his
Conversation to men, but God: or what if a man want light in his Duty to the
poor, and thinks it enough to bid his brother be fed, and be clothed, though
he give little for his relief: Perhaps he may give Two Pence, when according to
what he has, he ought to give Twelve Pence? Why may not want of Light, excuse
these men from being rejected out of Churches, as well as want of light makes
way for Unbaptized to come in? But perhaps you will say, these are Moral evils,
and they sin against men, well, let it be so: but I remember what Old Samuel
said to his Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 25. If one Man sin against another, the Judge shall
plead for him, but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall plead for him? But
we have now found an Advocate for Sin against God, in the breach of One of his
Holy Commands: when sin against the Law of God, that wrongs the poor shall not
go free.

You are pleased to tell us, that same Object, Page 86. against your Proofs,
out of the Epistles, because they were Writ to particular Churches: and indeed,
I am one of those same, to which you Answer, that some of them, as the first
Epistle of Corinth. and some others named, were not so directed, but to
particular Saints, as well as Churches.

I answer, I think that will be difficult for you to prove: For it is apparent,
the matter of those Epistles did respect Churches, and those Churches in
special to whom Directed (though of use to all Saints) as I might easily
demonstrate: But sir, pray you tell us, in your next, whether any of those you
mean, were Unbaptized beleivers, that were concerned in those Epistles:
forasmuch as you confess, in those times Baptism followed immediately upon
Conversion: if the^ were not Unbaptized Believers, ^ is without our question,
for Pa^^ might Write to them as well a Timothy and others, that they might know
how to behave themselves i^ the House of God.

You also say, Page 16. If Wate^ Baptism as other things, pester the Church as
of Old, trouble the peace wound the Conscience of the Godly, dismember and
break their fellowships, though an Ordinance, it'^ prudently to be shunned.

I answer, it is very boldly offered who gave you liberty to shun Truth for
Peace; But you hint, the Church has of old been pestred with Baptism, and
therefore when it is so, it may prudently be shunned. I confess if ever you
find Baptism a Pest or Plague to Churches, all men will shun the Plague: is
this the best Title you can give to one of Christ's Commands? did God ever send
an Ordinance, as a Pest and Plague to his People? are not all ^he Ordinances of
the Gospel, Blessings, yea, New Covenant Blessings? is there any thing in the
nature of Innocent Baptism, to Pester Churches, or do they Pester Churches that
plead for it, or they that deny it? but the Consciences of the Godly, you say;
are wounded, the Churches Peace broken, their fellowship dismembered, and what
then? Suppose these effects follow persons opposing other Ordinances, must they
be shunned, to avoid the effects? I have in my time known Godly Conscientious
persons Dismember Fellowships, break the Peace of Churches, by ^nakeing
Preaching by Method, Doctrine, Reason, and Use, to be Antichristian; who could
not be satisfied in their Consciences, as they said, unless the great Ordinance
of thus Preaching, was exploded, and some thing like Conference btought in the
room. I have known persons make a Sacrifice of the peace of Churches, for
putting the Administration of breaking Bread upon particular persons, by
Church-appointment, and not leaveing it promisciously amongst the
Gifted-Brethren, as each of them was Free; and these as exact Moralists in
their lives, and as Holy in their Conversations, as any of your Unbaptized
persons, that you so highly extol above others, to be the Honor and Crown of
Churches; and must the Church for peace sake shun these Great Appointments of
Preaching and Breaking Bread, rather then Grieve the Consciences of these Godly
ones? though it was no part of their Godliness to make such Breaches, neither
is it for any of those you plead for, to deny Baptism, how Godly soever they
may be in other things: if this be your Prudence or Wisdom, to shake hands with
Truth and Purity, for peace, the Lord deliver me from such a Fellowship; This
Wisdom is from beneath and not from above.

Your Second Argument is taken from Ephesians 4. One Spirit, one Hope, one
Faith, one Baptism; This Baptism, you say, is not of Water, but the Spirit.

I Answer, I see rather then you will miss your end in saying something, you
care not if your Pen be employed against every man, and you give the lie to all
Expositors besides your self (as I know of) if this be Spirit Baptism. Pray you
tell me what you mean by Spirit Baptism: if you mean the work of the Spirit in
Conversion, I grant Conversion is the Spirits Work; but where Conversion barely
without extraordinary gifts, is called the Baptism of the Spirit, I am in a
readiness to learn, if you can teach me, but why must this Baptism not be Water
Baptism, if Water Baptism be a Truth, the Spirit leads into this Truth, as
well as others: if Paul intended Spirit Baptism, in this place, as the last
thing he urges upon them, for Union: what does he mean by Spirit and Faith,
which are urged before by him, as Arguments? can Persons have the Spirit,
without the Fruits of the Spirit? Why does not Paul put Spirit again, in the
place of Baptism, according to your cense, who are pleased to make him speaking
one and the same thing, in his First and Last Arguments? though the one he
calls Spirit, and the other Baptism.

Sir, I list not to contend about this, but leave you to Answer those
Expositors that have in all their writings made this, Water Baptism.

Farther, if nothing but extraordinary gifts be called the Baptism of the
Spirit, in a strickt sense, then that Baptism, 1 Cor. 12. must be water
Baptism, as well as this in Ephesians 4. and then your Argument from both is
void.

Your Third Argument is, That these you plead for, have the Doctrine of
Baptismes; in which you are pleased to distinguish between the Doctrine, and
the Practice: this is one of the strangest Paradoxes that I have lightly
observed; is it enough to hold practical Doctrines, to know them so as to hold
them, and yet not do them? You need never ask a believer whether he hold a
practical Doctrine, his obedience to it will always speak for him: But I pray
you how came these Unbaptized persons to have the Doctrine of Baptism? Why? the
Doctrine of Baptism, you say, is the death of Christ, his Resurrection; and the
believers interest in both, to newness of life. I confess that Christ's death
and resurrection, and our interest in both, is signified by Baptism; but that
that was, or ought to be called the Doctrine of Baptism, I am yet to learn:
Verily, I took the Doctrine of Baptism to be the Command, that a believer ought
to be baptized in Christ's Name, for such ends which the Gospel expresses; I
never took the death Christ, nor the resurrection, to be the Doctrine of
Baptism: if the Resurrection be the Doctrine of Baptism, why does the Apostle
make that, and the Doctrine of Baptismes distinct in Hebrews 6. which you cote.

2. Under the Law all the Sacrifices of that dispensation with their Sabaths
and other things, were Tipes of that Christ who was the substance of all those
Ceremonies: If any of them then that professed Faith in the Messiah to come,
should upon scruples, or want of pretended light, neglect the whole, or part of
that Tipical-Worship, why may not a man say of them, as this advocate says of
the practice under debate? They had the richer and better Sacrifice, they had
the substance and body of all the Tipes: So that this principle puts the whole
of Gods instituted Worship, both under Law and Gospel, to the highest
uncertainties; and it is so indifferently commended to men for their practice,
that the holiness or good that is in it, is by the Author so indesernable, that
he can hardly fix upon any thing to say for it, though enough he has to say
against it; and that is the third thing I would take notice of in this Argument.

Baptism is but a Circumstance, as he is pleased often to word it: And Page 88.
Only an outward SHOW. He may have the heart of Water Baptism that is never
Baptized: it is but a form, (an almost nothing:) men are not much better. Is it
not enough for you to despise your brethren, but contempt also must be thrown
upon this precious truth of Christ? from whom have you Authority to nickname
any of Christ's precepts? is this according to the form of sound words? will
you be wise above what is written, and call Commands Circumstances, only mere
shows? do you pretend your self a Minister of the Gospel, and dare you thus
disparage Gospel truths by such low Titles, to discharge men of their obedience
to them? Verily Sir, what ever you think of your self, I am confident Christ
will not take this well at your hands.

4. You say these have the Doctrine of Baptism; if they have it, they
understand it: you say it is the death of Christ, his Resurrection, and their
interest in it: But I conceive in the Doctrine of Baptism there is some thing
else that more properly relates to-Baptism as a Command, which it will be hard
for you to prove these Unbaptized persons have.

1. A right Administration. 2. A right Subject. 3. The right manner of dipping.
4. The right end.
Have these you speak of the Doctrine of Baptism, as you say, and are strangers
to, or enemies to these Essentials of Gospel-Baptism? I think upon second
thoughts you will hardly stand by it.

5. Who taught you to devide between Christ and his Precepts, that you word it
at such a rate, that he that has the one has that which is better and richer
then the other? I had thought that he that has Christ, has an orderly right
to all Christ's promises, and all Christ's precepts; and that the precepts of
Christ are part of the riches which a believer has in and by Christ, and ought
not to be so slightly represented. He that slightly despises his Birth, right
of Ordinances, or Church Priviledges will be found to be a profane person as
Esau, in Gods account, though he thinks it is no Sin to make a mean account of
them.

Your Fourth Argument is grounded upon Romans 15. 1, 6. Receive one another to
the Glory of God.

I answer, 1. It was Paul's direction to the Church at Rome, how they ought to
carry it toward their Brethren Church members. And it is no ways likely, that
this receiving is a receiving one another into Church Communion, for they were
in before: but by reason of those Jewish differances that was amongst them
about meats, and drinks, and days, they were apt to grieve and Judge one
another in those indifferent things; and to cast each other out of their
hearts, having not that Christian respect to each other as they ought; by which
God was dishonored: therefore he exalts them to receive each others into their
affections, which would be to the Glory of God.

That the difference amongst the Romans was about indifferent things that
might, or might not be done, is clear from the 14 Chapter; their differences
was not about Baptism, or any New Testament Ordinance; for I have indeavonred
to prove them before Baptized: Therefore what you urge from hence comes not
near the matter in question.

2. You make Gods receiving to be the rule for our receiving* which in all
cases will not ^old: God receives men at that very instant in which they
receive his Son, before the fruits of their Faith appear; but so cannot we: God
received the thief upon the Cross, but the Church ought not to receive him till
he had given satisfaction by repentance, showing the fruits of it, for his
sinful bypast life: I doubt not but God may receive Infants dying in Infancy,
as the fruit of his electing love; but I suppose you your self will not yet,
receive them upon that ground.

3. You are pleased to go on in Page 91. very rhetorically: Vain man, think not
by the streightness of thine Order in outward and, bodily Conformity to outward
and shadowish Circumstances, that thy peace is maintained with God.

First, By vain man, you mean I suppose the Brethren of the Baptized way, that
differ from you in this point: Is this the best Title you have for them? But,

Secondly, You pinch at the streightness of their Order: I never knew
streightness in Order to be a crime, but rather a praise. Paul rejoiced to
behold the Order, Col. 2. 5. as well as the Faith of the Colossians, though you
despise it. But,

Thirdly, You are pleased to say, it is outward and bodily Conformity to
outward and shadowish Circumstances.

Sir, Is outward and bodily conformity become a crime? ought we not to glorify
God with our bodies as well as souls, which are Gods? Is not the whole Man to
be improved in the service 1 Cor. 6. 20.
of God? but you add in outward and shadowish Circumstances; I know you mean
Baptism, a Title that was never given (by any found in the Faith) to any New
Testament Ordinances: But you say our peace is not maintained hereby, but by
the Blood of the Cross: I know our peace is made for us by the Blood of
Christ's Cross, but is not our peace maintained and kept alive in the way of
obedience? has your sincere obedience to the Gospel Commands no influence upon
your Conscience, in the matter of peace? or, is your peace maintained in the
way of disobedience? if it be, I fear it is a false peace: I speak now of peace
of Conscience.

2. If you mean by peace with God, that which pacifies God, and is the manifest
cause of God's being at peace with us: who amongst us ever told you that our
peace in that sense is maintained by Baptism? or dare you say that your Faith,
or Love, or Obedience to any precept, does in that sense, either procure, or
maintain your peace, in the matter of Justification? If not* you ought not to
pare off any part of Gospel* obedience, and render it of so little worth; when
we own the whole of what we all do, is altogether too little to be a
Peace Offering for us.

Your Fifth Argument is* That a failure in Batism does not Unchristian us.

Answ. Who says it does? Persons ought to be Christians before they are
Baptized; and once a Christian, and always a Christian: but in pursuit of this
Argument you are pleased to rank Water Baptism with eating* or not eating, that
if a man do it, he is not the better, or neglect it, he is not the worse.

Verily Sir, if Gospel-Precepts must be ranked with Old Testament Ceremonies
that are abrogated by the death of Christ, I know not upon what account you
practice instituted Worship now, unless upon the same account as Paul p^actised
Circumcision upon Timothy, or shaving on others, not as a Command from God, but
as a prudential consideration as to others, which is below that confession, or
profession, that hitherto you have made* about Baptism. What ever your design
may be, either now, or hereafter.

Your Sixth Argument is, Edification, which you say is greater then agreement in
outward things, and contesting for Water Baptism.

Answ. Edification is the end of all Communion, but all things must be done in
order, orderly. Edification as to Church Fellowship, being a building up, does
suppose the being of a Church, before they can be thus Edified or built up: But
pray you, show us a Church without Baptism, approved of by the New Testament,
and then edify them as much as you can. But if by Edification be meant the
private increase of Grace in one another, in the use of private means, as
private Christians in meeting together, how does the Principle you oppose,
hinder that? Endeavor to make men as Holy as you can, that they may be fit for
Church Fellowship, when God shall show them the orderly way to it, we shall
never blame you; but you say Edification is greater then contesting for
Water Baptism; To which I answer,

I had thought that a Preaching and opening Baptism, might have been reckoned
as a part of our Edification, and we may be as well Edified by rightly knowing
and understanding that, as by many other Ordinances, especially if it signify
so much as you say it does. But add,

Why may you not as well say that Edification is greater then breaking Bread?
then any part of Church rule, or Government? and so at once shut out all
instituted Worship; for something you call Edification. Why must Water Baptism
be the BUT that you so constantly shoot at?

3. How comes Contesting for Water Baptism to be so much against you? is not
the least of truths worth the contending for? or, what need any to trouble
themselves, to contest for Water Baptism: If none of your new Church Members do
not contest against it, in principle or practice? which if they do, at whose
door shall sinful contention be laid, ours or theirs?

As for your instance of Aron, it was not a constant continued forbearance of
that part of God's Worship, but a suspending of it for that season, (and
perhaps upon Just and Lega^ grounds, though not expressed,) which made that
zealous man, Moses, who stoned a man for gathering sticks on the Sabath day;
and was a spectator of God's Judgments on Aron's Sons for their Sin:) so easily
bear with Aron in that matter. Paul for a seeming low thing did withstand Peter
to his face, and blamed him. And for Elded and Meded if they did miss it, it
was but in a Circumstance of place: It appears not, there was any possitive Law
broken by it, which is the case under our debate, how often so ever you
dispisingly call Baptism a Circumstance: neither does the case of Hezekiah
reach our case: it was indeed their not being prepared for that service, which
was their Sin, and may be too fitly compared to unpreparedness, to the Lords
Supper, or other solemn appointments, for which we do not cast, nor keep any
out of the Church, it being no denying either in word or practice, of any
possitive Ordinance; which is that we charge your intended Church Members with.

Your Seventh Argument for Communion with Unbaptized persons, is, Love.

Answ. That man that makes affection the rule of his walking, rather then
Judgment, it is no wonder to me, if he go out of the way. We can as boldly
assert our Love to all the Godly, though Unbaptized, as you; and I think we
have not been behind hand to manifest it, either in private Duties of Piety
with them, wherein we are agreed; or in works of Charity toward them, in all
their sufferings, according to our utmost ability: But must our love to these,
indulge them in any act of disobedience? cannot we love their Persons, Parts,
Graces, but we must love their Sins, and disorders? I take it to be the highest
act of friendship to be faithful to these professors, and to tell them they
want this one thing in Gospel order, which ought not to be left undone; and I
doubt your favor toward them, in descrying before them one of Christ's
Commands, as a Circumstance, mere show, that that may, or may not be done; for
which we are neither better nor worse (in your sense) making it no more then
eating, or not eating, as men are persuaded: Is this your faithfulness to your
friends, that you pretend so much love to? I doubt when it comes to be weighed
in God's Balance, it will be found no less then Flattery, for which you will
be reproved. May I not love a Saint, as a Saint for Christ's sake, unless I
hold Church Communion with him? unless I countenance him in a breach of Gospel
Order? Nay, if a Child of God fall into Sin, or disorder, without the due sense
of his Sin, yet I ought to love him: though I am forced to deal with him, and
to withdraw from him, yet I am not to count him as an enemy, but admonish as a
brother in some respects: and must we be Judged to have no love to the persons
under debate, because we are not willing to suffer them to sit down satisfied
with a lie, instead of the truth, a false Baptism, instead of Christ's
appointment, if in that matter Ephraim like, they are joined to an Jdol, must I
not wait till God shows them that abomination, and yet love them for what of
God we see in them?

Your Eighth Argument is from the state of the Church of Corinth, who you say
are called Carnal, for their divisions, and shutting each other out of
Communion for greater points, and on higher pretenses then that of
Water Baptism.

Answ. It is true, there was divisions in the Church of Corinth, for which they
are often called Carnal: and their divisions was about greater things then
Baptism, I grant: for I believe it was not ba^ely their divisions about
persons, but the highest Fundamental Principles, opposed by some of the leaders
of those Factions amongst them; as denying the resurrection of the dead; as
Paul says some of them did, Chap. 15. but whereas you say they shut one
another out of Communion for these things, that I find not: (What ever they
might or ought to do) it is certain they were a Church in order, planted upon
Gospel Principles, though afterward some of them declined from those
Principles: and though the Principles about which they might differ, was
greater then Baptism, is true, but that without much means, and due waiting for
the fruit of that means, they could not shut them out of Communion is as true;
and I put it to* your self, if any person should offer Communion with you, that
deny the Resurrection, would you receive him? but if any person do after
receiving deny that, or other Principles, can you immediately shut him out of
the Church, without the use of means, and waiting? this seems to me to be their
case, which agrees not with the controversy in hand. But you say their
divisions was about Persons, Paul, Apollo, and Christ: I do grant their
division was about persons, their Teachers; and one was for one, and others for
another; but I question whether any of them in this division was for Paul,
Apollo, or Christ; but rather for others in opposition to them who were true
Ministers: My reason is, because Paul tells us that what he had said of himself
and Apollo, was in a Figure, 1 Cor. 4. 6. not properly, but does modestly aply
the business to himself and others, as though their divisions was about them,
when it was not about them, but others that did oppose them, namely the false
Apostles, or Notional Teachers of that Church.

Secondly, You tell us, the great divisions of Corinth was helped forward by
Water Baptism: a very high charge against this great truth: It is no wonder you
lay divisions at our doors, when Baptism it self must be accused as a
makebate, or a furtherer of divisions amongst the Saints: Oh! let the heavens
blush at the insolency of this man of words; that ever Christ should appoint an
Ordinance so highly detrimental to the peace of Saints. But how does it appear
that Baptism has a hand in these divisions? because Paul imitates they were
not Baptized in his name: a good Argument to provoke to union; and to take them
off from doting upon those Factious leaders amongst them; by whom it is like
they were most of them Baptized, to let them know they were not Baptized in the
names of men, but of Christ. But wherein lies the force of this man's Argument
against Baptism, as to its place, worth, or continuance? Why? it is urged from
two grounds.

First, Because Paul knew not that he Baptized a^y but those he names; which
argues, he made not so great a matter of Baptism as some do now adays, for then
he would have heeded it better, and made more Conscience thereof, then so
lightly pass it over: What must the blessed Apostles Conscience be called in
question about one of Christ's appointments? and must it be supposed he is so
negligent in this matter? and only because he knew not who of the Corinths he
had Baptized. Is this so demonstrable a ground? Sir, if one should ask you how
many you have Baptized in the Course of your Ministry, can you give an account?
I think not, (unless you have kept a Record by you, of the persons, that your
works might be heard of to your praise, as occasion serves;) which I suppose
few Ministers do, neither did Paul it seems by his own words. I could tell you
of a person that is zealous for Baptism in the sense that you oppose, and makes
Conscience of it, as one of Christ's Precepts, to that degree which you disalow
of; and yet for those few that he has Baptized, far short of what Paul, or you
may have done, and yet he knows not, remembers not, who of the Church he walks
with, that he has Baptized, much less the number, or names of them he has
Baptized else where, and yet but one of the meanest dispencers of Baptism, who
has had less share in that blessed work, then many others he knows amongst us.
That Paul did first gather and plant the Church of Corinth, is clear; but that
the many that were added to that populous people, might be Baptized by the
teaching brethren amongst themselves, is more then probable, and therefore well
might Paul say, He knew not, or did not remember who he had Baptized amongst
them.

But your Second ground is from Paul's thanking God, and telling us he was not
sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: Does this prove that Paul slighted
Baptism? I think not, as will afterward appear.

That Paul did Baptize some of them, and many others, is not to be questioned,
because expressed: That Paul did any thing in this or other Ordinances, but
what he had a Commission for, may not be presumed: his meaning then must be,
that he was not only, or mainly sent to Baptize, but Preach; as the great work
he was to atend upon. Note, he does not say he was not sent to Preach Baptism,
but not mainly to Baptize: He had the same Commission to Preach Baptism, as
Faith; and he could not be true to his trust, if he should shun to declare that
part of the Counsel of God, as occasion served, and required. And yet though he
Preached Faith and Baptism, he might Baptize but few of them that were
persuaded to obedience by his Ministry, but the bare dispencing that ordinance,
might be by any gifted Brother, called to that work.

Annanias, a certain Disciple, Baptized Paul; (and not an Apostle.) Peter
commanded Cornelius, and those that were with him, to be Baptized: but the Text
does not say Peter did it; it might be done by some of the Brethren that came
with him: neither can it resonably be supposed that the 3000. converted by
Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. was all Baptized by him, or the Apostles only; but it
is very like they had many administrators, which does not at all entrench upon
the great Commission of Christ, but is found in it; it being given to Preaching
Disciples, as Preaching Disciples; and all Preaching Disciples have authority
from thence, to Preach and Baptize; (these being properly no Church-Ordinances)
though in order to it.

Your Ninth Argument is, That by denying Communion with Unbaptized persons we
take from them their privilege to which they are born.

Answ. We take from them nothing; but we keep them from a disorderly practice
of Gospel Ordinances: we offer them their privilege in the way of Gospel
order, as all the Scripture Saints received their Privileges. But if any will
find, and force another way into the Sheepfold, then by following the footsteps
of the Flocks, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, you according
to your old manner of confidence affirm. Drink ye all of this? Is this intailed
to Faith, and not Baptism? It is soon said, but never yet proved; it is neither
intailed by Precept, Promise, or president, to Faith, without Baptism, that
ever yet can be showed: Nay, it is most apparent, that this new way of
fellowship was not from the beginning, but Baptism went before, as a Simbol of
our new birth: and breaking bread followed after, as the spiritual nourishment
of Christ's new born Babes.

As for your Eighteen Inferances, or Absurdities drawn for our Principle and
Practice, they are in themselves so rediculous, so topful of ignorance, or
prejudice; and are in themselves such a heap of unheard of reproaches, that
deserve no other answer then contempt; they carrying their self contradiction
in their own bowels. I durst commit this cause to the worst of our Enemies, and
doubt not they themselves being Judges, would clear us in the things laid to
our charge; that none but your self could ever find an innocent truth, big with
so many monstrous obsurdities, as you do. You have carried it like one of
Machevel's Scholars, to purpose, Throw dirt enough, and some of it will be
sure to stick. And the last of all looks with so dreadful a countenance, that
it has a tendency, to provoke, not only all other professors, but all sorts of
persons, to shun us, as well as or Principle, as that which is ruining to
mankind in general; that they may upon that account (if true) eye us, as the
most pernicious varment under heaven; persons made to be taken and destroyed.
Can you so confidently affirm, that this principle and practice is the cause of
all our late Judgments. Sir, it is well for us, that you are none of the Kings
Chaplains; or if you were, that his Majesty had not an ear to hear, or a heart
to believe such unheard of reproaches as these are; for if he did, he could do
no less, then expulse such vipers, that have been the death of so many hundred
thousands of his subjects, as your devilish suggestions seems to intimate, not
only out of the Land, but out of the World.

Sir, who made you so privy to the secrets of Gods Judgments, that you must
assign this alone, as the cause of (not some but) all the Judgments that have
befallen us? And is not this high charge a prouded, presumptious, impeaching of
the Justice of God? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do righteously? Gen
19. Will he slay the innocent with the guilty? Are there not millions lately
swept into the Grave, and buried in the great deeps, that never heard,
directly, or indirectly of the controversy between you, and us, nor knew
nothing of the form or order of Gods house; and must their ruin lie at our
doors? No wonder Sir, that you deal so severely with us, since the Righteous
proceeds of the great God, have such a hidden cause assigned to them, as though
the times profaneness, Superstition, Blasphemy; and Atheism, has no hand in our
late Judgments, but the load of all, must be laid upon that which so few that
suffered, are concerned in. The Lord Judge between us, and this accuser; to
whom we shall say no more, but, The Lord rebuke thee.

Your Tenth and last Argument has so little reason, and so much of confusion
in it, that it renders it self unworthy of an answer. That the World may wonder
at our carriage to these Unbaptized persons, in keeping them out of Communion,
is your last Argument.

Answ. I grant, the World are in some cases Judges of our conversation; and it
becomes us to carry it well in those things, wherein they are capable to be
Judges: but I deny, that the World are proper Judges of the grounds of our
Profession, or Communion, as to Church Fellowship: these things are out of
their sight; and they do oftener Judge them that walk closest in their duty,
then they that are for the greatest liberty. All that the enemy could find
against Daniel, was in the matters of his God, (in the business of Worship,)
which the World World are incapable to Judge of: And therefore what you say, as
to their reproaches, does clearly vanish: and if you eye that you may preach
and pray, especially Baptize no more, which I perceive you have no great zeal
for.

I shall now take liberty to add some Arguments to Justify our Principle and
Practice, against all that you have said to the contrary.

THe Question is, Whether Vnbaptzed persons have been, or ought to be members
of Gospel Churches.

I answer, They ought not to be: for these Reasons.

First, Because the great Commission of Christ, Mat. 28. (from which all
persons have their Authority for their Ministry, (if any Authority at all) does
clearly direct the contrary by that Commission. Ministers are, first to
Disciple, and then Baptize them, so made Disciples; and afterward teach them to
observe all that Christ had commanded, as to other Ordinances of Worship. If
Ministers have no other authority to teach them other parts of Gospel Worship,
before they believe and are Baptized, it may be strongly supposed, they are not
to admit them to other Ordinances, before they have passed the first enjoined
in that Commission.

Secondly, That the order of Christ's Commission, as well as the matter therein
contained, to be observed, may easily be concluded from Gods severity toward
them that sought him not according to due order; 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Was God so
exact with his people then, that all things, to a pin, must be according to the
pattern in the Mount? Heb. 7. 16, and 9, 10. whose Worship then compartively,
to the Gospels, was but after the Law of a carnal Commandment: and can it be
supposed, he should be so indifferent, now to leave men to their own liberty,
to time and place his appointments contrary to what he has given an express
rule for, in his word, as before showed, Ezekiel 44. 7, 9, 10. It was the
Priests Sin formerly to bring the Uncircumcised in heart and flesh into his
house.

Thirdly, The practice of the first Gospel Ministers, with them that first
trusted in Christ, discovers the truth of what I assert. Certainly they that
lived at the Springhead, on Fountain of truth; and had the Law from Christ's
own mouth, knew the meaning of his Commission, better then we: But their
constant practice, in conformity to that Commission, all along the Acts of the
Apostles, clearly discovers that they never arrived to such a Latitude as men
plead for now adays: They that gladly received the Word was Baptized, and they
(yea they only) was received to the Church, Acts 2.

Fourthly, None of the Scripture Saints ever attempted this Church-Priviledge,
before Baptism, (if they did, let it be shown:) the Eunuch* first desired
Baptism, before any thing else: Paul was first Baptized, before he did assay to
join with the Church: our Lord Christ, the great example of the New Testament,
entered not upon his public Ministry, much less any other Gospel Ordinance of
Worship, till he was Baptized.

Fifthly, If Christ himself was made manifest, as the sent of God, by Baptism,
as appears Mark 1. 9, 10. then why may not Baptism as the first fruit of Faith,
and the first step of Gospel obedience, as to instituted Worship, be a
manifesting, discovering Ordinance upon others, who thus follow Christ's steps?

Sixthly, If Baptism be in any fence, any part of the Foundation of a Church,
as to order, Heb. 6. 1, 2. it must have a place here, or no where. Why are
those things called first Principles, if not first to be believed and
practiced? Why are they rendered by the learned, as the A B C of a Christian,
and the beginnings of Christianity, milk for babes, if it be no matter whither
Baptism be practiced or no? If it be said Water Baptism be not there intended,
let them show me how many Baptismes there are besides Water-Baptisme: Can you
build, and leave out a stone in the Foundation? I intend not Baptism as a
foundation any other way, but respecting order; and it is either intended for
that, or nothing.

Seventhly, If Paul knew the Galathians, upon the account of Charity, no other
way to be the Sons of God by Faith, but by this part of their obedience, as he
seems to import; then the same way we may Judge of the truth of men's profession
of Faith, when it shows it self by this self same obedience, Gal. 3. 26, 27.
Baptism being an obligation to all following duties.

Eighthly, If being Baptized into Christ, be a putting on of Christ, as Paul
expresses, then they have not put on Christ in that sense he means, that are
not Baptized. If this putting on of Christ do not respect the visibility of
Christianity, assign something else as its signification, great men's servants
are known by their Masters Liveries, so are Gospel believers by this Livery of
Water Baptism, that all that first trusted in Christ, submitted to: which is in
it self, as much as an Obligation to all Gospel obedience, as Circumcision was
to keep the whole Law.

Ninthly, If it were commendable in them of Thossalonica, that they followed
the footsteps of the Church of Judah, who, it appears, observed this Order,
of adding Baptized believers to the Church, then they that have found out
another way of making Church Members, are not by that rule 1 These. 2. 14.
praiseworthy, but rather to be blamed: It is not what was since in corrupted
times, but that which was from the beginning: the first Churches was the purest
pattern.

Tenthly, If so be that any of the members of Corinth, Galatia, Coloss, Rome,
Romans. 6. Colos. 2. 1 Cor. 15.
or them that Peter writes to, were not Baptized, then Paul's Arguments for the
Resurrection to them, or to press them to Holiness, from that ground, was out a
doors, and altogether needless: Nay, it bespeaks his ignorance; and 1 Pet. 3.
12.
throws contempt upon the Spirits Wisdom, Heb. 6.
by which he wrote, if that must be asserted as a ground to provoke them to
such an end, which had no being a and if all the members of all those Churches
were Baptized, why should any plead for an exemption from Baptism, for any
Church Members now?

Eleventhly, If Unbaptized persons must be received into the Church, only,
because they are believers; though they deny Baptism, then why may not others
plead for the like privilege, that are negligent in any other Gospel Ordinance
of Worship, from the same ground, of want of light, let it be what it will. So
then, as the Consequence of this Principle, Churches may be made up of visible
Sinners, instead of visible Saints.

Twelfthly, Why should professors have more light in breaking of bread, then
Baptism? (that this must be so urged for their excuse) has God been more
sparing in making out his mind, in the one, rather then the other? Is there
more precepts, or presidents for the Supper, then Baptism? has God been so
bountiful, in making out himself about the Supper, that few or none, that own
Ordinances, scruple it; and must Baptism be such a Rock of offense to
professors, that very few will seriously enquire after it, or submit to it?
has not man's wisdom interposed, to darken this part of Gods Counsel, by which
professors seem willingly led, though against so many plain commands and
examples, written as with a Sun beam, that he that runs may read; and must an
advocate be entertained to plead for so gross a piece of ignorance, that the
meanest babes of the first Gospel times were never guilty of?

Thirteenthly, If obedience must discover the truth of a man's Faith to others?
why must Baptism be shut out, as if it were no part of Gospel obedience? is
there no precept for this practice, that it must be thus despised, as a matter
of little use? or shall one of Christ's precious commands, be blotted out of the
Copy of a Christians obedience, to make way for a Church Fellowship of man's
devising?

Fourteenthly, If the Baptism of John, was so far honored, and dignified, that
they that did submit to it, are said to Justify God; and they that did not,
are said, Luke 7. to reject his Counsel, against themselves; so that their
receiving, or rejecting the whole Doctrine of God, by John, has its
demonstration from this single practice: and is there not as much to be said of
the Baptism of Christ? unless you will say it is (...) in worth and use, to
that of John's.

I add no more, but these few Queries, which I commmit to your most serious
consideration.

Some Queries.
1. ASk your heart whether popilarity, and ap^lause of variety of professors,
be not in the bottom of what you have said; that has been your snare, to
perve^t the straight way of the Lord, and to lead others into a path, wherein
we can find none of the footsteps of the Flocks in the first time?

2. Have you dealt brotherly, or like a Christian, to throw so much dirt upon
your Brethren, in Print, in the face of the World, when you had opportunity to
converse with (...) of reputation, amongst (...) Printing; being (...) the
liberty by them, at the same time, for you to speak amongst them?

3. Does your carriage answer the Law of Love, or Civility, when the Brethren
used means to send to you for a conference, and their Letter was received by
you, that you should go out again from the City, after knowledge of their
desires, and not vouchsafe a meeting with them, when the Glory of God, and the
vindication of so many Churches, is concerned?

4. Is it not the Spirit of Diophrites of old, in you, Who (...) loved to (...)
preheminen^ (...) 3 John 9. 10.
you are (...) as to keep out all the Brethren that are not of your mind in
this matter, from having any entertainment in the Churches, or meetings to
which you belong, though you your self have not been denied the like liberty,
amongst them that are contrary minded to you? is this the way of your
retaliation? or are you afraid lest the truth should in this matter invade
your Quarters?

6. Is there no contempt cast upon the Brethren, who desired your satisfaction,
that at the same time, when you had opportunity to speak to them, (...) that,
you commit^^^ (...) ^etter to others, by (...) reflection upon them?

6. Did not your presumption prompt you to provoke them to Printing, in your
Letter, to them, when they desired to be found in no such practice, least the
enemies of truth should take advantage by it?

7. Whether your Principle and Practice is not equally against others, as well
as us? viz. Episcopal, Presbiterian, and Independent, who are all of our side,
for our practice (though they differ with us about the subject of Baptism:) do
you delight to have your hand against every man?

FINIS.
IN the Epistle, Pag^ (...) president. p. 8. l. 17. (...) Elie. p. 16. l. 12.
r. death of (...) l. 4. r. exhorts.

1. SYmtomes of growth, and decay of godliness, in eighty signs of a living and
dying Christian, with the causes of decay, and remedies for recovery. The
second Edition much enlarged, with the Addition also of twenty signs largely
improved. 2. A new and useful Concordance to the Holy Bible, according to the
last Translation, containing the most material Scriptures, in the Line and
Margent of the old and new Testament, together with the chief acceptations of
special words, with notes to distinguish the promises, commands, and
threatenings, being plainer, and much larger then any of this Volume yet extant.
In Octavo and Twelves: Also to be had bound up with the Bible, in both Volumes.
By Mr. Vavisor Powel.

