THE Reign of the Whore DISCOVERED. And Her RVINE seen.
THis is a certain Truth revealed in the light, and witnessed to by the
Scriptures, that the Whore, (the false Church) has long reigned in her fenced
City which Cain the Vagabond and Murderer built; and long has she been
guarded and defended with Cain's Weapons, carnal Weapons; and long has she
sat as a queen, seeing no sorrow* and long has her golden Cup passed up and
down the Nations, which is full of abominations of her Fornication, whereby the
Nations have been That sign of long Reig
corrupted, and the Inhabitants of the Earth made drunk: But now is the hour of
her Judgment come, and coming; now is her skirts lifted up, and her secret
parts discovered, and discovering, and the Beast on whom she rode and rides, is
seen, and his color is known, and her secret Chambers of Imagery is found out,
and her Sorceries and Witchcrafts are made manifest, and many people on whom
she s;ate, and over whom she reigned, are redeemed from under her, and reigns
over her in Christ the Power of God, which redeems, and which preserves in the
redemption: Oh let the redeemed of the Lord praise his holy Name, and walk to
the praise and glory of his Grace for ever; for the day is dawned wherein
hypocrisy cannot stand, nor hypocrites hide themselves, and wherein fig leaves
cannot hide nor cover from the pure eye of the Lord God, which runs to and fro
through the Earth, though they may be sowed together by such who have eaten of
the choicest fruit the tree of knowledge of good and evil yields; and by such
who are called Orthodox men, Learned men, great Scholars, Wise Disputants, all
is in valn, their labor is little worth, the Lord is come down to walk in the
Garden, and his Voice, Where art thou? is gone forth, and now is the Lord come,
and coming to make inquisition for blood, and to bring every man's Work to
Judgment, and to reward every man according to his Work.

And now ye Priests and Professors in Southwark, especially who are called
Presbyterians, whose cry is very loud against us who are called Quakers, and
the noise among you is, That we are the deceivers, false prophets, and wolves
in sheeps clothing, and that we deny the Scriptures, and are Jesuits, etc.

Answ. Must this be true because you say so? And must the people believe you
before you prove it? Nay, but you will be counted false accusers, and fierce
despisers of those that are good, till you make it appear by better proofs then
you could find to prove your selves Ministers of Christ at the late Dispute,
and then you can find to quit your selves from being guilty of those things you
charge us withal; for indeed we count you guilty of the same things you accuse
us for, and ever shall unless you can clear your selves, and convince us to the
contrary; for we see many signs, marks, and characters upon you, and many
practices among you which were never found upon, nor among the true Ministers
of Christ, and that are not owned by the Scriptures; and this has been
signified to you already at the late Dispute, and in Writing also given into
William Cooper's hands some Weeks since.

And also in a printed Paper, titled, The grounds and reasons why we deny the
Teachers of the world; Which has been printed six years since, and no Answer
has appeared from you the National Priests, who are concerned therein.

And now seeing William Cooper and some others of your Brethren affirmed
publicly, that we (the people called quakers) are Jesuits, and Jesuitical, and
proffered to prove their affirmation, (in the bitterness of their spirits)
therefore let us reason a little with you, and prove and examine you, that the
people may see your Clothing or outside (if not your inside) to be Jesuitical
at least; and let us and all people know how you can quit your selves from
being of that Popish Train; and as for us, let our integrity and innocence
plead for us, otherwise we shall say nothing for our selves, for the Lord does
plead our cause.

Are not you like the Jesuits and Popish Priests, First, In your being made fit
for your Call to your Ministry. Secondly, In your Call. Thirdly in your going
forth, Fourthly, In your Work called to. Fifthly, In your Maintenance in your
Work. Sixthly, In your Doctrines, Practices, Places of Worship, and manners in
Worship. If you say nay, Make it appear not only in Words, but in Fruits; not
Fruits of Violence I do not mean; but Fruits of the Spirit of God, if you know
it, and answer.

First, Are you not like the Jesuits and Popish Priests in preparing your
selves, and making your selves fit for your Call to your Ministry you profess?
Are you not prepared and fitted at those Schools and Colleges first ordained
by the Pope? Does not learning some natural Languages and Arts, as Logic, and
Rhetoric, and such like, make you fit for your Call? And are not the Popish
Priests and Jesuits made fit after this manner, in such places, and by such
means, for their Call? Then are you nor like them in this thing? And was ever
any of the Ministers of Christ fitted and prepared after this manner that he
sent forth?

Secondly, Are you not called, appointed, and ordained by men to preach? And do
you not count that your Call, if you have the approbation of some that are
counted Orthodox men, which have learned the natural Tongues and Arts that are
taught in the Popish Schools and Colleges? And are not the Popish Priests and
Jesuits called and approved after this manner? And are you not like them in
this also? Was ever Christ's Ministers called by man, or approved by man?

Thirdly, In your yoing forth to preach are you like the Ministers of Christ?
Do you go gorth freely, and minister freely from City to City, and Nation to
Nation, as the Ministers of Christ did? Have you received freely? Have not you
bought what you have with money? And do you not strive to get the best Market
place you can to sit down into sell it again, even at a deer rate? And are not
the Popish old Mas-houses your Marketplaces, where you abide many times for
term of life? Are not you the creepers the Apostle spoke of, that should creep
into houses, and lead silly Women captive, laden with sin, led aside with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth? Are not all your followers such? Does not your fruits make you appear to
be such house-creepers as were in the Apostles days? Is not this the Popish
Priests manner? Do not they go forth in this way? Are not you careless
Watchmen, and dreaming Prophets, and idle Shepherds? Do you not say we are
Wolves? And have we not had meetings several years in many of your Folds,
(called parishes) in and over which you count your selves good Wattchmen, and
true Shepherds? But when did either of you, or any of you parish-Masters (who
would have others count you true Shepherds) so much as come to save your sheep
from being drawn or taken from, or out of your Fold? And have you not lost many
of the best and soberest of your flock? Have you cared naturally for your
flock, or naturally for the fleece? Have you showed your selves like true
shepherds, or like hirelings in this thing? Do you think you are wronged to be
called and counted careless, dreaming, false, idle shepherds, and such who want
the spiritual Weapons, and true Shepherds Crook? Put aside Whips, and Stocks,
and Prisons, and compulsive Laws, and what can you do? Where Is your Spiritual
Weapons? Where Is your Shepherds Crook then? If you lose these Weapons, what can
you do to defend your selves or flock? And if you put away the Wisdom which man
teaches, and which man has taught you, as natural tongues, and arts, what can
you say? Is your armor the whole armor of light? and have you the Sword of
the Spirit? and do you speak as the Spirit gives you utterance, as Christ's
Ministers did? Or do you not gain utterance as the popish priests and Jesuits
gains it? and have you not bought the art of uttetance? and yet are not many of
you so dull and sottish, that if you should lose your Notes (which I have seen
some of you craftily hide betwixt the leaves of your Bibles that the people
might not see them) would you not lose your method, matter and utterance, and
so have little to say? Why do you endeavor to hide your notes? And do not some
of you carry a Bible on purpose up with you into your Pulpits to hide your
Notes? And are there not some of you that have I have seen such
Note Books bound and painted in form of a Bible, when there is no printed
Letter in it? Now could you not preach better without your Bible, then without
your Notes and Note-Book? Why do you not leave your Bibles at home? Do you
bring it only for a cloak, custom and fashion? and is not this the reason why
people cry against us for denyers of the Scriptures, because we do not hold a
Bible in our hands when we preach to people, and because we follow not your
fashion, and have Notes to tell the people the Chapter and Verse? Did Christ's
Ministers go forth after this manner with Notes in their pockets, or in a Book,
to tell them what to preach, and how to preach? and did they ever sit down and
continue in one place for term of life, unless they could hear of a people that
would give them more money, and greater hire? Whose example do you follow in
this, if not the Popish Priests? Come Priests, let the people hear your answer.

Fourthly, In your Work called to; you say it is to preach the Gospel, and the
cry is among poor, blind, ignorant people, you are Ministers of the Gospel; But
are you not Ministers of the Letter? and do you not call Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John's Writings, the Gospel? and do you not take the Letter for your
groundwork, which you call your Text, and then by your art which you have
learned at School, raise that you call your Doctrines, Points, Reasons, Uses,
Motives, and Trials, and such like? Now is not your preaching, or making an
hours speech, artificial? and is not your Work herein like the Popish Priests?
and are you not very unlike the Ministers of Christ in this your Work? Did any
of the latter Prophets take the former Prophets Words to speak from? Or did any
of the latter Apostles and Ministers of Christ, take the former Apostles and
Ministers Words for their Groundwork? Did not they all minister according as
they had received from God? and was not their Work and Ministry for this end,
To turn people to Gods gift in them, from the darkness to the light, from the
power of Satan to God? But is your Work so? Do not you turn people's minds to
something without them? and do not your selves hate the light, and so are you
like to turn people from darkness? and are you not under the power of Satan you
selves? and do you not teach the poor ignorant people, that it is impossible to
be freed from under the power of Satan, and that they must never expect to be
freed from committing of sin while living in the Body? and are not those under
the power of the Devil that does the Works of the Devil, and obeys his Will?
are not those that commit sin the servants of sin, and free from righteousness?
Is not he that commits sin, of the Devil? Then to what end and purpose is all
your labor, pains, and study, and preaching, and praying, etc. if people must
always be servants of sin, and slaves to the Devil, and never be redeemed from
fin and iniquity? What spiritual things do you sow to poor people? What
Gospel do you preach? What glad tidings do you bring? Is this your glad
tidings, that people must live in sin, and under the power of the Devil? Are
you not miserable Ministers? Have you not brought another Gospel besides that
which the Apostles preached? Is not the Gospel glad tidings to such as are
weary and heavy laden with sin, and in bondage to the Devil? And is not the
Gospel the Power of God? And is not Christ the Power of God? and is not he
appointed to save his people from their sin, and not in their sins? Have you
not one thing still to learn of the Pope, and that is, to know where the time
and place of Cleansing is? How come you to miss preaching up a Purgatory, or
place of Cleansing after this life, seeing your Doctrine and Principles admits
of no such place and time in this World? But are not the Papists and you both
deceived in this thing? Does not the Tree lie as it falls? And Judgment find
as death leaves? And no unclean thing enter the Kingdom? Come Priests, let us
and the people here your answer.

Fifthly, As to your Maintenance in this your Work; How can you quit your
selves from being like the Papist Priest and Jesuits? Are you any thing like
the Ministers of Christ in this thing also? Have not the Pope, Cardinals, and
Bishops, been the Foundation of your settled standing-maintenance by Tithes,
Gleab-lands, Easter-reckonings, Midsummer dues, Mortnaries and Smoke penys, and
such like? Are you not beholding to the Pope and Popish Laws for this your way
of maintenance? And why do you deny the Pope? Is it because he has no
authority in this Nation to give you any more means, nor to take from you what
you have? Is it not a great sign that the root of all evil is in you, (to wit)
Covetousness, that you have swallowed down so much blood, liberty and goods of
many of the poor innocent Lambs of Christ within these few years, because for
conscience sake they could not put into your mouths? Have you not prepared war
against the innocent people of the Lord, who living in his pure fear, did not
dare to maintain you in your Idolatry, in your lightness, pride and
high-mindedness? How many of you have appeared like a Troop of Robbers in
taking, and causing to be taken away violently poor peoples Ports, and Pans,
and Kettles, and dishes from them, sometimes not leaving them things necessary
to make ready their food in; and Bedding, and Clothes, and Oxen, and Cows, and
Horses, and Harness, and Barns of Wheat, and Cart-loads of Hey and Corn, and
their bodies also cast into prison? Has not this been your Work in this
Nation? Has not the Lord raised a patient and harmless people to try you,
which have not striven against you in their Wills, that you might manifest what
was in your hearts, notwithstanding your talk of Christianity; Have we not seen
the murderer offer a sacrifice? and the profane person weep for the blessing?
and the children of the Devil call God Father? Has not our eyes seen this? And
is it not manifest if the Lord God, which is the higher Power, unto whom our
souls are subject, did not overpower, and chain, and fetter, and break the
horns of the Wicked, no less then our lives and blood would satisfy; for had
not you (to wit, you especially called Presbyterian Priests) rather sit as a
Popish Synod or Inquisition, then in the spirit of meekness, lowlinss, and
soundness in words, in life and conversation, and Scripture-example; prove your
selves Ministers of Christ by your fruits and effects? Was ever the true
Ministers of the Gospel in any age or generation since the days of Christ, the
Son of the living God, manifest at Jerusalem, maintained as you are maintained,
by the ruin of others? Did they ever take any thing violently from any man?
Nay, did ever they take or receive any thing at all from those that denied
their Doctrine, and that would not receive nor own them as Ministers of Christ?
What, are you quite without shame? Are you so greedy of filthy lucre, that you
do not care how much you manifest your shame, and uncover your nakedness to all
people? If you keep a Flock, eat the Milk the Flock will give you; if you plant
a Vinyard, eat the fruit the Vinyard will yield you; should you covet your
Neighbors goods, and take them away because you say he is a Heretic? Should
you rob your Neighbors vinyard because you cannot have fruit enough to
satisfy your covetous desires out of that you have planted? Should you go reap
your Neighbors field, because where you have sown there is little come up but
briars and thorns? If you do thus, may not we, yea and all people, count you
greedy of filthy lucre, covetous persons, and robbers? Would you have better
come up then you sow? They that preach the Gospel, lives of the Gospel, and
they never did, nor need petition the powers of the Earth to establish a
Livelihood upon them; but you smell much of Popery in this thing, and you have
no example in the holy Scriptures to justify you, but the Romish black Train
is your example, and therefore we deny you, and cannot but count of you as you
are, and in so doing we wrong you not; But have not you wronged us, and falsely
accused us, and charged us to be like, or one with those whose example you are
found in, and whose steps you follow, to wit, false Prophets, false Teachers,
Popish Priests and Jesuits? You shall bear your own Judgment.

Sixthly, Concerning your Doctrine, Practices, Places, and manner of Worship.

Are you not found, and do we nor find you in the popish Doctrine, and
Jesuitical practices, and popish Mass-Houses, and in the manner of their
Worship in some things, and in some other things of later invention which the
Scriptures does not own nor justify, neither did the Ministers of Christ allow
of? If so, may we not count you such as do not deny the popish vvayes, places,
and manners, but lives in them, and by them? Is it not a popish Doctrine and
practice to oppose the light within, wherewith Christ has enlightened every
man that is come into the World, and to teach some other way to attain the
knowledge of God, besides the light which shines in the heart, notwithstanding
the Scripture testifies, that the light which shines in the heart must give man
the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ? And is it not the papists
doctrine and practice to deny Revelation and Inspiration, and the immediate
power of God present now, as of old? and is not this your Doctrine and practice
also? Does not the Scripture say, or is it not written, That there is none that
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him? So do not the
papists herein (and you with them) deny that the knowledge of God is
attainable, seeing you deny the way wherein, the manner how, and the thing by
which he is known, seen, and revealed, to wit, the light within? and if God be
not known only, and alone, by the revelation of Christ, and you and the
papists deny revelation, and say it is ceased, then by what means do you expect
to attain the knowledge of God, which is life eternal?

And how do you that deny Inspiration and immediate power from God, believe the
Scriptures, wherein is promised many glorious things to be enjoyed by the
children of the Lord, as the pouring forth of his spirit upon his sons and
daughters? and how do you own the New Covenant, the fear in the heart, and the
Spirit of the Lord in the inward parts? and you that deny the immediate voice,
power, and presence of the Lord,, as of old, how do you believe Christ's words,
who said to his Disciples, Lo, I will be with you to the end of the world? and
is not the presence of Christ the immediate power of God? and where two or
three are gathered together in his Name, is he not in the midst? and is not he
and his Father one, whose abode is with his people? But is not this too
wonderful for Hirelings without a meaning?

And why do you talk of the Scriptures for your Rule? Is it not for ends to
yourselves? Does the Scriptures your pretended Rule, justify you any more then
they justify the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, and popish
priests? Why do you talk of three persons, or Trinity? Has not the Pope
learnt you that also? Does the Scripture speak any where of three persons? And
where had you that word Sacrament, and the word merit? Had you not these from
the papists?

And concerning your places wherein you commonly perform your public Worship;
who founded and named them for you? Did not the papists? as St. Mary Magdalens
Church, St. Thomas his Church, St. Stephen's Church, St. Peter's Church, St.
Paul's Church: Did not the very same spirit that was cast out of Mary Magdalen,
and that stoned Stephen, and that murdered Peter and Paul, build and give
Names to those Steeple Houses? which you have suffered, if not taught the
people, to call Churches, and the Houses of God, insomuch that it has been a
great crime among poor ignorant people to hear them called otherwise, and is
still, especially in some places of this Nation: Were they not the Popes
Mass-Houses, and places of their Idolatrous Worship? And what Rule have you in
the holy Scriptures for any to worship the true God in these Idolatrous Dens,
and Popish Houses, and to call them such, and such a Saints Church, especially
without alteration in form, in name and esteem? Did the children of Israel do
so? Did the primitive Christians do so? Where is your example? And who made
George a Saint? and Katherine, and Olives, and Mary Overies, and Giles, and
Gregory, etc. that your Churches are called by their Names? are they not of the
Popes making? are you not ashamed that people should call those places Churches?

And then concerning your Manners and Worship in these places; Is it not your
manner before your Worship begins, to ring Bells to call your Hearers (your
Brethren) together? and whom do you imitate? and who learnt you this but the
papists? and why do you deny them in words, and imitate them in practice?

And is it not your manner to get an hourglass to preach, and pray by, and to
sing by? and have you not the chief seats in the Assemblies? the popish Train
has so; and are you not like them? Do not they worship, and preach, and pray,
and sing by the hour? then do you not agree with them? Did ever the true
Christians and Christian Ministers do so?

And why must you have a soft Cushion with silken Jobs at the corners to lean
on to read your studied, devised, framed artificial Sermon or speech to the
people? And by what order was your Pulpit or high place hung with imbroydered
Cloth, and some other of your stalls lined with cloth, when others want it to
wear, even of your own heap, and sect and fold? Who are you like in this? Have
you any such president in the holy Scriptures? What? and where is your Rule and
Example? If you must have a Cushion, cut off the Jobs; and if you must have a
Pulpit, take off your imbroydered clothes, and cloathe your brethren which are
within your own Parish, and of your own flesh; and do not let them go up and
down begging for clothes and food, while your Pulpits and Stalls, or other
chief Seats, are clothed, imbroydered, and laced; What manner of Christianity
and brotherly love is there among you toward one another? And how come you by
this manners among you, that he that has a Gold Ring, and costly Apparel, and
is called a rich man, must have a sumptuous seat in the principal place; and
others in vile raiment can scarce have a place to sit on, but must stand afar
off? Where I say did you learn this manners? Did you learn it of the Church of
Christ, or the Pope and his Church? And is it not your manner and custom to
respect persons, places, times, days and things? Does not the Heathen so? and
the Papists so? Then who may we compare you with, if not with those? Did ever
any of the primitive Christians do so? Was it their manner to respect the
person of him or her that had a Gold Ring or costly Apparel? Or was it their
manner to respect or cry up the Jewish Synagogues, or Heathen Idolatrous
Temple, or any particular place or house whatsoever, as the only place of
Worship, and call it a Church? Or did the Church of God in the days of Moses
and the Prophets, when the Lord had given them victory over the Heathen their
Enemies, did they (I say) preserve the Heathenish Idolatrous places of Worship,
as Altars, Groves and Temples, and teach the people to call them Churches? Was
it not as lawful for those places to be called a Church, as it is for these
popish Dens (builded with observation East and West, with a picture of a Cock
and a Cross upon it, as the Papists devised and appointed) to be called a
Church? Did not the Ministers of Christ gather people out of them, and bear
their testimony against them, and all Temples made with hands? Did not the Lord
by his Hammer, and battel-Ax of War, break down, burn, and utterly destroy
those places, and Images, and Groves, set up and consecrated by the Idolaters?
Did not the Lord begin such a work in this Nation some years since? And has
some Instruments proved like Jehu, begun in zeal, and ended in covetousness,
which is Idolatry, and has not regarded the Law of God withal their heart,
And shall that frustrate the work and purpose of the Lord? Is he not raising
others to accomplish his Work, and fulfill his Decree against the Adulterous
generation, of what name or sect soever? and down in esteem, if not in form,
must the Popish Mass-Houses come, (and which is now the Priests Market place,
and called a Church) and down must your Bells, and Pulpit-embroydered clothes,
and such like trumpery come, which has been set up in the time of Popery, and
since the cry was, Who is able to make war with the Beast?

And then is it not your manner to respect times, days, and things? Are you
not like the Papists in this also? And have you not learnt of the Pope,
Bishops, Cardinals, Jesuits Priests, Friars and Monks, and Heathens, how, and
what to call your times, days, months, and quarters, etc. Have they not all
Heathenish and Popish Names? The holy Scriptures you are not ashamed to say is
your Rule, but in what one thing do you walk according to your pretended Rule?
unless you mean the Popish and Heathenish Scriptures, or Writings, and call
them your holy Rule; if you mean those, you shall be believed, because you are
found walking thereafter; but if you mean the Writings which holy men wrote as
they were moved by the Holy Spirit, we know you are liars, and cannot believe
you, for they never learnt you to follow the manners and customs of the Heathen
nor Papists, as you do, in respecting, and naming, or calling your Times,
Days, Months and things; the Scripture of Truth teaches to call Days and
Months after this manner, First day, second day, third day, fourth day, fifth
day, sixth day, seventh day. First month, second month, third month, and so to
the twelfth month. The Heathen and Papists, and their Writings, teaches to
call the first day of the Week Sunday, or dies Solis, the day of the Sun; the
second day Monday, or dies Lun^, the day of the Moon, or the Moons day; the
third day Tuesday; and the fourth Wednesday; the fifth Thursday; sixth Friday;
the seventh Saturday; according to the Names of the 7. Planets which the Heathen
and Papists talk so much of. And the first Month they call March, the second
April, and so on to the eighth Month, which is called October, which signifies
the eighth Month, November the ninth Month, December the tenth Month, from the
Lattin words, Octo, Novem, December, eight, nine, and ten; and the eleventh Month
you call January, and the twelfth Month February. Now do you not prefer the
Heathenish and Popish Traditions, Rules, Customs, Manners, and Writings,
before, and above what is delivered, prescribed, and taught in the Writings of
the holy men of God? so that it is come to pass by your so doing, that if
people are brought to call days, and months, and times, and places, and
persons, according as those did who had the spirit of God, which the Scriptures
teaches and witnesses unto; I say, When people are brought to this, they
become a hissing, and a wonder among you, and are counted nice, and frivolous,
and unmannerly, and when we speak and write of hours, days, and months, as
they are recorded in the Scripture, people cannot tell what we mean, nor how to
understand us, nor when such a time, hour day or month is, but will rather mock
and jeer at first hour, first day, first month etc. and will have no such
reckoning of times in their temporal, civil, or spiritual Accounts; these are
your Auditors your Disciples, or Scholars; as you have learnt, you teach; as
you the Priests are, so are the people, imitators of the Papists and Heathen in
this, as well as other things; and the Christians life, words, manners and
behavior, you are out of, and strangers to; and may we not justly with the
Heathen and Papists compare you, whose example you follow?

And then concerning the manner of your public Divine Worship, (as you call
it) have you not this manner and custom as the first part of your Worship, to
sing David's Psalms in rhyme and meeter, divised, or turned thereinto by Poets
or Musicianers, as Thomas Sternhold, and John Hopkins, and others, with apt
Notes to sing them withal, before your prayer, and after your Prayer; before
your Sermon, and after your Sermon, of all the people together; Is not this
your own invention? Was there any such manner of singing in the Church of
Christ? You say; Let us sing to the praise and glory of God; and you keep an
Officer to read the Psalm to people, which are some drunkards, some covetous,
some proud, some defrauders of their Brethren, dissemblers, double* dealers,
some Adulterers and unclean persons; some jesters, and idle talkers; some
light, and vain, wild, and wanton; some scornful high-minded, and mockers; some
disobedient to Parents, unthankful, and unholy, and of rude, unchristian
behavior; Of such consists your Church; and are not the Steeplehouse-singers
such? And can such persons sing to the praise and glory of God? Or are they in
a state and condition fit to sing at all? Does not weeping and howling,
mourning, sorrow, and lamentation, and woe from the dreadful Lord God of Heaven
and of Earth, belong to such singers? Singing with Grace in the heart unto the
Lord, we own; but singing with wickedness, with pride and covetousness in the
heart, we utterly deny; Singing with the Spirit and with understanding, we own;
but your singing by Letter, with Musical Notes and Tunes, customarily,
ignorantly, without understanding, we wholly disown, and bear our testimony
against it as abomination in the sight of the Lord, and it was never ordained
nor appointed in, nor by the true Church; but it has been ordained and
appointed by the false Church, the Whore, and her Merchants, in the dark night
of Apostasy, since the days of the Apostles, and since the true Church fled in
to the Wilderness; And is not this singing of David's Prayers, Mournings,
Sighings, Complainings, and Cries unto the Lord, and his Praises, Rejoicings,
and magnifying the Lord, and such like conditions as David was in; I say, Is
not your singing of these things, like the Papists singing? have you any more
rule in the Scripture for your singing, then the Papists have for their
singing? And has it not been one of the Whores later invention and addition to
your Worship, even about the time of Queen Elizabeth's reign in this Nation? but
the same pure, eternal light which appeared in the hearts of some about the
beginning of our English Wars, and manifested much of the Popish Trumpery which
was then in being, of which quiristers and singing-boys in white Surplices was
one; I say, the same pure, eternal light has manifested your singing and noise
to be as abominable in the ears of the Lord, as theirs, and to be denied and
witnessed against; for you have no more rule in the Scripture for your singing
David's Prayers, then the quiresters and singers then had to sing the Prayer
which Christ taught his Disciples, which they called Pater Noster; Which of all
you Mass-house Singers are, or ever were what you sing, as when you sing, O
Lord I am no^ puffed in mind, and that your eyes are not scornful? Are you not of
such a proud and hard heart, and puffed up mind, and scornful eyes, many of you,
that you will scarce look upon, nor walk with, nor relieve those that are poor,
though they be of your own Church? Then do you not sing a lie in this? And is
that to the praise and glory of God? Surely you dare not say that God is
glorified with a noise of lies; not that David's Psalms are lies, but you being
not in the same state, condition, and life that David was in, they are lies in
your mouths: David said, Mine eyes gush out with Rivers of water, because they
keep not thy law, I am afflicted, and ready to dye from my youth up; while I
suffer thy terrors, I am d^stracted, I am like a Bottle in the smoke; I am like
an Owl in the desert; I am like a Pelican in the Wilderness; I am like a
Sparrow alone upon the house top; all my friends and acquaintance has forsaken
me. This David said, and you sing these words ignorantly, customarily, never
witnessing the same state and condition, so they are lies in your mouths, and
God is not glorified, but dishonored by you in this part of your Worship; and
your singing, and the Papists, and quiristers, and Surplice-boys singing, is
abomination alike in the sight of the Lord, and in the sight of his servants
who are redeemed from amongst you, and from under the great Whore, which sits
upon the Waters; but the Lord our God is taking her seat from under her, and
into the pit she (with her golden Cup full of Sorceries, Witchcrafts, and
Fornications) shall fall, and none shall be able to deliver her, neither can
she save her self, nor those that has been, and still are made drunk with her
Sorceries and deceiveable ways of unrighteousness, of which this trick, craft,
and art of singing is one; James said, Is any merry, let him sing Psalms; He
wrote these words to Saints; but hear what he wrote to such as you, Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded; be afflicted,
and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy into
heaviness. Such as these has no cause to be merry, who are sinners, whose
hands are uncleansed, and whose hearts are unpurified, and whose minds are
double; And are not all ye Mass-house-singers in whole Christendom (so called)
such? But the Lord has redeemed, and is redeeming many thousands from among
you, Babylonish singers, and has brought, and is bringing them to godly
sorrow, which leads to repentance never to be repented of, and afterward to
the joy which shall never have an end; and your rejoicing and singing which is
carnal, customary, and formal, before any godly sorrow for sin you know, and
before you are lead to that repentance which is never to be repented of; I say,
this your rejoicing and singing which is before repentance, must of necessity
end in sorrow and anguish of heart: The Lord grant you such sorrow which
leads to repentance in time, before Eternity seizes upon you, that weeping,
and howling, and gnashing of teeth be not your portion for ever; for if the
prayers of the unregenerate, ungodly, or wicked are abomination to the Lord, is
their praises and singing any better? Is praise comely in the mouth of a fool?
And are not they fools that lives in iniquity, and yet rejoiceth? Consider this
ye Priests, ye Jesuits, and Popish Christians, and let the Witness for God in
your conscience, and in all consciences answer whether ye are not all alike.

Concerning your praying after you have done singing.

The Scripture says, I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath or doubting; But what hands do you lift up? Are your hands holy,
etc? Have not you Wrath, Envy, and Malice in your hearts, and doubtings, and
waverings in your minds? Is not your prayings like the Popish Priests and
Papists prayings? And like the Scribes and Pharisees prayings? Did Christ ever
teach you to pray any more then he taught them? Are you his Disciples, or
Scholars, or followers any more then they? What do you learn of him? And
whither do you follow him? Can you say that he has taught you to pray as he
taught his Disciple to pray? Have you not learnt to pray of some other besides
Christ? And do not you (instead of being led to pray by the Spirit of Christ)
pray customarily? You know when you have sung out your Psalm, you make and
frame a prayer, or else the people will wonder at you; so instead of waiting
and staying for the moving and leadings of the holy spirit to pray by, you wait
for the end of the Psalm, and then you move and stir up your selves, and makes
a mock of the movings of the spirit of God; and so instead of praying by the
Spirit, you turn up your Hourglass, and prays by that; so that you know how
long to pray, and how long to preach, and how long to sing by your guide, the
Hourglass, and your eye is often toward it for direction; and when it is a
pretty deal run, you will tell the people you see the time is far spent,
therefore you must hasten; and when your Glass is out, you tell the people the
time is spent, and you see the time is past, and therefore you shall conclude:
Oh what do ye mean ye Priests, that ye are not yet ashamed of this divice and
Popish Invention in this day of the light's breaking forth in the hearts of
people! Ye search the Scriptures which you falsely call your Rule, and you say
you are Ministers of Christ, and succeeders of the Apostles, but in trial you
are found liars, and your pretended Rule (the holy Scriptures) witnesses
against you as transgressors, out of the life of the holy men that gave them
forth, wresting their words to serve your private ends to your own (and others
that are led by you) destruction, and out of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ's steps, life, manners, behavior, doctrine and practices* Where is it
written in the holy Scriptures, and which of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ appointed and ordained that their succeeders should pray, and preach,
and sing by an Hourglass, and to meet together by the sound of the Bells to
worship? Where is that written? And which of the Ministers of Christ appointed
Bells to call their Brethren together? In which of the Christian Churches
before the Apostasy, was there Hour-glasses, and Bells, and Pulpits with
embroydered Cloth about them, and lined Stalls for the rich, with a lock and
key to keep the poor out, and many such like devices which are found amongst
you? I say, Where is your Rule^ Where is your Example for any of these and such
like things in the Scriptures of the holy men of God? Come Priests, look out
the Chapter and Verse, if you can, and let us know where it is; until then, we
shall conclude, yea, and it is concluded already, That you walk not, nor
worship not as the Christians before the Apostasy did, neither have you them
for your example or pattern; but that your example and pattern is the false
Romish Church your elder Sister, and the great Whore your Mother, we know, and
the Beast she rides on, we have seen, which is of a Scarlet color, and the
blood she has drunk of the Prophets, Saints, and Martyrs, the Lord is
enquiring after, and making inquisition for, and a bed of Torment she shall be
laid on; Hearken and rejoice ye Saints, ye Children of the Most High, a Bed
(which betokens a place of Rest) shall be the Whores place of Torment, her
resting place shall torment her; Alas! alas! Weeping, and wailing, and mourning
over her, shall be the greatest comfort her Merchants that has been made rich
by her, and her children she has delicately brought up, shall yield her; yea
all ye Ship-Masters, and all ye company in Ships, and Saylors, and Kings, and
Merchants, shall stand afar off for fear of her torment, and cast dust on their
heads, and cry, weeping, and wailing, saying, Alas! alas! that great City,
wherein were made rich all that had Ships in the sea, by reason of her
costliness, for in one hour is she made desolate: Rejoice over her thou Heaven,
and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her, you have
seen the Angel take up the great stone, and give the sign of her perpetual
downfall; and a great voice of much people in Heaven is heard, saying,
Halelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God,
for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great Whore
which did corrupt the Earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of
his Servants. And again they said, Halelujah, etc.

And now you National Priests, are not you the Ship-Masters, or Parish-Masters,
Merchants, or Traders by Sea here spoken of? And the gathering together of the
waters he called Sea; And the Beast with seven heads and ten horns rose out of
the Sea; The wicked are like a troubled Sea: And the waters thou saw where
the Whore sits, are peoples, kindreds, tongues, and nations: So the sea is
Waters, and the Waters is Peoples, Multitudes, Tongues and Nations, whereon the
Whore your Mother has long sat, and in, or among whom you her Merchants have
built your Ships, and set up your Trade by the Authority of the Beast which
rose out of the same place the Whore sat on; He that has Wisdom, let him
understand: I say, By the Authority of this Beast who has seven heads, ten
horns, ten Crowns upon his horns; and upon his heads the name of Blasphemy,
unto whom the Dragon gave his power, have you, and all Parish-Masters and
others of the Whores choice Merchants in whole Christendom sat and advanced
your Trade above, and beyond all the Crafts-mens Trade beside in the whole
World: And this may appear plain to the view of all people, if these few
particulars following are considered.

First, You have got a Marketplace where none must sell any Wares but your
selves, though it be never so much better then yours; neither must any come
into your Marketplace to give freely to poor people, whose souls are ready to
starve for want of the Bread of life, notwithstanding they buy of your
deceitful Wares.

Secondly, You have had, and some of your Brethren still have a compulsive Law
to compel and constrain all people within such a compass or quarter to come to
your Marketplace and buy of you, and none other.

Thirdly, Whether those people within such a compass, or quarter, or parish,
come to your Market, or no, or receive any of your Merchandise, notwithstanding
you will make them pay as much as if they did, or else you will take, or cause
to be taken from them violently (it may be) three, four, or five times as much
as the price was you first set upon your Commodities.

Fourthly, Though your Merchandise be never, so deceitful and insufficient, yet
none must refuse them, neither will you bate of your price; and if any come to
see the deceitfulness and insufficiency of what you sell at a very deer rate,
and declare against it, that people might not be deceived and defrauded always
with deceitful words, and devilish Doctrines, you will sue such at the Law for
slanderers, and get one of the Beasts Horns that has a Crown upon it, to grant
you 100. l. damage, or some other punishment, as whip, or prison, or
banishment, or life, (if ye can get it) for the Whore loves blood, and so does
her Merchants and children.

Fifthly, Another thing that makes your Trade exceed all the Crafts-mens Trade
beside in the whole World, is, That when poor people have bought your
Merchandise, and paid you, or at least are liable to pay you, you take them
home again in your Pockets, or Bibles, or Note-Books, and lay them up in your
Warehouse, to wit, your Liberary, and as you see occasion, and opportunity,
you carry them to Market again, and they will yield you as much as they did at
the first; and yet after you have sold your Imagery Work over and over, you can
trim it, and dress it a little, and put the title Doctor of Divinity to it, or
Batchellor of Divinity, or Mr. William, or Mr. John such a one, Ministers of
God's Word at such a Church, in such a place, and find a Chapman, some
Bookseller, or Printer, or other, to give you money for it: Much like this
might be mentioned, but this is sufficient to let all people which are not
quite blind see wherein this whores Merchants trade exceeds all other Arts,
Crafts, and Trades, in the whole world. And also the reason may here be seen
wherefore these Parish-Masters, and others of Mystery Babylons Merchants
strives and petition that their trade may be upheld even in this Nation, under
this notion, Propagate or hold up the Gospel; when if they would speak as they
mean, it is thus, Propagate, hold up, or maintain our Mothers Authority, by
which Authority we have had a good trade a great while, and our profits has
been great, and our incombs sure; and let the Romish Churches our elder
Sisters, her Institutions, Ordinations, Customs, Manners, Practices and Places
stand, else we shall have no certain Trade; for if we lose our Elder Sisters Law
which gives us Tithes, and that compels people to buy our Gospel, we shall be
undone, peoples hearts are so hard they will give us little freely, though they
have been, and still are our Auditors, and we have taught them some ten, some
twenty, thirty or forty years, yet we are afraid if we lose our elder Sisters
Law, that those that have been our constant customers would hate us much of our
price, and those that do not like our Doctrine and Church Discipline, and our
chargeable Gospel, will give us nothing at all; is not this the very language
of your hearts, whose cry is, Propagate the Gospel? let that which searches
your hearts and discerns the secret intents thereof, the light of Christ in
your Consciences answer; for the Gospel is Christ the power of God, which
propagates, or holds up all things, and it is ignorance and blasphemy to cry and
petition to an arm of flesh to propagate this Gospel, but it is another Gospel,
that they who have brought it are accursed that wants propagating; and this
shall all your Merchants of Babylon know, in the dreadful day of the Lord our
God, when all the blood you have drunk, and Tortures, and Racks, Whips and
Prisons, Stocks and Inquisitions, and other carnal weapons you have used to
propagate your Gospel, shall rise up in Judgment against you; then will ye cry
to the Rocks, and the Mountains to fall upon you, to hide you from the Wrath of
the Lamb.

And now is the wondrfull day at hand, wherein the Wolves, Bears, and Lions
shall be afraid and seek to hide themselves from the presence of the Lamb.
Consider this all ye hirelings, that rend and tear, and make a prey upon the
innocent lambs of Christ for to serve your own bellies, and covetous,
unchristian, greedy desires, how greatly do you dishonor the name of Christ,
in calling your selves his Ministers? have not you and all your Brethren, the
Popish Christians in whole Christendom sent an ill savor throughout the
Nations and Regions round about you? yea and many of those you count heathens
shall rise up in judgment against you, even against you who have the sheeps
clothing, the Prophets words, Christ's words, the Apostles words, but inwardly
ravened from the Spirit of God in your selves, and so have appeared devouring
wolves, and destroyers of the sheeps life, and scatterers of the flock of God,
hear the Word of the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet Ezekiel against such as
you, Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves, should not the
shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool, ye
kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock; the diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them, etc. Ezech. chapter 34.

There is much in these words; and this has been your work, as fully and as
truly as ever it was the false shepherds work in the time of the Prophet
Ezechiel, and now is the Lord manifestly appearing to be against ye shepherds,
and requiring his flock at your hand, and is causing you to cease from feeding
his flock, and also from feeding your selves of his flock, and delivering them
from your mouths, and gathering them from all places where they have been
scattered in the cloudy and dark day, according to Ezechiels Prophecy; and
this is the Lords own work, in this his mighty day, and all the hirelings and
wolvish Shepherds in whole Christendom shall not be able to withstand and
hinder the accomplishing, and fulfilling of this the Lords purpose, though Gog
and Magog, beast and false prophet, ioyn together; yet the Lamb and the Saints
shall have the victory, and the Plagues upon the Seat of the great Whore shall
be poured, and the tongue of the Egyptian sea shall be dried up, and the waters
which has overflowed the highest Mountain shall abate and be dried up, and the
ship-masters, the Parish-masters trade shall fail: And thou O Mount Seir,
because thou have had a perpetual hatred, and have shed the blood of the
children of Israel by force of the Sword in the time of their calamity, in the
time that their iniquity had an end; therefore as I live says the Lord God I
will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee, since thou hash
not-hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee, etc. This is the portion of
Cain, who was a murderer from the beginning, whose sacrifice is the fruit of
that ground which is cursed, and which the dew of heaven never descended upon,
nor the blessing of the most High was ever appointed for; And out of this
ground, out of this earth, in which Cain is a Vagabond, springs and arises
that spirit that can offer a Sacrifice, and murder when he has done, and that
this spirit is manifest in and among you the National Priests is very evident,
and sufficiently proved by your own fruits, acts and deeds within these few
years, yea and the cry of innocent blood has entered the ears of the Lord
against you, even against you both Priests and people, who notwithstanding your
pretenses of worshipping God, have envy, the root of murder in your hearts,
and violence in your hands, and while you regard iniquity in your hearts, your
very prayers are abomination and stinks in the nostrils of the Lord.

It Is the Whore and her Merchants that* thirsts after the blood of creatures
under the notion of heretics, and that murders men about matters of Religion;
the Christians and Christian Ministers never did so, neither did they wrestle
with flesh and blood, but you and the papists are found wrestling with flesh,
and destroying men's lives, and not saving them, and you shall have your reward
together according to your Work.

A few Queries for all that own Tithes due to the present Priesthood, and for
the Priesthood that takes them to consider and answer.
1. TO what end do you the people pay tithes? and to what end do you the
Priests take tithes? is your end according to the Law of God that gave the
tithes to the first Priesthood? then people why do you not see them improved
to that end? and Priests why do you not let them be improved to that end? and
was not the end wherefore tithes was given, that the Widovvs, Strangers, and
Fatherless might be relieved and maintained by them as well as the Priests?
And had not the Widovvs, Strangers, and Fatherless as much Right to the
Tithes, as the Leviticall priests had? and had they not their maintenance out
of them, so that there need not be a beggar among them? Was not the priests
gates to stand open, that the Widovvs, Strangers and Fatherless might be
relieved.

2. Did not that Law of God that gave Tithes to this end, ordain a place to
put them in, a Storehouse, (into which Storehouse the people brought them,
else they robbed God) and were they not to be taken out of this Storehouse,
as the Widows, Strangers, Fatherless and Priests had need of them? and was not
this Storehouse called Gods House? read Mal. 3. 10. How comes it to pass, if
not by the order of the Pope, Bishops and Cardinals, and the rest of the popish
train, that there is no Storehouse in whole Christendom (so called) to put
the Tithes of the Land in, nor no Widows, Strangers and Fatherless relieved
according to their necessities out of the Tithes, but pope, chief Magistrate
and priests, have, and would have them all brought into their own house? and
how many of their gates stand open, that the Widows, Strangers and Fatherless,
and poor, might pass freely in and take part of the Tithes with them? do they
not more frequently lie begging at their gates when they are shut? and lie
about the Streets begging and crying for bread, and at the Steeple Houses there
is a hideous, doleful noise for bread many times? was it so in the time of the
Law, which commanded Tithes from the people? did not the Lord make the Tithes,
give the poor, the Widows, the Strangers, the Fatherless, and priests also
enough? and now people that pay Tithes, and priests that receive Tithes, whom
do you imitate and follow, if not the Popish train? are not you unlike both
Jews and Christians? did the true Christians ever pay, or receive Tithes?

3. Is not this a monstrous Priesthood, that has rose up since the days of
the Apostles, who denied the first priesthood, that devours and impropriates
all the Tithes to themselves, and will not allow the Poor, the Widows,
Strangers, and Fatherless any share with them of the Tithes, though they may
be ready to starve for want of food and Raiment? is not this monstrous
priesthood in Christendom (who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel)
exceedingly stained and laden with the blood of the poor, of the Widows, of the
Strangers, and Fatherless? And you the people, how can you be clear in paying
your tithes to such a priesthood, that do not let their gates stand open, nor
have no Storehouse, nor that do not improve them to that end, that they were
improved to, in the time of the Law? are not all your Tithes given and received
to a worse end, notwithstanding you say you are Christians, and live in the
glorious day of the Gospel, then they were given and received in the time of
the Law? How many thousands of poor, of Widows, Strangers, of Fatherless, and
beggars are there in thy borders, O Christendom, which want relief, which the
Law of God that gave Tithes to the Priesthood which God ordained, provided for,
by the Tithes that were brought into the Storehouse? Why must a greedy,
covetous, proud priesthood, that is not like the priesthood under the Law, nor
the Ministers of the Gospel, swallow down, and devour, and treasure up to
themselves, which belongs no more to them, then to the Widows, Strangers, and
Fatherless? Put the Popes Law aside, the Magistrates of England, and if Tithes
and priesthood must stand, let them stand according to the Law of God by
Moses, and not according to the Papists Law, and covetous priests desires.

4. Did not the Pope, and the false Church (which has risen since the days of
the Apostles) who invented Tithes for the maintenance of his Ministers, exclude
and shut out the poor, the Fatherless, the Widows, and Strangers from having
a share with him and his priests of the Tithes? and people why do you love to
uphold a popish invention, and the false Churches Synodicall Decrees, Edicts
and Ordinances? and is not this one popish Decree, that Tithes are due to God
and holy Church? do you not know what God the Pope and papists mean? and what,
and where the Holy Church is, that Tithes are due to, by his, or their Decree?
is not their God their belly, and their glory their shame, and their Holy
Church a Cage of unclean birds, a den of Idolaters, which murders, prisons,
racketh and tortureth and persecuteth those that are indeed the members of the
Holy Church (which is in God) and did ever the ministers of Christ, who were
members of the Holy Church, preach up Tithes to be due to them, or covet after
them, or receive any of them? did they not on the contrary preach against
Tithes and deny them, and the priesthood that received Tithes, and the Law that
gave Tithes they denied also, and witnessed the change of the Law and
priesthood both? as in the 7. of Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews; Then are not
those priests that preach for Tithes, and plead for Tithes, opposers of the
true Ministers of Christ, and their Doctrine, and upholders of the Pope,
Papists and their Decrees, and Orders?

5. Did not Christ Jesus who is the substance of all the Mosaicall
administrations send forth his Ministers freely, saying to them, Freely ye have
received, freely give? did ever Christ bid them demand Tithes from the people
they preached to? then surely they did never sue them at the Law for that they
never demanded of them, as those that call themselves the Ministers of Christ
do now in this age, who have been rifling men's houses and fields for Tithes;
People do you not believe that it is a great abomination and blasphemy against
the Lord for such to call themselves the ministers of Christ? is not Christ's
glorious Gospel of God dishonored by them? is not the Pope that ordered Tithes
to be paid to the Priests, Bishops and Clergy men only, and that excluded the
poor from having part of the Tithes, more honored and obeyed then Christ, by
all the Tithe-mongers and hirelings in Christendom, and people that own them?
Christ said, Freely you have received freel^ give. The Pope and Popish Clergy
said, and says, We have not received freely, and we will not, nor cannot give
freely; and if people will not give us freely, we will compel them by force
and cruelty; and whose Ministers are such? and whose Commands and Ordinances do
such obey, Christ's or the Popes? has not your fruits and works answered
already, that the Popes Command and Order is preferred above Christ's, and
obeyed rather then Christ's Command and Order? Did not Christ say, Into
whatsoever Town or City you enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there abide
till ye go thence, etc. this he spoke to them which he sent forth. Did he ever
send his Ministers into any Town, City or Country, to enquire how much money
by the year they would give them to preach to them, and to enquire after
Tithes, and Augmentations and such like, and to agree and make bargains with
people for a 100. or 200 l. by the year? if Christ sent any such Ministers
forth, and if the true Christians ever owned such Ministers, priests and
people, answer and declare when, till then we shall reckon you with the popish
priests, and Papists.

This following Letter containing the substance of the Dispute, was given into
the hands of William Cooper about the middle of the third Month, enclosed with
some Directions for him to convey it to the rest of his Brethren which were at
the Dispute, if peradventure they might be showed their blindness and ignorance
in the things of God; and William Cooper soon after sent word by one of his
Communicants, That we should have a speedy Answer; but no Answer has appeared:
And now therefore are they further examined, and their practices and manners of
Worship more fully enquired into in the former Treatise; And in both all people
may see that are not quite blind, how that much and many relics of Popery are
yet standing chiefly in the Presbyterian Churches, so called, and that the true
Christian life and primitive Church Order is not among them. And if they can
say otherwise, let them lay aside that wisdom which man teaches, and which
they have learned at School by natural Education, and answer without logical
Arguments, in plainness, according to the holy Scriptures.

Friends,
YOU that profess your selves to be Ministers of Christ, and have put on the
sheeps clothing, but are erred from the spirit of the Lord; the time of trial
is now come, wherein secret things are brought to light, and the great Mystery
of Babylon is discovered, and all false Ministers are made manifest, and the
judgment of the great Whore is come, and your judgment also that has drunk
her Cup: And now something is upon me as to mind you of, and to lay something
of your own ignorance and weakness before you, which appeared in you at that
time of the Dispute in the Bridge-House, to the intent that you, and the people
that are under your Ministry may come to see the error of your ways, and may be
converted to God, and live; for it truly appears that death reigns in you, and
over you, and the fruits and effects thereof does spring from you, and the
cursed Tree is yet standing that brings forth the branches of darkness, of
unbelief, and of great ignorance: and the Sword of the Lord, which is the words
of his mouth, will utterly slay you.

And whereas you asked, If we owned you to be Ministers of Christ: Unto which
in part we answered, and I do here more plainly testify, No, we cannot own you
to be Ministers of Christ, nor sent of him, for we know the contrary, because
you are different and contrary to the Ministers of Christ that were in the
days of the Apostles, in Call, in Practice, and Conversation; in Maintenance,
and in your Fruits and Effects; in all these things we say, and can prove, that
you are not according, but different and contrary to the Apostles and Ministers
of the true Churches before the Apostasy; and therefore I hereby certify you,
That we (to wit) the People of God called Quakers, do not own you as the
Ministers of Christ, but do look upon you to be Deceivers and false Teachers,
and of Antichrist, and your fruits and works does manifest it, and thereby do
we know you not to be the Ministers of Christ, but false Teachers, as I have
said.

And whereas you affirmed your selves to be Ministers of Christ, and went about
to prove it by your Arguments of invented Logic, and the substance and intent
of your first Argument was, Those that have the Characters and Signs upon them
spoken of in 1 Timothy 3. are Ministers of Christ; but you have those Signs and
Characters upon you, and therefore, You are Ministers of Christ.

Ans. Now this Scripture which you have mentioned for proof of your Ministry,
when you are truly laid to the line and measure thereof, will prove that you
are not true Ministers, for you are not thus qualified in your Spirits and
Conversation, as this Scripture does signify, but the contrary fruits and
effects does appear from you, then is set down in this Scripture; Are you
blameless in your conversations? And are you sober and of good behavior, and
given to Hospitality, and apt to teach? And are you not given to Wine and
filthy Lucre? And are you patient, not brawlers nor covetous? And are you not
lifted up with pride? And are you of good report? And do you hold the mystery
of faith in a pure conscience? These things were required to be in the
Ministers of Christ; and have you these characters? and are you such as is here
spoken of? And have you these fruits and mark upon you? now are you to be
tried, and and I am searching your own proof, whether it holds sound to confirm
that for which you brought it? No it is manifest by your fruits according to
your own proof, that you are men of another generation, and are bringing forth
fruits and works clean contrary to them, whom the Apostle allows of for
Ministers; For you are not blameless, nor sober, nor of good behavior, for
you are guilty of the pride and vanity of this world, and live in envy and
bitterness, and so not blameless, nor sober, nor of good behavior, neither
apt to teach; for you want the Spirit, that was in the Apostles, and you cannot
speak as that Spirit gives you utterance, but you speak from humane study, and
what you have gathered from other men's works, and many of you are given to wine
and strong drink, and are greedy of filthy lucre, and sue men at Law for wages,
and remove from one place to another for more means, and for greater hire, and
this is covetousness and greediness of filthy lucre, which you (to wit,
genrally the Priests) are known to be guilty of through the whole Land; and ye
have an ill report, to be covetous men, and proud men, and ambitious, and
self-seeking men, this report you have of many that are without, and the poor
unconverted people they know you to be guilty of these things; and your
Consciences are not pure, neither do ye hold the mystery of faith in it; but
your consciences are defiled with the evil and sinful practices of this wicked
world; and that faith that you profess is not the true faith that the Apostles
had, which gave them victory over the world, and over all sin; for you are in
the pollutions of the world, unsanctified, and the guilt of sin lies upon
you; these things are true, as the Witness in your own consciences may
testifie^ so that your own proof and evidence has condemned you, and the
Scripture by which you thought to prove your selves Ministers of Christ, it
has turned upon your own heads, and manifested the contrary, and though you
have said, you were qualified according to that Scripture, and therefore you
were called into the mini^st^, and were the true Ministers, yet the contrary is
discovered, and that you are qualified by a contrary spirit and have the marks
and characters upon you, not of the true ministers of Christ, but of (...)
spoken of in 2 Timothy 3. and according to that sort of false Teachers are you
qualified; and therefore in Practice and conversation you do not agree with the
Apostles, but are different and contrary to them, and are according to the
false Teachers, and false Apostles, and with them you do agree in spirit and in
practice in many things.

And as to your call to the Ministry, you are not able to make any good proof
thereof at all, nor did not at that time, but some of them did deny, that the
anointing, the unction of the holy Spirit, was necessary unto the Ministry; and
this was the Argument, That all things were mentioned for the qualification of
a Minister, in that 1 Timothy 3. but the holy unction is not mentioned; therefore,
the unction of the spirit is not necessary to the Ministry.

Answer, Something was spoken to this before, as to show the ignorance of it,
and the wickedness of this Argument; and some of you were partly ashamed of it
your selves; and had not the man and you been wholy ignorant and blind, this
would never have proceeded from amongst you; and are you like to be Ministers
of Christ, who has asserted, That the spirit of God, and the anointing is not
necessary to the ministry? Was ever the like ignorance uttered by any before
you? even your Fathers, the Friars at Rome would be ashamed of you herein, to
utter such dark and ignorant assertions. Is this your Learning, and your wise
Logic, to prove the anointing unnecessary to the ministry? and such ministers
we believe are you that have not the holy unction of the spirit, but are
ministers of the letter, and by the will of man, and not by the spirit, nor of
the spirit, and so your call is not the same as was the Apostles, but contrary
to them and different from them; so that we cannot own you to be ministers of
Christ; for ye are different and contrary to them both in your call, and in
your conversations.

And though you seemed to deny to be made ministers by your Learning and
Education, yet it is manifest that through that, you received the ministry,
through the seize of such Arts and Sciences, and at last you came to
attain to the Office of Ministers as you say; and it was not by the call of the
spirit, nor by the gift of the holy Ghost, for that you have in part denied,
and says the unction is not necessary to the Ministry; so it is but your
hypocrisy to deny that you are made Ministers by your natural learning; for we
know that thereby only, and without the Gift of the Holy Ghost, did you attain
to that Ministry which now you hold, cannot convert sinners to God, nor turn
the wicked from his evil way; for it answers not the testimony of God in
people, but people remains always blind and ignorant under it; and you go on
dreaming for carnal ends unto your selves, seeking for your hire, and for your
gain, and therefore we do deny that you are true Ministers of Christ, for you
can neither prove that you are so, neither does your fruits and works prove it,
but the contrary is manifest.

And whereas you further said, The gift of the holy spirit is not sufficient to
make a Minister; This is also your ignorance; for as I said, they also have
received the spirit, have received the fruits thereof; and the Apostle says,
As every one has received the gift of the spirit, so he may administer of the
same to another; and who have received the spirit of Christ, they are Christ's;
and if any man have not that spirit, such are none of his, but how full of
confusion are you? I cannot but mind you of it; Some time you say, the Spirit
is not necessary to the Ministry; and again you say, The spirit alone is not
sufficient to make a Minister; and here is Babylons stuff (Confusion) brought
forth by you her Merchants, and such as these has deceived the souls of men,
one saying one thing, and others another, and thus is your kingdom divided, and
that is a sign that it cannot stand, but it must fall when the kingdoms of this
World becomes the Kingdom of Christ.

And whereas you affirmed, One may be called into the Ministry by Christ, and
yet at the same time be under the power of the Devil, and the self-same man at
the very same time may be a Disciple of Christ, and yet a Devil.

Ans. I cannot but mind you of your ignorance, and return your words to you
again; For a man that is under the power of the Devil, he is the servant of the
Devil, and not Christ's servant; and that man that is a Disciple of Christ, and
learns of him, is a child of God, and not of the Devil; for the Devil is out of
truth, and so are all that are under his power, but the Disciple of Christ is
in the truth, and learns of Christ who is truth; and though you would seem to
prove these things by Judas and Peter, yet as for Judas he turned from Christ,
and against him, and the Devil entered into him, and he lost the power of God,
and erred from it, and then he was a Devil, and a betrayer of the just; but
whilst he followed Christ, and was faithful in his Ministry, he was not a
Devil: Neither was Peter Satan, he that was Christ's Disciple; but he that
savoured the things that was of man, and not the things of God, and he that
denied Christ, he was the Satan; for the Disciple of Christ, and Satan, are
two, and not one; they are contrary, and not the same, though you in your
ignorance would make them one; but ye know not of what spirit ye are of, nor
whose work you are doing.

And whereas you held it forth, That you had the fruits of the spirit, because
you show forth faith and repentance, therefore, etc.

Now I did, and do deny that you show forth faith and repentance; for your
Works does manifest the contrary; And to prove that you have repentante, you
say you detest all sin, and therefore, etc. Now this I did, and do deny again,
and do assert the contrary, and thus I prove it, Whosoever breaks the commands
of Christ, and acts those things which he cried woe against, and those things
which the holy Prophets cried against, they do not detest all sin; but thus you
do, (to wit) you that profess your selves to be Ministers, you act those things
which Christ forbad, and which the holy Prophets cried against. therefore you
do not detest all sin, and so have not the fruits and marks of the Holy Ghost
upon you, that you act these things that Christ forbad, and which the Prophets
cried against; it is plainly manifest Christ forbad his Ministers to be called
of men Masters, but you are called Masters; and Christ cried woe against them
that loved the uppermost Rooms, and the chief Seats, and greetings in the
Markets, and these things are you guilty of. And the holy Prophets cried
against them that preached for hire, and divined for money, and against them
that fed themselves with the fat, and clothed themselves with the Wool, and did
not feed the flock; and these things you are guilty of; and thus it is manifest
you do not detest all sin, but lives in it; for in the fruits and works of the
flesh you do abound, in pride and covetousness, in wrath and bitterness, and in
many other things, whereby it is clearly manifest that you have not your own
noted signs of the holy spirit upon you, and so we cannot own you, but must
deny you to be the Ministers of Christ: And as for your carriages and
proceedings at that Dispute, they were not agreeing with the spirit of truth,
for you were wild, and vain, and scornful, which practices becomes not Christ's
Ministers: And why did you run so soon away? Why had not you longer patience
for the trial of all things? Were you afraid to be discovered, and that your
shame should have appeared? Were you hit upon your sore, which made you fling
away so suddenly, that you could not abide any longer. Many things more I had
to have spoken, if you had not left us in that manner, which a shame unto your
selves, and to your company who used such wildness and violence, and laid
violent hands upon me, thrusting me forth, and threatening of us with
Constables, and these things ought not to have been, nor had you been Ministers
of Christ would they have been, but your fruits makes you manifest, and by your
fruits we know you, as Christ has told us; for your fruits are the fruits of
unrighteousness and not the fruits of the holy Spirit of the Lord, which fruits
are pure and peaceable, but your fruits are otherwise, to wit, the fruits of
the spirit of this world that lies in wickedness, And whereas you accused us to
be Jesuits or such like; these were your false accusations, and we see you to
be nearer to agreement with the Jesuits then we are, and the Church of Rome is
your Mother, and from her you have descended in your Call and in your
Maintenance, and in the most part of your worship and practices, therefore
come, let us reason with you, Had not you (the Professed Ministers of England)
this way of making Ministers at Schools and Colleges, and by natural learning,
from the Church of Rome? Was not she the first that instituted these Colleges,
and gave the maintenance to them, and gave all these names to Scholars, as
Batchellour of Arts, and Master of Arts, Batchellour of Divinity, and such like
names, which yet remains amongst you, the original of which came from the
Church of Rome? and was first set up in England by the Whores Authority. Did
these things come from the Church of Christ, or was there such names amongst
Christ's true Ministers? or have not you received these things and ways from
the Whore, and drunken her cup? this way of making ministers have you had from
the Whore of Rome; and from whence had you this way of maintenance in your
ministry, by Tithes and gleab-lands, and Easter reckonings, and so much a year
out of your Parish? did not all this proceed out of the Church of Rome, and was
not in the day of the Apostles, nor practiced by Christ's ministers, but from
the Whore you have had this also? this way of being maintained, and suing
people at the Law for your Tithes and for your money, Christ's ministers never
did thus, but the Churh of Rome has been the original of all these things and
practices; and from whence had you this practice of sprinkling infants, and
calling it the Baptism into the faith, and into the visible church? did not
this come from Rome? and have not you received it from thence? if there was any
such Institution or Practice amongst the Apostles prove it by Scripture, else
we will not believe you, but must tell you the original of this came from
Rome, and you have drunken the Whores cup, and been made drunk thereby; and so
now when we examine you thoroughly in your ways and practices, we find you
agreeing with the Jesuits in many things; and while you accuse others your
selves are guilty; and now people begins to see your shame, and you cannot hide
it, for the witness is risen in people, and the seed of God is coming forth,
which tramples over and treads down the false church, and all her false
ordinances and institutions, and her cup must be broken to pieces, and she
shall no more make the Nations drunk; and as for you false ministers, though
you pray and preach, and cry against Heresy and Error, and would beg Laws to
suppress it, as ye say; yet your selves are found guilty of the error, and you
want the spirit of truth to guide you; and your own hearts are not cleansed,
and then how can you cleanse others? and that which you call error and heresy
is truth; for your judgments are corrupted, and your eye is blind, and what
you know, you know naturally, and not by the teachings of the spirit of God,
but by Traditions, and by the words of other men without you, and the holy
anointing in your own selves, you know not; for you have not received it; And
whereas you queried whether the Scriptures were the word of God and the rule of
life I do now answer:

The Scriptures were given forth by the spirit of God, and are the words of
God, and the word was in them that gave them forth, and Christ is that word,
and the Scriptures testify of him, and the Scriptures are not the rule of
life, but the spirit that gave them forth, that is the rule to the children of
God; for as many as are the sons of God are led by the spirit of God, and them
that walk according to that rule of the spirit peace is upon them, and so it is
the spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures; that is, the rule of life,
and not the Scriptures; yet where the spirit is the rule, it leads up
according to the Scriptures in the fulfilling of them; and as for ye hypocrites
who do profess the Scriptures to be your rule, and yet walks contrary to the
Scriptures, your own rule condemns you, and out of your own mouths will the
Lord judge you. Is the Scripture your rule to preach for hire, and to have so
much a year for preaching, and if any will not pay them to sue them at the Law,
and take their goods by violence, and to cast their bodies into prison? this is
the practice of many ministers in this nation; but what rule in all the
Scripture have you for these things, or what example, saving from the false
Prophets, false Apostles? and what rule have you in all the Scriptures for
sprinkling of infants, and calling it Baptism into the faith? and what rule
have you to take Tithes? and are not you hypocrites to profess the Scriptures
to be your rule and yet act these things which the Scripture neither gives
Commandment nor example for, but the rather bears witness against? but who has
the spirit, and walks by that rule, sees you, and judges you who are out of the
life of the Scriptures, in the life that is contrary, and with the spirit of
God are you reproved, in all your ways of darkness and error.

And whereas you queried concerning the light within, we do say, that Christ
the second A^am lighteneth all mankind that be come into the world; and this
light John bare witness of, and it shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not, and that was it that enlightened every man that comes
into the world; and this light brings all to receive Christ that does believe,
and they that believe not, this light is their condemnation; and though you
stumble at this stumbling stone, as your Fathers the Jews did; yet unto us that
do believe, Christ the light of the world is precious, and all that comes to
the knowledge of God, must come to the true knowledge by the light that shines
(...) hearts; for it is the light that shines in the heart, that gives the
knowledge of God; and although you wise builders do stumble at the foundation;
yet it will break you to pieces; and confound you utterly; for the light is
risen in the hearts of many, which light gives them the knowledge of God, and
the knowledge of you, and all your false ways of error, and brings men to
depart from them all, and to follow the Lord in righteousness, and so every man
is lightened, that they may believe; and they that believe, and walk in the
light shall be saved; but they that believe not, but hate the light, shall be
condemned, and this is their condemnation, that light is come into the world
and into their hearts; and as for you, you are but shallow men; for you want
the knowledge of God, and truth stands over you, though you oppose it, and it
will grow to a Mountain, where all the Righteous shall be refreshed; and the
Lord is begun to work in the earth, he has set his hand to pull down Babylon,
and there shall not one stone be left upon another, and all her Merchandise
shall fail, and her strong holds shall be broken down, and all her Merchants
shall howl and lament; therefore now consider it ye Leaders of the people, the
day of the visitation is now, but it will suddenly be shut up, with the night
of darkness upon you, and you will be wounded, and you can never be healed, you
will be ruined, and can never be revived; This is from a lover of your Souls,

EDWARD BOROUGH.

Something after.
AND now you Priests, the black Clergy of England, who count your selves
Orthodox men, sound, able Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, know and
consider, and let it be known to, and considred by all people, that we slander
you not, nor do you no wrong in disowning you to be the Ministers of Christ,
and in comparing you to the black, bloody, Popish trait, your Mother Church;
nor in comparing you with the false Prophets, idle shepbeards of Israel, and
the deceivers and false teachers which crept in, in the days of the Apostles,
which since has overspread the Nations; for if ever there were a company of
Priests that were like a troop of robbers, and that murdered with consent, and
that preached for hire, and divined for money, and that sought their gain from
their quarter, sed themselves with the fat, and clothed themselves with the
wool, and that cared not naturally for the flock, but for the fleece, and that
taught for filthy lucre, and that said, Thus says the Lord; when the Lords
voice they never heard; and that had stolen then Neighbors words, and that run
before they were sent, and that did not profit the people at all; I say, if
ever there was such Priests and Teachers, as certainly there was in the
Prophets days, and Apostles days, such assuredly in thee, oh England, does
exceedingly abouned, as by the fruits in every Conntry, City, Town, and Village
most evidently appears, in which wickedness is grown so exceeding high, and
the envy and offering of Cain, in priests and people is so strong, and the
Jewish blind zeal' so fierce, and the cry of the rude multitude, Away with him,
Away with him, so loud, loud, and many Pilates through importunity of the
priests, and cry of the multitude, so ready to deliver the innocent into the
hands of such who loves Barrabas the murderer better then he that came to save
men's lives, and not to destroy them; and better then his Ministers, whole
weapons were never carnal, as Tucks, Rapiers, Staves and Canes, which has been
the weapons of thirty English priests already recorded within this seven or
eight years, who have not only incensed and stirred up the Magistrates and
people to persecute, but has shed blood, beat and bruised many themselves, one
of which number was (and is still for ought I know) priest Griffin of Bread
street in London, who st^uck one Robert Ingram sorely over the head with a
Kane, many blows; and by means of such priests the Prophet Isaiah called greedy
dumb dogs, and that prepared war against such as could not put into their
mouths, has about two thousand of the the people of God suffered within this
seven or eight years twenty six has been murdered and imprisoned till death,
and some hundreds suffered long imprisonments in filthy, unwholesome places, and
cruel, inhumane usage therein by wicked, bloody Goalers, Thieves, Murderers,
and Felons, among which they have been cast; some others has been robbed and
spoiled of their goods for tithes, to the value of some thousands of pounds,
sometimes five, six, seven, or eight times the value of what was demanded by
the hi^eling Priest and Impropriator, to the ruin and destroying of many
families, widows and fatherless, (as to the outward) in taking away their
wearing clothes, bedding, pots, dishes, and kettles, (sometimes all was too
little) seizing sometimes 100 l. worth of goods for one years tithes, valued at
six pounds, and body also imprison^^: Oh horrible Minist^y! a worse was never
in any generation, I do believe, especially in times wherein the cry of
Reformation has been so loud, and liberty of conscience pretended; Oh! how is
it that people are so blind and sottish as to cou^^ greedy Hirelings (who are
like to leave their Names upon record as a stink and a wand^^ to the next
generation) Christian Ministers; Christian Ministers were no sigh^ers, nor
strikers, nor covetous, nor greedy of silthy lucre, nor demanders of Tithes
from the people, nor suers at law for the Tithes; if they were, you priests and
people produce the chapter and verse that must prove it; you have proved your
selves such, and we can ^^sily prove, and have proved, that you are not like
the Ministers of Christ, for the Ministers of Christ in the primitive church,
bore their testimony against Tithes, which God commanded to be paid to the
first priesthood; and many Saints, Martyrs, and Ministers of Christ of later
times mentioned in Fox's Histories, called, The Book of Martyrs, have, or did
faithfully in their measure bear their testimony unto death against the Tithes
which the Pope and his Train had invented and set up since the Apostles days,
which at this day yet stands as a main prop and upholder of a proud, high
minded, self-seeking, covetous ignorant, Popish Clergy here in England, against
which, and whom, we also bear our testimony, which has already been sealed
with much blood within these few years.

And if there be any honest, tender hearted men amongst the Priests, which
really desires and endeavors to have a conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward (...) let such come out from amongst them, and bear their testimony
against them that has committed such horrible things in the Land, and utterly
deny them, and disown them, else the best of them will be but as a B^yar, and
the most upright as a Thorn-Hedge, and a cons^ne to wickedness will be found in
their hearts in the day of the Lord; therefore accept the let no people count
some Priests better then other Priests, for there is little difference between
those that murder, and those that consent to murder; those that rob, and
those that consent to robbery; those that persecute, and those that consent to
persecution, and their reward will be alike at that day which God has
appointed to judge the Secrets of all (...) by the Man Christ Jesus.

W. S.

The End.

