AN IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE AFFAIRS of IRELAND DURING The Two Last YEARS.

WHITE HALL, APRIL 30. 1691.
LET this be Printed by Order of the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount SYDNEY,
one of Their Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

W. BRIDGEMAN.

A TRUE and IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF The Most Material Occurrences IN THE Kingdom
of Ireland DURING The Two Last YEARS. WITH The Present State of Both ARMIES.

PUBLISHED To prevent Mistakes, and to give the World a Prospect of the future
Success of Their MAJESTY'S Arms in That NATION.

Written by an Eyewitness to the most Remarkable PASSAGES.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES, LORD VISCOUNT MORPETH; AND The RIGHT
WORSHIPFUL Sr WILLIAM LEVISON GOWER; Bart. Both MEMBERS Of the Honorable House
of Commons: These PAPERS About the AFFAIRS of IRELAND, ARE HUMBLY DEDICATED.

THE PREFACE.
THese Papers were not designed to be published, till after the surrender of
the City of Mons to the French; for since there are some, and those too calling
themselves Protestants, who upon all occasions make it their business to
advance the Conquests of that King, and at the same time to lessen the Conduct
and Success of His Present Majesty; representing his Affairs to be in such a
Condition at Home, and his Army so inconsiderable in Ireland, that they
presently from thence expect such a Turn of State, as, if it should happen,
would certainly prove unfortunate and destructive to themselves, as well as
other people; tho they have no mind, or at least do not seem to see it. I do
not pretend (nor do I think it possible) to make such men sensible of the folly
of their unaccountable Behavior at this Juncture; only I think it a good
Opportunity, to let Them and the World know the impartial Truth of the most
material Passages of the Two last Campaigns in Ireland, with the true State of
both Armies, as it stood in January last; which possibly, may serve to mortify
all their Expectations from their Friends in that Kingdom. And as to the
Matters of Fact, I defy all the Enemies of our Government and Religion to
contradict me; tho at the same time, I assure them, That I have done their Side
all the Right that the thing it self will bear, and have concealed nothing that
I think could make any way for their Advantage.

But before I come to this, I will take the liberty to speak out, since I am to
treat of an Affair that concerns all that value either the public Safety,
Honor or Peace of their Native Country; it being every day more apparent than
other, that we are designed as a Prey to that Nation, to whom we nor our
Fathers were never yet in Bondage. This is no vain and groundless Fear or
Pretention, but the Reasons for it are many: Amongst the rest, take only these
few.

First, The Late King, by his unhappy Management, has given up the Cudgels to
the French (whom it is not to be doubted, he had rather should govern the
Nation, than those who at present do) by this means placing his own Interest,
and that of all English Protestants, in a diametrical opposition to one
another; since it is plain, that unfortunate Prince has been made instrumental
(and is so still) by the Zealots of the Church of Rome, to advance their
Religion, on the one hand; and by his most Christian Majesty on the other, to
promote his Glory. All the Care and Pains that has been taken of late by the
Priests, in a Business of the greatest moment, was, not to propagate King
James's Family, but his and their own Religion; for they value not tho He and
His Name perish, if their Work go but on: And (suppose the P. of W. really what
our Adversaries would have him.) who can ever imagine that a Successor, that
there was so much pains taken about, will either be bred a Protestant, or made
serviceable to that Interest; especially, since he is taken out of the Kingdom,
and put into the hands of the greatest Enemy to our Nation? And as to the
French King's part, can any one think, that he does all this out of a Principle
of Honor and Love, for the re-establishing of King James? All people know,
that his Generosity extends no further than his Interest: Those that will not
believe this, let them only look back upon his treatment of the same individual
Prince some years ago; for it is plain, that he has no other Prospect nor regard
to Men and Things, but his own Greatness and Ambition; not spearing even those
of his own Persuasion, when they stand in his way: Every one sees, that hsi
Brother of Constantinople and he, agree much better than his Holy Father at
Rome and he ever did, or are like to do; because the former is more favorable
to his Designs than the other. If then he falls out with him, whom his own
Religion obliges to pay all Deferrence and Respect to, and honor as a Father;
what can Protestants, nay even English Papists themselves expect, but to submit
to his Yoke, if they once give way for his Admission? When the Late King
appeared all on a sudden last Summer in France, after the Defeat at the Boyn,
it was observable, that tho the French King was surprised at his Presence, yet
he received him with all the seeming joy in the World; thinking it not fit to
discourage a Prince, whom he had still further occasion for. This has already
been seen into by some great Officers, even in the Irish Army; who begin to be
at a stand how to manage, since they can have no other Prospect from the
success of their own present Affairs, but future Ruin to their Country.

Secondly, Suppose the War already ended, and the Late King sent into England,
with all the Grandeur that France could afford him, and received here by the
consent of every Body: Yet the French King has a very large Bill to bring in,
which he will certainly pretend cannot be discharged with the Possession of
Ireland; what then can be more rationally intended, than that one day or other,
England may be brought to a severe account for those vast Expenses, and the
non-repayment of them shall be a sufficient Pretense for a War, when he finds
an Opportunity, tho King James himself sat at the Helm? For how easy a thing
it is to break all Rules whatever, when a man has the Power in his own hand, is
known to most men. Those then who favor him most, will only have the honor to
be last devoured; and even those of his own Persuasion, will have cause to wish
themselves, rather under a Protestant Prince, than a Popish Tyrant: We see
further, that His Present Majesty has not declared it a War of Religion, but is
linked in a Confederacy with a great many Princes of the Romish Church, that
have all the same reason to dread the growing-Power of France, who neither
spares Protestant when he has an opportunity, nor a Papist when he can gain by
it. And yet if we look narrowly into the thing, the present War of Ireland is
both more difficult and expensive for him to support, than it is for England,
both as to the distance of place, and multiplicity of other Diversions; for tho
he is a great Prince, yet his Power is not without limits.

Thirdly, It neither was, nor is the Interest of Their present Majesty's only
that we are struggling for, but under them for the Liberties of England, and
that against the most dangerous Enemy that our Nation ever had: this most men
think themselves obliged to do, tho the King's natural Life should end to
morrow (which God forbid, since for his own sake all that have had the honor
to be Eyewitnesses of those Noble and Heroic Personal Actions of His Majesty,
in pursuance of what he so generously undertook at first, dare, and will serve
him even to death it self, what he pleases to command them) for the Quarrel is
not, Whether the Late King, or the Present, shall Rule in England? but whether
the French King shall have our Country, or we keep it to our selves? Neither
is it only the King and Queen's Quarrel that we spend so much Treasure in, and
lose those Men (as is frequently objected) but it is the King that makes himself
a Drudge for ours (if I may so express it) running all Hazards, and suffering
all Hardships possible upon that Account. He was a Rich and Great Prince
before, and wanted neither Glory nor Power to have lived happy and magnificent;
nor is it likely he had any Design to provide for his Posterity in what he did,
since we are as yet deprived of so great a Blessing. And whatever may be called
unnatural in this War, is for the Father of his Country to endeavor the
depriving both his Natural and Legal Children of what God and Nature have made
them Heirs to.

Fourthly, King James might have been one of the greatest and happiest Princes
in Europe, notwithstanding his Religion; and the Roman Catholics enjoyed the
same Privilege as to the exercise of theirs, that other Dissenters do at this
day, if that would but have pleased them; but it was an odd thing to all men of
thought, that the hundredth part of a Nation, (as the Papists are no more at
best) should think to bring all the rest over to their Side, and that against
both their Humors and Interests; but it is now plain, that the Affairs of
England and Rome cannot be reconciled. And I would fain ask any Protestant,
Whether in King James's time he would not have been willing with all his heart
to have been secured from the approaching Danger? Or whether he thinks it
p^ssible this could have been done more easily, or more to the satisfaction of
the Nation in general, than it was? But this is the mischief of it, we all
would be out of harms way, but then every man must do it as he himself thinks
fit, or else it all stands for nothing. If King William had made his entry
through a Sea of Blood, this had pleased some People better, and made others
more afraid; the Easiness of the thing was the greatest Providence in it; and
yet by our fickle Factious Humors we begin to make it both more expensive and
hazardous; but let us take heed, lest if we tread in the Steps of our
Forefathers in Divisions and homebred Jarrings, we also run the same fate in
being subject to a Nation of Foreigners; and yet it is to be feared, that the
real ground of some Peoples Discontents, is not, that they at first disliked
the Present Government, but that they were disappointed in their hopes of some
Preferment that they thought themselves best deserved: and yet, God be thanked,
I cannot see any great Injury that those People can do to the Present
Establishment, since the King, Parliament and People are all of a side; and as
for the Malcontents, they are neither Popular nor Considerable.

There is a Story in Josephus something parallel to our Case; that was, The
Jews were commonly very strict in the observance of the Sabbath; and amongst
other Tenets of that nature, they held it unlawful so much as to defend
themselves, tho attackt by the Enemy on that Day; this their Enemies came to
the knowledge of, and put them upon the trial, cutting a great many to pieces;
which made the rest grant that it was lawful to stand upon their own defense,
but not to press upon the Enemy; and they met with a second Disadvantage upon
that score; but finding to their Cost the folly of such Conceits, it came at
last to this, That when they were undertaken a third time out of hopes of like
success; they not only defended themselves, but defeated their Adversaries most
effectually. This Story I apply thus: That notwithstanding of late we have mixed
Matters of Religion and Policy too much, and advanced the Arbitrary Power of
Princes, by stretching the Doctrine of Passive Obedience beyond its due limits;
yet let not our Adversaries believe that we want either Hearts or Hands to
opppose a Foreign or Unlimited Power, and that too without either departing
from the Principles of Religion, or so much as wavering in our Profession. Let
those then then that will, be fond of the Garlic and Onions of Egypt; for my
own part, I cannot see how we can make one step backwards without the danger of
being poisoned by them: For certainly there are several Questions now in hand
not to be resolved by the Rules of our Church, but by our Legal Constitution,
which in some Cases binds the Ecclesiastical it self. And for all that specious
Objection which some People make, That our Laws, as well as our Religion, are
against the Deposing Doctrine; Yet it will endure no serious thought, That God
has made so many Millions of People to be subject to the Humor or Interest of
any one particular Man. For whatever has been said to the contrary of late,
it is both agreeable to the Principles of Reason and Religion, that Salus populi
suprema Lex. Government no doubt is Jure Divino, of which if we were destitute,
nil sane brutis amantibus praestaremur (says Melanction); but then it is not
necessary to have it terminated in this or that Individual; for tho it is an
undoubted Truth, that any private person had better suffer Injuries, than
hazard the public Peace of his Country, by endeavoring to redress the same;
and it cannot be lawful for every one to fly in the face of Authority, when
he is injured, or at least thinks himself so; yet neither the Laws of Nature,
Reason, or Religion, oblige us to sit still, and see the Fundamental
Constitutions of our Country overturned, without any endeavor of ours to
obstruct it: And tho there may be danger in endeavoring to stem such a Tide,
yet I may go further, and say, That those People do not deserve good Laws, but
rather are the Betrayers of them, that dare not stand up in their just defense.
Measures of Obedience.
We know that the Apostle bids us submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, and that there is no Power but of God; but he does not tell us,
that either Tyranny, Slavery, or Oppression, are from God, but that we may
resist them for his sake, as well our own; and certainly if the usurping an
absolute Power above, and against all Laws, be not Tyranny, the seizing men's
Freeholds, contrary to all Justice and Equity, be not Oppression, and the
making ones Will the Law, in a Government which the wisest of men call Limited,
he not reducing people into Slavery, I know not what such things mean. For in
such a case, it is not the Law of a Country that deposes a Prince, nor the
Religion that justifies it, but it is his own Act and Deed; for if the
presenting to the People be but a Ceremony; yet, a Coronation Oath is not; and
if a Prince can raise what Storms he pleases in his Dominions, without
endangering his own Vessel at the same time, them such consequences must
unavoidably follow, as make all other people actually his Slaves, not Subjects;
but sure the greatest Privilege of an English man is to have the Law on his
side, and his Religion by that Law made a part of his Property, which is a
Blessing that few other Nations can boast of; and one main Reason why this has
been continued so long to us, whilst other people groan under the Yoke of
Arbitrary Power, is, Because we have the Sea between us and any Foreign Enemy,
and consequently no pretense for a standing Army, in times of peace, to defend
our Frontiers against any sudden Invasion. An Army, no doubt, in times of
peace, being the next step to Slavery: To say nothing of Inconveniences by
this means brought into private Families, and the general Encouragement it
gives to all sorts of Vice. So that upon the whole matter, one should think,
that none would be fond of King James, or his Government: unless they resolve
at the same time, with the Burgers of Mons, to receive the French Garrisons, and
afterward become their eternal Slaves.

As to what I have said in the following Account of the Affairs of Ireland, I
can affirm it to be true in the main, tho possibly I may be mistaken in some
Circumstances: Nor do I pretend to write a complete History of the War; That I
leave to men of better Judgments, and more happy Opportunities; so that if this
prove not advantageous, yet I hope it will produce what may, by inviting some
more skilful hand to undertake the work, nothing of this kind being as yet
abroad, except some little Pamphlets writ at random, by those, that (it seems)
never saw that Nation. I have not writ the least Sentence out of prejudioe to
any man; but if any have affected the Profit more than the Duty of their
Employments, and think themselves hinted at, in some general Expressions; I
have only this to say, That as I would not flatter, so I am not of such a
temper, as to fear any man, so far as to prevent me from speaking Truth; nor
can I (as I hope) be blamed by any but those, who, having done ill themselves,
take it not well to be told of it: But let even those examine their own Actions
impartially, and they will find I have been as sparing in my Expressions as I
well could, and not conceal the matter of Fact, which a great many know the
truth of as well or better than my self; and I am far from doing any man that
injustice, as to charge him directly with a Crime, that I am not very well
assured is due to him.

What I have said about the management of the Irish Army, is not barely our own
Accounts, but what I got from several of their Officers, either Prisoners, or
Deserters, or by other Opportunities, as design or chance brought me to them.

I pretend no importunity of Friends for the publishing of these Papers; for I
am not so vain as to think they deserve it: However, I hope they will satisfy
some, who have not yet had opportunities to know these things; and if this
Account may be any way serviceable to them, I shall be glad of it; if not, they
must even have patience till a better appear. As to the mixing some small
matter of History with the rest, I did it because it pleased a particular
Friend, tho my time will not allow me to do it in such a Method and Style as
the Dignity of the Subject requires.

AN IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE Affairs of Ireland.
England an happy Kingdom at the Restoration.
IN the Year 1660. when the Legal Administration of Government both in Church
and State was restored with K. Charles II. never was there any People more
happy than the English; not only secure from all Foreign Invasions by the
Situation of our Country, and from all Oppression at home by its Laws; but the
Temple of Janus was then shut, and we enjoyed an universal Peace with all the
World. This disturbed by designing Persons.
And yet Prosperity in a few years becoming a Burden to us, we took an
occasion to quarrel with our Neighbors of Holland, which several Wise men did
then, and have since looked upon, to be industriously begun and fomented by
Cunning and Designing Persons of a different Interest and Persuasion, to weaken
the Protestant Interest in Europe. Those unhappy Breaches however were made up,
and opened again; and then a good Understanding secured a second time, to the
satisfaction of all that meant honestly.

The Methods the French King took to Advance his own Interest.
The King was a man that loved to be easy, and please himself, by whose
Example a great part of the Nation became in a small time of the same temper,
and the natural Hardness of the English was to a great degree softened: this was
cheerfully observed by our Neighboring Monarch, who failed not to encourage
our King in his way of living, by contributing to his satisfaction in
whatsoever he had a mind to be delighted withal; and in the mean time gave
encouragement to our Ship-Carpenters and Seamen; both to build him Ships, and
sail in them; and no wonder, for they had no business at home. About fifteen or
sixteen years ago the French King sent a great part of his Fleet to the relief
of Messina, and some other places in Sicily, which some then looked upon as a
Blemish in his Politics; and yet it appears since, that this was none of the
least depths of them; for by this, and such like means, he has got now a good
Fleet, and expert Seamen.

The D. of York's managing.
But whilst these things were on foot abroad, the Duke of York had a
Considerable Game to play at home: For tho it is more than probable he was a
Papist all along; yet to amuse the People, he comes to Church; and considering
that the Popish Part in England was by much the least of Three, things were so
well managed on that Side, as to make the Protestants fall foul upon one
another, not only with hard Names and Characters of Reproach, but in other
Actions that seemed more severe; by which means the Interest of both Parties
was not only considerably weakened, but that of the Papists incredibly
strengthened: Then what by the dexterous management of the Presbyterian Plot,
and some improvements made of that by the Observator; by which the Popish Party
obtained a great Reputation, (and people begun to think that the Devil was not
so black as he is painted) in the height of which, when (they say) some
measures were thought of to reduce the D. of Tork and his Favorites, King
Charles died.

King James proclaimed.
The Duke of York was proclaimed King by the universal consent of all People,
and afterward as generously assisted in the West, as the Circumstances of the
Nation would allow: But then when the Parliament came to address his Majesty,
and beseech him, That for the satisfaction of the Nation, the Popish Officers
and others might be removed from Places of Trust, and have competent Pensions
allowed them; he gave a very positive Answer, which was, in effect, That they
were his best Friends, and he would not be without them. After this, things
grew every day worse than other; for then all men's eyes were opened, and every
body could discern the Storm approaching. Ruins his own Interest.
Accordingly the Rain came, and beat violently upon the House, but it being
founded upon a stock, thanks be to God, has stood. And as God often brings
Light out of Darkness, and can by ways unthought of, or not looked into by men,
turn things contrary to what they design or intend them; P. of Orange. comes.
so in the midst of our Necessities, he raised up an Instrument, who, by his
Virtue and Wisdom contrived, and by his Valor put our Deliverance in
execution. How prosperously this succeeded in England, is known to all the
World; for besides the natural Inclinatiof the people to Variety, their general
aversion to Popery made the thing at that Juncture very easy, tho the Prince
was then in a manner a Stranger to the Nation in general.

The State of Ireland at that time.
But tho all things succeeded so happily for the Protestant Interest in
England; yet there was a Cloud in Ireland that seemed to threaten us, if due
care was not taken in time to disperse it. My Lord Tyrconnel, during the Late
King's Reign, had been framing and modelling an Irish Army, that might be ready
to serve the Popish Interest on all occasions, part of which was sent over into
England, some time before the Prince Landed; and after his being proclaimed
King, my Lord Tyrconnel (having still a considerable Body of men in Arms)
refuses to deliver up the Sword. Some say that it was not demanded from him;
and more, That he had been easily forced to it at first; or at least, there
might have been a Method taken to have persuaded him. But the management of
this was entrusted to Major General Hambleton, a professed Papist; Lieut. Gener.
Hambleton sent over.
and so well did my Lord Tyrconnell and he, with some other, play their Cards,
that they got Hambleton sent over, against the advice of most that understood
the Affairs of that Kingdom; by which means Succors were delayed, and
Hambleton, as soon as he was safe in Ireland, was so far from persuading my
Lord Tyrconnell to yield, that he ordered all the Horses that were left in
Protestant hands, and fit for Service, to be seized for the Late King's use,
and treated those whom he believed King William's best Friends, at Dublin, very
harshly; for which Service he was made Leutenant-General of the Irish Army.

The State of England at that Juncture.
But the Affairs of England did not admit of present Succors to be sent to the
Protestants in Ireland, who now were groaning under several Afflictions; for a
great part of the old Army was disbanded, or sent into Holland, the Dutch were
sent home, and it is thought, some unseasonable Disputes and Heats about Matters
of Religion, did no small disservice to the Public There was also a hot Report
about that time at London (and indeed all over England) that King James was
dead; which Report was only spread abroad by his own Party; and several other
such little Artifices were used, on purpose to make others more secure; King
James lands in Ireland, March 12. 1689.
for shortly after we had a certain Account, that he landed from France at
Kingsale, in the West of Ireland, having about 1800. men with him.

This was on the 12. of March, and after some small time he came to Dublin,
where he was received with all the Demonstrations of joy imaginable, by my Lord
Tyrconnell, and all the Popish Party, who looked upon him as their only
Support, Champion and Deliverer; tho several of them have since changed their
minds.

A little before this, the Protestants in Ireland were in daily expectation of
Arms, Ammunition, Commissions, and some Forces from England; and it is more than
probable, that if they had got them, or not hoped for them, the Business had
cost neither so much Blood, or Treasure as since it has; yet some advised, not
to make any show of discontent, till they had an Opportunity, and were in a
condition to make their party good, by the arrival of Succors from England:
But the greater part, impatient of delays, begin to list Men, and with what
Arms they could get, to make a show of forming an Army. Rout at Drummore, March
14.
Against those in the North, Lieutenant General Hambleton marched, with about
One Thousand of the Standing Army, and nigh twice as many Rapparees, in a
distinct Body; they met at Drummore, in the County of Down, and on the 14 of
March the Protestants were routed with no great difficulty; and no wonder, for
they were very indifferently provided with Arms, Ammunition and Commanders; nor
was their Discipline any better: This was called afterward, The Break of
Drummore, (a Word common amongst the Irish Scots for a Rout). At the same rate
were some others served shortly after, at a place called Killeleigh, under one
Hunter, and those that resisted had the same Fate, at several other places. In
the mean time Major General Macarty, by the same measures, and some little
Artifices, brought the Protestants of Munster under the same Circumstances.

This gave occasion to King James and my Lord Tyrconnell, to take the Arms and
Horses from all the Protestants of that Kingdom, except those that fled to
Londonderry, and some few that went toward Iniskilling; but a great many that
could get away, for either England or Scotland, made what haste they could, and
in some few Weeks after, those that went that way, were actually shut up in
Derry.

On the 25th of March they had Arms and Ammunition brought them, by Captain
James Hambleton; and all the World knows they behaved themselves very well.

April 13. Succors sent to Derry.
On the 13th of April, Colonel Richards, and Colonel Cunningham, were sent to
their relief, with two Regiments, who came into the Lough, but returned without
doing any thing, and were broke for their pains.

Maj. General Kirk in the Lough.
Then went Major General Kirk with his own, Sir John Hanmer's and Brigadeer
Stuart's Regiments of Foot; the Winds were cross, and the Irish fortified the
River, that it was difficult to relieve the Town, and our Ships laid at least
two Months in the Lough; the poor Soldiers, as well in Town as on Board,
endured great hardships all this while: But the Dartmouth Frigate at length
forced her way, July 31. Siege Raised.
and the Siege was raised on the last of July. Some condemn the Irish Politics
mightily in sitting down before this Town, whenas if they had let it alone, the
people would either have submitted of themselves, or however, they had been at
leisure to have sent a part of their Army into Scotland, which was an easy
thing, as then, to do, and would, no doubt, have hindered any Succors going
over that year from England; but Providence orders all things, and rules the
Actions, and disposes of the Councels of men accordingly.

Mackarty taken Prisoner.
The day before the Siege of Derry was raised, the Iniskilliners hearing of a
Body of about Six Thousand of the Irish Army, Commanded by Major General
Mackarty, that was marching toward them; they very boldly and bravely met them
nigh twenty miles from the Town of Iniskillin, and at a place called Newtowne
Buttler, fought, and routed them, taking Mackarty Prisoner, killing and
drowning nigh Three Thousand, there being of the Iniskillin-men in all, both
Horse and Foot, not above Two thousand; losing not above Twenty, and having
about Fifty wounded. This Story seemed to me at first very Incredible; but I
was told, it partly happened by a Fatal Mistake in the Word of Command amongst
the Irish; for the Iniskillin-men charged the Irish Right Wing very smartly,
which Mackarty perceiving, ordered some of his Men to face to the Right, and
march to relieve their Friends; the Officer that received the Orders, mistook,
and commanded the men, instead of facing to the Right, to face to the Right
about, and so march; the Irish in the Rear seeing their Front look with their
Faces toward them, and move, thought they had been running, and so without
more ado, threw down their own Arms, and run away; the rest seeing their men
run in the Rear, run after them for company, and were most of them cut off, or
drowned in Boggs and Loughs; so unhappy may a small thing prove to a great Body
of men: and at other times a little thing in appearance, proves very
advantageous: For we read of a Roman at plough, who stood with his Ox-yoke in a
Gap, and stopped the Soldiers that were running away; this made them face about,
and win the Field; though, I believe, in that Action of the Iniskilliners, as
well as Derry, there was a great deal due to their Valor, and more to the
Providence of God.

Forces raised in England.
During these Transactions in Ireland, the King gives out Commissions in
England to raise 18 Regiments of Foot, and four or five of Horse for the
Service of Ireland. Most of those had their Commissions dated the 8th of March,
1688/9;. and the Levies went on with all imaginable speed; for greatest part of
them were raised, armed and clothed in less than Six weeks. I was in the
Armories at the Tower when the Arms were to be delivered out to the new Levies,
but there was not half so many there as would do it; for the Arms were most
squandred away, or lost, in the late hurry of Affairs; and though several
Proclamations were sent abroad to bring them in, yet His Majesty was forced to
have most of his Arms out of Holland, which was both expensive and troublesome.

March to Chester.
This Army was mustered, and disciplined as well as the time would allow; My
Lord Devonshire and the Honble Mr Wharton being appointed Commissioners to view
them in their several Quarters; and in July most of them were commanded to
Chester, in order to be shipped for Ireland. I am a Stranger to the Reasons of
State, why they went no soonner; yet, that that seems considerable to me, was,
that my Lord Dundee had left the Convention at Edenbrough, raising a powerful
Faction for the Late King, in the North of Scotland, and the Castle of
Edenbrough was not as yet surrendered by the Duke of Gordon; it might not
therefore be thought prudent, to part with an Army out of our own Kingdom, till
the Danger were over from that Quarter; so that it was the beginning of August
before our Army got to Chester.

August 8. Encamp at Neston, and then embarque.
Most of them encampt about a Week at Neston; and then on Thursday, the 8th of
August, about Six a Clock in the Morning, His Grace Duke Sconberg, General of
all Their Majesty's Forces, Count Solmes, General of the Foot, and several
great Officers more, with not Ten Thousand Foot and Horse, embarked at
Highlake, for Ireland.

The Winds being cross, they lay on Board till Monday the 12th; when at Four a
Clock in the morning, the Wind being S. S. E. and S. E. the Bonaventure Frigate
(Captain Hobson Commander) fired a Gun, and put his Light in the Main Topmast
Shrouds, that being the Sign for sailing. There was also The Antilope, the
James Galley, etc. The Cleaveland, and the Monmouth Yats, with between 80 and
90 Vessels more, who all were under sale at Six a Clock; and at Eight the
Bonaventure put out an Ensign in the Mizen-shrouds for all the Captains and
Masters to come on board; which done, they received Orders to sail directly to
Carigfergus-Bay in Ireland: In case of bad weather, so that they could not
reach thither, to sail for Loureau in Galloway in Scotland; and if they fell
short of that, Ramsey Bay in the Isle of Man to be the place of Rendezvous.

Tuesday the 13th, at break of day, the greatest part of the Fleet was up with
the Mountains of Dundrum in the County of Down (these are commonly called the
Mountains of Mourn, and are said to be the highest in Ireland; on the top of
one of the highest stood a famous Monastery in time of old.) About Three that
Afternoon the Fleet came up the Lough, within a mile and a half of Carigfergus;
at Four they came to an Anchor in Bangor Bay, and immediately the General
ordered his Flag to be put out at the Yats Main-yard-Arm, that being the Sign
for landing our men, which was done accordingly; Land in Ireland.
and they encamped that night in Fields adjoining to the Shore; they lay upon
their Arms all night, having frequent Allarms of the Enemies approach, but
nothing extraordinary happened; and yet if those of the Enemy that were in
Carigfergus, Bellfast, Bangor, and the Adjacent Garrisons had attackt the Duke
that night, it might have bred him no small disturbance.

Garrison of Carigfergus burn their Suburbs.
Next day, being Wednesday the Fourteenth, the Duke continued still encamped,
and the Garrison of Carigfergus, apprehending a Siege, burnt their Suburbs: The
day following, the Duke sent a Party of about Two Hundred and Fifty men,
commanded by Sir Charles Fielding, to see what posture the Enemy was in about
Belfast; the Enemy was retired toward Lisburne, and Sir Charles with his Party
returned to the Camp; and then the Duke sent Colonel Wharton's Regiment to
take possession of the Place.

Friday the 16th. Lieutenant-Collonel Caulfield, of the Earl of Drogheda's
Regiment, was sent with a Party of Three Hundred Men toward Antrim, who came
there the next day, and found the Town deserted by the Enemy.

The General marches to Belfast.
On Saturday the General marched with his Army to Belfast, from whence he sent
out Parties, who took several of the Irish that were robbing and spoiling the
Country: And then to Carigfergus.
And Tuesday following being the 20th. five Regiments of Foot were sent toward
Carigfergus, encamping before the Town, and next day seven more went, who
almost surrounded it; after which, some Cannon and a Mortar were planted, and
also small Entrenchments begun. The Town desired a Parley, and sent out
Lieutenant Gibbons, with Propositions in Writing: He presented them very
submissively, and the Duke went into a Tent to read them; but when he found
they desired time to send to the late King for Succors, or leave to surrender,
he sent the Paper out, and ordered the Lieutenant to be gone, and then their
Cannon played directly at the Tent where he left the Duke, doing some Damage
thereabouts, but the Duke was gone abroad. Our Cannon were as ready as theirs,
for we begun to play upon my Lord Denegall's House in the Town, on which the
Enemy had planted two Guns, which disturbed our Camp. Before next Morning our
Men drew their Trenches several Paces nearer the Wall, which occasioned very
warm firing on both sides all Night: We lost some men, and had two Officers
wounded; and a Drummer, that made his escape over the Wall, gave the Duke an
Account, that there were about thirty killed in Town that Night.

Batteries planted.
Thursday, The 22d, was employed in running the Trenches nearer; the Mortars
and Cannon still playing upon the Town, and upon the Half Moon, that was to the
Right of the Castle: This Day came a Fleet of about Fifty Sale into the Lough,
which brought over four Regiments of Foot, and one of Horse. The day and night
were spent in smart firing, four Regiments of Foot mounting the Trenches.

Friday the 23d. the Besieged desired another Parley, and would have marched out
with Bag and Baggage, Drums beating, and Colors flying, etc. But the Duke
would allow no other Terms, but to make them Prisoners of War. During this
Parley, the Duke visited all the Trenches, and observed the Walls of the Castle,
and a poor Dutchman was shot from the Walls, making his Returns to Reproaches
against the Prince of Orange, our King, saying, That their King was a Tinker
King, he had nothing but Brass-Money; he was not nimble enough at getting off,
when the Parley was over, and so lost his Life for his Jests sake. After this
the Duke gave orders for the Ingineers and Gunners to go on as vigorously as
possible. Before we had only two Batteries, one on the Wind-Mill-Hill (with
Mortars) before the Castle, Westward; the other of four Guns, against the
North-gate. The Duke then ordered a very large Mortar to be placed close under
the Walls, upon a New Battery, near the Lord Denegall's House (with two Small
Guns) which did great Execution: This Night was spent in continual firing of
great and small Shot, and next Morning the Town was all over smothered with
Dust and Smoke occasioned by the Bombs; Coll. Richards wounded.
Colonel Richards was carried to Bellfast, being wounded in the Trenches the
Night before, and there was one Mr. Spring made his escape out of Town, who
told the Duke, That all the Soldiers lay continually on the Walls, so that the
Bombs only plagued the Protestants in Town; as also that Mackarty Moor, and
Owen Mackarty, were the only two that hindered the Town to be surrendered; and
that they resolved, if we stormed the Town, to retire all to the Castle, in
order to which they had laid in great store of Corn, Beef, Salt, and other
Provisions proportionable: He gave also an account, that they were straightened
for Ammunition, having only at first 30 or 32 Barrels of Powder, with other
things suitable. This Afternoon several of them were observed to be very busy
on the top of the Castle; it was believed at first they were planting Guns
there, but we understood afterward, that they were pulling off the Lead to
make Bullets.

Breaches increased.
Sunday the 25th. The Siege continued, and the Breaches were made wider,
particularly one a little to the East, of the North-gate; and yet the Irish
were very industrious in making up at Night, what we beat down in the day.

Next morning our Guns played furiously, and the Breach (notwithstanding all
their cunning) was increased; which the Irish seeing, and fearing that our Men
would enter, they found out this Stratagem, (viz.) They got a great number of
Cattle, and drove them all as near the top of the Breach as they could force
them to go, keeping themselves close behind them; and this served in some
measure to secure the Breach, for several of the Cattle were killed by our
shot, and as they fell, the Irish threw Earth, Stones and Wood upon them; but
this they thought would not hold long, and so they desired another Parley, which
the Duke would not hear of, but ordered the Mortars and Cannon to play without
ceasing, and the Men of War had orders to play their Guns from the Sea upon the
Castle, which so terrified the Irish, that at Six a Clock next morning they put
out their white Flag again, and sent their Proposals to the Duke, which at
length he agreed to, having more business before him, and the Season of the
Year beginning to alter. Garrison surrendered.
He gave them leave therefore to march out with their Arms and some Baggage,
and they were to be conducted with a Guard to the next Irish Garrison, which
then was Newry; Colonel Wharton at the Parley lay before the Breach with his
Regiment, and was ready to enter, when the Duke sent to command his Men to
forbear firing, which with some difficulty they agreed to, for they had a great
mind to enter by force. When firing ceased on both Sides, several of our
Officers went into Town, and were treated by the Irish with Wine, and other
things in the Castle, and the Articles were scarce agreed to, till Mackarty
Moor was in the Duke's Kitchen in the Camp, which the Duke smiled at, and did
not invite him to Dinner; saying, If he had staid like a Soldier with his Men,
he would have sent to him; but if he would go and eat with Servants in a
Kitchen, let him be doing.

When we took possession of the Stores, the Irish had but one Barrel of Powder
left, tho some say they threw several more into the Sea to save their Credit.

The Irish march out.
On Wednesday the 28th of August, about Ten a Clock, the Irish marched out, and
had Sir William Russel, a Captain in Colonel Coy's Regiment, with a Party of
Horse, appointed for their Guard; but the Country people were so inveterate
against them (remembering how they had served them some few days before) that
they stripped most part of the Women, and forced a great many Arms from the Men;
and took it very ill that the Duke did not order them all to be put to Death,
notwithstanding the Articles: But he knew better things; and so rude were the
Irish Scots, that the Duke was forced to ride in among them; with his Pistol in
his hand, to keep the Irish from being murdered. The poor Irish were forced to
fly to the Soldiers for protection, else the Country people would certainly
have used them most severely; so angry were they one at another, tho they live
all in a Country. However, this was laid at the General's Door, by the great
Officers in the Irish Army, and they would say, That he had lost his Honor, by
engaging in so ill a Cause. The Governor of the Town was Mackarty Moor, but
Owen Mackarty had a great Ascendent over both him and the Garrison. The Garrison
consisted of two Regiments of Foot, lusty strong Fellows, but ill clad, and to
give them their due they did not behave themselves ill in that Siege.

The number of the Dead on both sides.
They had about One Hundred and Fifty killed and wounded in Town, and we had
near that number killed, and about Sixty wounded. The Town it self is not very
strong, but the Castle is considerable; it stands upon a Rock, and has its Name
from Fergus, the first King of Scots, who first brought the Irish into Britain,
and was drowned in this Bay, (as Camden tells you). However, it is one of the
most important Places in the North of Ireland, and the taking of it gave an
hopeful prospect of future success.

The General returns to Bellfast.
The Duke put Sir Henry Inglesby's Regiment into Carigfergus, and on Wednesday
the 28 th, and the day following, the Army marched to Belfast, where they
Encamped about a mile beyond the Town. On Friday Duke Schonberg's Regiment of
French Horse, consisting of 500 men, came to the Camp, and on Saturday, the
last of August, the Army was mustered, being as follows; Horse, my Lord
Devonshire's Regiment, my Lord Delamere's, Coll. Coys, Duke Schonberg's; and
Coll. Levison's Dragoons. Foot; One Battalion of Blew, Dutch; Carlesoon's
White, Dutch; Coll. Beaumont, Coll. Wharton, Lord Drogheda, Lord Lisburn, Lord
Mead, Lord Roscomon, Lord Lovelace, Lord Kingston, Duke of Norfolk, Coll.
Herbert, Sir Edward Deering, Sir Tho. Gower, Coll. Earl, La Millioneir, Du
Cambon, La Callimott.

September 1. A Letter sent from the D. of Berwick
Whilst the Duke staid at Belfast, there came a Letter to him by a Trumpet from
the Duke of Berwick; but 'twas returned un-open'd, because it was directed
only, For Count Schonberg; the Duke saying, That his Master the King of England
had honored him with the Title of a Duke, and therefore the Letter was not to
him. This is a piece of State that has been often practiced amongst Great Men;
for when King Edward the III d. sat down before Tournay in France, he sent to
the French King, whom he saluted only by the name of Philip of Valoys;
challenging him to fight a single Combat to prevent Bloodshed, or with 100 men
each; and if those methods did not please, then within ten days to join Battle
with all their Forces near Tournay: To which Philip made no direct Answer,
alleging, That the Letters were not sent to him, The King of France, but
barely to Philip of Valoys; yet he brought his Army within sight of the
English; and by the Mediation of King Philip's Mother, and two Cardinals, a
Peace was concluded till the Midsummer following.

But to return; Our Train sent by Sea to Carlingford.
Our Artillery-Horses were most of them as yet at Chester; and therefore the
Duke gave Orders for greatest part of the Train to be Shipped, and the Fleet to
sail with those, and all Necessaries for the Army, to Carlinford-Bay, within
Eight miles of Dundalk: And then on Monday the second of September, we marched
beyond Lisburn; this is one of the prettiest Inland Towns in the North of
Ireland, and one of the most English-like places in the Kingdom; the Irish name
is Lishnegarvah, which they tell me signifies the Gamesters-Mount; for a little
to the North-East of the Town there is a Mount, moated about, and another to
the South-West; these were formerly surrounded with a great Wood, and thither
resorted all the Irish Outlaws, to play at Cards and Dice; one of the most
considerable amongst them having lost all, even his Clothes, went in a Passion,
in the middle of the night, to the House of a Nobleman in that Country, who
before had set a considerable Sum on his head; and in this mood he surrendered
himself his Prisoner; which the other considering of, pardoned him; and
afterward this Town was built, when the knot of these Rogues was broke; which
was done chiefly by the help of this one man; the Town is so modern however,
that Cambden takes no notice of it.

On Tuesday, the 3 d. we marched through Hilsborough, a place where the Enemy
before our coming, had kept a Garrison, near which, on the Highway side, were
two of our men hanged for Deserting; We Encamp at Drummore.
that night we encampt at Drummore (the place where Lieutenant General Hamilton
routed the Northern Protestants); the Inhabitants had all or most of them left
the Town; and there was not so much as a Sheep or a Cow to be seen; our small
marching Train came up with us here from Belfast, and here the General had an
account, That the Duke of Berwick was at Newry, with about 1700 Foot and
Dragoons, and two Troops of Horse, designing to defend that Pass.

At Lough Britland.
Wednesday the 4 th, we marched to Loughbritland, where we encamped in two
Lines (as from the beginning) upon the side of a Hill, beyond the Town; the
Inhabitants had deserted this place also, and what little Corn there was, some
lay reapt and not bound up, and the rest was spoiled for want of management. As
our Army was marching up, I went Three miles beyond the Camp, where I met with
the Iniskillin Horse and Dragoons, whom the Duke had ordered to be an
Advance-Guard to his Army. I wondered much to see their Horses and Equipage,
hearing before, what Feats had been done by them; they were three Regiments in
all, and most of the Troopers and Dragoons had their Waiting-men mounted upon
Garrons, (those are small Irish Horses, but very hardy); some of them had
Holsters, and others their Pistols hung at their Sword-Belts: they showed me
the Enemies Scouts upon a hill before us; I wished them to go and beat them off,
and they answered, With all their hearts, but they had Orders to go no further,
than where they saw the Enemies Scouts; tho they seemed to be dissatisfied with
it; and added, They should never thrive, so long as they were under Orders.

Newry burnt.
And yet if those men had been allowed to go on in their old forward way, it is
very probable they might have saved the Town of Newry from being burnt; for the
Duke of Berwick was then in it; and a Troop of the Enemies Horse advanced that
afternoon, some three miles from the Town toward us; but seeing the
Iniskilliners, they retreated in haste to the Town, only leaving some few
Scouts to bring a further account of our motion. Those in the Town were
startled at the news, and made ready to march off; but seeing no Enemy
approach, they took time to set it on fire, and take all the people, with
whatsoever was valuable, along with them: They went away about Sunset, and
next morning came to Dundalk, where we heard that some of their great Officers
expressed themselves very melancholy, as if they had but small hopes to
withstand the English.

The General not knowing that the Town of Newry was burnt, nor that the Enemy
had deserted the Pass, gave Orders for 70 men out of each Regiment of Foot, in
all 1200, with a Party of Horse and Dragoons, and four Fieldpieces to be ready
to march by three of the Clock in the morning; this Party was commanded by
Coll. Wharton, and was designed to attack the Enemy, whom we expected at the
end of the Town, there being an old Church, with several other convenient
places, from whence they might prevent our marching; nor could we well go
about, without a great deal of trouble, and several days march, and then we
must leave the Enemy on our Rear, which was not to be done. We march to Newry.
The Party marched according to Orders, and the whole Army followed about Six
of the Clock: But on our march, the Duke had an account by one Mr. Humphreys of
Belfast, That the Enemy had retreated, and Burnt the Town; the General then
went forwards, and found the Flames not quite extinguished; and with Coll.
Levison's Dragoons, and some of the Iniskillin Horse, he went at least two
miles further, but nothing of an Enemy appearing, he returned, and gave Command
for his Army to encamp a mile short of Newry. The bad weather had disturbed us
before, but now the Rains and Wind were so extremely violent, that it was very
difficult for us to pitch our Tents; so that every one was forced to shift for
himself as well as he could; Provisions were also very scarce, for there wanted
Horses to bring them after us. We encampt here next day also; from whence the
Duke sent a Trumpet to the Irish, to let them know, That if they burnt any more
Towns, he would give no Quarter. I went abroad into the Country, where I found
all the Houses deserted for several miles; Customs of the Native Irish.
most of them that I observed, had Crosses on the Inside, above the Doors, upon
the Thatch, some made of Wood; and others of Straw or Rushes, finely wrought;
some Houses had more, and some less: I understood afterward, that it is the
custom among the Native Irish, to set up a new Cross every Corpus Christi day;
and so many years as they have lived in such a house, as many Crosses you may
find; I asked a Reason for it, but the Custom was all they pretended to: Here
the Corn also was either lying, and rotting on the ground, or else was shaken
by the violent winds, for the People were all gone, the Protestants the March
before, and the Irish now, at the retreating of their Army, some fled for fear,
and those that had a mind to stay, were forced away by the Army, with all their
Cattle, and whatever else was portable. In the Evening the Duke sent a
Detachment of 520 Foot, with a Party of Horse and Dragoons (commanded by my
Lord Lisburn) toward Dundalk; they got there the next morning, but found it
forsaken by the Enemy, and not burnt; tho it had been better for us if it had,
as it fell out afterward.

There is an old square Tower in Newry, which they call the Castle, this was
left standing, and not above five or six Houses more; the Town it self had been
a pretty place, and well built, standing upon a very advantageous Pass, the
Tide coming up above the Bridge, by a Bay that comes from Carlingford. In this
Castle the Irish had left some salt Beef and Herrings, but they were salted so
very much after the Irish fashion, that the Soldiers, for all they were very
hard put to it for Victuals, yet they could not eat them; (I believe the
greatest reason was, a fond conceit they had got amongst them, that the meat
was poisoned:) There was also a small Gun left in the Castle, and another
Twelve-Pounder thrown over the Bridge into the River. In this Castle the
General left Fifty men of Sir Tho. Gowers Regiment, commanded by Captain
Pallifer; The Army marched to Dundalk.
and on Saturday the 7 th of September the Army marched to Dundalk; in our way
thither we found two Redoubts, nigh a place called the Four-mile-house; for
Marshall de Rose, the French General, was at Dundalk some time before our Army
approached, and enquiring whether the River was fordable, he found it was in
several places; then he went on to Newry, and finding it a convenient Pass, he
ordered it to be defended, at the same time commanding those Redoubts to be
made, which if the Enemy had manned, they might have given us no small
diversion; for there are vast Mountains on each hand, and a Bog between them,
through which there was only a Causeway with a deep Ditch, and a small Stone
Bridge about the middle of it; at the farther end of the Causeway, the Forts
were placed a convenient distance one from another, from whence the Irish might
easily have retired, if we had forced the Pass; for neither could our Horse
follow, nor knew our Foot how to tread the Bogs after them: This place was
formerly very woody, and was fortified by O Neale, Earl of Tyrone, against Sir
Charles Blunt, Lord Deputy, which he found great difficulty in passing; but
next year he built a Fort some two miles nearer Dundalk, called Moyery Castle:
The Country between Newry and Dundalk, is one of the wildest places of all
Ireland, being the haunt some years ago, of the famous Tory, Redman O Hanlon,
whose Ancestors were wont to brag that they were Standard-Bearers in times of
old, to the Kings of Vlster.

Our encamping there.
We Encampt about a mile on this side the Town of Dundalk, in a low moist
Ground, having the Town, with the River, toward the West between us and the
Enemy; the Sea toward the South, the Newry Mountains to the East; and toward
the North were Hills and Bogs intermixed; the Protestants that were left there,
told us, the Irish boasted when they went away, that they would drive us all
back into the Sea again, or else we would die of our selves, the English not
being used to the Field, especially in a strange Country, and at that time of
the year. At our coming thither we got about 2000 of my Lord Bedlow's Sheep,
which came in very good time to the Army, for it had gone hard with us before
for want of Provisions; however Bread was so scarce, that the General gave
Orders, that what there was, should be for the Men, and not for the Officers,
(because he judged they could shift better.) It was also ordered the first
night we came there, That an Officer, with a Party of men out of every
Regiment, should go back and take up what men they met withal upon the Road
sick, for several were beginning to faint already, by reason of the Bad
weather, and constant marchings, and want of Provisions.

Gasper de Coligny, sometimes Admiral of France, and one of the most knowing
Men of his time, was wont to say, That War is a great Monster, which begins to
be formed by the Belly; meaning, that Food ought to be the very first care of a
General for his Army; this Duke Sconberg knew as well as any one; and now (his
Ships not being come) he takes part of his Train-horses to send for Bread.

Maj. General Kirk joins the Army.
On Sunday the Eighth, Major General Kirk's Regiment, Sir Jo. Hanmer's, and
Brigadeer Stuart's joined us; and that Afternoon we had a Report, that a Party
of my Lord Delamere's Horse were surrounded by the Enemy, but it proved false;
for there were none of them within ten miles of us.

Monday the 9 th, The Soldiers had Orders not to stir out of the Camp on pain
of death, for they stragled abroad and plundered those few People that were
left, and some of them were murdered by the Rapparees; a word which we were
strangers to till this time. Rapparees from whence.
Those are such of the Irish as are not of the Army, but the Country people
armed in a kind of an hostile manner with Half-Pikes and Skeins, and some with
Sythes, or Muskets. For the Priests the last three or four years past would
not allow an Irish man to come to Mass, without he brought at least his
Rapparee along; that they say in Irish signifies an Half-stick, or a
Broken-beam, being like an Half-pike; from thence the Men themselves have got
that name; and some call them Creaughts, from the little Huts they live in:
these Hutts they build so conveniently with Hurdles and long Turf, that they
can remove them in Summer toward the Mountains, and bring them down to the
Valleys in Winter. I went this Afternoon with some others to Carlingford; (this
is a little Town on the Seaside some eight miles backwards from Dundalk) there
being an excellent Bay here, our Ships had orders at Bellfast to sail thither;
(there had been a small Town (and it was known in Q. Elizabeth's time by reason
of a Defeat that Sir Henry Dockwra gave the Irish, not far from hence) but the
Irish about the time they burnt Newry, burnt this also, only there stood five
old Ruinous Castles upon the Shore, and a prodigious Mountain hung almost over
these into the Sea.) Our business was to see if our Fleet was come, or at least
in sight, but a small Fisher-boat was all the Fleet this place afforded at that
time, nor had we any Ships there for several days after.

Late King's Army at Drogheda.
By this time the General had an Account, that part of the late King's Army was
at Drogheda, a considerable Town on the Seaside, sixteen miles from Dundalk:
one of the Enemies Ingineers came over to us, who told the Duke, that the Enemy
was drawing together as fast as they could, but that they could not make above
20000 well-armed men. You must know, that every body who knew Duke Sconberg,
believed he would not come into Ireland without a good Army, and in all
respects well provided, and same had made our Army twice as many as they were:
the Irish Army was likewise harrassed by being at Derry; and several of them,
both Horse and Foot, were gone into the Country to Recruit; so that when we
came first to Dundalk, they were in such disorder, that most of them retreated
beyond Drogheda; and I was told since by some of themselves, that they had not
at that time above 8000 men in a Body: Marshall De Rose was very much
concerned at this, and he with some others, were for deserting Drogheda and
Dublin, and retreating toward Athlone and Limerick, as they did this year:
this my Lord Tyrconnell heard of, where he was sick at Chapell-Izzard, and went
immediately to Drogheda, where he told them, that he would have an Army there
by the next Night of 20000 men, which accordingly proved true, for they came in
from Munster on all hands. But when De Rose heard that Duke Sconberg halted, he
was sure (he said) that he wanted something, and therefore advised to make what
haste they could to get their Army together; They come to Ardee.
and a day or two after that, some part of their Army moved toward Ardee.
(This is a small Town between Drogheda and Dundalk, where my Lord More, and Sir
Henry Titchburne defeated a Party of the Irish in the late Rebellion): the
People here are most of them Protestants, so that when the Irish retreated
toward Drogheda, they expected the English Army, and therefore they provided
great quantities of Ale, Bread, and other Provisions, for the Soldiers; but the
Irish Army returning, it was all seized by them, several of the poor People
stripped, and some of them glad to save their lives by flying in the night to our
Camp. Whether it was that the General did not expect the Enemy to advance
toward us, or at least that they would not come to encamp so near us, or what
other Reasons he had, I am not able to judge; but since it happened we stayed
there so long, in all appearance here was a good Opportunity lost in not
sending to Ardee for all this Provision, as also in not getting in, or at least
in not destroying the Forage between Ardee and Dundalk; for when the Enemy
came, and sat down by us, they got a great quantity of Forage between our Camp
and theirs, and burnt a great deal afterward before our Faces; but they say
that was the first thing the General ordered, to cure all the Forage, or at
least make it unserviceable to the Enemy.

But to return to our own Camp. Coll. Coy sent abroad with a Party.
Monday the 9 th, in the Afternoon, Coll. Coy went out with a Party of 200
Horse to scour the Country, but met with none of the Enemy, for they were in a
doubtful Condition what measures to take. The 10 th, Little happened of moment,
only the General rid out to observe the Country; the Popish Chapel in Town
was made a Storehouse, and amongst other Papers of like nature, I found one
that sometime before had been given to the Priest, To pray for the Shoule of
Brian Rhode. The 11 th, There came a Gentleman from the Enemy, who told the
Duke, that their Numbers were not so great as was reported; and the Trumpet
returned that was sent formerly to the Duke of Berwick for they kept him on
purpose for some days, that he might not give an Account of their Condition
till their Army was got together.

Thursday the 12, it was given out in Orders, That Forage should be fetched
from beyond the Town toward the Enemy, and that if any Soldier would thresh
Corn, and bring it to the Commissary, he should be paid for it the full value:
The Majors were ordered to see the Arms of their respective Regiments kept
clean, and the Soldiers to leave off firing in the Camp, because that some
unskilful Fellows had done mischief to our own men: That none of the Soldiers
should Rob or Plunder the Country People, and that there should be a
Reserve-Guard appointed in every Regiment, consisting of a Captain, Lieutenant,
Ensign, and fifty men, to be always ready to draw out upon all Occasions.

Bread brought to the Camp.
Friday the 13. Two Hundred and Four Load of Bread came to the Camp, and four
Ships came to Carlingford: A Report was in the Camp, that our Horse, who went a
foraging in the morning, were engaged with the Enemy, which occasioned the
General to ride out, and all the Colonels that were in Town, were ordered to
the Camp; but the Business was only thus; A Party of the Enemies Horse appeared
at a distance, whilst a Party of ours, and some of Colonel Levisons Dragoons
were tying up their Forage, upon their Horses; our Men seeing the Enemy appear,
threw down their Forage, drew up, and marched to meet them; as our Men
advanced, they drew back, till they were out of sight; when our Men had got up
their Forage again, the Enemy appeared a second time, and so a third, till a
greater Party of Horse went out: After this, the Duke always ordered a Party of
One Hundred Horse to cover the Foragers whilst they were at work.

The Duke goes to Carlingford, but few Ships as yet arrived.
Next day the Duke went to Carlingford, longing to see the Fleet; but only four
Ships were come, and those the night before; the Weather then was very
tempestuous, and orders were given out how the men should receive their Bread;
this was very good News to them, for it had been very scarce ever since we left
Belfast; but to say truth, the Bread we had then, and during our stay at
Dundalk was full as good in its kind, as any we have had since. In the Evening
we had News, The Irish come and encamp at the Bridge of Slane.
that the Irish Army was come as far as Ardee, and part of them to the Bridge
of Slane, within three Miles of us; where they encamped, and where their whole
Army staid afterward for some time. This Evening it was given out in Orders,
That none that went a foraging should pass the Horse Out-guards, and that the
Horse might cut Wood for their Stables, and also the Foot for their
convenience; so that this was the first public appearance of our staying here.
News of the Danes coming.
Then the Report of the Danes coming was first spread abroad, and that we
deferred meeting the Enemy upon that account; about this time also landed
Colonel Viller's Regiment of Horse, having suffered much in a Storm, and lost
one hundred and four Horses. In two or three days most of the Wood about Town,
as also most of the Fruit Trees in my Lord Bedloe's Orchard were cut down. And

Sunday the 15th, It was ordered that a Colonel should go the Rounds every
night, and the Officer of the Guard to give him the Word. Our Entrenchments
begun.
The Right Wing was to furnish Monsieur Cambon, Quarter-master-General with two
hundred Men, to work at the Trenches at the West End of the Town, next the
Enemy, where we planted several Fieldpieces, and it was not easy for the
Enemy to break in upon us that way; the Majors were ordered a pound of Powder
for each Man, and to take care it should be delivered as there was occasion.

Monday the 16th, Six Hundred Men were ordered to work at the Trenches, which
the Duke saw then convenient to draw round his Camp, since he had an Enemy that
was too strong for him, very near, and therefore he must put it out of their
power to force him to fight; for Woe be to that Army, which by an Enemy is made
to fight against its will. And this is the Advantage of an Entrenched Camp,
that none can compel you to give Battle but when you please. This Method has
been practiced very much of late, especially by the French; and yet it is no
new thing, it being very much in use amongst the Romans; yet before the
vanquished Pirrhus, King of the Epirots, they never used any Entrenchments, but
lay in the open Fields; but having found that Princes Army entrenched, they
liked it so well, that ever afterward they practiced it themselves.

A Battalion mounts to the Trenches.
But not to digress too far, a Battalion was ordered to march next night into
the Trenches at the West End of the Town (which was Major General Kirks) no
Officers nor Soldiers were to stir out of the Camp; all the Colonels were to
send for their Detachments that were abroad, except that at Newry. The Captain
that commanded at Bedloes Town (that was an House of my Lord Bedloe's, about
half a mile to the North-West of Dundalk, where we had a Guard) if the Enemy
appeared, was to march to the Camp through Dundalk and that a Party of one
hundred Foot lie by the Horse-Guard that Night. This day or the next came
Colonel Tiffins, and the rest of the Iniskillin Foot, and encamped toward the
North-West of the Town, but within the Trenches on very safe Ground, as did
also their Horse.

What Brigadees of Foot we had.
Our Brigadeers of Foot were Sir Henry Bellassis, Sir John Hanver, Brigadeer
Stuart, and Mounsieur La Millinere; we had only one Brigadeer of Horse, who was
Colonel Villers. The General's Orders for the ordinary Guards.
Then the General gave the following Orders to be observed, and Detachments to
be made out of all the four Brigades of Foot, as follows, viz. One Brigade
was to furnish all Ordinary and Extraordinary Guards for the day, with what
little Detachments are to be made for that day; to which end the Brigade must
furnish Officers and Soldiers, as follows: For the Duke's own Guard, a
Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign with Colors, two Sergeants, two Drums, and
Fifty Men; the Main-Guard in Town the like Number; and the Artillery-Guard as
many: The Guard for Lieutenant General Douglas, a Lieutenant, Sergeant, and
Thirty Men: For Major General Kirk, an Ensign, Sergeant, and Twenty Men; the
Guard for the Treasury, a Sergeant and Twelve Men; in all, for the Ordinary
Guards, three Captains, four Lieutenants, four Ensigns, nine Sergeants, eight
Drums, and two hundred and twelve Men. Each Brigadeer had a Sergeant and twelve
Men out of their own Brigade; and the Colonels, when they were quartered with
their Regiments, had a Guard of six Men ( Count Solmes, and Major General
Soravenmore had Guards of their own Dutch). These were upon ordinary Duty: And
then the Reserve-Guard, of Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and Fifty Men, out of
each Regiment, was always to be ready, as well out of other Brigades, as that
which had the Ordinary Guards for the day: the Brigade that had the Guards was
always to have a Colonel ready in the Camp, as well to see the Detachments
made, as to go the Grand Round, through the four Brigades at night. The
Lieutenant Colonels and Majors were also ordered always to keep with their
respective Regiments, that in case Detachments were to be made, every one might
be ready in his turn to march. And the Majors of the respective Brigades were
to attend every night at the General's Quarters for Orders.

Next day, and the day following, one hundred Men out of each Regiment were
ordered to work in the Trenches, as also a Lieutenant and twenty Men, out of
each Company, to fetch Straw and Wood to build Hutts; what sick Men were in the
Camp, were sent to Carlingford; and now our Scouts and the Enemies stood
usually within a quarter of a mile of each other: Some little Skirmishes
happened, hut they turned to no account on either side: The General went
frequently abroad to view the Enemy, and ordered on Thursday that a Brigadier
should go the Rounds at night, and see the Guards in the day.

An Account that the Irish advanced.
Friday the 20th, In the morning we had an Account that the Enemy advanced
toward us, and that a Party of two thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse
were gone beyond the Mountains, to attack the Pass at Newry, and fall upon us
in the Rear; which had been no ill Project: but their Design was only to cut
off our Foragers, and Straglers. About ten a Clock a Party of the Enemies Horse
did appear in sight of our Camp, and they had several Battalions of Foot drawn
up in order near their own; but upon the advancing of a Party of our Horse,
theirs retired to their Main Body, which was too strong for us to meddle
withal. The detached Party of the Enemy that we heard was gone beyond the
Mountains, went to a place called the Blackbank; and hearing that my Lord
Hewet's Regiment of Horse, and Sir Henry Ingleby's Foot were marching to the
Camp, and were in Newry, or hard by it that night (though they came not thither
till the next) as also some French Detachments that the Duke had commanded in,
lay in Newry, besides the usual Garrison of Fifty Men; they came no further that
way, but struck off to the left toward Sligo; whenas its very probable, That
if our Enemies had been all men of Resolution, they might have sent part of
their Army in our Rear; and whilst we endeavored to oppose those, they might
with the rest have forced our Camp, and destroyed us; but Providence was our
best Guard. We had sent several men sick to Carlingford by this time. I happened
to be there that day, and we had News that the Enemy had taken Newry, and were
upon their march to Carlingford; this was not believed by us; but however, the
Irish that remained there, thought it true: and 'twas very observable with what
Joy the Little Boys, as well as the silly Old Women, received the News, running
together, and whispering; nor was it possible for them to conceal their inward
satisfaction. As I went to the Camp that Evening, I observed a small Party of
Light Horse cross the Rode a litte before me in great haste; and when I got
about a mile further, I understood that they were a Party of the Irish that had
killed five French men, and two Iniskilliners, as they were a foraging toward
the Mountains. Great Rains.
This Afternoon came the first of our Ships up to Dundalk, from Carlingford,
with Ammunition and Provisions: In the Night the Rains were extremely violent,
and both Horse and Foot had orders to forage toward Carlingford, for the
Forage was destroyed on the other side.

The Irish draw out their Army, and proffer Battle.
Saturday the 21st, About Nine a Clock in the Morning (it being a very clear
sunshine-day) our Camp was alarmed; the Enemy displayed their Standard-Royal,
and all drew out, both Horse and Foot, bringing along a very handsome
Field-Train. A great Body of their Horse drew up to the South-West of the Town,
about half a mile from our Outworks; the Duke went out to observe them, and
sent for Colonel Beaumont's Regiment, into the Trenches beyond the Town, and
about an hour after for Colonel Earls. It was reported, that several great
Officers were for fighting, and desired the Duke to send for the Horse home,
who were most of them gone a foraging as far as Carlingford; but his Answer
was, Let them alone, we will see what they will do. He received several fresh
Accounts that the Enemy advanced, and always bid, Let them alone. A Body of
their Foot came to the side of a Bogg, and fired upon a Party of our Horse, not
far from the Duke; but they knew the Horse could not come at them, else, I
suppose, they would scarce have come so near. Then our Gunners sent from the
Works, to see if they might fire amongst the Enemy; who, by this time were
within Cannon shot, but the Duke would not suffer it, except they came within
Musket Shot of our Trenches. He observed the Enemies motions and postures, and
said, He saw no sign of their designing to fight; only-once they drew their
Army into two lines, as if they would, and then he sent Lieutenant General
Douglass to the Camp, to order all the Foot to stand to their Arms; and sent to
the Horse, That upon the firing of three Pieces of Cannon, they should return
to the Camp, but till then to go on with their Foraging. Mean time the Duke, as
if there was no fear of danger for all this (for he used to say, That it was
not in their power to make him fight but when he pleased) alighted from his
Horse, and sat him down upon a little Hill, where he seemed to sleep for some
time, though I believe his thoughts were at work how to repulse the Enemy, if
they should attack him. Lieutenant General Douglass came to the Camp, and all
the Soldiers, with the greatest joy in the World, stood to their Arms; several
that had not stirred out of their Tents for a Week before, now got up their
Muskets, and all were glad to think that they had an opportunity of beating
their Enemy (for they never supposed the contrary) and so to march forwards
from that sad place, which they begun already to be very weary of.

But refused by the Duke.
We stood looking upon one another for some time, and most people desired that
they might march through the Town, and have a fair Trial for it; but the Duke
had no such thoughts; and therefore he did not so much as send for his Horse
home; besides, he knew that the Enemy could not easily force our Camp without a
great deal of hazard to themselves, and that he believed they would scarce be
brought to. And therefore about two a Clock, when the Enemy begun to draw off,
the General sent orders for the Soldiers to return to their Tents. My Lord
Lisburne, and Colonel Woolsley made some proffers to beat the Enemy back; or
with one thousand men to beat up their Guards that night; but this was not so
easy a Task as they made it; and the Duke refused it, considering if they did
it, the Honor was theirs; but if they miscarried, the disadvantage was his. As
the Enemy retired, a Party of Colonel Levison's Dragoons killed about four or
five of them, and some of the Iniskillin-men stripped themselves, and pursued the
Enemy, killing two or three more, tho some of themselves fell in the attempt;
but the Action of that day was very inconsiderable; for neither could they come
at us, nor we go to them, without such disadvantages, as are to be well
considered of in such cases: And that the General acted this day, as well as
before and after, according to the Rules of Art and Prudence, and that too for
the best, may partly appear toward the latter end of the Campaign. I had
almost forgot to tell you, that the Late King was at the head of his Army that
day, having come to the Camp some days before.

The Officers commanded to exercise their men.
The Orders were that Night, That none should forage, nor stir out of the Camp
next day; and that the Brigades that did not mount the Guards, should be
exercised at firing at a Mark when it was Fair weather (as 'twas very seldom)
for the Duke knew most of his men had never been in service, and therefore he
would have them taught as much as could be.

Part of the Irish Army remove.
Next day, being Sunday, we had news that the Enemy was removed toward
Drogheda, and had burnt their Camp; this was partly true, for they removed some
of their Army, and formed a Camp hard by Ardee to the East, nigh the side of a
Bog. My Lord Hewett's Horse, and Sir Henry Inglesby's Foot came this day to the
Camp (the latter being relieved at Carigfergus by Colonel Gustavus Hambleton
from Chester) and two French Granadeers were apprehended as they were going to
the Enemy. A Plot discovered.
But next Morning there was a further discovery made: And first, Four Soldiers
and a Drummer, then Sixteen more apprehended; several Letters were found about
some of those; as one to Monsieur d'Avaux, and, as they say, one to the Late
King; those it seems were writ by one Du Plessey, who served as a private
Soldier in M. Cambon's Regiment, and had for some time kept a Correspondence
with the Enemy; Enquiry being made into the thing, about Two hundred men, all
Papists, in Callimot's, Cumbon's, and La. Millineir's French Regiments, were
secured, disarmed, and sent with a Guard on Shipboard, and so for England; but
what became of them afterward, I know not.

Monday morning the Enemy came and burnt all the Forage that was left between
our Camp and theirs (the General would not send out a party for fear of an
Ambuscade) and the Soldiers seemed to be pleased with it, because, they said,
they could not get leave to fight them. The Weather for two or three days
proved pretty fair, and the Soldiers were exercised with firing at Marks; but
it was observable, that a great many of the new men who had Match-Locks, had so
little skill in placing of their Matches true, that scarce one of them in four
could fire their Pieces off; and those that did, thought they had done a feat
if the Gun fired, never minding what they shot at.

Tuesday, Two Granadeers of Coll. Beaumont's Regiment were Hanged for
deserting; and there was a Council of War designed between Major General Kirk
and Sir Henry Inglesby, about the business of Derry, the latter saying, That
Derry might easily have been relieved much sooner; with a great deal more to
that purpose; but it came to nothing, and was no more talked of.

On the 25th. the Army was Mustered, and several Regiments were grown pretty
thin, by reason of the distempers then beginning to seize our Men.

Six Frenchmen Hanged.
On the 26th. Six of the principal Conspirators amongst the French were Hanged,
upon a pair of Gallows built for that purpose near the Highway, as we went
from the Camp to the Town; They all died Papists, and confessed their design to
take over as many to King James as they could, and that this was their
intentions when they first Listed themselves; and that if we had engaged the
Enemy the Saturday before, they were to have put our Army into Confusion by
firing in the Rear, and so deserting. They prayed for Ring William and Queen
Mary, and asked Their Pardons for their Treachery. Du Plessey, the chief of
them, had been formerly a Captain of Horse in France, from whence, they say, he
fled for a Murder; but hearing what Regiments were to be raised in England, he
came thither under the notion of a poor Refugee; and for what Service he
proposed to do the Late King, he both expected his Pardon from the King of
France, and the Command of a Regiment in Ireland. He served as a Private
Centinal, the better to carry on his design. He was certainly one that knew his
business, and amongst other things, was a good Engineer; and the more to blind
the World, he went often in the Trenches at Carigfergus, and being wounded, he
would needs stay and encourage the Pioneers; so difficult it is to find the
bottom of men's hearts, except by Chance, or rather Providence. The French
before, were very insolent, which made them hated at all hands; but this
Treachery of their Contrymen made them so odious, that the Soldiers wanted
only some body to begin, and then they were ready to punish all for the faults
of some. Colonel Woolsley some time before this, had sent a Spy to Dublin, who
had brought him a particular Account of all Affairs there; amongst other
things, the Irish had great hopes of the French revolting to them; this he
acquainted the Duke withal, but he would not believe it till it discovered it
self; so good an opinion had he of those people, who for all this were not so
grateful to him as they ought to have been.

Coll. Lloyd defeats a Party of the Irish.
Friday the 27th, We had News, That two days before, Colonel Lloyd, with about
1000 Iniskilliners had defeated a Body of the Irish that were going toward
Sligo (consisting of about 5000), and had killed 700 of them, taken O Kelly
their Commander, and 40 more Officers Prisoners, with a great booty of about
8000 Cattle, with the loss only of 14 Men; upon which News, the General ordered
all the Iniskillin Horse and Foot that were in the Camp to Draw out, and
Complemented them so far, as to Ride all along their Line with his Hat off;
then he ordered the Dutch-Guards, and the Iniskillin-Foot to Draw into a Line
to the Right of our Works, at the West End of the Town, where they made three
Running-fires, which were answered by the Iniskillin-Horse from their Camp, and
by the Great Guns upon our Works, as also from our Ships that lay in the mouth
of the River. The Enemy admired what all this rejoicing should be for, and were
in some trouble at first, suspecting we had got some extraordinary News from
England; or that there was an Army landed in the West of Ireland (which they
themselves must have known before us); but when they understood the occasion,
they were not much concerned.

The 28th, The Officers were acquainted it was the King's positive Orders, that
the Soldiers should not be wronged in their Pay, nor neglected; and whosoever
was careless of his Company, should be broke without Ceremony (that was, I
suppose, without a Court Martial): Care was likewise commanded to be taken of
the Sick, at Carlingford. An Officer was sent out of every Regiment, to look
after them, and see them paid; but for all this, a great many of them died
miserably, and several Officers did not take the care that was necessary; nor
was there either Drugs, or indeed Chyrurgeons to look after the Sick. All
Officers that had any Baggage on Shipboard, were commanded to take it off,
because the Ships were said to go into Scotland for the Danes, though at that
time they were in Denmark. All Papists commanded to discover themselves.
All that were Papists in the Army, were commanded to discover it on pain of
Death; there were very few found but amongst the French, who were put again
under a Guard, and sent to Carlingford, there being the Afternoon before two
more Frenchmen taken, one who had a List of all the Army, and the Officers
Names in most Regiments, as also a Scheme of our Camp; this was the occasion of
the former Orders: And also that the next night it was ordered, That a List
should be given in from every Regiment, of the Officers Names, and where they
were, with the Names of those that were absent, and all those that had not
received the Sacrament since they had their Commissions, were to prepare
against the Sunday following (which was that day Seven-night.)

Next day Lieutenant General Douglas exercised the Regiments of the first Line,
teaching them how to fire by platoons, and then made Speeches to them about
their pay, which pleased the Soldiers mightily, but not so well the Officers.

Brandy delivered to the Men.
About the first of October, there was a good quantity of Brandy delivered out
to every Regiment; and Orders were again repeated, That the Officers should be
careful of their men; the weather was then exceeding bad, and we who lay on
wet, low, ground, had leave to remove our Tents a little higher, which we did,
and after some time built our selves Huts according to former Orders.

And because the French were yet so forward as to go out, and either buy, o^
take the Provisions that were coming to the Market, then exacting from the
English at least as much more as the thing was worth; this was the occasion why
the French were put upon the Guard whenever they could not give a good account
of themselves; upon which the General ordered that no French should be stopped
any more than English; but that none should pass the Out-Guards after Sunset,
nor buy any thing upon pain of death, till it come into Town to the open
Market. And because it was observed, that several Country people went between
our Camp and the Enemies, giving Intelligence of our Condition, it was ordered,
That all Contrymen that were stopped at or beyond the Out-Guards, and could
not give a reasonable account of their business, they should be brought before
the General.

Ships come to Dundalk.
Several of our Ships to the number of about 27, were now come to Dundalk, and
anchored nigh the Shore to the South-west of the Town, but when the Tide was
out, it was easy for the Enemy to come down on that side, and ruin them;
therefore the General ordered a Guard of a 100 men to go on Shipboard, and to
be relieved every 24 hours; he took all imaginable care likewise, that the Sick
should be well looked after, and that those that were well, should have Bread,
Cheese, Brandy, Beef, Pease, and Money; as also, That an Officer of a Company
should go out with a Party, and fetch in Fern for the Soldiers to lie upon; for
a great many began now to be sick, by reason of the extreme bad weather; and
most of them were so lazy, that they would starve rather than fetch Fern or any
thing else, to keep themselves dry and clean withal; which certainly was the
greatest occasion of Distempers, Sickness, and Death it self; and many of them
when they were dead, were incredibly Lousie: This occasioned the General to say
one day when he came to the Camp, and found that the Soldiers had not Hutted
according to Orders, That we Englishmen will Fight, but we do not love to
work, (for he used to call himself an Englishman, for all he loved the French
so well.) About this time there was a Captain and Fifty men sent to Moyery
Castle, some Two miles behind our Camp, as well to secure what Provisions were
coming thither, as to keep the Rapp^ees in awe, and prevent our men that were
going backwards and forwards, from being murdered, as several had been; for a
day or two before this, I saw a poor Soldier lying toward the mountains, who
had his Head cut off, and laid between his Legs, and one of his Arms likewise,
which lay at a distance from him; so cruel are those Wretches, where they have
an Opportunity or advantage.

On the 1 st of October, Coll. Lloyd possessed himself of James-town, a small
place near the Shannon, where the Enemy had a Garrison of 80 men, that they had
sent thither a little time before; The Irish Army removes to Ardee.
and on the 5 th, we had news, That the Enemies Foot began to march at one a
Clock in the morning, and their Horse followed in the Rear, burning their Camp
at the Bridge of Fane, and removing to Ardee. We had also an account, That the
Duke of Berwick, with a considerable Body of Horse, was gone toward
Iniskillin, to rescue Major General Maccarty, upon which a Detatchment of the
Iniskillin Horse and Foot, Coll. Russels Horse, and Eight Grenadeers out of
every Regiment, mounted on Horseback, were sent (on the 8 th) to keep a Pass
between us and Sligo.

On the 9 th, the General had an Account from one Hempson, and Johnston, with
four more, (who came from Dublin in an open Boat on the 7 th, and landed at
Carlingford,) That King James had given Orders to victual that place for his
Winter Quarters, and that the discourse was there of dividing the Army, in
order to quit the Field, because they thought it was impossible for us to
attempt any thing that Winter, as indeed it was: That night a Party of 100
Horse were sent out toward Ardee, but coming near an old Castle, where the
Enemy had posted themselves, they fired upon our men, which occasioned some of
the French Horse to retreat; but all the harm that was done, was one of the
Troopers had his Thigh bruised.

An Honorable Quarrel.
About this time there happened a Quarrel between two French Officers belonging
to Duke Sconberg's Regiment of Horse; they were afraid to fight nigh our Camp,
lest the General should have notice of it, and so try them by a Court Martial;
therefore they agreed to ride out toward the Enemies Camp, where they fought
with Sword and Pistol; and being both wounded, they told at their return, that
it was the Enemy had done it.

Both Forage and Firing grew now very scarce, and the Weather was mighty bad,
so that Mr. Shales had Orders to deliver out two Tuns of Coals to each
Regiment. About the 8 th or 9 th Sir John Lanier's, Colonel Langston's Horse,
and Colonel Hefford's Dragoons, with Colonel Hasting's Foot, landed at
Carlingford from Scotland. We had an account that there were more landed with
them; and that when they joined us, we should march forwards: but now it was
too late, and they did not come to the Camp, but were ordered to Armagh,
Clownish, and Places thereabouts. The General gave Orders that no Colonel, or
any one whatever, should give Passes for any to go from the Camp: and that the
Officers should visit the Soldiers Tents night and morning, to see what they
wanted.

The Sick ordered on Board.
On the 13 th it was ordered, that all the Sick should be sent on Board; and
that the Officers took care to see that those who were well should have Hutts
made; and the Quarter Masters were ordered to fetch Shoes, Bread, Cheese,
Brandy and Coals. And all the Surgeons in the Army were appointed to meet Dr.
Lawrence next day at 10 a Clock, to consult (I suppose) what Methods could be
taken to prevent the Flux and Fever, which then were very violent. The
General, Count Solmes, Lieut. Genesis Douglas, Maj. Genesis Kirk, and M. G.
Scravenmore, (or some of them) were out every day, either to observe the Enemy,
or view our own Camp. And on the 15 th we were told by three or four Deserters,
that the Enemy had entrenched themselves at Ardee, and designed to continue
there for some time; but the first was a Mistake, for it was the Town that they
were fortifying whilst they lay there, that they might leave a Garrison in it
when the Army went off to Quarters. A Colonel was ordered to go the Rounds
every night, and a Brigadier once in three nights. And we had at this time
about 105 Ships at Carlingford, besides those at Dundalk.

Our Horse encamp at Carlingford.
The 16 th all our Horse (except the French, the Inniskillin, and Col.
Levison's Dragoons) marched toward Carlingford for the convenience of Forage:
That day Capt. Ralph Gore was buried in Dundalk-Church; and the day following
Col. Deering, (as had been several Officers before.) Sir Edward was very much
lamented in the Army by all that knew him: He left a good Fortune in England,
purely to serve the King in this Expedition, as did three more of his Brothers,
one of which (viz.) Capt. John Deering died since at Taudrogee, being a very
ingenious young Gentleman.

On the 17 th a Party of Inniskillin Horse, and some of Levison's Dragoons,
were got so nigh the Enemy, that a Party of twenty Horse came behind them,
thinking to keep a Pass, whilst others charged them in the Front; Four Irish
Men killed.
but our Men discovering their Error, faced about, and charged those in the
Rear, whereof they killed four, and took six Prisoners. A Priest hanged for a
Spy.
The same day a Priest was hanged, who came from the Enemy as a Deserter, but
proved a Spy; he served then in station of a Captain. And to be even with us,
they caught a Spy of ours some days after in Priests habit, and hanged him.

The 20 th Capt. Withers of Maj. Genesis Kirk's Regiment was made Adjutant-General
of Foot; and next day it was again ordered that all our Sick should be sent on
board at Dundalk and Carlingford; though those Orders were not executed till a
fortnight after. We remove our Camp beyond the Town.
However, we removed our Camps, some beyond the Town, and some toward the
Artillery, leaving the Huts that we had made, full of sick Men. I know not the
distinct number of the Sick in every Regiment at that time; but besides what
were dead and gone to Carlingford before, as also some in the Town, we had 67
that were not able to march about twice twelve score to fresh ground, whom we
put into those Huts, leaving the Surgeon with an Officer and twelve Men
purposely to attend them: The Chaplain likewise went to see them once a day;
but always at his going, found some dead. Those that were alive, seemed very
sorry when the others were to be buried, not that they were dead, (for they
were the hardest-hearted one to another in the World) but whilst they had them
in their Huts, they either served to lay between them and the cold Wind, or at
least were serviceable to sit or lie upon. And since the Enemy were now drawn
off, the Guards were taken from the Ships, and from Mortimer's Castle, leaving
only a Sergeant and twelve Men at the Gate that leads to Bedloes Castle; and
because some Companies were so thin, that there were scarce twelve healthful
Men in them; it was therefore ordered, that every Company should do Duty
according to strength.

Tuesday the 22 d, great part of the Army were marched beyond the Town and
encamped, some toward Bedloe's-Castle, and some down toward the Shipping, in
so much that those that went over were ordered to do Duty as three Brigades;
and those that staid as one, the Surgeon of each Regiment was ordered to see
the Sick on Board. An Officer was sent to take care of them, and was to call on
Mr. Shales for Provisions: Every Officer was to see that none were sent on
Board but what were really Sick, and this was recommended to the Colonels as
well as to the Brigadiers. This Afternoon there came a Drummer from the Enemy
about the Exchange of Prisoners. Dutch Prisoners released by King James.
And three Dutchmen were taken as they were straggling in the Country, who
being brought to King James, and asked, Who they belonged to? when he
understood their Captain was the same that had the Care of him formerly at
Rochester, he dismissed them, with his Service to their Captain, giving each of
them some Money, because, he said, their Captain had been formerly civil to him.

The 23 d several sick Men having been sent on Board, and not Ships enough for
the rest, Mr. Shales was ordered to bring more from Carlingford, and most of
the Regiments went to encamp beyond the Town; I suppose the General was of
Opinion the Ground whereon we lay was infected, or else he would not have
removed us out of our Huts into our Tents again, especially in such boisterous
Weather.

A Trumpeter comes about the exchange of Prisoners.
The 24 th there was a Trumpeter sent also about the Exchange of Prisoners: And
it was ordered that the Officers should give an Account of their effective Men,
how many Sick, and where; as also of their spare Arms, and deliver them in to
the Artillery, taking a Receipt for them; but what Arms were broke or lost, the
Captains were to be accountable for; and it was but reasonable: nor did the
Officers take that due care in this particular that was convenient; for if any
Soldier is careless of his Arms, the Officer ought to punish him, by which the
King will be both better served, and freed from that unnecessary Charge of
supplying his Army anew every Year: but what with the Rain, and our own
carelessness together, our Arms were often in that condition, that should the
Enemy have attaqued us on a sudden, we had scarce one Musket in ten that was
serviceable.

The 25 th, 26 th, 27 th, all the rest of the Army removed through the Town,
and encamped on fresh Ground; the Weather still continued very bad, and great
Numbers, both of Officers and Soldiers, died. The General then gave Orders
that no No Firings for the Dead.
Firings should be for the Dead, because it encouraged the Enemy, who knew but
too well our Condition, and yet could do us but little harm. Most People now
began to murmur against the General, as if he had been the Cause of all their
Misfortunes: but it is commonly a Fate incident to great Men, to be extremely
magnified upon Success, and upon any notable Disaster to be as much reproached,
and sometimes neither justly, for he himself shared in the trouble of this
Affair, but could not in reason be made the cause of it.

On the 27 th, about 12 a Clock at Night, 200 of Col. Levison's Dragoons, a
Party of Inniskilliners, and some French Horse, were sent toward the Enemies
Camp, who went almost as far as Ardee, and brought back some Cattle and Horses,
took only a Sergeant Prisoner, and had a Lieutenant killed.

Next Morning there was a Party of 80 Granadiers mounted and sent abroad,
commanded by Lieut. Laton; but these returned with the abovesaid Party: and
frequent Trumpets were sent to and fro about the Exchange of Prisoners. This
Evening about nine a Clock, died Sir Thomas Gower of a Fever, as did also Col.
Wharton next Morning, and were both buried on the 30 th in one Vault, (where a
in Fortnight before Sir Edward Deering was laid) the Regiments being joined,
and fired three times by particular Order.

These two Gentlemen were very much bemoaned by the whole Army; Col. Wharton
was a brisk bold Man, and had a Regiment that would have followed him any
where, for they loved him, and this made him ready to push on upon all
Occasions. Sir Tho Gower, though he was but just in a manner entering upon the
World, yet I believe few or none of his Age could outdo him; he was of a quick
and ready Wit, as well as a solid Judgment, and made it his Business to know
Men and Things; to this was joined a very good Education, together with a most
sweet and affable Temper; being withal a Man of a comely and handsome Person,
(as was also Col. Wharton) that it made him truly bemoaned by all that knew
him. A day or two after died C. Hungerford, a very hopeful young Gentleman, and
of a considerable Fortune; with several other Officers, and great numbers of
Soldiers, (as I have said:) And many unthinking Men's Passions led them to
censure the General as the occasion of all this. They would say, that if he had
gone on at first, he might certainly have got Dublin, and what he did was only
to protract the War, and that he cared not how many died, so he was well
himself; but at best, that he was so old that he was not fit for Action, for if
he had but rid out, he would forget in two or three hours that he had been
abroad that Day. But all those were most false and ignorant Suggestions, as his
Majesty was very sensible of at that time; and it appeared to all considering
People to be so afterward. For besides, prime Ministers are not to level their
Proceedings to the Capacities of all who pretend Vigilance and Care of the
State, and no Man living in public Employments can manage so as to have the
good word of all People, neither indeed is it convenient or rational to
endeavor or expect it.

On the last of October, all the Quarter Masters had Orders to go on Board with
each ten Men, and see the Ships cleared to make room for the Sick; they were
all to have Tickets from their Colonels, and the Brigadeers were ordered to
visit them on Board: but if any were well enough to go to Carlingford, or the
County of Down, they were to be taken care of; the Colonels, or
Lieutenant-Colonels were to go with the Brigadier on Board, and every Adjutant
was to give a List next Morning of their Sick to the Adjutant-General, which
was a very large one.

The Enemy Decamp.
Friday the First of November, greatest part of the Enemies Army Decamped, and
marched to Quarters, and it was ordered that Night, that two Granadeers out of
each English Regiment, and three out of every French, should be on Horseback
at the White-House early next Morning, to go out as a Party to observe the
Enemy: the reason of this I suppose was, because the small number of Horse and
Dragoons that were left in our Camp were almost harrassed to Death with
continual Duty, the rest being nigh Carlingford at Gr^ss, as has been said. All
the Sick that were in any condition to March, were ordered to be at the
Artillery by seven a Clock in the Morning; their Officers were to give them a
Weeks Pay, and there was a Party appointed to conduct them to Newry.

The Inniskilliners Decamp.
Saturday he 2 d, the Duke ordered the Inniskilliners both Horse and Foot to
march toward Home, since News was brought to the Camp that Sligo and
James-Town were taken by the Irish: For Sarsfield, with a considerable Body,
coming that way, those at James-Town, not thinking it tenable, quitted it, and
marched to Sligo, losing some of their own Party, and killing some of the Irish
who pressed upon them in their Retreat. Sligo taken by the Irish.
Sarsfield with his Army, next Day, came before Sligo, which made Colonel
Russel retreat to Ballishannon, and he advised the Foot also to quit the Town.
There was a French Captain, with the Detached Party of Granadeers that went
from our Camp, and Colonel Lloyd with some Inniskilliners; these staid in the
Town, and from thence retreated to the two Forts at the end of it, Lloyd into
one, and the Frenchman with his Granadeers into the other. Colonel Lloyd went
away that Night, and lost several of his Men in his Retreat: But the French
Captain had carried in Provisions, and found three Barrels of powder in the
Fort. The Nights were dark, and he fearing the Enemy might make their
Approaches to the Fort undiscovered, he got a great many Fir-Deals, and dipping
the Ends of them in Tarr, they made such a Light, when set on Fire, and hung
over the Wall, that he discovered the Enemy coming with an Engine they called
Sow; but having killed the Ingineer and two or three more, the rest retired,
and he burnt the Engine. When Day appeared, the Enemy were forced to quit a
small Field-piece they had planted in the Street, our Men plied them so with
Shot from the Fort; and then making a Sally several of them were killed. But
their Provisions being gone, and there being little or no Water in the Fort,
our Men surrendered it one the 3 d Day upon Honorable Terms, viz. to march out
with their Arms and Baggage. At their coming over the Bridge, Col. Sarsfield
stood with a Purse of Guineas, and proffered to every one that would serve King
James, to give him Horse and Arms with Five Guineas Advance; but they all made
answer, that they would never fight for the Papishes (as they called them)
except one, who next Day after he had got Horse and Arms, and Gold, brought all
off with him. So steadfast were the poor Men, in what they had undertaken, that
tho they had endured a great deal of Hardship, yet would dye rather than be
Faithless. There were several also that were taken Prisoners as they stragled
from the Camp, or upon flying Parties; and tho they endured all the Miseries of
a severe Restraint, yet they could by no means be wrought upon to take up Arms
against the Interest they had come thither to venture their Lives for: Nay even
those that were a dying in the Camp were wont to express no other Sorrow, than
Plague on these Papishes, that we must dye here and not have leave to go and
fight them. The French Captain's Name, as I remember, was Monsieur de St.
Sauvem, he died afterward at Lisburn of a Feaverr. The Castle of Sligo is one
of the most Ancient in Ireland, it was formerly the Seat of the O Connors, who
would not for a great while yield to King Henry the Second, calling themselves
the Ancient Kings of Ireland.

But to return from this Digression. On Saturday in the Evening it was ordered
that a Colonel and a Brigadeer should go the Rounds, and stay in the Camp all
Night, to see the Guards all right, to enquire what Officers lay out of the
Camp, and to acquaint the General with it; and because they found there was
abundance of sick Men that neither could march, nor was there Room for them in
the Ships, therefore Wagons were ordered to be ready at the Bridg-End next
Morning to carry them all to Carlingford and Newry. The Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels and Majors of each Regiment were ordered to be there, and
see their sick Men taken care of, and to give them Money; there was also an
Officer out of each Regiment appointed with a Guard to attend them.

A great many Sick.
Next Morning the poor Men were brought down from all places toward the
Bridg-End, and several of them died by the way, the rest were put upon Wagons,
which was the most Lamentable Sight in the World, for all the Rodes, from
Dundalk to Newry and Carlingford were next day full of nothing but dead Men,
who ever as the Wagons joulted, some of them died, and were thrown off as
fast. The General very seldom used to be from the Church, but that day he was
for some hours at the Bridg-end, to see all the care taken for the Men that
could be, and was very much displeased that all the Field-Officers were not so
careful as he had given Command they should. The Ships were then filling with
Sick, and as many dying on that side: they were ordered to go into Deep-water,
and sail with the first fair Wind for Belfast. The Weather all this while was
very dismal, and yet we were obliged to stay till both the Ships were got into
Deep-water, and the sick gone by Land, lest when we were gone, the Enemy should
spoil our Ships, and kill our Men.

Monday the 4 th of November it was ordered, that all who had any sick Men on
Board, should send an Ensign with ten Men to take care of them; and if the Men
wanted any thing, they were to send to Mr. Shales for it. The Tents that were
by the Waterside were to be taken on Board to keep the sick Men warm, and every
Regiment was to have the same number again that they brought thither. The Fifth
it was confirmed that the Enemy were gone to Quarters, and the Sixth we had
Orders to march. Next day Stuart, Herbert, Gower, and Zanchy (formerly my L.
Lovelace's) toward Newry; Hanmer, Deering, Drogheda, Beaumont, Wharton,
Bellasis (before the Duke of Norfolk's) and Roscommon, were to march toward
Armagh; Maj. Genesis Kirk, and the Dutch, were to go by Newry, and so down to
Antrim. The Soldiers were ordered six days Bread, and a Fortnights
Subsistence. I remember next Morning, as we were marching off, word was brought
to us that the Enemy was approaching; and, God knows, we were in a very weak
Condition to resist them, those that were best being scarce able to carry their
Arms; however they were very hearty, and began to unbuckle their Tents at the
News, and said, If they came, they should pay for our lying in the Cold so
long: but it proved only a small Party who took two or three of our Men
Prisoners as they were straggling.

Thursday the 7 th of November, the Regiments abovenamed marched; the Hills as
we went along being all covered with Snow, (for what was Rain in the Valley,
was Snow on the Mountains); several that were not able to march up, were forced
to be left, and so died; and all of us had but indifferent Lodgings that Night,
amongst the Ruins of the old Houses at Newry. So little did the poor Men value
dying, that some of them being in a Stable overnight, the next day two were
dead; and the rest entreating me to get a Fire, which I did; coming about two
hours after, they had pulled in the two dead Men to make Seats of.

The ninth Day the rest of our Army marched from Dundalk, the Duke giving
Orders first to burn some Arms and Provisions that could not be got off,
because the Wagons were employed to carry the Men; and some few sick Men were
left that could not be removed, those were at the Mercy of the Enemy, who did
not use them ill, but buried several that were dead. At their first coming to
Dundalk, they removed the Corpse of our three dead Colonels out of my Lord
Bedlow's Vault, and buried them nigh the Church-door, but did not abuse them as
was reported.

Some Men killed.
As the Rear of our Army was marching off from Dundalk, a small Party of the
Enemy's Horse came as far as Moyery-Castle, two Miles from the Town, where they
killed the Adjutant of my Lord Kingston's Regiment, with two or three Soldiers
that were behind the rest; but a Party of our Horse advancing, the Enemy
retreated toward Dundalk, which they had possession of within an hour after we
had left it.

And that nothing might be wanting for the good of the Soldiers, the General
before he left the Camp, viz. on the 23 d of October, set forth an Order how
all Subaltern Officers and Soldiers were to be subsisted and cleared;
according to which all Colonels and superior Officers were to take care that
their Men were paid, as they would answer the contrary at their Perils.

A Remarkable Story.
Sometime after our coming to Quarters, I was told a very remarkable Story
relating to the manner of our decamping at Dundalk: It was by one Mr. Hambleton
of Tollymoore, a Justice of Peace in his Country, and a sober rational Man,
which was to this effect; Himself and two other Gentlemen, with their Servants,
coming from Dublin into the North, at least a Year before our Landing; As they
came toward Dundalk, about nine a Clock at Night, they espied several little
twinkling Lights in the Air, with two larger than the rest: They staid some
time in the Town, and designing for Newry that Night, Mr. Hambleton went a
little before his Company, and saw the same Lights again, as nigh as he could
guess, about the Ground where we afterward Encamped: On the side of the Hill,
as he was to go toward the Mountains, he turned about and looked at them, and
at the same time he heard the most dismal and heavy Groans in the World. This
startled him something, and presently his Company came up, who all saw the
Lights, and heard the Noise, which continued till they got almost to Newry; but
the Lights they saw no more after they turned their Backs off the Plains of
Dundalk. They have a great many Stories of this kind in Ireland: And the
Inniskilling-Men tell you of several such things before their Battles, but I
have only the Reader's Pardon to ask for the trouble of this.

How our Army was quartered.
The Army at our decamping, was dispersed all over the North to
Winter Quarters, which were but very indifferent; and what with coming to warm
Fire-sides with some, and others having little or no shelter to secure them,
and very little Provisions, the Country being all wasted and destroyed, (nor
was it possible to send Provisions every where till Storehouses were fixed):
And then most of the Men being very weak before they left the Camp, and
marching in the Cold and Wett to come to those Places, we had more that died
when they came to Quarters, than died in the Camp. I have a Copy of the Order
by me which directed how and where all Regiments were to be disposed, but it is
needless to insert it, only our Frontier Garrisons, were Green-Castle and
Rostriver, where quartered Beaumont and Stuart; Newry, where was Sir Henry
Inglesby; Taudrogee, Sir Henry Bellasis, and some of Levison's Dragoons;
Legacory had some of the French, and at Armagh were Drogheda and Deering; at
Clownish, Monohan, and those places, were Hastings and some of the
Iniskilliners. The General had his Headquarters at Lisburn; and the Hospital
was ordered to be at Belfast, which is a very large Town, and the greatest for
Trade in the North of Ireland; it stands at the head of the Bay of
Carickfergus, and the Inhabitants have lately built a very famous Stone-Bridg,
but the Wars coming on, it is not as yet quite finished.

I doubt not but most People will be curious to know how many died this
Campaign, and in Quarters, and what could be the occasion of such Mortality; as
likewise how many the Enemies Numbers were when they lay so nigh us, and wonder
why two Armies should lie so near together (for our Front and theirs were for
above a Fortnight not two miles asunder) and yet so little of Action happen.
The Reasons of our Men's dying.
As to the first, whatever the World may think, yet I can attribute those
Distempers amongst us to nothing else but the Badness of the Weather, the
moistness of the Place, the unacquaintedness of the English to hardships, and
indeed their lazy Carelessness: for I remember a Regiment of Dutch that
Encamped at the end of the Town, were so well hutted, that not above eleven of
them died the whole Campaign; but it is the same thing with the English whenever
you take them first out of their own Country as it was here: and let Men be in
other things never so happy, if they have Courage, and know the use of their
Arms, yet when they come upon Duty, if they have not Bodies inured to
hardships, they lie under a great disadvantage. But in truth we could scarce
have been more unfortunate either in a Place or in the Weather than whilst we
were there; for it would often rain all Day upon us when there was not one drop
in the Enemies Camp; this they used to call a Judgment, but it was because we
lay in a Hollow at the Bottoms of the Mountains, and they upon a high sound
Ground: the Enemy did not at first die so fast as we did, because they were
born in the Country, and were used to bad lying and feeding, but before they
decamped they were nigh as ill as we, and abundance died after they got to
Quarters.

Chirurgions ill provided.
One thing I cannot omit, and that is, that our Surgeons were very ill provided
with Druggs, having in their Chests only some little things for Wounds, but
little or nothing that might be useful against the Flux and the Fever, which
were the two raging Distempers amongst us; and yet I cannot but think that the
Fever was partly brought to our Camp by some of those People that came from
Derry, for it was observable that after some of them came amongst us, it was
presently spread over the whole Army, yet I did not find many of themselves
died of it.

Number of Men that died at Dundalk.
As to the Number of our Men that died, I am sure there were not above sixteen
or seventeen Hundred that died in or about Dundalk; but our Ships came from
Carlingford and Dundalk about the 13 th of November to Belfast, and there were
shipped at those two places 1970 sick Men, and not 1100 of those came ashore,
but died at Sea; nay, so great was the Mortality, that several Ships had all
the Men in them dead, and no Body to look after them whilst they lay in the Bay
at Carickfergus. As for the Great Hospital at Belfast, there were 3762 that
died in it from the first of November to the first of May, as appears by the
Tallies given in by the Men that buried them: There were several that had their
Limbs so mortified in the Camp, and afterward, that some had their Toes, and
some their whole Feet that fell off as the Surgeons were dressing them; so that
upon the whole matter, we lost nigh one half of the Men that we took over with
us.

The Enemies Numbers.
As to the Enemies Numbers, and the reason why so little Action happened; the
Accounts that were given by Deserters both as to the Enemies Numbers and
Designs, were so various and disagreeing, that the General himself was at a
Loss what to trust to: (which, if well considered, will answer many of those
rash Objections made to the management of that Campaign). I have seen a List of
their whole Army since; and the most agree that they had at Dundalk 17
Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, with as many Foot as made them nigh forty
thousand, though their Foot were not all very well armed, but some had Scithes
instead of Pikes: yet Lieut. General Hamilton denies that they were ever so
many in the Field. And as for so little of Action happening in so long a time,
the reason on the Duke's side (as I humbly conjecture) might be, that he found
himself exceedingly outdone in the number of his Horse: nor did the small Body
that he had, come all at one time, but straggling, by degrees: And therefore he
was unwilling to venture a few, except he had enough to push for all, which he
had not. And our entrenching our selves might make the Enemy think it was to no
purpose to alarm us, since they believed it impossible to force our Camp, which
it certainly was not, if we had had any other sort of People to deal withal but
Irish. But it may be they considered that Maxim, that the Invader is still to
proffer, and the Invaded to decline a Battle.

A List of our own Army.
The LIST of our own Army was as follows.
Horse and Dragoons.
Lord Devonshire, 6 Troops Lord Delamere, 6 Troops Lord Hewett, 6 Troops
Colonel Coy, 6 Troops Colonel Langston, 6 Troops Colonel Villers, 6 Troops Sir
John Lanier, 6 Troops D. Schonberg's French, 9 Troops Col. Woolsely's
Inniskilliners, 12 Troops Mr. Harbord's Troop, 1 Troop Capt. Matthew White, 1
Troop Provost Martial's Troop, 1 Troop Col. Hefford's Dragoons, 9 Troops Col.
Levison's Dragoons, 6 Troops Sr. A. Cuningham's Dragoons, 6 Troops Col. Gwinn's
Dragoons, 6 Troops
These make in all 13 Regiments, (besides three Independent Troops) 3 of which
marked thus, did not come to the Camp, and 2 more came late, so that we could
not make above 8 Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, when the Irish drew out upon
us, and 3 of those were Inniskilliners.

Foot.
A Battalion of Blew Dutch. Carlesoon's White Dutch. Major General Kirk. Sir
John Hanmer. Brigadier Stuart. Colonel Beaumont. Colonel Wharton. Lord Mead.
Lord Kingston. Lord Drogheda. Sir Henry Bellasis. Sir Henry Inglesby. Lord
Lovelace, then Colonel Zanchy's. Lord Roscommon. Lord Luburne. * Colonel
Hamilton. * Colonel Hastings. Colonel Deering. Colonel Herbert. Sir Tho. Gower.
Colonel Earl. La Millineir. Du Cambon. La Callimott.
Inniskillin and Derry Foot.
* Col. Gustavus Hamilton. * Colonel Lloyd. * Colonel White. Colonel
Mitchelburne. * Colonel St. John's. Colonel Tiffany.
Note, that the Foot marked thus *, were not at Dundalk, but in Garrison.

These make in all (counting the Blew Battalion for one) thirty Regiments of
Foot; but those were all that we had in Ireland; there were some at Derry, and
Col. Hamilton's Regiment at Carickfergus; some at Inniskillin, and others at
Sligo (till the Irish took it from us.) Fifty Men were left upon a Party at
Newry: There were also several killed at Carickfergus, and some left sick and
wounded at Belfast; besides the two Hamiltons, Lloyd's, White's, St. John's and
Hastings's, never came to the Camp. Sir Henry Inglesby's and two Regiments of
Horse came not till our Camp was fixed; and then Maj. Genesis Kirk's, Sir John
Hanmer's, and Brigadier Stuart's Regiments had laid long on Shipboard, and had
been harassed, so that they had lost several of their Number. Some also were
dead or sick, and others run away. Put all these things together (I say) and we
cannot suppose that the Duke had above 2000 Horse and Dragoons, and not many
more than 12000 Foot, when the Irish proffered him Battle.

I have no warrant from any body for what I am going to say, only I think my
self obliged to give an account of what I am persuaded is true, in answering
those Objections which were made by the Army first, and then by several of the
People of England that had lost their Relations or Friends, (viz.) That the
Duke was to blame he did not go on at first without stopping, for then we had
got Dublin, and all the Kingdom would have fallen of course, without half that
expense of Treasure that England has been at: And that we lost more Men by
lying at Dundalk, than we could have done in a Battle; and also a year's time
which might have been employed with an Army in the Heart of France. These
things, and several of the like nature, have been objected to the Conduct of
that Great Man, who always thought it better to owe his Victories to good
Management than good Fortune; since wise Counsels are still within the Power of
wise Men, but Success is not. And what Man in the World would be thought wise,
and his Actions entertained as the best, if only such were so, against whom and
which no Objection could be made? The Memory therefore of such a Man ought not
to suffer, who all his Life-long had been said to act with the greatest
Prudence in the World: And for his management in this Affair, no doubt he could
give very substantial Reasons, yet because those are not, nor cannot be known
to the World, I shall only offer some few that I have had from very good Hands,
and which I know in the main to be true. It Is an easy thing for Men to sit at
home by a warm Fireside, and find fault with Affairs of the greatest Moment,
tho they know no more than the Man in the Moon what such things mean: and if we
get but into a Coffee-house, or over a Bottle in a Tavern, we can be greater
Statesmen and Generals in opinion than those that are really so; and can do
that in conceit in two hours, which the greatest Men find a difficulty to
perform in some years. The Duke therefore I humbly conceive had more Reasons
for what he did than I can think on, or possibly ever heard of. But what I have
to offer are these, as,

The Reasons why the General went no further than Dundalk.
1. Where the Fault lay I know not, but I was at Chester when the Duke had been
above a week in Ireland; and all or most of the Waggon-Horses, and some of the
Train-Horses were there then: nor did they come over till we had been some time
at Dundalk. The Country, as we marched, was all destroyed by the Irish; so that
by that time we got to Newry, I was forced to go and dig Potatoes, which made
the greatest part of a Dinner to better Men than my self: and if it was so with
us, it may easily be supposed that the poor Soldiers had harder times of it.
This the Duke was very sensible of, and sent for Mr. Alloway Commissary to the
Train, and told him that he must send back his Horses for Bread for the Men:
And when the other urged, it was a thing never known that the Train-Horses were
employed to any other Use than what belonged to the Train it self; the Duke
replied, He knew the truth of that; but that he had rather break any Rules than
his Men should starve; and accordingly some of the Horses were sent for Bread,
as I have observed before.

2. For want of Horses and Carriages the Duke was forced to ship the greatest
part of his Train, and several Necessaries for a Camp, at Carickfergus; and
gave Orders that the Ships should sail with the first fair Wind for
Carlingford-Bay: but though the Wind was very favorable, they did not stir in
ten days after; nor did there any Ships come to Carlingford, till we had been
at Dundalk at least a week, and then only four came at a time. I have heard
indeed that he who had the Sailing Orders, went some-where with them, and the
Ships lay still for want of them: but how true this is, I know not.

3. It was said, that the General had assurance given him, before he left
England, that an Army should be landed in the West of Ireland, at his marching
through the North, (and accordingly we had it several times affirmed that it
was so:) This no doubt would have distracted the Irish, and made the Duke's
Passage to Dublin much more easy. But the General had an account I suppose that
this could not be, and therefore he must stand or fall by himself. Nor would
any that knew Duke Schonbergh believe he would ever come abroad with so small
an Army, and so ill provided: And I have heard say, that that Army was never
designed to conquer Ireland, but to defend the North.

4. It was no difficult thing for him to march his Army as far as Dundalk, and
that safely, by reason the Country was full of Mountains and Bogs; and the
Enemies Horse could not do him much harm, (though if they had pleased, they
needed not have let us come past Newry, and yet their Horse had then newly come
from Derry, and were gone to recruit.) But if he had passed that Place, it was
a plain and open Country, and we might easily have been surrounded, and our
Communication both from the North and also from our Ships cut off: for if we
past Dundalk, we could have no more benefit of our Shipping till we had been
Masters of Drogheda, or else have gone to Dublin, and then we must have gone
over the Boyne, which thrice our Number, and that too in a dry Season in the
midst of Summer, found some difficulty in passing; and all this we must have
performed in two or three days, or else have starved.

5. Suppose that if we had marched on and made an halt at Dundalk, we might
have gone to Dublin, the Irish Army not being got together, (for I have heard
it was debated whether Drogheda should have been surrendered if we advanced
thither? and it was once carried in the Affirmative): But the Duke was not
certain of the Enemies Condition; nor if he had, Would it have been any
prudence to have gone on without Provisions, without Ships, and a great many
other things that were absolutely necessary? He knew he was safe at Dundalk,
and therefore he chose to stay there and understand the posture of the Enemy,
and expect his own Things and Forces, rather than run the hazard of gaining
that by mere Fortune, which if she had frowned, the Damage was certainly
irreparable.

6. The General was a mere Stranger in the Country, and therefore he must look
at a great many Things with other Men's Eyes, and some of those were dim enough;
nor had he any Counsel assigned him, but had the whole shock of Affairs upon
himself, which was the occasion that he scarce ever went to Bed till it was
very late, and then had his Candle, with a Book and Pensil by him; this would
have confounded any other Man, and was fit for no Body to undertake but Duke
Schonberg, or his Master that employed him. Before the Duke could be ready
therefore to march forwards, the Irish Army was come and sat down by us, and
then it was too late.

And why he did not fight the Irish Army.
Nor do I think he was more to blame in refusing Battle, when the Irish seemed
to proffer it; for though it is probable that the Irish at our first coming
over, took our Numbers to be greater than they really were, yet by that time we
had been a Week at Dundalk, they knew our Numbers and our Circumstances as well
as we our selves did, both by the Intelligence they had in the Country, and by
several of the French that had a mind to betray us: For, all things considered,
we had not above 14000 Horse and Foot, and very few of those Horse; nor was the
Duke to go according to our reputed Numbers, but to what we were in Reality.
The Enemy had nigh four times our Number of Horse and Dragoons, with double ou^
Number of Foot: nor could we have drawn out upon them without a manifest
disadvantage, there being several Bogs and Causeys between us and them, that
whosoever gave the Attaque (all things else considered) it was odds against
them: Besides, most of our Soldiers were new Men, and had never seen a Sword
drawn in Anger, nor a Gun fired in Earnest in their Lives; and what such Men
will do till they be tried, there is none can tell. I believe the Men had as
good Hearts, and were all as ready I am sure to engage as was possible; but
several of them were ignorant of the true use of their Arms, for when they came
afterward to fire at a Mark singly, they gave too great proof to any Man of
sense of their Unskilfulness. This is no Reflection upon the Officers, for it is
scarce possible to make new-raised Men good Soldiers till they have seen some
Action; and yet several Officers might have taken more care than they did. If
it be objected, that the Enemies Men were far worse in this respect than ours;
I answer: Not, for a great many of them had been Soldiers for at least four
Years before: and if we had gone out into the Plain, and had our Foot charged
by their Horse at the rate we were afterward at the Boyne, I know not what
might have followed.

Besides, we had an Enemy in our Bosom at that time undiscovered, (I mean the
French); and if those at the beginning of an Engagement should have fired in
the Rear or Flank of our Army upon our own Men, and then run over to the Enemy
as was designed, this might quickly have bred an appre^hension of Treachery in
the whole, that a Consternation, and from this such a Confusion, that our whole
Army might easily have been disordered; for those that understand Armies, know
that a small thing in appearance may do a great deal of Mischief at such a
time. And some are of Opinion that the Irish did not design to fight that Day,
but only drew out to see who would come over to them, (because they were made
believe that all the French, and a great many English would) for the Duke, who
was a great Judge, often said, when he saw the Enemy appear, That they did not
look as if they would fight, (except once) but that they designed something
else: But, God be thanked, the English were steadfast and true to a Man, and
they were disappointed of their Foreigners too.

Upon the whole Matter, I doubt not but it will appear to any Man that pleases
to consider it, that the Duke did better in not hazarding that in a moment,
which may be was not to be redeemed again in many Ages, since not only the
Safety of these Kingdoms did in a great measure depend upon it, but a great
part of the Protestant Interest in Europe had a Concern in it. And where the
Fates of Kingdoms, and the Lives and Interests of Thousands are at Stake, Men
are still to act on solid Reasons and Principles; the Turns of a Battle being
so many, and are often occasioned by such unexpected Accidents, which also
proceed from such minute Causes, that a wise and great Captain (such as Duke
Schonberg was) will expose to Chance only as much as the very Nature of War
requires.

And as to what happened at Dundalk, by the Men's dying afterward, this was not
the General's Fault, for he could not march back till the Enemy was gone, (his
Men then being so very weak, had all been cut off); nor could he foresee what
Weather it would be whilst he staid, nor how the English Constitutions would
bear it. And as to his Care that they should want nothing, let any but consider
the Orders through the Camp, and he will find it was scarce in the power of any
Man to do more.

But I am afraid it will be thought impertinent, to endeavor the defense of
so great a Man's Actions, and to do it no better; Former Misfortunes at Dundalk.
I only add therefore, that this Town of Dundalk has by turns been unfortunate
to the People of the three Nations. It was in Time past a Town very strongly
walled, which Edward Bruce, Brother to the King of Scots, (who had Proclaimed
himself King of Ireland) burnt; but he was near this place afterward slain,
with 8200 of his Men. Afterward the Irish under Shan O Neal, laid siege to it,
but were repulsed with very great loss: Then in the Year 1641, my Lord Moore
and Sir Henry Tichburn beat three thousand Irish out of Dundalk, and killed a
great many of them, having only 750 Foot and 200 Horse. And the Misfortune of
the English last Year was not inferior to any of these.

But to return to Matter of Fact. 1700 of the Irish fall upon Newry.
The Enemy had left eight Regiments at Ardee when they Decamped, out of which
Regiments, so soon as we were gone to Quarters, they detached 1600 Men, and
those with 100 Volunteers were to force the Pass at Newry, and then go along
the Line to destroy our Frontier Garrisons, (which at that time had been no
difficult Task to have performed) they marched all Night Saturday the 23 of
November, and came on Sunday Morning, by break of Day (or before) to the other
side of the Bridge at Newry; this Party was commanded by Major General Boisleau,
having with him a Brigadeer, three Colonels and other Officers proportionable;
there was then in the Garrison most of what were left of Colonel Inglesby's
Regiment, which were not many above sixty, and not forty of those able to
present a Musket; the Enemy sent a Party of a 100 Men to pass the River a
little above the Bridge, and come in at the North-east-end of the Town, whilst
the main Body marched over the Bridge, beyond which we had two Sentinels placed
at 100 paces distance from each other; the first challenged thrice, and then
his Piece missed fire and he was killed, the next challenged and fired upon
them, which alarmed the Garrison: As they advanced near the middle of the Town,
in a strait place near the Castle, a Sergant and twelve Men being upon the
Guard, drew out and fired, then retreated to the old Walls, charged and fired
again; by this time all the Officers and Soldiers that were able to crawl were
got into the Marketplace, with some few Townsmen; the Enemy came in both ways,
and fired, doing us some damage; the poor fellows that were not able to come
out, fired their Pieces out at the Windows of some small Houses that were left
standing: others that could not do better, got their backs to the old Walls,
and so were able to present their Muskets: And are repulsed by an handful.
After some firing on both sides, the Enemy believing us to be a great many
more than we really were, begun to shrink, which occasioned our Men to Huzzah,
and then the Rogues run away, many of them for haste wading through the River
up to their Necks, (the Tide being high at that time) they were followed down
to the Bridge by a Captain and a very small party of Men, and though they were
both threatened and entreated by their Officers to rally again, yet all would
not do. They had a Lieutenant Colonel killed, and left six Men dead on the
place; but afterward we were informed they carried off twelve Horses laden
with dead and wounded Men: we took only one or two Prisoners, and if we had had
a party of Horse or Dragoons to pursue them, not many had gone home to tell the
News; those that were killed had not above two Bandileers full of Powder
a-piece, and the rest full of Salt, which made us believe the Enemy at that
time were scarce of Ammunition: they killed us two Captains and six Men,
wounding a Lieutenant and Ensign. It was thought very odd that not so much as a
Field Piece should be left at that important Pass of Newry, nor yet a party of
Horse: but the Reason of that might be, because there were no Houses left
standing to put them in, nor any Forage thereabouts for them. But after this
the General ordered Detachements out of Colonel Viller's, Colonel Coy's and
those Regiments that lay most convenient, to go to Newry, and relieve by turns.

Col. Cambon views Charlemont.
On the 26 th of November, Colonel Cambon went to view the Garrison of
Charlemont, having 60 of Col. Levison's Dragoons along with him: the Irish had
lined the Hedges nigh the place where he was to make his Observations, but were
beat from thence by the Dragoons, who alighted and killed two or three; but
about eight or ten of our Dragoons going too far from their main Body, were
surprised and taken Prisoners, and most of them died before they could be
relieved.

A Meeting of Country Gentlemen.
Toward the latter end of November the General summoned all the Gentlemen in
the Country to meet him at Lisburn, where they presented him with an Address;
and agreed upon Rates for all sorts of Provisions, which were commanded to be
sold accordingly by the Duke's Proclamation: but this was very disagreeable to
the Country People, who had made us pay trebble Rates before for every thing we
had from them.

A party of the Irish Garrison at Charlemont stole out one Night and burnt
Duncanon, a small Town some five miles off. And November 29, Brigadeer Stuart
having Intelligence that my Lord Antrim's Regiment in Dundalk designed again to
attack Newry, he with a party of about 250 Horse and Foot, met them as they
were coming, and killed about thirty, taking seventeen Prisoners, some of whom
were Officers.

Belturbet Surrendered.
December the 4 th, Colonel Woolsely went in the Night with a party of
Iniskilliners toward Belturbet, upon whose approach the Garrison being
surprised, they yielded (upon the first Summons) to be conducted to the next
Garrison, though they had fortified the place very well.

The Duke goes to view Charlemont.
The 12 th of December the Duke went to view Charlemont, they fired their
Cannon upon him and his Party; but however, some of our Men took a Prey of
Cattle from under the very Walls. And about this time the General gave out
Orders to be observed by all the Army; which being very commendable in
themselves, if every one had endeavored to put them in Execution, it will not
be improper therefore to mention some few of them.

Some of the General's Orders.
1. That the Captain or Officer commanding each Company, meet at two a Clock at
the Guard-House each Tuesday to punish Offenders, and to consider what may be
for the Good of the Regiment, and that the Country have notice thereof, that if
there be any Complaints against the Soldiers they may be heard.

2. That the Soldiers have strict Orders to frequent Divine Service every
Sunday; and that the Officers punish Swearing, and all other Vices, as directed
by the Articles of War.

3. That the Soldiers that are to mount the Guard, be there by six of the
Clock in the Morning, and exercise till Eleven; and that the Chaplain be there
to read Prayers before the Guard be mounted.

4. That every Captain take care of the General's Orders for regulating the
Foot, and the Major-Generals for Exercising; and diligently observe the same.

5. That an Officer twice a Week visit the Sick, and a Sergeant twice a Day;
and give the Surgeon and Chaplain notice that they may immediately repair to
them.

And a great many more Orders there were to this purpose, but these are
sufficient to show the Care of the General in every Thing, and that he was far
from those Imperfections some People were pleased to reproach him with.

About this time there was a great Booty of Cattle taken by Lieut. Col. Berry,
who went from Clownish to Sligo with a Party, he saw no Enemy, but found their
Cattle, and brought them Home with him. The Irish lessen their Brass Coin.
And now the Irish begin to make the Coin of their Brass Money less than it was
at first: Calling in the large Brass Half-Crowns, and stamping them a new for
Crowns. they wanting Metal to go on with it as they first began: They say it
was a Quaker that first proposed this Invention of Brass Money; but whoever it
was, they did that Party a signal piece of Service, since they would never have
been able to have carried on the War without it. However the Quakers have been
very serviceable to that Interest, for I am assured by some in the Irish Army,
that they maintained a Regiment at their own Cost; besides several Presents of
value that they made to the late King.

Mr. Shales a Prisoner.
There were now great Complaints against Mr. Shales, and those flew so high
that he was secured by an Order from England; and was sent with a Guard to
Belfast, and so designed for London: He stayed some Days at Belfast before he
could be ready, and in the mean time fell ill of a Fever, recovering with a
great deal of Difficulty: Yet afterward he went over, but I heard of no
Proceedings against him. We had Stories at Dundalk, and afterward, that the
Beef and Brandy, and what other things we received from the Stores, were all
poisoned; but all this was Stuff, and believed by no Body of Sense. I heard
indeed some Masters of Ships (who had their Vessels laden with Provisions for
Ireland) say, that he stopped them all at High-Lake and Liverpool, threatening to
seize them if they came over, for he had undertaken to provide the Army with
every thing. I am a Stranger to Mr. Shales, and yet I believe him to be a Man
of more Sense than that comes to; and further I have heard some People say,
that were near him in his Sickness, that he was not at all concerned, as being
not conscious to himself of any thing he had done which he ought not, but yet
he used to say, that he would set the Saddle upon the Right Horse.

A great Mortality.
Col. Langston dies at Lisburn in a Fever, and my Ld. Hewet and my Ld.
Roscommon of the same Distemper at Chester; and the Fever was very violent at
this time all the North of Ireland over, insomuch that it was impossible to
come into any House but some were Sick or Dead, especially at Belfast where the
Hospital was. I have sometime stood upon the Street there and seen ten or a
dozen Corpse (of the Towns People) go by in little more than half an Hour.

Major General Mackarty Escapes.
Toward the latter end of December, Major General Mackarty made his Escape
from Inniskillin, who had remained there a Prisoner ever since the Rout at
Newtown-Butler; he had been Sick, and at that time writ to Major General Kirk
to get leave of the Duke to have his Guard removed, which he complained of was
troublesome in his Sickness, this was done; but at his Recovery (they say) a
Sergeant and some Men were put upon him again. The Town it seems stands upon a
Lough, and the Water came to the Door of the House where he was confined, or
very near it. He found means to corrupt a Sergeant, and so got two small Boats,
called Cotts, to carry him and his best Movables off in the Night. The
Sergeant went along with him, but returned that Night to deliver a Letter,
which, and Mackarty's Pass, being found in the Lining of his Hat, he was the
next Day shot for it.

The General was much concerned when he heard of Mackarty's Escape, and said he
took him to be a Man of Honor, but he would not expect that in an Irishman
any more. Col. Hamilton, the Governor of Inniskillin, was blamed for his
Negligence, but he came to Lisburn and desired a Trial, which could not be for
want of Field-Officers till the 15 th of March, at what time he produced Major
General Kirk's Letter to him, by which he was cleared.

About Christmas there happened an unlucky Accident at Belfast; Cranmer, Bowls
and Morley, three Lieutenants in Major General Kirk's Regiment, happened to
kill two Masters of Ships, and being tried by a Court-Marshal, the thing
appeared so ill, that they were all three Shot.

th and 10 th of January there were several Regiments broke one into another,
by reason of the fewness of Men in them, viz. The Regiments broke were my Lord
Drogheda's, Col. Zanchy's, Sir Henry Inglesby's, Lord Roscommon's, Col.
Hamilton's; and the Officers were continued at h^lf Pay, till there could be
Provision made for them in other Regiments. The 12 th, 16 th and 20 th, several
Officers went over into England for Recruits. And Sir Thomas Newcomb's House,
in the County of Longford, Sir Thomas Newcomb 's house surrendered.
was surrendered upon very good Terms, it being held out by his Lady against a
great Party of the Irish; for the House is strongly situated, and she got about
200 of her Tenants into it; who defended the Place till the Irish brought
Fieldpieces against it, tho it was above 20 Miles from any of our Garrisons. Of
the Men that were in it one hundred of them were entertained by Sir John Hanmer
in his Regiment, and the rest were provided for by the Duke at Lisburn.

But though our Army had been much afflicted with Sickness and Mortality, yet
this was little taken notice of by a great many who gave themselves up to all
the Wickedness imaginable, especially that ridiculous Sin of Swearing: A
Proclamation against Swearing
of which complaint being made to the Duke by several of the Clergy then at
Lisburn, and frequent Sermons preached against it; this occasioned the Duke to
set out a Proclamation, bearing date January 18. Strictly forbidding Cursing,
Swearing, and Profaneness in Commanders and Soldiers; which, he said, were
Sins of much Guilt and little Temptation; but that several were so wicked as to
invoke God more frequently to damn them than to save them; and that
notwithstanding the dreadful Judgments of God at that time upon us for those
and such like Sins, fearing that their Majesty's Army was more prejudiced by
those Sins, than advantaged by the Courage or Conduct of those guilty of them.
And therefore he commanded all Officers and Soldiers in his Army from thence
forward to forbear all vain Cursing, Swearing, and taking God's holy Name in
vain, under the Penalties enjoined by the Articles of War, and of his utmost
Displeasure: Commanding also the said Articles to be put in the strictest
execution. For no doubt the Debaucheries in Armies are the high way to Ruin,
since those both obey and fight best that are most sober.

Brigadier Stuart's Stratagem to fall upon the Irish.
January 22. Brigadier Stuart with a Party of 500 Horse and Foot went from
Rostriver and Newry beyond the Mountains toward Dundalk and Carlingford,
burning most of the Cabbins where the Irish sheltered themselves, and took a
considerable Prey of Cattle. The Irish had some People dwelt amongst us, who
had agreed upon giving them a Sign when any Party of ours was to march out,
which was by making Fires in several Places: this the Brigadier understood by a
Prisoner, and so made Fires three or four times, which alarmed the Irish at
first; but when they found it done several times, and no Party appear, they
neglected the Sign: so that when our Party marched indeed, they took no notice
of it, which gave the Brigadier opportunity of marching where he pleased,
without opposition.

There came one Mr. King an Attorney from the Enemies Quarters, and gave the
Duke an account how things stood at Dublin. And about this time the Irish had
got a trick (having always good Intelligence) to come in the night, and
surprise our Men in their Beds, as they quartered in the Country in single
Houses They stole five or six of my Lord Droghedah's Men nigh Tondragee, which
obliged the Officers to order all the Men to lie in the Town for the future.
The 25 th of January the Duke went from Lisburn to Legacory, and so to several
Places on the Frontiers, as Lieut. Genesis Douglas had done before. And a great
Store was ordered at Armagh is the Metropolitan of the whole Island, where S.
Patrick the Irish Apostle ruled in his lifetime, and they say rested after
death, (tho there is as much Contention about his Grave as Homer's) in honor
of whom it was of such venerable estimation in that time, that not only Bishops
and Priests, but Princes paid their great Respects.
Armagh, and several others up and down the Country, for the most convenience
to the adjoining Garrisons.

Febr. 2. a Party of my Lord Drogheda's Regiment of 100 Men, with 20 Dragoons,
and about 60 of the Country People marched from Tondragee and Market-hill:
Their business was to surprise two Companies of Irish Foot, who lay nigh the
Mountains of Slavegollion, and defended a great number of Cattle there. The
Enemy had some notice of their coming, and seemed to design fighting, but
considered better of it, and ran away; 17 of them took to a Bog, in which were
taken one Lieutenant Murphey and four more, one Man being killed only; our
People brought home about 500 Cattle.

February the 8 th, the General had an account that the Enemy were drawing down
some Forces toward Dundalk, and that they had laid in great Store of Corn,
Hay, and other Provisions, in order to disturb our Frontier-Garisons from
thence. The Duke sent a Ship or two toward Dundalk, who burnt some of the
Irish Gabbords: The General draws some Forces into the field.
But the Report of these Forces obliged the General to send a considerable Body
of Horse and Foot that way; and he himself, February the 11 th, went toward
Drummore, in order to wait the Enemies Motion. (It was very observable how much
the Men and Horses were now recovered from what they had been two months
before.)

Sir John Lanier and Col. La Millinier were sent out with a Party, who went as
far as Carlingford, and returned with an account that there were only 3
Regiments at Dundalk as formerly. But the Design of the Irish lay another way:
for whilst the Duke was upon this Expedition, Col. Woolsely had notice that the
Irish had a design to fall upon Belturbet; to which purpose a considerable
Number of them was come to Cavan, and more to follow in a day or two. Col.
Woolsely to prevent them, marched from Belturbet with 700 Foot and 300 Horse
and Dragoons; he began his march in the evening, thinking to surprise the Enemy
next morning early, (the distance between being about 8 miles;) but he met with
so many Difficulties in his March, (and the Enemy had notice of his coming)
that instead of being at the Place before day, as he designed, it was half an
hour after daybreak before he came in sight of it; so that instead of
surprising them, the first thing our Men saw was a Body of the Enemy drawn up
in good order, judged to be nigh 4000: this was severe, but there was no help
for it, fight we must, for retreating was dangerous. Col. Woolsely encourages
his Men, and tells them the Advantages of being brave, and the inevitable Ruin
of the whole Party if they proved otherwise: they were as ready to go on as he
to desire it: And then he sends an advance-Party of Inniskillin Dragoons
toward the Enemy, who were presently charged by a great Party of the Enemies
Horse, and beat back past the Front of our own Foot, who were so enraged at
them, that some of M. G. Kirk's and Col. Wharton's Men fired, and killed 7 or
8: some of the Enemies Horse pursued them so far, that many of them were killed
by our Foot as they endeavored to get off. By this time the Body of our Party
was advanced pretty near the Irish, who were posted upon the Top of a rising
Ground not far from the Town: As our Men advanced up the Hill, the Irish fired
a whose Volley upon them, and then set up the Huzzah, but scarce killed a Man,
(for they shot over them;) our Men however went on till they were got within
Pistol-shot of them, and then fired, by which they galled the Irish so, that
they immediately run toward the Town: We pursued, and they retired to a Fort;
but Col. Woolsely's Men falling to plunder in the Town, the Irish sallied out,
and gave us a very fierce Attack. Col. Woolsely having 250 Foot and about 80
Horse for a Reserve, the Enemy was beat off again, their Horse flying beyond
the Town, and their Foot taking to the Fort. Our Soldiers got good store of
Shoes, and all sorts of Provisions, and about 4000 pounds in Brass Money, a
great deal of which the Soldiers threw about the Streets as not thinking it
worth the Carriage; their Ammunition was blown up, and their Provisions
destroyed (for Col. Woolsely was forced to set the Town on fire to get his own
Men out in the time of the Salley). The Colonel knew not what might happen, and
therefore he drew off his Men, and marched homewards. The Irish they say were
commanded by the Duke of Berwick, who had his Horse shot under him; and in two
or three days they were to have 10000 Men at Cavan to fall upon Belturbet, and
other places. The Enemy lost in this Expedition, Brigadeer Nugent, and as they
say O Riley, Governor of Cavan, with a great many Officers, and about 300
Soldiers.

In this Action we lost about thirty, with Maj. Traherne, Capt. Armstrong, and
Capt. Mayo, who were killed by pursuing too far; a French Reformed Officer, and
Capt. Blood an Ingineer, were wounded. We took twelve Officers and about sixty
Soldiers Prisoners, who were brought soon after to Carickfergus. I have spoke
with several Irish Officers since, and they will not allow their Loss to be so
great, or ours so little in this Action as we make them, yet give us the
Advantage to a great degree.

At the General's return to Lisburn, he received an Account from Col. Woolsely
of this Action, much to the same effect as I have related it. Sir John Lanier's
Expedition to Dundalk.
And on the 15 th of February, Sir John Lanier, with a Party of 1000 Horse,
Foot, and Dragoons, went from Newry toward Dunkalk; it was in the Evening when
he marched, and next Morning early, being Sunday, he appeared before the Town.
The Enemy had Fortified it very well, so that the Major General did not think
fit to attaque it, (nor do I believe he had any Orders to do it) he drew up his
Foot however on the side of an Hill, between the left of our old Horse-Camp and
the Town, a good Musket Shot from the Bridge; his Horse he sent nearer,
somewhat to the Right at the side of the Lane. The Enemy at the Allarm appeared
without the Town at first; but as we advanced, they retreated, till they got
within their Works, from whence they fired incessantly. Whilst the main Body
was so posted, Maj. Genesis Lanier sent a party of Horse and Dragoons beyond the
River, who burnt the West part of the Town, from Mortimer-Castle to Blake's
House, (being a great part of the Suburbs). At same time a Party of Col.
Leviston's Dragoons attaqu'd Bedloe's Castle, and took the Ensign that
Commanded it, with 30 Prisoners; we lost a Lieutenant and three or four
Dragoons, and had four Horses shot. Our Men brought from beyond the Town, and
about it, nigh 1500 Cows and Horses: The Ensign that was taken, was brought to
Lisborn, and carried before the Duke into his Garden, where he commonly used to
walk before Dinner: Before the Duke asked him any Questions, me-thought he gave
him a pretty Caution to be sincere in his Answers, (though the General knew at
the same time, he being a Prisoner, was not obliged to say any thing); You
(says the Duke) have a Commission, and for that reason (if not otherwise) you
are a Gentleman; this obliges you to speak Truth, which if you do not, I can
know it by examining of other Prisoners, and then I shall have no good Opinion
of you. After some public Questions, the Duke took him aside, and talked with
him nigh half an hour; but I suppose he could, or at least would say little
that was material.

The Danes arrive in Ireland.
The beginning of March, came 400 Danes from Whitehaven to Belfast, and the
Week following all the Foot arrived from Chester, with the Prince of Wittemberg
their General: The Duke went down to see them, and was very well pleased, for
they were lusty Fellows, and well Clothed and Armed.

Monsieur Callimot with his Regiment was posted upon the Blackwater nigh
Charlemont, and had kept them in very much on that side during Winter. On the 8
th of March he took possession of a little Village within less than two miles
of the Castle; the Enemy at first pretended to dislodg us, but having lost
three of their Men, they retired.

Monsieur Callimot's Design upon Charlemont Bridge.
On the 12 th at Night, Col. Callimot went, with a Party of his own, and some
of Col. St. John's Regiment, being in all about 80 Soldiers and 20 Officers,
with those he designed to cut down the Bridge at Charlemont, (it being Wood) and
so to prevent the Irish from making Excursions in the Night as they used to do.
In order to which, he put his Men into three Boats, and coming up the River
within a mile of Charlemont, he landed his Men; and though they were discovered
at a distance, yet he marched up to the Bridge and set Fire to it, taking a
Redoubt at the Bridg-end, as also another near the Gate that leads to Armagh,
killing about 20: But Day coming on, the Colonel thought it convenient to
retreat, having lost only five or six Men; but Major De la Board was killed as
he went off; Lieut. Col. Belcassel, and a Captain whose Name was Le Rapin,
wounded. This Attempt was very brave, for the Castle it self was within
Musket Shot of the Bridge, and nearer to those Works that we took. About this
time were four Prisoners brought to Lisburn that were taken nigh Charlemont;
they gave an Account, that the Garrison had been relieved some time before, and
that the Soldiers and Officers who came in lately, did not like Tongue O
Regan's Government; that Bread and Salt were scarce within, and that they
believed the Garrison could not hold out long if they had not fresh supplys of
Victuals. All this while the General was daily sending up Provisions to our
Stores upon the Frontiers, so that our Men were pretty well supplied every
where; but the Ways were very bad, and Carriages scarce, so that the Trouble
and Charge were both extraordinary.

His Majesty's Expedition into Ireland ascertained.
We had News before this, that his Majesty designed to come in Person for
Ireland against the succeeding Campaign; and now it was made certain, which was
great Satisfaction to all, both Officers and Soldiers, and that upon several
Accounts; some had been displeased, judging they had not fair play in their
Preferments; others hoped to show themselves worthy the King's Notice by their
future Actions; and most People expected a considerable Sum of Money to pay off
the Army.

Then every one knew his Majesty's Industry, Courage, and Resolution to be so
great, that he would endeavor to make a quick dispatch; and therefore, upon
some account or other, all our Friends were pleased with it, and the greatest
of our Enemies daunted to hear the News.

The French Land at Kingsale.
The 14 th of March about 5000 French Foot landed at Kingsale with two
Generals, Count Lauzun and the Marquess de Lery. K. James sending back Maj.
Genesis Mackarty with as many Irish. Our Fleet was then attending the Queen of
Spain, which made this Undertaking very easy to the French.

The 23 d of March Col. Woolsely sent out a Party beyond Cavan to bring in some
Cattle for the use of his Garrison; they got 1000 Head, and were pursued by the
Enemy, but they brought off their Prey, and killed about 20 or 30. Clothes,
Arms, Ammunion and Provision, arrived daily at Belfast from England.

Killishandra taken.
April the 6 th Col. Woolsely, with a detached Party of 700 Men, went to
Attaque the Castle of Killishandra, about seven miles from Belturbat; which
after he had fixed his Mines, and made some brisk Attaque on it, (the Men
firing in upon the Enemy at their Spike-holes) they surrendered to him; there
being 160 Men in it, commanded by one Capt. Darchey: We lost about eight Men in
this Action, and left 100 Men in Garrison there. Near the time of Col.
Woolsely's return, the General sent a Battalion of Danes to reinforce him at
Belturbet.

On the 8 th Col. Cutts, and Col. Babington's, with a Regiment of Danish Horse,
and some Recruits, landed at Whitehouse and marched to Belfast. And on the 10
th Col. Tiffin sent out a Party from Bellishannon, who brought off a Prey from
the Neighborhood of Sligo, and killed about 16 of the Enemy as they pursued
them.

Sir Clousley Shovel's Expedition to the Bay of Dublin.
Sir Clovesly Shovel came on the 12 to Belfast, as Convoy to several Ships that
brought over Necessaries for the Army; and there having Intelligence of a
Frigate at Anchor in the Bay of Dublin, and several other small Vessels laden
with Hides, Tallow, Wools, some Plate, and several other things designed for
France, he sailed April the 18 th, (being Good Friday,) to the Mouth of the Bay
of Dublin, and there leaving the Monk, and some more great Ships, he took the
Monmouth-Yatch, and one or two more, with several Long-Boats, and went to
Polebeg, where the Frigate lay, (being one half of the Scotch Fleet that was
taken in the Channel the Year before) having sixteen Guns and four Patteraroes.
King James when he heard of it, said, It was some of his Loyal Subjects of
England returning to their Duty and Allegiance, but when he saw them draw near
the Ship, and heard the firing, he rid out toward Rings-end, whither gathered
a vast crowd of People of all sorts, and there were several Regiments drawn out
of it were possible, to kill those Bold Fellows at Sea, who durst on such a
good Day perform so wicked a Deed (as they called it). Capt. Bennet that
commanded the Frigate, run her on Ground, and after several firings from some
other Ships. of theirs, as also from that, when they saw a Fireship coming in
(which Sir Clovesly had given a Sign to) they all quitted the Frigate, being at
first about 40, but they lost six or seven in the Action. Sir Clovesly was in
the Monmouth-Yatch where Capt. Wright was very serviceable both in carrying in
the Fleet, and in time of Action. In going off, one of our Hoys ran a-Ground,
and was dry when the Tide was gone; the rest of the Boats were not far off,
being full of Armed Men; and a Frenchman, one of K. James' Guards, coming nigh
the Boats to fire his Pistols in a Bravo, had his Horse shot under him, and was
forced to sting off his Jack-Boots and run back in his stockings to save
himself; some of the Seamen went on Shore and took his Saddle and Furniture.
When the Tide came in, they went off with their Prize to the Ships below. K.
James went back very much dissatisfied, and 'twas reported he should say, that
all the Protestants in Ireland were of Cromwell 's Breed, and deserved to have
their Throats Cut: but whatever his thoughts might be, I suppose his discretion
would not allow him to say so. However all the Protestants that walked that way
during the Action, were secured in Prison, and two made their escape to our
Boats.

Relief put into Charlemont.
May the 2 d. Col. Mackmahon with a Detachment of between 4 and 500 Men got in
the night over the Bogs into Charlemont, with Ammunition and some small
quantities of Provisions. Mounsieur Davesant, Lieut. Col. to Cambon, having
notice of it, and that they would return in a small time, he divided his Men
into three Parties, and the third Night after their going in, they were
marching out again (or at least others in their stand); the Road they took was
where one Capt. La Charry with forty Men was placed; he let their Van go past
him, then fired upon their main Body, and killed eight, with an Officer, the
rest retired again to Charlemont, leaving for haste 110 Muskets, six Halbards,
some Drums, and several other things behind them. They made a second Attempt
the same day, and at night they sallied out again upon some of Col. Callimott's
Men, who retreated to 40 of Col. Cutt's, and then beat in the Irish again,
killing nine, and taking six Prisoners. An Account of this being given to the
General, he sent two more Regiments of Foot to assist at the Bloccade, and some
say he knew of Mackmahons going in, and ordered they should suffer him to pass,
for he knew their stay there presently would bring the Garrison so low, that
they would be forced to Surrender. When old Teague O Regan saw his Party beat
in again two or three times, he was so Angry, that he swore, If they could not
get out, they should have no Entertainment nor Lodging within: And he was as
good as his word, for they were forced to make little Huts in the dry Ditch
within the Palifadoes, and upon the Counterscarp, few or none of them being
admitted within the Gates of the Castle; so that what between Teague on one
side, and our Army on the other, the poor Fellows were in a most lamentable
Condition.

Supplies from England.
During these Transactions, there came Ships every day from England with
whatever was needful for the Army, and in the second Week of May there landed a
Regiment of Brandenburgers with three Dutch, and a great many English
Regiments; and by this time all the Recruits were come, and the Regiments
clothed, so that we had an excellent Army, though there wanted as yet a great
part of the Train, and several other things, which his Majesty did not think
fit to leave England till they were in a readiness. The General had sent
several Regiments up toward Charlemont, who now take the Field, and encamp
almost round it; Cannon, and Mortars were also sent up that way, in order to
force old Teague out of his Nest if he would not quit it willingly.

The General had sent him a Summons sometime before, but he was very surly, and
bid the Messenger tell his Master from Teague O Regan, that he is an old Knave,
and by St. Patrick he shall not have the Town at all, (and God knows there was
no Town standing but the old Castle). The Duke only smiled at the Answer, and
said, he would give Teague greater Reasons to be angry in a small time. Our
Forces now lying so near them, and two Detachments being kept there against
their wills, made every thing so very scarce, that they were reduced to great
Straits, and no hopes of Relief appearing, Charlemont surrendered.
on the 12 th of May the Governor (having got leave from the Officer
Commanding without, and a Guard for them) sent a Lieutenant Colonel, and a
Captain, with Terms of Surrender to the Duke, which with some Ammendments were
agreed to, for the Duke had an Account that the place was very strong, and
therefore, he chose rather to give them Terms, than to spend time about it,
since greater Matters were then in hand, and his Majesty was expected over very
suddenly; the General ordered the Irish Officers to be treated very civilly,
and then the Articles were signed as follows.

The Articles.
1. THat all the Garrison, (viz.) Governor, Officers, Soldiers, Gunners, and
all other Inhabitants (the Deserters who run from us since the first of
September last excepted) shall have their Lives secured, and march out with
their Arms, Bag and Baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, lighted Matches,
Bullets in their Mouths, each Officer and Soldier 12 Charges of Powder, with
Match and Ball proportionable, and their Horses, without any Molestation in
their Persons and Goods now in their Possession (not belonging to the Stores)
upon any pretense whatsoever. 2. That the said Garrison may march the nearest
way to Dundalk, and not be compelled to march above eight or nine miles a Day.
3. That all sick and wounded Officers, and other Persons that are not able to
march at present, may remain within the said Garrison till they are able to
march, and then to have a Pass to go to the next Irish Garrison. 4. That none of
the Army under his Grace's Command shall enter the said Fort, except such as
are appointed by him to take possession of the same, till the Garrison be
marched clear out of the Gates. 5. That there shall be a sufficient Convoy
appointed for the said Garrison to conduct them to the place before mentioned.
6. That they shall deliver fully and wholly, without any imbezzlement or
diminution, all the Stores belonging to the said Fort; And that an Officer
shall be immediately admitted to take an Account of the same. 7. That the Fort
shall be put into the possession of such Forces as his Grace shall think fit,
at eight of the Clock on Wednesday, being the 14 th day of May, at which Hour
the said Garrison shall march out; and an Hour before the outward Gate shall be
delivered to such Forces as his Grace shall appoint, in Case a supply of one
Month's Provision for 800 Men be not brought into the Garrison for their Relief,
between the signing hereof and the said time. 8. That the abovementioned
Articles shall be inviolably performed on both sides, without any Equivocation,
mental Reservation, or Fraud whatsoever, according to the true intent and
meaning thereof. Lastly, All Acts of Hostility shall cease between the said
Garrison and Army, so soon as notice can be given on both sides.
The Articles being signed, a Truce was published, and the General sent Robert
Alloway Esquire, Commissary of the Train, to take an Account of the Stores in
the Garrison; and all the next day the Country People were buying Goods from
those of the Garrison; some of our Officers were invited in, and some of theirs
came into our Camp. At the time appointed they marched out; and then drew up
before the Gate, four Companies of Col. Babington's Regiment marching in. Most
of our Regiments that there-abouts were drawn up as the Irish marched along
toward Armagh, being all well Clothed and Armed, which made the Irish a little
out of Countenance to see it. The Colonel of the Brandenburgh Regiment seemed
very much concerned, that he should come so far to fight against such
Scoundrels as the Irish seemed by their Habits to be; some few of the
Detachments being only as yet well clothed, though their Arms looked well
enough, and most of their Army had new Clothes afterward.

The General himself went that morning from Legacory to see the Castle of
Charlemont; and after the Irish had marched about half a Mile from it, they
drew up in two Battalions, (about 400 Men in each) and there stood, till the
General came to see them; besides the Soldiers, they had also above 200 Irish
Women and Children, who stood in a Body by themselves between the two
Battalions. A Description of the Governor.
Old Teague the Governor was mounted upon an old Stoned Horse, and he very
lame with the Scratches, Spavin, Ring-bones, and other Infirmities; but withal
so vicious, that he would fall a kicking and squeeling if any Body came near
him. Teague himself had a great Bunch upon his Back, a plain Red Coat, an old
weather-beaten Wig hanging down at full length, a little narrow white Beaver
cocked up, a yellow Cravatstring but that all on one side, his Boots with a
thousand wrincles in them; and though it was a very hot day, yet he had a great
Muff hanging about him, and to crown all, was almost tipsy with Brandy. Thus
mounted and equipped, he approached the Duke with a Complement, but his Horse
would not allow him to make it a long one, for he fell to work presently, and
the Duke had scarce time to make him a civil Return; the Duke smiled
afterward, and said, Teague's Horse was very mad, and himself very drunk. The
General then viewed the Irish Battalions, who all, both Officers and Soldiers,
(after they had made him a great many Legs) stared upon him as if they knew not
whether he was a Man, or some other strange Creature, for the Irish were
generally wont to ask one another, what is that Shambear that all this talk is
of? Of the Garrison.
The Duke seeing so many Women and Children asked the reason of keeping such a
number in the Garrison, which, no doubt, destroyed their Provisions? He was
answered, that the Irish were naturally very hospitable, and that they all
fared alike; but the greatest reason was, the Soldiers would not stay is the
Garrison without their Wives and Mistresses. The Duke replied, That there was
more Love then Policy in it: and after some small time returned to the Castle,
which he rid round, first without the Palisado's, and then within the Rampart.

And of the Castle.
The Place is very strong, both by Nature and Art, being seated upon a piece of
Ground (not four Acres) in the middle of a Bog, and only two ways to come to
it, which the Irish had partly broke down: They had also burnt and destroyed
all the Country about it, being well inhabited formerly. The Town of Charlemont
stood by the Castle, as we were told, but the Irish had so levelled it, that
nothing remained to show that ever there had been any such thing; yet they had
cast up several Forts and Breast works to prevent our Approaches to the Castle,
which of it self is a very regular Fortification. It Is first palisado'd round,
then a dry Ditch and Counterscarp; within this a double Rampart, and next a
thick Stone-wall, with Flankers and Bastions almost every way; there are two
Draw-bridges, and both well fortified; and within all stood the Magazines, with
a large square Tower, where Teague, his Officers, and a great many of the
Soldiers dwelt. They had left no Provisions in the Castle but a little dirty
Meal, and part of a Quarter of musty Beaf: And certainly they were reduced to
great Necessity, for as they marched along, several of them were chawing and
feeding very heartily upon pieces of dried Hides, with Hair and all on. In
Teague's own Room I saw several Papers; amongst the rest a Copy of a Letter
writ formerly to some about K. James, giving an Account of the State of the
Garrison; and withal, a very true Relation of our Proceedings in several things,
which showed they wanted not Intelligence. One thing tho was false, for there
it was said, that the Creights, by coming down, and taking Protections from the
General, had furnished us with Cattle and Provisions, when as we were ready to
starve before. But that was an Irish Fancy, for several of the Creights came
down, and would have staid; but we sent them back because they brought nothing
with them; and as to our selves, we were well supplied, either from the Stores,
or from the Country.

There were two Priests in the Garrison, and there happened a pleasant Adventure
between one of them and a Dragoon of Col. Hefford's Regiment, as they were
guarding the Irish toward Armagh: they fell into Discourse about Religion, the
Point in hand was Transubstantiation; the Dragoon being a pleasant witty
Fellow, drolled upon the Priest, and put him so to it, that he had little to
say: upon which he grew so angry, that he fell a beating the Dragoon; but he
not being used to Blows, thrash'd his Fatherhood very severaly. Upon which
complaint being made to Teague as he was at Dinner with our Officers at Armagh;
all that he said was, That he was very glad of it, What te Deal had he to do to
dispute Religion with a Dragoon? The Duke ordered every one of the Irish
Soldiers a Loaf out of the Stores at Armagh; and the Officers were all civilly
entertained, which made them go away very well satisfied with the General, and
highly commending our Army. There were in the Castle 17 Guns, most of which
were Brass, one large Mortar-piece, Bombs, Hand-Granadoes, Match, and small
Bullets a great quantity; as also 83 Barrels of Powder, with a great many Arms,
and other things of use.

I know a great many blamed the Duke for not taking this Castle before he went
to Dundalk, for then he might have had it for asking; however, it was not good
to leave it behind him; but it is a mistake, for the Irish had then a good
Garrison in it, and the General could not at that time divide his Army, nor yet
whilst he lay at Dundalk was it safe to endeavor it.

Charlemont was built by Sir Charles Blunt Lord Deputy of Ireland, who in Q.
Elizabeth's Time had several Skirmishes with O-Neal Earl of Tirone in this
Country, and built this Fort a little below a former One that was called
Mount-Joy, and this he called after his Christian Name Charlemont. It was
afterward improved by the present Lord Charlemont's Grandfather, and sold to
the King, as being a Place of Strength and Convenience to keep the Northren
Irish in their Duty. It stands upon the Black-water, which runs from thence to
Port-a-down, where in 1641 a great many Protestants were drowned by the Irish.

But to return. Bellingargy taken.
The same day that Charlemont was surrendered, Col. Woolsely went with a Party
of 1200 Men to a Castle called Bellingargy, in which the Enemy had a Garrison of
above 200 Men. This was seated in a great Water, so that our Men must wade up
to the middle to come at it. Col. Foulks commanded the Foot, and marched at the
Head of them through the Water. The Enemy fired and killed us several Men;
however they saw we were resolved to have it; and so after several Fascins
brought to fill up the Ditches, and smart firings on both sides, they hung out
their white Flag, and agreed to march away without their Arms. Col. Woolsely
going down to encourage the Men, was shot in the Scrotum, but soon recovered.
We had 17 Men killed, 43 wounded, besides two Captains and an Ensign killed.

Three Gentlemen come from Dublin, with an exact Account of the Posture of
Affairs there.
About the middle of May came one Capt. King, Mr. Wingfield a Lawyer, and Mr.
Trench a Clergymen, with five or six more from Dublin, in an open Boat, and
gave the Duke a more exact Account than any he had formerly, how all things
went with the Irish. As to the Civil Affairs, the Government was in the hands
of Five, (viz.) my Lord Tyrconnel, Sir Stephen Rice Lord Chief Baron, Lord
Chief Justice Nugent, Bruno Talbot Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir William
Ellis. All Business in Matters Civil was done by them; and if a Protestant
petitioned the late King, it was referred to those, and never any answer given,
except it was indorsed on the Back; this solicited by such an One, who must be
some eminent Papist, and then perhaps it was answered. These Men ordered all
the Protestants Goods to be seized, that were fit for Traffic, and sent to
France. The late King pretended to pay them the half value in Brass Money, but
that was scarce ever got; and often if a Man was known to have Money, he was
sent to Goal under pretense of High Treason. Col. Simon Lutteril was Governor
of Dublin. As to the Churches, the late King seemed to incline to continue
Protestants in them; but what endeavors he made to restore Churches in the
Country, they were frustrated; sometimes under pretense that the King had no
Power in those Matters (and some say he never designed they should) and
therefore his Orders were not to be obeyed, or else his Clergy had not so
easily dissuaded him from performing what he had promised, except in the
Business about the Church of Limerick, wherein he observed, that when it was
for the purpose of the Papists to have the Protestants turned out of Town, then
they were very numerous, and consequently dangerous; but when the contrary
answered their Ends, as in the Instance of desiring the Church of Limerick,
then the Protestants were made very few, which he took notice of, and the
Protestants at Limerick keep the Cathedral all this while. They gave an account
also that our Churches were generally shut up, upon any Alarm from Sea, or
Report from the Army, and the Protestants imprisoned.

As to the Military Affairs, they gave an Account, that the French about 5000.
Men, came to Dublin some-time after their landing, being well armed and
clothed. Soon after, the possession of the Town and Castle were given to
Lauzun, whom the French acknowledged to serve, and not K. James; and they were
generally at free Quarter upon the Protestants; nor would Monsieur Lauzun set
his Guards in Town till he had possession of the Castle. That all care was
taken to provide Clothes for the Army, by obliging the Clothiers to make so
many Yards of Cloth a Month; the Hatters, Hats; the Shoemakers, Shoes, etc. And
that they had considerable Stores of Corn and other Provisions at Drogheda,
Trim, Navan, Dublin, Cork, Waterford, Kilkenny, Athlone and Limerick. The
Method they proposed to deal with K. William's Army, was, to make good the
P^sses upon the Neury Mountains, and at Dundalk, to spin out the War, as by
Order from France, and dispute their Ground without a general Battle till they
came to the Boyne, and there to defend the Pass but still without a Battle, if
they could help it, they hoping in a small time to hear some extraordinary
thing from a Party for K. James in England, and from the French Fleet. Those
and several other things they gave an Account of, first to the Duke, and
afterward to the King.

Toward the latter end of May we had several small Parties that went abroad,
one to Finnah, and another to Kells, bringing off Horses, Cattle, and some
Prisoners. And the 6 th of June Count Schonberg came to Belfast. At the same
time arrived our Train, some Arms, Ammunition, and 200 Carpenters and other
Artificers for the Service of the Army.

The King arrives in Ireland
And now the general talk and expectation was of the King's coming over, who
left Kensington the 4 th of June, took Shipping at Highlake the 12 th, and on
the 14, being Saturday, he landed at Carickfergus about four a Clock in the
Afternoon. His Majesty went through part of the Town and viewed it; and notice
being given immediately to the General, (who had prepared Sir William
Franklin's House at Belfast for his Majesty's Reception, and was there
attending his Landing) his Grace went in his Coach, with all speed, to wait on
the King: Maj. Genesis Kirk, and several Officers that were there expecting the
King's landing, attended the Duke; his Majesty was met by them near the
White-House, and received them all very kindly, coming in the Duke's Coach to
Belfast; he was met also without the Town by a great Concourse of People, who
at first could do nothing but stare, never having seen a King before in that
part of the World; but after a while, some of them beginning to Huzzah, the
rest all took it (as Hounds do a scent) and followed the Coach through several
Regiments of Foot that were drawn up in Town toward his Majesty's Lodgings,
and happy were they that could but get a sight of him.

That Evening his Highness Prince George, the Duke of Ormond, my Lord of
Oxford, my Lord Scarborough, my Lord Manchester, the Honorable Mr. Boil, and
a great many Persons of Quality landed, only Maj. Genesis Scravenmore staid at
Chester till all things were come over, who has taken a great deal of pains in
our Irish Expedition. There came also some Money ashore, but exceedingly short
of what was hoped for. Next day the King heard a Sermon preached by Dr. Loyse,
on Heb. 6. 11. Through Faith they subdued Kingdoms; and the same day came
several of the Nobility, Officers, Gentry and Clergy to wait on his Majesty;
And on Monday Lieut. Genesis Douglass came from Hambleton's Ban where he had been
Encamped for nigh a Fortnight, and Dr. Walker, with a great many more of the
Episcopal Clergy, presented his Majesty with an Address, being introduced by
Duke Schonberg and the Duke of Ormond.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, The humble Addess of the Clergy of the
Church of Ireland now in Vlster.
An Address presented to his Majesty.
GReat Sir, We your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, out of the deepest sense of the
Blessing of this Day with most joyful Hear to congratulate your Majesty's safe
Landing in this Kingdom. And as we must always praise God for the Wonders he
has already wrought by your Majesty's Hands, so we cannot but admire and
applaud Your remarkable Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of
these Kingdoms. We owe all imaginable Thanks to God, and Acknowledgment to your
Majesty, for the Calm and Safety we have enjoyed by the Success of your Arms,
under the happy and wise Management of his Grace the Duke of Schonberg. And we
do not doubt but God will hear the Prayers of his Church, and crown your
Majesty's Arms with such Success and Victory, that those happy beginnings of
our Joy may terminate in a full Establishment of our Religion, and our Peace,
and with lasting Honors to your Majesty, May Heaven bless and preserve your
Majesty in such glorious Undertakings, give strength and prosperity to such
generous Designs, that all your Enemies may flee before You; that your Subjects
may rejoice in Your easy Victory, and that all the World may admire and honor
You. Give us leave, great Sir after the most humble and grateful manner, to
offer our selves to your Majesty, and to give all assurance of a steady Loyalty
and Duty to your Majesty, of our Resolution to promote and advance your Service
and Interest to the utmost of our Power. And that we will always with the most
hearty importunity pray, That Heaven may protect your Royal Person from all
Dangers, that we may long enjoy the Blessings of your Government and Victories,
and that after a long and peaceful Reign here, God may change your Laurels into
a Crown of Glory.

The King staid at Belfast till Thursday, where on the 19 th he sent out a
Proclamation, encouraging all People of what persuasion soever to live at Home
peaceably, commanding the Officers and Soldiers, upon no Pretext whatever, to
Rob or Plunder them. That day the King dined at Lisburn with the General, and
then went to Hillsburough, where he sent out an Order on the 20 th, forbidding
the pressing of Horses from the Country People: And seeing that things did not
go on so fast as he desired, he expressed some Dissatisfaction, saying, that he
did not come there to let Grass grow under his Feet. The Army takes the Field.
And he made his Words good, for the whole Army now received Orders to march
into the Field: on the 21 th, several English Regiments met and encamped at
Loughbritland, some being already at Newry with Maj. Genesis Kirk, and Lieut. Genesis
Douglass, between Hambleton's Ban and Tandrogee with 22 Regiments of Foot, and
eight or nine of Horse and Dragoons. The Enemy had formed a Camp sometime
before this at Ardee, whither K. James came about the 18 th, with 5000 French
Foot, leaving Col. Latterel with about 6000 of the Militia in Dublin; who when
the late King was gone, shut up all the Protestants in Prison, so that all the
Churches and public Places were full of them. The Enemy at Dundalk.
About the 19 th or 20 th the Enemies Army came and Encamped beyond the River
at Dundalk all along where our last Camp had been the Year before.

A Party of ours falls into an Ambush.
On Sunday Morning the 22 d, a Party of Col. Levisons Dragoons, commanded by
Capt. Crow, and a party of Foot under Capt. Farlow, in all about 200, went from
Newry toward Dundalk to discover the Enemy, and to see if the Ways were mended
according to the Duke's Order. We had sent out several small Parties before,
and the Enemy had notice of it, which occasioned them to lay an Ambuscade of
about 400 Men at a place halfway, where they had cast up some Works the Year
before. In that next the Pass they had placed part of their Foot, and had the
rest with the Horse some distance off; the Morning was very foggy and favored
their Design, so that after greatest part of our Foot were got over the Pass,
and the Dragoons advanced about 200 Yards beyond it, then the Irish fired from
the Fort; and at the same time another party charged our Dragoons, who being
some of them Recruits, retreated past our own Foot, but most of them advanced
again, and the Engagement was pretty sharp, yet our Party not knowing but the
Enemy might have more Men in covert, retreated over the Pass and there drew up;
but the Irish did not think fit to advance upon them. Capt. Farlow and another
Gentleman were taken Prisoners, and we had about 22 killed; but the Enemy lost
more, as we understood by some Deserters that came off next Day.

The King comes to the Camp.
that Afternoon His Majesty, Prince George, the General, the Duke of Ormond,
and all the great Men came to the Camp at Loughbritland. The King had given
Orders before His coming, that we should remove our Camp from the South side of
the Town to the North west, that His Majesty might take a View of the Regiments
as they marched: the Weather was then very dry and windy, which made the Dust
in our marching troublesome; I was of opinion, with several others, that this
might be uneasy to a King, and therefore believed that His Majesty would sit
on Horseback at a distance in some convenient place, to see the Men march by
Him, but He was no sooner come, than He was in amongst the throng of them, and
observed every Regiment very critically: This pleased the Soldiers mightily,
and every one was ready to give what Demonstrations it was possible, both of
their Courage and Duty. The King and the Prince had their moving Houses set up,
Those Houses were made of Wood, but so convenient that they could be set up in
an hours time.
and never after lay out of the Camp during Their stay in Ireland.

His Majesty lost no time, but sent Major General Scravemoor (who now was come
over) that Evening with 500 Horse and a good Detachment of Foot, commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Caulfield, to discover the Ways and observe the Enemy, they
marched over part of the Barony of Phuse, and almost to Dundalk, returning the
23 d in the Evening: That Morning His Majesty with a Party of Horse went four
Miles beyond Newry, and returned toward the Evening to the Camp at
Loughbritland: At His coming back some brought Him a Paper to Sign about some
Wine, and other things for His Majesty's own use; but He was dissatisfied that
all things for the Soldiers were not so ready as he desired, and with some heat
protested, That He would drink Water rather than His Men should want. A little
after His Majesty received a Letter by an Aid du Camp from Major General Kirk,
Acquainting the King, That the Party he sent out that Morning went as far as
Dundalk, and seeing no Enemy, the Officer Commanding sent a Trooper to the
Mount beyond Bedloes-Castle, from thence he could see a great Dust toward a
place called Knock-Bridge, by which he understood that the Enemy were marching
off toward Ardee: His Majesty when He read the Letter did not seem to be much
concerned whether they had staid or not. At the same time there were two
Ensigns brought to Him, who had deserted the Enemy, and gave an Account, that
the Body which then was removed from Dundalk was about 20000. It was the
discovery of our Advance Parties which made them draw off, and they gave it out
that they would stay for us at the Boyne. Our Army advances.
The King sent Orders back to the Major General to march a Party next Morning
over the Pass toward Dundalk.

The 24th. in the Morning Lieutenant General Douglas decamped and marched over
the Pass toward Dundalk: And that day His Majesty set out a Proclamation to be
read at the Head of every Regiment, That no Officer or Soldier should forcibly
take any thing from the Country People and Sutlers, nor press any Horses that
were coming to the Camp, that thereby we might be the better supplied with
Provisions. On the 25th. we marched from Loughbritland to Newry, where a
Deserter of Sir Henry Bellasis's Regiment was shot. And on the 26th. toward
Dundalk; on our march, we heard great Shooting at Sea, which we once looked upon
to be the French and English Fleets, but it was only our own Fleet coming
toward Dundalk. We encamped that Night about a mile to the South-East of our
last Years Camp: As we got near to Dundalk some of my Lord Meath's Men espied
several of the Irish skulking, not far from the Road, to observe our march;
they pursued them toward the Mountains, killed one, and took another, who
proved a French Man that had deserted from Hillsborough about three weeks
before. On the 27th. we marched through Dundalk, and encamped about a mile
beyond it, where the whole Army joined, English, Dutch, Danes, Germans and
French, Their Number.
making in all not above 36000, though the World called us a third part more:
but the Army was in all respects as well provided as any Kingdom in the World
ever had one for the number of Men. That Afternoon a party of Epingar's
Dragoons came within sight of a party of the Enemies Horse, who retreated
toward their own Camp, which then was on this side the Boyne. I was told by a
General Officer of theirs since, that whenever our Army moved, the Irish had
a small party of Horse that knew the Country, and kept themselves undiscovered
in some convenient place, to give them an Account of our motions and posture.
They had fortified Dundalk last Winter very regularly and well, not, I suppose,
that they did design to maintain it in the Spring, but to secure the Garrison
from any attempts that we might make during the Winter: As we went through the
Town we found several of the Irish that lay dead and unburied, and some were
alive, but just only breathing. That evening a party of 1500 Horse and Dragoons
went out, and next morning early the King followed them. His Majesty went as
far as Ardee and viewed the Ground where the Enemy encamped last Year; He
returned to His Camp that night, but left the party to make good that Post.

On Saturday morning the 29th. there happened an Irish Man and a Woman to be
near a Well that was by the King's Tent, they had got something about them
which the Soldiers believed was Poison, to spoil the Waters, and so destroy the
King and His Army; this spread presently abroad, and a great many Soldiers
flocked about them, they were immediately both Judges and Executioners, hanged
the Woman, and almost cut the Man in pieces.

That afternoon the King views the Danish Forces, We march to Ardee.
and early next morning, being Sunday the 30th. of June, the whole Army marched
in three Lines beyond Ardee, which the Enemy had likewise fortified, especially
the Castle; we marched within sight of the Sea a great part of this day, and
could see our Ships sail all along toward Drogheda, which certainly must needs
be a great mortification to the Irish: upon the Road as we marched there was a
Soldier hanged for deserting, and a Boy for being a spy and a murderer; A
remarkable story.
the story of this Boy is very remarkable, which was thus, About three weeks
before we took the Field, one of my Lord Drogheda's Sergeants was gathering
Wood Sorrel nigh his Quarters at Tandrogee, this Boy comes to him and tells
him, if he will go along, he would take him to a place hard by, where he might
get several good Herbs; he follows the Boy, and is taken by five or six Irish
Men that were Armed, they take him to a little House and bind him, but after
some good words unty his Hands, but withal kept him a prisoner, designing to
carry him to Dundalk next day; he endeavors in the night to make his escape,
and did it, though they pursued him and wounded him in several places, the Boy
himself being one of the forwardest. Next week the same Boy was at Legacory,
where he was telling some Dragoons, that if they would go along with him, he
would take them to a place where they might get several Horses and a good prey
of Cattle; they were very ready to hearken to him, when at the same time one of
my Lord Drogheda's Soldiers going that way by chance, knew the Boy, (for he had
been often in their Quarters) and having heard the story of the Sergeant, told
it the Dragoons; upon which the Boy was seized, and after sometime confessed,
that all the last Dundalk-Camp he had gone frequently between the two Armies,
that he had trapan'd several, and had half a Crown Brass money for every one
that he could bring in; that he could observe as he went amongst our Regiments
how they lay, and what condition they were in, both as to Health and other
matters; that he had lately stabbed a Dragoon, in at the Back, as his Father
held him in talk, and that his Father would give him nothing but the Dragoons
Hat and Waste-coat, which he had then on: all this I have heard the Boy say,
and much more to the same purpose, he spoke English and Irish both very well,
he was brought prisoner to this place; and upon the march, after he had
received Sentence of Death, he profer'd for a Brass Sixpence to hang a Country
Man that was a prisoner for buying the Soldiers Shoes; and when he came to be
hanged himself, he was very little concerned at it.

The King was always upon Action; He observed the Country as he rid along, and
said it was worth Fighting for, and ordered the manner of Encamping that day
himself: After that, with a small party, His Majesty before He eat or drank rid
about four miles further toward the Enemy. As the Army was marching through
Ardee, a French Soldier happened to be very sick with drinking Water, and
despairing to live, plucked out his Beads and fell to his Prayers; which one of
the Danes seeing, shot the French Man dead, and took away his Musket, without
any further Ceremony. There were none of the Irish to be seen but a few poor
starved Creatures who had scraped up some of the Husks of Oats nigh a Mill, to
eat instead of better Food. It Is a wonder to see how some of those Creatures
live; I my self have seen them scratching like Hens amongst the Cindars for
Victuals; which put me in mind of a story that I have read in the Annals of
Ireland, where it is said, that in the year 1317. the Ulster Irish roved up and
down the Kingdom in a Body, whilst the Scots Army was down toward Limerick,
and those people were so hunger-starved at last, that in Churchyards they took
the Bodies out of their Graves, and in their Skulls boild the Flesh and fed
thereupon, and women did eat their own Children for hunger, so that of ten
thousand, there remained at last only three hundred, the reason of this plague
the Superstition of those Times attributed to their eating of flesh in Lent,
for which this Curse came upon them.

The Irish Army beyond the Boyne.
By this time his Majesty understood that all the Irish Army was marched over
the Boyn, the night before, except flying parties, so that on Monday morning,
the last of June, very early, our whole Army began to move in three Lines
toward the Boyn, which was but eight short miles off. Ours advance.
The Enemy being near, our advance Guards of Horse, commanded by Sir John
Lanier, made their approaches very regularly, and by that time they had got
within two miles of Drogheda, his Majesty was in the front of them: Some of our
Dragoons went into an old House, where they found about 200 Scythes stretched
out upon Beams, which the Irish, either had forgot, or had not time to carry
over, they brought one of them to the King, who smiled, and said it was a
desperate weapon.

His Majesty views their Army.
A little way further there was an Hill, to the East of the Enemies Camp, and
North from the Town; upon this His Majesty went, from whence he could see the
Town, and all the Enemies Camp which lay to the West of the Town, all along the
River side in two Lines, here his Majesty had a great deal of discourse with
the Prince, Duke Schonberg, Duke of Ormond, Count Solmes, Major General
Scravemore, my Lord Sidney, and other great Officers, who were all curious in
making their Observations upon the Enemy, Major General Scravemore called them
une petet Armee (for we could not reckon above five or six and forty Regiments
that lay Encamped) his Majesty Answered, that they might have a great many men
in Town, that there was also an Hill to the Southwest, beyond which they might
have men Encamped, and that possibly they did not show all their Numbers
however he said he was resolved to see very soon what they were. Such a great
Prince, knowing that to be warm in undertaking a great Design, and cool in
justifying it, when it comes to a push, is seldom attended with Success or
Reputation, his Majesty therefore went boldly on, and obtained both.

By this time our Horse were advancing a pace, and the Enemy we could discern
were all in a hurry, to get up their Horses, which were many of them at Grass,
and to set all things in order; his Majesty sent out several parties of Horse,
some toward the Town of Drogheda, and some toward the pass at Old Bridge, and
then rid softly along westward, viewing the Enemies Camp as he passed, he made
a little stop toward some old Houses and every one commended mightily the
order of our Horse marching in, here it was that the Enemy fired their first
Guns, from a Batterey of six Canons, that they had a good way below, but they
did no hurt; two of our Troopers, went to the very Ford, and took away an
Horse, as also a Barrel of Ale that the Irish had been taken over.

At Old Bridge.
His Majesty rid on to the pass at Old Bridge, and stood upon the side of the
Bank within Musket shot of the Ford, there to make his observations on the
Enemies Camp and posture, there stood a small a party of the Enemies Horse in a
little Island within the River, and on the other bank there were several
Hedges, and little Irish Houses almost Close to the River; there was one House
likewise of Stone, that had a Court, and some little works about it, this the
Irish had filled with Soldiers, and all the Hedges, and little Houses we saw,
were lined and filled with Musquiteers, there were also several Breast works
cast up to the right, just at the Ford. However, this was the place through which
his Majesty resolved to force his way, and therefore he and his great Officers
spent some time in contriving the methods of passing, and the places where to
plant our Batteries. After some time, his Majesty rid about 200 yards further
up the River, nigh the West of all the Enemies Camp, and whilst his Army was
marching in, he alighted, and sat him down upon a rising ground, where he
refreshed himself, whilst his Majesty sat there, we observed five Gentlemen of
the Irish Army, ride softly along the other side, and make their Remarks upon
our Men as they marched in, those I heard afterward, were the Duke of Berwick,
my Lord Tyrconel, Sarcefield, Parker; and some say Lauzun. Captain Pownel of
Colonel Levisons Regiment was sent with a party of Horse and Dragoons toward
the Bridge of Slane, and whilst his Majesty sat on the Grass (being about an
hour) there came some of the Irish with long Guns, and shot at our Dragoons,
who went down to the River to Drink, and some of ours went down to return the
favor; then a party of about forty Horse, advanced very slowly, and stood upon
a plowed field over against us, for near half an hour, and so retired to their
Camp; this small party, (as I have heard from their own Officers since) brought
two Field Pieces amongst them, droping them by an Hedge on the plowd Land,
undiscovered; they did not offer to fire them, till his Majesty was mounted,
and then he and the rest riding softly the same way back, their Gunner fires a
Piece, which killed us two Horses and a Man about 100 yards above where the
King was, but immediately comes a second, which had almost been a fatal one,
for it Graized upon the Bank of the River, and in the rising slanted upon the
Kings right shoulder, took out a piece of his Coat, and tore the Skin and
Flesh, and afterward broke the head of a Gentleman's Pistol.

The King wounded.
Mr. Coningsby (now one of the Lords Justices of Ireland) seeing his Majesty
struck, rid up and put his handkerchief upon the place, his Majesty took little
notice of it, but rid on for about forty yards further, where there was an high
Bank on either side, but it being open below, we returned the very same way
again, the Enemies Canon firing upon us all the while, they did some damage
amongst our Horse that were drawing up just before them, killing two of the
Guards, and about nine of Coll. Coys Horses with three Troopers, and also some
few more out of Coll. Byerleys, and other Regiments, which made the King give
orders for his Horse to draw a little backwards, to have the advantage of a
rising ground between them and the Canon.

When the Enemy saw their great Shot disturbed us, they set up a most
prodigeous shout all over the Camp, as if our whole Army had been undone, and
several Squadrons of their Horse drew down upon a plain toward the River, but
in such a place as they knew it was impossible for us to come at them, the
River being very deep and a Bank of nigh ten yards high on our side. I have
often observed the Irish very fond of shouting and Hallowing before an
Engagement, and there is a Tradition amongst them, that whosoever does not
Shout and Huzzah as the rest do in Battle, he is suddenly caught up from the
ground into the Air, and so into a certain desert vale in the County of Kerry,
where he eats Grass and lapeth Water, has some use of reason, but not of
Speech, but shall be caught at length by Hunters and their Hounds, and so
brought home, but this story is a little too light for so grave an Author as
Cambden, though he only relates it as a foolish fancy.

The King went to change his Coat, and get his shoulder dressed, and then rid
about to see his Army come in, which were all this while marching, and
encamping in two Lines. And here I cannot but take notice of a signal piece of
Providence in the preservation of the Kings Person, for whatever ill effects it
might have had for the future, it would have been of fatal consequence to the
Army at that time, if he had fallen, since instead of our going to them, the
Irish would have been ready to have come to us next morning, and how we would
have received them there is none can tell. I have met with several that will not
believe, that the King was touched with a Canon Bullet at all, and if so, that
it was impossible it should not kill him, but I was present when the thing
happened, and therefore can affirm the truth of it. I have seen a great many odd
accidents in wounds with Canon Bullets, and yet the Parties live, particularly
one of my Lord Drogheda's Men, who had all the Flesh of his right Cheek shot
from the bone without breaking his Jaw, and he is yet alive and very well. Tho
it seems at the Court of France, they could not believe any such thing, when
they made Bone-fires for King Williams death.

But to go one with the Story, Our Guns arrive
about three a Clock the first of our Field Pieces came up, and we lost no
time, but took two or three of them down toward the River, and Planted them on
a Furry bank over against the pass, the first shot (made by one Nelson) we
killed an Officer, that lay sick in the House beyond the River, and the second
or third, we dismounted one of those Field Pieces that the Irish had been so
brisk withal, and then their Horse that were drawn up toward the River made
what haste they could into the Camp; we continued all that afternoon pelting at
them and they at us, their Canon did us little more harm, but our Gunners
planted several Batteries, and threw a great many small Bombs into their Camp,
which obliged them to remove some of their Tents, one Bullet as we heard
afterward fell very nigh a Crowd of great Officers, that were at the late
Kings Tent, and killed a Horseman that stood Sentinel, they then removed their
Counsel to some other place, and were not admitted to crowd there any more. A
Frenchman of ours, that afternoon, run through the River before our faces to the
Enemy, When they saw him coming, a great many of them came down to receive him,
and crowding about him to hear news, our Canon threw a Bullet amongst the very
thickest of them, which killed several, and as it was said the Fellow himself,
however the rest made what have they could back again. We had some Deserters
also that came from them to us, but I heard of no more that left our Army,
except that one man. There was one Deserter that gave the King an account, that
the Enemy were about 25000 Men, and that they had sent away part of their heavy
Baggage toward Dublin.

The King calls a Counsel of War.
About 8 or 9 a Clock at night, the King called a Council of War, wherein he
declared, that he was resolved to pass the River the next day, which Duke
Schonberg at first opposed but seeing his Majesty positive in it, he advised to
send part of our Army that night at 12 a Clock, to pass the River at, or near
Slane-bridge, some three miles above, and so to get between the Enemy and the
pass at Duleek, which was about four miles behind them, but this advice was not
taken. One thing under consideration was, where to get Guides that were trusty
and good, whilst this matter was in question, my Lord George Hambleton was by,
who immediately brought four or five of his Iniskilling Officers that knew the
Fords very well, and took upon them to Guide the Army next day, and here it was
concluded how the Army should March, and who should Command at the different
Posts, which was ordered thus, Lieutenant General Douglas was to Command the
Right wing of the Foot, and Count Schonberg the Horse, who were to march early,
toward the Bridge of Slane and other Fords above to flank the Enemy, or get
between them and Duleek, my Lord Portland, and my Lord Overkisk had their Posts
here as Mareschals de Camp, the left wing of our Horse were to pass between the
Enemies Camp and Drogheda, whilst in the mean time a Body of Foot forced their
way at the Pass at Old Bridge.

The Enemy held likewise a Council of War, wherein Lieutenant General
Hambleton, advised to send a party of Dragoons to a Ford that was below the
Town of Drogheda (which we either knew not of, or else did not regard) and all
the rest (being eight Regiments) with their whole left line toward the Bridge
of Slane. King James's Answer was that he would send fifty Dragoons up the
River, which the other seemed to be Amazed at, the place to be defended, being
of such importance; however they resolved to defend the Passes, and if it were
possible to retreat with their Army toward Dublin, in order to which they drew
off most of their Canon in the night.

Orders that night.
Toward the close of the Evening, the Canons ceased on both sides, and Orders
were given out, that every Soldier should be provided with a good stock of
Ammunition, and all to be ready at the break of day, to March at a minutes
warning, with every man a green Bough or Sprig in his Hat, to distinguish him
from the Enemy (who wore pieces of paper in their Hats) All the Baggage with
the Soldiers great ^oats, were to be left behind with a small Guard in every
Regiment to look after them. The word that night was Westminster, his Majesty
was not idle, but about 12 a Clock at night, rid with torches quite through his
Army, and then

The Battle at the Boyn.
Tuesday the first of July 1690. The day was very clear, as if the Sun it self
had a mind to see what would happen; about six a Clock, Lieutenant General
Douglas marched toward the Right with the Foot, and Count Schonberg with the
Horse, which the Enemy perceiving, drew out their Horse and Foot toward their
Left, in order to oppose us: Our Right wing draws out.
the Right wing at first were ordered to pass all at Slane, but being better
informed, several Regiments were Commanded to pass at other Fords between our
Camp and that place. As some of our Horse marched to the River, there stood a
Regiment of the Enemies Dragoons (sent thither over night) nigh the Bank on the
other side who fired upon us, and then thought to have retreated to their main
Body, but before they could do that, they were flanked in a Lane, and about
seventy of them cut off; we met with little more opposition in passing the
River but marching forwards we found the Enemy drawn up in two lines: we had
then twenty four Squardons of Horse and Dragoons, with six Battalions of Foot,
those being too few, Lieutenant general Douglas sent for more Foot, and in the
mean time we drew up in two lines also, my Lord Portland advising for the more
security to mix our Horse and Foot, Squadron with Battalion; (this is no new
way of managing, but was first practiced by Caesar at the Battle of Pharsalia
against Pompey, for he there quite altered the manner of embattleing amongst
the Romans, covering one of his Flanks with a small River, and then placing
several Battallions of his best Foot amongst his Squadrons in the other, by
which he soon routed Pompeys Horse, and then falling into the Flanks, and Rear
of his Enemy, obtained the Victory.) However more Foot coming up, our great
Officers altered the first Figure, and drew all the Horse to the right, by
which they outflanked the Enemy considerably. But as our men were advanceing,
they met with a great deal of difficulty in the Ground, for there were large
Corn Fields, with great Ditches, and those very hard to be got over,
(especially for the Horse, who were obliged to advance in order, when they were
in the face of an Enemy,) and beyond all those, there was such a Bogg, as few
of our men ever saw before; the Horse though went to the right of it, but the
Foot being Commanded to march through, found it as great an hardship as
Fighting it self, yet when the Enemy saw our men take the Bog, instead of
charging them in it, they retreated in have toward Duleek, which Count
Schonberg seeing, fell in amongst their Foot with his Horse and killed a great
many.

The King did not know of this disadvantage of Ground, but computed the time
when he thought our right wing was got well over, and then he ordered his Foot
to attack the pass at Old Bridge; during all which a great part of the Enemies
Horse and Foot were still marching toward Slane, (where every one expected the
main Battle would be,) and in their march, our Canon played continually upon
them, yet tho we killed several it did not disorder their Trops. The blew Dutch
guards post being to the right, they were the first that took the River at Old
Bridge: The Irish had lined the Houses, Breastworks, and Hedges beyond the
River, with my Lord Tyrconnels Regiment of Foot Guards, and some other
Companyes; they had posted also seven Regiments of Foot, about 150 yards
backwards, who stood drawn up behind some little hills, to shelter them from
our Canon, which played all this while, besides these, were 2 Troops of Guards,
4 Troops of my Lord Tyrconnels, and 4 Troops of Parkers Regiments of Horse,
posted in the same manner, (tho if they had posted the French here instead of
the Irish it would have been more to their advantage, but the reason of this
was, the Irish Guards would not lose the post of Honor.) The Dutch Guards take
the River.
The Dutch beat a march till they got to the Rivers side, and then the Drums
ceasing, in they went, some eight or ten a breast, being presently almost up to
the middle in the Stream (for they stopped the Current by their sudden motion,
and this made it deeper than usual) the Enemy did not fire till our Men were
toward the midst of the River, and then a whole peal of Shot came from the
Hedges, Breast-works, Houses, and all about, yet we could not perceive any fall
except one, and another staggered; he that was foremost was a Lieutenant of
Granadeers, who as he got footing on the other side, drew up two files of men,
then stoopt, and they fired over him at the next hedge, which was not fifteen
yards from them, at which fire those in the Hedge quitted it, which the rest
seeing, all left their Posts, and were followed with a Volley of Shot from our
men that were Advancing. And are charged by a Squadron of Horse.
The Irish Foot run scattering into the next Field, and before the Dutch could
get well over, and draw up, they were charged very bravely by a Squadron of the
Irish Horse, who came down in a full carreer, but were quickly beat off again.
One would have thought that Men and Horses had risen out of the Earth, for now
there appeared a great many Battalions and Squadrons of the Enemy, all on a
sudden, who had stood behind the little Hills. We had two French Regiments,
and Colonel St. John's, who passed the River near the same time the Dutch did,
but about 100 Yards below; which Lieutenant General Hambleton perceiving, (who
commanded at the Pass) he Advanced with a party of Foot to the very River, and
himself with some others went into it, giving orders at the same time for my
Lord Antrim's Regiment, and some more, to go and Flank Sir John Hanmer and
Count Nassaw's Regiments, who were passing about 200 Yards further down; but
neither would his men stand by him, nor could the other be persuaded to come
near Hanmer: however, as Hambleton retreated a Sqadron of their Horse charged
our French so bravely, that about forty of them broke quite through Monsieur La
Callimot's Regiment, and wounded himself mortally: those must go back the same
way, or else pass through the Village and so wheel to the Left, to recover
their own Men; they chose the latter, but were so paid off by some of the Dutch
and Inniskillin Foot, that not above six or eight of them got beyond the
Village, most of their Horses straggling up and down the Fields.

Our Foot Advance beyond the River.
The Dutch and the rest of our Foot advanced all this while, and then the Irish
Foot quitted a second Hedge that they were persuaded to rally to; another Body
of Horse came down upon the Dutch, who neglected the Hedges and met them in the
open Field, but keeping so close that it was impossible to break them; but as
the Irish came on, the Dutch begun to fire by Platoons, and both flanked and
fronted the Horse, by which they killed a great many (though not without some
loss to themselves) before this party drew off: Are Charged again.
By this time some of the French and Inniskilliners were got into the Field,
from whence the Enemy disturbed us with their Canon the day before, and then a
fresh Squadron of Horse coming down upon the Dutch, those two Regiments stopped
them, and obliged them to Retreat with considerable loss. Much about this time
there was nothing to be seen but Smoke and Dust, nor any thing to be heard but
one continued Fire for nigh half an hour; and whilst this Action lasted,
another party of the Irish Horse Charged Sir John Hanmer as he passed the
River, (nigh a place where the Enemy the day before had a Battery of six Guns,
but now they were gone, as was most of their Artillery:) It was the Duke of
Berwick's Troop of Guards; and as they advanced, one that had been formerly in
Sir J. Hanmer's Regiment came out singly and called one of the Captains by his
name; who stepping toward him, the other fired both his Pistols at him, but
was taken Prisoner: this Troop was beat off again with the loss of only three
of Sir John Hanmer's Men.

All our Horse went over to the Right and Left except one Squadron of Danes,
who passed the River whilst our Foot were engaged, and Advancing to the Front,
Hambleton sent out sixty Horse, who charged the Danes so home that they came
faster back again than they went, some of them never looking behind them till
they had crossed the River again. The want of Horse was so apparent at this
place, that the very Country People cried out Horse, Horse; which word going
toward the Right, and they mistaking it for Halt, stopped the Right Wing nigh
half an hour; which time, well spent, might have done service. This and the
Irish breaking through the French Regiment happened much about a time; The
General killed.
which, I am apt to believe, was the occasion of Duke Schonberg's going over so
unseasonably, for in this hurry he was killed near the little Village beyond
the River: the Irish Troopers as they rid by, struck at him with their Swords;
and some say that our own Men Firing too hastily, when the Duke was before
them, shot him themselves; however it was, his mortal wound was through his
Neck, and he had one or two cuts in the Head besides, he fell down and did not
speak one word; and Captain Foubert was shot in the Arm as he was getting him
off; Doctor Walker going, as some say, to look after the Duke, was shot a
little beyond the River, and stripped immediately; for the Scotch-Irish that
followed our Camp were got through already, and took off most of the Plunder.

This Action begun at a quarter past Ten, and was so hot till past Eleven that
a great many old Soldiers said they never saw brisker work: but then the Irish
retreated to a rising Ground, and there drew up again in order, both Horse and
Foot, designing to Charge our Party again that had past the River. Whilst this
Action at the Pass lasted, the Left Wing of our Horse (consisting of Danes and
Dutch, with Colonel Woolsley's Horse and some Dragoons) passed the River at a
very difficult and unusual place: And the Danish Foot, with Colonel Cutts's
and some others, went over a little above them. My Lord Sydney and
Major General Kirk went from one place to another, as the posture of Affairs
required their presence. His Majesty passes the River with the Left Wing.
His Majesty, during those Transactions, was almost every where; before the
Action begun He rid between our Army and theirs with only one Dragoon, and had
ordered every thing in other places as well as possible, He passes the River
with the Left Wing of His Horse, and that with as much difficulty as any body,
for His Horse was Bogg'd on the other side, and He was forced to alight till a
Gentleman helped him to get His Horse out. As soon as the Men were got upon the
other Bank, and put in order, His Majesty drew His Sword (which yet was
troublesome to Him, His Arm being stiff with the Wound He received the day
before) and marched at the Head of them toward the Enemy, who were coming on
again in good order upon our Foot that had got over the Pass, and were
Advancing toward them, though they were double our Number; but when these two
Bodies were almost within Musket shot of one another, the Enemy espied the
Left Wing of our Horse marching toward them, at which they made a sudden
Halt, faced about, and so retreated up the Hill to a little Church and a
Village called Dunore, about half a mile from the Pass; our Men marched in
order after them; and at this Village the Enemy faced about and Charged; our
Horse were forced to give Ground, though the King was with them: His Majesty
then went to the Inniskilliners and asked what they would do for Him? and
Advanced before them; their Officer told his Men who it was, and what Honor
was done them: And Charges several times at the Head of his Men.
At the Head of those Men the King received the Enemies Fire, and then wheeling
to the Left, that His own Men might have liberty to Advance and fire, they all
wheeled after Him and retreated above 100 Yards; the King then went to the
Left, to put Himself at the Head of some Dutch that were Advancing; and the
Inniskilliners being sensible of their mistake, came up again, doing good
service: some of Duke Schonberg's French Horse were here also, who behaved
themselves well, and took one or two of King James's Standards. Another party,
Commanded by Lieutenant General Ginkel, Charged in a Lane to the Left, but the
Irish being two many for them they retreated; which a party of Sir Albert
Cunningham's Dragoons, commanded by his Lieutenant-Collonel, and another of
Col. Levison's, commanded by Captain Brewerton, perceiving, the Officers
ordered their Men to alight and Line an Hedge, as also an old House that Flankt
the Lane, from whence they poured in their Shot upon the Enemy.
Lieutenant General Ginkel staid in the Rear of his Men, (being much vexed at
their retreating) and was in some danger by our own Dragoons; for the Enemy
being close upon him, they could not well distinguish; however the Dragoons did
here a piece of good service in stopping the Enemy, (who came up very boldly;)
and our Horse Rallying both here and to the Right, after near half an hours
dispute the Enemy were again beat from this place, and a great many of them
killed. Lieutenant General Hambleton finding his Foot not to answer his
expectation, he put himself at the Head of the Horse, and Lieutenant General
Hambleton taken Prisoner.
when they were defeated he was here taken prisoner, having received a wound on
the Head. When he was brought to the King, His Majesty asked him, Whether the
Irish would fight any more? Yes, (said he) an't please Your Majesty, upon my
Honor I believe they will, for they have a good Body of Horse still. The King
looked a little aside at him when he named his Honor, and repeated it once or
twice, Your Honor? Intimating (as He always says a great deal in few words)
that what the other affirmed upon his Honor was not to be believed, since he
had forfeited that before in his siding with my Lord Tyrconnel; and this was
all the Rebuke the King gave him for his breach of Trust. There were several
other prisoners taken here also, but not many of note.

How things went to the right of our Army.
Now, you must know, that whilst all this happened here, our Men on the Right
were making their way as well as they could over Hedges, and Bogs toward
Duleek, and as they Advanced the Enemy drew off, till they heard what had
happened at the Pass, and then they made greater haste, yet they could not
retreat so fast but several of them were killed, especially of their Foot,
amongst whom a party of our Horse fell in; but they presently scattered amongst
the Corn and Hedges till they got beyond a great Ditch, where our Horse could
not follow. Colonel Levison, with a party of his Dragoons, got between some of
the Enemies Horse and Duleek and killed several, yet if they had not minded
retreating more than fighting he might have come off a loser. When most of them
were over the Pass they drew up and fired their great Guns upon us; and we ours
upon them, though we could not easily come at them with our small Shot, (for
there are several Boggy Fields with Ditches at Duleek, and in the midst of
these a deep strait Rivulet, very soft in the bottom and high Banks on each
side, there is only one place to get over, and there not above six can go a
breast.)

Their confusion, however, was so great that they left a great many Arms, and a
considerable quantity of Ammunition in that Village of Duleek, and, indeed, all
the Country over; but our Men were so foolish as to blow up the Powder wherever
they met with it, and few or none of the Men escaped that came in their Hands,
for they shot them like Hares amongst the Corn, and in the Hedges as they found
them in their march.

Reasons why so few killed.
By that time therefore a Body of our Horse was got over the Pass, that was
sufficient to Attack the Enemy, they were gone at least a mile before, their
Horse and Artillery in the Rear, and their Foot marching in great haste and
confusion; we went after them for at least three miles, but did not offer to
Attack them any more, because of the Ground. Then night coming on, the King,
with some of the Horse, returned to the Foot that were Encamping at Duleek; but
the greatest part of them remained at their Arms all night, where they left off
the pursuit.

The Number of the dead.
On the Irish side were killed my Lord Dungan, my Lord Carlingford, Sir Neal O
Neal, with a great many more Officers; they lost at the Pass, at Dunore,
Duleek, and all the Fields adjoining, between 1000 and 1500 men; one thing was
observable, that most of their Horsemen that charged so desperately were drunk
with Brandy, each man that morning having received half a Pint to his share;
but it seems the Foot had not so large a proportion, or at least they did not
deserve it so well.

On our side were killed nigh four hundred. The Dutch Granadeers told me,
before we got to the Church at Dunore, that they had lost seventeen, and the
rest proportionably; the French also lost several, but all this was nothing in
respect of Duke Schonberg, who was more considerable than all that were lost on
both sides; whom his very Enemies always called a Brave Man, and a Great
General. I have heard several reasons given for the Dukes passing the River at
that juncture: but, doubtless, his chief design was to encourage the French,
whom he had always loved, and to rectify some mistakes that he might see at a
distance: However 'twas, this I Am certain of, that we never knew the value of
him till we really lost him, which often falls out in such cases; and since it
was in our Quarrel that he lost his life, we cannot too much Honor his Memory,
which will make a considerable Figure in History whilst the World lasts. He was
certainly a Man of the best Education in the World, and knew Men and Things
beyond most of his time, being Courteous and Civil to every Body, and yet had
something always that looked so Great in him, that he commanded respect from men
of all Qualities and Stations. Nor did we know any fault that he had, except we
might be jealous he sometimes was too obliging to the French: As to his person,
he was of a middle stature, well proportioned, fair complexion'd, a very sound
hardy man of his age, and sat an Horse the best of any man; he loved
constantly to be ^at in his Clothes, and in his Conversation he was always
pleasant: he was fourscore and two when he died, and yet when he came to be
unbowelled, his Heart, Intrails and Brain, were as fresh and as sound as if he
had been but twenty; so that it is probable he might have lived several Years,
if Providence had not ordered it otherways. Monsieur Callimot, an honest worthy
Gentleman, died soon after him of his Wounds, having followed that great Man in
all his Fortunes.

Some who pretend to more skill than possibly they are really Masters of, will
needs affirm, that there were two oversights committed at this time; one in not
pursuing the Enemy closser after they were once broke, which had been less
hazardous, considering all things then what followed afterward; my Lord of
Oxford and my Lord Portland were for sending three thousand Horse, with each a
Musqueteer behind him, to fall upon them in the Rear as they retreated, which
might have done great matters; for the Enemy were in such a Consternation that
they marched all that night in great fear and confusion, expecting us at their
Heels every minute. But those that have seen the Ground at Duleek, and
thereabouts, will say that it is scarce possible to make an orderly pursuit at
such a place; for whilst an Enemy continues in a Body, there is no going after
them as if Men were a Fox-hunting, since nothing encourages, even a flying
Enemy more to rally and fight again, than to see a disorderly pursuit of them:
The Passes therefore were so narrow and troublesome, that before we could get
over a Body of Men, sufficient to attack the Enemy, they were got a mile or two
before us, and new difficulties between us and them: nor was the case the same
with them, for they got over any where as well as they could, except the Rear,
who kept their order as far as we could see them. As for his Majesty himself,
he chose the Field, drew up his Army, gave his General Orders to his Officers,
and the best Orders wherever he was in Person; but the greatest Captain that
ever was, or will be, is not, nor can be, of himself sufficient, to redress all
Disorders, or lay hold on all Advantages in an instant, when Armies are once
engaged. And further, his Majesty having committed a considerable part of his
Orders to the care of his General, the death of him must needs be a
disadvantage to the whole Army.

Another thing they pretend to find fault with was, in not sending ten thousand
Men immediately from the Boyne toward Athlone and Limerick, since we were as
nigh those places here as at Dublin; and if we had gone behind them, Limerick
and Galloway would certainly have yielded, for it was at least a fortnight
before any number of their Army got thither, and then (they say) the Irish Army
must either have fought again in the Field or else submitted, since Dublin is
not to be kept by those that are not Masters of the Field. But there are very
good reasons why this was not done, for his Majesty knew at this time that the
French Fleet was hovering nigh the English Coast, and therefore would not
divide his Army, nor draw them from the Sea; nor did his Majesty know as yet
whether the Irish would not stay for him between that and Dublin, and so fight
again. And before he was assured of it, the News of the French Fleets success
at Sea, altered both his and the Irish Peoples measures; for this put them into
heart again, especially when it came with a report (spread a broad, I suppose,
on purpose) that King William was dead, as well as Duke Schonberg, and that the
Dauphin of France was landed with an Army in England. But though there was
little of Truth in these reports, yet they animated the Irish, (who of all men
living are the soonest discouraged, but up again with the least hopes,) and to
work they went in making provisions to defend their Towns, especially beyond
the Shannon; but this I Am afraid will be thought impertinent, at least it is out
of order, and therefore to return.

King James's Carriage at the Battle and after.
King James, during part of the Action at the Boyn, stood at the little old
Church upon the Hill called Dunore, but when he saw how things were like to go,
he marched off to Duleek, and from thence toward Dublin: the first news that
went to that place, was, That K. James had got the day, our General killed, and
the Prince of Orange (as they called him) taken prisoner; this was very
afflicting to the poor Protestants who were shut up in Prisons all over the
Town: but toward night they observed several Officers come to Town in great
confusion, some wounded, and others looking very dull upon the matter, which
they thought were no sings of Victory, and then begun to hope better things.
About nine a Clock King James came to Dublin, with about two hundred Horse with
him, all in disorder. My Lady Tyrconnel met him at the Castle-gate, and after
he was up-stairs, her Ladyship asked him what he would have for Supper? who then
gave her an Account of what a Breakfast he had got, which made him have but
little stomach to his Supper: He staid all Night in the Castle, and next
Morning sending for the Lord Mayor and some others, he told them, That in
England he had an Army which durst have fought, but they proved false and
deserted him; and that here he had an Army which was Loyal enough, but would
not stand by him; he was now necessitated to provide for his Safety, and that
they should make the best Terms for themselves that they could, and not to burn
or injure the Town; and immediately after took Horse, and with about twelve in
Company went toward Bray, and so to Waterford, where he took Shipping for
France. The Irish Horse came most of them into Dublin that Night, and most of
the Foot next Morning. And before Night on Wednesday they were all gone, taking
the City Militia along, who were all Papists; but they released all the
Prisoners, not out of love to them, but for fear lest we had been at their
Heels.

Some say that K. James sent Sir Patrick Trant, and another Gentleman toward
Waterford to provide Shipping for him beforehand, for fear of the worst, but I
have not heard the certainty of it: However this was not the way that Heroes
used formerly to take in England, for the Romans burnt their Ships when they
landed there, that their Men might have no hopes of a Retreat, but to conquer
or die: And so did the Duke of Normandy, who soon after got the name of
Conqueror. King Williams.
But King William gave his Army better proofs of his Courage and Conduct, nor
can I pretend to be able to give his Majesty the just commendation his merit
forces from his very Enemies, only this I am sure of, that he dare do any
thing, and has not a Soul subject to fear, or any thing that's below a Prince,
never had an Army a better opinion of a King, than ours of him, their only fear
was that he would expose himself too far, and whatever difference happens
between him and them can be only this, that they desire to stand between his
Majesty and all danger, But he always has a mind to put himself between them
and it, may we long therefore have such a General in a King, and he not only
Soldiers, but Subjects of all professions, that love him as well. Prince
George accompanied his Majesty in most of his dangers; and in the greatest of
them, was always near him, and nothing but the bravery of such a King, could
hinder him, of the greatest Charracter in this Account. As to our English
Forces, there were few of them, that had an opportunity at this place, to show
themselves, but those that had, acquitted themselves very well, the French and
Iniskilliners did good service, and to give the Dutch Guards their due, they
deserve immortal honor for what they did that day. I enquired at several, who
they were that managed the retreat, the Irish made that day so much to their
advantage, for (not to say worse of them then they deserve) it was in good
order so far as we could see them, (I mean with the Horse, and French Foot,)
whatsoever they did afterward, but I could hear of none in particular, only
Lieutenant Genesis Hambleton says, it was my Lord Gilmoy, who is not thought an
extraordinary Soldier; but this is certain that the French were toward the
left of their Army that day, and so did little or no service, except it was in
the retreat, whereas if they had posted them, instead of the Irish Foot, at the
Pass, we had found warmer work of it: But Providence orders all things, and
amongst those the Counsels of the greatest.

The night after the Battle we lay upon our Arms at Duleck, and next morning
were sent a Party back out of every Regiment, to fetch up our Tents and Baggage
from beyond the Boyn: As likewise Brigadeer La Millinier was sent with a Party
of a thousand Horse and Dragoons, about three hundred Foot, and eight piece of
Canon to summon Drogheda.

Drogheda surrendered.
The Governor received the first Summons very indifferently, but then he had
word sent, that if he forced the Canon to be fired on them, they should have no
quarter: The Governor at length considered better of it, and believing the
Irish Army to be totally routed, he surrendered upon Condition to be conducted
to the next Garrison, which was Athlone. And the next day about 1300. of them
marched out without their Arms, having a Convoy according to Agreement. Colonel
Cuts's Men took possession of the Place, where they found good store of wine
and other things that were considerable, and took great care to preserve the
Town from any violence of the Soldiers. This Town is one of the best in
Ireland, unto which King Edward the Second, for Theobald Verdens sake, granted
License for a Market and Fair, and succeeding Kings confirmed many and great
Privileges to it, amongst others that of a Mint: Cromwell at his first landing
in Ireland took it by Storm, and put above 2000. men to the Sword in it. The
River Boyn runs through the Town, which takes its name from swift running, for
Boin both in Irish and British signifies Swift, as the Learned say: Its a
great and rapid River, and whatever it has been formerly it will be famous in
succeeding Ages for this Action: I have shown the spot of ground to some who
design to erect a Pillar where the King escaped so narrowly, to perpetuate so
memorable an Action. Near the ground, where we encampt, stands Mellifont-Abby,
founded in the year 1168. by Donald King of Uriel, and is much praised by St.
Bernard, it was given afterward by Queen Elizabeth to Sir Edward More of Kent,
for his good service in the Wars both at home and abroad, and is now the Seat
of the Earl of Drogheda.

But this I Am afraid will be thought a little out of my present rode, and
therefore Wednesdy, the 2 of July, we marched not above a mile, to convenient
Ground, and there pitched our Tents: I remember we had a kind of Alarm that
afternoon, and some say it was five Troops of Horse, and three Regiments of
Foot, that came from Munster to join King James's Army, who appeared in the
flank of us, but sending two Spies to discover who we were, they were taken and
hanged, tho the Party marched off untouched. Mounsieur Cambon had almost set
his own and my Lord Drogheda's Regiment by the Ears by ordering a Detachment of
his men to take away by force the Grass from the Rear of the other Regiment:
The matter came so high, that both Parties were charging their Pieces, but my
Lord Drogheda ordered his men to their Tents, and Lieut. Genesis Douglas ordered
Mounsieur Cambon to desist from his pretensions, this might have been of
dangerous consequence, and yet my Lord was so kind to Mounsieur Cambdon, as not
to acquaint the King with it.

King William marches toward Dublin.
On Thursday the 3. of July, his Majesty marched forwards with his Army to a
place called Bally Brighan, and there encamped; on his march he had an account
by one Mr. Sanders, (whom the Bishop of Mead, Dr. King, Captain Fitz Gerald,
and other Protestants, that had taken upon them, the protection of the City,
had sent for that purpose) that the Irish had left Dublin: toward which the
Duke of Ormond marched with 1000 Horse, and found Captain Farlow Governor, who
two days before had been a Prisoner. The Dutch Guards were sent also, who took
possession of the Castle, as the Duke of Ormond did of the out Guards of the
Town with his Horse, next day we lay Encamped, and above 300 Citizens came out
from Dublin, to wait upon the King, and to welcome our Army, and abundance of
people flocked from all places, to see our Camp. The Country all hereabouts, is
most of it Inhabited with old English, and is called Fingal, that is a Nation
of Foreigners: Its scarce worth the Relating what is writ in the Irish Annals
of a Country man nigh this place, that in the year 1341, found a pair of
Gloves, in drawing on of which, he Barked like a Dog, and from that present,
the Elder in that Country Barked like big Dogs, and the young ones like Whelps,
and this continued with some for eighteen days, with others a month, and with
some for two years, and entered also into several other places; and they tell
you likewise of the men in the County of Tipperarys being turned into Wolves at
a certain time of the year; but these are trifles, for they are commonly Dogs
or Wolves in their Nature, but no otherways.

Encamps at Finglass.
Saturday the 5 of July, we marched to Finglass, two miles wide of Dublin, his
Majesty did not go to the City, but staid in the Field with his Army, yet next
day being Sunday, he went to St. Patricks Church, and returned on Horseback to
the Camp to dinner. A Description of Dublin.
This City of Dublin, is by much the Largest and Best in all Ireland, and
inferior to none in England, except London, most of the Houses and Streets,
are very Regular and Modern, and the people as Fashionable as any where. Its
called by Ptolomy Eblana, the Irish call it Bala Cleigh, that is the Town upon
Hurdles, because they say it was built upon a Fenny, Boggy place, but whatever
it has been, the Ground about it is now very sound, and the Air wholesome, it
was much afflicted in the Danish Wars, and afterward came under subjection of
Edgar King of England, then the Norvegians possessed themselves of it, and we
read that Harold of Norway, after he had subdued the greatest part of Ireland,
built Develin. And hither King Hen. 2. after he had gained a great interest in
this Kingdom sent over a Collony of Bristow men, who were the first English
Inhabitants of this City. In the year 1220. was the Castle of Dublin built, by
Henry Londres, Archbishop of that Sea. And in the Reign of King Ed. 2.
Alexander de Bicknor Archbishop of Dublin, began to encourage the profession
of Learning, having obtained from Pope John the 22. the privileges of an
University to the College of Dublin, which he builtin the place, where of old
stood the Monastry of All-hallows, the first Master hereof was Friar William
Hardite. In times of War, and Tumult, it was defaced, but rebuilt in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and endowed with several privileges, being ever since a
Nursery of Protestants, till they were turned out by King Jams's Soldiers, and
it made a Guard House, but now at King Williams coming, restored to the
Protestants with their other possessions.

Monday, the 6. Several parties of Horse, were sent up and down the Country,
and next day the Bishop of Mead, the Bishop of Limerick, and all, or most of
the Clergy, then in, or near the City of Dublin, waited upon the King; the
Bishop of Mead made a Speech, telling his Majesty, The Bishops and Clergy
Address the King.
That they came not to Beg his Protection, for he had given sufficient
demonstrations of his affection toward them, by ventring his Royal Person for
their deliverance, but they came to Congratulate his Arrival, to pray for the
continuance of his good success, and to give his Majesty all the assurance
possible of their Loyalty and Obedience, entreating his Majesty not to think
worse of them for staying in Ireland, and submitting to a Power that it was
impossible for them to resist, since they had been as serviceable to the
Churches interest and his Majesty's by staying, as they could have been
otherwise; with a great deal more to that purpose. The King made Answer, that
as he had by the blessing of God succeeded so far, he doubted not, but by Gods
Assistance, to free them absolutely, and that in a small time, from Popish
Tyranny, which was his design in coming. Then the Bishop of Limerick desired
his Majesty to give them leave to appoint a day of public Thanksgiving, and to
compose a Form of Prayer upon that Occasion, to which his Majesty assented.

Money left in the Treasury.
The Irish went away in such haste, that they left 16000 l. Brass money in the
Treasury, and a great quantity of French pieces called Souses. I enquired of
some People concerned in the Treasury in King James's time, and they told me,
that there had not been much above 1100000 l. Brass money Coined during all the
time it passed.

On Tuesday, July the 7. the King sent out his Declaration, to the Irish,
assuring all under such a Quality of his protection, and because the not
observing of it has since done a great deal of prejudice, not only to his
Majesty's affairs, but also to all sorts of People belonging to that Country,
it will not be improper here to insert it.

The Declaration of William and Mary King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, etc.
To all Our People of Our Kingdom of Ireland whom it may concern. William, R.

K. Williams Declaration.
AS it has pleased Almighty God to bless Our Arms in this Kingdom with a late
victory over Our Enemies at the Boyn, and with the Possession of Our Capital
City of Dublin, and with a general dispersion of all that did oppose us; we are
now in so happy a prospect of Our Affairs, and of extinguishing the Rebellion
of this Kingdom, that We hold it reasonable to think of Mercy, and to have
Compassion upon those whom we judge to have been seduced: Wherefore We do
hereby declare We shall take into Our Royal Protection, all poor Laborers,
Common Soldiers, Country Farmers, Plowmen, and Cottiers whatsoever: As also
all Citizens, Trads-men, Townsmen, and Artificers, who either remained at
home, or having fled from their dwellings, shall by the first of August next
repair to their usual places of abode, surrendering up what Arms they have to
such Justices of the Peace as are or shall be appointed by Us, not only to
receive the same, but also to Register the Appearance of such of the said
Persons as shall come and submit to Our Authority. For Our Royal Intention is,
and We do hereby declare, That We will not only pardon all those seduced people
as to their Lives and Liberties, who shall come in by the time aforesaid, for
all violences they have committed by the command of their Leaders during the
time of the War: But We do also promise to secure them in their Goods, their
Stocks of Cattle, and all their Chattels personal whatsoever, willing and
requiring them to come in, and where they were Tenants, there to preserve the
Harvest of Grass and Corn, for the supply of the Winter. But forasmuch as many
of them have a Legal Right to the Tenancy of several Lands, some holden from
Protestants, and some held from Popish Proprietors, who have been concerned in
the Rebellion against Us. Our Will and Pleasure is, that all those who held
from Our good Protestant Subjects, do pay their Rents to their respective
Landlords: and that the Tenants of all those who have been concerned in the
Rebellion against us, do keep their Rents in their hands, until they have
notice from the Commissioners of Our Revenue, unto whom they are to account for
the same. And as we do hereby strictly forbid all violence, Rapine and
Molestation, to any who shall thus come in and remain Obedient to us: We do
hereby Charge and Require, that they be not disquieted in any sort, without Our
particular Command. For the desperate Leaders of this Rebellion, who have
violated those Laws, by which this Kingdom is united and inseparably annexed to
the Imperial Crown of England; who have called in the French, who have
Authorized all Violences, and depredations against the Protestants, and who
rejected the Gracious Pardon, We offered them in Our Proclamation of the 22 of
February, 1688. As we are now by Gods great favor in a Condition to make them
sensible of their Errors, So are we resolved to leave them to the Event of
War, unless by Great and Manifest demonstrations, We shall be convinced that
they deserve Our Mercy, which We shall never refuse, to those that are truly
penitent.

Given at Our Royal Camp at Finglass near Dublin, the 7 th. of July, 1690. In
the Second year of Our Reign.
This Declararion was published in the Camp two days after, and had it been
punctually observed according to the intent of it, we had had fewer Enemies at
this day by at least 20000: For though the King was punctual in his observance of
it, some Officers and Soldiers were apt to neglect the Kings Honor, and the
Honor of our Country and Religion, when it stood in Competition with their own
profit and advantage. July the seventh and eighth, the King took a view of his
Army by distinct Regiments, and though it often Rained very fast, yet his
Majesty sat on Horseback in the midst of it, and saw each Regiment march by
him, enquiring the Officers names, and what other things concerning them he
thought fit: The Commissaries taking an exact List of all the private Men, both
Horse and Foot, that appeared in the Ranks: And it was observable, that with
Heat, Dust, Marching, and other inconveniences, most people in the Army had
got very sore Lips, nor was his Majesty himself exempt from this inconveniency
for he had toild and labored as much as the best of them.

Because several people may be curious to know what Number of Men we had at the
Boyn, and also how many the Enemy were, I have here inserted the Exact Number
of our own Horse and Foot, as it was taken at Finglass. And likewise a List of
the Irish Army, as it was delivered, first to the Duke at Lisburn, and
afterward to the King.

An Abstract of the Private Men of his Majesty's Army which appeared at the
Review taken at Finglass the 7 th. and 8 th. of July 1690.
Regiments. Men. English Horse. First Troop of Guards 140 Granadeers 47 52
unmounted 5 Third Troop 133 Granadeers 40 43 unmounted 3 Earl of Oxfords 368
Sir John Laniers 357 360 unmounted 3 Colonol Villers 244 245 unmounted 1 Col.
Russel 242 Col. Coy 236 Col. Byerley 244 Col. Langston 225 Count Schonberg 242
Duke Schonbergs French 387 395 unmounted 8 Col. Woolsley 423 Captain Harbords
Troop 38 Dutch Horse. Troop of Guards 143 145 unmounted 2 Lord Portland 351 357
unmounted 6 Monopovillans 168 171 unmounted 3 Leuten. Genesis Ginkel 148 152
unmounted 4 Col. Scholks 157 167 unmounted 10 Van Oyens 161 164 unmounted 3
Reidessels 173 174 unmounted 1 Bancour 176 178 unmounted 2 Nyenhuys 174 175
unmounted 1 Danes Horse. Col. Jewel 264 268 unmounted 4 Col. Donop 250 263
unmounted 13 Col. Schescad 267 281 unmounted 14 Total of Horse 5881 Dragoons.
Col. Matthews Royal Reg. 406 Col. Levison 246 Col. Gwinns 260 Sir Albert
Cuningham 337 358 unmounted 21 Col. Eppingers Dutch 618 621 unmounted 3 Total
of Dragoones 1870 English Foot. Major General Kirk 666 Brigadeer Trelawney 553
Colonel Beamont 526 Brigadeer Stuart 660 Sir John Hanmer 593 Colonel Brewer 571
Col. Hastings 606 Earl of Mead 678 Col. Fouks 439 Col. Gustavus Hambleton 560
Sir Henry Bellasis 628 Lord Lisburn 611 Lieutenant Genesis Douglas 648 Earl of
Drogheda 660 Col. Earl 693 Briggadeer La Millineer 529 Col. Cambon 640 Col.
Callimot 562 Col. Mitchelburn 664 Col. Tiffin 625 Col. St John's 589 Lord George
Hambleton 583 Total of English Foot 13335 Dutch Foot. C. Solms 3 Battali. 1850
1931 2 Compan. of Cadets 81 Count Nassaws Regiment 652 Brandenburg 631 Col.
Babington 416 Col. Cutts 543 Col. Grobens 490 Total of Dutch Foot 4663 Danes
Foot. Regiment of Guards 698 Queens Regiment 634 Prince Fredericks 555 Prince
Christans 547 Prince George's 547 Zealand Regiment 527 Juitland Regiment 554
Findland Regiment 519 Total of Danes Foot 4581 Dutch Foot 4663 English Foot
13335 Foot 22579 Dragoons 1870 Horse 5881 Total of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons
30330 Reform. Officers of Horse 111 Reformed Officers of Foot 372 Total 483

Colonel Deering. Colonel Herbert. Colonel Hambleton. Colonel White.
Were all in Garrison and not included.

And note, that neither Officers nor Sergeants are included in the former List,
nor yet those that were sick or absent, as several were, but these all marched
in the Ranks before the King, so that the complete number was much greater.

A List of the late King James's Army taken Apr. 9. 1690.
Regiments of Horse.
Duke of Tyrconel 9 Troops in a Regiment 53 Men in a Troop Lord Galmoy Col.
Sarsefield Col. Sutherland Six Troops in a Regiment, 53 Men each. Lord Abercorn
Col. Henry Lutterill Col. John Parker Col. Nicholas Purcel

Horse Guards.
Lord Dovers Troop 200. each Troop. Duke of Berwicks Troop

Troop of Granadeers.
Col. Buttlers 60

Dragoons.
Lord Dungan 8 Troops in a Regiment, 60 men each. Sir Neal O Neal Col. Simon
Lutterel

Regiments.
Col. Robert Clifford Six Troops in a Regiment, 60 Men each. Sir James Cotton
Col. Tho. Maxwel Lord Clare

Regiments of Foot.
Royal Regiment 22 Companies, and 90 each. Earl of Clancarty. Col. Henry Fitz
James. Col. John Hambleton. Earl of Clanrickard. Earl of Antrim. Earl of
Tyrone. Lord Gormanstown. Lord Slane. Lord Galloway. Lord Louth. Lord Duleek.
Lord Killmallock. Lord Kenmare: Sir John Fitzgerald. Sir Maurice Eustace. Col.
Nugent. Col. Henry Dillon. Col. John Grace. Col. Edward Butler. Col. Thomas
Butler. Lord Bophni. Col. Charles Moor. Col. Cormach O Neal. Col. Arthur
Mackmahan. Earl of Westmeath. Col. Cavenaugh. Col. Uxbrough. Col. Mac. Carty
Moore. Col. Gordon O Neal. Col. John Barret. Col. Charles O Bryan. Col. O
Donavan. Col. Nicholas Brown. Col. O Gara. Sir Michael Creagh. Col. Dom. Brown.
Col. Bagnal. Col. Mackellicut. Lord Inniskillin. Col. Hugh Mac Mahon. Col.
Walter Bourk. Col. Felix O Neal. Lord Iveagh. Col. O Keyley.
These 44 Regiments were 13 Companies in each, and 63 Men in each Company.

Regiments from France.
The Red Regiment. The Blew Regiment. Two White Regiments, each divided into
several Battalions, being in all about 5000 Men.
Regiments that were sent to France in Exchange.
Lord Mountcashels. Col. Richard Butler's. Col. Daniel O Bryan's. Col.
Fielding's. Col. Arthur Dillon's.
Regiments that were Raised and never taken into pay, but Disbanded.
Lord Castle Connel. Col. Roger O Connor. Col. Charles Geoghagan. Col. John
Brown. Col. James Butler. Col. Manus O Donnel. Col. O Cahon. Col. Edward
Nugent. Col. Charles Kelly. Col. Brian Mack Dermot. Col. James Talbot.
These last are all mere Irish, and consequently good for little, so that no
wonder if they were broke: But these were all the Forces that the late King had
in Ireland; and a great many were in Garrison in Munster and other places: but
as to their Numbers at the Boyn, some of their own Officers call them five and
twenty, and others seven and twenty thousand.

About the eighth or ninth of July the King had an Account of the misfortune of
the Dutch and English Fleets; and Wednesday the ninth he divided his Army, and
went himself with the greatest part of it beyond the Town of Dublin, in order
to go Westwards: sending at the same time Lieutenant General Douglas with three
Regiments of Horse, two of Dragoons, and ten of Foot toward Athlone, which is
fifty miles North from Dublin: The Regiments that went upon this Expedition
were these; Horse, Langston, Russel, and Woolsley: Dragoons, Sir Albert
Cunningham, and Gwin: Foot, the Lieut. Generals own Regiment, Sir Hen.
Bellasis, Sir Jo. Hanmer, C. Babington, L. Droheda, C. Gust. Hambleton, C.
Mitchelburn, C. Tiffin, C. St. John's, and L. Geor. Hambleton. I shall leave,
therefore, his Majesty going Westwards, and give an Account of L. G. Douglas's
Affairs till he joins the King at Cariganliss, within five miles of Limerick.
Lieutenant General Douglas goes to Athlone.
Lieut. Genesis Douglas and his party Encamped that Night nigh Chappel-Issard; and
next day at Manouth; Friday we Encampt at Glencurry, about five miles further,
and we had not got this length till we begun to plunder, though the General
gave strict Orders to the contrary. Saturday the 12th. we marched to Clenard
Bridge, here we staid all Sunday, and Lieutenant General Douglas took an
account of every Man in his party, that he might have Bread provided
accordingly; the Soldiers went abroad and took several things from the Irish,
who had staid upon the Kings Declaration; and frequent complaints came already
to the General, but Plundering went on still, especially amongst the Northern
Men, who are very dextrous at that sport. Sunday morning Captain Aughmouty, of
Colonel Woolsley's Regiment, went with a party of Horse toward the County of
Longford. And Monday the 14th. they met the Army at Mullingar, (whither we
marched) and several of the Irish came in for Protections, though when they had
them they were of little force to secure their Goods or themselves.

Two Spies taken.
The party that was sent out brought in a great prey of Cattle from the Enemies
Quarters, and took two Spies with Letters from Athlone; one was, to Advise one
Tute to Defend an Island nigh Mullingar, in which he had store of Horses, and
several things of value; Another Letter was from an Officer at Athlone, to his
Father in the Country, telling him, that my Lord Tyrconnel, the Duke of
Berwick, and several more great Officers were come to Limerick with a good Body
of Horse, and that all their Army would be there in two or three days, so that
they would make either a Hog or a Dog on it, (as he expressed it) That the Dauphin
was landed in England with a great Army; that the French had beat the English
and Dutch Fleets; that Duke Schonberg was dead; and it was said the Prince of
Orange was so too; that their King was gone for France, but it was no great
matter (he said) where he was, for they were better without him. Then he
advised his Father not to take a Protection, because those that did were looked
upon as Enemies. And after his Letter was sealed, he had writ on the outside,
Just now we have an Account, by a Gentleman that is come to us from Dublin, that
Orange is certainly dead, so that all will be well again. Such were their Hopes
and Expectations at that time: But though they believed most of those things,
yet they did not certainly know what to make on it, for they had no good opinion
of the late King, as may appear by a great many instances; for Sarcefield
sometime afterward, speaking of the Action at the Boyn, swore if we would
change Kings they would fight it over again and beat us. For, certainly, the
Courage and Countenance of the Chief Commander in Armies is a material Point in
the success of the Action, and especially in Kings; for he that has a Genius to
the War has Advantages above other Men; that makes his Gentry, Nobility, and
Officers strive to imitate his Example, by which he is better served, and
commonly more fortunate.

The 15th. we remained Encamped at Mullingar, and about 500 Creights came from
the County of Longford, with their Wives, Children, Cattle, and every thing
that they could bring away; their business was to procure the Generals
Protection, which was granted them, and they moved homewards as the Army
marched forwards, but were most of them plundered afterward. There had been a
Friery at Mullingar during the late Kings Reign, but the Friday before we got
thither the Fathers thought fit to go a Pilgrimage into Conaught. This Evening
a party of Col. Russel's Horse went toward Athlone, and came within three
miles of the place, but did no feats worth the mentioning; next day we marched
to Ballimoor, where stands a strong House at the side of a Lough, which the
Enemy has since fortified: Athlone Besieged.
And Thursday, July 17th. we came before Athlone, and encamped within a quarter
of a mile of the Town; the Enemy playing their great Guns upon us as we
marched, but did us little damage. The General sent a Drum to Summons the
Town; but old Colonel Grace, the Governor, fired a Pistol at him, and sent word
those were the Terms he was for. The Town it self stands on a narrow Neck of
Land between two Bogs, (one on either side the Shannon,) and you cannot come to
it, much less pass the River any where, up or down, within six or eight miles
except at the Town, through the midst of which the River Shannon runs, and is
both very broad and deep, being by much the greatest in these three Kingdoms.
Ptolomy calls this River Senus; Giraldus Flumen, Senense; but the Irish call it
Shannon, that is, the Ancient River. It arises out of Theru Hills in the County
of Letrim, and running through an excellent Country, and several Towns,
(particularly Limerick and Athlone,) it falls into the Sea beyond
Knock-Patrick, a Mountain upon which St. Patrick conjured all the Venomous
Creatures in Ireland, and threw them into the Sea, insomuch that nothing of
that kind has appeared, or will live, in that Kingdom ever since, (if you will
believe what the Irish do;) however, this River is Navigable for above twenty
Leagues. That part of Athlone standing on the South Side the Shannon is called
the English Town, and that on the other, the Irish Town, where stands a very
strong Castle. Athlone is the head Town in the County of Roscommon, and was
formerly the Barony of the O Kelly's. There is a very good Stone Bridge between
the two Towns, which was Built by Sir Henry Sidney in Queen Elizabeth's time,
and because this is commonly accounted the Center of Ireland, that Queen once
designed to make it the Residence of the Lords Justices. The English Town not
being so easy to defend, the Irish Burnt it the day before our coming, and
broke down the Bridge. They had several very convenient opportunities to
disturb us in our march to the Town, because of the Bogs, Woods, and Passes
that lay very advantageous for that purpose, but they retired over the River,
to defend the other side; about 200 Yards above the Town they had raised some
Breast-works; on the River side, nigh the end of the Bridge, they had cast up
several Redoubts, and other Works, and had planted two Batteries of two Guns a
piece, besides what were in the Castle.

Friday we spent in contriving our Batteries, and our Works, and on Saturday we
planted two Fieldpieces, which did the Enemies Guns some damage; then one
hundred and fifty Men out of each Regiment were ordered to make and carry
Fascines; and in two days more we had a Battery of six Guns finished, nigh the
Bridge-end, which played upon the Castle, and made a small Breach to wards the
top. On Sunday the 20th. the General sent a Detachment of Horse, commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Barry, and 150 Granadeers mounted, commanded by Major
Morgison and Captain Carlisle, toward Lanesbrough Pass, but they returned the
next day, without doing any thing that was Remarkable; the Enemy having a Fort
well manned toward the Bridge, and four Companies of Foot in the Town. That
day one Captain Mackgill, a Voluntier, was killed at our Battery with a
Canon-shot from the Castle. Our Train at Athlone was only two twelve Pounders,
ten lesser Guns, and two small Field Mortars; which, when planted against the
Castle, did it little or no damage: (This was a misfortune that
Lieutenant General Douglas found Athlone stronger than he expected, for it is
said, he had what Guns and Men he desired to reduce it withal.) The firing
continued, however, on both sides; and on Tuesday one Mr. Nelson, our best
Gunner, was killed with a small Shot. On Wednesday we had news that Sarcefield,
with 15000 Men, was coming to raise the Siege; which made the General send all
his sick and wounded Men toward Mullingar. Next Morning early, the Besieged
hung out a Bloody Flag, which occasioned smart firing; and in the Evening the
General called all the Colonels to a Council of War, where he told them the
necessity of Removing from the Town; for we had very little Bread all the
while, and there was some reason to believe the Irish Army would cut off our
Communication from Dublin. So that we had Orders to be ready to march at twelve
a Clock that Night; we begun at the time appointed to send away our Baggage,
and at break of Day, or a little after, we marched off, the Enemy not so much as
firing one Gun at us.

Reasons why it was not taken.
I know that whilst we lay here there were some that profferr'd to pass the
River at a Ford a little above the Bridge, and so beat the Irish out of their
Works; but this was sooner said than done, for the Ford is naturally very deep
and dangerous; besides, the Irish had fortified the other side with
Breast-works, two Batteries, and a considerable Fort: And then if we had forced
our way over, and could not have taken the Castle in a small time, we must have
been obliged to fight the greatest part of the Irish Army, which was then
drawing down upon us. Nay, if we had been Masters of the Town and Castle, the
Irish might so have ordered it, as to have cut off our Communication from
Dublin, and so starved us, for we were already glad of a very small Allowance
of Bread.

Colonel Grace, the Governor, had been very active on the Irish side in the
last Wars, but was now very old, and this was the third time that he had burnt
that Town; the Enemy had in it three Regiments of Foot, nine Troops of
Dragoons, and two of Horse, and more lay encamped not far off. During our stay
here (which was from Thursday the 17th. to Friday the 25th.) the Country
People, of all Persuasions, begun to think us troublesome.

This must be said for Lieutenant General Douglas, that both whilst he staid
here, and all along on his march, he constantly gave out very strict Orders
against Plundering or Straggling from the Army. But it were better that good
Rules were not made, than when they are so, they should not be observed, and
the breakers escape punishment. For some Peoples taking liberty to break Rules,
encourage others to lose their Reverence to them. Example always goes further
than Precept, and most Men see better than they understand; so that whatever
Rules are made in an Army by a General, they are to be observed by every one;
else with what justice can one be punished for the breach of those Orders,
which others make no Conscience in obeying.

What Men lost there.
We lost in this Expedition not above thirty Men before the Town, and the Enemy
very few; but in our march too and again, what with sickness, hard marching,
the Rapperees surprising as they straggled, and several other disadvantages, we
fell short of our Number three or four hundred; though before we got to the
Kings Army we killed and took Prisoners a great many thousands, but more of
these had four Feet than two.

All the poor Protestants thereabouts were now in a worse condition than
before, for they had enjoyed the benefit of the Irish Protections till our
coming thither: and then showing themselves Friends to us, put them under a
necessity of retreating with us; which a great many did, leaving all their
Harvest at that time ready to cut down, etc. and yet were hardly used by our
own Men.

On our first Days march backwards, the General received an Express from the
King, (some say it was to draw off and join the Army, and that he had positive
Orders before not to pass the Shannon at all:) And at the same time we had an
Account of a Conspiracy in England against the Queen, and that some French were
Landed there, having burnt some Towns on the Coast: And it was reported also
that the late King was Landed in that Kingdom. We marched back that Day to
Ballimore, where we staid four Days; on one of which there happened the greatest
Thunder and Lightning that has been heard of in those parts. And about this
time several of the Irish that had taken Protections, when they could not have
the benefit of them, began to turn Rapperees, stripping and sometimes killing
our Men that they found straggling.

Lieutenant General Douglas marches to join the Kings Army.
On the 30 of July, Colonel Babington's Regiment marched from Ballimore toward
Dublin, and the same day Leiutenant-General Douglas marched with all the rest
of his party to Stony-Cross, (which is out of all public Rodes from Dublin,
and so were most of our future marches, till we joined the Kings Army, which
was one reason why we had little or no Bread for almost four days together, and
after that but a very slender allowance.) From this place, we marched to
Balliboy, and as we went a long, the General ordered one of his own men to be
Shot immediately, for Morodeing (as they called it.) The General had given out
orders, that none should stir out of their Ranks on pain of Death, however this
poor Fellow and four more were not so observant of their duty as they ought to
be, which the General espying caused them to be seized immediately, and throw
Dice for their lives. Ballyboy, that the Enemy was at Banoher Bridge, with a
very strong party to disturb our march, which made us next day strike to the
left, to Roscreaugh, instead of going to Bur as we designed, for that way was
full of Woods and narrow Passes, where the Enemy had great Advantage of us. We
stayed at Roscreaugh, the second of August, and on the third in the Morning,
came twelve Troopers from the Kings Army (who lay then at Goulden Bridge) to
hasten our march, for the King expressed himself to be in trouble, lest the Enemy
should be too many for us in that place. That day we marched beyond the Devils
Bit, and all along as we passed, we could see the Rapparees looking upon us
from the Mountains, but we had now so many Cattle, Horses and Attenders, on our
marches, as made us look as big nigh hand as the other part of the Army, and
the Soldiers used to say, that the Cattle and Sheep themselves could tell by
their different tones to whom they belonged. From this place all down to
Cashel, and so toward Clonmel and Waterford one way, and toward Tipperary and
Limerick another, is one of the finest Countries I ever saw, if it had
Inhabitants accordingly. (Great part of it is called the Goulden vale.) On the
4 Colonel Woolsleys Horse, Colonel Tiffins and St. John's Foot marched back from
hence toward Mullingar, to secure the Country, they came so far lest the Enemy
should attack us, and now we being secure, they marched back another way.

We marched on the 5. to Holy-Cross, nigh Thurles, which of old enjoyed several
peculiar Privileges and Freedoms granted in Honor of a piece of Christ's
Cross there found (as the Story goes) This place by K. Henry 8. gave the Title
of Barons to the Buttlers. The General I believe, had heard that several people
had enjoyed great privileges at this place in the days of old, and therefore
he gave his Soldiers liberty this afternoon, to take what they pleased for
their sustenance, but the true reason was, because we had no Bread. The 6. we
marched to a Village called Dundrum, a little to the North of Cashel, one of
the most Ancient Cities in Ireland, famous of old, for the Preaching of St.
Patrick, where afterward was built a very considerable Cathedral, it was made
an Archepiscopal dignity by Eugenius the third Bishop of Rome, and had under it
in times past, many Bishoprics and Suffragons. As you go up to this Church,
there is a Stone upon which Anciently all the Kings of Munster used to be
Crowned. (I suppose it was after the same manner with the Ulster Kings, which
was by throwing an old shoo^ over their heads, and sometimes by killing a white
Cow, etc.) There are several Monuments of good Antiquity in this Church, In the
year 1318. The Archb. of Cashel was both Lord Justice, and Lord Chancellor
and it was remarkable in the late Wars, for my Lord Inchiqueens killing all
the Priests that were got into it, and pretended with a Body of the Irish, to
defend the place, which naturally is pretty strong, and its called at this day,
the Rock, because it stands on the top of one. On the 7. We marched to Cullen,
and on the 8. to Carriganliss, whither the Kings Army was gone from
Goulden-Bridge. Its therefore convenient, that I should give the best Account I
can of their march from Dublin thither.

The Kings march toward Limerick.
On the 9. of July, His Majesty, with his Army Encamped at Cromlin, within two
miles of Dublin westwards, where he settled the method of granting Protections
according to his Declaration. And gave a Commission to the Bishop of Mead, my
Lord Longford, Dr. Gorge, Captain Fitz Gerald, Mr. Coughland, Dr. Davis and
Captain Corker, to save all forfeited goods; and to see that those, and the
Corn upon the Estates of all Absentees, were safely kept, or disposed on for
the Kings use. The Bishop of Mead, whether out of dislike to the proceedings
of the rest, or averseness to business, soon forbore his Attendance at their
meetings, the rest went on in their Business, but in such a method as was
neither to the Kings advantage nor satisfaction, and not much to their own
Credits. The 10. in the morning his Majesty set forth a Proclamation, to put a
stop to the passing of Brass money, only at the valuations following, viz. Every
large half Crown, and new stamped Crown at a penny, the small half Crown at
three farthings, the large Copper Shilling at an half penny, the small
Shillings and six pences at farthings, etc. And the same day, the Army Encampt
between the Ness and Racoole. Little happened remarkable, except the Kings great
care to keep the Soldiers from Plundring the Country, and every night, it was
given out in orders that on pain of death, no man should go beyond the line in
the Camp, or take violently to the lest value from either Protestant or Papist.
The 11. the Army marched to Kill Kullen Bridge, the King this morning passing
by the Ness, saw a Soldier Robbing a poor Woman, which enraged his Majesty so
much, that he beat him with his Cane, and gave orders that he and several
others guilty of the like disobedience should be Executed the Monday following,
some people were so wicked as put a bad construction on this Action of the
Kings but it had so good an effect upon that part of the Army, that the Country
was secured from any violence done by the Soldiers during that whole march,
two of the other Sufferers, were Iniskillin Dragoons. On Sunday the Army
rested, and on Monday they marched to Tommalin, several of the Country people
and some Gentlemen that were Papists coming in, to whom the King ordered
Protections. We heard all long on our march of the Confusion the Enemy was in,
and had Accounts daily, of their resorts to Limerick, and other strong places;
whilst we were here, several came to us from Killkenny, who gave his Majesty an
Account of the State of that Garrison, that part of the Enemies Horse and Foot
were there still, but with thoughts of quitting the Town upon our approach, and
at their going off they made the Inhabitants give them a sum of money, to save
the Town from plundring. From Tommalin we marched to Castle-Dermot, where stood
in old time, two or three Religious Houses, the Ruins of which as yet remain;
one of these was of the Friars Minors, Sacked and Plundered by the Scots, under
Bruce, in the year 1316. In which year, the Irish were here also overthrown by
Edward Bottilar (or Buttler) Lord Justice of Ireland. Here the King received
some Packets from England, giving him a further Account of his Fleet, and Sea
affairs, which was easily understood not to be very grateful, and as is
supposed was the occasion of our slow marches. Several Protestants every day
came to the Camp, all expressing their great Joy and Satisfaction for his
Majesty's Presence and their Deliverance. We had also an Account here, of some
that took Protections, and yet in the night made their escape to the Enemy,
having only got those Protections thereby to procure a better opportunity of
going off with what they had, upon which parties were lent out on all hands to
clear the Mountains and Woods near the Army, which kept the rest at home, from
hence Colonel Eppingar, went with a party of 1000 Horse and Dragoons, to secure
Wexeford, which some time before was deserted by the Irish Garrison, this Town
was first taken by Fitz Stephen, in the Reign of King Hen. 2. And hereabouts
were the first English planted in Ireland, they were a Colony of West-Country
men, and retain their old English Tone and Customs to this day. I am credibly
informed that every day about one or two a Clock in Summer, they go to Bed the
whole Country round, nay the very Hens fly up, and the Sheep go to Fold as
orderly as it were night.

The Duke of Ormond goes with a party to Killkenny.
The Army rested a day at Castle Dermot, and the next day marched beyond
Carlow, sending forwards a party of Horse, under the Command of the Duke of
Ormond to take possession of Kill Kenny, and to secure the Protestants, and
other Inhabitants in the Country about, from being Plundered by the Enemy, for
by this time some of them adventured to look behind them, and to return to take
along what they had not time nor convenience to carry off at first, here the
Army staid a day also, and the next day marched to a place called Kells, two
miles beyond Loughlind Bridge, and the day following to Bennets Bridge, three
miles to the Northest of Kill-Kenny upon the same River.

The 19. his Majesty dined with the Duke of Ormond, at his Castle of Kill
Kenny, this House was preserved by the Count de Lauzun, with all the Goods and
Furniture, and left in a good Condition, not without the Cellars well furnished
with what they had not time to drink at their going off. Killkenny signifies
the Cell or Church of Canick, who for the Sanctimony of his Solitary Life in
this Country was highly Renowned; this was one of the best Inland Towns in
Ireland: the Irish Town has in it the said Canick's Church, now the Cathedral
of the Bishop of Ossory. The English Town was built by Randolph the third Earl
of Chester, and fortified with a Wall on the West side, by Robert Talbot a
Nobleman, and this Castle by the Buttlers, Ancestors to the present Duke of
Ormond.

On Sunday the 20 th. They marched six Miles farther, and Encamped at a Place
called Rossed-Narrow upon the Estate of one Mr. Read, where the King had an
Account of one Fitz Morris, Sheriff of the Queens County, that was under
Protection, and afterward went off in the Night with his Family and all his
Stock: the King had also News that the Enemy had quitted Clonmel, whither Count
Schomberg marched with ^ Body of Horse. This is one of the strongest Towns in
Ireland, and cost Oliver Cromwell at least 2000 Men in taking it: the Irish made
some Pretensions to hold it out now; in order to which they levelled all the
Suburbs and Hedges, but all they did was to make the Inhabitants pay them 300
l. to save the Town from being burnt or plundered: it stands upon the River
Sure, in a pleasant and fruitful Country. Here my Lord George Howard, and some
more, came in and submitted, who had Protections.

The Army goes to Carruck.
Monday the 21 st. The Army marched to Carruck, situate upon a Rocky Ground,
whence it took its Name (being called from Carruck Mack Griffin) the Habitation
formerly of the Earls of Ormond; which together with the Honor of Earl of
Carruck King Edw. II. Granted unto Edward Boteler or Buttler, whose Posterity
(the present D. of Ormond) still enjoy it. There the King received an Account
of the State of Waterford (by some that escaped from thence) and of the
Resolution of the Garrison to hold out. There also the King had some
Intelligence of the Condition of the City of Cork and that County, with great
Solicitations from the Inhabitants to hasten to their Relief, which at that
time they represented as a thing very easy.

On the 22 d. Major General Kirk with his own Regiment, and Colonel Brewers; as
also a Party of Horse went toward Waterford, more Forces designing to follow.
Waterford summoned,
The Major General sent a Trumpet to Summon the Town, who at first refused to
surrender, (there being Two Regiments then in Garrison) their Refusal however
was in such civil Terms, that we easily understood their Inclinations; for soon
after they sent out again to know what Terms they might have, which were the
same with Drogheda; but not liking those, they proposed some of their own;
which were, That they might enjoy their Estates, The Liberty of their Religion,
A safe Convoy to the next Garrison, with their Arms and proper Goods: those
would not be Granted, and then the heavy Cannon were drawn down that way, and
some more Forces ordered to march; And Surrendered.
but the Irish understanding this, sent to ask Liberty to march out with their
Arms, and to have a safe Convoy, which was granted them; and accordingly on the
25 th. they marched out with their Arms and Baggage, being conducted to Mallow.

In the mean time the Fort of This Fort was also given John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsburry, but afterward by Act of Parliament it was annexed to the Crown
for ever.
Duncanon, Seven Miles below Waterford, was summoned. This is a Strong and
Regular Fortification, being at that time Commanded by one Captain Burk, and
well furnished with Guns, and all other Necessaries: the Governor required
Seven days to Consider of it, which being denied him, he said he would take so
much time; but upon the approach of our Forces, and the appearing of some Ships
before it, he surrendered upon the same Terms with Waterford.

The day that Waterford Surrendered, the King himself went to see it, and took
great care that no Persons should be disturbed in their Houses or Goods. Here
we found my Lord Dover, who was admitted to a more particular Protection, he
having formerly applied himself when the King was at Hillsborough, by a Leter
to Major General Kirk, to desire a Pass for himself and Family into Flanders.
The City of Waterford was built first by certain Pirates of Norway, and
afterward won from the Irish by Richard Earl of Pembrook: The Citizens hereof
had large Privileges granted them by King Hen. 7. for demeaning themselves
Loyally against Perkin Warbeck. It was Granted by Patent from King Hen. 6. to
John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury and his Heirs, who by the same Patent were to be
Senescals of Ireland. But this City afterward was annexed to the Crown.

The King speaks of going for England.
At the King's returning to the Camp, His Majesty held a Council, wherein he
declares his Resolution to go for England; In the mean time our Horse Encamped
between Carruck and Clonmell, and the Earl of Granard came to wait on His
Majesty; he receiving at the same time an Express from Lieutenant General
Douglass, who gave but an indifferent Account of that Expedition.

On the 27 th the King left the Camp at Carruck, and went toward Dublin, in
order for England, which occasioned various Conjectures, and some Apprehensions
that the Affairs of England were in no pleasing Posture. Count Solmes left
General.
His Majesty left Count Solmes Commander in Chief, and went that night to
Carlow, where he met with some Accounts from England, upon which he expressed
himself doubtful whether to go over or return to the Army. However he went on
as far as Chapel Izard, and there he was employed for about Three days in
hearing Petitions; some of which related to the violation of Protections, and
the Outrages committed by Lieutenant General Douglas's Party: As also others
about Abuses and Inconveniences from the late Commission; and several
Complaints were made against Col. Trelawney's Regiment then in Dublin. Here the
King gave Orders that Count Sehomberg's Horse, Col. Mathews's Dragoons, Col.
Hasting's and Col. Trelawney's Foot, with one Troop of Guards should be shipped
for England; A second Declaration.
and on the first of August published a Second Declaration, not only confirming
and strengthening the former, but also adding, That if any Foreigners in Arms
against Him would submit, they should have Passes to go into their own
Countries, or whither they pleased. And another Proclamation came out, dated
July 31. Commanding all the Papists to deliver up their Arms; and those who did
not were to be looked upon as Rebels and Traitors, and abandoned, to the
discretion of the Soldiers. A Proclamation for a Fast.
And at the same time was likewise published a Proclamation for a General Fast
to be kept constantly every Friday during the War, in all parts of the Kingdom
under his Majesty's Obedience, for asking God's Pardon for our Sins, and
imploring a Blessing upon Their Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land. At this time
also Mr. Poyne, Mr. Reves, and Mr. Rothford, Lords Commissioners of the Great
Seal, began to act, and received Instructions from the King how to proceed.

And now the King received a further account from England, that my Lord
Torrington and several more were secured, and that several wicked Designs were
discovered and prevented; That the Loss at Sea was not so great as was at first
reported; and that the French had only burnt a small Village in the West of
England, and gone off again; The King returns to the Army.
return to the Army; he lessened his Baggage and Retinue, giving his spare
Horses to the Train; and then, on the 2 d of August went back toward his Army,
which he found then at Goulden Bridge; on which day a Soldier was hanged for
mutining. Here the King stayed a day or two, and had Accounts from several
Deserters of the Preparations the Enemy was making for their own defense and
safety. On the 6 th, the King with his Army marched to Sallywood, having the
day before sent a Party of Horse toward Limerick. And on the 7 th his Majesty
marched to Carigallis, within five miles of Limerick. Upon our approach thither
the Enemy burnt and levelled all the Suburbs; as also set fire to all the
Houses in the Country between us and the Town. A Party sent toward Limerick.
On the the 8 th of August early in the Morning my Lord Portland, and Brigadeer
Stuart were sent toward Limerick, with about Eleven hundred Horse and Foot,
who advanced within Cannon shot of the Town, but met with little opposition
from the Enemy; and before they returned his Majesty went out with about Three
hundred Horse, being accompanied with Prince George, the Here Overkirk, Major
General Ginkle, and several other great Officers. When these went nigh the
Town, a Party of the Enemies Horse advanced toward them: But Captain Selby, of
my Lord of Oxford's Regiment having the Advance Guard, drew toward them, with
a design to charge them; which they perceiving, thought fit to draw homewards,
their Cannon firing from the Town several times. Then in the Evening Lieutenant
General Douglass with his Party joined the Kings Army,

The 9 th of August in the morning early, the King sends three Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons, with a Detachment of One Thousand Foot, commanded by Sir
Henry Bellasis (as Brigadeer) my Lord Drogheda, and Colonel Earl, as an
Advance Guard to make the first approach, The whole Army make their Approach.
and all the Army both Horse and Foot followed in order. About six a Clock our
Advance Party discovered some of the Enemy upon the top of an Hill, three Miles
on this side the Town: our Men drew up, and then marched slowly forwards; and
as we proceeded the Enemy disappeared by degrees, till they were all gone off
the Hill: We drew forwards; and about half a mile further we could see a great
part of the Town from a rising ground, but could not discover the ways to it,
nor who were between us and it, because of a great many thick Enclosures and
Lanes; in one of which the Enemy appeared again. Our Men halted a little till
the Pioneers had cut ^wn the Hedges to the right and left; which done, they
advanced, and the Enemy drew back. This took some time a doing, and therefore
the Front of our Army, both of Horse and Foot came up: The King was here at
first, riding from one place to another to order Matters, as his Custom always
was. We cut the Hedges in a great many places, and went forwards, and the Enemy
they drew homewards, till they came to a narrow Pass between two Bogs, within
half a Mile of the Town. The Neck of Land between these Bogs is not above 150
Yards over, and this full of Hedges, with a large Orchard, a Stone Wall, and
also the Ruins of a great House upon the Lane-side, which the Irish had burnt
the Day before. But there were Three Lanes that led this way toward the Town,
the middlemost being the broadest, the Irish Horse stood in it, on the Pass
beyond this old House; and whilst our Pioneers were at work, the Front of our
Horse went up so close, that there were several little Firings, but not much
damage done on either side: To the Right and Left of the Irish Horse, the
Hedges were all lined with Musketeers, of whom our Foot were got now within
less than two hundred Yards. The Pioneers labored at the Hedges all this
while, and the Army made their Approaches in excellent Order: The Detached
Party of Foot was upon the Advance toward the Center, the Horse a little to
the Right of them, followed by the Earl of Drogheda's Regiment, and Lieutenant
General Douglas at the Head of them (my Lord Drogheda himself being upon the
Advance Guard). The Danes were toward the Left, led on by the Prince of
Wirtemberg, and Major General Kirk: The Blue Dutch, and several English
Regiments, were upon the Right: All those were lined with Horse, and these
supported again with more Foot: So that all Men that understood it, said it was
a most curious sight; for though the Hedges were very thick and troublesome,
yet it was so ordered, that the Front kept all on a Line, except the advance
Party, who went always some distance before. Whilst things were going on thus,
the King ordered Two Fieldpieces to be planted toward the Left, where they
could bear upon the Enemies Horse. These fired several times, and the Enemy
soon quitted that Post. Our English Foot were so little concerned, that though
they knew the Enemy to be in the next Hedges, yet whilst the Pioneers were at
work, they would sit them down, and ask one another, whether they thought they
should have any Bread to day? (for they began to want their Breakfasts, though
some few of them went to the next World for it.) The Danes to the Left stood
with all the Care and Circumspection in the World; but observing the Posture of
some of our Men, and hearing what they said, they believed we had no mind to
fight; yet no sooner were the Hedges down, and our Front advancing in a narrow
Field, but the Irish fired a whole Volley upon them from the Neighboring
Hedges; which our Men seeing, some of them cried aloud, Ah ye Toads, are ye
there? we'll be with you presently: And being led on by my Lord Drogheda and
Colonel Earl, they ran along the Field directly toward the Hedges where the
Irish were planted; which the others seeing, immediately quitted, and then our
Men fired upon them as they retreated to the next Hedges, and so beat them from
one Hedge to another, even to the very end of the Suburbs, which then were all
burnt and levelled. During this Action the Danes advanced in the Left, and the
Blue Dutch with the English on the Right, the Horse coming on in the Center. So
that in less than half an hour from the first Volley, the Irish were driven
under their very Walls; nor did we lose a Dozen Men in all this Action: When as
if the Irish had managed this Advantage of Ground, and fortified the Pass, as
well as Ireton's Fort on the Right of it, (which was built by Ireton on his
first coming before Limerick: It stands on a Rising Ground, and over-looks the
Pass on one side, and the Town on the other: (This we commonly called Cromwell's
Fort) they might have kept us some Days from approaching the Town; at least,
they might have killed us a great many Men: But the truth is, they had not time
for all this: They had drawn up, however, several Companies of Men in the Fort,
but when they saw us coming on, they retreated toward the Town without ever
firing a Shot.

The Cannon play.
We were not as yet saluted with one Great Gun from the Town, because their own
Men had been between them and us, but as soon as they retreated under the
Walls, they let fly amain amongst us, and killed several as they marched in;
amongst others, a French Captain had both his Legs shot off, and died
presently. We drew Four Fieldpieces immediately to Cromwell's Fort, playing
them upon the Town and the Outworks; and before Five a Clock in the Afternoon,
all our Army was marched in, and most of them encampt within Cannon-shot. In a
Siege the first two things that are to be regarded, is the safe encamping our
Men, and the drawing the Line of Countervallation, to prevent the Enemy from
Sallying; but the latter of these we did not much mind, because I suppose we
did not much fear any desperate Sallies; and the former was in some measure
prevented by the situation of our Camp. The Danes encampt to the Left, where
they found an Old Fort built by their Ancestors, which they were very proud of;
and from thence they fired Three or Four Fieldpieces upon the Irish that lay
entrenched between them and the Town. The Detached Party kept an Advance Post
till they were relieved about Nine a Clock, and the Lord Drogheda's Regiment
was placed next the Town, nigh Cromwell's Fort, where they were to stop the
Enemies Career, if they attempted a Sally.

The Town Summoned.
As soon as our Army was posted, the King ordered a Trumpet to be sent with a
Summons to the Town; and, as we understood since, a great part of the Garrison
were for Capitulating, but Monsieur Boiseleau, the Governor, the Duke of
Berwick, and Colonel Sarsfield opposed it with a great deal of Heat, telling
them, that there were great Divisions and Insurrections in England; That the
Dauphin was landed there with Fifty Thousand Men, and that the Prince of Orange
would be obliged soon to draw home his Army into England. The Trumpeter was
sent back from Monsieur Boiseleau, with a Letter directed to Sir Robert
Southwell, Secretary of State (not sending directly to the King, because he
would avoid (I suppose) giving him the Title of Majesty), The Answer.
That he was surprised at the Summons, and that he thought the best way to gain
the Prince of Orange's Good Opinion, was by a vigorous defense of that Town
which his Master had entrusted him withal. That Evening a Party of Dragoons was
sent to view the Pass at Annaghbegg, Three Miles above Limerick, where Six of
the Enemies Regiments of Foot, Three of Horse, and Two of Dragoons were posted,
on the other side of the River, where there stood a large New House, with a
great many Brick Walls about it, and several convenient Hedges were adjoining
to the River: They fired from thence upon our Men, but did little or no
Execution, and that Night they marched off to the Town. The Cannon played on
both sides till it grew dark, A Party pass the River.
and next Morning early, being Sunday, the 10 th, the King sent Eight Squadrons
of Horse and Dragoons, Commanded by Lieutenant General Ginkle, and Three
Regiments of Foot, under Major General Kirk, who passed the River without any
opposition, and immediately His Majesty went thither Himself: The Stream was
very rapid and dangerous, though the River has not been known to be so low
these many Years. The King at his Return, left Major General Kirk, with his
own, Brigadeer Stuart's, and my Lord Meath's Regiments, who encampt one beyond
the Ford, and two on this side, having a Party of Horse (relieved every Twenty
Four Hours) to support them.

A Cornet this Morning deserted the Enemy, who told the King, That a great many
in Town were for surrendering, but prevented by Sarsfield and Boiseleau; That
Count Lauzun, with the French, were encampt nigh Galloway, the Irish refusing
to receive them into Town (because themselves had done so with the Irish some
time before at Limerick): That my Lord Tyrconnel, with most of the Irish Horse,
and some Foot, were encamped on the other side, about Six or Eight Miles from
Limerick: That there were Fourteen Regiments of Foot, with Three of Horse, and
Two of Dragoons then in Town. The King sent that Afternoon a small Party of
Horse to discover my Lord Tyrconnel, but (...) was then removed about Ten Miles
further off toward Galloway.

The Town described.
But it will be convenient that I here give as good a Description of the City,
and its Situation, as I can of a Place that I had not the liberty to go into,
though I have been sometimes very near it. It Is therefore for Circumference one
of the largest in that Kingdom, except Dublin, and the Houses are generally
built very strong within the Walls, being made most of them Castle-ways, with
Battlements: It stands upon the River Shanon, and though it be nigh Sixty Miles
from the Sea, yet Ships of Burden can come up to the Bridge; for the River
below the Town looks like an Arm of the Sea. One part stands on Munster side,
and is called the Irish Town, being compassed about with a very strong Stone
Wall, and without this a Counterscarp with Pallisado's, and also several Forts
and Bastions; and on the inside the Wall they had cast up a vast Ditch, with
an huge Bank of Earth and Stones, having only a place left to go in and out.
The River about a quarter of a Mile above the Town, splits it self in two, and
between the Branches lies a most pleasant spot of Ground, called the King's
Island, being about Two Miles Circumference, on the lower end of which stands
the greater part of Limerick, where there is a Castle, and a Cathedral Church.
This also is invested with a Stone-Wall, and is called the English Town,
between which and the Irish Town there is a very large Stone Bridge; and beyond
the English Town, upon the further Branch of the River, there is another Bridge
that leads into the County of Clare, near which stands a considerable Fort of
Stone, and the Irish cast up several more of Earth, and made great
Fortifications in the King's Island, at which they were busy all the while we
continued there: Here the Irish kept continually a strong Guard, having also
during our stay Two or Three Regiments entrenched, opposite to the Danes on
Munster side, toward the West of the Irish Town.

This Place was first won from the Irish by Reimond the Gross, an Englishman,
and Son of William Fitz Gerald, but afterward burnt by Duvenald, an Irish
Petty King of Thoumond; and then in process of time Philip Bruce was infeoffed
of it, and it became an English like Town, being fortified with a Castle, and
walled, by King John. In the late times Cromwell was called over into England
before his Army reached that Place, and Ireton managed the Seige, who died here
afterward. He laid a great many Months before it, and did not take it at last.
Colonel Fennel, and others of the Irish, in some respect, betrayed the Town to
him; for against the Governor's Consent they drew up Articles, and sending
them to Ireton's Camp, on the 27 th of October 1651. they received Two Hundred
Men at St. John's Gate, and more into another Fort, called Price's Mill; next
day getting possession of the Town, Ireton hanged several of those that were
still for defending of it.

But to come again to our business: The Irish erect Forts.
The Irish began also to make Two small Forts between us and the Irish Town,
one nigh the South Gate, about the middle of the Suburbs, where stood Two
Chimneys, and it had that Name; the other toward the East, nigh that part of
the Wall where we afterward made a Breach: They had a Citadel toward the West,
whereon they had several Guns, which plagued us till we killed that Gunner, and
then we were more at ease from that Quarter. There was a Spur at the South
Gate, whereon the greatest of their Guns were planted, and at another small
Gate, with a Sally-port (called St. John's Gate) toward the East, they had
also a Battery of Three Guns, which from its Color we called the Black
Battery: This was just under the place where we made our Breach. Our Camp was
ordered thus: The King's Camp was to the Right, in the Second Line; next him
the Horse Guards, and Blue Dutch; then some English and Dutch Regiments, then
the French and Danes, and behind all were the Horse, though after some time we
rather encamped conveniently than regularly.

Whether it was that His Majesty was made believe the Town would surrender upon
Summons, or what else was in it I know not; but when we sat down before
Limerick, we had only a Field-Train, though we had been a Month in our March
from Dublin thither; and whether it be usual to go before a Town without
sufficient Materials to force it, I am no Competent Judge: However, there were
Six Twenty Four Pounders, Two Eighteen Pounders, a great quantity of
Ammunition, much Provisions, our Tin Boats, and abundance of other things all
at this time upon the Road from Dublin, under the Care of Two Troops of Colonel
Viller's Horse.

Notice of our Guns coming up, by a Deserter.
The Day after we got to Limerick, a Frenchman, (as was reported) a Gunner of
ours, run away from us into Town, and gave the Enemy an account where our Train
lay, as also of those Guns, and other things that were coming up, the manner of
our encamping, and where the King's Tents stood, with all the Particulars that
were material for them to know. They had always a plaguey spite at our Guns,
and therefore on Monday Morning early they played theirs most furiously toward
the place where our Train lay. I happened to be not far from the place that time,
and in less than a quarter of an hour I reckoned Nineteen or Twenty great Shot
that fell in a manner all in a Line. This place grew presently so hot, that we
were obliged to remove our Train beyond an Hill further off. They fired also
all this day, and the next, at the places where the King's Tents stood, killing
some Men, as also Two of the Prince of Denmark's fine Horses: His Majesty was
advised to remove to some more convenient and secure Ground, which he did.

Monday the 11 th. in the Morning, we planted six Twelve Pounders at Cromwell's
Fort, which dismounted one of the Enemies best Guns upon the Spur, and did
further damage to the Houses in the Town. The same Morning came one Manus O
Brian, a substantial Country Gentleman to the Camp, and gave notice that
Sarsfield in the Night had passed the River with a Body of Horse, and designed
something extraordinary: Sarsfield passes the River.
For when Sarsfield heard what the Frenchman had told, he was pretty sure, that
if those Guns, Boats, and other Materials came up to us, the Town would not be
able to hold out; and therefore he resolves to run a hazard, and destroy them
in their March if it were possible; if he succeeded, then he broke our
Measures, but if not, he then designed for France, if he did but survive the
Attempt: In order to which, he takes all the best Horse and Dragoons that were
in Town, and that very Night marches over the Shannon, at a Place called
Killalow, a Bishops See on the Shannon, Twelve Miles above our Camp. The
Messenger that brought the News was not much taken notice of at first, most
People looking upon it as a Dream; A great Officer however called him aside,
and after some indifferent Questions, asked him about a Prey of Cattle in such a
Place; which the Gentleman complained of afterward, saying, he was sorry to
see General Officers mind Cattle more than the King's Honor. But after he met
with some Acquaintance, he was brought to the King, who to prevent the worst,
gave Orders that a Party of Five hundred Horse should be made ready, and march
to meet the Guns; but whether His Majesty's Orders were not delivered to the
Officer in Chief that was to Command the Party, or where the fault lay, I am no
competent Judge, but it was certainly One or Two of the Clock in the Morning
before the Party marched, which they did then very softly, till about an hour
after they saw a great Light in the Air, and heard a strange rumbling Noise,
which some conjectured to be the Train blown up, as it really was. For on
Sunday night our Guns lay at Cashell, and on Monday they marched beyond Cullen,
to a little old Ruinous Castle, called Ballenedy, not Seven Miles from our
Camp, and directly in the Rear of it, where they Encamped on a small Piece of
plain green Ground, there being several Earthen Fences on one side, and the old
Castle on the other: If they had feared the least danger, it had been easy to
draw the Guns and every thing else within the Ruins of that old Castle, and
then it had been difficult for an Army, much more a Party, to have touched
them; Nay, it was easy to place them and the Carriages in such a Figure upon
the very Spot where they stood, that it had been certain Death to have come
nigh them; but thinking themselves at home, so nigh the Camp, and not fearing
an Enemy in such a Place, especially since they had no notice sent them of it;
they turned most of their Horses out to Grass, as being wearied with marching
before, and the Guard they left was but a very slender one, the rest most of
them going to sleep; but some of them awoke in the next World; The Guns
surprised.
for Sarsfield all that day lurked amongst the Mountains, and having notice
where, and how our Men lay, he had those that guided him through By-ways, to
the very Spot, where he fell in amongst them before they were aware, and cut
several of them to Pieces, with a great many of the Waggoners, and some Country
People that were coming to the Camp with Provisions. The Officer Commanding in
Chief, when he saw how it was, Commanded to sound to Horse, but those that
endeavored to fetch them up, were killed as they went out, or else saw it was
too late to return: The Officers and others made what resistance they could,
but were at last obliged every Man to shift for himself, which many of them
did, though they lost all their Horses, and some of them Goods of a
considerable value: there was one Lieutenant Bell, and some few more of the
Troopers killed, with Waggoners and Country People, to the Number in all of
about Sixty: Then the Irish got up what Horses they could meet withal,
belonging either to the Troops or Train; some broke the Boats, and others drew
all the Carriages and Wagons, with the Bread, Ammunition, and as many of the
Guns as they could get in so short a time into one heap; the Guns they filled
with Powder, and put their Mouths in the Ground that they might certainly
split; what they could pick up in a hurry they took away, and then laying a
Train to the rest, which being fired at their going off, blew all up with an
Astonishing noise; the Guns that were filled with Powder flying up from the
Carriages into the Air, and yet two of them received on damage, though two more
were split and made unserviceable: every thing likewise that would burn, was
reduced to Ashes, before any could prevent it. The Irish took no Prisoners,
only a Lieutenant of Colonel Earl's being sick in a House hard by, was stripped
and brought to Sarsfield, who used him very civilly, telling him, if he had not
succeeded in that Enterprise, he had then gone to France. Our Party of Horse
that was sent from the Camp, came after the business was over, in sight of the
Enemies Rear; but wheeling toward the Left, to endeavor to intercept their
Passage over the Shanon, they unhappily went another way; since if our Party
had been Fortunate, they had a fair Opportunity first to save the Guns, and
then to Revenge their loss, and if either had been done, the Town had
surrendered without much more Battering. Sir Albert Cunningham's Dragoons were
abroad also, who met with some of the Irish, killed a Major, one Captain James
Fitz-Gerrald, and about Fifteen more, but the Main Body marched off secure.
Colonel Villers went also with another Party of Horse toward Bryans Bridge,
but the Enemy did not return that way.

This News was very unwelcome to every body in the Camp, the very private Men
showing a greater concern at the loss, then one could expect from such kind of
People; the loss of the Guns was not so great, as that of the Horses and
Ammunition; but to make the best of a bad Market, the Duke of Wyrtemberg, and
several Great Officers, sent their own Horses, and every Foot Regiment
furnished so many Garrons, to bring up the Guns and broken Carriages; as also
to bring up two great Guns and a Mortar that were coming from Waterford. The
Seige g^ts on.
We went on with the Siege however, and planted several more Guns, and Fireings
continued briskly on both sides, all the Army both Horse and Foot being ordered
to make such a number of Fascheenes a day, and bring them to the Heads of their
respective Regiments; to which end we cut down most of the Hedges and Orchards
about.

Castle Connel taken.
On Tuesday the 12. Brigadeer Stuart, with a Detachment of his own and my Lord
Meath's Men, went toward Castle Connel with Four Fieldpieces: the Besieged
submitted, and were brought Prisoners to the Camp, being 126 in number,
commanded by one Captain Baluwell. This is a strong place upon the River
Shannon, Four Miles above Limerick, built by Richard the Red Earl of Ulster.
(Queen Elizabeth gave the Title of Baron Castle Connel to William Bourk, for
killing James Fitz Morice, who was a Rebel in those Days.) Here we kept a
Garrison till the Siege was raised, and then it was blown up. During these
Transactions several Parties of Horse were sent abroad; and Wednesday the 13.
Lieutenant Colonel Caulfield was sent to Cullen, with a detacht Party of 300
Foot mounted upon Garrons, there to remain as a Guard to those who passed to
and from the Camp; as also to scour the Country, the Rapperees (upon the
miscarriage of the Guns, and being partly plundered contrary to the Kings
Orders) beginning to disturb us. Next day there came an Express from Youghal,
giving an Account, That they had killed some of the Irish thereabouts that
robbed and plundered the Country. (This Place was surrendered to us about 10
days before, and had now a Garrison of 80 Foot and Dragoons.)

Upon some complaints from the North of Ireland, on the 15 th, the King sends
out his Proclamation, Commanding all to pay Tithes as formerly. These
troublesome Times have fallen heavy upon the Clergy of Ireland (who lived very
plentifully before) and yet it will be a great while ere they be so poor as
their Predecessors: For they say in times past they had no other Rents or
Revenues but three Milch Kine a-piece, which the Parishioners exchanged for
others new, when they went dry; as Adam Brenensis, a German tells the Story
from themselves, as they returned that way on a time from Italy. Tho I suppose
the People were then as ignorant as the Clergy poor; but now the Case is
altered, and they want neither Encouragement nor Respect.

Sunday the 17. Monsieur Cambon, our Quartermaster General, was very diligent,
in order to have the Trenches opened that night; and all things being prepared,
Seven Battalions, consisting of English, Danes, Dutch, and French Foot,
commanded by the Prince of Wyrtenberg Lieutenant General, Major General Kirk,
Major General Tettau, and Sir Henry Bellasis Brigadeer. The King I suppose, by
this mixture, thinking to raise an Emulation in his Soldiers; or further, that
they might instruct one another, several Regiments having never been in
Trenches before: they were commonly Seven Battalions on at a time, and relieved
at Twelve a Clock at night: but this method was altered, for a reason to be
given afterward. This night we advanced our Trenches, and attackt the Irish at
the two old Chimneys, the Granadeers threw in their Granades, and then
endeavored to get over: this occasioned a general firing from our Trenches,
and also from the Town; the King himself was at Cromwells Fort to see what
happened (as he was constantly every night.) The Irish in the Fort made no
great resistance; but after once firing they cried out Murder, and Quarter, but
made the best of their way toward the Town; those that stayed in the Fort were
knocked on the head: The firing from the Walls and Trenches continued for at
least two Hours longer, by which time we had secured this Fort from the Enemies
retaking it.

A Battery planted.
Next day, being Monday the 18. we planted a Battery below the Fort, to the
right of our Trenches, and dismounted some of the Enemies Cannon. All that day
the Guns played briskly on both sides; and at night the Trenches were relieved
by Lieutenant General Douglas; my Lord Sidney, and Count Nassau, as Major
Generals, and Brigadeer Stuart. We made our Approaches toward the Fort without
the Wall; and Lieut. Genesis Douglas's, and Brigadeer Stuart's Regiments were
posted toward the right: It was dark when they went on, and they did not
perceive the Enemy to be so near them as they really were; for there was at
that time scarce Twenty yards distance between them: they were ordered to lie
down upon their Arms; which they did, and a great part both of the Officers and
Soldiers fell asleep: The Enemy perceived this, and attacked them, which put
them presently into a Confusion, and several of them gave ground, but presently
recovered themselves and fired, but they did not know at what: The Danes to the
left took our own Men for the Enemy sallying, and so fired upon them; they
believed the Danes to be the Irish; and so returned the Complement. The Irish
fired upon both, and they at one another. This Confusion lasted nigh two hours;
in which time several were killed; nor did the King, or any body else know what
to make of it. At last our Men found their mistake, and the Irish were beat in,
crying quarter and murder, as they used to do. After this his Majesty ordered
the Trenches to be relieved in the day; and our Men marched always in and out,
in the very Face of their Cannon.

The story of the Irish Deliverer.
About this time we had an Account of one Balderock Rho O Donnel, of the
ancient Family of Tyrconnel: this Man was born and educated in Spain. But there
being a Prophecy amongst the Irish, that he should free his Country from the
English, doing great matters in his own Person, and more by his Conduct; he was
sent for on purpose, and came to Limerick. It Is incredible how fast the vulgar
Irish flocked to him at his first coming; so that he had got in a small time
Seven or Eight thousand Rapparees, and such like People together, and begun to
make a Figure; but after a while the Business cooled, and they were weary of
one another: and he is only now a Colonel in Limerick. They had another
Prophecy also, That we should come to the Field above Cromwell's Fort, where
stands an old Church, where on a Stone hard by we should pitch our utmost
Colors, and afterward be undone; with a thousand such like Fopperies, not
worth the naming.

Tuesday the 19th. our Battery played upon the Walls, and also the Guns from
Cromwell's Fort upon the Houses in Town: And the Enemy were not idle; for their
Shot flew very thick, His Majesty had a narrow escape.
insomuch that the King riding softly up toward Cromwell's Fort, directly as
His Horse was entering a Gap, a Gentleman staid His Majesty to speak to him, and
in the very moment there struck a Twenty four pounder in the very place, which
would have struck His Majesty, and Horse too, all to pieces, if His usual good
Angel had not defended Him; it struck the Dust all about Him however, though He
took little notice of it, but alighting, came and laid Him down on the Fort,
amongst all the Dust. That Night we planted Four Twenty four pounders at the
Angle of our Trenches, near the South-east corner of the Wall, where we made
the Breach afterward.

A Fort taken from the Irish.
Wednesday the 20th. Colonel Cuts's Granadeers, commanded by Captain Foxon, and
my Lord Meath's, by Captain Needham, were placed conveniently in the Trenches
for an Attack; and at Two a Clock in the Afternoon (the Signal being given by
firing Three Pieces of Cannon) they leapt over the Trenches, and ran straight
to the Fort which the Enemy had to the Right of us, at St. John's Gate. The
Enemy fired from the Fort, and from the Walls; our Men did the like from the
Trenches; and the Great Guns went to work on both Sides. The Granadeers threw
in their Granades, and Captain Foxon made an Attempt to climb up, but was
thrown down again; but entered at the second Trial, and his Men with him: So did
my Lord Meath's Men, with Captain Needham; and in a small time we were Masters
of the Fort. There were about Fifty killed in it, and Twelve with the Captain
taken Prisoners, and some made their Escapes to the Town. The Firing continued
however on both Sides for above an Hour, and all possible diligence was used to
bring down Faggots, wherewith to make up that side of the Fort that was open to
the Town. Before the Attack, a Party of our Horse were drawn up in a Lane, to
the Right of the Trenches, to prevent the Enemy from sallying, upon which the
Enemies Cannon played; so that after the Fort was ours, they drew back beyond an
Hill for their Security. They sally.
About an Hour after, some Friend in Town gave notice that the Enemy were going
to sally, which they did immediately, both Horse and Foot, from St. John's
Gate: Their Horse came up very nigh the Fort, though our Men fired from thence,
and the Trenches, as fast as they could: Then the small and great Shot on both
sides began afresh again. Major Wood of Colonel Byerley's Regiment commanded an
Advance Party of Twenty four French and Twenty seven English Horse: At the
Noise he advanced with this Party, and leaping a Ditch, he engaged immediately
a Squadron of the Irish Horse, and broke them. Then came in Lieutenant Colonel
Windham, and Captain Lucy, as also some Dutch and Danish Horse: These charged
the Irish that sallied, and beat them back, following them almost to the very
Gate. But we being exposed to all the Enemies Shot from the Walls, lost several
in coming off; amongst the rest, Captain Lucy, a Gentleman much lamented by all
that knew him. The King saw all this Action, (as indeed he did most things that
happened, going often into the Trenches, and never without danger) expressing
Himself to be in pain for Major Wood, when he saw him and his Party in such
danger, losing the greatest part of them. Captain Needham, after all was over,
and he leading his Men off, was shot by a Chance-Bullet, and died immediately.
We lost at the taking of the Fort, and at the Sally afterward, 58 Foot killed,
and 140 wounded; Horsemen, 21 killed, 52 wounded; 64 Horses killed, 57 wounded;
besides the Danes. These Men sold their Lives dear, and you may easily believe
the Enemy gained nothing by this Afternoons Work; for the next Morning two
Drummers made their Escape out of Town, who told us, the Enemy had lost above
300 Men; and in two Hours after came a Cornet and four Trumpeters from the
Enemies Camp. That Afternoon Captain Bourn was killed, as he was marching down
to relieve the Trenches; and Major Morgison was wounded with a Cannon-bullet as
he lay in Bed, of which he died in two days.

A new Battery.
The 22d. we raised a Battery of Eight Guns, most Twenty four pounders, nigh
the Fort that we took the day before, from whence we beat down Two Towers that
stood upon the Wall, out of which the Enemy fired upon our Trenches. That night
we threw good store of Bombs and Carcasses into Town, which disturbed the Enemy
very much, most of them having never seen such things before.

The 23d. there was a Drum sent, and a Truce toward the Evening, for the
Burying the Dead killed on both sides at the taking the Fort. When our People
came to look amongst the Dead, they found a French Officer wounded, and his
Horse lying upon him, and yet the Gentleman was alive, and, as I heard, he
recovered, though he lay from Wednesday till Saturday in the Evening. I cannot
omit a pleasant Adventure that fell out at the taking the Fort, between a
Chaplain in the Army and a Trooper. This Chaplain happened to go down after the
Fort was taken, and seeing a Trooper mortally wounded, in all appearance, he
fancied himself obliged to give him his best Advice: The other was very
thankful for it; and whilst they were about the matter, comes the Sally. Our
Horse came thundering down, at which the Clergyman making haste to get out of
their way, he stumbled and fell down. The wounded Trooper seeing him fall,
judged he had been killed, and stepped to him immediately to strip him, and in a
trice had got his Coat off on one side: The other called to him to hold, and
asked him what he meant. Sir, (says the other) I beg your pardon; for I
believed you were killed, and therefore I thought my self obliged to take care
of your Clothes, as well as you did of my Soul.

This Afternoon were Eighty four Prisoners brought to the Camp, from a Castle
some twelve or fourteen Miles off, called Nignagh Round: These kept out the
Castle for Twenty four hours against Major General Ginkell and his Party of
about 1500 Horse and Dragoons; they killed us Fourteen Men; Nignagh Castle
taken.
but seeing two Cannon come, and the Soldiers very busy in bringing Faggots
for a Battery, they submitted to Mercy. Their Commander was one Captain O
Bryan. This Afternoon also one of Colonel Levison's Dragoons was hanged, for
deserting. In the Evening our Bombs and red-hot Balls began to fly, which set
part of the Town on fire, which burnt all that night, destroying a great
quantity of Hay, with several Houses. I remember we were all as well pleased to
see the Town flaming as could be, which made me reflect upon our Profession of
Soldiery, not to be overcharged with Goodnature.

Another Battery.
The 24th. we fired pretty smartly, but our Guns only struck the top of the
Wall off, and therefore we raised a new Battery within sixty Yards of the Wall,
and that Night drew the Angle of our Trenches within twenty Yards of the
Counterscarp; Thirty Volunteers out of a Regiment working very diligently, and
had Two shillings apiece for their pains; several Wooll-sacks being carried
down to secure our Men from Shot as they were at work. Monday morning we began
to fire from our new Battery, and the Breach in the Wall began to be
considerable; which the Enemy seeing, brought abundance of Woolsacks, to damp
the force of our Cannon. This was like Josephus's defending his Towns in
Gallilee, who filled large Sacks full of Chaff, and hung them over the Walls,
to defend them from the Battering Rams of the Romans; for Cannons were not then
invented.

The Breach appears.
The King sent his Gunners some Drink down to the Batteries, which made them
ply their Work very heartily; and for all the Wool-sacks, the Wall began to fly
again; and early that Morning were two Cannon planted about 300 Yards to the
right of our Trenches, in order to beat down the Bridge: But we were too late a
beginning this Work; the Irish seeing what we intended, were very much afraid
of the Bridge, and and therefore they planted two Guns without the Town, in the
King's Island, which played upon our Battery, and also flankt their own
Counterscarp. You must know, that two or three days before this, it had rained
so violently for nigh twenty four hours together, that the Soldiers were almost
up to the Knees in the Trenches. This looked very ill, and therefore we were
obliged to hasten our Work, lest the Rains should force us to desist. That
Night therefore a Council of War was held, whether we should make an Attack
upon the Counterscarp next day; and it was deferred till Wednesday, because as
yet the Breach was not wide enough: Monsieur Cambon was for deferring it for
two or three days longer, which had been a great happiness if it had; and yet
this could not well be, for our Ammunition began to sink.

Tuesday the 26th. we plied the Breach hand all day with nigh Twenty Cannon
from several Batteries, and in the Night saluted the Town after the usual
manner, with Fireballs, Bombs, and Carcasses. And on

The Town stormed.
Wednesday the 27th. a Breach being made nigh St. John's Gate, over the Black
Battery, that was about Twelve Yards in length, and pretty flat, as it appeared
to us, the King gave Orders that the Counterscarp should be attacked that
Afternoon; to which purpose a great many Wool-sacks were carried down, and good
store of Ammunition, with other things suitable for such a Work. All the
Granadeers in the Army were ordered to march down into the Trenches, which they
did. Those being above Five hundred, were commanded each Company by their
respective Captains, and were to make the first Attack, being supported by one
Battalion of the Blue Dutch on the Right, then Lieutenant General Douglas's
Regiment, Brigadeer Stuart's, my Lord Meath's, and my Lord Lisburn's, as also a
Brandenburgh Regiment. These were all posted toward the Breach; upon the left
of whom were Colonel Cutts and the Danes. Lieutenant General Douglas commanded,
and their Orders were to possess themselves of the Counterscarp, and maintain
it. We had also a Body of Horse drawn up, to succor the Foot upon occasion.
About half an hour after Three, the Signal being given by firing three Pieces
of Cannon, the Granadeers being in the furthest Angle of our Trenches, leapt
over, and run toward the Counterscarp, firing their Pieces, and throwing their
Granades. This gave the Alarm to the Irish, who had their Guns all ready, and
discharged great and small Shot upon us as fast as 'twas possible: Our Men were
not behind them in either; so that in less than two Minutes the Noise was so
terrible, that one would have thought the very Skies ready to rent in sunder.
This was seconded with Dust, Smoke, and all the Terrors that the Art of Man
could invent, to ruin and undo one another; and to make it the more uneasy,
the Day it self was excessive hot to the Bystanders, and much more sure in all
respects to those upon action. Captain Carlisle, of my Lord Drogheda's Regiment,
run on with his Granadeers to the Counterscarp, and though he received two Wounds
between that and the Trenches, yet he went forwards, and commanded his Men to
throw in their Granades; but in the leaping into the dry Ditch below the
Counterscarp, an Irishman below shot him dead. Lieutenant Barton however
encouraged the Men, and they got upon the Counterscarp, and all the rest of the
Granadeers were as ready as they. By this time the Irish were throwing down
their Arms, and running as fast as they could into Town; which our Men
perceiving, entered the Breach pellmell with them, and above half the Earl of
Drogheda's Granadeers, and some others, were actually in Town. The Regiments
that were to second the Granadeers went to the Counterscarp, and having no
Orders to go any further, there stopped. The Irish were all running from the
Walls, and quite over the Bridge, into the English Town, but seeing but a few
of our Men enter, they were with much ado persuaded to rally; and those that
were in, seeing themselves not followed, and their Ammunition being spent, they
designed to retreat; but some were shot, some taken, and the rest came out
again, but very few without being wounded. The Irish then ventured upon the
Breach again, and from the Walls and every place so pestered us upon the
Counterscarp, that after nigh three hours resisting Bullets, Stones, (broken
Bottles, from the very Women, who boldly stood in the Breach, and were nearer
our Men than their own) and whatever ways could be thought on to destroy us,
our Ammunition being spent, it was judged safest to return to our Trenches.
When the Work was at the hottest, the Brandenburgh Regiment (who behaved
themselves very well) were got upon the Black Battery, where the Enemies Powder
happened to take fire, and blew up a great many of them, the Men, Faggots,
Stones, and what not, flying into the Air with a most terrible noise. Colonel
Cutts was commanded by the Duke of Wyrtemberg to march toward the Spur at the
South Gate, and beat in the Irish that appeared there; which he did, though he
lost several of his Men, and was himself wounded: For he went within half
Musket Shot of the Gate, and all his Men open to the Enemies Shot, who lay
secure within the Spur and the Walls. The Danes were not idle all this while,
but fired upon the Enemy with all imaginable fury, and had several killed; but
the mischief was, we had but one Breach, and all toward the Left it was
impossible to get into the Town when the Gates were shut, if there had been no
Enemy to oppose us, without a great many Scaling-ladders, which we had not.
From half an hour after Three, till after Seven, there was one continued Fire
of both great and small Shot, without any intermission; insomuch that the Smoke
that went from the Town reached in one continued Cloud to the top of a Mountain
at least six Miles off.

When our Men drew off, some were brought up dead, and some without a Leg;
others wanted Arms, and some were blind with Powder; especially a great many of
the poor Brandenburgers looked like Furies, with the Misfortune of Gunpowder.
One Mr. Upton getting in amongst the Irish in Town, and seeing no way to
escape, went in the Crowd undiscovered, till he came at the Governor, and then
surrendered himself. There was a Captain, one Bedloe, who deserted the Enemy the
day before, and now went upon the Breach, and fought bravely on our side; for
which His Majesty gave him a Company.

The King stood nigh Cromwell's Fort all the time, and the Business being over,
He went to His Camp very much concerned, as indeed was the whole Army; for you
might have seen a mixture of Anger and Sorrow in every bodies Countenance. The
Irish had two small Field pieces planted in the King's Island, which flankt
their own Counterscarp, and in our Attack did us no small damage, as did also
two Guns more that they had planted within the Town, opposite to the Breach,
and charged with Cartridge-shot.

The Loss at this Attack.
We lost at least Five hundred upon the Spot, and had a thousand more wounded,
as I understood by the Surgeons of our Hospitals, who are the properest Judges.
The Irish lost a great many by our Cannon, and other ways; but it cannot be
supposed that their Loss should be equal to ours, since it is a much easier
thing to defend Walls, than it is by plain Strength to force People from them;
and one Man within, has the advantage of four without. Nor possibly may it be
amiss to insert the List of the Officers killed and wounded at the Attack, in
the Five English Regiments that were upon Duty, as it was taken exactly next
day.

In Lieutenant General Douglas's Regiment.
Wounded.
Sir Charles Fielding. Capt. Rose, mortally wounded. Capt. Guy. Capt. Trevor.
Capt. Rose junior. Capt. Wainsbrough. Lieut. Wild, mortally wounded. Lieut.
Wybrants. Lieut. Lacock. Lieut. Rapine. Lieut. Lloyd. Ensign Goodwin. Ensign
Burk.
Killed.
Major Hambleton. Lieut. Ennis. Lieut. Morison. Ensign Tapp. Ensign Pinsent.
In Colonel Cutts's Regiment.
Wounded.
Colonel Cutts. Capt. Newton. Capt. Foxon. Capt. Massham. Lieut. Levis. Lieut.
Barrock. Lieut. Carry. Lieut. Trenchard. The Adjutant. Mr. Hows, a Voluntier.
Killed.
Capt. Hudson. Ensign Mead.
In the Earl of Meath's Regiment.
Wounded.
The Earl of Mead. L. C. Newcomb, mort. wounded. Lieut. Blakeney. Lieut.
Hubblethorn.
Killed.
Lieut. Latham. Ensign Smith.
In Brigadier Stuart's Regiment.
Wounded.
Brigadier Stuart. Major Cornwall. Capt. Pallferey. Capt. Galbreth. Capt.
Stuart. Capt. Casseen. Lieut. Stuart. Lieut. Cornwall. Lieut. Carry. Ensign
Stuart.
Killed.
Capt. Lindon. Capt. Farlow. Lieut. Russell.
In my Lord Lisburn's Regiment.
Wounded.
Major Allen. Capt. Adair. Capt. Holdrich. Capt. Hubbart. Lieut. Hillton.
Lieut. Goodwin. Ensign Hook.
Killed.
Capt. Wallace. Capt. West. Ensign Ogle.
These make in all Fifty nine, whereof Fifteen were killed upon the Spot, and
several dyed afterward of their Wounds; the Granadeers are not here included,
and they had the hottest Service: Nor are there any of the Foreigners, who
lost full as many as the English; so that I Am afraid this did more then
countervail the loss that the Irish had during the whole Seige, at least in the
numher of Men.

Next day the King sent a Drummer, in order to a Truce, that the Dead might be
buried, but the Irish had no mind to it; and now the Soldiers were in hopes
that the King would make a second Attack, and seemed resolved to have the Town
or dye every Man. But this was too great a hazard to run at one Place, and they
did not know how scarce our Ammunition was, it being very much wasted the day
before; this day however we continued Battering the Wall, and it begun to Rain;
and next day it was very Cloudy all about, and Rained very fast; so that every
Body began to dread the Consequences of it. The King therefore calls a Council
of War, wherein it was Resolved to quit the Town and Raise the Siege, which as
the Case stood then with us, was no doubt the most prudent thing that could be
done. The Siege Raised.
We drew off therefore our heavy Cannon from the Batteries by degrees: And on
Saturday August the 30. we marched greatest part of them as far as Cariganliss,
the Guard being the Earl of Drogheda's and Brigedeer Stuart's Regiments. The
Rain which had already fallen had softened the ways, and we found some
difficulty in getting off our Guns, especially since for the most part we were
obliged to draw them with Oxen, a part of our Train Horses being disposed of to
the Enemies use before; and this was one main Reason for Raising the Siege; for
if we had not (granting the Weather to continue bad) we must either have taken
the Town, or of necessity have lost our Cannon, because that part of the
Country lies very low, and the Ways are deep. Therefore on Sunday the last of
August, all the Army drew off, (having a good Body of Horse in the Rear): As
soon as the Irish perceived we had quitted our Trenches, they took Possession
of them with great Joy, and were in a small time after over all the Ground
whereon we had Encamped; two days before we Raised the Siege, a great many
Wagons and Carriages were sent toward Cashell and Clonmel, with sick and
wounded Men, which was the Reason that we were forced to leave a great many
Bombs, Hand Granades, and other things behind which we buried in the Artillery
Ground, but with a Train to blow them up; so that when it took Fire the Irish
were mightily afraid, and thought we were beginning a new Seige from under
Ground: But yet they dug up most of our dead Officers and Soldiers, only to get
their Shirts and Shrowds.

The Army removes.
The Army Encamped that day at Cariganliss, and then the Artillery marched
forwards to Cullen, whither the Army followed the day after: but as soon as the
Protestants, that dwelt in that Country, understood that the Army was drawing
off, they prepared to march along with Bag and Baggage, which most of them did,
and looked something like the Children of Israel, with their Cattle, and all
their Stuff, footing it from Egypt; though most of those poor People had no
Promised Land to retire to, but were driven into a Wilderness of Confusion; for
I saw a great many both Men and Women of very good Fashion, who had lived
plentifully before, yet now knew not which way to steer their Course, but went
along with the Crowd, whither Providence should direct them.

In a day or two after we were removed from before Limerick, Monsieur Boisleau
the Governor made a Speech, and told the Irish, Monsieur Boiseleau's Speech to
the Irish.
That with much ado he had persuaded them to defend the Town, which with Gods
help they had done; but assured them it was not Fear, but Prudence and Policy
that had made the Enemy quit the Siege, as might appear by their slow Marches;
and withal he told them his Opinion, that the next time the Enemy came they
would have it: Which said, he took leave, and went to the French Forces then at
Galloway, and designing for France.

His Majesty goes for England.
His Majesty, that day we Raised the Siege, went to Cullen, and so to Clonmel,
from thence to Waterford, in order to take shipping for England, accompanied
with the Prince, the Duke of Ormond, and several of the Nobility. From
Waterford His Majesty sent back the Right Honorable Henry Lord Viscount
Sidney, and Tho. Conyngsby Esquire to the Camp; Lords Justices Appointed.
they, with Sir Charles Porter, having a Commission to be Lords Justices of
Ireland: The King set Sail with a fair Wind for England, where he was received
with an universal rejoicing; and the Two Lords Justices on the Fourth of
September came to the Camp, then at Cullen, where they staid till the Sixth; in
which two days, they, and the General, Count Solmes, ordered all Affairs
relating to the Army. And here we received Money, which was very acceptable,
for it had been very scarce all the Campaign, both with the Officers and
Soldiers, and yet every body were content, and our Wants were no Obstruction to
our Duties; as His Majesty was pleased to take notice afterward in His Speech
to the Parliament From Cullen we marched on the Sixth to Tipperary, blowing up
a strong Castle when we Decamped, and the two Lords Justices took their Journey
toward Dublin, in order to enter upon their Government.

Some that are Men already prejudiced, will pretend to be Judges in this Affair
(though they never saw the Place or the Country) and affirm, that the Irish
made never a false step, but one, during this whole Siege, and that was, in not
Fortifying the Pass, and Cromwell's Fort without; as also in not drawing a
large Trench from the River toward the East, and then running it round that
part of the Town, on which they might have raised several Forts and
Breast-works; from whence they might have retarded our Approaches; but indeed
they had not time for all this, though they had done something of that kind
toward the West, where they keept Men Encampt all the while we lay before the
Town; and they had made also some Forts toward the East, but they could not
put Courage in their Men to defend them, especially when Walls were so near to
fly to.

Objections against the Siege at Limerick.
What Objections they make against us were these, that we ought to have divided
our Army, and sent a part beyond the River; as also to have broke down the two
Bridges, one between the two Towns, and the other on the County of Clare side;
by which means we had prevented the Irish Communication between the two Towns,
and also from without; the greatest hazard that we could run, being to Attack a
Town that had one side open, to bring in what Men and things they pleased. All
these, and a great many more inconveniences were seen into at that Instant;
but the dividing the Army was impracticable, because that when one Part had
been over the River, they must have marched several Miles to the Right, and
then down again, before they could come nigh the other side of the Town, by
reason of a vast Bog that runs from the Town a great way cross the Country, and
then it was no easy thing to bring Provision to those: and besides, if the
Rains had fallen (as it often threatened us) that part of the Army which had
gone over, must have run the hazard either of starving, or fighting their whole
Army, or both; for the Shanon rises all on a sudden, and the least swelling in
the World, would have made it impassible for the Army, since it was with great
difficulty that single Regiments could get over as it was, and it never has
been seen so low in many years. Nor had we Men enough, to make what Works were
convenient, to secure both Parts of the Army from Sallies or Assaults from
without, if we had been divided. We know Caesar at the Siege of Alexia, shut in
Eighty thousand Guals; made a Line of Countervallation of Eleven Miles
Circumference; and one of Circumvallation that was Fourteen, Fortifying both
these with Sharp Stakes, and vast Holes in the Ground, slightly covered over;
by which, he both reduced that great Army within to his Mercy, and kept off a
much greater, that designed to Raise the Siege. But his Army were Men of
Fatigue and Labor, as well as Courage, and his Numbers six times as great as
ours. And though we were Commanded by a Prince of as great Courage and
Resolution as ever Caesar was, and he had Men that were as willing, yet several
of them were beginning to be sick, and were not able to endure the Fatigue;
except both our Time had been longer, and the Season better; and though Kings
are Gods in Wisdom as well as Power, yet there is one in Heaven that limits
them.

Lieutenant General Douglass Decamps.
September the 7 th, Lieutenant General Douglas, with his own Regiment,
Brigadeer Stuart's, Sir Henry Ballasyse's, Lord George Hambilton's, a Derry
Regiment, the Third Troop of Guards, Colonel Russel's Horse, and Guinn's
Dragoons, marched from Tipperary toward the North, to Winter Quarters, and the
rest lay encamped.

September the 8 th. my Lord Lisburne, with a Party of Foot, being about Four
Hundred, and Monsieur La Forest, with a Party of Five hundred Horse, were sent
to Killmallock, a Place between Cork and Limerick, where the Enemy had a
Garrison of about two hundred Men, who when they saw our Party, and Four
Fieldpieces, which they brought along, they yielded upon the first Summons,
and had Conditions to march out with their Arms and Baggage.

From the 8 th to the 13 th nothing of Moment happened, except the General's
sending out several Parties unto all the little Towns and Castles thereabouts,
having Engineers along to see what could be done in order to their Defense, on
which account Dr. Davis, Dean of Ross, was very serviceable, who understood the
Country thereabouts very well.

And Major General Kirk, with the rest of the English.
This took up time till the 13 th, when Major General Kirk, with Seven Foot
Regiments, (viz.) Kirk, Hanmer, Mead, Cutts, Lisburne, Earl, and Drogheda's;
and Sir John Lanier, with his own, Lord of Oxford's, Langston's, Byerley's
Horse, Levison's Dragoons, and part of Cunningham's, marched toward Bir; Which
way we heard that Sarsfield was making, being then with a Body of about Five
Thousand Horse, Foot and Dragoons, at a place called Banohar-Bridge, not Eight
Miles from Bir. The same Day Major General Scravemore, and Major General
Tatteau, with Twelve hundred Horse and Dragoons, as also Two Regiments of
Danish Foot, went toward Mallow, in order to go to Cork, where we had a
Report, that my Lord Marlborough designed to land. There were some Deserters
also that came from the Enemy, that gave us an Account, that my Lord Tyrconnel,
Count Lauzun, Monsieur Boiseleau, with all the French Forces, were gone from
Galloway toward France; for hearing of my Lord Marlborough's Fleet coming
abroad, they made more haste than they designed, and so left several of their
Men sick at Galloway: They brought an excellent Field-Train in the Spring out
of France, which they took along with them when they returned.

The rest of the Army remove to Cashel.
September the 14 th, the rest of the Army removed to Cashel, and from thence
were dispersed to Quarters; part of the Danes and Dutch went toward Waterford,
some to Clonmell, and others staid at Cashel: The French went toward the
County of Carlow: And so the Army was dispersed. Count Solmes commanded the
Army from His Majesty's Departure, till the Camp broke up, and then he went to
Dublin, in order to go for England. On the Day following a Captain of Colonel
Levison's Dragoons, with his Troop, routed a Body of Irish Rabble that were got
together, and a Party of Horse were sent after a Company of Rapparees that had
killed some of our Men as they were a forraging. Lieutenant General Ginkle was
now Commander in Chief of the Army, and went toward his Head Quarters at
Killkenny.

Sarsfield besieges Bar.
At Major General Kirk's coming to Roscreagh, he understood that Sarsfield and
his Party had besieged the Castle at Bir, in which was only a Company of
Colonel Tiffin's Regiment: The Enemy had brought several Pieces of Cannon, one
of which was an Eighteen Pounder, with which they did the Castle some damage;
but however the besieged defended it stoutly, and killed them several Men.

Relieved by Major General Kirk.
Tuesday the 16 th, Major General Kirk, and his Foot, marched from Roscreagh
toward Bir, and joined our Horse (who went that way the Night before,
Commanded by Sir John Laneir), some Three Miles short of the Town. There we
understood that Sarsfield's Party in Bar was very strong, and Major General
Kirk thought it was too great a hazard to engage with those Men he had; so sent
an Express to Lieutenant General Douglas, who was then at Mary-Borough, some
Twenty Miles off: We returned to Roscreag that Night, and next Morning being
reinforced with Douglas's Horse, we marched forwards toward Bir again. The
Enemy then had left the Town, and encamped Three Miles from it toward the
Shanon; but their Out-Guards were within a Mile of Bir, and could overlook our
Camp. The General sent out all the Granadeers, who took the shortest way over
the Bog, toward the Hill where the Enemy stood; and at the same time sent out
a Detachment of Horse, who beat the Enemy off; Thursday the 18 th, our Army
encamped beyond the Town, and one Lieutenant Kelly, of Levison's Dragoons, as
he was discovering the Enemy with a Party, being surrounded, was taken
Prisoner: He is since exchanged, and gives us an Account of the Present State
of Limerick, which is something different from the Public.

Friday the 19 th, the Enemy decamped, and marched to Banohar-Bridge, though
that Night a party of their Horse beat in our Out-Guards.

Saturday the 20 th, our Army begun some Fortifications in Town, it being only
an open place before, and part of them stayed here encamped for Ten or Twelve
Days. Some say also, that here was a good opportunity lost, in not falling upon
the Enemy in their Retreat toward Banohar; for they marched off in great
Confusion: But during our stay here, the Soldiers, either by the bad Example of
others, or making the Scarcity of Bread a Pretense, they ^gun to strip and rob
most of the Irish that had got Protections; which made it natural for them,
after this, to turn Rapparees, and do us all the Mischief they could. And it
did not stop here; for there was scarce any distinction made of Papist or
Protestant in this Affair.

Lords Justices come to Dublin.
Toward the middle of September my Lord Sidney, and Tho. Coningsby, Esquire Lords
Justices, came to Dublin, and on the 15 th they took the usual Oaths of Chief
Governors of that Kingdom, before the Commissioners of the Great Seal, with
all the accustomed Formalities, the People by their Bonefires, and other Signs
of Joy, expressing their satisfaction for the restoring of the Civil
Government. One of the first things they did, was to consider of the Settlement
of the Militia, in such hands as might be most for the King's Service, and the
Countries Interest; and in some small time after, gave out Commissions
accordingly. The same Day they sent out a Proclamation, to encourage all People
to bring in their Goods to the Market at Dublin, forbidding any Officers or
Soldiers to press such Peoples Horses, which has been a trick too frequent in
that Country. And whereas the Rapparees began to be very numerous in several
places, the Lords Justices issued out a Proclamation, requiring all Papists to
remain in their respective Parishes, at least not to go Three Miles farther,
and only then to Market. This bears date the 18 th. And because the hardships
that the Soldiers had endured, occasioned a great many of them, at the breaking
up of the Camp, to steal from their Colors, and make the best of their way for
England, a Proclamation came out the 19 th, Forbidding all Masters of Ships, or
Seamen, to transport any Officers or Soldiers, or other Person whatsoever,
except known Merchants, and Persons of known Quality, not belonging to the
Army, without a Pass from the Lords Justices, or the General of the Army. The
Papists on the Frontiers were very angry at us, and gave constant Intelligence
to the Enemy of all our Affairs; by which means our Men, in small numbers, were
often surprised and murdered, and several other Inconveniences fell out; so
that a Proclamation came out on the 26 th, Forbidding all Papists to dwell
within Ten Miles of the Frontiers: And another bearing the same Date,
Commanding all the Wives, Children, and Dependants upon any of the Irish in
King James's Army, or of those who had been killed, or taken in that Service,
to remove beyond the River Shanon, by such a Day, or else to be proceeded
against as Enemies and Spies. And accordingly most of them went, having a Guard
to conduct them to our Frontiers. And a Third there was dated that day also,
Forbidding any of the Protected Irish to Harbor any that belonged to the late
King's Army, or that robbed and plundered the Country in the Night. And
because Coals were now very scarce at Dublin, and other Firing not coming in so
plentifully as formerly, some Days before this, there was a Proclamation
published, Promising Protection to all Ships and Mariners that should be
employed in transporting Coals from any part of the Kingdom of England, or
Wales, to the City of Dublin. One there came out on the 30 th, Forbidding all
people to buy any Goods but in open Markets, because several Abuses were
committed by the Soldiers, taking peoples Goods, and selling them at an
undervalue. And on the 7 th of October there was another Proclamation,
Forbidding any to pretend to be Soldiers in Colonel Fouks, and Colonel Herbert
's Regiments, that were not; Those two Regiments being then in Town, and
several Abuses committed that way; and some of the Soldiers affronting the
Militia, had like one Night to have made a great deal of Mischief; upon which
the Alarm was beat, and several people wounded, one or two being killed
outright.

All the Army in Quarters.
By this time the Soldiers every where had got to Quarters, and it was proposed
by several Justices of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenants in the Country, That
if the Soldiers would be quiet, and not take things at their own hands, the
Country should find them with Meat and Drink, with whatever else they could
reasonably think on; which was very well liked by some Colonels, but others,
for their own Gains sake, ordered the Countrey-people to bring in most of their
Corn to such and such places, and secured it for their own private use,
allowing the Soldiers in the mean time to do what they would. This made the
Irish and English both plundered at all hands; and if by chance an Englishman
had any thing left, the Rapparees being stripped of what they had themselves,
were ready to come in the Night, and steal that; by which things were not in
such order as good Men could have wished.

But before I go any farther this way, it will be convenient to look back, and
see how Major General Scravemore, and his Party went on, and how the business
of Cork and Kingsale was managed.

On the 17 th of September Major General Scravemore and Major General Tatteau,
sent Colonel Donap to burn the Bridge of Mallow, and to view the Castle; which
he did, and brought an Account of a Body of Rapparees, to the number of about
Three Thousand, that were not far off; upon which they sent out a Party of an
Hundred Horse, and Fifty Dragoons, under Major Fittinkhoft, designing
themselves to follow; but he succeeded so well, that he routed the Irish, and
killed near Three Hundred of them, getting a great many Silver-hilted Swords,
and some fine Horses amongst the Plunder.

My Lord Marlborough lands at Cork, joined by Major General Scravemore.
. On the 21 st of September the Earl of Marlborough came into Cork-Road with
the English Fleet, having on board Brigadeer Trelawney's, Lord Marlborough's
Phusileers, Princess Ann's Regiment, Colonel Hastings, Colonel Hales, Sir David
Collier's, Colonel Fitz-Patrick's, an Hundred of the Duke of Bolton's, and Two
Hundred of the Earl of Monmouth's, under Major Johnston, my Lord Torrington's,
and my Lord Pembroke's Marine Regiments; and sending an Express to Major
General Scravemore, and Major General Tetteau, they marched immediately to join
his Lordship.

The 22 d the Lord Marlborough, with his Fleet, entered the Harbor, receiving
some Shot as they passed, from a Fort of Eight Guns; but sending some Boats
ashore, the Enemy were obliged to quit their Battery, and the Guns taken.

The 23 d, in the Morning the Army landed, and on the 24 th Five or Six Hundred
Seamen, and others, of the Marine Regiment, were employed to draw the Cannon
along, and to mount them before the Town, which they did with great
cheerfulness, and the Duke of Grafton at the Head of them, though Two Troops of
Dragoons, and a Body of Foot appeared without the Town; but our Men firing some
Fieldpieces upon them, they retired. That Day the Duke of Wirtemberg sent Dean
Davis to my Lord Marlborough and Major General Scravemore, to give them an
account, that he was marching to join them with a Detachment of Four Thousand
Foot. There was then a Report, that the Duke of Berwick designed to raise the
Siege, and therefore Major General Scravemore sent the Dean back to hasten the
Duke's March, and the next day ordered a Party of Horse to go and cover the
Duke's Foot. The same Afternoon Major General Tatteau, with a Party of a
Thousand Men, having drawn down some Cannon to the Fair Hill; resolved to
attack one or both of the New Forts, and New Shanon Castle; but no sooner were
his Men posted in order to that Design, but the Enemy set Fire on the Suburbs
between him and them, and having deserted both the Forts and Castle, retired in
haste into the City.

And the Duke of Wyrtemberg.
On the 26 th the Prince of Wyrtemberg, with his Danes, and a Detachment of
Dutch and French Foot, came, and encampt on the North side the Town.

A Battery planted at Cork.
We now being in possession of Shanon Castle, planted our Guns there, and
played them both into the Fort and Town; and Major General Scravemore, with his
Horse, took up his Quarters at Cill Abbey.

The 27 th, the Enemy having deserted their Works at the Cat-Fort, without a
blow struck, we were Masters of it, and planted a Battery there, playing our
Bombs into the City, and our Guns upon the Fort, from the Friars-Garden, and
another Battery above the Fort, near the Abbey. There was also a Church in our
possession, into the Steeple of which Major General Scravemore sent Lieutenant
Townsend with a Party (laying Boards cross the Beams for them to stand upon),
who did good Service in galling the Irish within the Fort. Another Battery of
Three Thirty Six Pounders was made by Red Abbey, which playing against the
City-Wall, made a Breach; whereupon they came to a Treaty, whereon a Truce was
granted till next Morning.

The 28 th, the Enemy not accepting the Conditions that were proposed, our
Cannon began to play very furiously, which made a considerable Breach; and when
the Enemy began to appear on the Wall near it, they were raked off by our small
Ordnance from the Cat. Last Night a Captain, Lieutenant, and Forty Men, were
posted in the Brick-Yard, near Cill Abbey, to hinder the Enemy from making their
Escape that way through the Marsh; and accordingly some attempting it about
Midnight, Captain Swiney, and Four more were killed, and Captain Mackertey
taken, (being wounded,) and the rest forced to retire to the City again. About
One a Clock that Afternoon, the Danes from the North, and Four Regiments of
English from the South, under Brigadeer Churchil, passed the River into the
East-Marsh, in order to storm the Breach that was made there in the City-Wall:
They passed the Water up to the Armpits; the Granadeers under my Lord
Colchester led the Van, and marched forwards, exposed to all the Enemies Fire:
There went on Volunteers with this Detachment, the Duke of Grafton, the Lord O
Brian, Colonel Granvill, and a great many more. Immediately the Van posted
themselves under the Bank of the Marsh, (which seemed to be a Counterscarp to
the City-Wall,) in which Approach the Duke of Grafton received a mortal Wound
on the point of his Shoulder. The Salamander also, and another Vessel, which
came up the Morning-Tide, lay at the Marsh-end, directly before the Wall,
playing their Cannon at the Breach, as likewise throwing Bombs into the City.
The Garrison surrend'red.
In the midst of which Puther my Lord Tyrone, and Lieutenant Colonel Rycatt
came out, (having beat a Parley before) and made Articles for its Surrender;
which were these:

I. That the Garrison should be received Prisoners of War, and there should be
no prejudice done to the Officers, Soldiers, or Inhabitants. II. That the
General would use his endeavor to obtain His Majesty's Clemency toward them.
III. That they should deliver up the Old Fort within an Hour, and the Two Gates
of the City the next Day at Eight in the Morning. IV. That all the Protestants
that are in Prison, shall be forthwith released. V. That all the Arms of the
Garrison, and Inhabitants, should be put into a secure place. And VI. That an
exact Account should be given of the Magazines, as well Provision as
Ammunition.
In the Evening the Fort was surrendered, and the Protestant Prisoners set at
Liberty.

On the 29 th in the Morning, many Seamen, and other loose persons, entered into
the City through the Breach, and other places, and plundered many Houses,
especially of Papists. But as soon as the Bridge could be mended, the Earl of
Marlborough, Duke of Wyrtemberg, and Maj. Genesis Scravemore entered, and took much
pains to save the City from further Damage. In the Afternoon all Papists were
ordered by Proclamation, on pain of Death to deliver up their Arms, and repair
to the East Marsh, where all that had been in Arms were secured, and put under
Guards, the Officers in the County Courthouse, The Number of the Prisoners.
amongst whom were the Earls of Clencarty and Tyrone, Colonel Mark Ellicat, the
Governor, Lieutenant Colonel Rycat, etc. the rest, to the number of between
Four and Five Thousand, were secured in other places.

The County of Cork was formerly a Kingdom, and is the most fertile Country in
Ireland: This Kingdom was granted in the Time of Henry the Second, to Sir
Robert Fitz Stephen, and Sir Miles de Cogan, in these Words, Know ye that I
have granted the whole Kingdom of Cork ( excepting the City, and Cantred of the
Oustmans) to hold for them and their Heirs, of Me, and John My Son, by the
Service of Sixty Knights. At Cork was born one Briork, a Famous Saint in the
Days of Old.

The same Afternoon a Party of about Five hundred Horse were sent under
Brigadeer Villars to infest Kingsale; he sent a Trumpeter at his Approach to
summon the Town, but the Governor threatened to hang him up for bringing such a
Message, and then set fire to the Town, and retreated to the Old Fort; which
our Horse seeing, rid in, and quenched the Fire, killing seven or eight of the
Irish that they found in Town.

On the 30th. a Party of our Foot marched to Five-mile-House toward Kingsale,
and the Magistrates of Cork reassuming their Places, proclaimed King William
and Queen Mary, and put the Place into some order.

The Army marches to Kingsale.
On the First of October the Earl of Marlborough marched out of Cork to
Five-mile Bridge, and the next day came near the Town, then in the possession
of our own Men: Toward the Evening the Lord Marlborough posted his Men toward
the New Fort; and Major General Tetteau, with 800 Men, the next morning early
passed the River in Boats, and stormed the Old Fort, in which he succeeded very
well: Several Barrels of Powder at the same time accidentally taking fire, blew
up nigh Forty of the Enemy; the rest flying into an old Castle in the midst of
the Fort, were a great many of them killed before they got thither, and all
that made resistance, as we scaled the Walls were cut in pieces: The Old Fort
taken.
So that of 450 Men in this Fort, about 200 were blown up and killed, and the
rest submitting to Mercy, were made Prisoners. Some endeavored to escape to
the New Fort by Water, but were most of them killed from the Shore. The
Governor and several Officers that would have prevented our Men from coming
over, were killed upon the Ramparts.

The New one besieged.
My Lord Marlborough having gained this Fort, resolves to make as quick work as
he could with the New one; for the Weather was now very bad, and Provisions
were growing scarce; and withal, his Men began to fall sick, which made him
judge it was the best way to attack the Place briskly, in which he was like to
lose fewer Men, than if by lying long before it, he should have it surrendered:
He sends a Summons however to the Governor to surrender, who returned him
answer, That it would be time enough to talk of that a Month hence. Batteries
raised.
Whereupon the Cannon being planted, we began to batter the Fort in two Places,
the Danes on the Left, and the English on the Right. On the Fifth of October
the Trenches were opened, and on the Ninth we were got nigh the Counterscarp.
On the Twelfth in the Morning Six Pieces of Cannon were mounted at the Danes
Attack, and Two Mortars at the English, which fired all day, and the Mortars
continued all night. On the Thirteenth Two Guns of Twenty four pound Ball were
planted on the English Battery, and on the Fourteenth Three more; for the Danes
on their side had made a pretty large Breach. We then sprung a Mine with very
good success, and were preparing to spring another; and being Masters of the
Counterscarp, on the Fifteenth the Cannon played all the Morning, and every
thing was ready to lay our Galleries over the Ditch: But at one a Clock the
Enemy beat a Parley, and desired a Treaty about the Surrendry of the Fort; The
Fort surrendered.
which being done, the Articles were agreed to and signed, by which the middle
Bastion was to be delivered up next Morning, and the Garrison (being about 1200
Men) to march out the day after, with their Arms and Baggage, and be conducted
to Limerick. We had killed and wounded in our several Attacks about 200; but a
great many more were sick and dead by reason of bad Weather. In this Fort we
received a very considerable Magazine, and great plenty of all sorts of
Provisions, sufficient to have supported a thousand Men for a Year; there were
1000 Barrels of Wheat, 1000 Barrels of Beef, Forty Tuns of Clarret, a great
quantity of Sack, Brandy, and strong Beer. My Lord Marleborough did a
considerable piece of Service in reducing those Places, which will be of great
advantage to the next Campagn.

(In October, 1601. Don John d' Aquila landed at Kingsale from Spain, with an
Army to assist the Irish against Queen Elizabeth, calling himself Master
General and Captain of the Catholic King in the War of God, for holding and
keeping the Faith in Ireland: But by the Courage and Industry of Sir Charles
Blunt Baron Mountjoy, then Lord Deputy, the Irish were defeated, and the
Spaniards forced to go home upon dishonorable Terms.)

But to return again to Dublin, and the Affairs of that part of the Kingdom. On
the 18th of October the Blue Dutch Guards set sail for England, and a day or
two afterward landed Colonel Mathews's Dragoons and Count Schonberg's Horse
from thence. And now after the taking of Cork and Kingsale, part of the Irish
Army that was in Kerry made several Incursions, and burnt all the Towns and
Villages of the Counties of Cork, and Limerick, that had hitherto escaped. My
Lord Duke of Berwick dined in Charlevil-house, one of the Second-rate Houses of
these Kingdoms, built by the late Earl of Orrery, and after Dinner ordered it
to be fired, and staid to see it in Ashes. And those of the Irish Army that lay
between Limerick and Athlone, burnt Balliboy, wherein were Six Companies of my
Lord Drogheda's Regiment: The thing was thus. Lieut. Col. Bristow was at the
Breaking-up of the Camp at Birr ordered to Kilkormack Castle, a considerable
Pass, and within Two Miles of Balliboy; but he liking Balliboy better, as a
Place of more Forage and Shelter for the Men, quitted the other, and took most
of his Men into that open Village; which the Irish having notice of, came in
the night, and lay in the Hedges nigh the Town. Our Men had heard of the
designed Attempt the day before, and desired Colonel Bristow to deliver out
Ammunition; but he apprehending no danger, took no care to prepare for such a
Mischief: However, our Men sat up all that night, and sent out a Lieutenant,
with Twenty Men mounted, to learn Tidings of the Enemy, who returned without
discovering any, for they were all this while close in the Hedges. After
Revallia, the Officers and Soldiers, thinking all safe, went to their Lodgings,
all but the ordinary Guard: They had not been dispersed half an hour, till the
Irish set both ends of the Town on fire. The Officers and Soldiers made what
haste they could to a Mount toward the middle of the Town, where they staid
till a Party of Dragoons came from Birr to their Relief; for the Irish after
some small time drew off, and would not adventure to force them from the Mount,
though they were four times our number. We had about Twenty eight killed, and
some wounded: And Captain Henry Gore, as he was going toward the Mount, had a
Rencounter with some of the Irish Granadeers, in which with Club-Musket he had
his Jaw Bone broke, and several Wounds on the Head; but he is since recovered.
We killed several of the Enemy, both in the Streets, and in the Houses that
they went to plunder.

The 21th. some of the Rapparees marched toward Philipstown in the King's
County. A Party of ours going out to discover them, took two of their Officers
and hanged them. And the 23d. being the Anniversary of the former Irish
Rebellon, was kept with great Solemnity; a Proclamation being issued out the
day before, commanding the Sixteenth of November to be kept as a day of
Thanksgiving, for preserving the King, and reducing three entire Provinces:
Which accordingly was obeyed.

On the 28th. there came an Account from Meerscourt in the County of
West-Meath, that part of the Enemies Forces advanced from Lanesborough in the
County of Longford, and came within six Miles of Meerscourt, but retreated
without any harm done to either side. If I am not much mistaken, when we left
Limerick, it was our Business (and Advice was given accordingly) to secure all
the Passes upon the Shanon; which had been easy at that time, our Army being
together, and in the Field; for these, and the Castles all along by the Shanon
side, might easily have been made tenable, where our Men might have been
secure, and had a very plentiful Country at their Backs for their Relief; and
then might have made Incursions into Conaught when they pleased: But in stead
of that, we retired further into the Country, and left them all the Passes and
Forts upon the Shanon; by which means they are not to be kept in their own
Province, as they might have been, but can both keep us out, and also come
amongst us when they have a mind to it.

Several Protestants come from Limerick.
About this time the Enemy gave leave to several Protestants to come off, who
gave account, that all things were very scarce amongst them, Wheat being
generally about Ten pound (Brass Money) a Barrel; Malt, Nine pound; Brandy,
Three pound a Quart; Ale, Two Shillings six pence; Men's Shoes, Thirty
shillings; Salt, Twenty shillings a Quart: And that the Irish Army were in a
very miserable condition in all respects. And yet it was not so bad as 'twas
reported. This Week the Lords Justices had an Account, That one Captain Long,
formerly Master of a Ship, was in February last surprised in the Bay of
Killibeggs in the North of Ireland, and taken Prisoner to Galloway; A Ship
brought off from Galloway.
but whilst he was there he so ordered the Matter, as with the help of some
Protestants he seized upon a Frigate, and brought her from Galloway to
Carigfergus: She had Twelve Guns and Four Patereroes. November, a French Ship
of thirty Tuns, laden with Brandy and Salt, sailed into the Port of Kingsale,
coming to an Anchor under the New Fort, believing that Place still to be in the
Hands of the Irish: but the Ship was soon boarded by our Men, and made a Prize.

His Majesty's Birthday.
The Fourth of November, being His Majesty's Birthday, was observed with all
the Splendor that Place could afford, Dublin Militia.
all the Town Militia were drawn out, being 2500 Foot, two Troops of Horse, and
two of Dragoons, all well Clothed and Armed; and at night the Lords Justices
made an Entertainment for the most Considerable Persons in and about the Town:
The next day also being the Fifth of November, was observed according to the
Act of Parliament. By this time Commissions being given out for Lords
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants; as also for Officers of the Militia in the
Country, they had got Arms, and were in a pretty good Condition. And on the
First day of the Term, Mr. Sergeant Osburn, Their Majesty's Sergeant at Law,
moved the Court of King's Bench, for Writs of Certiorari, to remove all
Indictments of High Treason, found in several Counties of this Kingdom, against
those in Rebellion against the King and Queen, which was granted, and Writs
Issued out accordingly; Proposals were made also by the Commissioners for the
Forfeited Estates, to set Leases for a year of all Lands, that are Forfeited in
this Kingdom, but I did not hear of many Tenants; for amongst other things
there Proposed, the Farmer must give in an Exact Account of the Acres both
Arable and Pasture, of the Farm he designs to take contains; and if upon view
it appears to be more, than to pay 28 s. for every Acre of Arable, and 5 s. for
every Acre of Pasture that was overplus; this indeed is a good way to get an
Account of all the Lands, but not to make any Benefit to the King of them, for
I Am afraid several Acres will not yield 20 s. in many years.

An Exploit of Captain Archer's.
On Tuesday the 13 th. of November, Captain Archer, one of the Militia, had a
scuffle with the Raparees in the County of Wicklow, killed about Five, and took
Twenty three Prisoners, with the loss of Five or six of his own Men; and about
this time the Enemy burnt Philip's Town (the chief Town in the King's County;
so called from King Philip, as Mary Borough is from Queen Mary; for in this
Reign those two Counties were settled, and part of them given to Thomas
Ratcliff Earl of Sussex) though we had a Garrison in it; for they came from a
great adjacent Bog in the Night, and having set the Town on Fire, retreated
thither again. The General comes to Dublin.
At this time Lieutenant General Ginkle, who Commands in Chief over His
Majesty's Forces in Ireland, came to Dublin, and on the Thirteenth Published
several Orders and Rules; how the Army should be subsisted, and the Country
paid and secured, which are too long to insert, but very Commendable if they
had been observed. And the General and Lords Justices consulting together, the
Justices send out a Proclamation the Fourteenth, for regulating the Quartering
the Army, and assertaining the Rates of things; as what should be paid by each
Soldier for all sorts of Provisions, and Confirming the General's Orders
Published the day before. We had News brought from Limerick, by a Lieutenant
that deserted, of several Inconveniences the Enemy were put to, but these were
only true in part: there was a Report also, that a supply of Arms, Ammunition,
and Money was come from France, and this was true in some respect; for at that
time there was a Ship with Arms, Ammunition, and some Provisions on Board, with
about Sixty Officers designed for Limerick, but cast away in that River, and
all the Men lost.

The Rapparees all this while were very busy about Cashall and Clonmel, and
did a great deal of mischief: this occasioned some of our Army to join part of
the Militia, who went toward Cullen, and burnt the Corn, bringing away a good
Booty without any opposition.

The Fifteenth of November Colonel Byerly's Horse marched from Dublin to Mount
Naelick, a Village toward the Frontiers; and on the 19 th. the Lords Justices
Publish a Proclamation, Declaring, That if any of their Majesty's Protestants
Subjects had their Houses or Haggards burnt; or were Robbed or Plundered by the
Rapparees, such Losses should be repaid by the Popish Inhabitants of that
County. And in regard the Popish Priests had great Influence over their
Votaries, it was ordered, That if any Rapparees exceeding the Number of Ten
were seen in a Body, no Popish Priest should have liberty to reside in such a
County. And it was further declared, That the Government would not give
Protection to any Person that had a Son in the Enemies Quarters, unless such
Son return to Their Majesty's Obedience, before the Tenth of December next
following. And in regard at this time the Government was apprehensive of some
danger nigh Dublin it self, they Publish a Proclamation the 22 d. That all
Papists, who have not been noted Housekeepers in the City of Dublin for Three
Months last past, were within Forty eight Hours to depart, at least Ten Miles
from the City, or else to be proceeded against as Spies; and that not above
Five Papists should meet together upon any Pretext whatever.

A Plot discovered.
About the 24 th. there was great talk of a Design discovered to the Lords
Justices, of sending a Supply, of Meal Salt, Tobacco, Brandy, and several other
things, from Dublin to the Enemies Quarters. Those who were carrying these
things were pursued, and overtaken in the County of Kildare, upon a By Road:
they all made their escapes however; but one of them being a Woman, dropped a
Petticoat, in which was found a Letter, and also another in a Roll of Tobacco,
which gave grounds to believe, that a Correspondence was kept between the
Papists in Dublin and the Enemy beyond the Shanon; and therefore on Sunday
Night the 30 th. of November a general search was made through the City, and
most of the Papists secured. This Piece of Service the Militia performed very
dexterously, without noise or suspicion, till the thing was done.

A List of the Privy Council.
The last Packquets from England, brought a List of the Privy Council,
appointed by His Majesty for the Kingdom of Ireland, as also of several of the
Judges: The Council were, The Lord Primate, the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, Archbishop of Dublin, Duke of Ormond, Earl of Mead, Earl of
Drogheda, Earl of Longford, Earl of Renelah, Earl of Granard, Viscount Lisburn,
Bishop of Mead, Robert Fitz-Gerrald Esquire the Vice Treasurer, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Master of the Rolls, Secretary of
State, Master of Ordance, Sir Henry Fane, Sir Charles Merideth, William Hill of
Hillsborongh Esquire. On Monday the First of December, several of the said
Persons attended the Lords Justices at the Council Chamber, and there took the
usual Oaths of Privy Counselors. The Judges named for the Respective Courts in
Dublin were, Sir Richard Reynoll, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir
Richard Stephens, one of the Justices of the same Court, Mr. Justice Lindon
being formerly sworn there: In the Common Pleas, Mr. Justice Jetfordson, Mr.
Justice Cox being formerly sworn there: In the Exchequer, Jo Healy Esquire Lord
Chief Baron, and Sir Standish Hartstone one of the Barons of the Court, Mr.
Baron Ecklin being formerly sworn there. This day we had News of the Enemies
passing the Shanon at several Places, and Orders were sent to our Frontiers to
be in readiness; and Colonel Gustavus Hambleton sent a Party from Birr toward
Portumna, who met with a Party of the Enemy, which they routed, killing some,
and brought off two Officers, with Eleven Prisoners being Dragoons and Foot.

December the 2 d. A Proclamation was issued out by the Lords Justices and
Council, forbidding all Their Majesty's Subjects of Ireland, to use any Trade
with France, or to hold any Correspondence or Communication with the French
King or his Subjects: This was the first that was Signed by the Council, and
these were present, viz. Fran. Dublin, Drogheda, Longford, Granard, Lisburn,
Robert Fitzgerald, Anth. Mead, Charles Merideth.

We had at that time an Account from Cork, that on the 22 d. of November last
there were 60 of our Horse and Foot, who met with near Five hundred of the
Rapparees, in the Barony of West Carberry near Castlehaven; our Men at that
disadvantage Retreated toward Castlehaven, the Enemy followed in the Rear, and
fired at a distance several times, our Party facing about killed Nine; and
afterward being Attackt again, they killed one Brown an Ensign of the Enemies.
Castletown Besieged.
The Enemy next day Besieged Castletown, an House near Castlehaven; they were
Commanded by O Donavan, O Driscoll, and one Barry: As they approached the
House, our Men killed Twelve of them; this put them into an humor of
Retreating, though one Captain Mackronine with his Sword drawn endeavored to
hinder them; but he and some more of the Party being killed, the rest got away
as well as they could. Several of them had Bundles of Straw fastened upon their
Breasts instead of Armor; but this was not Proof, for about Thirty of them
were killed upon the Spot, amongst whom were young Colonel O Driscol, Captain
Tiege O Donavan, besides several that went off Wounded; we lost only two Men.

Rapparees defeated.
At this time Colonel Byerley being at Mountmelick with part of his own
Regiment, and some of Colonel Earl's Foot, he was frequently Allarumed; as well
by Parties of the Irish Army, as by Considerable Numbers of the Rapparees, who
had a design to burn the Town, as they had done several others thereabouts; but
the Colonel was very watchful, and kept good Intelligence (a main Matter in
this Assair.) He was told of a Party that designed to burn the Town; and he
took care to have all his Men, both Horse and Foot, in readiness to welcome
them; but they heard of his Posture and durst not venture; however on the Third
of December he had notice of a Body of Rapparees, that were not far from the
Town, and designed him a mischief; he sends out Lieutenant Dent with Twenty
Horse, and ordered each Horseman to take a Musqueteer behind him; when the
Horse came almost within sight of the Rapparees, they dropped their Foot, who
marched closely behind the Hedges unperceived by the Enemy. When the Enemy
espied so small a Party of Horse, they Advanced from the side of the Bog
toward them; the Horse seemed to Retreat a little, till the Rapparees were
Advanced within Musket Shot of our Foot, who firing amongst them, killed
feveral, and then Lieutentant Dent fell in with his Horse; as also the Foot
Charged them a second time, that after some resistance they killed Thirty nine,
and took Four, whom they hanged without any further Ceremony. The rest escaped
to the Bogs, and in a moment all disappeared; which may seem strange to those
that have not seen it, but something of this kind I have seen my self; and
those of this Party assured me, that after the Action was over, some of them
looking about amongst the Dead, found one Dun a Sergeant of the Enemies, who
was lying like an Otter, all under Water in a running Brook, (except the top of
his Nose and his Mouth;) they brought him out, and although he proffered Forty
Shillings in English Money to save his Life (a great Ransom as he believed) yet
he was one of the Four that was hanged. How the Rapparees conceal themselves
and their Arms.
When the Rapparees have no mind to show themselves upon the Bogs, they
commonly sink down between two or three little Hills, grown over with long
Grass, so that you may as soon find a Hair as one of them: they conceal their
Arms thus, they take off the Lock and put it in their Pocket, or hide it in
some dry Place; they stop the Mussle close with a Cork, and the Tutch-hole with
a small Quil, and then throw the Piece it self into a running Water or a Pond;
you may see an hundred of them without Arms, who look like the poorest humblest
Slaves in the World, and you may search till you are weary before you find one
Gun: but yet when they have a mind to do mischief, they can all be ready in an
Hours warning, for every one knows where to go and fetch his own Arms, though
you do not.

Boats fitted up to be sent to the Shanon.
About this time the Lords Justices Ordered Four Long Boats, like Men of Wars
Pinnaces, to be fitted up with Pattereros and little small Guns, the Sides to
be fortified with Boards and other Materials, and those to be filled with a
hundred Choice Men, commanded by Captain Hoord, who had been Provost Martial,
but turned out for some Irregular things, and was resolved to do some desperate
Service to be readmitted. These Boats were to be drawn upon Carriages to the
Shanon, and there put in; the Design was very plausible, and might have done
Service if pursued; for there are several Islands in the Shanon, wherein the
Irish have very considerable Riches; and besides, Hoord and his Men designed to
make Incursions into the Enemies Country, and to burn and destroy all before
them; if a small Party appeared, then they would fight them, but if a great
Body, then they could retreat to their Fleet, and go away to another Place: And
further, one design of those Boats, was to carry over a part of our Army (at
least their Necessaries) that shortly designed an Expedition beyond the Shanon;
but the Boats were stopped beyond Mullingar and ordered to go no further.

A Spy seized.
Nigh this time, one Kirowen, an Irish Officer; came from Athlone to Mullingar,
he pretended to be a Deserter, and told a fair Story; but next day a Protestant
that made his escape, gave an Account, that he was a Spy, and had some bad
Designs; upon which being examined and searched, he had on a Pair of Breeches,
made of the Petticoat of a Gentlewoman whom he had murdered, and upon strict
examination of his Boy and others, it appeared, that he was sent on purpose to
burn the Garrison, so was the Saturday following hanged for his pains. There
was also a Discourse, as if the Papists had a design to burn Dublin when the
Irish Army was to approach, which they expected every day: this was discovered
by a Letter from Lieutenant Colonel Woogan's Lady to him in Limerick: the
Letter was intercepted, and gave an Account, that the Protected Papists were
ready to join with the Irish Army in doing us what mischief they could; upon
which most of them were secured (as I have said) but however those of them that
would take the Oath of Allegiance to K. W. and Q. M. were released (but the
refusers kept in Prison,) yet were Ordered by a Proclamation from the Lords
Justices and Council December the Eight, to obey the former Orders, in removing
from Dublin, and all Their Majesty's Garrisons on the Frontiers. And several of
the Papists who had Sons in the Enemies Quarters, having made Application to
the Lords Justices, for further time to bring them in, pursuant to a
Proclamation November the 19 th. they set out another December the 8 th.
allowing them time till the Tenth of January; but for all this, I heard of very
few that came over. Another Proclamation was Dated the same day, Ordering all
the Laws in that Kingdom, for the Restraining the Exportation of Wool, to be
put in Execution, except to England and Wales only, and this with License after
the usual manner.

We had an Account from Clonmel, that Captain Archer, with a Militia Troop, met
with a Party of the Irish, killed Twenty five, and took a Booty of Three
hundred Cows, with several other things. And Colonel Woolsley sent word, that
what Provisions and Ammunition were sent to the North, were safely arrived, his
Men having killed Eight of the Irish the day before, and hanged Three Spies.
And about the middle of December, we had News from Limerick by a Deserter, that
all things were very scarce, the Soldiers wanting both Meat and Clothes. But
Leiutenant Kelly, who was taken Prisoner at Birr, and now released, says the
Irish are not in so very bad a Condition, because they have got nigh Ten
thousand Horse load of Corn out of the County of Kerry this Winter, which
possible we might as well have had as they, if we had been as diligent.

Nigh this time one Mack Finin, one of the Prisoners that escaped from Cork (as
they say a great many did by sinister means) marched with a Party of about 400
of the Army and Rapparees toward Iniskeen in the County of Cork, and finding
it guarded, they went to Castletown, where there was a Lieutenant and Thirty
Dragoons; they defended the Place bravely for some time, killing Ten of the
Enemy, but their Ammunition being spent, and having Five of their Men killed,
they were forced to surrender upon Quarter, but the Lieutenant was afterward
murdered, though a Party coming from Iniskeen from Major Culliford, set upon
the Irish, killed Twelve, and took Five Prisoners.

The Lords Justices and Council now fearing, that in those Houses where there
dwelt Papists, if any public Trade was kept, as to the selling of Ale, Wine,
Coffee, etc. they might be Plotting and Contriving Mischief; therefore they
Publish a Proclamation, December the 12 th. That no Papist shall keep a Public
House in or about the City of Dublin, after the 25 th. of December next. And
now His Majesty designing for Holland, and having thoughts of making my Lord
Sidney one of the Secretaries of State, sent for him over, who on Monday the 15
th. of December Embarked with a Fair Wind for Chester, leaving every one sorry
for his departure, in that by his Affable and Courteous Demeanor, and his
Diligence in His Majesty's Service, he had gained the Hearts of all People. And
on the 24 th. Sir Charles Porter, one of the Lords Justices came from England,
who on the 29 th. was sworn Lord Chancellor, receiving the Purse and Great Seal
from the late Commissioners.

Part of the Army march to Lanesborough.
We had now a part of our Army on their March toward Lanesborough-Pass,
Commanded by Major General Kirk and Sir John Laneir; the Foot were my Lord
Lisburn's Regiment, my Lord George Hambleton's, part of Col. Brewer's, some of
Major General Kirk's, and several others: A Party of the Militia also were
ordered from Dublin, and those in the Country were to be up on all hands. At
the same time Lieutenant General Douglas was to march toward Sligo, and fall
upon the Irish on that side.

On Wednesday, the 31 st of December, part of our Army under Colonel Brewer,
went toward Lanesborough: The Enemy appeared on the Bog on this side the Town,
being, as they say, nigh Three Thousand, and had cut several Trenches cross the
Causeys that go through the Bog toward the Town; these they disputed for some
time, but losing some of their Men, they retired into Town, and from thence to
beyond the Shanon, defacing the Fort on this side, and breaking the Bridge
behind them: (You Will say they were not very closely pursued that had time to do
all this) However, our Men took possession of the Town and Fort, as they had
left it; and if we had had the Boats, we might have gone over, the Enemy
quitting the other side for at least Three Days; but then we were too small a
Party: and before the rest of our Men came up, Three Regiments of the Irish
were posted on the other side the River; and then little happened of moment, only
some small Firings, and sometimes they made Truces, Colonel Clifford, and the
other Irish Officers drinking Healths over to our Men, and those on our side
returning the Complement.

When this Party marched to Lanesborough, there was a Detachment of 300 Men out
of L. Drogheda's, Sir Jo. Hanmer's, and Col. Hambleton's Regiments, ordered
from Bir to join them; and so to cross the Country from Bir to Mullingar: But
in their March they were set upon by about Fifteen Hundred of the Irish Army,
and Rapparees: Our Party had but Thirty Dragoons with them, and the Enemy
brought several Squadrons of Horse; and though we were attacked for at least
Five Hours together, and that at several places of great disadvantage, yet they
fought their way through, and went that Night to Mountmelick, having lost only
Six Men, and Captain Jeffreys, of Sir John Hanmer's Regiment: but the Irish got
all our Baggage. This Party was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Bristow, and
Major Caulfield.

Rapparees in the Bog of Allen.
The Rapparees by this time were got to the end of the Bog of Allen, about
Twelve Miles from Dublin (this Bog is the largest in Ireland; for it reaches
through a great part of the Country, from hence as far as Athlone, and is at
least Forty Miles in length, having several Islands full of Woods in the midst
of it): These robbed and plundered the Country all about; for they had an
Island on this end of the Bog, which they fortified, coming out in the Night,
and doing all the Mischief they could. This being so nigh Dublin, it made a
great noise; so that Colonel Fouks, with his own Regiment, part of Colonel
Cutts's, and some of the Militia, marched out toward them; and coming near
them in the Night, at a place called Tougher Greggs, at the entrance of the Bog
of Allen; he stayed there till it was light, and then advanced upon the Causey,
(having Three Fieldpieces along with him.) Defeated by Col. Fouks.
The Irish at first seemed to defend the Place, but as we went forwards, they
quitted their Posts, leaving our Men to fill up the Trenches they had made
cross the Causey, (being Twelve in number.) Colonel Fouks marched his Horse
over, and so went to the Island of Allen, where he found Lieutenant Colonel
Piper, who had passed thither on the other side at the same rate: The Irish
betook themselves to the Woods, and we only got some little things they had
left. It Is thought they had a Thousand Foot thereabouts, besides some Horse,
though most of them that made this Disturbance at this place, were only Two
Hundred Boys, with an old Tory their Commander.

Who were admitted to administer the Oath, and why.
And now the Lords Justices, and Council, issue out Two more Proclamations, one
forbidding all Persons whatsoever, except the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and
Sheriffs of Dublin, to administer the Oath, or give Certificates to the
Papists: Because some took upon them, for Money, to certify they had sworn
when they did not, or else gave them the Oath without the word Allegiance, as
did Sir Humphrey Jervace, who was imprisoned, and fined Three Hundred Marks for
it afterward. The other Proclamation required all that had bought any of the
Train-Horses, or Utensils, to bring them in by such a Day: For the Carters and
Waggoners were very careless, and either sold the Horses, or suffered them to
be stole.

Maj. Genesis Tetteau marches from Cork with a part of the Army.
About the time that Lieutenant General Douglas, and Major General Kirk,
marched from the North and South, Major General Tetteau marched also in the
West toward the County of Kerry; and if they all had pusht forwards at one
time, it had been a great advantage to our Affairs next Campaign: All things
seemed to favor the Attempt, especially the Weather, better never being seen
for the Season. Major General Tetteau marched from Cork December 28. and on the
29 th was joined by Brigadeer Churchill, Sir David Collier, Colonel Coy, and a
part of Colonel Matthews's Dragoons; and the day following they marched through
the Country, which the Irish had for the most part burnt, after they had
carried away whatever they could.

New Years-Day our Men attackt a Fort at a place called Scronclard, which was
intended to hinder their passage that way: We took it in Two Hours, though it is
said, the Enemy employed 500 Men for Two Months to build it. (This showed their
Diligence, though not their Courage; these Two Virtues are sometimes divided
between us and them, but not always both on either side.) Near Brewster's Field
we discovered some of the Enemies Scouts; whereupon Seventy of Eppingar's
Dragoons, and Colonel Coy's Horse having the Advance-Guard, came near a Party
of the Enemy of One Hundred and Sixty: These were mounted upon small Horses,
and retreated, as did also their main Body, burning the Country. Our Men then
went toward Ross, wherein the Enemy had a Garrison of Six Hundred Men,
commanded by Colonel Mackartey: We did not think fit to attack the Town, but
went toward a Fort near it, which we attacked with Fifty Danes, and Fifty of
the Kingsale Militia: We carried the Fort, in which were Seventy Seven Men, of
whom Fourteen swam toward a Rock, Five were taken, and the rest killed;
Captain Baenburg, and Captain Caroll, the Commanders, were both wounded, the
former with a Granade, and the other shot through the Leg. Goes to Tralee.
From thence we marched toward Tralee, which the Enemy deserted, having
therein Twenty One Troops of Dragoons, and Seven of Horse, Commanded by Colonel
Sheldon. The Enemy were much alarmed on this side, and if they had been pressed
home on the other, it had been much for our Interest. But I heard of nothing
further remarkable at Lanesborough, except of one Captain Edgworth's defending
a Pass with One Hundred Men against a much greater Body of the Irish; and after
our Men had laid there in the Cold for nigh a Fortnight, they were ordered
back, being much harassed with Cold and Hunger. The Boats were never brought to
the River; and Lieutenant General Douglas went as far as James-Town, and then
retired again into the North, without doing anything remarkable. This indeed is
to be said for both sides, That suppose our Men had passed the River at
Lanesborough, they must have gone Three Miles forwards before they could have
seen any thing but Bogs and Woods: The Irish no doubt knew of their coming, and
would have let them advance some Miles at least, and then resolved, with all
the Force in their Power, to attack them; nor could Lieut. Genesis Douglas join
them on a sudden; so that seeing our Men were inferior to theirs in number, it
was not the safest to go into the midst of their Troops; and yet any that will
but consider the Circumstances of the preceding Story, and put things
together, will find, that it has been partly our own faults that Ireland has
not been reduced already.

A short Description of the former State of Ireland.
The Soil of this Country is in all respects as good, if not better than that
of England: And as to the People, though this Country was in the Infancy of
Christianity, called Sanctorum Patria, yet in process of Time the Irish did
very much degenerate, and did in a manner turn perfect Barbarians, till at
length they were partly civilized by the English Conquest of that Country: and
yet as the Nature of Man is apter to decline than improve, instead of Reforming
the Irish, a great many of the English did dwindle into mere Irish, both in
Customs and Habit, and are the very People that we are subduing at this
juncture, not One in Ten of them being of ancient Irish Extraction. Most part
of the North of Ireland is at present inhabited by People from Scotland. The
Reason of this may be, because of the Vicinity of those Two Nations at that
place, they not being Three Hours Sail asunder; or else it is, because in the
Ninth Year of King James the First, the North of Ireland being then in
Rebellion, that King invented a New Title of Honor both in England and
Scotland; for all such (the Number not exceeding, as I remember, Two Hundred in
each Nation) as would maintain Thirty Soldiers a piece, for Three Years, at the
rate of 8 d. per diem, in the Service of Ireland (and yet they were to be
Gentlemen, and worth 1000 l. per annum), those he called Barronets, and made
this Title Hereditary, adding to each Man Phternal Cont the Arms of Ulster,
which is in a Canton, or an Escatcheon, which they please, in a Field Argent, a
Sinister Hand Cooped at the Wrist, Gules. But this, however, was more taken
notice of by the Scots than the English; at least, a great many of them went
over themselves in Person into Ulster, and after the Rebellion, had Lands
assigned to them and their Followers, whose Posterity enjoy them still.

As for the other Provinces in Ireland, (viz.) Lemster, Munster, and Conaught,
they were generally inhabited with English and Irish intermixed, though the
Irish were in a manner Slaves to the English, and every Landlord was as
absolute as a Prince amongst his own Tenants, but in all other respects they
had the English Laws and Customs, and lived more plentifully than they did in
any place of England. Some may justly wonder to hear of all those multitudes of
Cattle which have been at several times taken from the Irish; but as they went
off from any place, they still drove along all the Englishment Stocks; and
certainly the Country affords abundance, because it has never been thoroughly
inhabited; for those places that might be improved and tilled, are, for want of
People, stoct with Sheep or Cattle, which was the Reason that in Queen
Elizabeth's Days we read of one surly Boy in the North of Ireland, who had a
Stock of Fifty Thousand Cattle to his own share.

Of the Present State of the Irish Army.
But in short, my humble Opinion of the Affairs of that Kingdom at present, is,
First, as to the Irish, they are naturally a fawning flattering People, they will
down upon their Knees to you at every turn; but they are rude, false, and of no
Courage (as D. Aquila complained, when he came out of Spain with an Army to
their assistance in Queen Elizabeth's Reign): Give them but Encouragement, and
then there is no People so insolent: So that as Slaves, there is no way to deal
with them, but to whip them into good Manners; and yet many of the Vulgar Irish
have been abused in what they had, who thinking our Soldiers in the fault, they
cut their Throats wherever they can get the upper hand. As to their Army,
their Condition is not in some Respect much worse than it was before: For, 1.
Their Men have seen more Service, and understand the use of their Arms better,
being made good Fire-men at Limerick and Athlone. 2 dly, They are now in a much
narrower compass, which is easilier defended, and they may in a small time draw
their whole Army to any corner; when as we are dispersed up and down, and
cannot so easily be got together upon any sudden occasion: They have also most
of the Passes upon the Shanon in their possession, which could not easily be
taken from any but Irishmen. 3 dly, They are very watchful and diligent, having
always good Intelligence, which is the Life of any Action; and yet it is plain
there is no such way to destroy the Irish, as to employ some to ruin the rest,
which they will certainly do their own Fathers for Money. But then after all
this, they have a vast Crowed of People, and will not, nor cannot have
convenient Subsistence for one half of them in a small time: And further, the
French are retired, and it is to be supposed without design of returning; else
they would not have gone away: Suppose therefore the Irish fortify all those
Places in their possession, and have Arms and Ammunition, with whatever else is
needful from France, yet all this will neither put Courage into them, to defend
those Places, nor is it altogether in the power of France to supply them with
necessary Provisions.

And lastly, Of our own.
But, Secondly, As to our own Army, I doubt not but we have several that are
indifferent whether the War be quickly at an end or not; for they find the
Irish to be an easy sort of Enemy, and if the War were done here, they must
expect hotter Service somewhere else. They look upon it however as an Enemies
Country, which is the reason that great Spoils are made, and Outrages
committed; nay, which is worst of all, no Distinction made of Papist or
Protestant. This, it is to be feared, may bring a Famine; and then all Peoples
Condition in that Kingdom will be very severe: For though there be Plenty enough
in England, yet the People of Ireland being poor, no body will be at the pains
to carry their Goods into a Country where there is nothing to be got in return
of them.

But then whatsoever pains the Irish take in fortifying their Towns, we take as
much in carrying things to beat them out of them; for there is a vast quantity
of Bombs of the largest size, with all things convenient for such a Design,
daily brought to Dublin. And as to our Army, our Numbers are the same as last
Year, (except Two Regiments that are broke:) they are also much healthfuller,
and better acquainted both with the Country and their Arms; and to encourage us
the more, the Parliament has granted His Majesty a considerable Fund to carry
on the War, as also to Equip His Fleet, which we were in both defective last
Summer. Besides, we have now at least Twelve thousand of the Militia in good
order, either to defend our Garrisons behind us, or assist in our Army upon
occasion; for one should think that there is no body so fit to fight for their
own Country, or indeed to be entrusted with it, as those People whose Concern
it is. And more than all this, we shall have a great many Protestant Rapparees
from the North and other Places, that we can at least set against theirs; for
the Northern People are most of them armed, either from our Men that died last
Year, or by some means or other; so that I hope we shall have no want of Men.

If therefore we have a mind to retrive our Losses, we must encourage such as
do well, and reward them for their Valor and Conduct; but punish Offenders,
though their Station be the greater. And as to the Arrears of the Army, they
are not so very great as some People make them; for though we have not had our
Accounts stated for some time, yet we have still received Money upon Account,
and the Soldiers have constantly been supplied with Bread and other Provisions.
But it is usual with a great many, that when they can have no other Excuse for
their Extravagancies, then they will say, the King owes them so much; but say not
a word of what they have received. And as to what the present Irish War both
has cost, and is like to do, both as to Men and Money; it is not to be named
with that in Cromwell's time, which any may see, that will but read Burlace's
History: Nor can there be any Comparison between the present Government and
that; for then both Law and Religion were trampled upon, but now they run in
their due Channel.

But after all, the Reason why Ireland was not reduced last Year, was our late
taking the Field; and the Occasion of that, was because the Affairs of the Army
could not be put in a complete Posture any sooner: For England has a long time
been used to Peace and Ease, and therefore unprovided of those things that are
absolutely necessary in time of War, which were to come from abroad. The King
did as much as was possible in the time, as any who have seen the Country may
know; for if Ireland were as well Peopled and Manned as the Soil it self will
bear, it may defy all the World besides: You cannot see a Town or a small
Castle, but where there is either a Bog or a River, or both; all Places being
fortified as well by Nature as Art: And in War there is no doubt but time must
be allowed to regulate such Mistakes as may happen, since no Man is infallible
in that Art. Nor was there a sufficient Fund of Money the Year past, to supply
the real Necessities of so great a Work; which Inconveniency being now removed,
a fair Conclusion may be rationally hoped for.

As to the Charge of maintaining a competent Army there, when Ireland is
reduced, the Country will night do that of it self, since the Customs in that
part of the Kingdom now in our possession, amounted to Sixty seven thousand
five hundred twenty six pound for the Six Months last past; and what must the
whole Kingdom come to in Times of Peace and a settled Establishment? I have only
this to add, That when our Armies go out to defy our Enemies, and yet at the
same time in their Practice defy the Living God; or if we should stay at home,
and fast and pray for their good Success never so heartily; yet God will
neither hear us, nor help them, if we are negligent in our Duty toward him. If
therefore we desire that our Armies and Fleets may make a considerable Figure
in the World, let us not grudge at and censure every thing our Betters do, but
be careful to do our Duty to God and Man, then after the enduring for a Season
the Inconveniences of War, we may hope to be happy in a lasting Peace. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas there are some mistakes occasioned by the Printer's oversight; which
the Author, (being suddenly called to his Post in Ireland) had neither leisure
nor opportunity to Correct; the Reader may, if he pleases, supply such Defects.

Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
A New History of the Succession of the Crown of England, and more particularly
from the Time of King Egbert, till King Henry the VIII. Collected from those
Historians who wrote of their own Times. A Discourse concerning the
unreasonableness of a New Separation on account of the Oaths; With an Answer to
the History of Passive Obedience, so far as relates to Them. A Vindication of
the said Discourse, concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation, from
the Exceptions made against it, in a Tract called, A Brief Answer to the said
Discourse, etc. An Account of the Ceremony of Investing His Electoral Highness
of Brandenburgh with the Order of the Garter at Berlin, June 6. 1690. By James
Johnston Esquire and Gregory King Esquire His Majesty's Commissioners. Dr. Freeman's
Sermon at the Assizes at Northampton, befote the Lord Chief Justice Pollexfen,
August 26. 1690. -- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons,
November 5. 1690. Dr. Tenison's Sermon before the Queen, concerning the
Wandering of the Mind in God's Service, Feb. 15. 1690. -- His Sermon before the
Queen, of the Folly of Atheism, Feb. 22. 1690. Dr. Fowler's Sermon before the
Queen, March 22. 1690. The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon, at the Funeral of the Lady
Brook, February 19. 1690. -- His Fast Sermon before the King and Queen, April
29. 1691. Mr. Fleetwood's Sermon at Christ Church on St. Stephen's day.
A full and impartial Account of the secret Consults, Negotiations, Stratagems,
and Intregues of the Romish Party in Ireland, from 1660. to 1889. for the
Settlement of Popery in that Kingdom. A Ground Plot of the strong Fort of
Charlemont in Ireland, with the Town, River, Marshes, Boggs, and Places
adjacent. Drawn by Captain Hobson, price 6 pence. An Exact Ground Plot of
Londonderry, with the River, Woods, Ways and Places adjacent, by the same
Captain Hobson, price 6 d. There is preparing, and will shortly be Published, A
Prospect of Limerick, bearing due West, exactly showing the Approaches of the
English Army, with the Batteries and Breach.
ANglia Sacra: Sive Collectio Historiarum, partim antiquitus, partem recenter
scriptarum De Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Angliae a Prima Fidei Christianae
susceptione ad Ann. 1540. Nunc primum in Lucem editum. Pars Prima de
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Ecclesiarum Cathedralium quas Monachi possederunt.
Opera Henrici Whartoni. This Book will be ready for Publication by the Fourth
of June next: Subscriptions will be taken till the First of July. Proposals for
the same may be had of Richard Chiswell, and most other Booksellers in London
and the Country.

