(...), OR THE SAINTS FIRST REVEALED AND COVENANTED MERCIES, Shortly
Approaching. As being the Main Scope of Revelation-Prophesie; Opened and
Resolved by Christ's Divine Key of Prophecy, in the four last Chapters
thereof. In exceeding much Mercy lately Discovered to the Weak and Unworthy
Penman of the ensuing Work, and especially by the help of the more late and
very Useful Key and Covenants, An. Dom. 71. with Parallels of Dan. and Rev.
more directly leading us to the last said great Discoveries, Explained in our
last Books. And for the better Improvement of them all, here is prefixed a
Summarie of the Clearest and most Abundant Scripture-evidence of that Blessed
State of the World to come. In Reference to a Scheme or short Prospective View
of the Whole, from God's Word.

By W. Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1676.

The Introduction to our Scheme or short Prospective View of the most strong
and clear evidence of the blessed state of the 1000 Years, Rev. 20. as is
manifest in our late Works. Showing;
1. THat such a state shall be in the World in the seventh Millen.

2. What that state is declared to be from the Word of God.

3. Showing in a fit Latitude the time when, or the near approach of that said
state.

4. How, or by what means it shall be set up.

5. Unto these we shall add somewhat of the Usefulness of that excellent
gracious Discovery thereof, chiefly from Parallelling Dan. and Rev. both in
connection of Matters and Times, as leading us to the fourth Gentile Monarchy,
wherein Gods Kingdom of the Stone, Dan. 2.44. was to be set up, An. Dom. 34.
for 1666. years from Christ's Ascension to his Descending again to break all
adverse Kingdoms and Dominions, until it self become a Mountain, v. 34, 41.
about An. Dom. 1700. with the allowance of Bishop Vshers four years lost or
more, and so probable to be sooner.

Concerning the first, three things are here to be done, first to prove (as in
the method, Iren. Chap. 1. the (...), namely) to show that such a Sat or
Kingdom shall be: which is abundantly proved in our said work; first from the
seven Foundations in our Irenic., mentioned in the beginning thereof. ^dly,
From the other seven Convincing Arguments [besides that Third] in the Word
Written: all which are of very large comprehensiveness; and if duly weighed,
will be found to be of very great force: And all our Parallels of Danniel and
Revelation do also very greatly establish these Truths; all which we refer to
the Judicious and Impartial Readers perusal: together with the Twelve
Foundations of our Faith thereof, proved all along from Genesis 3.15. to the end
of the Revelation: which Faith was also much formed by our 31 Useful
Observations to understand Mystical Prophesies? and by the short Assertions,
and useful and needful Distinctions in our Key: To the due consideration of all
which, we advise the serious reading of our Account of the whole Work, first
more generally of the subject, p. 1, 2. and 2dly, of the Nature, Use and Order
of the Parts of the said Work, in page. 2, 3, 4. with the two first leaves of
the General Title Page, or of the said Twelve Foundations, and in the two first
leaves of the last Book on Rev. 21.5. showing what parts serve for Explication,
what for Confirmation, and what for Illustration, and Application, etc. page 1,
2, 3, 4.

2dly, To show this said state shall be in the World, which is sufficiently
done by our 15 well approved Reasons by the Learned in those Studies (to which
many more may be added.) See our New Jerusalem on Jer. 3.17. page 9, 10, 11, 12.

Of the most Certain, Infallible, and Irresistable farther Evidences.
ANd now from Gods gracious late Discovery to us that the said blessed state
will be the fulfilling of his declared and Covenanted Mercies then in the said
seventh Millen. unto the Fathers themselves, and to their spiritual seed
through and with that their own Divine Seed Christ, Gal. 3. and 2 Samuel 7.16 to
the end, as in our two last Books on Rev. 20.5. and Rev. 21.5. is largely
explained, which Christ's said Revelation Key Divinely opens, and which we
endeavor here to the best advantage we can in a business of this nature to
communicate, so briefly, to all faithful Christians herein concerned; and for
all others who may be such, by setting before all men, yet more strong, clear,
and irresistible evidences from the word of God concerning the said Mercies, as
eternally decreed by God, and after carried on in the said Covenants and
Prophesies of the Old Testament, and witnessed to through the New, to manifest
how in the said 7th Milen. as Christ by his Revel also has infallibly resolved
us, that all shall answerably be done (as in good part was showed) in our
Picture of Christ's most Divine Key, p. 63. of the Resur. which I doubt not but
will farther make the evidences thereof so strong, clear, and irresistible, and
(as I verily believe) of so great weight, as greater cannot be had to prove any
Truth, (nor need to be expected for these) and greater then for any other Truth
in the whole book of God, this containing the sum of all, namely, Christ's
great work of Redemption, as the work so eternally appointed by the Father to
be so carried on by him in the time of his Mediatorship in the first six
Millen. (as by and by we doubt not to prove) to redeem the souls, bodies,
persons, outward conditions of his Saints and servants then from the Power and
Tyranny of their Enemies: and the World and Creatures in that state from the
Corruption, Curse, Bondage Enmity in it since the Fall of Man, as in Restit. p
45, 46, 37, etc. Whereupon we must lay down this needful Caution by the way;
viz. That we must distinguish the said General work of Redemption, from that
Spiritually Powerful work of Reconciliation for his Saints at Christ's first
coming, according to the warrant of the holy Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ reconciling us unto himself, and now by his word of Reconciliation. Romans
5.10. When Enemies, we were reconciled to Grd by the death of his Son: and Ephesians.
2.16. That he might reconcile both Jew and Gentile in one body by the Cross,
etc. Christ by his death so making an Atonement in his blood by his own
oblation of himself once for all his people, and thereby laid the sure
foundation at his first coming, for his powerful and glorious carrying on of
all the parts and degrees of the other (as being made the Fathers Commissioner)
during his Kingdom of the Stone (whilst he sits upon his Fathers Throne) at
that glorious delivery of the Book with 7 Seals Rev. 5. to him the Lamb, with
seven Horns, and seven Eyes, to open, and execute the Contents thereof, unto
chap 19. until his second coming at the end of the said 1666. years when he
will sit upon his own Throne, Rev. 3.21. for we cannot ascribe enough to that
soul astonishing wonder, of Gods so free and gracious giving his only Son so to
dye for such sinners to reconcile them to himself, yea God was in Christ so
reconciling them (as says the Apostle) to himself; nor of Christ's Love and
Compassion, so to reconcile them to God the Father by his own bloodshedding,
all which were also carried on by the powerful and glorious operation of the
Lord the Spirit both for Christ, at first overshaddowing the blessed Virgin at
his holy Conception, and having by the eternal spirit offered himself to God
without spot, Heb. 9.24. and at last by his Resurrection, declaring him with
power by the Spirit of Sanctification to be the Son of G^d, Romans 1.4. and by
his working in his Saints at all times: which said work of Reconciliation was
to be the sure and necessary foundation of all the following parts of the said
General Work of Redemption from Man's Fall to the end, taken in the greatest
extent, as it was Gods said eternal Design by Christ so to carry on the said
Work in the said time, which we shall here endeavor to set before the eyes and
understandings of all such serious Christians for their exceeding great
Consolation and satisfaction (if duly pondered and improved) which will farther
appear (as we said) by the said eternal Decrees, Covenants and Prophesies in
the Old Testament, and the Witnessings of Christ and his Apostles in the New;
but all most strongly determined by Christ's own most Divine Revelation But
because the first 6000 years appear to be also appointed by him for the
carrying on of his Design for that state in the seventh Millennium, and
therefore to run parallel with the said decreed great work of the Redemption of
the World, viz. both of Men and Creatures, (as we said) we shall upon this
third Particular, respecting Christ's carrying it on in the fix first
Millenniums to the seventh, consider, what proof and evidence we find from the
word of God for the same, which may double the strength of the said farther
remaining Proofs which we are to proceed to speak of; therefore we shall first
manifest the reality thereof from Scripture warrant, before we proceed to the
other proofs thereof, (which will include much also of the condition of that
said state from first to last) first the Holy Ghost excellently expounds them
by his resembling of them to the six days of Creation, before God rested the
seventh day, and to the Type of the Israelites rest in Canaan under Joshua's
conduct, signifying thereby, that after 6000 years should be Christ's Sabbatisme
of rest from such his great work of Redemption: as the spirit of God explains
both, Heb. 3, and 4 chapter which our Savior likewise confirms by his most sure
Revelation interpretation thereof, and none like it.

And 2dly, this is also done by God's Spirit comparing 1000 years to one day;
as first from Psalm. 90. where 1000 years with God are said to be as yesterday,
which the Apostle Peter, 2 Epist. 3.8. sets forth with great Emphasis, and
declares it to be a great point, which he would not have Christians ignorant
of, that one day with the Lord, [Christ] (whose coming he there speaks of) is
as 1000 years; and he puts it both ways, saying, and 1000 years as one day;
viz. in reference to his said coming, to be at the end of the sixth Millennium;
and our Savior also most exactly determines that Sabbatisme of the seventh
Millennium accordingly, by 1000 years six times over, Rev. 20.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
of which more afterward, etc.

3. Christ's carrying on that said work of Redemption for his Universal True
Church, as that work which his Father gave him to do, in that respect, in his
execution of his three great Offices in the time of his Mediatorship in the
World, which was first in his eminent Prophetical Office in ^000 years to his
first coming; and secondly in his eminent Priestly Office in the New Testament,
in the next 2000 years, before the period of his eminent Kingly Office for his
said Universal true Church will begin, in that following state in that world to
come: (as is largely proved in our Treatise on Genesis 3.15)

4. This also may appear from that frequent Promise of Gods showing mercy to
1000 Generations, that is, for the 7000 years of the worlds continuance: (as we
reckon in the middle state of things, three lives to be 21 years, as in page 6,
and 7 of our Key is explained.)

5. From Scripture Chronology, first of Moses his 2400 years and more,
revealed to him for time past, with what was in Joshua, Judges, Kings and
Chronicles, which Bishop Usher, that very good man, and great Antiquary,
computes at Solomon's Temple built 3000 years, and at the Jews Captivity at
Babylon about An. Mund 3450 years, as Daniels Divine great Calender, chapter 8. of
2300 years of their Bondage, under the four Gentile Monarchies declares, (as we
shall farther by Divine Assistance manifest.) Which, with Christ's 1000 years,
Rev. 20. make up 6750 years, besides the little space of Satan's loosing, (not
said what it will be.) To like purpose is the concinnitie of Bucolcerus in our
Table of Chronology in the beginning of our Irenicon, of his 50 Jubelies to
Isreal's coming out of Egypt, and to Babylons Captivity 70 Jubelies, which is
3550 years, unto which, part of Daniels 2300 years 'till Christ, is to be
added; and from thence he speaks as aptly, saying, The seven Seals, and the
seven Trumpets out of the seventh Seal, and the seventh Vial falling under the
seventh Trumpet, brings us to the seventh Millinary, or great Sabbatisme of the
Saints rest with Christ, (as it is called, Heb. 4.9)

And as God eternally appointed Christ (as after may be showed) in that state
to be Heir of all thing, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. upon his carrying on his three great
Works in the world in the 6000 years foregoing (for they also pass through the
6000 to the 7th, wherein he with his Saints shall enjoy the same, as we shall
show) the first is his making the Worlds, that is, the (...), or his
Providencial Management of the several states of things, 1. in the Old World,
2. in this present evil World, and 3dly in the world to come, Ephesians. 1.20. and
Heb. 2.5. the word is, (...), an habitable world to come. [For as for Christ's
creating Heaven and Earth at first out of nothing, spoken of v. 10, 11, 12.
that was his Transient act, but this his making the worlds as he carries on his
said work of Redemption, through all the said (...), against the God of this
present evil world, and the Children of it both said, (...), of this world, (as
the Scripture decyphers them many times as 2 Cor. 4.4. and Luke 16.8.) such his
making of them is his immanent, and so long continued act, so providentially
disposing what is past, and will do so for what remains to be done, with the
Father and by the operation of the Holy Spirit: and so 2dly, for his upholding
of all things by the word of his power, etc. verse 3. through all those (...),
or several states of thing; and 3dly by purging the sins of his Elect, 1. by
his word and will revealed, 2 by his blood shed or to be shed, and 3dly, by his
Spirit given, through all the said (...) or Worlds, until from his Personal
second coming to the Judgment of the great day he perfects the said work of
Redemption, and by his carrying on of these 3 things in the first 6000 years,
and that so his three fold most Just Title and Right may then manifestly arise,
of his inheriting all things, verse. 2, 3. which (s^ith he) his Saints shall
also then inherit with him, Rev. 21.7.

But here some may object, that the sixth Millen. will so want above 200 years,
etc.

Answ. 1. Christ tells us of shortning evil times for the Elects sake: he may
mean it of these, etc.

2. The sixth Millen. in that respect seems more like the sixth day in the
Creation; at the end of which (most probably) the Serpent Satan tempted Eve,
she seduced Adam, and God in the cool of the day Summons, Arrains, and
Sentenceth all the three said Offenders, and cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise:
(all which would require some considerable time) and we know not but that he
has designed the little space of Satan's loosing to make it up, being a bad
state of things with them who shall act in that wicked attempt, which yet will
not reach the Saints, but only make Christ a little work to perfect his said
Redemption then, by destroying the Devil and wicked men at once, when he lastly
delivers his Saints in the world, as in our six Conclusions is showed, page 17,
18. of Restitut. [also a Germane Doctor gives an account of much more than 200
years lost in several Computations which he mentions, and so the 6000 years
should be much past; (but we insist not upon that) only acknowleding God is
Sovereign Lord of all times and actings in them; and for such particularities
we may not be curious, where he has not revealed, but we see the Parallel of
the sixth day, and sixth thousand year from Gods one is considerable, and (as
was showed) we have Gods Spirits Guidance thereto, and Christ's Explication
thereof before the little space we mentioned: and by all which it may appear
there is Scripture ground for Gods Millenniari me for the first 6000 years, as
well as for Christ's on the seventh, etc. besides, God appointed Christ to be
then Heir of all things; so the order, and manner, and means, with the times
for the same: and those times arev ery punctually and exactly set forth by
Christ himself. We shall now proceed to the further most irresistible evidence
of the said near approaching time and state.

1. From Gods eternal Decree manifested by his word in four particulars, all to
take place in the same time and state; all which are also Divinely, Gloriously
and Graciously resolved ultimately (that none may dare to contradict under a
terrible Penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19.) by Christ in his Book of Revelation, to
belong to the same. The first is, his eternal Decree of appointing Christ then
to be Heir of all things, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. from his 3 fold said right which we
but now mentioned, when the world to come, or last state of things in it shall
take place; of which, more (if God will) in the instance of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, when the Revelation also declares Christ shall have the Sovereignty
and Dominion of the world given to him, as Dan. 7.13, 14. and Rev. 20. and all
things shall be made new for him and his Saints, chapter 21.5. to become a fit
Inheritance for him and them, as he promises, (as was said) Rev. 21.7. for
which purpose, when St. James speaks of raising up David's Tabernacle, the
Spirit of God directs him to set down that great Truth foreknown to God are all
his works from the Foundation of the world] as if he would thereby show that
the said raising of the Tabernacle of David was a matter [foreknown to God from
Eteraity Acts 15.17. when Christ will arise and judge the Earth, that he may,
(as the Psalmist speaks) inherit all Nations, Psalm. 82. ult.

2. Gods Word witnesses that God made an eternal Covenant with Christ to give
to him all his Elect in the said times to be redeemed by him, until he receive
his Inheritance, and when the Heathen shall be given him for his Inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession, Psalm. 2. And so he
declares Esa. 62.6. that he will give them for a Covenant of the people; which
the Sep. very appositely and fitly renders [(...)] of my Generation; not of
Bloods, or the will of the flesh, or the will of Man; but born of God, as John
1.13. and born of the Spirit, John 3.5, 6. and of this Covenant the Holy Ghost
gives an excellent explication, Isa. 59 ult. As for me, this my Covenant with
them (says the Lord) my spirit which is upon thee, [Christ] and my words which
I have put in thy mouth, (which includes all his Ordinances grounded upon his
Word) nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed:
and again he adds, [saith the Lord] (for this Scipture is full of Emphasis)
from henceforth even for ever: I do here only briefly touch upon these great
things, referring what remains to future Discourses (if God will) and all those
so Heavenborn Creatures, given by Covenant to Christ from Eternity, the
Apostle, Romans 8.17. declares, (where also he speaks of other matters respecting
that state of the 1000 years, verse 19, 20, 21, etc.) that they shall be Heirs,
and joint Heirs with Christ; and they are also so explained to be the New
Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, called there, The Bride, the
Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.2, 9. which will be the Spirits of just men made perfect,
which before that time were in the Jerusalem above, Gal. 4. but then coming
with Christ at his appearance and Kingdom, are called the Bride the Lambs
Wife, at the Saints first bodily Resurrection, Rev. 20.4, 5. when as our
Savior prayed, John 17.23. they will be then made perfect in one, and behold
his glory, etc. verse 24.

3. Gods word witnesses that God by his said Eternal Decree, appointed the
Creation of the World for Christ and his said Saints, to be possessed by them
in the said seventh Millennium; for although he made Angels and Men at first in
the perfection of their Natures, yet he was not then pleased to e^gage his
Almighty Arm to uphold them in that state: wherefore, foreseeing they would
fall, he carries on thereupon his everlastitg design through Christ for his
Saints to his own greatest Glory, etc. by whom both the Elect Angels were
confirmed in grace and glory; and the sins of the Saints should through all
times be purged away by himself; for the good of whom he has ever since made
his Elect Angels Ministering Spirits, having from Eternity given them by his
said Covenant unto Christ: Therefore the Spirit of God evidently so explains
Psalm 8.4. in that excellent Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 2, 6, 7, 8. speaking
by allusion there to the first Adam: but in both texts Christ is said to be the
Son of Man, which the first Adam was not but only by Creation the Son of God,
Luke 3. the last. And this Son of Man [Christ] is he that was for a little
season in the world made lower than the Angels, but after Crowned with Glory
and Honor; who for the suffering of death, (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 1.3.)
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and has all things (as he
goes on, v. 8.) put in subjection under his feet; viz. Decretively and
Declaratively, not actually (as all shall then be) and so the holy Apostle
speaks there [ we do not yet see all things put under him, v. 8.] and now in
some sort or sense the world is the Saints, as 1 Cor. 3.22. but then it shall
be [not only as Christ now providentially orders all for their good therein]
but then it shall also be theirs in possession too, at the said times of the
Restitution of all things (as our Savior resolves in that world to come, Rev.
21.5.7.) Consider well as to this Head, our Divine Theses, in page 3, 4, 5, 6,
etc. of our first Irenic. and Abridg. p. 7, 8, etc. all (though short) yet of
great weight.

4. Gods word witnesses that by an Eeternal Decree he has appointed to set
his King Christ upon his holy Hill of Sion, Psalm 2. according to his last
Covenant with David for his sure Mercies respecting Christ's Universal and
perpetual Kingdom that he promised to him for ever, 2 Samuel 7.16. to the end;
and that after all the vain attempts in the world to the contrary, v. 1, 2, 3,
which have ever been in acting since the Fall, that Enmity was put by Gods
Justice between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.
and will be to that very time when he shall come with his Saints to take
possession of it, which I doubt not but this Generation will shortly see; and
what a time of trouble will then be, 'till Christ's said coming ends it, Dan
12.1. Rev. 16.18. experience will soon manifest; but notwithstanding all that
has been, is now in acting, or shall be, until then: yet says God, I have set
my King [Christ, the great King of the New Jerusalem, as he styles himself, Mat
5.35.] upon my holy Hill of Sion; when also upon his asking (as he did John
17.20.) he will give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost
part of the Earth for his Possession; and when he will make him his Firstborne
(and so Heir to the Kingdom) higher than the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89.27.
and Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. and therefore when he destroys
the Beast and false Prophet at the Armageddon Battle, his Name shall be written
upon his Vesture, and upon his Thigh; whose Name also is called the Word of
God, v. 13. yea, he had a name written that no man knows but he himself, v. 12.
but yet, v. 16. his Name is so written King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev.
19.11, etc. whereupon he with his raised Saints shall Reign upon Earth 1000
years, Rev. 20.4, 6. which will be Gods said setting of his King Christ upon
his holy Hill of Sion, and his possessing of his said Davidical Kingdom for
ever, 2 Samuel 7. which from our 12 Foundations of our Faith hereof is abundantly
evident with others.

Hence also it is very observable, Acts 15.16, 17. that the Holy Spirit upon
the Apostle James his speaking of the raising David's Tabernacle, which the
Prophet Am. shows, chapter 9.11. the last shall be so that the people shall never
more thenceforward be pulled up out of their own Land (as also is said 2 Samuel
7) and to be when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, as Romans 11. which
he styles all the Heathen that are called by my name, to which text of Amos S.
James having spoken of the Gentiles first call, which was in part (as he said by
his mouth, v. 7. he then adds, after that I will return, [which words are not
in Amos 9. but Gods Spirit taught him so to explain them] and build up his
Tabernacle also; and as declaring it not to belong to that first call of the
Gentiles, but as Amos says when all the Heathen shall be called by his name;
and thereupon adds that great general Divine Truth, here to be especially
applied to the raising of David's Tabernacle, v. 18. known unto God, says he,
are all his works from the beginning of the world, as if he would thereby teach
Gods people that it was Gods eternal design then to raise David's said
Tabernacle in Christ according to his Covenant with David, viz. for his House,
his Throne, and Kingdom for ever, as 2 Samuel 7. and that all the works of God
in the world since tend to fulfill that which is his great design in that time
in the world; namely, for Christ to reign in the renewed state thereof with his
Saints in it, where they had all been before so Conteamed, Persecuted, and
Oppressed by the black Prince of this present evil world, and by ungodly men
also called the children thereof; namely of this present evil world. And thus
we may see in all these particulars, Gods eternal decrees are confirmed and
explained by Christ as, they shall take place in that state in those times
accordingly, of which much more will be manifest from the Divine exactness, the
comprehensive usefulness, and the certain determination of Christ in his said
Key, which is chiefly the spirit of Prophecy, and the Testimony of Jesus, as
he had before spoken by his spirit in his Prophets, Rev. 19.10.

The next evidence of the said sat in the said times, is from the most ancient
Declarations, Promises, and Covenants in his word unto the Fathers, as the next
revealed grounds of the same. The first was Gods own Declaration upon Man's
Fall, That the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head; and because he
was to be only the seed of the Woman, and not of the man, therefore was
necessarily to be the Son of God, as he was manifest to be in the in 4000 years
after, and by the breaking of the Serpents head by degrees, in respect both of
his head of Policy and Power, at last he should so make way for his own
sovereignty, and the Dominion over the Creatures, at last to be restored to
him, as largely is to be seen in our Treatise on Genesis 3.15. so that in that
first Declaration we may observe, first, how all evil shall by him be taken out
of the world, viz. by Christ's destroying the works of the Devil, as St John
speaks, and that both in his Designs and actings by all his wicked Instruments
in the old world, and ever since in the new world, especially in his designs of
his three Babels, as in chapter 5. of our Iren. all to come to utter confusioon at
his 2d coming, (having laid the firm foundation thereof by his death at his
first coming) by bringing in again at last oneness of Language, peaceable and
good Gvernment, and vindicated his Gospel Truth from Mystical Babylons
pollutions: but more especially he will break his head of power by his great
day of Judgment eminently at the first act thereof, Rev. 19.20. and totally,
and finally at the last, v. 11.

And 2dly, this in the next place God more generally made known to Enoch, as
St. Jude records it, v. 13, 14. who was a Type of Christ's Ascension, having
this Testimony, that he pleased God, as the Apostle witnesses (as God was well
pleased with Christ who having done all his wills, ascended into Heaven, and at
his descending again begins the first act of his Judgment of his said great
day, when the body of the Beast shall be given to the burning flame, Dan. 7.
and the last act will totally and finally break h^s said head of power, which
our Savior teaches shall be after the 1000 years of his Reign with his Sts.
Rev. 20. when Satan shall be cast into the fiery lake, wherein the Beast had
been 1000 years before.

The 3d to whom God revealed those Mercies so long before was Noah, and that
three ways; First, as saving his Family by an Ark, from that destruction with
wicked men by the flood, as a Type of Christ's saving his Saints from the fires
of Gods wrath at both those acts of Judgment against men and Devils. And then
2dly, on the other hand for carrying on of Good for the Saints then, God in the
second place made a Covenant with Noah for the Worlds and Creatures
preserration, until those last times, and set the Rainbow in the clouds as a
token thereof, and also for the fruitfulness thereof, for all their
Accommodations till then; and that the greatest fruitfulness should be in that
last state, as the Prophets afterward both confirm and explain, as Joel 3.
Ezekiel. 34. Amos 9.13.

And in the 3d place, God gives a Prophecy to Noah, that his two Sons
posterity, viz. the Jews descending from Shem, who obtained the first interest
in Gods favor then; and the Gentiles in their time descending from Japhet,
should be persuaded by God to dwell in the Tents of Shem. viz. to be of the
true Church, when the Jews were cast off, Acts 13 being the two stems, out of
whose roots the Elect should (mostly) arise, until Christ's second comeing
(though (happily) many Proselites might spring out of Chams race since, as before
the flood out of Cains) the former Call of the Gentiles, Hos. 10. is explained
Romans 9. and the joint Call of both to come, is explained, Romans 15. when the
Gentiles, with all Gods ancient people, shall rejoice together, as Deuteronomy. 32.43.
but after that time all Nations and People shall see the salvation of the great
God of Israel, when the Heathen (as was said) shall be given to Christ for his
Inheritance, etc. and as Dan. 7.27. all the Kingdom and Dominion, and
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven (N. B.) shall be given to the
Saints of the most high with Christ, and all Dominion shall serve and obey him.
And thus briefly of the said Predictions to the said three Fathers, Adam, Enoch
and Noah, all extending to the said time and state, (as our Savior has
likewise by his Revelation resolved us, etc.)

Come we now to the Covenanted Mercies made by God to the following Fathers,
and their spiritnal seed, for the Typical Canaan, and Mount Sion therein, etc.
to enjoy the benefits thereof through their Divine seed Christ; [for there are
many disterences betwixt them, and their natural races interest, which was but
conditional, and so broken by them, as we set down in many distinctions, page
10, 11, 12. of Resurect.] but their spiritual Race with themselves will enjoy
their sure interest in the renewed state thereof at the first Resurrection, (as
in our Key of the Covenants with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David, of which
many great things are there observable, page 6, 7, 8, etc. and all suiting to
Christ's Revelation in the New Jerusalem state, and Kingdom of Christ, chapter 20,
and 21, and 22. all holding forth the truth and faithfulness of God, as we more
largely showed both in the Systeme of promised Mercies and Covenauts, and the
Treatise following of Resur.

First, Abraham the Father of the Faithful had a seven fold gradation of the
said Promises and Covenants for the Land of Canaan, and the chief City in it
for his natural seed in the Type, but as for his own interest, he looked for a
City that was then a sar of, at the first Resur. (with his spiritual seed) that
has foundations, whose Maker and Builder is God, which God (says the Apostle)
had prepared for the Fathers, who Without us also shall not there be made
perfect, Heb. 11.10, 16, 40. or perfect in one, John 17. in the New Jerusalem
as the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.2, 9. for as Abraham saw Christ's day, first and last
by Faith; so it is not to be doubted, but he saw that City of an Heavenly
excellency, (though it will be in the world then, as our fifteen Reasons
approved by the learned and judicious sufficiently manifest) and so the
Covenanted Confirmations to the like purpose made unto Isaac and Jacob: as may
particularly be seen in our said Key respecting all their three Covenants; for
here we only briefly touch upon them, as affording us their strong evidence to
these said Divine Truths.

The last is Gods Covenant with David as to his sure Mercies respecting his
Kingdom, gloriously to be set up in Christ, when he shall return (as Luke 19.)
from his Fathers right hand, ceasing then as Mediator, to sit upon his Fathers
Throne, Rev. 3.21. and coming to sit with his said Saints upon his own Throne
then; for all these said Fathers natural Offspring were cast out of the
Typical Canaan with a sore destruction for their great sins, Mic. 2.10. and
David's natural Race ceased to succeed him over Israel and Judah, for the height
of their wickedness, to the falling of his Tabernacle; for their long bondage
of 2300 years, during the four Gentile Monarchies succeeding thereupon, (as God
revealed to the greatly beloved Prophet Daniel) and after his Visions is also
contained in St. John's the beloved Disciples book of Revelation, whenas the
Prophet Amos speaks, chapter 9. and is explained by the Apostle James, Acts 15.
that David's Tabernacle at the end of the last Monarchy (now near approaching)
shall (as was said) in Christ that Son of David be set up again, when the
spiritual and Divine part of the last Covenant with David shall most surely be
fulfilled, to the exceeding great glory amongst all his said Saints, of his
Wisdom, Power, Justice and Truth against the Serpent and his seed; and of his
Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness, Faithfulness and Truth to themselves, as in our
Treatise of Resurrection is set forth. The like Testimony now of the almost
experienced time God gave by his other Divine Contemporary Mistical Prophet
Ezeekiel. chapter 21.26, 27. saying both of the fall of David's Tabernacle in the
last of his Natural Race, I will overturn, overturn, overturn; and of the
raising it up again as follows, etc. The fall is first redoubled there not only
for certainty of its falling; as the four Monarchies were twice revealed, first
to a Gentile, secondly to a Jew, etc. but it seems to be a farther confirmation
of Daniels large measure of the suffering times of the Jews and Gentiles under
the same four Monarchies, which by Gods Spirit seems expressly to be declared
in the next words, which declare the raising it up again; viz. [until he come,
whose right it is, and I will give it him] which was meant evidently of his
second comeing; for he came the first time to suffer, not to reign: neither
does God give it to him, until his second coming, at the destruction of the
Beast, Dan. 7.9, 13, 14. when the Tabernacle of David is to be raised up again
in him. But this three fold overturning was to be fulfilled in that long
interim of their bondage 2300 years, (as since has been found by experience
near to the end thereof.) The first overturn was by the Caldeans, when the Jews
were led Captive to Babylon; [But under the Medo-persians, God wonderfully
reduced many of them by working the Spirit of Cyrus to it, to fulfill Jacobs
Prophecy of the comeing of Shilo, and Daniels 70 weeks, to Christ's finishing
transgression by his death, and bringing in everlasting righteousness by his
Resurrection and Ascension, when God set up his Kingdom of the Stone (as was
noted) yet secondly, under the Greek Monarchy their Land was saddly harrased
and spoiled a long time, betwixt the two Wings or Branches thereof, Egypt and
Syria lying on both sides of it, until the end of Antiochus Epiphanes his
outrage, when the Roman (by Scripture account) began, under which their Land
has been again greatly overturned, and turned into a Province until those
Ruiners of that Monarchy, viz. the Mahumitans, Saricens and Turks both harrased
it and took it, and by degrees all the Eastern Empire also; so that the Jews
have changed only their Oppressors, but not their Bondage, and still in the
Land of Magog, or Roman Monarchy, wherein they are to continue in that part
until that Monarchy, and their present Oppressor [the Turk] both perish
(probably) together at Christ's said appearance and Kingdom: and thus through
all that said time; that three fold overturning will be very probably
fulfilled: and the Spirit of Christ has in many things to come also witnessed
by Ezekiel as well as Daniel (though the Series and order of them is chiefly
from Daniel) But Ezekiel chap. 36. speaks of their Divine Grace as the
foundation of all future Mercy: so Daniel 12.1, 2, 3. and chapter 37. of their
Deliverance and Union: so Dan. 12.1. and chap. 38.39. he had the Vision of Gog
and Magogs destruction: so Dan. 7. and chap. 40. to the end of the Book: the
Vision of the New Jerusalem, and the Temple upon the Enemies said ruin: so
Daniel at that end of their days shall stand up in his Lot in that state.

3. It is manifest from Gods many explications of the said Predictions and
promised Covenants and Mercies to the Fathers, as they are afterward confirmed
and explained in the following Prophets; all which are ultimately determined by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the said state and time, as respecting all
such said Saints that shall then be raised by him to reign with him in his said
Mediatory or Davidical Kingdom in the 1000 years, and be in the New Jerusalem
happy state then in the world, at the times of the Restit. of all things:
wherefore Christ's said Revelation ought exceedingly to be regarded and
believed, besides other Reasons for the light it gives to all such Prophetical
Scriptures, and for the manifold comprehensive usefulness of it, etc. And here
we might proceed farther to show how these Covenants were confirmed by the
following Prophets which largely might be done, had it not been set forth from
Acts 3. as he spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, in our Iren. chapter 5,
6, 7, 8. and in our 12 said Foundations, with many other parts of our said
work, which is now by Divine disposal become a useful Comment upon our two last
Treatises on Rev. 20.5. and Rev. 21.5. page 1, 2, 3, 4. of Restitut. Since
Christ's Spirit has vouchsafed these great Discoveries to so weak and unworthy
an Instrument of late, by the help of all our former Pieces, especially of our
more late useful Key, and also our three first Convincing Arguments in the Word
Written, abundantly prove the same, we need add no more, etc. and our Savior,
Rev. 21. applied diverse Texts in Esa. 60, etc. to the time and state of the New
Jerusalem, as a pattern of many more, etc.

4. The fourth Scripture evidence is of the many passages in the Gospels, and
Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles, which receive no full and sure explication,
but by the help of Christ's said Revelation, which teaches us also, that they
have relation to all the former heads. 1. of Gods eternal Decree in all the
said Particulars. 2. To his declared or promised Mercies and Covenants before
named; or to the Prophets Confirmations, Explications or Illustrations of the
same, which all explaining their sense in the New Testaments; and also is very
evidently the most excellent Divine Key of all such Prophesies referring to
that said time and state, and even the Prophecy of Jacob, and the like, and
the partial deliverance of the two Tribes wonderfully by Gods working Divinely
upon the spirit of Cyrus to that end, and Daniels 70 Weeks of Years, all
specially and immediately respecting the Messiah or Shiloe's first comeing. Yet
since Gods Kingdom of the Stone began, at or about his Ascension for 1666.
years from that his spiritual powerful Victory over the Powers of Darkness
then, Col. 15. until his said glorious, visible and powerful victory be
obtained over all his great Enemies, making them then (at the end thereof) his
footstool: so we may thence also see the drift of that great Foundation then
laid for the Saints said Reconciliation to God, was to advance the glorious and
blessed ends of Christ's second comeing, when they shall reign with him, which
we have already given instances of, from Luke 20.35, 36. explained in Resur. by
Rev. 20.5. and of Acts 3.19, 20, 21. explained by Rev. 21.5. in the beginning
of both our last books and shall by Gods gracious assistance do in some other
of the Epistles, but especially as a pattern of all the rest in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, to manifest that Revelation Interpretation of all such said Parts
of Scripture is the best and most sure Interpretation of them.

5. It is manifest from the many Parallels in the Books of Daniel and the
Revelation, and of the admirable connection of both: First of the matters and
things; and secondly of their times or the Series and order of them both. First
from their many Parallels: as 1. The manner of writing them both, Rev. 1.19.
first of the things which both of them had seen. 2. of the things then in their
own time, as we observed in our Summary of Daniel, page 3, 4, 5, etc. And 3dly,
of the things that shall be afterward, etc. where many things are set down
suiting to one another: and though Daniel set forth more generally and briefly
all the four Monarchies, chap. 2. and chap. 7. yet at the end of them in both
chapters, he shows the state of things to be in the 1000 years: at the end of
chap. 2. he sets down the beginning of the Kingdom of the Stone at v. 44, etc.
about Christ's Ascension, to continue for 1666 years, which should break the
Iron Roman Monarchy in that time, and it self become a Mountain filling the
whole Earth, v. 35. when the time of the ten Kings, chapter 7. and the little
Horns time, time, and half a time; viz. of the Beast or Antichrist, [haply
the Turk also, for there are many Resemblances of both, etc.] shall be extinct,
and therefore in that ioyenth chapter he speaks of the first act of the
Judgment of the great day to give the body of the Beast to the burning flame:
when he had also the Vision of Christ's comeing in the Clouds to receive his
universal and perpetual Kingdom in the world, next after the Beasts Date of a
time, times, and half a time are out; explained by 42 months, and 1260 days
in Rev. 11. and briefly in passing over the Persian, v. 1, 2. and running
through much of the Grecian Monarchy in chapter 11. to v. 36, he comes to the Roman
at its height in Christ's time, and after in the primative Persecutions, v. 36.
and to the Popes, v. 37, 38, 39. and so by the Saracens in that time of the
end, v. 40. and the Turks, v. 40. that King of the North, of whom as the second
Woe-trumpet he proceeds to speak v. 41, 42, 43, 44. to his end 45. about
Christ's appearance; and so chapter 12. setting forth the time of Christ's appearance
and Kingdom, he gives farther explications of the times of the Beast v. 5, 6,
7. and those before it, verse 4. and in reference to Christ's said comeing, chapter
10. he had a Vision aforehand of his glorious person, and so had St. John, chapter
1. and as the man in white Linen, chapter 12. as the great High Priest declares
the time, viz. of that last Gentile Monarchy should be no longer than Christ's
appearance: so Christ the same person swears the like, Rev. 10 at the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet, which is the very same time: see more in our Parallels
of the Roman and Christ's Monarchy from both Books. And he that is able to make
these and the like Parallels understandingly by Gods Mercy may soon prove very
judicious in matters respecting the said happy state of the 1000 years, so
excellently set down by Christ farther to explain these last things in the 4
last chapter of the Revel.

And 2dly, there is a wonderful connection of the Misterious times of Daniel,
with those of the Revelation succeeding them, first the great Calender of 2300
years in chapter 8. of Daniel, misteriously given by Palmoni, or the secret
Numberer, as it is opened v. 17. by him, at the time of the end the Vision
shall be, and v. 19. in the last end of the indignation, viz. against the Jews;
and v. 26. as a Key of both, to be shut up for many days, with many other
Reasons in our Summary on that text, which manifest it to be the measure of the
times of the Gentiles Dominion, and Israelites and Jews joint Bondage, which
contains Daniels three Monarchies past, and the Romans to Christ, and thence by
vulgar account 1700 years to Rev. 19 chapter as in Restitut. p. 26, 27, 28. until
the ruin of the Beast, and until Christ's said Kingdom of the Mountain begins;
likewise, in Daniels second Number of the 70 weeks, from the execution of the
Command, in the 20th year of Artaxerxes Longimanns, about Anno Mundi 3550. to
build the City Jerusalem, to Christ's putting an end to sin by his death, and
bringing in everlasting Righteousness by his Resurrection and Ascension, in the
middle of Daniels last week, making up 490 years, when the God of Heaven set up
the Kingdom of the Stone for its 1666 years, and is also the period of
Antichrists Date, Rev. 13. ult. to be found out by the Spirits Divine Wisdom
in Daniel and St. Paul, who says the apperance of Christ's comeing will destroy
him, 1 These. 2.8. and this Number of Daniel proceeds i^ connection with the
Revelation, from Anno Dom. by vulgar account, about 34. by adding the said
Divine Number (as I esteem it) both ways, 1666. for the end of the Kingdom of
the Stone, then beginning that of the Mountain, as v. 35. and also the end of
the Beasts Date, and so stands in connection with Daniel in respect both of the
former and latter times of Daniel and Revelation, so suiting admirably each to
other, etc.

3. For Daniels third Mistical Numbers connection by a mark [of taking away of
Sacrifice, and setting up the abomination of desolation, chap. 12.] to be found
many hundred years after; and yet when it comes after Adrians the Emperors
driving the Jews from sacrificing about 130 years after Christ, and
Constantines about 312. that it so wonderfully should be ordered about 365 in
Julian the Apostates time, that by such an eminent hand of God, as we showed.
page 6. of Abridgm. of Dan. and of Parral. p. 34. it should then be taken away
ultimately (as public at least) to which 365. by adding the before revealed to
Daniel 1335. (thence to the blessed times) the said Revelation number of 1700
years, to chapter 20. is so by that wonderful connection made up by both these
beloved Servants of God and Christ's so strange agreement in witnessing jointly
to both Divine books from the same Holy Spirit, which is one admirable evidence
of the said Truth witnessed by both.

And as to the excellent Divine Contrivance of the Book of Revelation in two
Schemes, to chapter 19. as an explication of Daniels short Hints for the Times;
during 1666 years, under the Kingdom of the Stone, Dan. 2.24. from Christ's
Ascension to his descending again, as page 26, 27. of Restitut. with other
things observable in the order of it: all these may be observed in our Scheme
of Revelation, and Summary of Daniel in one sheet, of excellent use, (if well
perused, and frequently.) But for the matter of the four last chapters briefly
handled, Dan. 2. and Dan. 7. after the fourth Monarchy our Savior explains
Divinely many things as referring to the other Prophets, from first to last,
chiefly respecting the said ancient Predictions and Covenants with wonderful
exactness, which the latter Prophets, and New Testament confirm, as they are so
explained by Christ's said Revelation.

Yet many allusions to other Prophets are made in that whole book to the Old
Testament Dispensations, both of the Camp of Israel in their Wilderness
condion, and when the Temple was built, and to Rulers the 24 Elders; and to
Church Guides, the four Beasts full of Eyes, Rev. 4. and to Ezekiels Vision,
chapter 1. and 10. and Es. 6. to Zacharies two Olive Trees, chapter 4. the Witnesses,
Rev. 11. etc. wherein we may note the passing of the handle of Christ's Key (as
we may fitly call it) by Promises and Encouragements (as in our seventh
Convincing Argument) to their times of fulfilling in the 1000 years: as the
Souls beheaded, and their fellow Servants and Brethren, Rev. 6.9, 10, etc. are
raised to Reign, chapter 20.4, 6. which is a very weighty and useful consideration
therein. We only by the Abridgments [mentioned in our Account, p. 3.] passed
per Saltum (as we said page 3. of Resur.) unto the twentieth chapter referring
Christians for the former part to chapter 19. (now almost fulfilled) to Mr. Medes
Commentary, and Clavis chiefly: but the Observation of December. 7. 1664. in the
Prodr. on Mr. Durhams book do explain many things from chapter 5. to the end: but
note here, that as Daniels twelfth chapter is a Key to that Book, so Rev. 17. to
the times of the Beasts 1660 years, as in our useful Observations, where that
and many other excellent matters respecting both books are set down, Observe. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. next after the Tract upon Rev. 22.20. Thus we see the Holy Spirit
so many ways joins Daniel and the Revolation both in times and things (as was
showed) in both Books through the 2300 years of the four said Gentile
Monarchies from the falling of David's said Tabernacle, which points Unto us
this consolation that God will be mindful of that covenant when the time comes:
as also of all the former whose Period is the same and their mercy in
substance will be the same: and it is no wonder it should be so long before
that peoples reducement, since their Sin was so great at first, but especially
at their last and longest and sorest Captivity when they had killed the Lord of
life with so great a curse upon themselves and their Children.

Upon all which said confirmations and evidences Gods Design in Christ's
redemtion was at his first coming to be manifest to be the son of God in the
flesh, and to have a body given him Heb 10.5. as in both respects foretold by
the Prophets, when as God-man he by dying laid the foundation of all future
good, Reconciling both Jews and Gentles by his death: Romans 5.10. and meriting
the salvation of all his Saints souls, about An. Mun. 4000. but toward the end
of the Sixth millennium at his 2d coming he shall powerfully destroy his great
Visible enemies and bind Satan the 1000. years and raise the Saints bodies from
the grave freeing the persons and outward conditions of his people, and the the
world and Creatures in it from the bondage of Corruptions as largly is
explained Restit. p. 44. 45. 46. etc. and in the 4. last chapter we shall here only
farther observe Christ's curious exactness that speaking of the beasts
destruction at the time of his eminent breaking of the Serpents head at the
first act of the Judgment, he only says these are the true sayings of God c.
19.9. but when he speaks of the promised mercies to the Fathers (twice) to be
then fulfilled, he says, chapter 21.5. and chap 22.6. these words are both
faithful and true.

And also for the times in respect of the when he sets the mark (...), it is
done, at the renovation of all things, chapter 21.6. which before he had set, Chap.
16, 17. by a like great Voice from the Throne to show their coincidence at the
same time, saying, (...), it is done, as from Ezekiel. 39.8. is remarkably
explained. [N. B.] page 61, 62. of Restitut.

And for the quandiu how long it shall continue, Christ set it down in an
unparalleled manner, six times over to be 1000 years; and 3 of them absolutely
1000 years, (...), and then three times relatively, (...), those, those, those
thousand years, Rev. 20. First, of Satan's binding, v. 2, 3. 2dly, of the Saints
first bodily Resurrection and Reign with Christ in the world, v. 4, 5. 3dly, of
the happy condition in that state. 1. They are blessed. 2. holy, as the reason
of that blessedness. 3. Their security thereupon, they shall not be hurt of the
second death. 4. Their great Privilege, then they shall be Priests of God and
of Christ. 5. In their supreme Authority with Christ, then they reigned with
Christ 1000 years. In such a wonderful glorious manner has our Savior
determined the said time and state, which is the Divine Millenniarism of Christ
so exactly and curiously set before us by his Scriptures of Truth.

And lastly, by the comprehensive usefulness of this book, it refers to all
parts all Holy Scriptures; for first, Christ explains the last times of the
four Gentile Monarchies, mistically contained in Daniel, as we showed from the
beginning of the Kingdom of the Stone, to the end thereof, at chapter 19. whose
Chronology begin when David's Tabernacle fell for the Sins of his natural Race;
and those said Gentile Kingdoms reach through the 2300 years of their
continuance, to the raising of David's Tabernacle in Christ, as the Son of
David's Reign with his Saints, New. David's Covenant for his said Kingdom (which
that state of Israel was then grown up unto) carries us back to the former
Promises and Covenants to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, respecting the renewed
state of the Land, and the New Jerusalem belonging to their Spiritual Seed, and
Noah's Type of the Ark, sets forth the safety of the Saints in the end of the
world, by Christ their true Ark; the Covenant for all Creatures signified by
the Rainbow, assures the worlds continuance, and the accommodations of its
fruitfulness, and that chiefly for those times (as following Prophets teach us)
his Prophecy of Shems and Japhets Posterity, set forth of what Race mostly
(besides Proselites happily all along) should rise, as the Prophets after explain
in both their double great Calls; and how the Messiah from Adam, Enoch, Noah,
and all the rest should lineally descend, who should restore his Saints with
himself, to a much more glorious and happy Paradise of God in that said state
and Kingdom of Christ than the first Adam had, when he was the only Monarch of
the world.

Yea, this most Divine Book will carry us higher than the Creation or beginning
of time to Gods eternal Purpose in the four said particulars all explained and
confirmed in Christ's Revelation Key.

By the help of this we may judge of the several Prophesies from the Fountains
of them, revealed in the Word of God, as they relate to the Revealed and
Promised Mercies in their particular drift; as what relates to Adams, what to
Noah's, to Abraham's, Isaacs and Jacobs for their Land, and what to David's, as to
his sure Kingdom, etc. and upon these Discoveries of Gods so giving them title
to that state from the said sure Promises and Covenants they will then sing
their Halelujahs upon such accounts, which, the Revelation teaches both us and
them; as in our Saints Resurrection largly.

Thus we may evidently see that what God designed to be performed in the four
particulars to be found in the 7th Millennium, as Christ's Revelation manifests
he carried on in the first times by revealed Predictions and Covenants to the
Fathers, and their Spiritual Seed through Christ; which are also explained and
confirmed by the following Prophets: all which are wit^ssed to by the Gospels,
and Acts, and Epistles of the holy Apostles; but lastly, wonderfully, exactly,
and most excellently explained and illustrated by Christ's Revelation: and what
greater or stronger evidence of these Divine Truths can be conceived or desired.

Now for the second head, what that state is declared to be from the word of
God, (for farther we may determine nothing) which we have so largely considered
in the times of Restitution of all things, both as to removing of Evils, and
conferring of good upon the Saints first bodily Resurrection, which is their
inlet into that happy state that we need here add no more, but that Christians
should attentively peruse, for that reason both our said Books which plainly
resolve the same.

And for the third, to show in a fit latitude the time when, or the near
approach of that state, it was the main drift of the said times of Restitution
with their near approach from p. 53. to p. 71. upon Rev. 21.5. and again to the
same purpose, from page 73. to page 77.

Likewise for the fourth, how or by what means Christ's said Kingdom shall be
set up; not by any worldly means, or any help of man, saving by Humiliation,
Faith and Prayer, or the like, but only Divinely by the hand of God, only such
as are only called by him, Rev 19. and Psalm, 149.9. who as he was said to set
up the Kingdom of the Stone 1666 years before, Da. 2.44. which in that time
has and does, and will in a Divine Spiritual way break, v. 34.35. and 44, 45.
all the adverse power of the Mettle Kingdoms, which at Christ's appearance
shall all become as the Chafe of the summer Threshing-flore; so God will then
give all the Kingdoms of the World unto Christ, when he comes in the Clouds of
Heaven, Dan. 7.13, 14. in the glory of the Father, and his own glory, and of
all his holy Angels, and his Saints shall then behold Christ's glory in that
said Kingdom which his Father has given him, as he willed at his death, John
17.24. and tells his little little Flock that it is his Fathers pleasure to
give them the Kingdom, Luke 12.32.

And lastly, for the manifold usefulness, exactness and excellency of Daniel
and the Rvelation in cennexion together, both for their Subject, Matter, and
Order of Times, being Divinely Delivered and ordered for such uses, (as we have
showed) and especially in respect of Christ's said Key in the four last chapters
of the Revelation, of which we have said so much in our last named Book, and in
what we have here added to that purpose, to prove such a state shall be in the
world in the seventh Millen. that it is not needful here to speak any thing
more thereof. And for a farther example of all we have said, as to the
usefulness thereof, for explication of Prophetical Scriptures, we shall (as we
said) now proceed to show how usefully and surely Revelation Interpretation
resolves all passages of that nature: We shall consider for a pattern, what we
find thereof in that excellent and Divinely perfound Epistle of the Apostle to
the Hebrews, who were a people specially concerned in that state.

We come now to give an Instance of the great usefulness, and certain exactness
of Revelation Interpretation of all the said Prophetic Scriptures, and of all
such passages in the New Testament as have reference to any of them; and
Christ's Revelation sometimes in connection with Daniels Prophetic Visions,
which appears to me to be an Ordinance of his own holy Spirit for that purpose,
of which we doubt not but to give a good account, as God may give opportunity.

But for this most excellent Epistle to the Hebrews, a people most concerned in
that Renewed State of the 1000 years, the Apostle Paul (most probably) though
to avoid their emulation then, conceals his name; yet being chiefly to write of
Christ's Prophetical Office, then comeing into its eminency, under the New
Testament, writing to them, takes occasion to insert much (as it were by the
way) of Christ's eminent Kingly Office in the ensuing state; and Christ in his
Revelation very Divinely opens all those, otherwise dark, and (by many much
mistaken) passages, as also he does many of his own speeches, in the Gospels
that respect that time and state, as was easy for us to show (if occasion
shall require;) and St. Paul in this Epistle evidently shows himself to be that
person rapt up to Heaven to learn such Divine Mysteries in this Epistle.

He begins to Mind them of their Privilege, with others succeding, that God
has spoken to all such now, by his Son, whom he first sets before them by his
glorious Titles of being the brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express
character of his person, and then what he should be in the ishue of his
proceedings, as God had decreed both for the things, and times, and way, and
means to fulfill them, he had appointed him eternally to be heir of all things
in the world: it may be observed, that he might well be so, for he had made
Heaven and Earth at first, v. 10, 11, 12. yea but that was but his transient
act before the fall; but he has three great immanent and long continued
actings to pass through in his Mediatorship; [for still the Dominion of the
world is usurped by the Prince of the Darkness of it] and so first faith the
second Verse farther, he has made the worlds, viz. the (...), the states, or
several providential disposals; as we opened before: 1. Of the old World. 2. Of
the new World. 3. Of the World to come, which he speaks of, chapter 2.5. as we
shall also farther show by Divine Assistance: and also 2dly, he by the word of
his power upholds all things through all those Worlds, viz. the said (...), or
states of them; and lastly purges the sins of his Elect through them all (as
was said before) and so v. 4. and all the chapter to the end, and throughout
chapter the second, he magnifies Christ's Sonship by comparing him with the
Angels, showing how far, and in how many respects the sacred Scripture sets up
this Son of God above the Angels; he had said something before of his eternal
glory for time past, but here he illustrates his Sonship for time present and
to come: wherein we may observe from Scripture ground that distinction of the
learned, of Christ's being eternally (...), or the wisdom in the bosom of the
Father, and (...), the word revealed or manifested in the flesh to be the Son
of God, in whose face (as being made flesh, and so God-man in one person (as
says our Apostle) all the Fathers glory is manifest, 2 Cor. 3.6. and John
1.12, and so he is the Fathers only begotten Son at his conception, when the
Holy Ghost overshadowed the blessed Virgin upon her Faith of the Angels Message
at his holy conception, Luke 1. and when the fame spirit of holiness with power
raised him from the the Dead, Romans ^.4. Psalm. 2. Acts 13. and so he is called
his first begotten from the Dead, Rev. 1.5. for Scripture only speaks of his
being the Son of God, only in reference to some Divine Manifestation to be made
in time toward his humane nature, whereby God manifests and owns him to be his
Son; as he was first eternally decreed, or Prophetically declared so to be, but
no otherwise; and so at his Baptism, Matthew 3. and at his Transfiguration,
Mat. 17. at his Ascension as he prayed, John 17. to have as the Fathers Son his
former glory, which he had etc. so when the Spirit led him into the Wilderness
to be tempted of the Devil, he brought him to that trial, If thou be the Son of
God, etc. Mat. 4. And at his Death Gods power was so manifest toward him, that
the very Centurion at that discouraging state strongly asserts it, Truly (says
he) this was the Son of God: And our Apostle here adds one more to come, which
is the greatest, the most glorious, and gracious accomplishment of the end of
all others before in the world: when he shall be brought again into that world
to come [N. B.] which shall, as he there shows, not be subject to Angels, but
to the Son of God: so gloriously then above all other times before, to manifest
him to be the Son of God, ad his heir of all things, as appointed for that time
and state, as his Firstborne, higher than the Kings of the Earth, Psalm 89.27.
as we shall farther show, as Christ's Revelation Explication manifests from chapter
2.5. And our Apostle from v. 4. having laid down many glorious Testimonies of
holy Scripture for that great Title of Son, v. 5. and of his comeing to take
his Kingdom at his second comeing, v. 6. from Dan 7.13, 14. and of his Kingly
Dignity, v. 8. when Angels are his Ministering Spirits, v. 7. but then at his
said comeing again, his Divine Throne which he shall then sit upon, as the Son
of David will then gloriously manifest also that he is the Son of God, in that
it will be to the end of the world, being then ordered by his Scepter of
Righteousness, as Esa. 9. as is explained v. 9. and the first Foundation he
laid, for this Kingdom was his creating Heaven and Earth, v. 10. and as he
made them, he will also dissolve them in his time, v. 11, 12. with Rev. 20.11.
but in the last place, Gods spirit directs him, v. 13. after his Divine manner,
to point out the time of his said Inheritance and Kingdom before spoken of, v.
2, 6, 8. and that from that great Oracle, Ps. 110.1. (so often repeated in the
New Testament) showing it will be at the end of his sitting there, which is at
his second comeing, or when he brings him again into the world, v. 6. and in
chapter 10.13. until then (as he shows) he sits expecting the same till that time
his foes shall be made his footstool; and chapter 2. after he had warned them of
hearing God speaking by his Son, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. as he does again toward the
end of the Epistle, chapter 12.25. he proceeds to show the pre-eminence of Christ
in the world to come, which is to begin then, when God shall bring his Son
again into the world, as he proved before from Psalm. 97. which Ps. foretells
that time and state, and shows then will be the world he there speaks of, and
tells them, it was not to be subject unto Angels, but must be to the Son of
God, chapter 2. v. 5, 6, 7, etc. and to that purpose then adds a great Testimony
from Psalm. 8.4. excellently here explained, v. 6, 7, 8. where he teaches that
the Creation at first (since defaced by man's fall, and Satan's Usurpation and
wickedness of Men) which Christ had undertaken to rescue from his Tyranny for
himself and those which the Father had given him; for which cause he was made
for a little time lower than the Angels, and had made the purchase of the world
anew, which after he was to possess; but first he must go to the high Court of
Heaven to be gloriously put into possession in due time, and then to return (as
Luke 19.) to take his said Inheritance, Kingdom and possession, when it is made
fit for him at the Renovation of all things, yea for him and his Saints in that
time and state here spoken of, as the Apostle expressly says, v. 8. we do not
yet see all things put under him: but our Saviors Revelation Key, in the four
last chapters, gives an excellent account of that time, and Gods way of
performing them; and opens all those things (if men would humbly and
conscientiously attend to it:) which I well (through Divine Grace still more
and more find does strongly resolve all such things above all that man can say
to the contrary) and so as I am well, from his word and holy Spirit, assured,
he will make good before long time pass: Now that this world to come is so be
taken (besides what was before said) all fitly leading to it, as by Gods Spirit
so Divinely ordered: note farther, v 5. it is 1. styled (...), an habitable
world: and 2dly, it is spoken of to be when God brings his Son again viz the
second time into the world, v. 6. (...) the Adverb there is joined with the
Verb, and (...) points it out to be a special distinct time and matter he
speaks of, though also another proof of his Divine Sonship because then at his
second comeing all the Angels must Worship him, and it is as was Prophesied of
before, Psalm. 97.7. and of that state (which largely might be made thence to
appear) the Verb (...), also is of future signification answerable to the time
and state of that Prophecy, and some Fathers, and even some Papists have so
understead that time, to be Christ's second comeing; of which, much more might
be said, but this is to me above all, I am sure Christ explains all these in
this sense in the Revelation, as our two last books (if rightly understood) do
manifest: I thought to have spoken of many things more in this Epistle so
ordered by Christ's holy Spirit, as I find them to this purpose, as in ch 11.
many things of the sufferers and Covenants to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
others; but we have spoken of them partly in our Key, p. 7, 8, 9, etc and in
our said last Books: and of the Communion in the New Testament state then, chapter
12. which also we spoke of in the said Books, and more in our Tract on Jer.
3.17. and because we have but a short Introduction in hand to our intended
short Scheme (if God will) we will be satisfied with thus much at present to
our present purpose. The like exposition I have from Christ's Revelation, of
what St. Paul says of Christ's first comeing, and the first Resurrection of the
Saints, 1 Cor. 15. after he had risen above 1600 years before, as their first
fruits, to sanctify and effect their Resurrection afterward at his second
comeing, v. 23. and ((...) deinde) intends 1000 years after (as Christ
teaches) shall be the end, which will be when he shall have put down all Rule
and Authority and Power, that is chiefly (as Scripture witnesses) Ezekiels Gog
and Magog, and shut up Satan in the bottomless pit for 1000 years; and after
that destroy the last Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8, 9. and cast the Devil into the
lake of Fire, and the last Enemy, Death, will be destroyed, with the Author of
it, the first Soul Murderer, and sin the effect of his wickedness, and also
the matter for death to work upon will be taken away, which are the destroying
of death, (none remaining from thence in the world in the natural life) but
after the said 1000 years shall be that Mystery of the general Rapture, which
he speaks of, v. 51, 52. at the last Trump; at his descending with a shout (as
also the same Apostle speaks) at his last comeing (which I believe from the
same warrant) he speaks of, 1 These. 4.15, 16, etc. as distinguishing his
bringing with him all that sleep in Jesus, which he had called the appearance
of Christ with all his Saints before, chapter 3. ult. from this last, when those
dead in Christ ( viz. all that departed in 1000 years before) shall rise first
then, that is, before the wicked at the last Trump then: both which sorts are
these our Savior calls the rest of the dead that rose not till 1000 years
after, or till the 1000 years were finished, v. 5. the first said Resurrection
of the Saints is Rev. 20.4, 5. (as Christ there exactly distinguishes both of
them) and this may be observed by humble and conscientious seekers to be
resolved: which Resolutions of these Texts I do upon good grounds believe
shortly will be approved by Christ himself at his comeing, and how matchless a
Resolver that Revelation (so called) with a witness is, (and in some things
with Daniel also) such as rightly seek by it as they ought, I doubt not but may
more and more by their own Experience find, and in the interim (after all
present gainsayings) yet with declared willingness to give a Christian-like
account to all serious persons, etc.) I bless and magnify the holy name of God
my heavenly Father in Christ my gracious and merciful Redeemer, and of the Lord
the Spirit my Sanctifier and Teacher (to my great comfort and satisfaction) of
these and many like Divine Truths (couched as he has been pleased to lay them
down in his holy Word) and for others I only here pray, saying, Blessed and
Holy Trinity of Persons! in the Unity of the Divine Essence; open the eyes of
thy faithful servants in these times, to understand the holy Scriptures
respecting that said world to come, at Christ's second comeing, as our blessed
Savior after his Resurrection opened his Disciples understandings, Luke 24.45.
then to see the things before, and at his first comeing, and especially
respecting his Death and Refurrection, then newly past, etc. Amen.

We might here note hat strong confutation might be taken against Pelagian,
Arminian, Popish and Socinian Errors, and many others; and excite all to get
true Grace as the best security of all good; and to that end lay aside worldly
and wicked projects in the world, and keep close to God in the use of all good
means, and that Great Persons should kiss the Sun, etc. Psalm. 2. but we are
forced now only to hint thus much.

FINIS.

