THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS OPENED: OR, CHRIST'S Coming as a Bridegroom
Cleared up, and Improved from Matthew XXV. Ver. 1, 2, 3, etc.

By Benjamin Stonham.

The Marriage of the Lamb is Come, and his Wife has made her self Ready, Rev.
19. 7.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXVI.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. Line 8. Tinie for Time. p. 20. l. 18. by for be. p. 21. l. 23. Read
Voles. p. 21. l. ult. r. such. p. 45. l. 14. r. these. p. 76. l. 14. r.
tarryeth. p. 69. l. 38. r. 8. p. 121. l. 22. r. Awakened. p. ibid. l. 33. r.
18. p. 122. l, 2. r. the. p. 124. l. 32. r. 28. p. 131. l. 24. r. be. p. 138.
l. 37. r. might. p. 139. l. 29. r. Complainers. p. 153. l. 28. r. Delatory. p.
175. l. 36. r. every. p. 186. l. 16. r. her. p. 194. l. 33. r. 32. p. 198. l.
39. r. 11th. p. 202. l. 21. r. were. p. 204. l. 17. r. 12. p. 214. l. 3. r.
were. p. 216. l. 36. r. shown. p. 216. l. 40. r. 15. p. 218. l. 40. r. Mat. 9.
15. p. 221. l. 40. r. 1 Kings 1. 41. p. 227. l. 30. r. peculiar. p. 229. l. 19.
r. Attlred. p. 233. l. 29. after Salvation add should awaken us, Romans 13. 11.
p. 234. l. 17. r. often. p. 241. l. 26. r. as. p. 265. l. 2. r. 29. p. 265. l.
35. r. and as if. p. 279. l. 9. r. bare. p. 283. l. 38. r. as. p. 299. l. 24.
r. Type. p. 299. l. 35. r. his. p. 96. l. 18. r. Ezekiel. p. 96. l. 34. r.
Ezekiel. p. 96. l. ult. r. resented.

To the READER.
AS in all Ages it has been Satan's Design to Blind the Minds of Men, even
from our first Parents, whom he had soon rockt into a dead sleep, with all
their Posterity, in which they had lain till now, had not Christ awakened them:
So ever since, and more Eminently in the last Times is he so Employed, all
things concurring to the Accomplishment of his Design. The World, which has
Ordinarily been a pricking Bryar, by that means preventing some Men's Sleeping,
has been turned into a ^ed of ease; and the Watchmen, by whom Slumberers
should have been awakened, have supported them with Pilows; yea, Men have been
so disposed to sleep, that they have closed their own Eyes, unti^l the Best
have slumbred, and the most are fast asleep; which has ever been Dangerous,
but now more than ever. Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, who was manifested to
Destroy the works of the Devil, has Knocked at such sleepers Doors, by his
awakening Providence, and by his Servants the Proph^^s, Rising up early, and
sending them. But now the danger of sleepi^g unto Death is so great, that he
sends forth a Crier at Midnight, to prevent the Ruin that would o're-whelm
those Sleepers by the Morning.

This is the Critical Hour, and the last Application; those that do not then
Recover, perish for ever. Were we sensible of the present Danger of such a
Nature, we should not be Offended at plain dealing.

The following Discourse (which the Providence of God gave me with others an
Opportunity to Hear) is of such a Nature: The Instrument by whom this Truth was
sounded forth, being first sent to awaken others now sleeps in Jesus; who
willing that all Men should come to the knowledge of the Truth, has by his
Providence Ordered the surviving of this Testimony, that so it may come to
their hands who had not an Opportunity, nor (possibly) an Heart to Receive it
from the Speakers Lips. It was Joy to me to hear of its being Printed, though I
do expect as Christ himself did, so his most Material Truths will meet with
hard Usage in the World. The Foundation and Cornerstone, which God lays in
Sion, becomes a stone of stumbling to the Men of Judah (being Rejected of their
Builders) yet nevertheless precious to them that believe. It Is Dangerous not to
Believe the Truth, much more to be Offended at it. The Good Lord prevent Sorrow
upon either Account.

Receive nothing for Truth, without a Touchstone: We do not only Tell Gold
after a Brother, but heretofore when Men were more Exact, did Weigh it also
with Gold Weights, which then were wont to be in Readiness with them, differing
from those by which baser things were Weighed. So also is utmost Holy Curiosity
Commendable in Weigihng Truth, only (...) careful to have the Sanctuary
Balance (viz.) (...) Scriptures, and (...) Traditions of the Elders, or
formerly Received Principles.

And if something be hard to be Understood, be not Hasty to Reject at, much
less the whole for the sake of it; the Fault may possibly be in thine Eye, and
not in the Object; we Live under a Dispensation wherein the fine Gold, or
Gospel Grace is changed, and become Dim, as well as Lamps going out. The
Difference between Wise and Foolish Virgins is not so easily discerned, save by
searching the Vessels, which this serves unto, and Gold will lose nothing by
being Rubbed; nor can Foolish Virgins be damnified by having the Emptiness of
their Vessels discovered, whilst Oil is to be bought: Solomon says, to every
Purpose there is Time and Judgment, therefore the Misery of Man is great, who
wants Judgment, to know the Time appointed to his purpose. Every Professor
will one day know this Truth, which yet will not prevent theri Misery, save by
the timeliness of such Knowledge. It was the great Aggravation of Jerusalem's
sin and sorrow, that she did not know (even in that her Day) the things that
did Concern her Peace, which therefore are hid from her eyes ever since; as we
may well expect it will be with those Foolish Virgins, against whom (for the
same Reason) Christ will shut his Door.

I knew not what would be greater Rejoicing to me than to see Christ in his
Truths and Interests advanced in mine own and others Hearts, to the silencing
of that Ignorance and prejudice that has with-stood the Receiving of the Truth
in Love, wherein we might have been established, and not so Subject to be blown
to and fro by the Tempters Wind, as at this Day. Going out at Midnight is
attended with many Difficulties, but when once entered into Christ's
Bride-chamber, they will be no more Remembered, nor will there be any cause of
Repenting that Labor when they shall hear others Knock, and Cry in vain
without, which God prevent being our Portion, by a Timely and effectual
Grafting into the true Olive Tree, that so this Oil of Grace and Light may
never fail, so an Entrance shall be Ministered into the Everlasting Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, to which the
Called are pronounced Blessed; until when, Fellowship with this Testimony is
Acknowledged a good Heritage, bestowed by the Lord on a very Unworthy Creature,

VV. B.

THE PARABLE OF THE Ten VIRGINS Opened.
Math. XXV. 1. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins,
which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.
CHrist having Satisfied his Disciples (in the foregoing Chapter) concerning
the Signs, both of Jerusalem's Destruction, and of his own Coming; does
thereupon Exhort them to be Watchful, both from their Ignorance of that Day and
Hour, Mat. 24. 42. as also from the Temptations which will Accompany such a
Time, in point of sensual Security, Mat. 24. 38. Backsliding into
Voluptuousness and Persecution, v. 48. 49. or at leastwise into a sleighty
slumbring disposition, Mat. 25. 4, 5. Now, this Coming of Christ is either
Personal or Precursory. His Second Personal Coming will be at the beginning of
John's Millennium, Rev. 20. 4. or New Jerusalem; and therefore we read of the
Lamb's being there, Rev. 21. 22. and of Gods Tabernacling with Men, v. 3. as
Christ did at his Incarnation, John 1. 14. in which regard he was then called
Immanuel, or God with us, Mat. 1. 23. Which Personal Coming of his cannot so
properly be in this place intended; because its suddenness, 1 Cor. 15. 52.
(together with its Destructiveness unto the Generality of wicked ones, 2 Pet.
3. 10.) will not so fairly Admit of any such Parley (between the Foolish
Virgins and the Wise, or Christ and the Foolish Virgins,) as is here signified,
Mat. 25. 9. 11, 12. But there is also a Precursory Coming of Christ, relating
to us Gentiles, in these latter days, before the Jews Conversion; who will (at
last) have all their Ancient Privileges (in a qualified sense) Restored to
them, but not until the Gentiles fullness be come in, Romans 11. 25.

Which Dispensation (Ultimately referring to the Natural Jews) does seem to be
intended by That Coming of Christ, which is distinguished, as from the
Destruction of that Old Material Temple, so from the proper Ending of this
World at last, Mat. 24. 3. (before which End Christ will not Come in Person, 2
Pet. 3. 10.) And which Precursory Coming of his, may possibly be meant, by that
Sign of the Son of Man, Distinct from his Coming in the Clouds, Mat. 24. 30.

And thus we read of Christ's Coming to Judge the Earth, Psalm. 96. 13. as he
will do, when the seventh Trumpet sounds, Rev. 11. 15. 18. or when the Ark is
(in the Temple Opened) to be seen, v. 19. which Temple is not in John's New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 22. or at that Time, when Christ will come in Person; and
so by Consequence, the Lord will come to Judge (and in these latter days)
before his Personal or Proper Coming at the last; or while the Ark and
Tabernacle; or Temple (clear Types of Instituted Worship) are in Being; and
therefore those very words, Psalm 96. 13. are a part of that Song, 1 Chronicles. 16.
33. which David Composed that Day, v. 7. in which he did remove the Ark, v. 1.
Especially since in the following Psalm, (or Psalm. 97. which is but an Appendix
to this former, or Psalm. 96.) God bids all the gods (or Men and Angels) to
worship Christ, Psalm. 97. 7. when he shall bring in Again the first begotten
into the World, Heb. 1. 6. (for so the Greek there is to be rendered,) which
plainly hinteth Christ's being to come Again before his second Personal Coming;
or while the Ark (or Instituted worship) is abiding, and when it shall be set
in a New Tent, which David (or Christ) has pitched for it, 1 Chronicles. 16. 1. in
his own City, 1 Chronicles. 15. 29.

And which Precursory Coming (also) might be further Argued, from Christ's
being said to Reign, together with the Seventh Trumpet's sounding, Rev. 11. 15.
who therefore must needs come, at such a time, and in some sense, though not in
Person, as at the first, Luke 1. 32. and at the last, 2 Timothy 4. 1. for such a
purpose. An Earnest of which Coming was in the days of Constantine, Rev. 12. 5.
though but an Earnest, in Comparison of this.

Yea, therefore we also read of Christ's Rejoicing as a Bridegroom, (which is
more close unto this present Parable of the Virgins) together with the full
Redemption of his People, Isa. 62. 4, 5. which Prophecy relates (Lastly) to
the Literal Jews, and will completely be made good unto them at their last
Conversion, before Christ's Personal Coming, as all confess: But in the mean
time, their Promises will firstly be fulfilled upon us, that so through our
Mercy they may obtain Mercy, having lost their Priority through unbelief, Romans
11. 30, 31. From whence it follows, that Christ will Come (as a Bridegroom)
before his Personal Coming. And under that Consideration shall I pursue this
Parable; although I dare not wholly exclude Christ's Personal Coming here, so
far as it is Applicable thereunto, since every of his Comings are so like each
unto other.

This being Premised, the Observation from the first Verse is this.

Observe. In these latter days, (or a little before the Seventh Trumpet's
sounding) the Kingdom of Heaven shall be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took
their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

In the Prosecution of which Point, some things will need to be enquired into,
which are as follows.

Quest. 1. What Is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven here?
Answ. Those words are variously Interpreted in the Scripture.

1. Thereby is sometimes meant, the True Believers future Glory, which is
entailed upon the Poor in Spirit, Mat. 5. 3. and such as do the will of God,
Mat. 7. 21. From all the Quarters of the World, Mat. 8. 11. The Perfection of
which Glory will be in Heaven, strictly taken; and well may that State be
called a Kingdom, because the Saints shall then be Kings, who now are
Sufferers, 2 Timothy 2. 12. They shall then trample upon Satan, Romans 16. 20. and
not be subject any more to sin or sorrow, since they will be thus freed before
that time; Rev. 21. 4. This Kingdom is now possessed by them, in Christ their
Head, Ephesians. 2. 6. but yet they must conflict and wait, before their proper,
Personal, and full possession.

2. Thereby is sometimes meant the Lord Jesus Christ himself; as when the
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto Treasure and a precious Pearl, which does
deserve the Sale of all, to Purchase it, Mat. 13. 44, 45, 46. This is the Lord
from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47. The giver of his Peoples Crowns, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Yea,
whose very Person (by whomsoever he is enjoyed) may well be called an Heavenly
Kingdom. The Quintessence of Heaven consists in being with him, Phil. 1. 23.
who also does make his People to be Kings at present, Rev. 5. 10. Nor can an
Earthly Kingdom give more content than he, in whom the sulness of all things
dwells, Col. 1. 19. who also is the hope of Glory, v. 27.

3. Thereby are sometimes meant, all manner of Gospel Truths, together with the
Preaching of them. As when the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Grain of
Mustard Seed, Mat. 13. 31. especially some kind of Truths, viz. The Mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven, v. 11. And therefore the Pharisees were said to shut
up the Kingdom of Heven against Men, Mat. 23. 13. because they kept them from
the knowledge of such Truths, Luke 11. 52. The Publication whereof is also
called by that Name; as when the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Net, Mat.
13. 47. which is most fitly applicable unto Preaching, Mat. 4. 9. And as these
things lead unto the Kingdom of Heaven, so is there a Kingly and Heavenly
Authority stamped upon them, when duly managed, which makes this to be their
proper Name.

4. Thereby is sometimes meant a visible Gospel Church; as when Christ gave to
Peter (in the Name of others) the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16. 19.
Or all Church Power, as it is explained, Mat. 18. 17, 18. And into which
Kingdom of Heaven none have a right to enter, but they whose Righteousness is
more than Pharisaical, Mat. 5. 20. And well may Gospel-Churches have this Name,
where Christ himself is present, Mat. 18. 20. And whose Inhabitants are only
Saints, 1 Cor. 1 2. and Angels, Rev. 1. 20.

5. Thereby is sometimes meant, the Dispensation of the Gospel, or state of
things and Persons (especially among Professors) in Gospel Times; and as in the
General, from first to last; so with Respect to such a particular part thereof,
viz. The Bridegroom's Coming. Thus is that Phrase most frequently to be
Interpreted; as when the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Sower, Mat. 13.
24. And when John bids, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.
2. And when Christ says of John, That the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is
greater than he, Mat. 11. 11. Since though John's Ministration was in some
sense above that of Moses, yet was it not properly Evangelical. And in this
last sense, I shall pursue these words, as being the plain meaning of them.

Quest. 2. Why is the Dispensation of the Gospel called a Kingdom?
Answ. 1. Because it is Governed by a King, as Christ is called, Mat. 2. 2.
whose Ministration that of the Gospel is, Heb. 8. 6. Christ's Spiritual
Government is Monarchical, which does admit of no Companions; and therefore
there is but one Law giver, James 4. 12. Nor will true Saints make mention of
any other, Isa. 26. 13. And therefore Saints (as such) owe no Obedience unto
Man, in Gospel-matters, save as this King's Authority is produced. What an
Arch-Traitor is the Man of sin, who dares to Prohibit or Impose, in such a
Case, without Christ's leave? The Nations are for a Kingly Form among
themselves, who yet therein Oppose the Sons of Sion, but all in vain, and to
their own Destruction, Psalm. 2. 5, 6.

2. Because this Kingdom is Distinct from any other, as in all Constitutions of
that Nature. Moses has no Command in Christ's own House; and therefore his
bare Authority in (Gospel Times) is no sufficient Plea. The Kings of Judah were
Types of Christ, and therefore in their days, the Temple was within the City,
or Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction were then confounded: But in Ezekiel's
last Vision, (relating to the Second Temple in Gospel Times) the Temple or
Sanctuary is without the City, Ezekiel. 45. 1, 2. compared with Ezekiel. 48. 15. To
hint the difference of those Dominions, which then will be made visible. Men
may Create their Civil Rulers, (at least till such a time,) but cannot thereby
make them to have Power in another's Kingdom, which all confess, save in
Relation to the Right of Christ.

3. Because it is made up of diverse Spirits, as every Kingdom is; wherein some
Men are Righteous and others Wicked. A Family may be more pure than can be
expected in a Kingdom. And therefore this more Refined Kingdom (here) is
distributed into Wise and Foolish Virgins. Subjection unto Christ, does not
sufficiently evince a sameness of Disposition; and the Children of this Kingdom
may be cast out of that which is to come, Mat. 8. 11, 12. There are a sort of
base Professors, who yet may carry it fairly, until a Temptation comes, and
then they show themselves. They who are counted the best and upright, may yet
prove very bad upon a Trial, Mic. 7. 4, 5.

4. Because the same Laws do bind all sorts of Persons, within the Compass of
such a Jurisdiction. There is not one Law for Great Ones, and another for
others; in this (no more than in any other) Kingdom. If this were duly weighed,
some would not dare to give themselves a Dispensation, whilst they are opening
the Law to others. Nor would some others fondly think, that such a Duty is not
incumbent upon them, unless they know it, and have it set upon their Hearts.
The Foolish Virgins are not excused, though wanting Oil or Light; because they
and the Wise Live in one Kingdom, whose common Laws do equally Oblige them both.

5. Because it is not easily shaken or Removed, which holds true, with
reference unto any Kingdom; but eminently here, as Paul informs us, Heb. 12.
28. Churches may fail, and many Revolutions may occurr, but yet the
Dispensation of the Gospel is abiding. This Kingdom subverted that of Old, Heb.
12. 27. but never will be subverted by it: And therefore the Restoration of
Moses his Law, (upon the Jews Conversion) and of an Adamitical State (or Legal
Ministration) in John's New Jerusalem, are but some Men's un-Scriptural
Fancies. None will be ever saveable, but by a Gospel Faith and Duty, or through
an Interest in the Everlasting Covenant.

Quest. 3. Why is this Dispensation called the Kingdom of Heaven?
Answ. 1. Because it is not of this World, but of a more sublimated or Heavenly
Rise. Moses his Ministration is called worldly, Heb. 9. 1. because it was the
same (for kind) with Adam's, whose Make was Earthly, 1 Cor. 15. 47. But
Christ's Ministration is like himself, who is the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.
47. How sad is their mistake, by whom the Dispensations of Grace and Nature are
Confounded. The good of Nature will never prove Gospel-Holiness; nor is the
difference between them only Gradual, but also in point of Kind (as in
Relation to God's thoughts and ours, Isa. 55. 9.) else Earthly and Heavenly
Privileges may also be as well Confounded.

2. Because what is contained under it, is at the present (mostly) of a more
Spiritual and invisible Nature, as Heavenly things yet are, 2 Cor. 4. 18. He
must have more than an Eye of Flesh, who can distinguish between the Wise and
Foolish Virgins. Moses Transgressors were easily to be Convicted, but proper
Gospel-sins are of a more Mysterious Nature. The Weapons of Paul's warfare were
wholly Spiritual, 2 Cor. 10. 4. which under the Law were mostly Carnal,
consisting of Man's coercive power in Religious Matters. Legal Rewards and
Threats were (save in shadows) altogether Temporal; but Gospel-Threats and
Promises are chiefly Spiritual and Eternal.

3. Because it leads unto Heaven strictly taken, which never was, nor will be
done by any other Dispensation. Moses did only undertake for Earthly
Blessings, but does not speak one word of Heaven, save in a way of Type and
Figure, Heb. 9. 24. And sinless Adam should only have Lived always upon Earth,
but not have been Translated thence to Heaven, by virtue of his present
Covenant. Whereas this Dispensation of the Gospel does rebound fallen Man
(beyond whence Adam fell) into a state of Heavenly Glory. Oh what a Price is
put into their hand, who Live there-under! Such may now walk from Earth to
Heaven, as from one Room into another, can they but follow Christ, before the
Partition-door between those Rooms is shut.

4. Because it is exceeding Glorious, as are all Heavenly things. Moses his
Ministration was very dark, but here the Veil is done away, 2 Cor. 3. 14. That
was the Dispensation of a Servant only, This of a Son, Heb. 3. 5, 6. That was
to be done away, but This remains, which therefore is much more Glorious, 2
Cor. 3. 11. That left poor Souls without a change; but This Transforms those
under it, from Glory unto Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Here are more Glorious Saints,
and Institutions, and Privileges, and Duties, and Discoveries, than generally
were of Old. Here is a Spirit of Glory upon Sufferers, 1 Pet. 4. 14. With Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Under the Ministration of this
Glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

5. Because a Fall from hence is most Destructive, as that from Heaven cannot
but be. The wicked Angels are most sadly broken, because they fell from Heaven;
and Capernaum was brought down to Hell, because sometimes exalted unto Heaven,
Mat. 11. 23. Whilst Tire and Sidon's Torment would be more Tolerable, v. 22.
The nearer that sinners are unto the God of Heaven, the more provoking is their
sin, and suitable will be their Suffering. Therefore the Children of this
Kingdom (if thrust out thence) must look for utter Darkness, Mat. 8. 12. It
would be better for Foolish Virgins, if they had Lived among the Sodomites,
whose Judgment will be lighter, because though Hell from Heaven fell on them,
yet did they not fall to Hell from Heaven.

Quest. 4. Why are the Professors of such a Time, here called Virgins?
Answ. Because of the Resemblance between them and Virgins, in the Letter.

1. Virgins are generally a Younger sort of Persons; and such are these, both
in a Literal and Mystical sense. This Dispensation relates unto a turn of
things, such as has been of later Years, in these our Days: Now, Aged Trees
will not so easily bend, or bear a Transplantation; and it is God alone, who
can persuade the Heart of Japhet, to dwell in the Tents of Shem; Genesis 9. 27.
his Younger Brother, Genesis 10. 21. Yea, therefore such are Mystically Younger
also, because of those later Discoveries which are embraced by them. Both which
have been abundantly exemplified, in our first goers forth.

2. Virgins are weak enough, the wisest of them, much more the Foolish ones;
and such are these Professors. They are apt to be more ashamed of being seen in
a dirty dress, than otherwise they would be, in a Corner; it is not sins being
in them, but its being seen, that is most troublesome. They are Ambitious of
going Fine, although unable to maintain that outward bravery, in point of
pretending unto Grace and Peace, supposing else it would be to their shame.
They will be in the Fashion, because it is the Fashion, and not because it is
Modest or Convenient; as many did sometimes own Christ's Kingly Interest, so
long as it was in Fashion, who since have laid it quite aside. They will not
Actually be defiled, but yet will dally with some less Temptations. They look
to be Entreated, with reference unto the most desirable Offer, although its
Loss be thereby hazarded.

3. Virgins will be, and do delight in one another Company, and so do these,
until there be some violent separation, or grievous discord. Next unto Christ,
sincere Professors are most delighted each in other, Psalm. 16. 3. Yea, such are
for Communion with others also, whilst undiscovered; as Sheep will feed with
Goats, until the Shepherd part them, Mat. 25. 23. And more refined Hypocrites
will leave the World, to walk with wiser Virgins than themselves; especially if
five of such to five sincere ones, as in this Parable. Some Foolish Virgins (o^
uncontracted ones) may have a Love for Christ, Cant. 1. 3. much more for
Spouses, Psalm. 45. 14. whose being put asunder, may be with Mutual Tears.

4. Virgins are visibly undefiled, and such are these; at least, with reference
unto more gross Pollutions. They may have wanton hearts, and eyes, and habits,
but are not commonly called Adulteresses, Compared with others. These are
ashamed of an Harlots Company, and cannot bear to be defamed with her Name or
filthiness. Whatever they have sometimes been, they now will Covenant against
all manner of Whorish Antichristianism. And with Respect unto their Carriage
otherways; such are for Purity, both in Communion and Conversation, which
makes them to be accounted Virgins, until they be out-stript by others, or do
degenerate.

5. Virgins are wont at Marriages to be the Bride's Companions, Psalm. 45. 14.
and for her sake they are the Bridegroom's Friends. The wisest have too much
Mercenariness in their Affections; but yet they have a true respect for Christ
upon his own Account; whilst others go out to meet him, merely in hope to wear
his Favors. What Zeal has been professed for Christ, of later Years, because
the Bridegroom's Coming was then expected? Many threw off their Harlots Veil,
lest that should hinder their being the expected Brides Attendants; the reality
of whose Affections is now come under a Providential Examination, by Reason of
the Bridegroom's stay.

Quest. 5. Why is Christ called a Bridegroom, at such a Time?
Answ. 1. Because the Bride is only his. By which word [Bride] the Saints are
sometimes meant; but here it is meant of such a glorious Dispensation upon
Earth, which Saints expect, and shall Live under. And thus Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom was called the Bride, in Competition with John Baptist's Ministration,
John 3. 28, 29. So is the New Jerusalem called, when Christ shall come again,
Rev. 21. 2, 3. And so is that fore-running State here called, which will be
under the Seventh Trumpet. Now, if this Bride be Christ's, let us acknowledge
all that Glory to be his; and let not John's Disciples murmr at John's
Decrease: and let us not fall too much in Love with another's Bride, but let
our Rejoicing then be chiefly for the Bridegroom's sake, John 3. 29.

2. Because this is the time of Marriage, or else one's being only made sure
to such a Woman, is not enough to make an Actual Bridegroom. Christ was of Old
Contracted unto this Kingdom, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. and 93. 2. but is content to wait,
until his Bride be Ready, and then his Marriage comes, Rev. 19. 7. Although
his present Marriage will be but by a Proxy (compared with that in John's
Jerusalem) after the manner of Earthly Prince^, when Living in another Kingdom,
as Christ now does; who therefore honors his People first, by giving them
leave to Marry his Bride, on his behalf, and then he calls himself the
Bridegroom, Isa. 62. 4, 5.

3. Because the manner of his Coming then, will be like that of a Bridegroom.

1. Very Glorious. A Bridegroom is decked with Ornaments. Isa. 61. 10. and so
are his Friends and Followers. And thus will Christ come at such a Time, the
day of whose Espousals was very Glorious, Cant. 3. 11. and then much more his
Wedding Day. His Chariots will then be Twenty Thousand, even Thousands of
Angels, as on Mount Sinai, Psalm. 68. 17. at his first appearing. The Father
will then Declare (as he has partly done already) that Christ is his Son,
Psalm. 2. 7. By the Glorious manner of his Appearing, Titus 2. 13. He will then
ride upon the Heavens, by his Name Jah, Psalm. 68. 4. which is contracted of
Jehovah, the Father's Name, Psalm. 110. 1. To signify that his appearing Glory
then, will be some less Abridgment of his Fathers Glory, Mat. 16. 27.

2. With utmost speed. A Bridegroom is up betimes upon his Wedding Day;
accounting each hour a Year, and knowing no Pace bu^ Galloping; in which
regard, the speedy moving Sun is likened to a Bridegroom, Psalm. 19. 5. And thus
will Christ come quickly, Rev. 3. 11. Leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping
upon the Hilis, Cant. 2. 8. That is, when once he is upon his March, his
Personal appearing will be in the twinkling of an Eye, 1 Cor. 15. 52. And his
Precursory Coming will be a Type of that. The Bride will then be Ready, and
then h^s Motion must needs be swift, that being his only Obstacle, Rev. 19. 7.
The cry of his Saints at such a Time, will hasten his speedy Coming, Luke 18.
7, 8.

3. With heightened Zeal, or fullness of Affection evidenced. Then shall the
Field be Joyful before the Lord, Psalm. 96. 12, 13. For Corn shall make the
Young Men cheerful, and Wine the Maids, Zech. 9. 17. when Christ shall come as
King, v. 9. Yea, he will then scatter his Gifts among the worst, Psalm. 68. 18.
Turning their Water into Wine upon his Wedding Day. What Tongue can then
express, what Heart can apprehend, the Richness of this Bridegroom's Favors
upon his Friends, at such a time? And as to the Bride her self, her Clothing
shall be of wrought Gold, Psalm. 45. 13. whom Angels shall show to others, with
Admiration, Rev. 21. 9. Yea, and the King himself shall greatly desire her
beauty, Psalm. 45, 11. Rejoicing as a Bridegroom, Isa. 62. 5.

Quest, 6. What Is meant by taking Lamps, and going forth to meet him?
Answ. Lamps are of use to Guide one in the dark, and therefore the Word is
likened to a Lamp, Psalm. 119. 105. So that by [Taking their Lamps] is meant the
furnishing of themselves with what might be of Use to lead them in their way at
such a Time. They did conclude, the Bridegroom's Coming would be with Clouds
and Darkness, which put them upon this Provision. Indeed the Day of his
Salvation is as a Lamp that burns, Isa. 62. 1. But yet this Day begins
with an Evening, Zech. 14. 7. At leastwise, in point of clear Discerning; as
has been to be Observed in our Times, when there was first a going out, which
all our Professing Virgins did seeem to Understand at such a time. Now, this
going forth to meet him, may be Interpreted three ways.

1. As an Evidence of Longing to behold him with the first; thus did the Jews
go out to John, Mat. 11. 9. And Balaam to meet the Lord, Numb. 23. 15. Yea,
thus God Meets him that Rejoices, and works Righteousness, Isa. 64. 5. And
thus all sorts of Virgins were sometimes very desirous to see the Bridegroom,
who therefore could not stay until he came, but must go out to meet him. How
did the Pulpits, Presses, and Occasional Discourses (then) abound with
canvassing Tinie Truths and Duties, to furnish themselves with Light into their
way. They who Delight in Christ, cannot but seek him also, Mal. 3. 1. with
reference unto his Person, Truths, and Interests; and happy is that Soul, who
is Admitted to behold this Sun at its first Rise. This vehemence of Desire, is
from the wiser Virgins Judgment, and from the others Ignorance of the Nature of
his Appearing, Amos 5. 18.

2. As a signal of that Respect which they have for him. Thus Lot went out to
meet the Angels, Genesis 19. 1. And Joseph to meet his Father, Genesis 46. 29. And
Solomon his Mother, 1 Kings 2. 19. Whereas a Person's standing till others come
to him, does manifest his Disesteem of them, Jer. 15. 19. Christ is the
deserving Object of all Honor, especially when he comes as a Bridegroom, Rev.
19. 7. which Virgins know, who therefore then go out to meet him. Wise Virgins
saw the Glory of his first Appearance, John 1. 14. but all shall see that of
his Second Coming, Mat. 24. 30. which at this Time the Foolish Virgins had a
Glympse of; and therefore they also are gone forth to meet him.

3. As this their going out, does intimate, what is Requ^red thereunto?

1. As one goes out of his Private House into the open streets; or with
Respect to that more Public Testimony on Christ's behalf, at such a Time. This
was the case of all our Virgins, who did of Old bear Witness to the Truths of
Christ, but only in their private Houses; whereas a Spirit of boldness
appeared in them afterward; So as to declare against the whole of (then known)
Antichri^tian^sm, yea, in the Face of utmost Danger. If any then should but
have told them, how they would after run into their holes again, (as they have
generally done) their Answer would have been like that of Hazael's to Elisha, 2
Kings 8. 13.

2. With Reference unto their going out of Ancient Mystical Houses, which must
be left behind, by those, who think to meet the Bridegroom. And thus did all
our Virgins at such a Time. Some then went out of their former way of National
Worship, and Church Government: Others went out of the Ancient National
Church State: And though some of them were fastened by a Rope unto those Houses
still, which since has drawn them back again; yet others were wholly loosened
from them, which is their Mercy. Nor were they likely to wear the Bridegroom's
Favors (in case he had then come) without these Tokens of their Virginity.

3. With Reference unto one's outward Interest, which must be gone out of also;
and whereupon the other two depend. The least Advance Christ-ward, is into
Dirty, Deep, and Dangerous ways at first; and the Mother of Harlots will both
brawl and fight, when called an Whore, or when her Dress has any dirt cast on
it. And in this Sense, there was a going forth by all our Virgins. Some lost
their Goods and Lives, and all did run the hazard of a Doubtful Case, with
utmost Resolution. They did run well, had they but been as good at Length; as
they were at Hand; and half that Self-denying Courage now, might have procured
their Admission into the Bridegroom's Chamber, at his Coming. So much for the
Explication: The Application follows. And so

Use 1. From that word [THEN] we have hinted to us, both at what time it will
be thus, and what will be at such a time. It has been formerly Declared, what
special Time is here referred unto, viz. That which is nigh unto the Seventh
Trumpets Sounding: And then this Parable of the Virgins (I humbly suppose) will
properly be fulfilled. And when the Generality of Professors do thus go forth,
we may conclude from thence, what Dispensation we are hastening under. Now, we
have plainly seen (in these our days) that going out to meet the Bridegroom,
such as has not been to be seen in former Ages, which gives us to ghess at
least, where we now are, in this dark Season.

2. Poor Foolish Virgins may sometimes possibly go forth (together with the
wise) to meet the Bridegroom. So it is here foretold, and has been verified,
or at the least, exemplified. Nor can I (as some others) think, this going
forth was from a sinful hastiness, although there was no voice of a Cry
requiring it, as afterward; whereof there was not any such need at first,
because that Duty was Then more Obvious, the Spirits more courageous, and their
encouragements greater, than at the second time. From whence is hinted, what
little cause Men had to count those real Saints, who then went forth.

3. Christ thinks none worthy to be called Professors, save only Virgins;
under which Title here he comprehends all the Professors of such a time. From
whence we may be able to Judge, concerning the visibility of their Spiritual
State, who are not unpolluted Virgins. Some have been apt to call those
Brethren, who still continued in their sin or Antichristianism, merely because
of their Parts and Moral Virtues: But Christ calls her the Mother of Harlots,
Rev. 17. 5. who was Arrayed in Purple, v. 4. which was a Tabernacle Color.
Professors may be Hypocrites, but yet they must be Virgins; or undefiled ones.
But then

Quest. How may we know a Virgin, and consequently, a visible Professor?
Answ. First, by way of Premise. My present work is not to Distinguish between
a Wise and Foolish Virgin, or Characterize a Real Saint: But only to show who
may be accounted Virgins, or Professors. In Order whereunto, we must be guided
by the Times and Dispensations which Men Live under: Since that may have
consisted wi^h Virginity in Times of Ignorance, which does denominate a Whore,
in Times of greater Light and Knowledge. Time was, when Polygamy was not
accounted Scandalous, nor Prelaty Antichristian; but many such things are now
enough to cloud the visibility of Saint-ship, which heretofore have been more
gently censured. Nor must I instance now in any of the Virgins Properties, save
what are good and Commendable.

Secondly, By way of Resolution. And so Professors may be known by their
resembling Virgins in the Letter, in these Respects.

1. Virgins are very Lovely, Eccl. 2. 2. And Desirable, Isa. 62. 5. Which does
expose them unto Temptations, 2 Samuel 13. 2. Such are Christ's Spouses in
Reality, Cant. 1. 8. and 4. 7. and 6. 10. Such are all visible Saints in
outward show. They have black Hoods or Masks of outward Sufferings, Cant. 1. 6.
Isa. 52. 14. But otherwise their Countenance is very comely, Cant. 2. 14. Such
are at a further distance from this world's tanning Sun, and have the Advantage
of Adorning Garments; yea, even the Foolish Virgins shine through the
Reflection of others beams upon them, with whom they do Converse. Sinners are
foul Egyptians, compared with Sarah, who therefore was most sorely Tempted,
Genesis 12. 14, 15.

2. A Virgin will not be Hired to play the Harlot, till first she cease to be
(in Heart) a Virgin. We Read of the Hyre of an Whore, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Yea, there
are some Whores without Reward, Ezekiel 16. 34. But Virgins (both in the Letter
and Mystery) prefer this Chastity before the greatest Gifts. It Is not the
Pleasure or Profit of such a sin that will entice unto so gross an Act; though
lesser failings may be too much indulged. Those are abusively Sir-named
Professors, who can comply with what has been confessed to be
Antichristianism; or seem to make no Conscience of Lying, Railing, Cheating,
and the like; which are against the Light of Nature, and Answer unto gross
Adultery.

3. Virgins will do their utmost to withstand defilement: Such will first Argue
with the Tempter, as Joseph did with his Mistress, Genesis 39. 7, 8, 9. If that
prevail not, such then will struggle, as Tamar did with Amnon, but that he was
the stronger, 2 Samuel 13. 14. And in that case, such will cry out for help,
Deuteronomy. 22. 27. And more especially unto the Lord, as David did, when many rose
up against him, Psalm. 3. 1. 4. Those are not visible Saints, who make a faint
Resistance, when followed with Temptations of an Whorish Nature. And though
poor Literal Virgins may be enforced, yet can there be no Mystical defiling,
without the Party's will; yea, God would help, if heartily cried unto, Jer. 29.
13.

4. A Virgin will not yield, in such a case, whatever Loss or Danger may ensue
thereon. Joseph would rather lose his Garment, Genesis 39. 12. and run the hazard
of his Place and Liberty, v. 20. than give consent unto his Whorish Mistress.
As visible Saints will not be won by hopes of Gain, so neither by the fear of
Suffering, to turn Adulteresse^, in a Spiritual or Moral sense. Those ought not
to be called Virgins, who do prefer their Liberty, Estate, or Life before their
Chastity; the loss whereof is looked upon (by Real Virgins) to be the greatest
Suffering, and so it is, both in it self, and as it is so great a sin, which is
indeed the only Suffering to be avoided, in Comparison.

5. Virgins are careful to avoid Debauched Company. Such know that wholesome
Counsel, Prove. 5. 8. Not to come nigh the Door of an Harlots House; and how
poor Dinah was desloured, Genesis 34. 1, 2. And what a pleasing sin unto the Flesh
this is, together with the force of Importunity and Opportunity upon a
Treacherous Heart; and how it may be just with God, to leave such Dalliers unto
themselves: All which are cogent with them, to keep out of the Tempter's
Jurisdiction. The Foolish Virgins here, Conversed only with themselves, and
with the Wise. Those are not visible Saints, who make no matter of being in the
Devil's way, or of unnecessary Communion with Enticers of this Nature, Genesis 39.
10.

6. Virgins will not put on an Harlots Dress. We Read of the Attire of an
Harlot, Prove. 7. 10. which honest Women will not be clothed with, though never
so Rich; yea, though it might keep off some pinching Cold. Our late Professors
were very Curious in that Respect; not wearing their former Garments of
Distinction, nor using the best Set-Form of Prayer that ever was, because these
were accounted Whorish Habits: and their return unto such things again, has
very much blemished their Virgin-Reputation. A Gentleman thinks scorn to have
an Ivy-bush hung at his Door; and visible Saints will thun appearances of evil,
1 These. 5. 22. especially when of so gross a Nature, by which they may be known
from others.

7. Virgins are very neat, and studious of their Beauty. Can a Maid forget her
Ornaments, Jer. 2. 32? Nor will a Spouse walk out without her Veil, Cant. 5. 7.
Such are ashamed to be seen undrest; and what they wear is very clean; yea,
they are for the finest stuff, and newest Fashion, with Sobriety. Their
Looking-Glasses are of daily Use, nor will they be Offended, if Friendly told
of any thing amiss about them; and would have every part of their Attire in its
due place and Order. Such will wash often, and carefully avoid what does defile
them; and keep within doors, for fear of being Sunburned. Those are no visible
Saints, who are not very Accurate, Compared with the Generality.

8. Virgins are in the best Capacity of caring for the things of God, because
discharged from other Cares; which is accordingly improved by Spiritual
Virgins, 1 Cor. 7. 34. Poor Carnal Creatures are Married unto the World, whose
care is therefore how to please that Husband, supposing it to be their Duty,
because they have no Faith in God, nor Love for ought but Mammon. But visible
Saints have had a taste of better things, Heb. 6. 5. and can Adventure more
upon the Promise, which does a little sublimate their Spirits and Affections. A
Covetous Professor should not be kept in others Company, 1 Cor. 5. 11. A^
Virgins are wont to sort together.

9. Virgins are Noted for their comely silence; as being to be seen, but seldom
heard: Whereas an Harlots voice is Loud, Prove. 7. 10, 11. They who have least
in Heart, are usually most full of Tongue; but deepest Waters make the smallest
noise. And though Saints are not for an Humorous silence, yet is their speech
more sparing, especially in such like Cases, as these which follow. Saints will
not Prate against the Truth, nor will they Boast of what they are, nor do they
place the main of Duty in much speaking, nor do they relish vain Discourse, or
love to speak themselves, but are more swift to hear. A Wise Man spares his
words, Prove. 17. 27. And Foolish Virgins may Learn that piece of Heavenly
Breeding, by being in the others Company. The very speech of over-talkative
Professors does bewray them.

10. Virgins are mighty apt to blush, upon the least Occasion; whereas an
Whores ^ace is Impudent, Prove. 7. 13. Refusing to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 3. Some
cannot Blush, though guilty of Abominations, which is a dreadful Sign, Jer. 6.
15. But visible Saints are of a more Ingenuous Temper, most fully sensible of
sin's defilement, and of a more tender Conscience, which makes them apt to
Blush when any spot is on them, especially when coming before the Lord, Ezra.
9. 6. Yea, when they do but hear or speak of other's grosser failings, Ephesians. 5.
12. Harlots count this the Virgins weakness, but it is Virtue's Tincture, and
from the want whereof Professors are shrewdly to be suspected.

11. Virgins have very strong Affections, and therefore the Lamentation of a
Virgin, is put to signify the depth of sorrow, Joel 1. 8. The Generality will
never hurt themselves for Christ; but Spouses love him with their Soul, Cant.
1. 7. And Tremble at his Word, Isa. 66. 2. And Serve him with all their Might,
1 Chronicles. 29. 2. And break with Longing for him, Psalm. 119. 20. And Joy in him
with an Excessive Gladness, Psalm. 4. 7. And Mourn for sin against him, as for
an Only Son, Zech. 12. 10. Those are no Prophets, (as all the Saints are
termed, Psalm. 105. 15.) whose Spirits and Affections are so much at their own
Command, in Spiritual Cases, whilst Things and Persons of a Godly sort, are to
be known from others by their Zeal and Vehemence, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

12. Virgins are forward to go forth, and meet the Bridegroom, though in the
dark; yea, though exposed thereby to Loss and Danger, which is the necessary
Consequent of going out at such a Time. It Is true, some of them (as the Foolish
Virgins) may chiefly be drawn out by their Companions; or from an hope of being
put among the Bride's Honorable Women, or merely from a Religious Humor and
spirit of Curiosity, to see and to be seen: But upon one account or other, all
Virgins are ambitious of this Service, who otherwise are not so much as visible
Saints; and therefore Christ knows not those Foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 12.
Because they went not forth the second time, v. 8. as at the first, v. 1.

Mat. XXV. 2. And Five of them were wise, and Five were Foolish.
IN these words we have the Ten forenamed Virgins Distributed, or
Distinguished, with reference unto their Wisdom and Folly, which cannot be
meant in a Natural sense, as Eccl. 2. 19. Or in a Worldly sense, as Luke 16. 8.
Or in one's own Conceit and Apprehension only, which is forbidden, Romans 12. 6.
But in a Moral sense, and in Reality.

And so the Observation from these words, is this.

Observe. Professors in these latter days, will be, some of them Spiritually
wise, and others of them in the same sense Foolish; as Folly is put for sin,
and Wisdom for New Covenant-Grace.

Whence several things ar^ offered to be enquired into.

Quest: 1. Why is New Covenant-Grace expressed by Wisdom, etc.
Answ. 1. Wisdom is chiefly seated in the Understanding, or Intellectual
Faculty, and does consist in Light or Knowledge, and so does Grace, which
therefore is Resembled by it. The New Man is renewed in Knowledge, Col. 3. 10.
And Grace is called the Law of the Mind, Romans 7. 23. Whilst sin is oft-times
called Darkness, Ephesians. 4. 18. and 5. 8. Which merely being Privative, does
therefore need no positive Cause; and consequently there is no Necessity, that
either God should be its Author, or that the Soul (which is its Subject) should
be by Natural Generation (upon the one of which Rocks many have run, from
un-acquaintance with sin's proper Notion) since sin is nothing but the Issue of
an Active Spirit, devoid of Light, which then cannot but err or stumble, John
11. 10.

2. Wisdom (or Knowledge) is that, wherein the Image of God consists, Col. 3.
10. A lower kind of wisdom, was that wherein consisted (mainly) God's Essential
Image, Genesis 1. 26. And highest wisdom (or true Holiness) is that, wherein God's
Personal Image does consist, Ephesians. 4. 24. As Christ who was his Father's wisdom,
Luke 11. 49. (with Mat. 23. 34.) Is therefore called the Image of his Person,
Heb. 1. 3. Which is the only Image of God, now owned by him, in a Moral sense;
so that a Godly wise Man is now the only God-like Man, whereas the Foolish
sinner is like unto the Devil, John 8. 44. who is Resembled by that Foolish
Woman, Prove. 9. 13. In opposition unto Christor Wisdom, v. 1.

3. Wisdom is to be got with all our getting, as that which is the Principal
thing, Prove. 4. 7. Above Gold and Silver, Prove. 16. 16. More precious than
Rubies, Prove. 3. 13. 15. Or all that can be else desired, Prove. 8. 11. The
price whereof Man knows not, Job 28. 12, 13. All which is true concerning
Grace, which therefore is fitly called Wisdom. Grace is that Better part, or
One thing Needful, Luke 10. 41, 42. and will be generally so accounted, though
now contemned. Saints would not lose their Graces for all the World. Godliness
is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It makes a Poor Man Rich, Rev. 2. 9
A Needy Man contented, Phil. 4. 11, 12. And takes the upper hand of present
Peace, 1 These. 1. 1. and future Glory, Psalm. 84. 11.

4. Wisdom is very Rare, and so is Gospel Grace. Great men are not always wise,
nor yet the Aged, Job 3^. 9. Job found not one wise man among his Friends, Job
17. 10. And wisdom was far from Solomon himself, when he said, I will be Wise,
Eccl. 7. 23. The whole world does lie in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. And the one
half of Professing Virgins are here declared to be Foolish; yea, it is but
little Grace th^^'s to be found among the best of God's own People. Some call
their Vices Virtues; and most Men count that Spiritual, which is but merely
Animal, or Natural, because they judge of Actions and Affections by their
Matter only: according to which Rule, the Sacred Fire upon the Jewish Altar
might have been counted Common.

5. Wisdom is chiefly self-advantaging, and so is Grace. If thou be wise, thou
shall be wise for thy self, Prove. 9. 12. Such may be profitable to themselves,
though not to God, Job 22. 2. He therefore loves his own Soul, who gets
wisdom, Prove. 19. 8. It Is true, good works are also Profitable unto others,
Tit. 3. 8. But as self-gain is far the greatest, so Grace (as Grace) does only
benefit the Soul it self. And though one's strength may help another, without
his will, yet wisdom is not Effectual to Preserve, or Guide, save him in whom
it is. Gifts may more profit others than ones self, but Grace leaves not its
Owner destitute of what it gives to others.

6. A little Folly does prejudice him very much, who is reputed wise; as
sweetest Ointments are most unsavory, in Case dead Flies be in them, Eccl. 10.
1. And so it is with Gospel Grace. A dirty Swine is not so much observed as a
Dirty Sheep; nor sin in any, so much as in the Saints, because their Linen is
clean and white, Rev. 19. 8. which makes spots to be the more conspicuous.
Degenerating Saints are most abominable, as Animal parts and Spirits Putrified
(because they are the best) are most Offensive. Let not a wise man therefore
utter vanity, whatever others do, Job 15. 2. Remembering how wicked ones
Blasphemed when David fell, 2 Samuel 12. 14. because he had a name for wisdom.

Quest. 2. How shall we Distinguish between a Wise and Foolish Virgin?
Answ. 1. By way of Premise. No Man is able (Infallibly) to make it out,
wherein this Difference does consist, so as to satisfy himself or others
fully, from the bare Matter of best Actions and Aff^^ctions; all which are
Imitable by some cunning Hypocrite, who mainly differs from a Real Saint, in
point of Principle, or with Respect unto that Spiritual Root of Actions and
Affections, which chiefly constituteth their being Gracious; the Nature of
which Root is so Mysterious, as that it cannot well be uttered, much less be
clearly understood, without the Spirit's Light and Witne^^. So that man's
utmost work and skill (in matters of this Nature) is, rather to show the
Negative, or who are not wise Virgins; (since fleshly Fruits are, of the two,
more manifest, Gal. 5. 19.) than to pretend unto the Demonstration of
Spirituality; save by those choiser Effects and Properties, wherewith true
Gospel Grace is constantly Attended; but yet it is very Cautelously to be
Concluded by them. And though some more Distinguishing Character (than those
which follow) might possibly be produced, in case the business were pursued at
large; yet is my present enquiry bounded by this Metaphor of Wisdom, and what
the Scripture speaks unto the point in hand, under that special and peculiar
consideration. Therefore let not the expectations of any be over-large, since I
am now under a double Limitation, viz. First, Of holding to this single word of
Wisdom; and Secondly, Of showing rather, who are Foolish, or Graceless Persons,
than who may (Peremptorily) be termed Wise; at least, with reference unto the
Greater part of mine ensuing Characters.

This being Premised, I now shall Answer unto the forenamed Question, by way
of sober Resolution, from what the Scripture speaks concerning Wisdom, by which
the Nature of Gospel Grace is shadowed out unto us. And so,

1. A Godly wise man departs from Evil, Prove. 11. 14. 16. Job 28. 28. Sin does
Depart from others, perhaps, together with the Tempter, who sometimes gives his
Servants Rest: Or from the want of Natural strength, as some Corruptions may
decay with Age; or else because one Lust calls for another, as Covetousness
will make the Drunkard sober. But otherwise, it is a sport to Fools to be
mischievous, Prove. 10. 23. And an abomination to depart from Evil, Prove. 13.
19. Whereas a Gracious Heart runs from a Temptation as from a Bear, and leaves
sin, before it leaves him; groaning to be delivered, Romans 7. 24. Accepting
help offered, as Jer. 41. 13, 14. and keeping himself from being touched
afterward, 1 John 5. 18.

2. Wise men are for a good Foundation, or Building upon a Rock, Mat. 7. 24.
whilst Fools are satisfied with a sandy bottom, v. 26. If ^oolish Virgins be
but Reformed, or bear some pleasant Fruit, they never mind the Root or
Principal, which is the main of all. Whereas the wiser sort, are for the
changing of their Tree, Mat. 12. 23. and bearing Fruit in Christ John 15. 2. Or
in the newness of the Spirit, Romans 7. 6. Such are for making their Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Proving themselves, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and begging of God to
search them, Psalm. 139. 23. because they know, the fairest Super-structure will
stand or fall, according to the Nature of its Ground, whereon it is raised.

3. Wise men are very circumspect (or Accurate) in their walking, which Fools
are not, Ephesians. 5. 15. Poor Foolish Virgins make light of Dallying with
Temptations, and mock at something which is a sin, Prove. 14. 9. In case their
Copy by not blotted, Hair-strokes are not much heeded in their writing. Whereas
a Gospel-Saint is very curious, hating vain Thoughts, Psalm. 119. 113.
Abstaining from Appearances of Evil, 1 These. 5. 22. Proving the Perfect will of
God, Romans 12. 2. not venturing unto the utmost of what is Lawful, 1 Cor. 10.
23. but walking worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing, Col 1. 10. and begging
to be cleansed from secret faults, Psalm. 19. 12.

4. Wise ones are for the Building of their House, or for the carrying on of
what they have begun; but Foolish Persons are for the plucking down of their
own building, with their own Hands, Prove. 14. 1. These Foolish Virgins went out
at first, but failed the second time, and so lost all their Labor. And
therefore with what Face can some men Glory in a former Testimony for that
Truth, from whence they have since fallen? Such seem to be Christ's House at
present, but do not prove so in the Issue, because they hold not out until the
End, Heb. 3. 6. Many come out of Egypt, who yet come not to Canaan, because
their time is spent in walking to and fro, whilst in the Wilderness. Whereas a
Gracious Heart goes forward, Ezekiel. 1. 9. forgetting what is behind, Phil. 1.
13. And always adding unto his Spiritual good Beginnings, 2 Pet. 1. 5.

5. Wise men will Hear, Prove. 1. 5. And Hearken unto Counsel, Prove. 12. 15.
And will receive Commands, Prove. 10. 8. Whereas Fools are not to be spoken
unto, because they will despise the Speakers wisdom, Prove. 23. 9. How sadly
does some Professor's prating evidence their present Folly, and their future
Fall, Prove. 10. 8. When Truths are not received in Love, (whatever Ignorance
may be pretended) it is one sad sign of a Professors state, 2 These. 2. 10. 12.
And this is the saddest time for Cavilling that ever was, as Foolish Virgins
will Experience, with whom the wise (at such a time) will not delight to Talk,
when sought unto for Oil or Light, Mat. 25. 8, 9. whose Answer intimates,
their being weary of Discoursing with them.

6. A wise man seeks knowledge, Prove. 18. 15. and does not only receive it,
when brought unto him: Such know its worth, and that it lies low, as Silver
does; which puts them upon a suitable searching for it, Prove. 2. 4. Saints
can have no Peace, in being Ignorant of their Duty, but are Industrious to
understand it. Some things are left more dark in the Scriptures, that studious
Saints might be distinguished from sluggish sinners, whose Soul desires, and
has nothing, Prove. 13. 4. How little is some kind of Knowledge searched after
by the generality, who rather seem to be afraid of seeing that which hazardeth
their worldly Interest, and thereby are evinced to be Foolish Virgins.

7. The wisdom of the Prudent, is, to understand his way, Prove. 14. 8. and to
look well unto his going, v. 15. Such will not see with others Eyes, as to the
matters of their Faith and Practice; but Labor for a full persuasion in
themselves, Romans 14. 5. They are not under the Command of Major vote, 1 Kings
22. 13, 14. but are Redeemed from Traditions, 1 Pet. 1. 18. and have no Master,
(or Leader of the way) save only Christ, Mat. 23. 10. Whereas the simple
believes every of some men's words, Prove. 14. 15. and it suffices him, if
others can make it out, with reference to what he Does, or does Believe. The
greatest part (I fear) of late Professors, may thus be proved to be Foolish
Virgins.

8. Wise men are for the Reduction of what they know, unto the Rule of
Practice; or for the showing of their wisdom by their works and Conversation,
James 3. 13. The Doer of Christ's sayings, is only dignified with hat name of
wise, Mat. 7. 24. whereas the simple Hearer is called Foolish, v. 26. At what a
rate will some men talk? Wherewith themselves are fully satisfied, like silly
Fools. Many can hear their sin Reproved, and will Repeat what they have heard,
remaining still what formerly they were. But Gospel-Saints are not for empty
Speculations, or the Discoursive part of Duty, or an imposing upon others
only; by which their Heavenly wisdom does appear.

9 Rebuke a Wise Man and he will love thee, Prove. 9. 8. So far are s^h from
Scorning to be Reproved; yea, a Reproof does enter into such, more than an
hundred-stripes into a Fool, Prove. 17. 10. Professors are generally grown so
Proud, that one had better meet a Bear, than Offer to deal plainly with them,
Prove. 17. 12. Much less are they Reduced by Reproofs; which does evince their
present Folly, and is a sign of following stripes. But Gospel-Saints would have
the Righteous smite them, Psalm. 141. 5. And sheep will run upon their
Shepherd's whistle, before his Dog be sent among them. Indeed some Foolish
Virgins may bear to be Rebuked; but wiser ones are by that means Reclaimed
also, which others seldom are.

10. Wise men are first for Purity, and then for Peace, James 3. 17. whilst
others are afraid, lest if Truths windows be too big, the House of Peace will
by that means be weakened; whereas it is a Duty to throw that House out of
Truth's window, rather than that its Light should be Obscured. The general
outcry at this day for Civil Peace, whatever becomes of Truth, does but
declare men to be Foolish. Whilst Hezekiah was for Peace and Truth, Isa. 39. 8.
And all are bid to be for Truth and Peace, Zech. 8. 16. Most men endeavor
only to preserve an Outward Union; but Paul was merely for keeping the
Spirit's Unity in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. Sinners would fain have Peace
of Conscience: but as there is no Peace unto the wicked, so Gospel-Saints are
for no Peace with sin; but are for Purity of Conscience first, and in the
second place, for Peace. Yea, this holds true, with reference unto the Peace of
God; which though it be highly prized by the Godly wise, yet is Grace first
desired by them, and Peace in the second place, Ephesians. 1. 2.

11. Wise men do very much Observe God's dealings with themselves and others,
which helps their Understanding, Psalm. 107. 43. Such are Instructed, when
others Suffer, Prove. 21. 11. because they wisely consider of God's doing, Psalm.
64. 9. And in Relation to themselves; such earnestly desire to know, why God
contendeth with them, Job 10. 2. and what he would have them do, at such a
time, Acts 9. 6. Such also take notice of their Mercy, and its Circumstances;
how it is within the Time prefixed, Exodus 12. 41. when in a low Estate, Psalm.
136. 23. when destitute of other help, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. when in a Dream, or
not expecting it, Psalm. 126. 1. and when prepared for it, Psalm. 10. 17.

12. The Heart of the Wise is in the House of Mourning, whilst Fools are in the
House of Mirth, Eccl. 7. 4. Mourning and Mirth were wont to Live in several
Houses, though later times have much confounded Funerals, and Festivals; but
Saints are to be known by their abiding in a serious Frame, as in their
constant Habitation. There is a Sober pleasantness, which (in its season) is
allowed, Eccl. 9. 7. and an Affected sadness is both Ridiculous and Sinful,
Mat. 6. 16. But Sorrow is better than Laughter, Eccl. 7. 3. And as the Levity
of some Professors (at this Day especially) will end in Heaviness, Prove. 14.
13. So does it sadly witness (at the present) their want of Spiritual Wisdom.

13. Wisdom does much appear in men's Discourse. A Fool is full of Words, Eccl.
10. 14. which he that has Knowledge spares, Prove. 17. 27. A Saint's Spiritual
Fruits prevent his being over-full of Leaves, which Barren Trees do most abound
with. And though a wise man is not for an Affected (much less a sinful)
silence; yet when he speaks, the words of his Mouth are Gracious, Ecc. 10.
12. Because his Heart does teach his Mouth, Prove. 16. 23. And therefore his
Tongue is Health, Prove. 12. 18. Now, if in the bare multitude of words, there
wants not sin, Prove. 10. 19. much more does super-added frothiness declare men's
Spiritual Folly, and then too many of our Professors cannot avoid the Name of
Foolish Virgins.

14. A wise man's Heart discerns both Time and Judgment, Eccl. 8. 5. and so
his Misery is prevented, v. 6. Wise Virgins are Instructed to go forth in Time,
Mat. 25. 10. To Pray in a Time of finding, Psalm, 32. 6. To bring forth Fruit in
its proper Season, Psalm. 1. 3. which makes it Beautiful, Eccl. 3. 11. All
Sion's Sons are Taught of God, Isa. 54. 13. And therefore they know the fittest
Time of Mourning and Rejoicing, (whereof the Pharisees were Ignorant, Mat. 9.
14, 15.) Of minding worldly matters, (which poor Gehazi did not, 2 Kings 5.
26,) When they should be Importunate with God for sparing Mercy, Joel 2. 17.
And when they should hold their Peace before him in an evil Time, Amos 5. 13.
and 6. 10.

15. Much of men's Wisdom and Understanding appears in the Coolness of their
Spirit, Prove. 17. 27. as the Margin has it; or in the Moderation of their
Inordinate Affections, which they that are Christ's have Crucified, Gal. 5. 24.
Such can Converse about these Lower things, in a way of Holy Carelessness, 1
Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Which others mind with all their might. And in particular,
wisdom does much appear in Meekness; James 3. 13. by which a Prudent man does
cover shame, Prove. 12. 16. unto his Honor, Prove. 20. 3. whereas a Fools Wrath
is presently known, Prove. 12. 16. His Lips do enter into Contention, Prove. 18.
6. And Anger rests in his Bosom, Eccl. 7. 9. Unbridled Passions are one sad
sign of Foolish Virgins.

16. A Wise Man's Eyes are in his Head, Eccl. 2. 14. or such are to be known by
Prudent foresight, and by their suitable Actings. Such look to be Besieged;
and therefore they store themselves before hand with Grace sufficient for those
Encounters. Such see, that Riches are uncertain, and therefore they make
provision for Eternity. Such know, how sin will gall upon a dying Bed; and
therefore they shun it whilst alive. Such do foresee, the shutting of Christ's
Door upon late comers; and therefore they strive to enter, whilst it stands
open. Such apprehend Christ's Coming may be delayed, and therefore their
Vessels are also filled with Oil, for fear their Lamps should fail, when fresh
Recruits cannot be had, until it be too late to buy them.

17. Wise men are to be known by their Acquaintance with hidden Mysteries:
Daniel was noted for his wisdom, because no secret thing was hid from him,
Ezekiel. 28. 3. who had a Gift of Resolving doubts, and of showing Hard Sentences,
Dan. 5. 11, 12. Answerable to which, in Gospel Times, are those more immediate,
and peculiar Discoveries of Christ's mind, which therefore are called, the
wisdom of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. and which are not perceived (save as
they are seen with others Eyes) by him who is merely Natural, v. 14. Such are
Time, Truths, and Duties, which are Discoveries of a later date, most bitterly
opposed by the world, and rarely received among Professors; and by Acquaintance
wherewith, men of that other Spirit have ever been Distinguished from the
Generality; nor has a Real Saint (in all the Scripture) been finally known to
fail therein; though Joshua and Zerubbabel did for a time surcease the Temple
work, or chief Duty of that time, who were not yet owned, till their Return,
Hag. 1. 4. and 2. 20. 23.

18. Wise men (in Evil Times) are subject to be Poor, and therefore to be
Despised, with reference unto their singularly useful wisdom; as that Poor man
Experienced, who by his wisdom did Deliver a Besieged City, Eccl. 9. 14, 15.
Indeed the Saints shall one day be Supreme, Dan. 7. 27. and then their wisdom
will be Admired, as Solomon's was, because residing in so Great a Person: But
in the mean time, (by reason o^ a wicked Ruler's Error) Folly is set in great
Dignity, and the Rich, (viz. in wisdom, as the Antithesis plainly shows) sit
in low place, Eccl. 10. 5, 6. Thus Christ was thought unworthy to be heard,
John 10. 20. whilst Hypocrites were had in great esteem, Luke 16. 15. And
self-denying Paul was branded for a Fool, whilst those of a Complying Spirit
were called wise in Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 10. The Generality of Professors are too
Rich, too much Regarded, to be Right: Therefore let no man's Popularity (which
is the Badge of Fools, (...) Christ shall sit upon his Temporal Throne) become
the Object of a wise man's Envy.

19. Wisdom Directs unto the Exercise of greatest strength in greatest
Difficulties; as when the Iron is blunt, or when its edge is not whetted, Eccl.
10. 10. Jades will draw down-hill, or when a work is easy; but the trial of
Heavenly Metal, is up-hill, or when the wheel is clogged. When Christ was in
his Agony, he Prayed most earnestly, Luke 22. 44. When David was most Derided,
he was most Resolute, 2 Samuel 6. 20. 22. And when Paul was in Bonds, the Godly
Brethren maintained his Suffering-cause with much more Holy boldness, Phil. 1.
14. whilst others plead, the Time is not yet come, Hag. 1. 2. so long as Danger
does attend the Temple-work. Yea, a wise Man does Scale the City of the Mighty,
and casts down the sirength of the confidence thereof, Prove. 21. 22. that is,
he overcomes in his most sharp Encounters. Saul slew his Thousands, but David
his Ten thousands, 1 Samuel 18. 7. because he slew that great Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
51. whom Saul fled from, v. 24. It Is one sad sign of a Foolish Virgin, not to
prevail in sorest Conflicts, but to indulge ones fear and weakness, with
reference unto the Power of some Temptations.

20. Lowliness and Wisdom are constant Twins, Prove. 11. 2. As Pride is
generally the Fools Companion, both in the Letter and mystery. The Mouth of
Fools does pour out Foolishness, Prove. 15. 2. whereas the prudent Man
concealeth knowledge, Prove. 12. 23. Or is not overforward to Declare what
makes for his Glory. Fools judge themselves to be exceeding wise, Prove. 12.
15. But a wise Man thinks that wisdom is far from him, Eccl. 7. 23. Poor
Laodiceans are apt to boast, Rev. 3. 17. but he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow, Eccl. 1. 18. It sadly signifies, when knowledge puffs up;
when God is upbraided with the Creature's Duty; or when one Duty does not make
way for more. Humility is the varnisher of other Graces, but Pride is the
Professor's stain, which spoileth all his other Beauty. An humble sinner is
better to be liked, than he who Glories in his being better, Luke 18. 11. 13,
14. The best are Tempted to be Proud. But this Temptation is stoutliest
resisted by them; yea, God resists it, and gives Grace unto the Humble, 1 Pet.
5. 5.

21. Wise Men will lay up knowledge, Prove. 10. 14. or Labor to secure it for
the time to come. There may be much Hearing, Reading, and Conferring, and yet
no wisdom, for lack of laying up what is by such means gained. We Read of
Hearing for the time to come, Isa. 42. 23. Mary was much an Hearer, who kept
and pondered in her Heart, what others only heard with present wondering, Luke
2. 18, 19. How Rich might some Professors be, in case their Faculty of Laying
up, were suitable to that of getting; by which a Spouse is to be known, at
whose Gates are laid up for her Beloved, all manner of pleasant Fruits, both
New and Old, Cant. 7. 13. Thence is it that a Godly Hearer is said to keep the
Word, Luke 8. 15. which else is subject to be caught away, though in some sense
it be sown in the Heart, Mat. 13. 19. An Holy Man does therefore Meditate in
the Law of God, Psalm. 1. 2. by which he is Distinguished from others, as Clean
Beasts were of Old, by chewing the Cud, Lev. 11. 7. According to which Rule of
Judging, there are (in many Flocks) more Swine than S^eep, because they who
divide the Hoof, (or have a double Calling, viz. as Men, and as Professors) do
not yet chew the Cud, or lay up knowledge; which is one Character of Foolish
Virgins.

22. Another property of wise men, is, to use aright that knowledge ^h^ch they
have, Prove. 15. 2. A Foolish Virgin may have good store (...) knowledge, but
does not rightly use it, as do the wise. Paul had (...) ^^nt of parts, 2 Cor,
11. 5, 6. yet could he do nothing against the (...), 2 Cor. 13. 8. nor set the
Tree of Knowledge against the Tree (...), as others d^d, 2 Timothy 3. 8. with
their Perverse Disputings, (...). 6. 5. which did evince their Folly, 2 Timothy 3.
9. though such D^p^ters were called wise, 1 Cor. 1. 20. He knew that all things
(and consequently sin it self) should work for good to every true Believer, Rom
8. 28. but yet he durst not therefore sin, though Grace thereby should be the
more abundant, Romans 6. 1. He knew, that some might weakly be Offended with his
Lawful Liberty; yet would he not therefore i^dulge himself, but seek another
wealth, in such a Case, 1 Cor. 10. 23. 24. He profited in the Jews Religion
above his equals, Gal. 1. 14. yet was ^e under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 21.
and counted all other knowledge loss, compared with the Excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8. Nor durst he dissemble his Light, as
others did, for fear of Persecution, Gal. 6. 12, 13. but did improve his
knowledge for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. though to the ruin of his Personal
Interest, Gal. 5. 11. From an habitual contradicting of which Rule, too many at
this day are clearly proved to be Foolish Virgins.

Use 1. How sadly are Saints mis-understood by sinners, as if they were the
veriest Fools, who are indeed the only wise. Poor Carnal Creatures, in some
Respects, are wiser than the Saints, Luke 16. 8. So may a silly Fellow (in
trivial matters) outstrip the wisest Statesman. Were we to Judge of Men, by
skill in Bodily concernments, or by their Natural Accomplishments, the
Righteous would be Condemned: But Men shall be Judged by the Scriptures, John
12. 48 and those speak in another Dialect. Let sinners therefore be well
Advised, before they say unto a Saint, Thou Fool; considering the Danger of so
speaking unto ones Brother, Mat. 5. 22. And that sad woe against mis-callers in
such a case, Isa. 5. 20.

Use 2. It does behove the Saints, to be in the Demonstration of that wisdom,
for which they have a Name, Poor Spiritual Fools are apt to think all like
themselves, Eccl. 10. 3. And indiscreet Professors give cause for such an
Apprehension But Wisdom is Justified of her Children, Mat. 11. 19. And
therefore none but Ba^tards will practically condemn her. Pretenders unto
wisdom had need be C^r^umspect, since Grace's Reputation lies at Stake, if they
miscarry. Walk wisely toward them without, Col. 4. 5. So will you put to
silence their Foolish Ignorance, 1 Pet. 2. 15. Or else they will Blaspheme,
though greater Folly in themselves be over-looked by them.

Use 3. There is no cause to wonder, if half the Professors of these latter
Times prove Foolish Virgins, or void of Grace. Ye^, Christ here speaks with
the least; for two third parts (^t such a time) must be cut off and die, Zech.
13. 5. Things really differing in point of kind, can hardly be Di^tinguished;
when the highest degree of a lower kind, is in Conjunction with the Lowest
appearance of an Higher. There are some Plants endued with a seeming sense,
there are some Brutes exceeding like to Men; and there are many Natural Men,
who are concluded to be Saints. Now, if the Disciples were so startled, when
only one of them was hinted to be a Traitor, Mat. 26. 21, 22. much more ought
we to be affected, since half our number will prove notorious Hypocrites.

Use 4. Let all be exhorted to get this wisdom, or Gospel Grace; since wisdom
is the Principal thing, which therefore should be got with all our getting,
Prove. 4. 7. And so much the rather, because it is so great a Rarity, as is here
hinted. Which Exhortation does chiefly concern those Virgins or Professors, who
have been Convicted to be void of wisdom, by any of those foregoing
Characters; but may be of use to others also, to grow in Grace, as is their
Duty, 2 Pet. 3. 18. or to be yet wiser, as is their Disposition, Prove. 9. 9;
with reference to both which sorts of Persons, I shall endeavor to set this
Exhortation home, by several Motives, taken from what the Scripture speaks
concerning wisdom.

Mot. 1. Wisdom is the way to Honor, as David did Experience, whose Name was
much set by; (among Readiness Servants) because of his wise behavior, 1 Samuel 18.
30. And therefore Solomon was sought unto, from all the Kings about him, which
had heard of his wisdom, 1 Kings 4. 34, The Wise shall Inherit Glory, whilst
shame shall be the Fools promotion, Prove. 3. 35. Men hitherto have been
admired, because of their Natural or worldly wisdom; but the time now draws
nigh, when God (or the appearance of his Grace) shall be for a Crown of Glory,
Isa. 28. 5. Yea, even at the present, he is Surnamed Reverend, whose other Name
is Holy, Psalm. 111. 9. And Wisdom makes the Face to shine, Eccl. 8. 1.

2. Wisdom is that which is most likely to Advance a Man into the Highest Place
of Rule and Trust. Joseph was seen to be Discreet and Wise, and therefore
Pharaoh set him over all his House, Genesis 41. 39, 40. Fools have been uppermost,
but shall be Servants to the wise, Prove. 11. 29. because the King's Favor is
toward a wise Servant, Prove. 14. 35. and he shall Rule over a Foolish Son,
Prove. 17. 2. Grace has the Promise of this Life also, 1 Timothy 4. 8. which shall
be performed in due time, when wickedness shall be de-throned, Ezekiel. 21. 25,
26. And Saints shall have the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 27. Judging the World and
Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. The Beast has Crown*d his Horns, Rev. 17. 12. But
David will cut them off, and then the Saints Horn shall be exalted, Psalm. 75.
10.

3. A wise Man knows hidden Mysteries, or the Interpretation of a thing,
Eccl. 8. 1. which is a great Advantage. Such Men shall see the Name (or Mind)
of God, when he is crying to the City, by some signal Judgment, Mic. 6. 9. The
Godly wise shall understand God's Loving kindness, in all his dealings with
them, Psalm. 107. 43. which sweetneth Mercies, and makes the Cross more easy.
Such Men shall understand the Reason of a Public Scourge, Jer. 9. 12. The
Truth and Application of the Promises, Hos. 14. 9. together with the time of
their Accomplishment, Dan. 12. 10. As we would be most knowing men, so let us
Labor to be most Holy; since these have that Revealed to them, which is not
known to others, Ephesians. 3. 5.

4. Wisdom is better than strength, Eccl. 9. 16. or Weapons of War, v. 18. both
in a Defensive and Offensive way, Eccl. 7. 12. 19. and 9. 15. Justice will be
too many for the most United force of sinners, Prove. 11. 21. but cannot hurt
the weakest Saint for ever. Satan knew Christ and Paul, who were too hard for
him; but he could overcome those wicked Jews, when offering to adjure him,
though in the Name of Jesus, Acts 19. 13, 14, 15, 16. The words of the Wise are
heard in quiet, more than the Cry (or utmost endeavors) of him that Rules
among Fools, Eccl. 9. 17. Some put their trust in Moral Virtues, or Natural
Tempers and Resolutions; but Satan's fiery Darts will not be quenched with such
Scarfs and Feathers. Saints are the only Conquerours, Romans 8. 37. because they
keep themselves from being touched by him, 1 John 5. 18. Who leads others
Captive, 1 Timothy 2. 26.

5. Money may (in some cases) be a Defense, as well as Wisdom; but the
Excellency of Knowledge is, that wisdom gives Life to them that have it, Eccl.
7. 12. A Foolish Man is dead, as to his better part, viz. his Understanding;
and Graceless Persons are called Idols, Zech. 11. 17. in whom there is no
Breath (or sign of Life) at all, Hab. 2. 19. Yea, sin is the saddest kind of
Death that is, because it is both Spiritual, and likely to be Eternal, and yet
consistent with the quickest sense of highest Misery. And if such were not Dead
indeed, this consideration would make them take fast hold of Grace or Heavenly
wisdom, and not to let it go, but keep it, because it is their Life, Prove. 4.
13.

6. Wisdom is of most use to others also; because it makes most willing and
most successful, Prove. 15. 7. Men of a Lower Spirit are sparing in their
Communications, lest others should be as knowing as themselves: But Grace is
free to light a Greater Candle, though its own lesser Lamp should thereby be
Eclipsed. Such also are likely to be most Successful, because they are most
careful, and have the promise of Christ's Presence with them. The words of the
wise are Goads, and such are careful to fasten their Nails, for fear of
dropping out, Eccl. 12. 11. And though a wicked man may possibly Convert
another, yet is there no Promise for it, save unto those, who do themselves
stand in God's Counsel, Jer. 23. 22. and winning Souls, or turning Men unto
Righteousness, is chiefly Attributed to the Godly wise, Prove. 11. 30. Dan. 12.
3.

7. Wisdom is that which sets out other things, and without which there is
nothing that does become. Wisdom is good with an Inheritance, Eccl. 7. 11. not
but that wisdom (it self) is good without it; only an Inheritance is not else
seemly: whereas the wise man's Riches are his Crown, because of that
Conjunction, Prove. 14. 24. Wherever the Branch (or Christ) does grow, the Fruit
of the Earth will there be Excellent and comely, Isa. 4. 2. as Earthen Vessels
are, when Tipped with Silver; wether we take that Earthly Fruit, for outward
Blessings, or Moral Virtues, and Common Actions, or for a mean Descent relating
to a Gracious Soul, whom every thing becomes, as Ordinary Garments do an
handsome Body.

8. Folly does Incapacitate a Man for that which he is apt to be ambitious of,
and which naught else can fit him for, save only wisdom. All would have Joy,
but yet delight does not become a Fool, Prove. 19. 10. No more than Laughter
does a Malefactor, when going to Execution. Saul was desirous of being
Honored, 1 Samuel 15. 30. but Honor does not become a Fool, no more than Snow
does Summer, Prove. 26. 1. Men would be prosperous; but the Prosperity of Fools
is their Destruction, for then they turn away, Prove. 1. 32. Men would take in
the Creature; but when a Fool is filled, the Earth is then Disquieted, Prove.
30. 21, 22. Some would be sometimes speaking of good things; but Excellent
speech does not become a Fool, Prove. 17 7. because it is too High for him,
Prove. 24. 7.

9. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. Yea, all
would be glad of Earthly Riches; the very fancying whereof is unto some poor
Creatures an over-pleasing Vanity. Now, Riches are entailed upon wisdom, as
Solomon did Experience, 1 Kings 3. 11. 13. And as Christ promises, when Grace,
or the Kingdom of God is first sought after, Mat. 6. 33. This has been always
vertu^lly made good unto the Saints, because Contentment is the Fruit of
Godliness, which answers unto Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. But as such have the
Promises of this Life also, 1 Timothy 4. 8. So we are now hastening unto the Time
of their Accomplishment; when Meek ones shall Inherit the Earth, Psalm. 37. 11.
Flowing together for Wheat, and Wine, and Oil, Jer. 31. 12. And when their
Brass and Iron shall be turned into Gold and Silver, Isa. 60. 17. And in a way
of Reparation for all their former Losses, receiving double for their shame,
Isa. 61. 7. Yea, in this Life an hundred fold for that which they have
sometimes lent to Christ, Mat. 19. 29. Then shall their Riches also be their
Crown, Prove. 14. 24. because they will be taught to Consecrate their Gain unto
the Lord, Mic. 4. 13. and to the Duties of his Worship, Isa. 61. 5, 6.

10. Wisdom, or Understanding does make the words of Christ to be exceeding
plain, Prove. 8, 9. and easy, Prove. 14. 6. which otherwise cannot be
Apprehended. Saints have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16. chiefly because they
have the Spirit's Guidance, John 16. 13. but partly from an innate sagacity, by
which a Man of Understanding will draw that out which lies deep, Prove. 20. 5
Now, we must be Judged by the words of Christ, John 12. 48. And therefore woe
be to that Soul who does not understand them, and so cannot receive them. And
if some Children would give any thing, to have their Lessons rendered easy;
what Fools are those, by whom Facilitating Wisdom is Despised? This Grace is
worth the seeking after, were it only but to remove that Labor of Duty and
sweating at it, which Poor fallen Man is subject unto. Christ's Yoke is
therefore easy to his Disciple^, Mat. 11. 30. and his Commandments are not
Grievous, 1 John 5. 3. which others long to be Discharged from, Amos 8. 5.
because of weariness, Mal. 1. 13. With what Delight would sinners mind God's
Book, had they but that which would endue them with an Holy Ingenuity, whereby
they might be able to Run and Read what is contained in it.

11. When wisdom enters into thine Heart, Prove. 2. 10. it will Preserve and
keep thee, v. 11. To Deliver thee from the way of evil men, v. 12. Which must
be meant of Gospel Grace, else utmost wisdom will not prevent ones Fall, as
Solomon did Experience; yea, whilst his wisdom (of a lower kind) remained with
him, Eccl. 2. 8, 9. Virtue may Apprehend, Imprison, Condemn, and Torture sin,
but nothing short of Grace, will ever prove its proper Executioner, or absolute
Suppressor. Grace is Man Rallied, or Reinforced with a greater strength than
ever Adam had; which therefore does subdue its Adversaries, as David did those
Philistines, 2 Samuel 8. 1. whom Saul did only vex, 1 Samuel 14. 47. but was at
last subdued by them, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Now, is not that Balm worth seeking after,
which is the only Healer of a deadly wound, Jer. 51. 8? Is not that Armor
worth the putting on, which only will enable to withstand, and having done all
to stand, Ephesians. 6. 13? They who now Mock at sin, will one day wish they had been
wiser, than to Despise that Grace or Wisdom, by which they might have been
preserved from its Mortal sting, although its present stain were not to be
regarded.

12. This wisdom had need be speedily endeavored after, because there is no
wisdom in the Grave, which Men are going into, Eccl. 9. 10. The Door of Grace
is sometimes shut on Earth, as Foolish Virgins will Experience, Mat. 25. 10.
much more when Hell has shut its mouth upon the Sinners Soul. Oh how
Industrious would the Damned be, had they but any hope of getting that which
formerly they have Despised. And no Man has a Lease of Life, as Hezekiah had,
Isa. 38. 5. which is enough to startle slumbring Fools, for fear of sleeping
unto Death; especially since Fools are threatened with the shortest warning,
Luke 12. 20. Nor will men plainly say, that wisdom is not the principal thing;
why then do they delay to get it with all their getting? Which Ordinary wisdom
will direct unto, in such momentous and uncertain cases. How careful are
Prudent men to expedite the setting of their House in Order, before they dye,
which is a Duty, Isa. 38. 1. but nothing in Comparison of setting the Heart in
Order, and getting ready that Land-Lord's Rent, whose Coming may be before to
morrow, and who will then give no longer Day. Whilst men are walking to the
Grave, (which every step they take is tendi^g unto) let them remember, there is
no wisdom there, and let them Act accordingly.

13. Fools cannot improve the best Advantages, and therefore a Price put into
their Hands, is to no purpose, Prove. 17. 16. Wise men are for the multiplying
of what they have, but Fools are only good at spending, Prove. 21. 20. Good
Company is a precious Talent, but yet the Foolish Virgins were not bettered by
being in Communion with the wise. Fools may be often Instructed, but silly Men
and Women are ever Learning, and never come unto the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. A Foolish People will badly requite their Gracious Benefactor,
Deuteronomy. 32. 6. or are not the better for Favors shown them, Isa. 26. 10. And
though a Fool be brayed in a Mortar (or be more hardly used) yet will not his
Foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27. 22.

14. Fools are unacceptable to God and Man. God has no pleasure in them, Eccl.
5. 4. but does abominate their very Sacrifices, Prove. 15. 8. (they are such
sorry things, Eccl. 5. 1.) although not brought with a wicked mind, Prove. 21.
27. Nor any Man (in his right wits) can take Delight in Mad men, no more than
Achish did in David, when seeming to be such a one, 1 Samuel 21. 13, 14, 15. Who
can Delight in wicked Fools? Considering their more than Brutish Rage, Prove.
17. 12. Their crackling Laughter, Eccl. 7. 6. Their vain Voluminous Talk, Eccl.
5. 3. Their making a sport of mischief, Prove. 10. 23. And their intolerable
self-conceit, Prove. 12. 15. Therefore good David did bewail his being made to
dwell in Mesech, Psalm. 120. 5.

15. As a Dog returns to his Vomit, so will a Fool unto his Folly, Prove. 26.
11. Such may begin to walk in the Spirit, as the Foolish Galatians did, Gal. 3.
3. but alas, their wisdom is apt to fail them by the way, Eccl. 10. 3. as did
the Foolish Virgins Oil, Mat. 25. 8. Such may be pretty Sober for a while, but
Mids^mmer Temptations will make these Mad men rage as much as ever. They can do
nothing with Discretion; and without Judgment there is no certainty of
Perseverance: Such Build upon the Sand, and therefore their House must fall in
a Tempestuous day, Mat. 7. 26, 27. As any would secure their present standing,
so let them seek for wisdom, which only will preserve them, Prove. 4. 5, 6.

16. Let the Portion of such be duly weighed. Fools must expect to be
Afflicted, because of their Transgressions, Psalm. 107. 17. The People that does
not Understand, shall fall, or be severely punished, Hos. 4. 14. and therefore
he that made them, will not have Mercy on them, Isa. 27. 11. This kind of Folly
will not Excuse Men, however Natural madness may be indulged. As a Whip is for
the Horse, and a Bridle for the Ass; so is a Rod for the Back of Fools,
properly relating to them, Prove. 26. 3. Stripes are prepared for them, Prove.
19. 29. although they do not at the present feel them. Yea, the Great God
himself, that formed all things, will both reward the Fool, and will reward
Transgressors, Prove. 26. 10.

Now, as Men would be Interested in this Gospel Grace, or Spiritual Wisdom, let
them Observe these following Helps.

Helps. 1. Labor to be sensible of its want. There is more hope of a Fool,
than of one wise in his own Conceit, Prove. 26. 12. because this self-conceited
man, must first become a Fool, before he can be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. A Soul
that is full loatheth an Honeycomb, Prove. 27. 7. And such will never seek for
Grace, who do but ^^^nk they have no need thereof, Rev. 3. 17. Let the
foregoing Ch^racters be faithfully improved, whose Light will not Cr^ate, but
only manifest men's hidden Folly, before it be too late to purchase Wisdom. The
Ruin of these Foolish Virgins arose from hence, because they did not make a
timely search into their empty Vessels, through sleightiness, or self-conceit.

2. Make sure of Christ, who is the Head, Col. 2. 19. and therefore wisdom
cannot be had without him. Grace is by Christ, John 1. 17. In whom are hid all
wisdom's Treasures, Col. 2. 3. From whom we therefore must receive, and as in
point of Imputation, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So also of Inhesion, John 1. 16. And what he
has, is to be had, yea, by the silliest Souls that are. List, how Essential
wisdom Cries, Prove. 9. 3. Who so is simple, let him turn in hither, v. 4. How
long will ye love simplicity, Prove. 1. 22. When will ye be Wise? Psalm. 94. 8.
Forsake the Foolish, and Live, Prove. 9. 6. Unto you, O Men, I call, and my
Voice is unto the Sons of Men, Prove. 8. 4. with whom are my Delights, v. 31.
and those that seek me early shall find me, v. 17.

3. Next unto Christ, Converse much with his Law or Scriptures; whose use is,
to make wise the simple, Psalm. 19. 7. Yea, which are able to make men wise unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Could men but be Admonished by these, instead of their
unprofitable Studies, Eccl. 12. 12. How might those Conduit-pipes convey this
water of Life into their Thirsty Souls! But yet the Scriptures are but the
Mines of wisdom, which do require deep digging into, as for Silver, Prove. 2. 4.
or being In them, as the Greek word has it, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Else one may have
the Field, and yet not be the better for those Treasures which lie hid therein,
and are not sought for. One may both Hear and Read, and yet not rightly
Understand, and so not be the wiser, Acts 8. 28. 30.

4. If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives Liberally, and
upbraideth not, James 1. 5. But Offer not the Sacrifice of Fools, Eccl. 5. 1.
whilst you pretend to be at Prayer for Wisdom. Seek for it with all your Heart;
else is there no Promise of Success, Jer. 29. 13. And be importunate, since
Knowledge must be cried after, Prove. 2. 3. And Persevere therein, since he
alone is Blessed, who watches daily at Wisdom's Gates, Prove. 8. 34. But ask in
Faith, believing that God is able and willing to bestow this Grace, Jam. 1. 5,
6. And always bear in mind, that early seekers are the surest finders, Prove. 8.
17. Which when it is thus asked and obtained, has other Blessings added to it,
1 Kings 3. 11, 12, 13.

5. Have a care with whom you walk; since, though the Company of Wise Virgins
cannot insure the Foolish Virgins Change, yet such Companions are a special
Help; and he that walks with Wise men is likeliest to be wise; but the
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed; Prove. 13. 20. Communion is a
Conduit-pipe, through which both Sweet and Bitter Water is conveyed; and such a
derivation oft-times does much assimulate. The Foolish Galatians were bew^tched
with the Eye, as the Greek word signifies, Gal. 3. 1. And the beholding of
Gospel-Glory in another, is of a Changing Nature, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Yea, such as
are not altered by their Company, may yet be very much restrained, as David was
from good, whilst in the presence of the wicked, Psalm. 39. 1, 2. And as these
Foolish Virgins were from Evil, whilst with the Wise.

6. Compare not your selves with your selves, or with such as you are; which
was the cause why those poor Creatures were not Wise, 2 Cor. 10. 12. Some
eminent Professors are seen to be Voluptuous, Dissembling, Proud, Passionate,
or Vain; and therefore others make light of such Distempers in themselves. Had
there been but one Foolish Virgin amongst these Ten, that One might have been
sooner wrought upon; but if there be any Saint, for a Foolish man to turn unto,
he will not easily be convinced, as seems to be hinted, Job 5. 1, 2. Yea,
therefore a Scorner will not go unto the Wise, because he loves not to be
Reproved by them, as being better than himself, Prove. 15. 12. Whereas we ought
to walk according to the choicest Pattern, Phil. 3. 17. and only to follow the
Faith of such, but not their failings, Heb. 13. 7. Or rather to look at Jesus,
Heb. 12. 1, 2. and to be perfect as God is perfect, Mat. 5. 48.

7. Labor to keep up the Price of Wisdom in your esteem, since none will Buy
that which he does think is naught, whatever he may say, Prove. 20. 14. Eve was
not tempted by the Tree of Knowledge, until she saw its being to be Desired,
Genesis 3. 6. Nor will this Tree of Life (or Spiritual Wisdom) be otherwise
regarded, or prove Tempting, in an Holy way. Stand in the viewing of those
foregoing Motives, until you be in Love with Wisdom; remembering also, that
all other things to be Desired, are not to be compared to it, Prove. 8. 11.
Wisdom Excels Folly as far as Light Excels Darkness, Eccl. 2. 13. Yea,
Death and Destruction say, We have heard the Fame thereof, Job 28. 22. which
will not be Exchanged (by its wise Possessors) for Jewels of finest Gold, v. 17.

8. Be careful to Improve that Measure which you have received; since unto him
that has (or well improveth) it shall be given, Mat. 25. 29. Which Promise
appertains to the truly Gracious, who might have more, did they but Labor as
David did, who by that means was wiser than his Enemies, or Teachers, or than
the Ancients, Psalm. 119. 98, 99, 100. Nor can it be denied, but that a Natural
man might do more than he does, in Order to his Spiritual good; and though I
find no Promise of special Grace annexed unto the best improvement of Nature's
strength, yet who does know what God might do (in way of Arbitrary goodness) if
such did carefully improve their single Talent? And if they turn at his
Reproof, he then will pour out his Spirit unto them, Prove. 1. 23.

9. Refuse not any good Instruction, but Hear it, and be wise, Prove. 8. 33. or
that thou may be wise (at leastwise) in thy Latter end, Prove. 19. 20.
Whereas a Scorner seeks wisdom, but does not find it, Prove. 14. 6. But he is
wise who hearkeneth unto Counsel, Prove. 12. 15. Faith comes by Hearing, Romans
10. 17. As Sin first entered by the Ear, 2 Cor. 11. 3. which when it is not
opened to the wise man's Charming, that Poison of sin cannot be changed, Psalm.
58. 4, 5. Nor will the Serpent's subtilty be turned into Heavenly wisdom. Most
Men are therefore Graceless, because they will not Hear, at least, not Hearken
to that Counsel which wisdom gives; and which gives wisdom the Hearing
whereof is both one sign of wisdom, and one chief means whereby to gainit,
which every wise Man will therefore do, Prove. 1. 5.

10. Take heed of Satan's Bribes, since Gifts will blind the wise, Exodus 23. 8.
Satan will cast his Golden Balls before you, whilst running after wisdom, to
stop your Pursuit. He tempts to make the Conscience Drunk with worldly
Pleasures, as poor Arrested Debtors do the Bailiff, thinking thereby to Cheat
the Creditor: But Conscience will awake, and follow such self-deceiving Fools
into their everlasting Chains. Yea, he has wisdom's Counterfeit, and makes
many think that Notional Knowledge; or Spiritual Gifts, together with the
Matter of good Actions, is Gospel Grace and wisdom. He also calls the simple to
him, Prove. 9: 13, 16. but not to make them wise, as wisdom does, v. 4.

11. Be Humble, since wisdom is with the Lowly, both as Humilty is a sign of
wisdom, Prove. 11. 2. and as it is a means to gain it, Prove. 3. 34. Those have
no Grace, who think they have it, because of their Improving Nature. Know not
the Grace you have Received, in Point of Pleading (upon that Account) for more.
Those are not likely to press forward, who do not, in some sense forget what is
behind, Phil. 3. 13, 14. Whereas he was the wisest Man on Earth, 1 Kings 13.
12. who Humbly thought that wisdom was far from him, Eccl. 7. 23. Scorn not to
be Reproved or Corrected; since the Rod and Reproof give wisdom, Prove. 29. 15.
And since mere Natural wisdom is not Restored to men Distracted, without big
words, and sometimes blows. Scorn not to be Instructed by an Inferior, or by
an Adversary; since we are bid go to the Ant for wisdom, Prove. 6. 6. Yea, unto
Serpents, Mat. 10. 16. This standing upon Terms in Spiritual Cases, proc^ed,
from want of wisdom, and does Obstruct its being gained. And let not the wise
Man Glory in his wisdom, Jer. 9. 23. Since Pride fore-runs a Fall, Prove. 16. 18

12. The right Numbering of one's Days will much Advance the Application of
Men's He^rts to wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. All will confess their Days cannot be
many; but this affects not, save as they are so T^ught to Number them, viz In a
Serious way. Could Men but see into the shortness of this Life, (wherewith
their Outward Comforts will Expire) and that Eternity depends upon this Moment,
they would be wiser than they are. Yea, all other kind of wisdom (save what is
Spiritural) will perish in the Grave, Eccl. 9. 10. As did wise Solomon's
Philosophy, whose Sacred Writings are only Extant, 1 Kings 4. 32, 33. Death
Respresents the worth of Saving Grace.

Mat. XXV. 3, 4. They that were Foolish took their Lamps, and took no Oil with
them: But the Wise took Oil in their Vessels, with their Lamps.
IN these two Verses we have a Particular Instance of the forenamed V^rgins
Folly and Wisdom, with Reference unto that Oil which the Wise took with them,
and which the Foolish left behind. From whence the Observation Offered, is this.

Observe. Professors Evidence themselves to be Wise or Foolish, by Taking, or
not taking Oil in their Vessels, together with their Lamps.

In the pursuance whereof, these few things may be Quaeried.

Quest. 1. What are we to Understand by Oil? Such as the Wise Virgins had?
Answ. Metaphorical Oil (which needs must be here meant) most commonly denotes
the Special Gifts or Graces of the Spirit, and Spiritual Light or Knowledge
among the rest; which therefore are ofttimes called Ointment, Cant. 1. 3.
Unction, 1 John 2. 20. or Anointing, v. 27. And because of the full Resemblance
that is between them and Oil in the Letter; as in these following Respects.

1. Oil is very Beautifying; it makes the Face to shine, Psalm. 104. 15.
Therefore did Naomi bid Ruth to anoint her self, when going unto Boaz; Ruth 3.
3. Such are these Gifts and Graces. Grace made Christ fairer than the Sons of
Men, Psalm. 45. 2. The chiefest of Ten Thousand, Cant. 5. 10. Yea, therefore his
Glory was like the Fathers, because he was so full of Grace, John 1. 14. Grace
makes the Spouse all Fair and Ravishing, Cant. 4. 7. 9. Whose Comeliness is not
destroyed by Holy Terror, Cant. 6. 4. Nor by the Blackness of outward
Suffering, Cant. 1. 5. This is more Obvious unto a Spiritual Eye, Acts 11. 23.
But yet Ingenuous Virgins can also witness hereunto, both in Relation to the
Spouse, Cant. 5. 9. and Christ, Cant. 6. 1.

2. Oil is of a Regal Nature, and will be uppermost, whatever other Liquors it
is mingled with; and therefore to be anointed with fresh Oil, is put to
signify, the Exaltation of one's Horn, Psalm. 92. 10. Of such a Nature is
special Grace. This Oil may for a while be under water, when shaken by the
Tempter's Hand; but sin shall never have Dominion over Saints, because they are
under Grace, Romans 6. 14. Such may be sometimes Foiled, but they will be up
again, Prove. 24. 16. And every Yoke in time shall be destroyed from off their
Neck, because of the Anointing, Isa. 10. 27. which has been always Spiritually
made good, and will at last appear, with reference unto a Temporal Supremacy
there intended.

3. Oil makes any kind of Motion quick; therefore are Wheels and Locks
anointed, together with their Shields of Old, Isa. 21. 5. which made the
Enemies Darts to glide off quickly; yea, therefore Men's Bodies also were wont
to be anointed, to make them nimble. And herein Grace is like to Oil.
Therefore the Saints can run and not be weary, Isa. 40. 31. as were these
Foolish Virgins for lack of Oil. This keeps Satan's shafts from fastening
upon their Shields, and makes them go with lesser Weights (or fewer Motives)
and with less creaking noise, because their Wheels are Oyled. And though
Christ's Mediation be the only Key, yet must that Key be Oyled with Grace,
which much avails in the work of Opening the Door of Mercy, James 5. 16. Not
that it works with Christ in point of Impetration; but as it is required by
him, unto the Believer's being benifited by his Intercession.

4. Oil is Embalming; therefore Christ's Body was anointed to the Burying,
Mark 14. 8. And others came afterward, on purpose to anoint him, Mark 16. 1.
Grace also keeps from Putrefaction. The Saints very Bodies shall be made
Incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 53. When Grace is perfected in them, as it was in
Christ, who therefore might not see Corruption, because he was God's Holy One,
Acts 2. 27. Yea, Holy David had (in some sense) this Privilege made good to
him, Psalm. 16. 10. However, in a Spiritual sense, this Oil of Grace wears off
sins fretting Rust, and does secure its Owner's Name from Rotting, Prove. 10. 7.
And keeps the Soul from entering into those Degrees of Moral Putrefaction, which
others cannot prevent.

5. Oil is of an Healing Nature, which therefore is applied to wounds, Luke 10.
34. and was Symbolically used by those who had the Gift of Healing, James 5.
14. Mark 6. 13. Such an All-heal is Grace. What noisome Ulcers are upon sinners
Hearts, Isa. 1. 5, 6. which Grace keeps sweet at present, and is in the way of
an Effectual Cure. The best of Nature's Medicines are only Skinning, or
Repercussive, Imprisoning Rebellious Humors, which makes them rage the more,
and break out other where with greater fierceness. But Grace Designs the
altering of one's Constitution, beginning with the Heart or Mind, and thence
expelling into the Members, that which it will not leave there neither, Romans 7.
23, 24.

6. Oil does not break the Head. Psalm. 141. 5. But is of a Mollifying Nature,
Isa. 1. 6. The Emblem of soft words, Psalm. 55. 21. And that which gently does
insinuate it self into a Part or Member. Such also is the Property of Grace. A
bare Command is very Irritating, Romans 7. 8. And Slavish fear begets an Angry
kind of Duty, Exodus 4. 25, 26. Which is Tormenting, 1 John 4. 18. But Grace
does soften a stony Heart, Ezekiel 36. 26. And soaks into the Will, Mat. 26. 41.
Gently dispersing peccant Humors, and making the Soul to Act from Love, so
that Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. And when there is most of Grace
in any man, there is most of sweetness, both in Relation to himself and others,
proceeding from the Nature of this Oil.

7. Oil is not apt to Freeze, like other Liquid things. No more is Grace.
Nature is very fluid in the Summer Season, and Hypocrites are Active, while
they are in the midst of warm encouragements; but when that Sun declines, how
stiff are such, how Cold for Christ, and like-dead Flies, until the Spring
returns? Whereas a truly Gracious Soul, though sensible of such
with-drawings, yet is as fit for present use as ever, because of that Native
warm^h wherewith he is endued. Saints can endure Hardship, 2 Timothy 2. 3. 2 Cor.
11. 27. Partly because they are inured to it, Luke ^. 29. But chiefly from the
Grace or Fatness of that Olive Tree which they are Graffed into, Romans 11. 17.

8. Oil is not apt to wast, but is the Preserver of other things; and therefore
Colors are laid in Oil. A Carnal Man's Goodness is like the Dew, Hos. 6. 4. Or
of a waterish Nature, which quickly dries up: And Moral Virtues are of a
pretty Color, but apt to fade, because not laid in Grace. How quickly did that
Lovely Young Man look pale, for lack of following Christ, Mark 10. 20, 21, 22.
Or merely because his Virtue was not added unto Faith, as it should have been,
2 Pet. 1. 5. But Grace is of an Everlasting Nature, not waxing lean with Age,
Psalm. 92. 14. But springing up to Everlasting Life, John 4. 14. According to
the Nature of its Covenant, Jer. 32. 40.

9. Oil is of a Chearing Fragrant Nature. We read of the smell of Ointments,
Cant. 4. 10. whereby they do bewray themselves, Prove. 27. 16. Filling the House
with Odor, John 12. 3. which stirs up Love, Cant. 1. 3. and is Heart chearing,
Prove. 27. 9. Therefore it is called the Oil of Joy, Isa. 61. 3. and Gladness,
Psalm. 45. 7. which was not to be used in the Times of Mourning, 2 Samuel 14. 2.
Nor with a Sin-Offering, Lev. 5. 11. Or Jealousie-Offering, Numb. 5. 15. which
called for sadness. All which agrees to Grace, in point of Savor and
Refreshing, confessed by all who have their Senses Exercised. Christ had Grace
poured into his Lips, Psalm. 45. 2. whose Lips were therefore like to Lillies,
dropping sweet smelling Myrrh, Cant. 5. 13. Yea, and how Odoriferous might
Professors be, did they but Open their Box of Ointment, or were but in the
Exercise of Gospel-Graces.

10. Oil is a very stately, satisfying, and Pleasant Nourisher. Much of the
Israelites Food was Oil, 1 Kings 17. 12. whose pleasantness was that by which
their Manna was resembled, Numb. 11. 8. Yea, Oil is very satisfying, by reason
of its Fatness, and very stately also, which therefore is coupled with fine
Flower and Honey, Ezekiel. 16. 13. and Wine, which he that Loves overmuch, will
not be Rich, Prove: 21. 17. To signify the equal Costliness of Oil and Wine.
And such a kind of Nourisher is Grace; Heart-strengthning, Soul-satisfying, and
very pleasant unto a Spiritual Palate: Yea, when that Stately Feast of Oils (as
the Hebrew has it) is made upon Mount Sion, Isa. 25. 6. Its first Course will
be Grace, as Glory will be the Second, Psalm. 84. 11.

11. Oil is of a diffusive Nature, soaking into the Bones, Psalm. 109. 18. And
that by which a running River is Resembled, Ezekiel. 32. 14. An Instance whereof
we have in Aaron's Ointment, which ran down from his Head unto his Beard, and
thence unto the Skirts of his Garment, Psalm. 133. 2. Sin is self-propagati^^,
and so is Grace; which is not able to contain it self; save as it is enforced.
A worldly prudent Man can stop the current of his Testimony when he pleases,
because his Prophesying Spirit is of an Ordinary Nature, which therefore is
Subject to such kind of Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32. But good John Baptist could
not hold his Tongue, although he thereby lost his Head, Mat. 14. 3, 4. 10.
whose Life and Liberty might else have been preserved.

12. Oil was abundant in the Land of Canaan, which therefore was called a Land
of Oil, 2 Kings 18. 32. Especially some part thereof; and therefore Asher was
bid to dip his Foot in Oil, Deuteronomy. 32. 24. wherein much of their Treasure did
consist, Prove. 21. 20. And wherewith they Traded with them of Tire, Ezekiel. 27.
17. The Assyrian boasted of his Natural Oil, 2 Kings 18. 32. But Grace is no
where to be found, save in, and among God's Israel, and there it is abundant
especially with those who have the Name for Happiness, which Asher signifies,
Genesis 30. 13. Although their outward Lot (like his) be stony, yet do they suck
this Oil out of the Flinty Rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. which is the Richest Treasure,
Isa. 33. 6. and wherewith such do Trade, Romans 1. 11.

13. Oil was of an Ancient Use in the Designation of Persons unto some more
than Ordinary work or Office, wherewith the High Priest was Anointed, Numb.
35. 25. So were the Prophets, 1 Kings 19. 16. Psalm. 105. 15. And also Kings, 1 Samuel 16. 13. As these were Types of Christ, who was both Prophet, Priest, and
King, and was accordingly Anointed, Isa. 61. 1. Acts 4. 27. Psalm. 45. 7. Thus
also Grace resembles Oil, because the Saints are thereby both Designed and
fitted for such Offices; for he which has Anointed them is God, 2 Cor. 1. 21.
Poor Carnal Creatures are Designed for Lower Uses, whilst Higher Places are
reserved for Saints; who as they are at present Kings and Priests to God, so
they shall Reign on Earth, Rev. 5. 10. as David did soon after his Anointing;
and then will Foolish Virgins wish they had their Vessels filled with this Oil.

14. Oil was of Use in Sacrifices, which Jacob therefore poured twice upon his
Pillar, Genesis 28. 18. and 35. 14. Whereby to Testify his Thankfulness, and gain
some further Mercy from the Lord; Whereof that Typical Meat Offering did
consist, Numb. 15. 4. which was as Sauce unto their Sacrifices, to make them
Savoury and Complete; as Grace does Gospel-Sacrifices, which therefore is
Required in Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and Praises, Col. 3. 16. But therefore it was
Their grievous sin, who set God's Oil before the Heathen, Ezekiel. 23. 41. And
sent their Ointments unto Ashur, Isa. 57. 9. merely to get their Favor. And
thus Grace is an Acceptable Sacrifice, when Offered up by Christ, the Altar, 1
Pet. 2. 5. Yea, though there be nothing but this Oil, or Grace appearing in the
will, 2 Cor. 8. 12. But woe be to those Israelites, who prostitute this Sacred
Oil at the Feet of Men, or give up their Light and Duty unto the wills of
others, (as many Professors in our days have done) merely to curry Favor with
them.

15. Oil may be spoiled very much, as Ointment is apt to be, by some dead Flies
got into it, Eccl. 10. 1. And as Oil (Typically) was of Old, when touched by
one that was unclean by having touched a dead Body, Hag. 2. 12, 13. And thus,
even Saints themselves (yea, and their very Graces) are apt to be unsavory, by
reason of some strong Corruption labored under. Yea, that which some Men count
a sorry Fly, may be sufficient to breed this Putrefaction, until it be taken
away, which cannot be without some kind of loss. And in particular, one's
touching (or compliance with) Man's Prohibition of Temple-work, or Open worship
(which is the only thing intended by that Prophet Haggai) is apt to make this
Oil unclean, or to obstruct Communion with any so polluted.

16. Oil is of special Use for Light (which is the Resemblance chiefly here
intended:) And so is Grace, which also does much resemble Light, as sin does
Darkness. Darkness is merely privative, and so is sin: But Grace is of a
positive Nature, which therefore has its Author, Heb. 12. 2. as Light had its
Creator, Genesis 1. 3. Grace is from Christ, John 1. 16. as Light is from the Sun;
and sin from Satan, John 8. 44. that Prince of Darkness, Acts 26. 18. The Light
is sweet, Eccl. 11. 7. And Grace is a gladsome sight Acts 11. 23. whilst none
but Night-Birds can delight in Darkness. The Light makes manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13.
And so does Grace, the Nature of sin and Duty, which poor dark sinners do not
understand. There Is no Communion between the Light and Darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
And as not in a Natural, so neither in this Moral sense. Darkness is staining,
Job 3. 5. and so is sin: But Light and Grace do give a shining luster, Eccl. 8.
1. Darkness and Sin (both of them) are exceeding Cold, Mat. 24. 12. whereas
Grace (like the Sun) does set the Heart on burning, Luke 24. 32. Darkness
Occasions Terror, Psalm. 91. 5. and so does sin, Lev. 26. 16. But Grace and
Light are equally rejoicing. Darkness and Sin expose unto mistakes and Dangers,
both which are happily prevented through the Light of Grace. Darkness unfits
for Action, as these poor Foolish Virgins did Experience; whereas the others
Lightsome Oil kept them in a walking posture (after their being once awakened)
until the Bridegroom came.

These are the Principal of those respects, wherein New Covenant-Grace
resembles Oil; the last of which (viz. Its being of special use for Light) is
chiefly here intended. In which regard, I now shall a little further clear up
the Nature of this Oil, or Grace, with reference unto that Light, for which it
serves. And so,

1. This Oil of Grace (together with its Light) is merely Spiritual, and no way
Natural. There is a Natural Oil, and there is also a Light of Nature, in a
Moral sense, Romans 2. 14. proceeding from a Mystical (yet Naturally Moral) Oil.
But now, this Oil and Light of Grace is wholly of another Nature. The first
Adam's Paradise was Richly stored with Natural Olive Trees, both in the Letter
and Mystery; but Gospel Grace cannot be had save by a fresh engrafting into
that supernatural Olive Tree, Romans 11. 24. or Second Adam, who is from Heaven,
1 Cor. 15. 47. Nature's Wild Olive will never yield this Oil, which those are
therefore strangers unto, who have not in them any thing, save what is Natural.

2. This Oil and Light of Grace is always Accompanied with some good Measure of
Spiritual Heat. There is a shining Light,-which is not burning; as that of the
Moon, which fitly answers unto Nature: But that of the Sun (which is an
undoubted Type of Christ, Mal. 4. 2.) does set the Heart on burning, Luke 24.
32. as well as open the Disciples Eyes, v. 31. The Light of Grace is therefore
troublesome unto the most, because it is so hot; whereas a Carnal Jew can Joy
(at leastwise) in John Baptist's Light, Abstracted from its burning Heat, John
5. 35. Christ's Oil does scald the Old Man out of Doors; and his very Light or
Brightness is Destructive unto wickedness, 2 These. 2. 8. by which it is to be
known from that more Carnal Light, which has no burning Influence upon its
Owner's Dross, no more than Balaam's had upon his Covetousness.

3. This Oil of Grace (as that in the Letter also) must first be fired before
it yields any Heat or Light, whatever immediate use it may be of, in other
regards: Grace does depend on Christ, not only as its Author, but also as he
must Actuate it; or else that Habit must sleep in Cold and Darkness. Those two
Disciples had of this Oil within their Vessels; but till Christ came and
kindled it, they neither saw, nor were they warmed, Luke 24. 31, 32. Saints
never will be Independents, with reference unto Christ's renewing Influences;
but he that works the Disposition, must also draw it forth to Exercise; else
though they be something, yet can they do nothing, John 15. 5. because they
Move, as well as Live in him, Acts 17. 28. It Is to be feared, those men have
bought a Wind of Satan, who think they have the Spirit's Wind at their Command.

4. The Light of this Oil is of no use unto a Natural Eye, but is Offensive to
it. Saints have Discoveries thereby made, which others do not understand; both
in Relation unto Christ, Cant. 5. 9, 10. and things of a Spiritual Nature, 1
Cor. 2. 14. Christ was that Light, John 1. 9. whom yet the Common Jews received
not, v. 11. but their very Seers were offended with it, Mat. 12. 12. partly
because it was too Manifesting, John 3. 20. and partly, because it was too
Great, or like unto the Sun it self, when looked on; this Object being Light,
as well as that by which it is seen, Psalm. 36. 9. Yea, therefore was John
Baptist's Light rejoiced in but for a Season, John 5. 35. though his was far
Inferior unto Christ's, John 1. 8. That Light which Natural Men can bear
without Offense, (in point of Doctrine or Conversation) is much to be suspected.

This Light of Grace is very clear (compared with any other) or that which
makes the Object very plain. Poor Heathens do rather feel than see, Acts 17.
27. and common Israelites could not look very far, 2 Cor. 3. 13. but
Gospel-Saints behold with open Face, (compared with others) though in a Glass
compared with their Future Sight, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Faith gives the clearest
Evidence, Heb. 11. 1. And therefore True Believers are best Resolved, in point
of Sin and Duty, which others stick at, through want of full Conviction. O how
is Grace to be desired then, since Answerable to the Measure of our Light! So
is the safeness of our Walking, John 11. 9, 10. and Satisfaction that our way
is Right, John 12. 35.

6. This Light is of a Growing Nature, which shines more and more unto the
Perfect Day, Prove. 4. 18. A Natural Eye (both in the Letter and Mystery) is apt
to wax dim with Age; but though such as Christ does englighten, may at the
first see Men as Trees, yet do they afterward see clearly, Mark 8. 23, 24, 25.
The way of the wicked is as Darkness, Prove. 4. 19. but Saints walk in a Beam
unto the Sun, Journeying as Abraham did unto the Southward, Genesis 20. 1.
Therefore their Light must needs increase. And when the Moon (or Light of
Nature) shall equalize the present Sun, then shall the Sun (or Light of Grace)
be as seven Suns United into one, Isa. 30. 26. until Saints know as they are
known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

7. The Measure of this Light (as that of a Lamp in the Letter also) is
Answerable to the Weik, or that wherein it is subjected. Some Men have larger
Hearts, 1 Kings 4. 29. or more Receptive Weiks, therefore their Light is
greater, v. 30. All Saints have Grace, but some have more, according to the
Measure of the Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. and as Occasion does require. The
Wind of Temptations blusters in some places more; therefore the Light had need
be stronger. Some have more Curious work in hand, whose Light had therefore
need be clearer. Some Men have work in several places, as had Paul, 2 Cor. 11.
28. who therefore needed Extraordinary Knowledge, v. 26. Or many Lights set up
at once, as Acts 20. 8. I may not offer to un-Saint another, simply because his
Light is less, in case it be sufficient for the Present work, as this, of going
forth.

8. This Lightsom Oil is separable from its Lamp and Vessel; as these poor
Foolish Virgins Evidenced, Mat. 25. 3. and did Experience, v. 8. It Is but a
common Adjunct, and no Proper Accident, save as it is so made by Grace. When
those bad Angels fell from Grace, yet did they keep their Essence still: Nor is
it from a Natural Necessity that Gospel-Saints shall never fall from Grace, but
merely from an Adventitious undertaking on their be^alf, Jer. 32. 40. When such
are Tempted to Presume or Vapor, let them remember the Root bears Them, not
They the Root, Romans 11. 18. And therefore let Men's Lamps and Vessels be
thoroughly searched in due time.

9. This Light is in-extinguishable and Everlasting. The Prince of the Air can
never blow it out, Luke 22. 31, 32. The Waters of Persecution shall never
wholly quench it, Cant. 8. 7. Nor will it ever of it self go out, as did these
Foolish Virgins Lamps, Mat. 25. 8. which Argues their having never
(Spiritually) been enlightened, 1 John 3. 6. This Oil is like that Widdow's, 1
Kings 17. 16. And this Light is like David's, 1 Kings 11. 36. whereas the Lamp
of the wicked shall be put out, Prove. 13. 9. It is with Grace, as with the Sun,
whose Light is subject to be Clouded, Eclipsed, and oft-times hidden for a
Night; yet it is always shining, although not always seen.

10. This Light must yet be carefully looked after, for fear of running in
Arrears through want of constant watchfulness; as these wise (slumbring)
Virgins did Experience. Those Sacred Lamps were daily to be Dressed, Exodus 30.
7. and so must these be Trimmed, else un-removed snuffs will prejudice their
shining luster. And though New Covenant-Grace shall never wholly fail, yet is
there room for the use of means, which are as necessary, as the End is certain.
And that is the Happiness of all wise Virgins, that Christ has undertaken to
rouse them up, as well as to secure their Oil.

Quest. 2. What Is meant by Lamps, distinct from Vessels? And what is further
meant by Oil in the Vessels, together with the Lamps? And by the Foolish
Virgins taking no Oil with them?
Answ. I. By Lamps (distinct from Vessels here) do seem to be chiefly meant,
the Souls Affections, in competition with its Judgment, as all these Metaphors
do jointly evidence. Oil is undoubtedly here put for Light: And Vessels are the
subject of that Oil, from whence the Lamps are fed, or kept from going out.
Now, a Man's Judgment is the seat of Light, which therefore fitly Answers unto
the Vessels, from whence the working of Affections is maintained; and therefore
these Lamps do fully Answer unto those Affections. And this Interpretation
(unto me) does seem to be more fully worded, than that of Practice and
Profession, which though it be more commonly received, yet is it not unto the
present purpose; since Practice can no way Answer unto Vessels, or Seat of
Light, although Profession is some what like to Lamps: And since false hearts
may Practice much, as well as make a great Profession; and so the difference
between a Wise and Foolish Virgin (chiefly intended here) would be destroyed.

II. Oil taken in the Vessel, does Naturally import these two things further.

1. That it was not now to Buy, but ready at Hand, yea, in Possession also; and
in the surest part of Man, viz. The Heart or Judgment. Each Gospel-Saint is
Actually blessed with all Spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3. And though his Grace
be hid, yet it is hidden in the Heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4. which is a Castle that
Satan cannot Storm, nor shall it be ever taken from him, Luke 10. 42. as was
that single Talent, Mat. 25. 28. which was hid elsewhere, v. 25. Things in the
Heart are sa^er than in the Head or Hand; and of more present use upon
Occasion, than if in the nearest shop that is. Therefore wise Virgins will have
Oil in their Vessels, on purpose to prevent that double Danger.

2. Oil in the Vessel intimates store thereof; or such a Competent measure of
it, as will maintain the Lamp so long as its Light is needful. Indeed the least
drop of Grace's Oil is of the same lasting Nature with abundance; but yet a
Competency of its Measure is also requisite unto its lastingness, by virtue of
a Divine Appointment, which has so Ordered its Preservation. Therefore we read
of a sufficient Grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. and putting on the whole Armor of God,
Ephesians. 6. 13. and of abounding, 2 Pet. 1. 8 in one Grace added to another, v. 5.
that so we might not fall, v. 10. nor can there be true Grace without it, v. 9.

III. These Foolish Virgins may here be said to take no Oil.

1. Because they had not the Oil of Grace, but only that of Nature; as is most
evident, because their Oil did wholly fail, Mat. 25. 8. which that of Grace
will never do, but springs up to Everlasting Life, John 4. 14. Now, that
which is not of the Noblest kind, is often times represented as if it had no
Being. Thus Rational Creatures are called the World, John 3. 16. and True
Believers all Things, Col. 1. 20. and Idols (or false gods) Nothing, 1 Cor. 8.
4. And thus may Nature's Oil (or Light) be termed, None at all. This quells
their Pride who Glory in a thing of Naught; and shows their sin, who Nullify
true Grace, by making it the same (for Kind) with Nature.

2. Because this very Common Oil was only in their Lamps, not in their
Vessels. They had some good Affections, but were not Acted by a solid Principle
in their first going forth, for then their Light would have continued: Since
the Command (had that been eyed) was every whit as clear, (or rather more) the
second time. Now, injudicious Acts are counted none; and therefore, although
the Jews did oft-times Pray with much self-humbling, yet it is said, they
Prayed not, Dan. 9. 13. nor were they Humbled to that day, Jer. 44. 10. because
they only did such things from flashy Affections, and not from Judgment. How
sadly Fools will sometimes weep, which yet among the Wise is counted Nothing.

3. Because this Oil was spent (at least, they would not use it) when there was
most Occasion for its Light; or when the Cry was made at Midnight. Now,
useless things are said to have No Being; as Job's un-useful Friends are called
Nothing, Job 6. 21. nor ever had such things some kind of Being; in which
regard, that only seems to be had, which proves unprofitable (in the Issue)
unto its Owner, Luke 8. 18. Well therefore may Professors go for workers of
Iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. when they back-slide, because their Zeal is gone, when
Christ and they stand most in need thereof; which therefore is (in such a case)
as if it had not been at all. Christ Represents these Foolish Virgins, as those
who took no Oil at first.

Quest. 3. Why were Lamps taken by these Virgins, who took no Oil?
Answ. 1. Because they needs must have a Form of Godliness, else all Wise
Virgins would cast them off, and not be for Communion with them; therefore so
small a matter shall not part them. Saul was desirous of Samuel's Continuance
with him, which made him do more than otherwise he would have done, 1 Samuel 15.
30. Formal Professors would gladly shine with others Beams, especially if empty
Lamps (put into a common stock) will make them Partners. Yea, Conscience it
self will not be quiet without the stirring of some Affections; but if those
Lamps be to be seen, poor Fools are satisfied. Those are not worthy to be
called Virgins, whose Outside is not very Neat and Trim.

2. Because these Lamps are Light (Compared with Vessels full of Oil) which
therefore lazy Hypocrites will rather choose to bear. Oil in a Gracious Heart,
is like to Water in its Element, which is not Ponderous; but unto others, it is
Grievous to be born, who therefore have no delight to carry it. The Light of
this Sacred Oil is like that of the Sun, Discovering Moats as well as Dirt;
both which an Hypocrite can bear the Presence, but not the Sight of, in such a
Reproving way, who therefore hates it, John 3. 20. This Oil is also thought
too Dear, because the Heart or Vessel must be emptied of other things; which
none but Fools will either wonder at, or grudge: But yet such therefore are
conte^^ ^o be without it.

3. Such possibly may think, they have this Oil of Grace, or that it is not now
to take; and upon that Account it may be left behind, through self-undoing
self-conceit. There have been self-deceivers in all Ages, who yet do most
abound in these last days of ours, or in the Declining State of Churches and
Professors, Typified by those self-conceited Laodiceans, who were the last of
those Typical Asian Churches. Which sad mistake arises, partly from lothness
to enquire, lest Conscience should be disquieted, or lest the Soul should
suffer loss; as when Brass Money is become one's own, its Owner will not
therefore let another rub it. Partly, because they might think Oil inseparable
from a Lamp, (or that Affections are always Spiritually Judicious) and having
Lamps, did thence conclude their having Oil, Partly, from Spiritual Pride,
because Hypocrites would not be thought to want so main a business: And partly,
from the Resemblance that is between Special and Common Oil, or Grace and
Nature; as is between Tin and Silver, which therefore (at least, by Fools) are
often Confounded.

4. These Foolish Virgins thought they had enough to serve their present turn;
and Hypocrites are for no more, in matters of a Spiritual Nature. As is the
work, such is the need of suitable Instruments; a wooden Needle may serve to
stitch some coarser Cloth together: And their first going forth was Manifestly
of a Lower Nature. I will not say, that Gospel Grace is absolutely necessary
unto the Second going forth; for then, all of that sort must be concluded to be
Real Saints, from that very Act of going out; (which I dare not affirm, unless
the whole of that Duty be performed, which I shall clear up afterward:) but
something far short of Grace, might carry these out at first; as is apparent,
both from the Issue, and from the Nature of that forenamed work, which might
Occasion this neglect.

5. Such might, at leastwise think this Special Oil was to be had in Time,
although they had it not at present: And Hypocrites are not for being
overhasty in looking out for Christ's Commodities. They might presume to
borrow Oil of their Companions, in case of need, or that they should have time
enough to buy it, as may be gathered from their attempting afterward, in both
these ways to be supplied. Such are acquainted with Christ's tender Bowels, and
readiness to help poor sinners, which is abused by them to indulge their
present carelessness, and to delay their closing with a present Offer, though
to the hazarding of their Eternal State, by dallying with such Opportunities.

Quest. 4. How came they to go forth at first, not having this Light or Oil?
And not (as well) the Second Time?
Answ. 1. At their first going out they were in the Prim^^^ their Affections,
and Zeal for Duties of such a Nature. There was some kind of another Heart
(like that of Readiness, 1 Samuel 10. 9.) bestowed upon all Professors at that time,
which raised them unto an higher pitch than Ordinary. They were then like to
Ground which had been long un-occupied; and therefore that first Crop was
Extraordinary. That was the first resistance made, which usually is very
violent, especially among the Ruder sort, although not lasting. An Ordinary
Spirit will Act to Admiration, when raised up; and upon that account, these
Foolish Virgins might thus out-act themselves at first, until their Youthful
heat was cooled.

2. Their way was not so dark (at their first going out) but that it might be
hit, with empty Lamps, at least, without this special Light. It might be some
kind of Evening then, but not a Midnight Darkness, as when the Cry is made,
Mat. 25. 6. It was an easy matter Then, to bear an open Testimony, because
they had some color of Authority (at that time) to bear them out. And though
they ran the hazard of their Estates, yet had they then good store of Company,
which will provoke a Worldly minded Man to spend more freely, than else he
would do. Nor was there any need of Special Light, to show the grossness of
that Church State, which then was gone out of.

3. At their first going out, their All was laid at Stake; and in that Case Men
will run out at Midnight without a Lamp or Candle. Their utter Extirpation
then was strongly feared, which was enough to draw Men out, who only had the
Light of Nature: But when the Cry is made, the greatest apprehended Danger is
in going forth, which may Occasion their pretending Then a want of Light. Men
are not so likely to leave their Beds at Midnight, when Liberty may be secured
by keeping in; or whilst there is any hope of being Indulged by some less
Compliance.

4. There was a greater probability of present Recompense at their first going
out, than at the second time; which is a great Inducement unto Graceless
Persons. Poor Carnal Professors may help to pluck down Antichristian Officers,
if likely to enjoy their Lands and Benefices: And Mercenary Soldiers will
Fight most Desperately, in hope of more than Ordinary Pay: Yea, very Hypocrites
(or such as Judas was) may bear an open Testimony on Christ's behalf, so long
as Providence does seem to savor it, though only with the Applause of People.
But when the Cry is made, these Livings, Spoils, and general Approbations may
be more likely to be lost by going forth, which makes the Second time more
Difficult.

5. The Truth is, at their first going out, these Foolish Virgins went they
knew not whither, and merely because their Vessels were not stored with Oil;
which made them to attempt at first, what afterward they were not free to
prosecute, as might be instanced in abundantly. Did not some Act and Speak, as
Balaam Blessed Israel, not being themselves at such a time, and as their
contrary after-Practice has evinced? Would many so much have cried some things
up, and others down, had they foreseen what followed afterward? This was the
Fruit of their not being Acted by a Principle, or want of Oil in Vessels.

Quest. 5. How does Not-Taking, or Taking Oil, so Eminently evince Men's Folly
or Wisdom, as seems to be hinted here?
Answ. 1. Because the Taking of this Oil is Principally pretended unto, by all
sorts of Spiritual Virgins. Would not all Professors be counted Gracious? Would
they not be thought to be endued with Saving Light? Yea, will they not grant
themselves to be notorious Fools, in case this Holy Oil were wholly wanting?
All will count him a very Fool, who having none but empty Vessels, does style
himself an Oyl-Merchant, which is the Virgins case: Yea, will not he call
himself a Fool, who having but one thing needful to remember, does yet forget
to take it? This Oil is Wisdom, under another Name; he therefore needs must be
a Fool, who leaves this Oil behind him; as he is called, whose Wisdom fails him
by the way, Eccl. 10. 3.

2. Because their is no Light or Guidance, without this Oil. It Is not in Man
(as he is Naturally considered) to Direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. at leastwise
not in Spiritual cases, 1 Cor. 2. 14. or with Respect unto the Bridegroom's
way. And though the Scriptures are a shining Light, 2 Pet. 1. 19. yet are they
only as a Lamp, Psalm. 119. 105. which must be fed with Grace's Oil, else it
will be of little use, in point of safe Direction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Now, is it not
a very Foolish part, to walk in unknown Paths without a Light? How may such
Wander, for ought they know, yea, meet with harm, at leastwise go in continual
fear, and merely through their careless Folly.

3. Because there else will be no Persevering to the end, which is a point of
high Concernment. Nature may Foot it for a while, without this lightsome Oil,
but soon grows weary, as did these Foolish Virgins, and upon that Account. Now,
to begin, and not to Perservere, does Argue Folly, Gal. 3. 3. and that upon a
double score. Partly, because all former Labor is thereby lost; and is not he
justly mocked, who does desist from what he has begun to Build, Luke 14. 29,
30? But especially, because he only shall be saved, who does endure unto the
End, Mat. 24. 13. and there can be no higher Folly, than not to think of
Soul-Concernments.

4. Because the Trimmest Lamps will not Advantage, but only Disgrace the
Bearer of an empty Vessel. Poor Foolish Virgins must have their Lamps; as in my
Text; yea, they will Trim them also, Mat. 25. 7. but to no purpose, in case
there be no Oil. Lamps are no Lightsome Bodies of themselves, and in the Dark
their Trimming is not seen, which therefore needs must be unprofitable Burdens;
yea, very Ridiculous also: As when a Man is seen to carry some curious Lanthorn
(in the Night) without a Candle. What are the most Raised Affections, if
manifestly void of Truth and Judgment, but a piece of Neat, well-worded
Nonsense? Which Solomon calls the Sacrifice of Fools, Eccl. 5. 1. It were far
better to make no show at all, than thus to shame one's self, by offering to
deceive another's raised Expectation; and therefore Hypocrites are most
egregious Fools.

5. Because Another's Oil or Light will no way benefit a Foolish Virgin, at
such a time. Indeed one Lamp, or Candle (in the Letter) may show the way to
several Walkers, but not in a Mystical sense. And though some formerly have
seen with others Eyes, yet is it not so likely now, or in an hour of
Temptation. Wise Virgins are not unwilling to lend what Light they can afford,
upon a serious Motion made, but Fools cannot receive it, at leastwise will
not; and then the clearest Sunbeam will not Advantage him whose Eye is either
out, or shut. And though a Blind man may be (and oft-times is) Directed by
another Guidance, yet Foolish Virgins (in such a case and time as this) will
not believe the Wise, the Danger of going out is now so Visible.

6. Because this Oil or Light might easily have been procured by them, if
sought for in due time. Silver and Gold are deeply hidden under Ground, which
yet Men are content to dig for, whilst Heaven is dis-regarded, although it may
be seen with looking upwards. The choicest good things are proffered upon the
cheapest terms, viz. for Asking, Mat. 7. 7. and without Price, Isa. 55. 1. Yet
most Men rather choose to Labor (and spend their Money also) for that which does
not satisfy, Isa. 55. 2. Nor is this Oil a Burden, save unto those who have it
not. Now, this is the highest Aggravation of Man's Folly, to Perish for want of
that which would have cost him nothing.

Use 1. Upon the whole, we may Observe from hence, that Hypocrites (or Foolish
Virgins) will have their Lamps with them, whatever else is left behind. Those
may be suspected to be no Virgins, or Visible Saints, who have not had some
good Affections stirring in them, and with Respect unto Time Truths, and
Duties, such as the Coming of this Bridegroom is, and going forth to meet him.
But yet Hell's mouth is full of good Desires; and flashy Affections are nothing
like unto a Spouse's Love; yea, those full Sails (without the Ballast of a
Solid Judgment) may only hasten the over-turning of an empty Vessel. What
shall we then think of Persons disaffected to the things of Christ? Who needs
must be Profane, if naked good Affections may be in those, who are but
Formalists, or Foolish Virgins.

Use 2. Poor Foolish Virgins are to be known, as by their want of Oil, so by
their want of Care to take it with them, at leastwise in their Vessels,
together with their Lamps. The dis-regarding of a Principle does Argue Men's
Natural Foolishness; much more in Spiritual cases, because these are of
greatest Consequence: And then, how many Foolish Virgins are there to be seen,
in this Professing Generation. The Generality of Professors follow Christ, as
those did Absalom, in their simplicity, 2 Samuel 15. 11. Nor are they careful to
Inform the Judgment, so as to hold unto a Righteous Principle. Thence are such
sad Apostacies, and shameful self-contradicting Practices, which make their
Folly manifest beyond dispute.

Use 3. Wise Virgins are for making sure, by taking Oil with them, and in their
Vessels also. A Soul and Christ are mutually betrothed in Judgment, Hos. 2. 19.
and by that means in Faithfulness, v. 20. And as Christ's Person is fully known
by such, unto an hair, Cant. 5. 11. So are they well acquainted with his
Interests, before they do Espouse them; which Knowledge and Wisdom is said to
be the ground of their Stability, Isa. 33. 6. So that the Difference between a
Wise and Foolish Virgin is very great, in case their Vessels be but looked
into, by means whereof most Hypocrites might be Discovered. Away with that
Soul-ruining Opinion, That Grace and Nature do only Differ in Degree; since
Christ says plainly, the Foolish Virgins had no Oil, that is, no Grace at all;
as had the Wise, and in their Vessels also: or as was Evidenced by their
Principled good Affections, and Acting from a Spiritually enlightened Judgment.

Use 4. If Wisdom and Folly be thus Discovered, it highly concerns all
Professors to get their Vessels furnished with this Oil; as they would be (and
be Reputed) Wise. In Order whereunto let these Directions be Observed.

1. Search your Vessels well. Professors perish for want of self-examination. I
like not some men's Boasting; since empty Vessels are wont to y^eld the greatest
found: A Wise Man fears, whilst raging Fools are Confident, Prove. 14. 16.
Trust not unto another's good Opinion; it was the Ruin of these Foolish
Virgins, because they had Communion with the Wise. Be not deceived with the
Matter of Religious Duties; Christ calls them workers of Iniquity, who could
say much in that Respect, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Presume not upon your having Done and
Suffered, with reference unto Time Truths, and Duties Heretofore; the Foolish
Virgins did go out at first to meet the Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 1, 2. Nor may we
gather Satisfaction from being awakened with the Cry, or from a Trimmed Lamp,
and seeming willingness to borrow Light, with reference unto the Last, or
Second going out; for so far went these Foolish Virgins.

2. Study the Nature of this Oil, in Order to your being made in love
therewith. How Nimble will it make you for that Race, which gives an
Incorruptible Crown unto the swiftest Runner, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25! How will it
Heal those Wounds which sin has made, in point of Being, though not in point
of Guilt! How will its savor cheer your Spirits; and not yours only, but
others also, both God's and Man's! How will it make your Faces shine, so as
that Graceless Persons shall witness unto your Beauty! How will it feed your
Lamps, and Lead you in the Darkest way of most Mysterious Truths and Duties!
And is not this Oil worth carrying with you? Or will you not Exchange your
Puddle-water for it?

3. Take heed of being cheated with Nature's Oil, wherewith (perhaps) these
Foolish Virgins Lamps were for a while maintained. This Oil of Grace was
Typified by that Holy Oil of Old, Exodus 30. 25. peculiarly belonging unto the
Priests, v. 30. who were the Types of Gospel-Saints, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Which did
consist of so much Oil and Principal Spices, Exodus 30. 23. 24. viz. Five
hundred Shekels of Purifying Myrrh, and Healing C^ssia, and half so much of
Comforting Cynamon and sweet Calamus, to signify unto us, that Gospel Grace is
sweetly Comforting, but much more of a Purifying and Healing Nature. Yet as
this Holy Oil was Subject to be sinfully applied to others besides the Priests,
(as Hypocrites may flatteringly be called Saints:) So was it apt to have its
like or Counterfeit; both which are evident from that strict Prohibition, Exodus
30. 33. And from the Latter of which (viz. its being Imitable) does seem to be
hinted to us, that it requires abundant Knowledge and all Judgment, in way of
Trial to Approve, those things which Differ in point of Excellency, Phil. 1. 9,
10.

4. Labor to be Engrafted therefore into Christ, that good Olive Tree, as he
is called, Romans 11. 24. from whom this Special Oil must be Derived. Christ's
Faithful Witnesses are sometimes called Olive Trees, Zech. 4. 11. Rev. 11. 4.
because the Candlesticks (or Saints and Churches) are maintained with their Oil
or Light, Zech. 4. 12. But yet these very Trees (Compared with Christ) are
only Olive-Branches, Zech. 4. 12. because Christ is the Root of all their
Fatness, Romans 11. 17. there is indeed another Root, or a Wild Olive Tree, Romans
11. 24. which is the first Adam's Nature: But Souls must be cut off from that,
and Graffed (contrary unto Nature) into the other, viz. Christ, as is there
signified, before they can partake of his good Oil, v. 17. Earth will as soon
grow up to Heaven, as will the First Adam's Nature into the Second's, 1 Cor.
15. 47. without this Supernatural Transplantation.

5. Be sure to have enough. Improve your Fears of having no Oil at all, unto
the Multiplying of your hidden store. Christ calls for widened Mouths, Psalm.
81. 10. Who gives Liberally without upbraiding, James 1. 5. save where his
Offers are not Accepted, Mat. 11. 20. In times of Danger, (such as these are)
no man repents of buying necessary Arms, although he may not have Occasion
for them. However, Godliness is Profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. which
therefore will be our money at any time, especially at Christ's Appearing, 2
Pet. 1. 10, 11. Yea, this Expensive hour of Temptation does need a more than
Ordinary stock; and these wise Virgins therefore slumbred, because they had not
Oil, or Light enough to keep them waking. Empty your Vessels therefore, and get
them Multiplied, or Enlarged, so will this Oil increase, especially when it is
poured out (or in continual Exercise,) and with the Door shut upon you, or
without Ostentation, 2 Kings 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.

6. Look after these things betimes. Christ calls for being heard To Day, Heb.
3. 7. and would not have you to delay your Neighbor (much less your selves)
until to Morrow, Prove. 3. 28. In Times of bad Trading (such as these are) who
knows how soon Christ may shut up his shop; especially since we are now looking
for that Lord's Day, 2 Pet. 3. 10. (in a fore-running sense, explained
formerly,) on which he will not work, Rev. 22. 10, 11. However, what Fools are
they, who think their Spiritual and Eternal state can be too speedily secured?
Especially since Christ does here foretell their doleful Portion who took no
Oil with them at first. The Time is hasting, when it will be sufficient to keep
Men out for ever, merely because they come too late, or when the Door is shut,
which will not be Opened, unto the loudest Knock, or Cry, Luke 13. 25, 26, 27.

Use 5. Let the Professor's Acting from a Principle of Solid Judgment, in every
of his Spiritual Undertakings, evince the having of this Oil in Vessels,
together with the Lamps of good Affections. Unto the setting home of which
Exhortation, let these few Motives be duly weighed.

1. Our God is a God of Judgment, Isa. 30. 18. whose Predestination follows
his foreknowledge, Romans 8. 29. Who weighs the Just man's Path, Isa. 26. 7.
Who works all things after Counsel, Ephesians. 1. 11. and all whose ways are
Judgment, 4. 37. His Spirit also is a Spirit of Judgment, Isa. 4. 4. which
therefore is shadowed out by those seven Eyes engraven upon Christ, that
Cornerstone, Zech. 3. 9. because Christ has the seven Spirits of God, Rev. 3.
1. by which is meant the Holy Ghost, Rev. 1. 4. And Christ himself (or Wisdom)
dwells with Prudence, Prove. 8. 12. betrothing Souls unto himself in Judgment,
Hos. 2. 19. and who is called the Discretion of his Father, Jer. 10. 12. by
whom the Heavens were prepared, Prove. 8. 27. Now, what a shame it is to
Christians, in case their Acts be in-judicious; since they pretend to be the
Children of that God of Judgment, endued with his Spirit of Judgment; and to
have put that New Man on, which is renewed in Knowledge, after his Image, (viz.
Christ's) who has Created them, Col. 3. 10.

2. Else Actions are not Rational, and so beneath a Man, much more a Christian;
which is a great Reproach, both to a Christian's Person and Profession.
Insensible Creatures are Acted by their Natural qualities; Brutes by Instinct,
and Fools (or Men Distracted) by sudden Fancies: But Sober Persons walk by a
Rule of Judgment. Now, what a shame it is for Christians to come short of Men,
who should be more, 1 Cor. 3. 3. at leastwise Rational, since only those are
called unreasonable, who have not Faith, 2 These. 3. 2. Though Natural Reason
will never grow up to Gospel-Faith, yet Grace is so far from Destroying Reason,
as that it self is nothing else but Holy Understanding, Prove. 9. 10. or Good
Judgment, Psalm. 119. 66. And therefore some Men count Religion a mere Humor,
because Professors are not seen to be duly Rationa; as when such manifestly
contradict their own Professed Righteous Principles.

3. We call for the Exercise of utmost Judgment in another, especially if we
our selves are any way concerned in their Actings; which should Oblige our
walking by that Rule our selves. How apt are we to censure Another's
In-advertency, and to Mock that Foolish Builder, who did not first set down,
Luke 14. 28, 29, 30. Thou therefore which Teach another, Teach thou not
thy self, Romans 2. 21? How sharply do we Rebuke a Friend or Servant, who does
endammage himself or us, through want of being well Advised? And shall we
indulge that Giddiness in our selves, which is injurious to our Souls, or
Christ? We beg, that God would not Correct us in his Anger, but with Judgment,
for fear of being brought to nothing, Jer. 10. 24. And shall we Offer unto him
a Sacrifice without an Head, or not do unto him, as we would have him do to us,
Luke 6. 31? Yea, therefore Christians should be ashamed of not Considering what
they do for him, Eccl. 5. 1. because the Riches of his Grace has so abounded
toward them, in all Wisdom and Prudence, Ephesians. 1. 7, 8. as might be cleared up
at large.

4. We use to be Preponderate in other Matters, and Christianity is the Highest
Calling, Phil. 3. 14. which therefore does require the constant Exercise of our
Maturest Judgment. Shall we consider what is spoken by us before Judicious Men,
and yet be hasty to utter any thing in Prayer to God, Eccl. 5. 2? Shall we
first count the Cost, before we begin an Earthly Building, and not much more,
with reference to our Engaging in the ways of Christ, Luke 14. 27, 28.? Are we
content to Learn the Mystery of a Common Trade, before we Set it up; and shall
we rush into a Gospel-Temple, before we know the Pattern of that House, Ezekiel.
43. 10? A Man will tell Gold, after his Father; and shall we not tell Truth
after a Brother, but pin our Faith upon a Teachers sleeve? And if we are wont
to hear both Parties speak, before we Judge in Humane Causes; shall Christ (in
any of his Truths, or Members) be Condemned, before he has been heard tospeak,
John 7. 51? How may poor Carnal Creatures thence conclude, that such irrational
Professors are merely Humorous?

5. It may provoke us hereunto, because this Oil in Vessels (or walking by a
Principle of Solid Judgment) is so exceeding Rare, which some Men think is not
a Duty, and fewer Evidence it by their Practice, among Professors. Good Agur
humbly thought himself Inferior unto an Ordinary Man, Prove. 30. 2. and yet his
Reasonableness (in point of worldly Riches, v. 8.) did prove him to be above
the most: But God does bid Idolaters to show themselves Men, Isa. 46. 8. And
Solomon in his Time could not find two among a Thousand, Eccl. 7. 28. Yea, it
should seem, that One could not be found in Populous Jerusalem, Jer: 5. 1. Our
Lot is cast into those Times, wherein a Man is precious, above the Gold of
Ophir, Isa. 13. 12. at least, wherein there are Seven Women unto One Man, Isa.
4. 1. And as appears by Men's injudicious Actings. Thence is it, that many are
so tossed to and fro, and Principles so frequently contradicted; nor can men
give a Reason of their Faith or Practice, because they are guided mostly by
Affections, as Ships are by their Stern, and not their Head.

6. We else shall want the benefit of that Satisfaction in a Duty, which
otherwise might be enjoyed. How cheerfully both Horse and Man will Travel in a
way that is known, compared with another, though possibly an unknown path may be
as right and better. And though poor Brutes are pleased, if only Sense be in
its Exercise; yet Men (and much more Christians) are like to Fishes upon the
Land, out of their proper Element, save as their Judgment also is employed. The
Sinners mis-guided Understanding does yield him more imagined content, than
does the Upright Walker's Ignorance. What Pleasure can any take in Hearing the
most precious Truths, save as he grasps them? Nor is the Conscience satisfied
with the fairest Shows, save as Affections are enlivened with an Intelligent
Heart or Soul. It Is not a Real (but Rational) Act of Faith, which gives
Comfort; or as a Direct Act of Believing is Reflected on: Nor can we Joy in any
kind of Duty or Obedience, in a solid way, save as it is performed with
Understanding; since, else its Graciousness cannot be known, which groundeth
Joy.

7. Acts unadvisedly performed (or without Judgment) are never Lasting. As is
the Root or Fountain, so is the durableness of streams and Branches. Some
little Rivulets (fed by a Living Spring) will hold their Course, when greater
Land-Floods are wholly dried up: And Ivy (about the Oak) will dye, when Natural
Oak-Branches Live; because that Ivy has not these Branches Root. He only
believes for a while, who has no Root, Luke 8. 13. for want of Hearing with
Understanding, Mat. 13. 23. Thence is it, that an Hypocrite will not Pray
always, Job 27. 10. Nor will a Fool pay that which he has rashly Vowed, Eccl.
5. 4. No more than Foolish Virgins will ever persevere, who take not Oil in
Vessels at their first setting out. But that which is done in Judgment, is done
for ever, Hos. 2. 19. Its Nature has been duly weighed, and therefore it will
not lightly be Repented of; Effects and Consequents have been considered, which
therefore will not hinder its Pursuance; and that which is begun with good
Advice, will never fail, through want of being furnished with what is needful
for its Accomplishment. Judicious Saints will persevere.

8. Else c^n we look for no Acceptance, much less a Rececompence; save as our
Actings and Affections proceed from Judgment. The Head (among all other Parts)
was first required, in Legal Sacrifices, Lev. 1. 8. because that is the Seat of
Knowledge: But if we Offer the blind for Sacrifice, will God be pleased with
us, or Accept us, Mal. 1. 8? He therefore hears not Sinners, John 9. 31. for he
has no pleasure in such Fools, Eccl. 5. 4. whose Heart is so far distant from
himself, Isa. 29. 13. and from their Duty, Ezekiel. 33. 31. And what Reward can
Men expect from God, in case their Work be of a Brutish Nature? Man's
Understanding is that Male, which God has Blessed him with, chiefly for
Sacrifices to himself; and without which no Blessing (but a Curse) is to be
looked for from this great King, Mal. 1. 14. Such may go wrong, as well as
right, for ought they know, who know not what they do: And Duty performed by
Accident, may Peradventure be Rewarded, or if it so falls out. Such act not
with Respect to a Divine Command; for then Obedience would be Universal; John
6. 38, 39. And if the Command sets not on work, the Promise is at Liberty in
point of Pay. Such do but half their work at best, leaving the better half
undone: And no Inheritance can be expected, unless the Lord be followed wholly,
Josh: 14. 9.

9. Discretion will Preserve thee, Prove. 2. 11. but there is he that is
Destroyed for want of Judgment, Prove. 13. 23. both in respect of Sin and
Suffering. How sadly (in his haste) did David speak, Psalm. 116. 11. And there
is more hope of of a Fool (in point of being Reclaimed from Sin) than of one
hasty in his words or matters, Prove. 29. 20. And as to Sufferings, Judgments
are prepared for him that scorneth Judgment, Prove. 19. 28, 29. Yea, it went ill
with Moses, for speaking unadvisedly, Psalm. 106. 33. And Nadab and Abihu dyed,
for Offering strange Fire before the Lord, Lev. 10. 1, 2. being somewhat
Distempered in their Heads, as seems to be hinted by that immediate following
Prohibition, of Drinking Wine or Strong drink, when going into the Tabernacle,
v. 9. And if the bare Carnality of Affections (Typified by that strange Fire)
be of so sad a Nature, how do they take God's Name in vain, (for which he will
not hold them guiltless, Exodus 20. 7.) who Sleep, or Wander in a Religious
Duty? And what if he then should cut them off, as he did those Priests?

10. How just is it with God, to give those up unto an in-judicious mind, who
do not serve him with their Mind or Judgment? As that unprofitable Servant's
Talent was taken from him, Mat. 25. 28. And as their Vineyard is Let out to
others, who do deny its Fruits unto the chief Proprietor, Mat. 21. 24. Yea,
customary sleightiness does Naturally beget an Habit of that kind, which soon
will leaven the whole ^ump of Actions: As one may be so Giddy with frequent
Turning, as not to Command his standing when he would. Now, a Reprobate Mind
(or void of Judgment, as the Greek word signifies) is one of the saddest
Characters, and sorest Judgments threatened, Romans 1. 28. the fear whereof made
Paul to mind (himself) that which he Preached to others, 1 Cor. 9. 27. How sad
would it be, if Hearts should grow wild through wandering; and silly, through
multiplied Acts of In-advertency; and Carnal, for want of Exercising Spiritual
Infused Habits, which else may fall into a great Decay! A Closed Eye is justly
blinded, Mat. 13. 14, 15.

11. If Vessels be not filled with Oil, they will abound with something else
unto our Dis-advantage: There being no absolute vacuity or utter emptiness; and
as not in a Natural, so neither in this Moral Sense. Hence it is, that sleighty
Professors are of an Airy Spirit at the best; yea, even their Mind and
Conscience is Defiled also, Titus 1. 15. who do profess to know God, but in
their Works deny him, to every good work being Reprobate, or void of Judgment,
v. 16. An empty Vessel is apt to have Puddle-water cast into it by some
mischievous Person: And empty Houses (though never so Neatly Garnished) are
subject to be haunted, or possessed by Evil Spirits, Mat. 12. 44, 45. Since
while Men sleep, the Enemy will sow his Tares, Mat. 13. 25. And therefore if
the Heart be not Engaged in a Religious Duty, it is not only vain, but wicked
also; Ezekiel. 33. 31. Now, what a sad thing it is, if we shall deny that unto
Christ, which if he has not, the Devil will have; and at the worst time that
is, or while we are pretending to be most Holily employed, and in Christ's
Service.

12. There is no Oil at all, unless it be in Vessels, together with the Virgins
Lamps, as may be gathered from this Text: To signify that there can be no
Grace at all, where good Affections do not proceed from Spiritual Judgment; as
there can be no proper Virtue, when Actings and Affections are Morally
in-judicious; nor yet right Reason, when Words and Actions are wholly destitute
of Natural Judgment. One part of a wicked Man's Description, is, his not
understanding Judgment, Prove. 28. 5. and that there is no Judgment in his
goings, Isa. 59. 8. and without which Discretion, all other fairness
whatsoever, is but as a Jewel of Gold in the S^out of a Brutish Swine, Prove.
11. 22. Whereas the Wise Man's Eyes are in his Head, Eccl. 2. 14. who swears in
Judgment, Jer. 4. 2. and whose Affairs are Ordered with Discretion, Psalm. 112.
5. So that it does concern Professors to have Oil in their Vessels, and to
evince it by the Judiciousness of their proceedings in Religious Duties, as
they would not be numbered among Transgressors or Graceless Persons.

13. We border upon those Times, wherein our Principles will be enquired after,
as well as Practices; which therefore had need be minded by us, for fear of
what may follow. Time was, when Paul himself was but a Child, who then was
satisfied with Lower things, as Children are with Brutes and Babies: But when
he became a Man, he put away those Childish things, 1 Cor. 13. 11. Judging
himself and others, not by the Zeal of an Affection, save as it was according
unto Knowledge, Romans 10. 2. And we have ground to hope, that wiser Virgins will
for the future be well Advised, with whom they walk; searching the Vessels of
their Companions, and trusting no more to Trimmed Lamps. In the Time of
Ezekiel's Second Temple, the Sons of Zadock, Ezekiel. 44. 15. shall stand in
Judgment, v. 24. causing the People to Disc^^n, between the unclean, and the
clean, v. 23. not bringing into the Sanctuary Strangers uncircumcised in Heart,
as did their Predecessors, v. 7. who will be then Degraded, v. 13. As we would
therefore stand in God's Holy place, when David's Tabernacle shall be reared
up; so let there be a suitableness between our Hearts and Hands, or Principles
and Practices, Psalm. 24. 3, 4.

14. We cannot shun appearing before Christ's Seat of Judgment, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
who then will searate the Sheep and Goats, Mat. 25. 32. both which divide the
Hoof, and chew the Cud alike; only they differ, as to the Spirit or Principle,
from whence those Actions do proceed. God searches Hearts (or Vessels) to give
unto every Man according to his ways, Jer. 17. 10. as all the Churches shall
one day know, Rev. 2. 23. Christ will not Judge by Sight or Hearing, Psalm. 11.
13. who does Accept a willing Mind, 2 Cor. 8. 12. more than the work of him,
whose Heart or Meaning is not engaged in it, Isa. 10. 6, 7. Now, what will it
advantage us, if wisest Virgins should be satisfied with our naked Lamps, since
that great Judge will also pierce our Vessels, passing his final Sentence on
our Eternal state accordingly. As we would therefore not come under the Foolish
Virgins Condemnation, so let us take heed of their miscarriage, or trusting to
good Affections.

In Order whereunto, these Helps may be of Use.

1. Habituate your selves to be considerate, in every of your Common
undertakings: Since he that is a rash or hasty Man, will scarcely ever prove a
Solid Christian. There is an unruly Spirit, which some Men are possessed with,
Prove. 25. 28. whose Customary In-advertency in Ordinary Matters, does much more
easily beset them in Religious Exercises. As a Bodily Temper does much affect
the Natural Spirit; so does a Christian's Duty savor of his Natural
Disposition: Since Nature is both therein a fellow-worker, and Grace's Elder
Brother. A wise Man's Heart is wont to teach his Mouth, Prove. 16. 23. therefore
his words are Gracious, Eccl. 10. 12. And if a constant Watch were set before
our Lips, Saints would not want the benefit of Ordinary helps in Extraordinary
cases. But he that is not careful in the least, (such as our Natural
concernments are, wherein both Grace and Nature join) wills much less be so in
the greatest, Luke 16. 10. Such as Religious Matters are, wherein (as to the
point of Care) Grace usually is left alone.

2. Indulge not your Affections overmuch, whose proper place is, to be
Servants unto the Understanding's Dictates; but he that Delicately brings up
his Servant from a Child, shall have him to become his Son at last, Prove. 29.
21. As Hagar did Despise her Mistress soon after her being taken into her
Master's Bosom, Genesis 16. 4. Wine takes away the Heart, Hos. 4. 11. Or Judgment,
Prove. 31. 4, 5. And one may Ea^ unto Intoxication, Eccl. 10. 7. Therefore
Christ bids to take heed of Surfeiting and Drunkenness, as Men would not be
unawares surprised, Luke 21. 34. And if in Natural Respects, then much more in
a Moral sense, Men of Inordinate Affections, are generally injudicious, because
of the Members warring against the Mind, Romans 7. 23. which we are therefore bid
to Mortify, Col. 3. 5. And as Affections are termed Lusts, when fixed upon a
sinful Object; so when they are not duly bounded, with reference to what is
Good, which yet is always of a Lower Nature; and partly, upon that Account, the
Foolish Virgins might forget to fill their Vessels, because they did so
violently Affect the Bridegroom's Coming, upon a Carnal Score.

3. Behold the Beauty of Judiciousness in Other's Actings, how comely such are
in going! Men of a sleighty Spirit themselves, will yet bear witness unto the
seemly carriage of another who walks by Judgment. Heart answers unto Heart,
as does the Face (in water) to it self, Prove. 27. 19. That is, there is an
Harmony or sweet Agreement between the Hearts of Men, as is between a Face and
its Reflection. How Grateful is Consistency in a Discourse, when one thing
correspondeth with another, and every Expression with the speaker's
Understanding: Yea, we are apt to be in Love with seriousness, although
appearing only in the Countenance, much more in Words or Actions; and such
especially as are of high concernment. Man's Beauty is chiefly seated in his
Eye, the Rolling whereof (both in a Natural and Moral sense) disfigureth the
fairest Face; especially when they who seem to be Religious, are least
attentive unto the matters of their God. How justly do we loath that man, whose
Heart (we know) agrees not with his Tongue; especially when such egregious
Nonsense is confidently uttered with strong Affections. This we can see in
others, which should provoke its greater detestation in our selves.

4. Let us Reflect upon our own Experiences, which are the very Life of
Reasons, and Proof of Demonstrations. Have we not been oft-times ashamed of
making Enquiry after Vows, by Reason of a Rash Engagement? Have not our Hearts
often smitten us, for leaving them behind, in a Religious Duty? And shall we yet
feed that Worm of sleightiness, which has so gnawn our Consciences? Whereas on
the other side, what inward satisfaction has been the consequent, of pondering
what we hear; and pouring out the Soul in Prayer; and of our being in that
Duty, which we at any time have been employed about? Indeed how can it be
expected, that the Spirit in man should be well pleased, save as it self is
Exercised in a Service? Which else will sharply chide, as did those Ephramites
with Gideon, because they were not called to Accompany him in such an
Expedition, Judge. 8. 1. And as the Judgment is more Spiritual, so are the
Senses better Exercised, Heb. 5. 14. To smell the sweetness of that Spikenard
which Christ exciteth, whilst he is sitting at the Spouse's Table, Cant. 1. 12.
And if the present Taste has so Refreshed us, much more should we remember the
benefit of that Digestion, which has attended the calling of our Spirits in,
at such a Feast; compared with that Leanness, which always is the consequent of
having our Heads employed other ways, in Spiritual meal-times, as in a Bodily
Respect.

5. Be earnest with the Lord in Prayer, who is the Father of our Spirits, Heb.
12. 9. both as he is the Former of them, Zech. 12. 1. and as he has them under
his Command, Prove. 16. 1. Prayer is too heavy a work for us (and so is every
other Duty) unless the Spirit helps out Infirmities, Romans 8. 26. which
Heavenly Monitor is to be had when seriously asked by us, Luke 11. 11, 12, 13.
David was purposed, that his Mouth should not Transgress, Psalm. 17. 3. yet did
he also beg, that God would set his Watch before it, Psalm. 141. 3. And if
Christ be withdrawn, though but a little way, his poor Disciples will fall
asleep, when bid to Watch and Pray, Mat. 26. 38, 39. 41. It Is not in clearest
Arguments, or Observations, or Experiences, to Rule that Heart which must
improve them, save as it self is overruled by the God of Spirits, to
Understand, and Mind, and Follow such Directions; whose only work it is, to
keep such things for ever in the imagination of his People's thoughts, and to
prepare their Heart unto himself, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. Only this Spirit must
earnestly be desired by us, as Food is by an hungry Child, Luke 11. 11, 12, 13.
Nor will it wholly take the work out of our Hand, but as it witnesses together
with our Spirits, Romans 8. 16. So does it help Infirmities, v. 26. by lifting
together, over against us, as the Greek imports.

Use 6. It does behove the Virgins to Search and Try whether they Act from
Judgment; and from a Judgment Spiritually enlightened.

Now, the Judiciousness of our proceedings, may be Discerned by these Signs.

1. That which is done in Judgment, is duly weighed beforehand, as to its
Nature, Grounds, Effects, and Requisites. As to its Nature, they know the Lord,
(Hos. 2. 20.) who are in Judgment betrothed to him, v. 19. whereas he is a
Foolish Vower, (Eccl. 5. 4.) who afterward does say (before this Angel) it was
an Error, v. 6. Such also know, what Grounds they do proceed upon, and
therefore it is incumbent upon Christians, first to Believe, and then to Speak,
2 Cor. 4. 13. Yea, and to give a Reason of their Hope, 1 Pet. 3. 15. and fully
to be persuaded in their Mind before they Practice, Romans 14. 5. And such will
first sit down (or mind Effects) before they begin to Build, Luke 14. 28. In
which regard, Christ bids him weigh the Consequents of being his Follower, Mat:
8. 20. who was so forward in his Offer, v. 19. Nor will such make Attempts,
till their Ability for such a work be understood, Luke 14. 31. or what is
requisite for such an undertaking, and till it is first fitted, Prove. 24. 27.

2. That which is done in Judgment, is carefully attended unto, in the Doing of
it, as need requires. The words of such, are with Heart-Meditation, before the
Lord, Psalm. 5. 1. The Consideration of whose being so far above them, makes
their words few (or well Digested) and not Rash or Hasty, Eccl. 5. 2. Such
diligently mind what is Confessed or Promised, or Prayed for, in Order unto a
suitable Pursuance; whil^t others Lay such kind of Eggs, and then leave them,
^s does the Ostritch, (Job 39. 13, 14.) who is hardened against her Young ones,
as though they were not hers, v. 16. because she is deprived of Understanding,
v. 17. Hence is that clashing disagreement between an injudicious Person's
Speech and Practice, Mat. 23. 3. there being so great a Distance between his
Heart and Lips, Mat. 15. 8. as is be^ween the sleighty Hearer's Ear and Heart,
who therefore soon forget^eth what manner of Man he was, whilst his Affections
were sometimes stirred in him, James 1. 23, 24. but not his Judgment.

3. That which is done in Judgment, is firmly persi^ted in, and gains
strength by Opposition. Judgment is as the Eye, and what a man has seen, he
will not question, though all the World should differ from him, in that
particular. Judgment is the Root of Actions, which shoots deeper into its
ground, when shaken with the wind of Persecution. Paul Acted from a Principle
of Judgment, who knew in whom he had Believed, 2 Timothy 1. 12. and therefore kept
the Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7. when all forsook him, v. 16. Whilst Peter ran, for
Company, Mark 14. 50. from under the most strong Affectionate pre-obligation,
Mat. 26. 33. But therefore Peter (afterward) could not but speak what he had
seen, Acts 4. 20. though Man forbad him, v. 18. whose Boldness made his
Persecutors to perceive, that he had been with Jesus, v. 13. His Heart was
never right with God, who is not steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. Nor
had such ever any depth of Root, who finally fall away in times of Tribulation,
Mat. 13 21. Whereas his way shall be established, who^ Path is Pondered, Prove
3. 26.

4. That which is done with Judgment, is also Ordered with Discretion;
according to the Nature, Time, and other Circumstances of a Duty. As there are
Songs, 1 Kings 4. 32. Songs of Degrees, Psalm. 120. Title; and a Song of Songs,
Cant. 1. 1. So there are lesser and more Weighty Matters, Mat. 23. 23. the
latter of which are principally attended unto, by Judicious Practisers. Such
are for Real Truths at any Time, but yet predominant Time-Truths, are chiefly
insisted on by a Judicious Preacher. If there be any Virtue, it will be thought
upon by such, Phil. 4. 8. but yet Faith is the Prime Object of a Judicious
Christian's Diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 5. If Civil Subjection to Antichristian
Powers, (which is more dark) be bogled at by such, much less will Man's
Commands, or Prohibitions (in Religious Matters) be complied with; by a
Judicious Scrupler; because this latter is more clear. Such will do good to
all, but more especially where need does most require; or else their Love does
not abound in Knowledge and all Judgment, Phil. 1. 9.

5. That which is done with Judgment, is done with due Affections also; the
Judgment being always so Accompanied, as Princes are with their Attendants,
although Affections oft-times go alone. They who judiciously confess a failing,
(especially some kind of sins) are suitably Affected with inward bitterness,
Zech. 12. 10. else do they not seem to know that kind of Plague, 1 Kings 8. 38.
which must be driven out with Holy Violence. Such will pour out their Heart in
Prayer, Psalm. 62. 8. especially for Spiritual Blessings: Else do they not pray
with Understanding; since cold Petitioners (in such Cases) do only Teach
another to deny them. Such will draw out their Soul (together with their Bread)
unto the Hungry, Isa. 58. 10. else may they give much Alms, as did the
Pharisees, Mat. 6. 2. who yet omitted Mercy, Mat. 23. 23. because they did it
not with Bowels of Compassion. And such who do judiciously return unto an open
Testimony (in Times of Danger) as their Duty, cannot but be ashamed of their
former failing in that Respect; and so in any other case whatever.

6. That which Men do with Judgment, they will endeavor to Accomplish, by the
diligent use of most effectual Means conducing thereunto. Such are no Idle
Beggars, but he that Cries after Knowledge (with Understanding) will seek her
also, and search for her, as for hid Treasure, Prove. 2. 3, 4. Temptations
Cordially groaned under, are striven against, and watched over, else do not men
judge them very burdensome, whatever may be deceitfully pretended unto. Such
also study what to render, for all those Benefits, which are judiciously
acknowledged by them, Psalm. 116. 12. ^^ how to take in their Bonds, and Pay
their Vows, which have been made with Understanding, v. 18. Whereas men guided
by mere Affections, are to be known by their remissness of their Endeavors,
and sluggishness of their Desires, and the In-activity of their
Acknowledgments. Nor can we better Judge of Heartless Hypocrites, than by
Observing the Dis-proportion that is between their Practice and Profession,
Mat. 23. 3.

These are the Signs of Acting from Judgment, in the General. The Signs of
being Spiritually Judicious (in our Religious Actings) are briefly these which
follow.

1. The Light of Spiritual Judgment, is also Universal; at least, with
reference unto the Main of whatsoever is a Duty. Men Naturally Judcious, are
Uniform, as to the whole of a Particular Action: But that which is truly
Spiritual, does suitably appear, in every of a Judicious Professor's ways.
Nature deals by Retail (in Spiritual Matters) but Grace by whole S^le: And
therefore he is guided into All Truth, who by the Spirit of Truth is guided
into Any one, John 16. 13. Grace does renew the Mind, and casts Salt (as did
Elisha) into that Spring which heals every of its Streams or Actions; as
Natural Understanding does in Ordinary Cases, but not Re^igious. No Verdict can
rightly pass upon a man, ^ut by Accumulation, or taking him altogether, No more
than Parrots can be con^^uded Rational, or Drunkards Sober, from some few words
which they may utter; And therefore Saints are oft-times called Vines, whose
Fruit is Clustered, as Phil. 1. 11.

2. True Spiritual Light is of a self-evidencing Nature; like that of the Sun,
which needs no Foreign help, nor can be Discerned by any other, save its own
Beams; and which the strongest Arguments cannot prevail against, in his Opinion
whose Eye is therewith Lightened Such call for no Reason, save what is
Scriptural; nor can they see with Nature's Spectacles in Spiritual Cases; nor
are they shaken in their Faith, by mere Prudential Arguments, or Man's
Authority. Those are not Spiritually Judicious, who plead for Nature's Negative
Voice upon Divine Commands; or Argue from thence the Warrant of
self-preservation, when Christ (who is the Lord of all, Acts 10. 36.) expressly
calls for self-denial. Prophets were therefore counted Mad, 2 Kings 9. 11. and
so was Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 13. because so confident, against all Rules of Ordinary
Demonstration; not knowing Christ after the Flesh, as heretofore, v. 16. And
every Man in Christ is thus Renewed, v. 17.

3. True Spiritual Light is thoroughly Purifying; And therefore the Spirit of
Judgment is also called the Spirit of Burning, Isa. 4. 4. with reference unto
that Dross and Filth, which it Discovers and consumes, both at once. Those
men who are but Naturally Judicious, may alter their Opinion or former evil
Practice, yea, with Affection also; and yet without the utter Extirpation of a
contrary Principle, As is to be Observed in some Moralists, who yet without the
Spirit of Christ can never Mortify a sinful Lust, Romans 1. 13. But Duty
proceeding from Spiritual Judgment, destroys the Root of Disobedience; as does
the Love of Truth, what is Erroneous: Yea, the Confession of a sin (when it is
Spiritually Judicious) does secretly Eradicate that which is so acknowledged.
Let us Observe what Execution is done upon our Spiritual Adversaries, by every
one of our Religious Exercises, as we would Argue our being therein Acted by a
Spiritually enlightened Judgment: Since Christ's Peculiar Baptism (with the Holy
Ghost) is of a fiery Nature, and so appears, by its consuming whatever is
combu^tible, Mal. 3. 11, 12.

4. True Spiritual Light Transforms a Soul into the Nature of what is thereby
seen or done; it being the Spirit's property to change Beholders into the Image
of what it does Discover, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Balaam did Naturally Understand what he
denounced upon Isreal's Cursers, Numb. 24. 9. which yet did not prevent his
cursed following Practice, Rev. 2. 14. No more than Notional Acquaintance with
Gospel-Mysteries, can change a Carnal Heart, who yet may Naturally understand
them, 1 Cor. 13. 2. But he that Spiritually (or by the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor.
4. 13.) believes in Christ, is thereby turned into a New Creature; all things
are New, as well as Old things done away, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Such are Transfigured,
as Christ was in Prayer, Luke 9. 29. and are Delivered into what they Hear, as
it is in the Greek, Romans 6. 17. because this Spiritual Digestion does Convert a
Feeder into the Nature of his Meat, which Natural Understanding does not, but
leaves the Heart as void of Spirituality, to be sure (though not, perhaps, so
grossly vicious) as it was before.

5. Men Naturally Judicious, are always Sober; but Spiritual Judgment does also
keep them very Humble, and of a Lowly Heart, with reference to what they either
Know or Do. That Knowledge is but Natural at the best, which Puffs up, 1 Cor.
8. 1. And Elevating Duty is not Evangelical, which some are apt to Glory in,
because they know not wherein true Spirituality does consist, and how far short
they come thereof. But the work of the Spirit is to Mortify all Fleshly Lusts,
Romans 8. 13, and Pride among the rest, by convincing the Soul of more Mysterious
failings, John 16. 8, 9. comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.
13. by pressing forward, so as to make us forgetful of what is behind, Phil. 3.
13, 14. and by affording its super-added help in Holy Exercises, Romans 8. 26.
all which are of an Humbling Nature. How can he Boast, whose work is seen (by
the Spirit's Light) to be imperfect, and full of Blemishes? Yet, who does see,
he works not, as unto that wherein the Glory of his work consists. They who
are apt to be Transported, do not appear to be Judicious, at least, not
Spiritually.

MATTHEW XXV. 5. While the Bridegroom tarried they all slumbred and slept.
IN this Verse, we have an Account of the forenamed Bridegroom's tarrying,
together with what followed thereupon, viz. The slumbring and sleeping of all
these Virgins.

Observe. After these Virgins going forth at first, the Bridegroom tareth; which
does Occasion their General sleep and slumber.

Quest. 1. In what sense does the Bridegroom Tarry, after such a Time?
Answ. I. Negatively; Christ is not slack as Men count slackness, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
nor does he pass the time appointed, as Pharaoh did, Jer. 16. 17. but as the
Day of his Coming is known to him, Zech. 14. 7. So will it be Observed by him,
unto a self-same Day, as when he brought Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 41.
which must be Acted over a Second time, Isa. 11. 11. And as the Agreement may
be in other respects, so doubtlessly in this, that Christ will hasten this
latter in his Time, Isa. 50. 20. and beyond which he will not tarry, no, not an
hour.

II. But then Affirmatively; Christ may be said to Tarry, (or to Prolong his
Time, as the Greek word signifies) in these Respects.

1. With Respect to the seeming Need of his more speedy Coming; as when he
tarried two days still, after the News of Lazarus his Sickness, John 11. 6.
whose Death else might have been prevented, v. 21. And thus the Virgins thought
(at their first going forth) that there was need enough, why Christ should then
have come; in which regard, he might be said to Linger. The Witnesses had then
already Prophesied (as some yet hope) 1260 Years in Sackcloth; and was it not
then High time to Perfect their Redemption? Especially when Christ himself did
sometimes plead for those Poor Jews, who had been then but 70 Years in Literal
Babylon, Zech. 1. 12. And since Relapses are likely to be most Dangerous. Had
Christ come then, his People's Faith would not have failed, his own Beloved
Interest would not have Dyed, nor would some others have so Blasphemed, as
whilst he does Delay his Coming, Mat. 24. 48.

2. With reference unto the Virgins Longing for him; and therefore Sisera's
Chariot-wheels were said to Tarry, because his Mother did so long to see him,
Judge. 5. 28. as all the Virgins sometimes did, (with reference unto Christ) and
may do still; which did invite their first going out to meet him, and has
Occasioned their sad Complaining of his stay. Some wish for this Day of Christ
in way of Scoffing, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. but others do more seriously seek after
him, Mal. 3. 1. yea, Foolish Virgins also, or such as will not stand when he
appears, v. 2. Now, a Soul that longs to see the Face of Christ is apt to
say, God has forgotten, Isa. 49. 14. Yea, that his Promise fails for
evermore, Psalm. 77. 8. At least, to cry, How long, O Lord, Rev. 6. 10. make
haste and make no Tarrying, Psalm. 70. 5.

3. With reference unto their General Expectation of his Coming, at their first
going out: In which respect, he may be said to Tarry, as Zacharias did, because
he came not so soon as was expected by the People, Luke 1. 21. Which confident
Expectation of him (at such a Time) we know to have been True, and may
conjecture at its Rise.

1. Partly, from an Impatient haste, proceeding from the weakness of Men's
Faith, Isa. 28. 16. but yet Occasioning their being Confounded or Ashamed, as
the Apostle hinteth, Romans 9. 33. because they hope for that which is so
vehemently desired, Job 6. 19, 20. As Confident speaking does follow True
Believing, 2 Cor. 4. 13. So Confident Expecting is equally (oft-times) the
Fruit of Fancy, since Men are apt to pre-conclude (with utmost confidence) what
is Importunately desired by them; as did, not only Sisera's Mother, concerning
her Son's Victory, Judge. 5. 29, 30. but David also, concerning his Sons Life, 2 Samuel 18. 27. Now, all these Virgins did earnestly wish for the Bridegroom's
Coming, at their first going out; from whence their Expectation of him might
arise, and consequently their supposal of his Tarrying beyond the Time.

2. Partly from probable Grounds, both Scriptural and Providential. His Coming
(at their first going out) was Generally the Object of their Faith and Prayer,
with whom God's secret is, who therefore might conclude his speedy Coming Then,
from Psalm. 25. 14. Luke 18. 7, 8. His Servants (at that time) took Pleasure in
Sion's Stones, as was apparent from their Endeavoring Then to Build them up,
with greatest Hazard, Industry and Alacrity: who therefore might suppose, the
Time (yea, the set Time) was come, from Psalm. 102. 13, 14. The many wondrous
works of God (relating unto the Time before mentioned) did much encourage to
believe the near approaching of Christ's Name or Dispensation, from Psalm. 75.
1, 2. The falling of so many Stars (at such a Time,) did comfortably evidence,
that this Sign of the Son of Man, was even at the Doors, from Mat. 24. 29, 30,
33. The Witnesses have been signally warred with, as Rev. 11. 7. which War does
properly import their being uppermost, or upon equal terms; and therefore it
might be Then presumed, the Kingdom should not be left to other People, from
Dan. 2. 44. No wonder then if Expectations were so high.

3. Principally, because they were not aware of Christ's forerunner, with
reference unto his Coming as a Bridegroom, which is sufficiently hinted in the
Scriptures: And after which Harbinger, his Proper Coming will be ushered in, by
such a sad state of things, as we have met with. Thus Christ himself was slain,
after his being Proclaimed King, by his Disciples, Luke 19. 37, 38. As David
was pursued by Saul, after his having been Anointed King by Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.
13. And as after the Saints being called Earthly Kings, Isa. 24. 21. they must
be gathered together as Prisoners in the Pit, v. 22. as Joseph was, Genesis 37.
22. After that his Supremacy was first Declared, v. 9. And after that Sion's
set time is come, Psalm. 102. 13. there will be a sore Reproach, v. 8. Drink
mingled with weeping, v. 9. a Casting down, after a being lifted up, v. 10.
groaning Prisoners, and some Condemned to Dye, v. 20. Yea, after the fourth
Beast's being slain in the little Horn, the rest of the Beasts (or a grosser
interest) will in some sense survive, though they have no Dominion (or proper
settlement) in Scripture Phrase, Dan. 7. 11, 12. And when the Witnesses are
Risen and Ascended, or have Received their Kingdom, as Christ did upon his
Ascension, Luke 19. 12. then comes that dreadful Earthquake, Rev. 11. 12, 13.
which Term^^ateth upon their Enemies, but will Begin with others, as seems to
be hinted by that Harvest, Rev. 14. 15. before the Vintage, v. 18. just as
God's Israel met with that check in the Valley of Achor, after their being
Actually possessed of Canaan, Josh 7. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And as poor David had long
War with the House of Saul, 2 Samuel 3. 1. after being made King in Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. 4. And as the Jews were troubled, Ezra 4. 4. after the return of their
Captivity, v. 1. All which (with reference unto the latter days) is clearly
signified, by that Prophetical praying for a Turn, Psalm. 85. 4. After the
Captivity is brought back, v. 1. and by the Assyrian's inrode into Imanuel's
Land, Isa. 8. 7, 8. Or that of Gog and Magog, into a Land that is brought forth
out of the Nations, Ezekiel 38. 18. and by the Nations coming against Jerusalem,
when Re-Inhabited, Zech. 12, 9. or after the bringing again of their Captivity,
J^el 3. 1, 2. Then will be the Time of Jacob's greatest Trouble, J^r. 3^. 3. 7.
of Si^n's Second Travail, Mic, 4. 10. and of Satan's resisting Joshua, after
his having been a Brand plucked out of the Babylonish Fire, Zech. 3. 1, 2.

These things the Scriptures have foretold, but they have not been generally
understood; and therefore Christ has been conceived to tarry, or prolong his
Time, merely through our mis-apprehension.

Quest. 2. Why does Christ Tarry beyond the Expected Time?
Answ. Not from his being forgetful, or asleep, as Baal was tauntingly said to
be, 1 Kings 18. 27. Since Christ is always mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.
5. and does not sleep or slumber; Psalm. 121. 4 however wrongfully he may be
Judged of, Psalm. 44. 23, 24. Not from any want of Power; whence Amasa's
tarrying beyond his time might possibly arise, 2 Samuel 20. 5. Since Christ is
Almighty, Rev. 1. 5. who therefore is improperly said to have been hindered, or
withstood by the Prince of Persia, Dan. 10. 13. -- Much less from wnat of Will,
or good Affection; from whence Lot's lingering in Sodom did proceed Genesis 19. 16.
but not Christ's Tarrying here, no more than in that cas^ of Lazarus, John 11.
6. whom he yet Loved, v. 3. and whose sa^ Death, v. 14. (together with his own,
v. 34. and his beloved Sister^ Weeping, v. 33.) had been prevented by his
coming sooner, v. 32. especially since Christ now comes as a Bridegroom, whose
stay can not be therefore thought to be from want of Love or any good Affection.

But he now Tarrieth for other Reasons, such as these are:

1. To proclaim his Sovereignty; as when he would not Gratify his Mother just
at her Time, to let her know, his Godhead was not i^ Subjection to her, John
2. 3, 4. God sometimes bids his People to Command him, Isa. 45. 11. but lest
they should abuse his Condescension, he therefore would not heal Miriam now, as
Moses did too boldly move, Numb. 12. 13, 14. Must he needs therefore come at
such a Time, for fear of frustrating his Creatures Expectation? Or lest their
Labor should be lost, in going out to meet him? Christ may set Man his Time,
the Disputing whereof was their great sin, Hag. 1. 2. But it becomes a Spouse
not to awake her Love, or stir him up, until he pleases, Cant. 8. 4. The
Temple-work will be revived, but so, as that it shall appear to be an Act of
Grace, and not of proper Debt, Zech. 4. 7.

2. To make his Coming the more desired, which is a chief part of his Design,
and thus Accomplished. Christ will not come as King of Nations, until he be
Desired by them, Hag. 27. no more than David would be King of Israel, 2 Samuel 2.
7. till such a Time, 2 Samuel 5. 1. He will be enquired of, Ezekiel. 36. 37. and
they shall seek him, Hos. 3. 5. with all their Heart, Jer. 29. 13. resolving to
make mention of his Name alone, Isa. 26. 13. And thus, when both the Bride, and
he that Hears, shall say, Come, Rev. 22. 17. then, I come quickly, says the
Bridegroom, v. 20. Now, though an Hypocrite will not pray always, Job. 27. 10.
yet tarrying is an Incentive to a Cordial seeker, who is not silent in the
Night, although his Cry (the Day before) has not been heard, Psalm. 22. 2. Yea,
therefore such will pray more earnestly, Luke 22. 44. And as Christ's
Satisfaction is thus consulted for, so is his People's also; since a Return of
Prayer is then most Acceptable, Psalm. 69. 13. when Eyes are apt to fail with
waiting, or when one's Throat is dried through weary Crying, v. 3.

3. Christ therefore Tarrieth at such a Time, because his own set Time is not
Then come: Which Time (in such a Case) is not for us to know, Acts 1. 7. Our
Time is (in such Cases) always ready, so is not his, John 7. 6. who will not
come, until the fullness of his Time be come, Gal. 4. 4. till when, a Thousand
Years (with him) are as one Day; but when that Time is come, one Day is as a
Thousand Years, 2 Pet. 3. 8. That is, he will not Tarry, Heb. 10. 37. Nor is it
any just matter of Grief to us, that Christ thus tarryeth, since Fruits are
sweetest, when fully Ripe: However it is no cause of Wonder, since Mercy must
give place to Truth, Psalm. 138. 2. and therefore those Days of Tribulation are
no whit shorter, than as was fore-determined, Mat. 24. 21, 22.

4. That so his Coming might be with greater State, after the manner of Earthly
Kings, whose Motion therefore is not too quick, and who are therefore wont to
have an Harbinger, as Christ has also, which cannot but Occasion some kind of
tarrying. Christ's Spiritual Kingdom was thus Ushered in, Mat. 3. 3. much more
(then) must his Temporal Kingdom be so Attended, because the Glory of this
latter will be more Visible. And though Christ's Coming (in this Parable) will
be but such an Harbinger, compared with his Personal Coming, yet this
forerunner (compared with it self) will also have its Messenger, when Christ
shall come into his Temple, Mal. 3. 1. which Temple is not in being at his
Personal Coming, Rev. 21. 22. And thus Elias must first come, Mark 9. 12.
until the ending of whose Ministration, the Bridegroom tarrieth. Poor Virgins
would fain have had him come forthwith, but that would not so well have suited
his designed Kingly State.

5. That so the Foolish Virgins might be Discovered. Christ always comes with
his Fan, Mat. 3. 12. and Fullers Soap and Fire, Mal. 3. 2. which they must be
brought under, who are not absolutely cut off, as others, Zech. 13. 8, 9. John
Baptist laid his Ax unto the Root of Fruitless Trees, Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. much
more will Christ himself unmask all sorts of Hypocrites. This Coming will much
resemble that at Last, Mat. 24. 30. and therefore Sheep and Goats will now be
severed, Mat. 25. 32. or such as formerly have been accounted clean, Deuteronomy. 14.
4. Now, had Christ come at first, these Foolish Virgins had not been known, no
more than Carnal Israelites would have been if Moses had not delayed his
coming, Exodus 32. 1. Therefore Christ Tarryeth to make his Jewels up, or that
Men might Discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, Mal. 3. 17, 18. We
should not else have known who of Christ's Followers would have denied him.

6. That so his Coming might be upon a New Covenant-score, or merely for his
own Names sake, which is consulted for, Ezekiel. 36. 22. And which had not been so
Apparent, in Case he had come Then. All sorts of Virgins (at their first going
out) were in their Prime, their Lamps were very Trim, and their Affections much
let out in way of Prayer and Zeal for Christ. So that his Coming then might
have been thought to be Deserved, Men are so apt to Magnify their Duty; and
therefore (possibly) his Coming in that Nick of Time was verily Expected by
them with so much Confidence. But he does choose to tarry till all those
Virgins be asleep, that so it might appear to be an Act of double Grace, Zech.
4. 7. viz. with reference to their unworthiness at the present, as well as with
respect to any Natural Tie that was upon him at the first.

7. To try the Faith and Patience of the Best. Christ's Coming is Ushered in by
a trying hour, and with respect to all, Rev. 3. 10. The trial of whose Faith is
much more precious than that of Gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Now, had Christ come at
first, this trial had not been made: Whereas his tarrying does Experiment what
they will say, as to the Promise of his Coming; whether they will Repent of
former Duty, because their Recompense is not so speedy; now they can wait one
hour beyond the utmost of their Expectation, how they can bear to be Derided,
because Events are not according to their Hopes; whether their Faith was
grounded upon the Scriptures, or mainly upon uncertain Providence; what they
will say, when Israel falls before the King of Ai, in their own Land of
Promise? What they will do, when Tempted to deny their Ancient Master? Whether
they can believe the Resurrection of a Dying cause? Or how they can Return
(with David) into a former low Condition, after their having been Advanced? And
how the Valley of Achor (in these latter days) can be a Door of Hope.

8. That Servants (of a Lower Rank) might have that Opportunity, both for their
Work and Wages, distinct from that of Sons, which otherwise could not have been
effected. As in a Great House, there are some Vessels to Honor, and some to
Dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 20. So Christ has both his Saints and Sanctified ones,
whose Work and Wages are Distinct, both in Respect of Worth and Time. The Lord
will give a Banner to them that fear him, Psalm. 60. 4. And Judah also shall be
employed at Jerusalem, Zech. 14. 14. Such Honor have all the Saints, Psalm.
149. 9. But he will first Command his Sanctified Ones, such as the Medes and
Persians were, Isa. 13. 3. 17. till when, the Men of Judah cannot be at
Jerusalem. And as his Saints shall be Rewarded at his Coming, Rev. 11. 18. So
meaner Servants must have their Temporary Gifts before that Year of Liberty,
Ezekiel. 46. 17. Therefore he Comes not at their first going forth, that so this
Difference between his Sons and Hired Servants might be consulted for, whom he
will have to be Distinguished.

9. That so the Sufferings of other Fellow Servants might also be fulfilled; in
which regard, those former Sufferers, (who cried, How long) were bid to Rest
yet for a little season, Rev. 6. 10, 11. Christ has a great Respect for
Passive Duty, and till that be Accomplished, he will not enter into his Glory,
Luke 24. 26. though some Men's Expectations be thereby Disappointed, v. 21.
Yea, those Disciples of a choiser Spirit will also Rejoice in their Prolonged
Sufferings, till that which is behind (of Christ's Afflictions, in their flesh)
be filled up, Col. 1. 24. Now, had Christ come at first, John Baptist had not
been a Prisoner; and many Late Sufferers would not have come upon the Stage,
since grosser Persecutions (or Destructions) will come to a Perpetual end, when
Christ shall have prepared his Throne for Judgment, Psalm. 9. 6, 7. There would
not else have been those Hopeful Prisoners for him to send forth, and render
double unto, Zech. 9. 11, 12. when he shall come as King, v 9.

10. The Lord is therefore Slack, (or rather long-suffering) because he is not
willing that any should perish, but would have all come to Repentance, 2 Pet.
3. 9. as Paul came not (as yet) to those Corinthians, from a Design to spare
them, 2 Cor. 1. 23. and not from any Lightness, v. 17. The saving of those
Samaritans did countervail his Tarrying, John 4. 40, 41. Yea, therefore Paul
endured much for the Elects sake, that they might also obtain Salvation, 2 Timothy
2. 10. And those Old Saints might not receive the Promise in their Days, God
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made Perfect, Heb. 11. 39, 40. Now, had Christ come at first, the Hearts of
some Fathers (then) had not been turned to the Children, unless John Baptist
had gone Before him, Luke 1. 17. Nor had his Patience been so apparent, as now
it is, unto the utter silencing of those who have not sued out their Pardon in
this Respite.

11. To Prove the Spirit of Ancient Persecutors, whether they will be Warned by
his Affrighting Messenger, or go on still, unto their utter Extirpation. God's
Method is to Usher in Rejection by an immediately foregoing Admonition, Titus
3. 10. Since the Beginning of a Judgment is apt to Promise a Souls Return,
which Christ is willing to Improve, to show the Riches of his Mercy. Thus
Pharaoh had his Respite, Exodus 8. 15. to try the Nature of his Relenting, v. 8.
And Zedekiah's threatening Adversary was Removed, Jer. 34. 21. To try the
Performance of that Liberty which he had Promised in his Distress, v. 8. 11.
And therefore Christ's Ministration was after John's, Acts 10. 37. to try what
Operation his Harbinger's Rebuke would have upon the Pharisees and Herodians,
Mark 9. 12, 13. Nor would it else have been so manifest, that Envious Edom
would have so looked upon his poor Distressed Brother, Obad. 12. Or that the
Assyrian would have got the Men of Judah's Money, 2 Kings 18. 13, 14, 15, 16.
and then Engage against them, v. 17. Or that all sorts of Interests would have
Combined with Ashur against God's hidden Ones, Psalm. 83. 3. 8. who else might
have been Built up in the midst of Israel, had they walked worthy of their
Restoration after an Affrightment, Jer. 12. 15, 16.

12. To shame his own unworthy People, 1 John 2. 28 by frustrating their
Expectation, Job 6. 20. and to Correct them, by bringing Trouble and no Good,
when they did look for Peace and Healing, Jer. 14. 19, 20. He had been
oft-times made to Tarry for their Duty, who therefore justly makes them Stay
for their Deliverance. They quickly waxed Wan on with a little Liberty, who
therefore were remanded into Bonds, till better able to bear Enlargement. They
were not Thankful for what they had, which therefore was thought meet to be
withdrawn. A Toleration was sometimes called Monstrous, therefore it is
Recalled, till it shall have a better Appellation, and duly General
Distribution. They had a mind to spare some Goodly Babylonish Garment;
therefore though Jericho was fallen before, yet Ai must check them in their own
Land. They were exceeding Hypocritical, Isa. 10. 6. therefore they must fall
under the Slain; and it is well, if that be all that is to be infl^cted, v. 4.

13. To make the Revelation of himself (at last) more Ravishing, and his
Continuance Grateful by Reason of his present Tarrying, as warmth is after a
tedious Winter, and Meat unto an hunger-bitten Soul. Christ (or the Head-stone)
must be brought forth with sho^tings, Zech. 4. 7. And when he Comes, he means
to tarry by it; for though John must Decrease, John 3. 30. yet will there be no
End of Christ's increasing Government, Isa. 9. 7. therefore he will consult for
more than Ordinary Welcome. Now, that which has been long desired, is most
Affectionately Entertained, and like to be most Lastingly Delighted in: Since
waiting does enlarge one's Receptivity, and gathers up the Souls Affections
into the Bosom of its Beloved Object, until that Object does become the sole
Inheriter of its Love. Therefore the Saints shall not grow weary of being ever
with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. because they have been made to wait for his
Appearing, 1 These. 1. 10. with so much earnest Expectation, 2 Cor. 5. 2.

14. To Fit and Prepare all sorts of Persons for their respective future
Portions at his Coming. Christ waits to be Gracious to his People, Isa. 30.
18. and the Damnation of others does not slumber, 2 Pet. 2. 3. yet does he
tarry till These be fitted to Destruction, and till Those be prepared unto
Glory, Romans 9. 22, 23. Israel's Redemption must therefore be delayed, because
the Amorites sins were not yet full, Genesis 15. 16. Nor will Christ Bury those
Dead, until some competent Waiting has evinced that they are Dead indeed.
Yea, God's own People were too Hot to Drink at their first going out; they were
not fine enough to be then Married; they were too Young to Sway the Scepter,
too Private Spirited to be entrusted with a Public Stock; too High to be
Exalted, too Sensual to eat their fill, too Low of Stature to wear Long Robes,
too Choleric to eat Christ's Sweetmeats; indeed too Many to be Feasted, and
too too Carnal for a Spiritualized Kingdom. But when the Grapes are fully Ripe
the Vintage will be Gathered, Rev. 14. 18, 19. And when the Bride is Ready the
Bridegroom will not tarry, as till that time he does, Rev. 19. 7.

15. To show the Greatness of his Power, in scattering his Re-inforc'd
Adversaries, and in Reviving that Work which had been given up for Dead and
Buried. As he abode still where he was, John 11. 6. till Lazarus was Dead, v.
14. and had been four Days Buried, v. 39. that his Disciples might Believe, v.
15. and that his Enemies might bear Witness to such a Miracle, v. 46, 47. The
Virgins Party was too Potent at their first going out, as Gideon's was, who
Therefore were not then Delivered, lest Israel should vauntingly impute their
being saved to their own Hand, Judge. 7. 2. Therefore Christ tarrieth until
their Power be wholly scattered, Dan. 12. 7. to make them sing, His Holy Arm
has gotten him the Victory, Psalm. 98. 1. and not their Sword, Psalm. 44. 3. Nor
would the Faith of some have been so strengthened by healing what was only
Sick, as by one's being Raised from the Dead; which latter Dives thought (in
Hell) sufficient to Convince the greatest Unbeliever upon Earth, Luke 16. 30.
Nor does Christ judge the Beast to be an Adversary strong enough until the
Dragon does succeed him, whom Pharaoh Typified, and whom God raised up to show
his Power, Exodus 9. 16. Christ sleeps till the Ship be full of Water, Mark 4.
^7, 38. But when Senacherib (or Babylon's Assistant) does threaten L^banon and
Carmel, 2 Kings 19. 23. Now will I Rise, says the Lord, Isa. 33. 9, 10. And
when all Nations are United against Jerusalem, Then shall the Lord go forth and
fight against them, as in the day of Battle, Zech. 14. 2, 3.

16. To Aggravate both Sions Mercy, and her Opposers Judgment by their
joynt-suddenness at his Appearing thus unawares. At their first going out the
Virgins Generally did Expect him, and so did others, as their Amazing fear did
then Evince: therefore Christ tarrieth, designing to surprise them all, as they
are either Watching, Luke 12. 37. or Sleeping, Mark 13. 36. or Revelling, Mat.
24. 49. at leastwise minding other Matters, Luke 17 28. and not thinking of
him, Mat. 24. 44. Which suddenness does marvellously Affect (according to the
Nature of a Dispensation) both in a way of Paining at the very Heart, Jer. 4.
19, 20. and of Rejoicing, 2 Chronicles. 29. 36. How will the Saints Mouth be filled
with Laughter when their Captivity is Returned, whilst they are in a Dream,
Psalm. 126. 1, 2. And how will others be confounded when their inevitable
Destruction comes, whilst they are saying, Peace and Safety, 1 These. 5. 3!
Therefore Christ does prolong his Time, that so his unexpected Coming might
fill his Peoples Hearts with Wondering, and others with Consternation.

Quest. 3. What are we to Understand by Slumbring and by Sleeping, here? Both
as to the Difference that is between them, and as to the Particular Cases which
they refer unto.
Answ. I. As to the Difference between these two, it may be considered two
ways. Either first, with Respect unto their Nature; and so all know that
Slumbring is less than Sleeping, as being but an Entry into the Sleeper's
House. A Slumberers Senses are not so fast bound up, but that he can hear some
greater Noise, and understand what is said or done, and give some kind of
Answer; yea, have some stirring of Affections, and be awakened sooner than he
that is fast asleep: Witness the Spouse, whose Heart was then awake, therefore
her Sleep was but a Slumber, Cant, 5. 2. because she then could hear the Knock
of her Beloved, and understand his Voice, v. 2. and gave some kind of Answer,
v. 3. Yea, had some Moving in her Bowels for him, v. 4. and presently awakened
so, as that she arose and Opened to him, v. 5, 6. This shows the Difference
that is between them, as to their Nature. Secondly, this Difference may be
considered, as to their Use or Application here, unto those Virgins; which may
be double.

1. In a way of Distribution, or so, as that the Foolish Virgins slept, whereas
the Wise did only slumber. And such a Distinction may easily be supposed,
since Folly (or Weakness) does much incline unto a Deeper kind of Sleep, as is
to be Observed in silly Aged People and little Children. Saints are not wont to
be so altogether heavy Headed as others are who want their rouzing Heat, and
many other Soul-awakening Helps, which Grace affords. Saints are (all of
them) Children of the Day, 1 These. 5. 5. but they that Sleep, Sleep in the
Night, v. 7. Christ keeps his Disciples waking with frequent Jogs, Luke 22,
46. Yea, their own Conscience is an Alarm to them. Slothfulness casts sinners
into a deep Sleep, Prove. 19. 15. but Saints have something else to do, Psalm.
132. 4. Nor will their Riches suffer them to sleep, like other poor Creatures,
Eccl. 5. 12. Therefore this sleep and slumber may be thus Distributed among the
Virgins here; which is one way of Understanding them.

2. It may be taken in a way of showing how sleep at last did seize upon them
all, viz. by slumbring at the first, or that they all first slumbred, and so at
last fell fast asleep. As we would not give sleep unto our Eyes, so we should
not give slumber to our Eye lids, Prove. 6. 4. The latter of which is but a
Needle, which will soon stitch our Eyes together. Therefore Christ bad his
Disciples Watch, for fear of entering into Temptation, viz. by giving way unto
their slumbrings, Mat. 26. 41. Sluggards (both in the Letter and Mystery) plead
only for a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the Hands
together, Prove. 6. 10. But we are taught (from what the Virgins have
Experienced) to be more Wise, than to crave Liberty of Leaping up unto the
Knees in the Ocean. And thus the Difference between these two is briefly
Opened, both as to their Nature, and Application.

II. As to the Particular Cases here referred unto, these Virgins may be said
to slumber and sleep, as follows.

1. With Respect to common Principles of Truth and Righteousness, which
formerly have been avouched. Time was, when Reason and Scripture Proof have
been demanded instead of Major Vote, or mere Humane Authority. A Fundamental
Public Good has been preferred before the most Ancient Custom, Highest
Worldly Form, or Personal Interest of any Man whatever. Right Gospel Churches,
Truths, and Ordinances, have not been sometime Judged of according to the
Flesh, or by the Numerousness of their Abettors, but by Agreement with the
Rule. It heretofore has been Accounted sin to fail in Duty, though Ignorant
thereof; or though (at least) one be not Spirited thereunto, but now the Case
is altered. There was a general Cry (at first) for Liberty of Conscience in
Matters of a Religious Nature, which when some Men had gained for themselves,
how did they vilify those very Arguments (in others Mouths) and break that
Sword in pieces by which themselves had been Defended.

2. With reference unto their sometime Zeal for Christ, and against the Man of
sin; subjection unto Commands and Prohibitions in Religious Matters has been
Accounted only due to Christ, which yet o^ later Years has been thought
yieldable unto Man without his being Deified. Some Men have separated from
those supposed Churches, whose Acts of Office (and consequently their Essence)
have been confessed valid, which since has been denied by them to others,
unti^^ the Essence (as well as Purity) of their own Churches be Destroyed. Did
some Men ever think they should have been free to swear (by necessary
consequence) the Preservation of that Hierarchy which they had formerly
Declared to be Antichristian? Time was when such were loath to use Christ's Form
of Prayer, who since could hear Humane Imposed Liturgies; And they who
sometimes pressed hard for Purity i^ Communion, could since endure to walk with
those who have returned to their Ancient Vomit, and have not cast them out.

3. With reference unto their Entertainment of Christ's Little ones, such as
Time, Truths, and Duties are. Some have been bold (of later Years) to Question
the Being of Time-Truths at all, who yet doubt not the Truth of something which
scarce had any Being before their Time. Others would grant that Name to be
abiding still, but not its Application, save unto what was Fansied and Approved
by themselves. Others would yield that Application also, which some contended
for, who yet thought other common Truths more Profitable to be insisted on,
though little else (but such as these) was sometimes urged by themselves, and
such Discourses then were counted-Edifying; yea, very great stress was laid
thereon by all the Virgins at their first going out. But since that time
succeeding Infants of this Nature have much been over-looked (if not
over-layed) by our Sleepers, and their poor Nurses have been Offended sadly.

4. With reference unto their former Courage and self-denial in the way of
Duty. How boldly did these Virgins sometime Talk and Write, unto the Hazard of
their All, who since have quarrelled with the very Name of Self-adventuring.
Time was when Suffering Service was thought most Honorable, but since that
time, if Active Duty be more safe, it has been set before the other. Christ's
Instituted Worship has been thought worth the loss of Life, but that (of late)
was counted Lawful to be Dispensed with, if but Estate or Liberty were by that
means endangered. How will some (one day) be ashamed of fearing the Oppressor's
Fury, when it shall (tauntingly) be said unto them, Where is the Fury of the
Oppressor, Isa. 51. 13? Yea, they who sometimes have not feared many Deaths in
the Open Field, have since been frighted from their Duty by a Prison. Nor is it
to be wondered at, if waking Little Children be in the Exercise of greater
strength than Giants that are fast asleep.

5. With reference unto their sometime Faith and Hope, as to the Bridegroom's
Coming. At their first going out how did the Pulpits ring with Babylon's
Funeral Sermons! Yea, Civil Constitutions were also threatened with being shaken
in pieces, as some then Witnessed; nor was there so much striving (then)
against the fifth Monarchy-Principle, as who should be the Men; Christ's Coming
was (at that time) so generally expected. But since that time, where is (said
some) the Promise of his Coming, 2 Pet. 3. 4? It is Delayed, says another.
Mat. 24. 48. We had great Hopes (said some of his Disciples) we Trusted it had
been He, Luke 24. 21. But that Expected Child (said others) has proved a false
Conception, Isa. 26. 18. Not so, I hope, (says Hezekiah) only there is not
Strength to bring it forth, Isa. 37. 3. No, no, (says Sion) the Lord has
forsaken me, my God has quite forgotten, Isa. 49. 14. Thus has there been a
Mighty Cry, but yet no Faith on Earth, Luke 18. 7, 8. whilst others of a more
Believing Spirit have been for Signs and Wonders, Isa. 8. 18. And if it now be
otherwise, it is either from some present Dream, or from the Virgins late
awaking.

6. With reference unto their former Accurateness, or walking closely with the
Lord, as does become the Gospel. Time was when all our Virgins were very Sober,
seeming to be of a serious Spirit, not swallowed up in Worldly businesses,
willing to hear what might be Offered, Diligent in Religious Exercises, and
trembling to think of grosser failings, in point of Practice or Opinion. But
since that time how have they fl^nted it in Worldly Fashions, making Provision
for the Flesh: What Levity has appeared in their Spirits, and Frothiness in
their Discourse? How has their Cloven Foot United, having Buried their General
in their Particular Calling? How have they scorned Instruction, at least, to be
Reproved? How yawningly has God been Worshipped, whilst Mammon has had the
Male? Yea, how have Dangerous Errors been Indulged, and Grosser breach of Duty
made light of? Thus have the Wiser Virgins slumbred, whilst others have fallen
fast asleep.

Quest. 4. What are the Distinct or Proper Signs of slumbring and sleeping?
Answ. I. The Signs of slumbring (suitable to what is in the Letter) are these.

1. The slumberers Eyes are closed, who therefore cannot see, unless it be some
little glimmering of a greater Light that is just before them: Whereas the
wakers Eye is Open, who therefore sees at a distance, and can discern what is
more darkly hinted, by sending forth to meet the Object, and in a way of Prying
Observation. But slumberers cannot understand some kind of Truths and Duties
which formerly were very plain, save as their present Luster can penetrate a
shut Eyelid, or not without some more than Necessary Demonstration. Time was
when all our Virgins were fully satisfied concerning several things, which
since they say are not so clear; the Reason whereof is more to be Lamented,
than to be wondered at, viz. The Heaviness of their Eyes, which must be
thoroughly first awakened before they can see the Glory of Christ's altered
Countenance, or of those Men who talk of Sufferings, Luke 29. 30, 31, 32.

2. The slumberer's Posture is very much wavering, this and the other way,
until such either be awakened, or else laid down to sleep. Watchmen can stand
whole Days and Nights, Isa. 21. 8. but others are tossing to and fro; one while
enclining to Profaneness on the Left hand, another while to Right Hand
Superstitions; sometimes too forward, and presently fallen back as much behind.
Seers may be for Going on unto Perfection, Heb. 6. 1. therefore all kind of
Alterations are not to be Condemned: But one may easily Distinguish between the
Watchman's walking and the Slumberer's Nodding; between a Judicious variation
and Childish instability. When Persons do thus Multiply self-contradicting
Motions, or when their Head has lost its due consistency in Matteres of Faith
or Duty, we may conclude them to be slumbring, especially if they have formerly
been more Discreet and Fixed.

3. The slumberer's Hand is easily apt to let things go or fall, who thereupon
awakeneth, unto his Fruitless sorrow. A watchful Christian is to be known by
holding fast that which he has Received, Rev. 3. 2, 3. especially what is of
worth, and of a Brittle Nature, such as are the steadfast Profession of our
Faith, Heb. 10. 23. the Confidence of our Hope unto the End, Heb. 3. 6. the
Form of sound words, or Scripture Language, 2 Timothy 1. 13. the word of Christ's
Patience, Rev. 3. 10, 11. and every Gospel-Institution, Rev. 2. 25. yea,
whatsoever is good and true, 1 These. 5. 21. or that good thing (be it what it
will be) which is Committed to his care, 2 Timothy 1. 14. But slumberers may soon
have such things wrested from them; yea, of themselves (by little and little)
they will let fall what has been sometimes highly prized, and then awaken,
when in some sense it is too late. How sadly Remiss (of later Years) have the
most of Virgins been, as to their Ancient Testimony, the Purity of their
Communion, the Savouriness of their Discourse, their searching after Knowledge,
and the like; all which evinceth their having entered into this sad Temptation.

4. Slumberers may Hear, and understand a little, but such are not Affected
duly with what is said or done. Such can endure to hear their scruples
Answered, their Duty Opened, their Sin Reproved, and yet have no Impression (to
any purpose) upon their Spirits. They may have sluggish good desires, and yet
have nothing, Prove. 13. 4. because their hands are folded, Prove. 6. 10. there
way is as an Hedge of Thorns, Prove. 15. 19. there is (say such) a Lion in the
way of Action, Prove. 26. 13. and therefore their desire kills them, Prove. 21.
25. Such may be heard to groan in Prayer, with reference unto some Corruptions,
but take no further course to be Delivered: They like such kind of Spiritual
Food, but that it grieves them to bring their Hand and Mouth together, Prove.
26. 15. therefore such Roast not what they have seemed to take in Hunting,
Prove. 12. 27. Lord evermore give us this Bread, say such, John 6. 34. but do
not eat it, when set before them, v. 35, 36. Whereas a watchful Christian has
his Affections stirring, and is in an immediate fit Capacity for suitable
Actings, as in that case of Opening, Luke 12. 36.

5. Slumberers may sometimes speak, but very simply; witness the slumbring
Spouse, whose Answer to her Beloved's Voice was like that of a Child, as if she
knew not how to Dress her self, or how to put that on, which was put off, Cant.
5. 2, 3. They seem to Pray in the Spirit, but not with Understanding, not
knowing what they say, no more than Peter did, Luke 9. 33. when half asleep, v.
32. They will confess, if such a Rule were followed, God would be Glorified
more, yet will they not grant it to be their Duty. Another's Ruining of himself
and Family, (in a common case) will be acknowledged to be his Liberty, but not
his bounden Duty, for fear themselves should then be made to Suffer with him.
They heartily could wish that all were free to Suffer in such a cause; till
when, they Judge it not incumbent upon particular Persons, as if another
failing might warrant mine. They will Declare compliances with Man's Commands
or Prohibitions to be unlawful, and yet themselves persist in such a way.
Whereas a watchful Christian is to be known by that consistency which is
between his Heart and Tongue, his Practice and Profession.

6. Slumberers will oft-times waken, and yet immediately will Nod again, both
in the Letter and Mystery. A sudden Light may rouse such up a little, as did
John Baptist's Light those slumbring Jews, which made them Skip or Dance a
Galliard, though only for an hour, as the Greek there has it, John 5. 35. and
as his Dispensation (in our Days) has wrought upon some others, who since that
time have slept again. Much more will such be startled with a sudden Noise,
such as is that of a Terrible Word, or louder Providential Knocks: All which
were soon forgotten by Ancient Israel, Psalm. 78. 11. though God had slain some
of them, and had Redeemed the rest, v. 34, 35, 36, 37. But most of all, such
may be made to look about them when they are struck, or nipt, or Personally
(although more gently) touched; as Pharaoh did, when struck with God's own
Hand, Exodus 8. 8. but was at his old work again, v. 15. as Ahab did, when
sorely nipt with that Denunciation, 1 Kings 20. 42, 43. but presently Nodded
into a greater sin, 1 Kings 21. 2. 4. 13. 16. and as the Disciples did, when
touched by Christ, Mat. 17. 7, 8. whom he then kept awake, else had they slept
again, as at another time they did, so soon as his back was turned upon them,
Mat. 26. 43.

7. Slumberers cannot endure some kind of sudden, loud, or dismal Noises. One
must begin with such, a great way off, as Nathan did with slumbring David, who
else would not have born too sudden a Rebuke, 2 Samuel 12. 1. 7. Such must be
gently dealt with at the first, else drousie Carnal Israelites will be
Disturbed, in case the Trumpet's Voice be very loud, Exodus 19. 16. They must
have smooth things spoken to them, Isa. 30. 10. else will they be Offended, as
were the Pharisees when Christ spoke harshly to them, Mat. 15. 7. 12. Whereas a
watchful Christian is not surprised with Christ's sudden Knock, Luke 12. 36.
but can immediately then say, Lo, this is he, because they have waited for
him, Isa. 25. 9. Nor are such Passionately affected with the Loudness of his
Voice, because they fain would hear and understand it. Nor is their Head
Disquieted with smiting reprehensions, because it is according to their
Expectation and Desire, if need requires, Psalm. 141. 5.

8. Slumberers cannot endure the Light, especially in case it be too nigh, too
Glorious, or uncertain in its shining. Such will Approve an Open Testimony in
Others, or in the General, but not with Respect unto Their Times or Persons;
it is not the Nature (so much as Nearness) of that Light which does Offend them.
Such will confess Church Members should be Saints, but that they should be more
than Babes in Christ, is somewhat too Glorious a Discovery for some awakened
ones, much more for Slumberers. Such are for Hoping to the End, so long as
Providential Grounds are steady; but if those waver, the Light of this Duty is
so uncertain, as that it does Disquiet them, who fain would slumber until the
Day break, without Dispute. Therefore such gladly would have that Light removed
till such a Time, and then it will be Acceptable, as Christ was to the
Converted Jews, though it was still a burden unto others, who Labored under a
Spirit of Slumber, Romans 11. 8.

These are the Signs of Slumbering. The Signs of Sleeping are as follows.

1. Men fast asleep can hardly Hear, and to be sure, not See at all; Sleep
being that which binds up the Outward Senses altogether; as in this Moral
sense it was with those on whom the Spirit of a Deep sleep was poured out, Isa.
29. 10. Such must be loudly cried unto, else can they Hear no more than Baal
did, because (as Elijah said, by way of Holy taunt) He, peradventure, was
asleep, 1 Kings 18. 27. Such do not see those Angels who Observe unseemly
Gestures in Religious Exercises, 1 Cor. 11. 10. nor how Christ walks among
the Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. nor how their shame is seen by others, else
would they watch, and keep their Garments, Rev. 16. 15. John saw Christ's
Glory, John 1. 14. but so did not the Jews, who therefore slept whilst this Sun
shone full in their Faces, Mat. 13. 13. 15. and so it is still, with reference
unto his Interests, though one would wonder that People do not perceive the
easiness of his Yoke, (compared with that of Satan and the Man of sin) both in
Relation to his Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, and Temporal Kingdom, but only that
their Faces are, as it were, hid from him, Isa. 53. 3. and Eyes are closed.

2. Men fast asleep are apt to Dream, and thereupon to Laugh or Weep, when many
times there is no cause, but what is of a quite contrary Nature, unto the
Aggravating of their Grief and Shame when once they come to be awakened. We may
conclude those Men to be asleep, who Dream of Eating when they are faint, Isa.
29. 8. who call their Lying Dreams the Word of God, Jer. 23. 28. or who are
filthy Dreamers, Jude 8. pretending unto an Interest in Christ, and yet will
turn his Grace into Lasciviousness, v. 4. So on the other side, they who were
in a Dream when Babylon's Captivity was returned, Psalm. 126. 1. and did evince
it by their Weeping, when there was Ground for Joy, or when the Foundation of
the Second House was laid, Ezra 3. 12. as in a way suitable to that Type, some
Old Professors in our days have done, whose very Age disposes (as in the
Letter) to Sleep and Dream. But whilst such sleep at Prayer, they are not wont
to Dream of Hell, or how poor Eutychus was likely to have never wakened more,
Acts 20. 10. Nor are their Affections Exercised according to Substantial
Grounds, or as the Case indeed requires.

3. Sleep makes the Greatest Giant as unactive, and as unable to help himself
or others, as is the Weakest Child: Therefore Men of an Active Spirit are
described by their not sleeping, Isa. 5. 27. Yea, God himself (when Active for
his People) is said to be Awaked, Psalm. 78. 65. Till when, Christ's Presence
with his Disciples did not profit them, Mat. 8. 24, 25, 26. Nor can his Poverty
be prevented who loves sleep, Prove. 20. 13. Some are as Lions, in point of
Strength, provided they be awake; but when the Horse and Chariot are cast into
a sleep, Psalm. 76. 6. then are the stout-hearted spoiled, and none of the Men
of Might can find their Hands, v. 5. Such cannot prevent their Falling down
from a Third Loft, though taken up Dead, Acts 20. 9. and never likely to be
Recovered but by a Miracle, v. 10. Those Men are fast asleep, whose Arms are
folded, Prove. 6. 10. whose Field is overgrown with Thorns, Prove. 24. 30, 31.
33. who do not rise up from the Dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. who put not their Beautiful
Garments on, Isa. 52. 1. or do not awake to Righteousness, 1 Cor. 15. 34.
especially at such a Time as this, Romans 13. 12, 13.

4. Men fast asleep know not what does befall them, or is done unto them,
although in never so Material a Respect. Such may be Robbed of a Rib, as Adam
was, (or of their strength) and yet without any apprehended pain, Genesis 2. 21.
Yea, such may be deprived of all their former strength, as Sampson was
(together with his Locks) whilst Delilah made him sleep upon her Knees, Judge.
16. 19. The Enemy may come and sow his Tares among their Wheat who are asleep,
Mat. 13. 25. which will not be rooted again, v. 30. so long as this World
continues, v. 39. Yea, such may have a Dead Child (or one of Satan's Brats)
laid in their Bosom instead of one alive; as had that Woman while she slept, 1
Kings 3. 20. Such may be in Danger of being Slain, as Saul was, when fast
asleep, 1 Samuel 26. 7, 8. who lost his Spear, and yet he knew it not, v. 21.
Yea, such (being softly gone unto) may have a Nail driven into their very
Temples, as Sisera had when he was fast asleep, Judge. 4. 21. Those Men are more
than Slumberers, who are not deeply sensible (at that very instant) of such
like Spiritual Losses and Hazards run.

5. Men fast asleep are apt to be secure, though in the midst of utmost
Dangers; as sleeping Drunkards are upon a Topmast, and in the midst of the
Sea, Prove. 23. 30. 34, and as poor sleeping Jonah was, when the Ship was almost
broken, and Heathen Mariners cried every Man unto his God, Jonah 1. 4, 5. Such
have Gray hairs upon them here and there, and yet they know it not, Hos. 7. 9.
Feasting and making Merry, when at the very Gates of Death, Isa. 22. 13. The
Day of the Lord is Darkness, and not Light to them, yet do they Ignorantly
desire it, Amos 6. 18. although not likely to stand at his Appearing, Mal. 3.
1, 2. Yea, such will Eat and Drink, and Buy and Sell, and Plant and Build,
until the Son of Man does Come, (as in the days of Lot and Noah) unto their
utter overthrow, Luke 17. 26. 28. 30. Whereas a watchful Christian is
constantly at work with Holy Fear, Phil. 2. 12. not being secure, though in no
visible Danger, Job 3. 25, 26. but Trembling in himself when speaking of God's
Salvation for his Anointed People, Hab. 3. 13. 16. How would it startle some
asleep, could they but see how daily Industrious, and self-suspitious others
are, whose work is yet already done, as to the Main thereof.

6. Men fast asleep are apt to be awakened with much Affrightment, upon some
rouzing Noise or Accidents; as that poor Jailer was, who being awakened with an
Earthquake, and seeing the prison-doors open, drew out his Sword, and would
have killed himself, supposing the Prisoners had been fled, Acts 16. 26. 27.
Such being pricked at the Heart, are subject to cry, with sh^icking, What shall
we do, Acts 2. 37? Yea, to lay violent Hands upon themselves, as Judas did,
Mat. 27. 5. or at least, Desperately to say, with Cain, My sin is greater than
that it may be forgiven, Genesis 4. 13. as the Margin there has it, and as the
same Hebrew words are elsewhere rendered, Psalm. 51. 5. Genesis 50. 17. Exodus 10.
17. And if Judge Felix Trembled when Paul, a Prisoner, did but Reason at his
Bar concerning the future Day of Judgment, Acts 24. 25. much more will such be
startled, when awakened out of their present sleep, Dan. 12. 2. and made to
appear before Christ's Judgment Seat, 2 Cor. 5. 10. to receive their dreadful
Sentence, Mat. 25. 41. And in the mean time Chri^t's Coming (as a Bridegroom)
in the Night, will ^e (in such Men's Apprehensions) like that of a Thief, Rev.
3. 3. or as if he came only to steal and kill, and to destroy, John 10. 10.
Whereas a watchful Christian can bear Convictions without Astonishment, Ezra
10. 2. and will have Confidence at Christ's Appearing, 1 John 2. 28. being able
immediately to Open to him when he shall come and knock, Luke 12. 36.

Quest. 5. How are we to Interpret that word [All] with reference unto the
Virgins, and their being over-taken with this Temptation?
Answ. This word [All] is of a Diverse Acceptance, of use to be Observed.

1. It sometimes signifies some of All sorts, where there is any Distribution
made, as of these Virgins into Wise and Foolish. Thus Christ is said to have
tasted Death (with reference to its special Benefits) for All or Every Man,
Heb. 2. 9. as he did sometimes heal All Sicknesses, and Every Disease among the
People, Mat. 4. 23. That is, some of All sorts, or all Manner thereof, as it is
there Translated, which is the same Greek word as in the other place. Thus also
[All the World] is sometimes used; as when John (Writing to the Jews) calls
Christ a Propitiation, not only for Their sins, but also for the sins of the
whole World, 1 John 2. 2. viz. for some of All sorts, both Jews and Gentiles;
which Gentiles (Distinct from Jews) are sometimes called the World, Romans 11.
12.) and not with respect to Every individual in the World, since Christ is
only a Propitiation through Faith, Romans 3. 25. which Faith All Men have not, 2
These. 3. 2. In which sense also Christ lightneth every Man, John 1. 9. if meant
of Spiritual Light, since some have not the Spirit, Jude 19. But [All the
Virgins] in my Text, is meant of more than some of All sorts.

2. By this word [All] sometimes the whole (or Every Individual) is intended,
without the least Restriction or Limitation. Thus All (as in the Greek) or
whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, John 3. 15. and thus the
Promise is sure to All the Seed which is of the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4. 16.
And thus All Israel (in the Letter) shall at last be saved, Romans 12. 26. Thus
also is Marriage Honorable in All, without excepting any, in competition with
Fornication, Heb. 13. 4. And thus All Scripture (and every part thereof, unto a
word or syllable) is given by Holy Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. But as the former
sense was too Restrictive, so is this Second too Comprehensive to be intended
in my Text; as if All Virgins or Professors (not any one excepted) are then
asleep, or slumbring, since there would else be no room for any Watchers, nor
consequently such whom Christ will then serve, which yet is intimated, Luke 12.
37. and by such Watchers this very Cry at Midnight seems to be made;
therefore All will not be asleep, in that sense.

3. The word [All] is oft-times put to signify the Generality; as All Judea
went out to John, Mat. 3. 5. And as those walked in All God's Ordinances, Luke
1. 6. and as the Gospel went into All the Earth, Romans 10. 18. etc. In which
last sense, these Virgins (All of them) are said to sleep and slumber.

The Ground and Reason of which General sleep may be, as unto God, That so the
Lord might thereby Humble the Generality of Professors, at such a Time. And
thus was David's Covenant (partly) Ordered, 2 Samuel 23. 5. that none should then
seek after God, Psalm. 14. 2. as his Dispensation was a Type of Christ's, Romans
3. 11. and as with reference unto Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, so with Respect
unto his Temporal Redemption also, Ezra. 20. 44. by turning their Captivity,
who then were sleeping, or in a Dream, Psalm. 126. 1. as it is with sinners when
Christ first gives them Light, Ephesians. 5. 14. Nor can his People's Pride be more
effectually prevented, than by their slumbring at such a time; since by that
means there is no visible Difference between the Wise and Foolish, and since
they fail in the Predominant Duty of such a Time, and which they have been so
eminently forewarned of by Christ himself, Mark 13. 35, 36, 37. And thus, when
All have sinned, the freeness of their Redemption is consulted for, Romans 3. 23,
24. or when the Deliverer of Sion shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans
11. 26. finding them (at that time) in Blindness, v. 25. or Laboring under
that Spirit of slumber which he has therefore given them, v. 8. But as to
Means, or Second Causes, the Reason of this General sleep, is, because,

1. Christ Comes in the Night, 2 Pet. 3. 10. and the Cry is made at Midnight,
Mat. 25. 6. As Typically of Old in Egypt, Exodus 12. 29. which Night is thought
to be no Time for work, John 9. 4. but General sleeping, 1 These. 5. 7. and
though some Rise up early, and others sit up late, Psalm. 127. 2. yet All are
wont to be asleep at Midnight: So that the very Season is one Reason why this
Temptation is so Epidemical. Now, who would have imagined (according unto
common Rules of Judging) that such a Friend, a Savior, and much more a
Bridegroom, should Order his Coming at such a Time? Especially since he was
confidently Expected the Day before? Yea, one might be apt to think that Work
or Labor, should only be expected (from Man) until the Evening, Psalm. 104
23. by virtue of God's Appointment, and that his sleep might then be
warrantable, since, when the Night comes, no Man can Work, John 9. 4. It Is
true indeed, this holds not in Moral Cases, or when a Particular Exception is
expressly made; but drouzy Heads are easily thus made to sleep when Satan rocks
them.

2. Because of so many bad Examples set, the sorce whereof is greater than that
of Precepts, since these do only Teach, whereas the other, (viz. Examples)
Draw, especially in sinful Cases. Most Men will rather go out of their way than
lose their Company; as Joash did (with reference unto his evil way) so long as
good Jehoiada Lived, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. And as more do out of Christ's way on that
Account, since solitariness does more Afflict (the Generality) than
Disobedience. Now, here is no want of sleepy Presidents, with reference unto
all sorts of Virgins: and if a little Leaven be so dangerous, 1 Cor. 5. 6. much
more will half Mankind (viz. the Woman) encourage the other half (viz. the Man)
to follow that Example, Genesis 3. 6. and when All go astray, the Priests
themselves will hardly stay behind, Ezekiel. 44. 10. It Is like, these Virgins fell
not All asleep at once, but Nodded one after another, until the last was
over-taken also, because she had not one Companion left to keep her waking; as
poor Elijah ran for Company, when fansying himself to be alone.

3. Sleep is the Natural Effect of certain Causes, which Antecedents being
General, the Consequent must needs be so, according to the Ordinary course of
Nature; and this is Principally the Reason why this Temptation does Generally
so prevail (at such a time) upon these Virgins. Sleep is Occasioned (as in the
Latter, so in the Mystery) sometimes from Weariness, Judge. 4. 21. Sometimes
from having naught to do, Prove. 19. 15. Sometimes from Fansied security, Luke
12. 39. Sometimes from having Naught to lose, Eccl. 5. 12. Sometimes from
Sensuality, Joel 1. 5. And sometimes from a Swoon, Mat. 9. 24. All which meet
here, with reference unto these Virgins. They have been lately wearied with the
greatness of their way, from Canaan to Assyria, Isa. 57. 9, 10. They have been
Slothful, in hiding that Talent, which should have Publicly been improved,
Mat. 25. 25, 26, 27. They were Secure, as in the Days of Lot and Noah, Luke 17.
26. 28. 30. Yea, they were Spiritually poor, which made them careless, Rev. 3.
17. They have been very Sensual, Mat. 24. 38, 39. Yea, they have fall^n into a
Spiritual Swoon, and must be awakened from some kind of Death by the sound of
the Seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15. 18. No wonder then, if Sleep has been so
General, the Causes of it having been so too.

Quest. 6. What Influence does Christ's Tarrying lend unto the Virgins
Slumbring?
Answ. 1. Because Sleep is very Natural, yea, unto Christ's own Disciples in
his Absence, especially in Spiritual Respects, as sometimes in the Letter, Mat.
26. 40. Whilst Adam was alone, his sinless Nature was inclined to Sleep, Genesis
2. 20, 21. And much more is the Old Man subject thereunto, save as the Second
Adam bids that sleeper to awake, Ephesians. 5. 14. Christ is that Sun, upon whose
Setting, or withdrawing, Man Naturally falls into a slumber, and is apt to
sleep the sleep of Death, save as his Eyes are so enlightened, Psalm. 13. 3,
Christ sets the Soul on work, who else is Idle, Mat. 20. 1. 6, 7. And
slothfulness will quickly cast one into a Deep sleep, Prove. 19. 15. Now, whilst
the Bridegroom tarrieth, his quickening Influences are withheld more than before
they were; and if he abides still, though but two days, John 11. 6. his very
Friend sleeps, until he goes to awake him, v. 11.

2. Because Satan is then most busy, who has the greatest Skill (next unto
God himself) of casting poor Creatures into a slumbring Frame. He knows what is
intailed upon Watchers at such a time, Luke 12. 37. 42. who therefore will Then
be sure to be at Joshua's Righthand, resisting him, Zech. 3. 1. when likely to
be clothed with Change of Raiment, and with a fair Mitre upon his Head, v. 4,
5. He also knows how sadly the Sleeper's House will then be broken through,
Luke 12. 39. and what Temptations such will be exposed unto, both in respect of
Sin, v. 45. and Suffering, v. 46. especially Professors, or such as know
Christ's will, and yet are careless, v. 47. He also has his Songs and Cradles,
and Soporiferous Applications wherewith to make men sleep, as Delilah did her
Sampson, Judge. 16. 19. And though Christ does prolong his Time, yet Satan then
knows his Time is short, which makes him Rage the more, Rev. 12. 12.

3. Christ's Tarrying Occasions Grief, and Grief Occasions Drousiness;
therefore the Virgins slumber, if Christ be absent, especially when he
Tarrieth. It is so in a Spiritual case as it was with Israel, who were for the
making of other gods, when Moses (who was a Type of Christ) Delayed his coming
down out of the Mount, Exodus 32. 1. It was so in the Letter, when sorrow made
those Discipl^^ sleepy while Christ was absent, and with respect unto his sad
expected absence afterward, Luke 22. 45. And if his going from them (for the
Comforter) so filled their Hearts with sorrow, John 16. 6, 7. much more the
Hope of his Return, when it is deferred, will make the Heart sick, Prove. 13.
12. and consequently, the Head exceeding heavy. Many of our Virgins eyes were
ditted up with dirty Tears, and they have Cried themselves asleep, as Children
oft-times do, when left alone in some dark Room, and partly from Vexation.

4. No Man Precisely knows when he will Come, or whether some awakening
intimations of it be not mere Delusions, which adds weight unto the former
Heaviness, and does encourage slumberers to be secure. Some ask, How long, Rev.
6. 10? but none can absolutely tell, Psalm. 74. 9. whether it will be at Even,
or at Midnight, or at the Cock Crowing, or in the Morning, Mark 13. 35. This
Day and Hour being hid^^m Angels, Mat. 24. 36. and from the Son himself, Mat.
13. 32. as he is Man. Yea, many false Alarms also are fore signified, which we
are bid to take heed of, Mark 13. 21, 22, 23. And to be Sober as well as
Vig^lant, with reference unto the end of all things being at hand, 1 Pet. 4. 7.
Now, when poor Samuel (in the Night) is wakened with an uncertain Call, he may
be easily persuaded to lie down again, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5. And Passionate Jehoram
(in such a Case) will roundly say, What should I wait for any longer, 2 Kings
6. 33.

5. Such only think (at first) to slumber, but not to sleep; or only to sleep
a little, but hope to waken before his Coming; or that they shall awaken
presently, and soon be ready, upon some timely presumed. Notice of his Coming:
All which help forward this Temptation while he tarrieth. Sin is Deceitful,
stealing upon some (as sleep does) by degrees, who only meant to slumber or
dally with its Temptations: Others Design a downright sleep, but only of so
long continuance, trusting that Conscience will awaken them at such an hour of
the Night: But he that says in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his Coming (the
same Greek word that is in my Text) will take his fill of sinful sleep, Mat.
24. 48, 49. especially when such are furnished, as these Virgins are, some of
them with Oil in Vessels, and all with Trimmed Lamps, who therefore doubt not
of being Ready. So that the Bridegroom's tarrying must needs Occasion the
Virgins slumbring.

Use. 1. From the Bridegroom's tarrying we may Observe, the Christ's Affections
(the strongest of them, viz. his Conjugal Affections) are absolutely under his
own Command; though he now comes also to ^^ecute his Vengeance, Isa. 61. 2.
which is another very strong Affection. He is the Lord of Anger, as the Hebrew
has it, which is Translated Furious, Nahum 1. 2. and does evince it by his
slowness thereunto, though great in Power, and of an Holy Nature, and much
provoked by his Enemies, v. 3. He also loves the Dispensation of his Coming,
which therefore is oft-times called his Bride: Yet is he not thereby
Transported to outrun his Father's Time, though strongly urged by all his
Paranymphs, or Bride-maids earnest Expectations. True Holy Zeal is no way
inconsistent with due Sobriety, whatever some may Fansy; but turbulency in
Affections is one sad sign of their being Carnal, though fixed upon a Spiritual
Object. When Tempted to be Impetuous, let us ^emember Christ, and that they who
are his, have Crucified such Affections, Gal. 5. 24. as is their Duty, Col. 3.
5.

2. If all the Virgins be asleep (at leastwise slumbring) at such a time, we
then may hence conjecture at the Reason of what has been to be Observed among
the Churches and Professors of later Times, unto some Men's Amazement,
supposing this Parable to have such a reference, as ha^^ been with Sobriety
suggested. Some have admired that Men pretending unto Light and Conscience
should be so Blind, so wavering, so apt to let their Duty fall, so little
Affected with what they Understood, so Childish in their Reasonings, so often
Relapsing into the same Temptation, so utterly unable to bear plain dealing,
and so Offended with some kind of Light. Whilst others have been stark Deaf,
affected strangely with ungrounded Fancies, unable to Resist the Weakest
Adversary, not knowing what did befall them, yea, very secure in greatest
Dangers, and marvellously affrighted with what in its self has been a Mercy.
The Reason whereof has been their being all asleep, which is not so obvious in
a Spiritual sense, as in the Letter, else should we not so much have wondered at
these Appearances.

3. We now may see what little cause we had to be Offended with the
Dis-appointment of our sometime Expectation, since Christ had told us of his
tarrying, after the Virgins first going forth to meet him. Some have been
therefore apt to Question wholly, whether that was He, because they trusted he
would have then Redeemed Israel altogether, Luke 24. 21. But on we Fools, and
flow of Heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, v. 25. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things (after his being Proclaimed King) and then
to enter into his Glory, v. 26? Our failing at this Day is sadly Aggravated by
that Record, and by Christ's own Prediction here (added to those of Old)
according to what has come to pass. Let us with shame acknowledge our former
In-advertency, and not persist to Question the Near approaching of his Name,
because of that, which is indeed one Promising Sign thereof; viz. his Tarrying
beyond the Time Expected.

And since the Bridegroom's tarrying Occasions sleep, by those forenamed
Influences thereby Ministered, these following Considerations may be of some
Preventive Use, by way of Counterpoise.

1. Let us Remember, that all this while we have been merely Exercised with the
want (or rather the Delaying) of a Privilege, and of a Lower Nature only.
Christ's Spiritual Presence (and our Communion with his Grace or Peace) has
not been necessarily denied unto us, by Reason of this late Dis-appointment:
Yea, such Communications might have thereby abounded, had we been Watchful in
such a Trying Hour, since in his absence, the Comforter is promised to supply
his place, to our Advantage, John 16. 7. It Is not Christ's fault, but ours, if
the Quintessence of Outward Liberty be not enjoyed by us in Soul-Enlargements;
since, if the Father was to be seen in Christ, John 14. 9. much more Christ's
Quickening Presence is in the Spirit, and without which his Flesh would profit
nothing, John 6. 62, 63. Now, shall we cast away these choiser Influences (as
Sleepers do) merely because we yet have not what is of far less worth? What
clearer Evidence can there be of Childish Folly and Mercenariness in our
Profession, than to Despise Christ's Peace because of Worldly Tribulations, and
to desist from bounden Duty for want of Present, or immediate Pay?

2. It seems Christ waits also, as this his Tarrying does import; Expecting,
till his Enemies be made his Footstool, Heb. 10. 13. And shall not we then
Watch with him one Hour, Mat. 26. 40. especially when bid to do so, v. 38? His
bare Command should satisfy a ^riend, John 15. 14. a Lover of him, John 14.
15. much more his Practice, John 13. 14. especially with reference unto the
same Time, as well as Thing; as ^n this case it is. Shall we not take that Yoke
upon us, (and count it easy also) wherein himself is willing to be a Partner,
Mat. 11. 29. 30? Those are Proud Servants, who will not Help their Lord, by
lifting at the Other (and Lighter) end of any Burden. Yea, he is Suffering all
this while; and is it not a shame for his Disciples to fall asleep, whilst he
is sweating, as it were, great drops of Blood, Luke 22. 45? Especially since he
has signified his being then at Prayer for Peter also, and the rest, v. 31,
32. who formerly had continued with him in his Temptations, v. 28. but now
could neither Pray for him, nor for themselves, being fast asleep, v. 46.

3. Christ also tarrieth, for our Advantage, as has been shown: And shall we
then so ill requite him, as at that very Time to Grieve him by our sleeping? He
thereby does design the Actuating of our Graces; shall we then let those Habits
sleep, as if we had a mind to cross him? This Respite is vouchsafed for our
Dressing; and shall we only then improve it in putting off our Clothes for
sleep? How sadly did it aggravate the case of Saul and Eli, that they should
sin just when God was Establishing the one Man's House, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and the
other's Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13. 13. How will it vex awakened Virgins, to think how
ill they have Rewarded Christ and their own Souls by slumbering at such a Time,
as doubtlessly it did King Joash, who stayed his own Hand, when God had given
him leave to smite his Enemies until they were consumed, 2 Kings 13. 18, 19.
This Trying Hour is that wherein more work might have been done than all the
Day before; and trifling now, may prove more Dis-advantaging than any of these
sleepers Dream of, whose utmost Diligence afterward will not Redeem what Now
is Lost.

4. He will Come certainly at last, Hab. 2. 3. and unawares on them who are not
Watchful, Luke 12. 45, 46. and this all are forewarned of, on purpose to
prevent their sleeping. In case the Lord were not to come, that slothful
Servant would be the Happiest Man: Or if one might be sure to be awakened in
due Time: Yea, sleep might be more Pleasant (though no whit safer) if this had
not been sounded in our Ears, which one would think, should make the Virgins
startle, however others may sleep securely who know it not. Now, it might break
poor Sampson's Heart, that he should sleep till his Hair was cut, and then
awaken with that sad word, The ^hilistines be upon thee, Judge. 16. 19, 20.
especially he having Twice been warned before, v. 9. 12. When apt to slumber,
let that be sounded in our Ear, The Bridegroom is upon you; whose sudden coming
unto Sleepers may be of sadder consequence than that of the Philistines was to
^^mpson. And if this were of Ancient Use, Mark 13. 35, 36, 37. much more to us,
on whom the End is near approaching.

5. We may be sure (upon Substantial g^^unds) that Christ will come as soon as
may be, or that he will tarry no longer than he needs must. There are some
Watchmen upon Jerusalem's Walls which never hold their Peace, and who are bid
to keep no silence, nor give him Rest, till he Establish her, Isa. 62. 6, 7.
And his Elect do Generally make an heavy Cry, whom he will therefore speedily
avenge, although their Faith is gone, by his long bearing with them, Luke 18.
7, 8. Yea, his own Interest does put him on upon a threefold score; Partly,
because that Dispensation is his Bride, whom none can Love more than the
Bridegroom does; and therefore he only tarrieth till all things are made ready
for the Marriage, Mat. 22. 4. Partly, because he comes as an Avenger upon his
Wicked Adversaries, which is an case unto his Heart, Isa. 1. 24. And therefore
he will not long be burdened. And Partly, because he all this while is in a
Suffering state, as to his Name and Interests, and such a blot will suddenly be
wiped away. Therefore we may conclude his Coming with utmost speed, and so keep
Waking.

6. H^s Coming as a Bridegroom; (in these our Days,) cannot but be exceeding
near, from all those Plausible fore named Grounds, (both Scriptural and
Providential,) by which the Virgins were all encouraged to Expect him at their
first going forth. And unto which I now shall add One more, which is (to ^^e) a
Demonstration; viz. Because that Dispensation (with reference unto its Present
setting up) was manifestly (of later Years) The Truth of such a Time; since it
Then was the Only Truth opposed by Worldly Powers, and merely in regard of its
being then to be set up. Now, Worldly Powers will always Persecute some Glorious
Truth of Christ or other; such as (by way of Eminency) Time-Truths are:
Therefore this having been the Only Butt of Persecution, (and with Respect
unto its Present Exaltation) it is thereby Evidenced to have been The Truth of
such a Time; and consequently to have been speedily to be Advanced, since else
(in such a Respect) it could not be a Truth. Which might have kept us Waking.

MATTHEW XXV. 6. And at Midnight there was a Cry made, Behold the Bridegroom
Comes; Go ye out to meet him.
IN this Verse we have a Notification of the Bridegroom's Coming; wherein we
may Observe, 1. The Thing Notified, He Comes. 2. The Note of Attention added,
[Behold] he Comes. 3. The Means or Manner of this Notification, by a Cry. 4.
The Time when this Cry is made, viz. At Midnight. 5. The Duty thereupon
Exhorted unto, Go out to meet him. From all which the Observation is this.

Observe. After the Bridegroom's Tarrying for a certain time, a Cry is made at
Midnight to the Virgins, Behold he Comes, Go ye out to meet him.

Quest. 1. How will the Bridegroom come, (...) as to the Kind and Manner of his
Coming?
Answ. As to the Kind thereof (and merely with Respect unto his ^^mporal
Kingdom) there is a Diverse Coming mentioned in the Scripture.

1. There was a Typical Coming in David's Time, Psalm. 40. 7. in whom Christ
came to Do and Suffer his Father's Will, Heb. 10. 7, 8, 9. and does now Reign
accordingly, though more invisibly at the present, Heb. 2. 8. and with Respect
unto his Father David's Throne. To which may be referred what of that Typical
Nature was Before, when Christ did first set up his Temporal (as well as
Spiritual) Kingdom in the World, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. and when that Kingdom was
Restored afterward, Zech. 2. 10.

2. There was a Coming (afterward) by way of Show or Emblem, when Christ was
Transfigured upon the Mount, Mat. 17. 1, 2 which seems to be that Coming in
his Kingdom, which some there standing should not taste of Death until they
saw, Mat. 16. 27, 28.

3. There also was a Coming in the days of Constantine, when Christ did first
Erect his Temporal Kingdom, Rev. 12. 5. to Recompense his Faithful Servants,
Rev. 7. 17. and Execute his vengeance upon others, Rev. 6. 16, 17.

4. There will be also his Coming as a Thief, Rev. 16. 15. when Israel (or the
Eastern Kings) shall be Converted, v. 12. to whom shall come the first (or
chief Dominion that ever yet was, Mic. 4. 8. who shall be All Righteous, Isa.
60. 21. but yet not Perfect; therefore that also will be but for a Time.

5. There will be his Second Appearing at the last, without sin, Heb. 9. 28.
which therefore must needs be Personal, or in his Humane Nature, wherein he
sometimes bare the sins of his Elect, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

6. But then there also is a Precursory Coming, which last is Principally
intended in this Parable, as has before been hinted.

Thus will Christ's Temporal Throne have six steps up into it, as Solomon's had
of Old, 1 Kings 10. 19.

The Manner of which Precursory Coming will much Resemble that of his Personal
Coming, and the rest, as in these following Particulars will appear.

1. His Coming will be very sudden. When his Enemies will be secure, 1 T^^s. 5.
2, 3. Mat. 24. 49. 50. Luke 17. 28, 29, 30. When the Foolish Virgins think
there is time enough to Buy Oil in, Mat. 25. 10. When former Signs will not be
seen, by Reason of their Dis-continuance, Psalm. 74. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 4. When his
Elect abound with unbelieving Cries, Luke 18. 7, 8. When there will be great
Mountains in his way, Zech. 4. 7. the Mount of Olives to be divided, Zech. 14.
4. and none shut up or left in Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. This rotten Old House will
fal^ in a Calm, despised fore-warnings will thus be punished, his former
tarrying will thus be recompensed; he then has nothing else to do, but just to
come; thus will he amaze the World, and thus has he consulted for the need of
Daily Watching, Mark. 13. 36.

2. His Coming will be with a dreadful Earthquake, Zech. 14. 5. Valleys will be
Exalted, and Mountains Levelled, Isa. 40. 4, 5. The Old Heavens will pass away,
and the Earth be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. and New Created, Isa. 65. 17. The
state of things will be dissolved, and yet not Ruined, Psalm. 75. 2, 3. He then
will tread the Wine Press of the Almighty's wrath and fierceness, Rev. 19. 15.
till blood come unto the Horse Bridles, Rev. 14. 20. Michael and the Dragon
will then try their utmost; the Trouble then must needs be great, Dan. 12. 1.
And if the Beast's Full (before) was shaking, much more will Satan's be so,
Rev. 12. 8, 9. Christ will then come to Judgment, Rev. 11. 18. the Name whereof
made Felix tremble. And this will be a Time of Restitution, Acts 3. 21. and
therefore of much Commotion. Yea, all must be done in a little time, which
cannot be without a mighty noise. See therefore to your standing, Luke 21. 36.
and flee away from Babylon, Jer. 51. 45. as far as Azal, or separation, Zech.
14. 4, 5.

3. His Coming will be with Clouds and Darkness, Psalm. 97. 2. as to the
Justifiableness of several things, according to a common Rule of Judging.
Israel will then be as the Dew which tarrieth not for Man, Mich. 5. 7. but
readily will Publish that word which God himself gives forth, Psalm. 68. 11. The
Temple and City Walls will not depend upon a fresh Humane Command, Ezra 5. 3.
but will be pleaded by an Ancient Order, v. 11. 13. which was Divine, Ezra 1.
1. That Day of the Lord will be upon every one that is Lofty, Isa. 2. 12. the
spoilers will then be spoiled, Ezra 39. 10. the Judge will pull down and set up
at pleasure, Psalm. 75. 7. the Solitary shall be set in Families, Psalm. 68. 6.
and out of Judah shall come every (so called) Oppressor, Zech. 10. 4. This
King's Highway will not be Common, but where there none was wont to be, for
his Redeemed, Isa. 35. 8, 9. as it was of old, Psalm. 77. 19, 20.

4. Yet Righteousness will be his Habitation, Psalm. ^^. 2. which will sustain
him, Isa. 59. 16. As to his making war with some, Rev. 19. 11. and his
Redeeming others, Isa. 1. 27. Israel's Nobles shall be of Themselves, Jer. 30.
21. which is but Righteous, according to the Chaldeans Principles, Hab. 1. 7.
They shall be Righteously Redeemed for Naught, because they were so Sold, Isa.
52. 3. No Weapon shall prosper any more against the Just, the Servants of the
Lord, which will be both their Heritage and Righteousness, Isa. 54. 17. Christ
shall then Reign, Rev. 11. 15. and he in that respect will then be called a
Righteous Branch, Jer. 23. 5. for unto him it appertains, Jer. 10. 7. whose
Right it is, Ezra 21. 27. God's Law (viz. the Light of Nature and the
Scriptures) will be the Rule; for he will then Magnify his Law, and for his
Righteousness sake, Isa. 42. 21. Saints then will walk in the Name of the Lord
their God, which is but Just, since others Judge it to be their Right, Mic. 4.
5. Babylon shall be Rewarded, as the has Rewarded others, Rev. 18. 6. and
Saints shall have double for their shame, Isa. 61. 7. both which are Righteous,
2 These. 1. 6, 7.

5. His Coming will be variously Represented by Men of Differ in Spirits. Some
will suppose him to be John the Baptist, Mat. 16. 14. But others will more
confidently say, Lo, this is He, Isa. 25. 9. And Blessed is the People that
know the (Seventh Trumpets) joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. Some will be Angry,
Rev. 11. 18. and oppose him Psalm. 2. 1, 2. as the Philistines did David, 2 Samuel
5. 17. but others will desire him, Hag. 2. 7. Some will then stumble, and
thereby be ensnared, Isa. 8. 14. but others will call his saddest Executions
Righteous, Rev. 16. 5. and blessed is he that is not Offended in him, Rev. 15.
3. Some will then Sing, whilst others shall Cry for sorrow of Heart, Isa. 65.
14. Some will give Glory unto God, Rev. 11. 13. Indeed who shall not fear him,
and Worship before him, Rev. 15. 4? Yet others will not Repent to give him
Glory, Rev. 16. 9.

6. His Coming will be with Glory, Riding in the Heavens, by his Name Jah,
Psalm. 68. 4. and being thereby Declared to be the Son of God, Psalm. 2. 7. His
Harbinger has been astonishing, as Luke 3. 15. much more himself will be so,
as of Old, John 10. 41. Kings will then shut their Mouths at him, Isa. 52. 15.
and Heathens will bow unto his Scepter, Isa. 19. 18. A New Earth and Heavens
(or Glorious Dispensation) will be Created, Isa. 65. 17. wherein all sorts of
Persons shall then share, v. 20. The Lu^tre whereof will be set out by that sad
state of things immediately before, Psalm. 32. 5. The Spirit also will then be
poured sorth, Isa. 32. 15. whose Fruits will be unto his Praise and Glory,
Phil. 1. 11. He will then come with all his Saints, Zech. 14. 5. most
Gloriously attired, Zech. 3. 4, 5.

7. The Glory of this Coming will be Low at first. Babylon will then be taken
at one end, Jer. 51. 31. Israel's last. Enemies will first be Ruined in some
Isles, Ezekiel. 39. 6. Glory to the Righteous will first be heard from the utmost
parts of the [then] known Earth, Isa. 24. 15, 16. The first Ruler in Israel
will be from Bethlehem Ephratah, or Fruitful House of Bread, Mic. 5. 2. when
the Assyrian is in that Land, v. 5. The Tents of Judah (in competition with the
Glory of David's House) will first be saved, Zech. 12. 7. The Sanctuary waters
will first be to the Ankles, Ezekiel. 47. 3. The Tenth of the City will only fall
at first, Rev. 11. 13. and more will follow after, Rev. 16. 19. But the Stone
will become a Mountain, Dan. 2. 35. The Grain of Mustardseed will grow
Exceedingly, Mat. 13. 31, 32. His Temporal Kingdom will increase, as did, and
does his Spiritual.

8. His Coming will (in some sense) be Once for All, though with some kind of
Circumstantial variation, as to the Measure, Place, and Manner of his
Appearing. The Seventh Trumpet will continue until the Last Trump shall sound,
Rev. 16. 17. The Gentiles Glory will increase until their Fullness be come in;
upon whose Degeneration (then) Christ's will Translate that Kingdom to the
Jews, Romans 11. 24. until his Coming to Reign in Person, when Jews and Gentiles
shall have fulfilled their Course. But Antichristianism will have its deadly
blow at first, for all the last Plagues are killing. And Grosser Persecutions
or Destructions will come to a Perpetual End, wherever Christ has once set up
this kind of Throne, Psalm. 9. 6, 7. And thus the Saints Dominion (once begun)
will be for Ever, Dan. 7. 27. passing from them to Christ himself, and thence
at last unto the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 28.

Quest. 2. What Is meant by this Word, Behold, with reference to his Coming?
Answ. 1. Behold sometimes imports Presentiality, as John 1. 29. And thus he
Comes when the Cry is made, viz. soon after; therefore it is said, he Comes;
not that he Will Come. The Time of this Cry does clearliest hint his near
Approach, which therefore is to be Studied and Observed. Time was, when it was
Dangerous to reckon his Day at Hand, 2 These. 2. 2. And when the Seventh Angel
begins to sound there will be Time no longer, Rev. 10. 6, 7. But a little
before that Time it will be said, Behold he Comes. There will be Time After
that for all the Virgins to Trim their Lamps, for some Discourse between them
concerning Oil, and for the Foolish Virgins going out to Buy it; bu^ not for
their Return before his Coming, Mat. 25. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And if (as some
conceive) this Cry has been already made, it is near indeed.

2. It sometimes hinteth Obviousness, or Easiness to be Discerned, John 11. 36.
Of such a Nature is his speedy Coming then unto an Open and Observing Eye.
Christ here affirms it, whose Name is True, Rev. 3. 7. and therefore he has
bid it should be Written, Rev. 21. 5. His Harbinger is come already at their
first going forth; therefore himself cannot be now long after. The Signs hereof
had been before, Luke 21. 25, 26. whose very beginning called for our looking
up, v. 28. His previous work is then Dispatched; and he is not slack as Men
count slackness, 2 Pet. 3. 9. This Cry concludes the Second Woe; and then the
Third comes quickly, Rev. 11. 14. Some will not yet see, but they shall see
unto their shame, Isa. 26. 11. being willingly Ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

3. It also hinteth In-advertency, as Mat. 7. 4. And therefore these Virgins
are bid, Behold. Some have no mind to see that Object, it so Affrights them to
hear of Judgment, Acts 24. 35. Others do not believe for Joy, Luke 24. 41. nor
can they hearken for present Anguish and cruel Bondage, Exodus 6. 9. especially
when this increases, Exodus 5. 21. after the raising of their Expectations,
Exodus 4. 31. Others are so engaged in the World, as that they would not have
this Earth and Heavens to be yet Destroyed, which makes them in observant of
such Intimations. Some are unwilling to believe until they See and Feel, John
20. 25, especially since some have been mistaken, who rashly have determined
the very time. And all are sleepy, who therefore need being bid, Behold.

4. It notes Marvelousness, or Matter of Wonder, as Isa. 7. 14. And such a
Dispensation is Amazing, upon a manifold score. Its like has not been seen
these many hundred Years, or not since Constantine's Time, Rev. 12. 5. and with
respect to R^rities, Men use to say, Behold. The Lord will then do a New thing
in the Earth, by making a way in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert;
which therefore may well be bid to be Beheld, Isa. 43. 19. Truth is now fallen
in the street, and Equity cannot enter, Isa. 59. 14. Therefore it may be then
well said (by way of Admiration) Behold, a King shall Reign in Righteousness,
Isa. 32. 1. The Gentiles shall carry the Saints upon their shoulders, which is
a Wonder worthy to be Beheld, Isa. 49. 22. There is none that shows, yea,
there is none that Hears this; therefore the first Informer may well say,
Behold, behold them, Isa. 41. 26, 27.

5. It sometimes notes of what Use and Consequence it is, to take especial
Notice of what is so Accompanied, as Rev. 3. 20. In which last sense it is
chiefly here intended. He comes now to Judgment, Rev. 11. 18. and all the
Churches shall then know it is he that searches the Reins and Hearts, Rev. 2.
23. He now will give no longer day unto the Virgins to buy that Oil, which
formerly has been neglected, but only to Trim their Lamps, and so go forth,
or be shut out for ever. The Manner of his Appearing (from first to last) will
countervail the glad Beholder's want of sleep, unto Their after-grief who do
not mind it. He then will make so great a Change, as that Old Objects will not
be worth the looking after, so as to take the Eye off from him. Yea, this very
Notice of his Coming will startle all the Virgins; which shows how fitly this
word, Behold, is set before it.

6. It sometimes does denote Entreaty or Beseeching; and therefore that word,
Lo, or Behold, 1 Chronicles. 17. 1. is elsewhere rendered, see, I pray, 2 Samuel 7.
2. as the Hebrew word there used for [Now] is oftimes rendered, Numb. 12. 13.
etc. Nor is it strange, for God (by others) to beseech poor Man; or for his
Cryers and Ambassadors to Pray Men in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5. 10. especially
in such Momentous Cases. Christ knows of what concernment it is, to be aware of
him, and of his Day, Luke 21. 34. who therefore Prays them, for their own
good. He knows the Judgment wants not Light; who therefore thus applies himself
to their Affections by such a Pathetical Exhortation. He knows the Virgins love
to slumber, who therefore earnestly beseeches their awakening. He might Enjoin
what is Convenient, but for Love's sake he rather does Beseech, Philem. 8. 9.
His Fatherly Compassions are stirred in him for the Wiser Virgins, who
therefore speaks thus Affectionately unto them all. Thus does Christ sometimes
condescend to gain our Duty, and to set us a Copy.

Quest. 3. How may we know the Cry which is then made?
Answ. This Cry must either be conceived to be Ordinary, or Extraordinary.

If Extraordinary, it then must be Prophetical, which some may be in the
Expectation of, but not upon substantial Grounds. We may not be Wise above that
which is Written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. Now, the Scripture does no where plainly hint
such Extraordinary Gifts, with reference to these our days; since, if that
Prophecy, Joel 2. 28. be strictly now to be fulfilled again, we may as well
expect Christ's Personal Coming Now, which that Place firstly did refer unto,
Acts 2. 16. Nor is it needful, since the Perfecting of those Scriptures, by
which the Man of God is thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
Yea, with Respect unto these Latter days; those have no Light in them, who go
not to that Law and Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. which are a surer word of Prophecy
than is a Voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. or one sent from the Dead, Luke
16. 30, 31. He also is sadly Threatened, who shall add ought (as Extraordinary
pretended Prophets needs must do) unto that finishing Book of Revelations, Rev.
22. 18. And though God is at Liberty to give forth such a Gift, yet are we not
required to Believe on that Account before hand, though Men pretending
thereunto may sometimes have hit right. Nay, it is expressly said (with reference
to such a time) there is no more any Prophet among us that knows how long,
Psalm. 74. 9.

I therefore judge this Cry to be more Ordinary, or something which does
occur (according to the Scripture) after the Bridegroom's having Tarried, and
as the next, or more immediate Antecedents of his Coming. As for Example.

1. When the Inhabitants of Mount Seir shall be destroyed by Moab and Ammon,
who were Confederates against the Men of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 10. which was the
Beginning of that Salvation, v. 22, 23. in the Valley of Berachah, v. 26. for
poor unworthy good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2, 3. As that foretold Christ's
Coming (in Jehoshaphat's Valley) to Judge his People's Enemies, after the
Return of their Captivity, Joel 3. 1, 2. Which said Inhabitants of Mount Seir
were Esau's Offspring, Genesis 36. 8. who was (a very little) Jacob's Elder
Brother, Genesis 25. 25. but Sold his Birthright or Priority, (and thereby lo^t
his much desired Blessing of Supremacy) for a Trifle, Genesis 25. 33. and 27. 35.
whereupon he hated his Brother Jacob, v. 41. though Israel did not dis-possess
him of his Inheritance, 2 Chronicles. 20. 10, 11. These Men will join (against
Judah) with Moab and Ammon, and yet be Destroyed by their own Confederates:
Soon after which Christ Comes.

2. When Israel's Adversaries shall Unite, to cut them off from being a Nation,
Psalm. 83. 4, 5. Designing to take God's Houses into their Possession, v. 12.
and burning up his Synagogues in the Land, Psalm. 74. 8. Then will Christ
evidence his being King of Old, Psalm. 74. 12. by doing to these bold Enemies as
to the Midianites, Psalm. 83. 9. and in a very little while his Anger shall
cease in their Destruction, Isa. 10. 25, 26. as it was with Abasuerus, upon
Haman's being Executed, Esth. 7. 10. who sought to Destroy all Mordeca^'s
People, Esth. 3. 6. Thus when the Heathen help forward their Affliction who are
but lately come out of Babylon, God will return with Mercy to Jerusalem, Zech.
1. 12. 15. 16. and make the Chaldean's Daughter silent, who had no Mercy for
her Captives, Isa. 47. 5, 6.

3. When Israel's sad Case will be (unto the Eye of Reason) Desperate. One Sign
of Sion's Restoration, is, the seeming Incurableness of her Sorrow, and her
being called an Outcast, Jer. 30. 15. 17. after the Return of her Captivity,
v. 3. When God shall have Accomplished to scatter the Holy People's Power, then
will these things be finished, Dan. 12. 7. after the Time, and Times, and Part
of Time, or after the Little Horn's decease, who did so long continue, Dan. 7.
25. and consequently after their being possessed of the fourth Beast's Kingdom,
v. 21, 22. Their expectations must miscarry, who look for deliverance from
themselves, Isa. 26. 18. But when the Eyes of Man, as of all the Tribes of
Israel, are toward the Lord, then will his Burden rest upon the Land of
Hadrach and Damascus, Zech. 9. 1. And thus, No Faith on Earth will Usher in the
Bridegroom's Coming, Luke 18. 8. And when there is no Humane intercessor
visible, then Christ's own Arm will bring Salvation, Isa. 59. 16. repaying
Recompense unto his Enemies in the Islands, v. 18.

4. When God has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, he then will punish
that Assyrian, Isa. 10. 12. the stretching out of whose Wings has filled the
breadth of Immanuel's Land, Isa. 8. 8. An Hypocritical Nation must first be
soundly whipped, then will that Rod be cast into the Fire, Isa. 10. 5, 6. 16, 17.
Achan must first be fully stoned, and all his ill-gotten Goods consumed, then
will the fierceness of God's Anger be turned away, Joh. 7. 25, 26. It must
appear who count God's Service vain, (because the wicked are Delivered) and who
yet think upon his Name, Mal. 3. 14, 15, 16. Then shall a Providential
difference be put between the Righteous and the Wicked, v. 18. Two Thirds of
Israel must be cut off and die; and the Remaining Third Part must be Refined;
then shall they call upon the Lord and he will hear them, Zech. 13. 8, 9.

5. When long endurance (both on God's part and Man's) shall fix the Generality
in their Respective Wanderings. A willing Ignorance is one Gray Hair upon the
Old World's Head, 2 Pet. 3. 5. or Sign of its Last days, v. 3. as dying at the
Root does evidence the Harvest to be fully Ripe. When Controversies cannot be
determined by Ordinary means, then comes the Judge into his Valley of Decision,
Joel 3. 14. When Daniel understood not the Time of the End, from what Christ
told the Angel, Dan. 12. 6, 7, 8. Christ gives him a plainer Sign, viz. the
fixedness of Men in wicked ways, v. 10. Some will debase themselves, even unto
Hell, Isa. 57. 9. without being grieved for it, v. 10. but go on forwardly in
their own way, v. 17. then comes the Time of Restoration, v. 18. and Prince of
Peace, v. 19. And when these Virgins part from inability to Give or to Receive
any further Oil and Light, the Bridegroom comes before it can be Bought, Mat.
25. 8, 9, 10.

6. When Ashur and Eber are both of them Afflicted by Ships from the Coast of
Chittim, which Balaam makes to be the immediate forerunner of Ashur's
Perishing, Numb. 24. 24. and of Christ's having the Dominion, v. 19. or of his
Coming out of Jacob, as a Star; to destroy the Generality, or all the Children
of Sheth, v. 17. who was the only Hopeful Remaining Son of Adam, Genesis 4. 25.
put for the Generality of Professors. Now, Ashur came of Shem, Genesis 10. 22. who
was the first Devourer of God's Israel, Jer. 50. 17. and their last Troubler
afterward, Ezra 4. 2. who therefore fitly answers unto Satan or the Dragon,
who was before the Babylonish Beast, Rev. 12. 3. and does resist Joshua
afterward, Zech. 3. 1, 2. Eber came of Shem also, Genesis 10. 21. from whom the
Hebrews (or Professors) had their Name, which was first given to Abraham, Genesis
14. 13. This Ashur (in the latter days) shall be United with those Hebrews;
both which shall jointly be Afflicted (though not Destroyed) by Ships from
Chittim, which was a place eminent for Trade and Shipping, Ezekiel. 27. 6. Dan.
11. 30. Soon after which, this Ashur shall perish for ever, and Christ shall
come as King, or as a Bridegroom.

7. When the Harvest is Reaped, as being fully Ripe, Rev. 14. 15, 16. then
comes the Vintage, v. 18. or wrath of God upon his Enemies, v. 19. (Joel 3. 12,
13.) by the space of two hundred Miles, v. 20. Soon after which, seven Angels,
Rev. 15. 1. come out of the Temple Opened, v. 6. Upon the Seventh Trumpets
sounding, wherewith Christ comes to Reign, Rev. 11. 15. 17, 18, 19. Which
Harvest may thus be known. It is an Harvest, Rev. 14. 15. which eminently does
consist of Wheat, Mat. 13. 29, 30. or Men of a choiser Spirit, who then must be
cut down, as to some kind of former standing, Natural, or Mystical. It Is Reaped
by one like the Son of Man, Rev. 14. 14, 15. or by the Son of Man himself, Rev.
1. 13. or by a more immediate hand of God, which is a sad Dispensation to the
Godly, and therefore it is Accompanied with a Cordial Prologue unto such, Rev.
14. 13. It Is Reaped upon the Prayer of one out of the Temple, Rev. 14 15. viz.
an High Priest, or a Priest, at least, who Typified Saints of greater Spiritual
Strength, because no other can bear to join in such a kind of Prayer, but
rather pray against it. It Is after the Return of Babylon's Captivity, or when
the Lamb and his Party are on Mount Sion, Rev. 14. 1. It Is also after that loud
Denunciation against Complyers with the Man of Sin, at such a Time, Rev. 14. 9,
10, 11, 12.

8. When God shall have made, of a City an Heap, of a Defenced City a Ruin: A
Palace of Strangers to be No City, Isa. 25. 2. Then will he be a strength to
the Poor, v. 4. and the Branch of the Terrible ones shall be brought low, v. 5.
in Order unto his Marriage Feast, v. 6. at his Expected Coming, v. 9. Which
Dispensation may thus be known: It must be a Metropolis, because there is a
Palace in it, which therefore is applied by some to Babylon. It is a Defenced
City, and therefore its Ruins must chiefly be within its Walls. It is a Palace
of Strangers; as Strangers and Israelites are contra-distinct, Jer. 5. 19. Such
as the Assyrian is in Israel's Land, Mic. 5. 5. Its Ruins must be very Great,
because it Never shall be rebuilt, or not of a long time, at least, as Exodus
21. 6. where the same Hebrew words are so intended. And this sad Judgment will
much Affect; since Therefore shall the strong People Glorify God, and the City
of the Terrible Nations shall fear him, Isa. 25. 3.

9. When God shall make his Enemies like a Wheel, Psalm. 83. 13. in Order to
Their being troubled for ever, v. 17. who have consulted against his hidden
ones, v. 3. that Men may know Jehovah is most High, over all the Earth, v. 18.
Which Wheel donoteth Restlessness, or self-destroying Variations; and thus the
Lord ^^ings to Naught the Heathens Counsel, Psalm. 33. 10. whereas his
Coun^^^ands for ever, v. 11. because he speaks and it is done, he does
Command, and it stands fast, v. 9. Thus Pharaoh (that Egyptian Dragon) did
first increase his Cruel Persecutions, Exodus 5. 7, 8. and then abated of his
Rigor, Exodus 8. 8. until he rose again, Exodus 14. 5. unto his utter
overthrow, v. 28. Thus did the Assyrian Adversaries first make the Jews to
cease by Force and Power, Ezra 4. 23. who afterward did only take the
Builders Names, Ezra 5. 4. until they made a fresh Complaint, v. 17. unto the
Reversing of that Prohibition, Ezra 6. 6. 11. Thus also did the Martyrs Cry,
Rev. 6. 10. because of Galienus his increasing Persecution, which then abated
till the Nineteenth Year of Dioclesian, v. 11. who afterward Revived it, v.
11, 12, 13, 14. unto the extirpation of that Roman Dragon, v. 15. and thus it
was with Typical Sennacherib^ 2 Kings 18. 13. 17. Isa. 37. 8, 9. 36.

10. When the Worship of God is openly Blasphemed by his Enemies at such a
time. The Adversary's Blaspheming the Name of God is pleaded as an Argument
with him, to pluck his Hand out of his Bosom, Psalm. 74. 10, 11. and was
effectual in that Typical Valley of Achor, Josh. 7. 9. though long endured,
when first the Man of sin arose, Rev. 13. 5. If Pharaoh did profess himself to
be an Atheist, Exodus 5. 2. calling those Idle, who only would have Liberty to
Sacrifice, v. 17. God will soon make him know there is none like himself, by
sending all his Plagues upon the others Heart, Exodus 9. 14. And if the Assyrian
does Blaspheme the Holy One of Israel, Isa. 37. 23. calling High places and
Idolatrous Altars God's required Worship, Isa. 36. 7. and like ning the true
God to Idols, v. 20. the Lord will soon turn him back, Isa. 37. 29. and
signally destroy him, v. 36. It also much displeases God, Isa. 59. 15. so as
to make him Furious, v. 18. when he that departs from evil is counted Mad, as
the Margin has it, v. 15. and as the Hebrew word is by some Jewish Writers
rendered. Yea, Christ will soon cast off those Old Professing Jews, who do
Blaspheme the truth of such a Time, which was first Preached to them, Acts 18.
5, 6.

11. When Tire and Sidon shall have Sold the Children of Judah unto the
Grecians, Joel 3. 4. 6. after the Return of Babylon's Captivity, v. 1. then
will God plead the cause of Israel, v. 2. and raise them out of that place
again, v. 7. casting their Sellers into that Condition, v. 8. in a way of just
Recompense, v. 7. Which Tyrians and Sidonians of Old, were very like the
present Hollanders, in point of Strength at Sea, Zech. 9. 3, 4. all manner of
Trading, Ezekiel. 27. 3. Oppression, Ezekiel. 28. 16. 18. Pride, Ezekiel. 28. 2. 6.
Policy, Ezekiel. 28. 3, 4, 5. Zech. 9, 2. and falling in with Israel in their
Prosperity, 1 Kings 5. 1. for a self end, 2 Chronicles. 2. 15. but else a pricking
Briar, Ezekiel. 28. 22. 24. Confederating with Ashur against them, Psalm. 83. 7.
and Selling them unto the Grecians, Joel 3. 4, 5, 6. Which Grecians here do
seem to be the last of Israel's grosser Adversaries, Zech. 9. 13. chiefly so
called because of their Resembling the Ancient Grecian Monarch, in point of
Speedy Conquest, Dan. 8. 5. or filling the breadth of Immanuel's Land, Isa. 8.
8.

12. When the Angel out of the Temple, Rev. 14. 17. (or Saints of an Higher
Rank, such as the Priests were of Old, who only might enter into the Temple)
when such are loudly cried unto by another Angel from the Altar, who had Power
over Fire, v. 18. or Saints of a Lower Rank, such as the Ancient Levites were,
who Ministered at the Altar, although not in the Temple: Then will the Vintage
of the Earth be Reaped, v. 19. by the space of two hundred Miles, v. 20. And
then the Viols are poured out, Rev. 15. 1. And when the Watchmen upon Mount
Ephraim (or Persons of a Lower Spirit) shall Cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to
Sion, Jer. 31. 6. The Lord will then bring them from the North, v. 8. and they
shall Tremble from the West, Hos. 11. 9, 10. Uniting with Judah against the
Philistines, Isa. 11. 13, 14. and against the Sons of Greece, Zech. 9. 13.
seeking the Lord, and David their Kings, Hos. 3. 5. and being encouraged
thereunto by Abner, or some chief Leader, who sometimes was for Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 3. 17, 18. Thus when the Elect shall cry (or they whose Actual Saint-ship
is not so clear) Christ will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8.

13. When the Priests (or choicest Saints) do weep between the Porch and Altar,
as not being in the Temple (which yet they had a Right to enter into) but now
are come out from thence, Joel 2. 17. then will the Lord be Jealous for his
Land, v. 18. and remove far off from them his Northern Army, v. 20. when the
Old Heavens (or Present state of visible Churches) shall seem departed, as a
scrowl when it is Rolled together, Rev. 6. 14. or when their Beauty is defaced,
in Order unto a Change, then will the Great Day of Christ's wrath come, v. 17.
And when the four Beasts (or former Church Officers) are not mentioned as
before, but only Twenty four Elders, or Saints- at large, Rev. 11. 16. The
Temple of God is Heaven will soon be Opened, v. 19. Nor will that smoke Offend
mine Eyes, wherewith the Temple will be so filled, as that no Man will be able
to enter into it; that being one Sign immediately foregoing the seven last
Plagues, Rev. 15. 8. or Seventh Trumpet's Sounding. When such as fear the Lord
(in a way of Distinction from Ordinary Church Members at such a time) speak often
each to other, Mal. 3. 16. God's Day is near, Mal. 4. 1, 2.

14. When Israel's Adversaries shall Divide, each one being set against his
fellow, then is Salvation near at hand. Thus David's Kingdom over all Israel
was Ushered in by Abner's falling out with Ishbosheth. Thus Ammon and Moab
(having jointly slain the Edomites) did help to Destroy each other in that
Valley of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. who were distinguished by their
respective Idols, viz. Chemosh and Milcom or Molech, 1 Kings 11. 7. which
latter signifies a King, and the former is supposed to be Bacchus. Thus shall
Lot's Children (whom Ashur helps) be done unto, as were the Midianites, Psalm.
83. 8, 9. when every Man's Sword was set against his fellow, Judge. 7. 22. Thus
shall it be with Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. 21. or with the People that fight
against Jerusalem, Zech. 14. 12, 13. which is the cleaving of Mount Olivet in
the midst, v. 4. and then the Lord shall come, and all the Saints with him, v.
5. This will conclude that Earthquake, Rev. 11. 13. which Ushereth in the Third
Woe (or last Trumpet of seven) quickly, v. 14.

15. When Tidings out of the East and No^^h shall Trouble the last Northern
King, Dan. 11. 44. then will be the time of the End, v. 40. both of that
Northern King, v. 45. and Israel's Trouble, Dan. 12. 1. by reason of their
Prince's interposing on their behalf. Which King is there Described, Partly, by
his being from the North (as the Assyrian was, Isa. 14. 31.) or at a further
Distance from the Sun, viz. a grosser Interest than his Confederates were:
Partly, by his entering into the Glorious Land, Dan. 11. 41. which fairly hints
his being the same with that Assyrian, Isa. 7, 8. Partly, by his Uniting with
the King of the South, against the former King there, Dan. 11. 40. which King
of the South may be a more Refined Interest, (or somewhat nearer to the Sun,)
and possibly may be Ezekiel's Gog (whose Name in Hebrew signifies Covered or
Disguised,) and with whom Magog is United, whose Name does signify Uncovered,
Ezekiel. 38. 2. both which are Threatened, v. 21. as is the Assyrian and his
Confederates, Isa. 10. 26. Partly, by Edom's escaping out of his hand, together
with Moab, and the chief of the Children of Ammon, Dan. 11. 41. or not being
dealt so Rigorously with by him, as others may: And Partly, by his having Power
over the Treasures of Gold and Silver, Dan. 11. 43. just as the Assyrian
boasts, Isa. 10. 14. But tidings out of the East and North will Trouble him,
and make him Furious, Dan. 11. 44. and soon after that comes Israel's full
Redemption, Dan. 12. 1. All which (I grant) does ultimately relate unto the
Literal Jews, in their own Land, as Zech. 12. 9. but do believe, we Gentiles
(first) shall meet with Their Temptations and Deliverances. These are the more
immediate (Providential) Antecedents of Christ's Coming in the Latter days. To
which I will but add one more, as follows.

16. When there shall be a General warning given, not to Comply with the Beast
at such a time, for fear of being thereby brought into a present state of
visible Reprobation, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. then comes that dreadful Judgment,
which first begins at God's House, or with the Harvest, v. 14, 15, 16. and
Ends with others, viz. the Vintage, v. 19. This seems chiefly to be the Cry
here made. Which warning is thus Described there. It Is after the Return of
Babylon's Captivity, Rev: 14. 1. and singing thereupon, v, 2, 3. as the
beginning of Babylon's Judgment, v. 7, 8. It Is also after the Revival of that
Bestial interest once more; else would there be no need of such a present
warning. It Is a little before the Harvest, or Christ's Visitation of his own
House, Rev. 14. 15. It does not thus sadly threaten such, who only have the
Number of that Beasts Name upon them, or his Name; viz. some more Remote
(though Natural) Relation thereunto, such as the Owning of their Acts of Office
is, which consequently does own their Church; yet may not this visibly unsaint
a Man, as being not overcome till after the Vintage, Rev. 15. 2. But those are
now sadly threatened, who worship the Beast and his Image, or who receive his
Mark in their Hand or Forehead, Rev. 14. 9. who do more plainly own him by.
Words or Practices, viz. either with their Forehead, the Emblem of a Bold
Profession; or with their Hand, the Instrument of Action, which Hand is also
capable of being Covered. And such a kind of warning may be this Cry, which Cry
is further Described in my Text, by several Arguments or Qualifications. And so,

It is exceeding Loud, as that word [Cry] imports; and therefore it needs
must be some General or Public Notification.

It also is a Voice as well as Cry, as that which says, Behold, etc. therefore
it is not barely of a Providential Nature.

It also is relating to a former Practice, or only puts upon going out
again to meet the Bridegroom, which has been done before.

Yet it is not Impetuous or Confused, as the Greek word sometimes signifies;
but is only made up of Demonstration and Beseeching.

It also startleth, or is some way Effectual; since thereupon the Virgins are
Awakened, and do Arise.

And it is made at Midnight, after the Bridegroom's tarrying; Which
Circumstance of Time does lead me to the next Enquiry.

Quest. 4. What are we to understand by Midnight, as being that by which this
Cry is partly to be known?
Answ. 1. Midnight is a time of thickest Darkness, in which no Man can clearly
see or know, but only De^m or Feel, as did those Mariners at such a time, Acts
27. 27, 28. Therefore did not the Egyptians stir so long as such Darkness was
upon them, Exodus 10, 22, 23. And such a Darkness have we felt. He that could
sometimes say, Lo, this is He, John 1. 29, 30. could not so clearly see him
afterward, when he was in Prison, Mat. 11. 2, 3. Peter knew Christ at Liberty
more than the Common People did, Mat. 16. 14, 15, 16. till Christ was
Apprehended, and then he knew him not, Mat. 26. 74. it being then about that
time of the Night wi^h him, both in the Letter and Mystery. How have Professors
been Feeling after God (like those poor Heathens, Acts 17. 27.) with reference
unto some Truths and Duties which yet have not been far from every of them. And
at that time this Cry is made.

2. Midnight is therefore also a time of greatest Terror, or being Troubled,
Job 34. 20. which Aggravated Pharaoh's last Plague, because it was at Midn^ght,
Exodus, 12. 29. Yea, Boaz was then afraid of Ruth, Ruth 3. 8. who afterward
became his Wife. And such a Midnight have we seen. How have some been afraid,
so as to Lie, Isa. 57. 11. as if the Enemy were ready to Destroy, and where is
the Fury of the Oppressor, Isa. 51. 13? when Ashur did but only Threaten, how
did poor Hezekiah re^d his Clothes, Isa. 37. 1. who might have Laughed him to
scorn, v. 22. Yea, Christ himself at such a time was thought to be an Ev^l
Spirit, Mat. 14. 25, 26. and such a call to Duty as now is Owned, was then
Affrighting. There was no Lion in the way of Duty, but only Satan, who would
have fl^d, James 4. 7. if steadfastly Resisted, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. But if the Earth
shall quake at Midnight, Acts 16. 25, 26. some unbelieving ones are almost
frighted out of their wits, as was that Jailer then, v. 27. I wish they may
resemble him, v. 34.

3. Midnight is a time of Deep and General sleep; therefore that Harlot arose
at Midnight to lay her Dead Child in the others Bosom, 1 Kings 3. 20. which was
not perceived till the Morning, v. 21. which Depth of sleep has Generally been
upon our Virgins, and in like manner it has appeared. How have the Wise been
cheated (by their Companions) of Living Truths and former Quickening influences?
How have the Living embraced the Dead, Isa. 8. 19. because there was no Light
(no Morning) in them, v. 20. Nor will the Matter be Decided easily, there being
no witness, 1 Kings 3. 18. or common Reason by which to Judge. But if the
Living Child (upon a fresh Temptation) shall be in danger of being slain, 1
Kings 3. 25. then will its Natural Mother be discerned by the Yern^ng of her
Bowels, v. 26. and scarcely otherways; nor but by such as Solomon.

4. Midnight is a time of Lothness to arise, Luke 11. 7. unto a Friend, v. 5.
though one be then awake, till more than Friendship shall constrain it, v. 8.
And such a Time our Eyes have seen. How meltingly have some of Christ's
professed Spouses been moved by him to Open to him, Cant. 5. 2. whom they call
Friend, v. 16. But they have put him off, with telling him, that they were all
undrest, in Bed, and should defile their lately washen Feet, (or Dirty
themselves by outward Sufferings) by Opening to him at such a Time, Cant. 5. 3.
They were so far awakened, as to Hear and Parley with him: They were not
absolutely Benumbed or Disabled by Bonds or Sickness, but that they could have
Risen then: Nor did they deny the thing, only the Time was not Yet come, Hag.
1. 2. Is this your Kindness to your Friend, 2 Samuel 16. 17? But they impute it
to his unseasonableness. Nor will ought but a Cry make them Arise; who then,
perhaps, may Open to him when he is gone, and may not find him, till greater
Sufferings have made them sick of Love, Cant. 8. 6, 7, 8.

5. Midnight is a Time for Sampson (before his Hair was cut) to Rise and do
Exploits, Judge. 16. 3. For David (or Men after God's own Heart) to Rise, and to
give thanks, Psalm. 119. 62. For Paul (a Prisoner of Jesus Christ) to Pray and
Sing, Acts 16. 25. who (when he was at Liberty) continued his Discourse till
Midnight, Acts 20. 7. whilst one of his sleepy Hearers had like to have never
wakened more, v. 9. This also has been to be Observed by us, in our late
Midnight. Some have been strengthened (as Sampson was) to quit themselves of
those Temptations which others thought insuperable. Some have been able (in a
time of saddest Darkness) to give thanks (with David) at the remembrance of
God's Holiness, as is their Duty, Psalm. 30. 4. Some have Lift up their Voice
and Sung, when there was no other Light, save that of God's Majesty in the
Fires, Isa. 24. 14, 15. Some also have thought it meet to continue their Speech
(with Paul) till such a time, so long as Liberty has been afforded: Oh that
such also could Revive that Eutychus, who being sleepy at such a Time, has
fallen into a seeming state of Death out of a Window (or means of Light) three
Stories High.

6. Midnight is no time to look for any Notice of a Friend's or Bridegroom's
Coming, but rather for such a Cry as then was made in Egypt, Exodus 12. 29, 30.
And such a surcease of Expectations; or such a Midnight, has manifestly been
upon us. The Bridegroom's near approach has not been Credited by those who
formerly went out to meet him. That Witness has been wholly waved, as being
thought unedifying. It has Offended some, when but encouraged unto a Sober
hope, till Providence should cast the Scale. We have been cast behind in some
Men's Apprehensions, as Israel in Reality was through others unbelief. Yea,
Sober intimations of the Bridegroom's Coming have been (like Thieves) cried out
against, as being Dangerous, or tending to Rob Men of Estate and Liberty. Thus
has a Midnight been Apparent in our Times; and such a Dispensation is that by
which the Cry is partly to be known, as having been already made.

Quest. 5. Why is a Cry Now made, more than at their first going forth?
Answ. 1. Because the Virgins Now are fast asleep, who formerly had been awake.
They do not stir, as heretofore, therefore Christ Calls them; they cannot stir
until awakened, therefore Christ Cries to them. It Is not an Ordinary Voice
that can be heard by one asleep; And thus Christ suits his Notice unto their
Necessity. He might indeed have bid them now sleep on, as Mat. 26. 45. but
their Condition Cries unto him, to which his Crying Notice Ecchoeth. He
knows that the Wiser Virgins Spirit is willing, therefore he gives them one
awakening more, Mat. 26. 41. He knew this Cry would have some rouzing Efficacy;
and whilst there is any hope, he is for the use of means, Luke 13. 8, 9. Some
would have thought it hard, if he had taken them at this Advantage; therefore
he takes this course to stop their mouths, Romans 3. 19. His Tarrying was a great
Temptation to them, which is removed by his Cry. How sadly is the straining of
his Voice requited by others snorting!

2. Because they now are put upon the Repetition of a former Practice; which in
a Case of this Nature needs a Cry. One may do something once, in way of
Frolic, which is not Seconded, because it was not thought to be a Duty: And
thus some serve the Lord, in way of real Humor, or apprehended Supererogation,
who therefore count its expected Repetition to be unreasonable. One may do that
at first, which is recalled upon Second thoughts, till quickened up by fresh
instructing Opportunity. However being wearied by their former walk, and having
found that Rest is good, they might be somewhat stiff, and loath to Rise, unless
some Louder Cry does force them to it. Yea, having once gone out before, they
might suppose it needless to go forth again; so sparing we are of Multiplied
pains, save in a way of our own choosing, especially since Christ here takes no
Notice of their former Action, and since it has been dis-continued: Both which
are strong inducements to sit still at present, Isa. 58. 3. Cant. 5. 3. unless
a Call be of a Crying Nature.

3. The Season wherein this Cry is made does make it Necessary.

1. As the Midnight is a time of greatest Deadness or Inactivity, both in
respect of Inward Liveliness, and Outward Motives thereunto. At Man's awakening
(in the Morning) he is most like to God, Psalm. 17. 15. as to his being Active;
but Night (especially Midnight) is Man's time of Rest, Psalm. 104. 23. Though
Beasts of Prey are then at work, v. 20, 21. whom in the Morning the Righteous
shall have Dominion over, Psalm. 49. 14. Time also was, when all the Virgins (at
their first going forth) were much Encouraged from without. Their Governors
began to say, Jerusalem's Inhabitants shall be our strength, Zech. 12. 5. they
walked then from strength to strength, (increasing in their Number) as they
went to Sion, Psalm. 84. 7. God did then own them by his Providence, as Heathens
did Confess, Psalm. 126. 2. enough to make the Old Man Lively. But it has since
been otherwise; therefore a Cry is Needful.

2. As Midnight is a time of greatest Darkness, especially in Tempestuous
Seasons, such as that is, wherein this Cry is made. These Virgins (at the
first) did seem to have no want of Light, but then were fully Satisfied, as to
their Present Work and Duty: Their Loins were girt, and their Lamps burning,
which made their way exceeding plain, to what it has been, since the failing
of those Affections by which the Judgment of most Men is guided. How easily
then were all Objections Answered; which would not since have been thought
strong again, but that the former Light (of General Harmony) is now Eclipsed,
which then was clear? Nor can it be denied, but that the Work (at first) was in
it self more Obvious, as will appear upon the Opening of this Latter going out;
In which regard, a Cry is needful, to clear that Eye, which has of late been
so dim-sighted.

3. As Midnight is a time of greatest Hardship and visible Danger. The Air is
then Raw and Cold, which tender Virgins cannot bear without the hazard of their
Health; and therefore such have pleaded, they needs must Die if sent to Prison,
not knowing that such a moist Ce^^ar is Christ's House of Wine, Cant. 2. 4.
Yea, Lions then are wont to Roar, Psalm. 104. 2. 21. which nothing but a Louder
Cry will make poor feeble Virgins not to fear. Thieves also are then abroad,
therefore Men judge it not their Duty (but their sin) to walk at Midnight,
without a more than Ordinary Call, viz. a Cry: Though all are set (by Christ)
upon their Watch at such a time, Mark 13. 35. 37. which one would think is Call
sufficient. But we are apt to fit our Duty for the Meridian of our Interest,
and not to venture out if self-concernments lie at Stake, unless a greater Cry
be made within, as sometimes was in Egypt, which made them all to rise at
Midnight, Exodus 10. 29, 30. though Robbed by it, v. 36.

Quest. 6. What Is meant by those words, Go ye out to meet him?
Answ. 1. These Virgins were Now Asleep; and Going is an Act of one awakened:
which therefore intimates the Rouzing up of drouzy Habits into awakened
Exercises. That Rising Sun will have the Sapo^ Radical Dispositions drawn up
into the Branches of Respective Actions. There is no visible Difference between
the Wise and Foolish (the Dea^^ and Living) while asleep; whom Christ will now
Distinguish, by putting them upon Motion. He is content to eat his Spouses
Honeycomb together with her Honey, Cant. 5. 1. but Roots alone will not
conten^ him, when also Fruits are not laid up for him, as is expected from ^
Spouse, Cant. 7. 13. He therefore has called them out of Darknes^ into Light,
that they might show forth his Virtues, 1 Pet. 2. 9. an^ not only have them
Dormant in their Habits. This is their Duty always; therefore he takes no Notice
of their present slumbring, but pu^ them on immediate Action, or Going out to
meet him, as they would have him Own them.

2. These Virgins had gone out Before, who yet are bid to go o^ Now; which
therefore intimates The Repetition of their forme^ Practice with fresh
Amendments. He does not check them for wha^ they had done, nor is he yet fully
satisfied with it, who else would no^ have Vain (or Needless) Repetitions, Mat.
6. 7. Their First going out was Warrantable, but not faultless; else should no
place have bee^ sought for the Second, as in Relation to that first Covenant,
Heb. 8. 7. Tha^ first was from John Baptist's Cry; the Influence whereof must
first Decrease, before the Bridegroom's Voice is heard. Yea, that at first was
(mostly) upon the first Adam's Motion, whose weakness must first appear; then
comes the Son himself, as in Relation to the Law and Gospel, Romans 8. 3. Indeed
that first going out was very Mercenary; therefore he puts upon this Second,
to try the Nobleness of their Principle. However, Christ is for a Second
Edition, which usually is Corrected; and his best Wine is kept by him until
the last, John 2. 10.

3. The Virgins (at their first going out) did verily Expect the Bridegroom's
Coming then, as their Design to Meet him signified, who Now are bid go out
again, together with an Additional Notification of his Coming: which therefore
intimates, The Re-assuming of their former Expectation, upon a fresh and surer
Ground. They took John Baptist to be the Bridegroom; wherein he checks their
over ha^tiness, by telling them, that his Own Coming was not till now to be
Expected. Their former Hope was merely grounded upon Providence; he therefore
now more plainly expounds the Scriptures, unto the Revival of their Dying
Expectations, as Luke 24. 27. He takes pleasure in his Peoples Hope, Psalm.
147. 11. whose very Expectation shall not Perish, Psalm. 9. 18. therefore he
catches at sinking Peter, though his first Confidence was not a grounded
Faith, Mat. 14. 28, 29, 30, 31. They were now Tossing to and fro (or Nodding)
by Reason of the Bridegroom's Tarrying; therefore he gives them at last this
steadfast Anchor.

4. One's going out to Meet another, is both a Token of Respect, Genesis 9. 1. and
a sign of Longing to behold him with the first, Numb. 23. 15. which therefore
intimates his present Expectations of that Nature from them, with reference
unto himself. He then expects to be Worshipped by all the gods, both Men and
Angels, Psalm. 97. 7. and Saints will Honor him at such a time, Rev. 19 7.
which Time is therefore hinted by this Cry. But chiefly is this desired by him,
as going out to Meet him is a signal of their Longing to behold him with the
first; and therefore he that Hears, is bid say, Come, Rev. 22. 17. and to
evince ^t by this Going. Which cannot but be readily performed by the Saints,
with reference unto their Lord and Friend, their Brother, Husband, and Blessed
Savior. Nor may it irk them to go forth a little, since he is pleased to come
the greater part of the way, by far, only requiring their meeting him in the
Air, who comes to them from Heaven, out of Respect and Love.

5. These words import their going out of something, in Order to their Meeting
of the Bridegroom. Which things then to be gone out of, are as follows.

1. They are to go Out of all their sinful Desilements of a Common Nature,
which has been their Duty always, 2 Cor. 7. 1. but Now is so by way of
Eminency. And if the Name of Christ obliges hereunto, 2 Timothy 2. 17. much more
the Notice of his Coming as a Bridegroom, and as a Judge. His Day will be upon
the Losty, Isa. 2. 12. therefore Go Out of Pride. The Meek will then most
probably be hidden, Zeph. 2. 3. therefore Go Out of Passion. The Time will Now
be very short, Rev. 10. 16. therefore Go Out of Earthly-mindedness, 1 Cor. 7.
29. 30, 31. The Face of the Covering will be Destroyed, Isa. 29. 7. therefore
Go Out of Formality. The Lord alone will be Exalted, Isa. 2. 17. therefore Go
Out of Slavish Fear and Fleshly Confidence, v. 22. A sin of mere Omission will
send some then to Hell, Mat. 25. 41, 42. therefore Go Out of Negative
Christianity. Preachers and others will then be termed Workers of Iniquity,
Mat. 7. 22, 23. therefore Go Out of bare Material Duty, into its Life, and
Power, and Spirituality.

2. They are to Go Out of Babylon, as far as may be from the Beast, especially
from the Whore, or Antichrist in his more Spiritual appearances. This Latter
was a Duty always, the neglect whereof was never so severely punished as Now it
will be. Now, Temporal Judgments will be entailed upon Spiritual Sins, and it
is then High Time to Go Out thence, Rev. 18. 4. Yea, every one that is then
found in Babylon shall be thrust through, Isa. 13. 15. therefore let none stand
still, but let Jerusalem come into their Remembrance, Jer. 51. 50. And though
the Beast's Name (as that of Priests) may falsely be continued unto some; yea,
though some still retain the Number of his Name, yet may both these escape that
Brand of visible Reprobates, which then will be the Portion of his Worshippers,
and such as do receive his Mark; or more downright and Manifest Compliers with
that Interest, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. Were these things rightly understood as to
their Sense and Time, enquiries of that Nature would not be though unuseful.

3. They are to Go Out of Privacy into an Open Testimony, as they had done
before, at their first going forth. This also was an Ancient Duty, the
Neglecters whereof (in times of utmost Danger) are threatened by Christ himself
to be Denied by him, as being the Deniers of him, Mat. 10. 27, 28. 33. Upon the
first Rise of the Man of Sin, the Woman then fled into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.
14. as that denoted her want of former Outward Glory, but not from fear of
Bloody Cruelty, (as Brightman well Observes upon the place) only to show, that
such Apostates did falsely call themselves Christ's visible Churches. Which also
follows upon the Privacy of Church-worship, which is a Worshipping of the
Beast, unto the Clouding of Professors Saint-ship, and the destroying of a
proper Accident, viz. Visibility, which is inseparable from a Churches Essence:
And though Repentance may recover Saint-ship, yet such a failing lays
Churches wast, till New Erected, and which may prove to their Advantage.

4. They are to Go Out of those Old Heavens, which then must Pass away (at
least, be changed) together with the Earth of Civil Constitutions. This Going
out of Churches is Warrantable in the forenamed case, yea, and a Duty; but at
this time there will be no visible Churches to continue in, although
Church State may still remain. Thus was it with the Jewish Church, at Christ's
first Coming: Thus will it be with Temple-state, at his next Personal Coming,
Rev. 21. 22. Yea, thus it was with present Constitutions, a little before his
Coming in Constatine's Time, Rev. 6. 13, 14. and as the sixth Seal concluded,
so will the sixth Trumpet. We Now are in the Expectation of those New Heavens,
Isa. 65. 17. and then the former shall not be Remembered. Upon the Reviving of
Temple-work, the Temple is said to be then Founded, Hag. 2. 18. therefore we
then must have New modelling. Therefore we Read of no Beasts (or Pastors) just
when the Seventh Trumpet sounds, Rev. 11. 15, 16. as having lately
Disappeared since, Rev. 14. 3. until Rev. 15. 7. Now, Officers and Churches
are wont to go together. Which is more plainly hinted by Christ's Resolving to
spew those Laodiceans out, Rev. 3. 16. who were the Last of those Typical Asian
Churches under the Dragon's or Satan's Dispensation, Rev. 2. 10. 13. who must
be laid aside a little before the setting up of Christ's own Throne, Rev. 3. 21.

5. They are to Go Out of Lower Good seize into an Higher state of
Evangelical Perfection. Their Childish things must now be put away, as 1 Cor.
13. 11. their Wheat must out-grow its Blade and empty Ear, ^^^k 4. 28. they
should endeavor to be more than Babes in Christ, else will they want that
Wedding Garment of an Healthful Appetite for Christ's strong Meat, Heb. 5. 14.
when he shall make his Marriage-Supper, Mat. 22. 4. 12. They must be Accurate
as to the Matter of Duty; all which must diligently be added unto Faith, 2 Pet.
1. 5. Yea, both Obedience and Believing must be completed, by having Respect
unto the Scripture as their Rule, God's Glory as their Highest Aim, and the
Second Adam's Spirit as their Root and Principle. And thus as Natural Beauty
consists of Integrality, Symmetry, and Complexion; so is a Gospel-Saint made up
of Body, Soul, and Spirit; or Nature, Animality, and Spirituality: as Salem,
Sion; and Millo were all United into one Jerusalem in David's Time, 2 Samuel 5.
6, 7. 9. which therefore was called a City Compact, Psalm. 122. 3. and the
Perfection of Beauty, Psalm. 50. 2. as Sion was a Type of Gospel-Saints,
especially in David's Time, and when he Rules over all Israel, which fully
Answers unto the Seventh Trumpet's founding, Rev. 11. 15.

6. In Order unto all which before mentioned, They are to Go Out of Themselves
at such a time, and every of their self-concernments into a self-denying frame
of Spirit, else will they neither follow Christ, Mat. 16. 24. nor yet Prepare
to Meet him. Amos 4. 12. They must go out of sinful self, else will they not
say to their Defilements, Get you hence, Isa. 30. 22. They must go out of
Worldly self, else will they not leave their Babylonish Accommodations, or
self-securing Privacy in times of Danger. Yea, they must go out of Spiritual
self in some Respects, else will it irk them to leave their Old Heavens, and to
count all things loss for that which is more Excellent, Phil. 3. 8. Such must
not then talk of Ceiled Houses, Hag. 1. 4. nor yet receive Honor o^e of
another, John 5. 44. nor value Man's Judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. nor Judge of Things
or Persons, according to Appearance, John 7. 24. nor yet call ought a
Privilege, save as it is of Christ's Appointment, and no way interfering with
our Duty.

Quest. 7. Why will Christ have the Virgins thus to Meet him, by Going Out?
Answ. 1. That so they might be Thoroughly thus Awakened, which is one Branch of
Going Out, and by their Going is Effected: Since, if the Sleeper's Rising and
standing up does tend to his Awakening, Ephesians. 5. 14. Isa. 51. 17. much more his
Going also, in this Moral sense, as in the Letter, Mat. 26. 45, 46. By which
awakening here, is meant the Actuating of that Light and Grace which formerly
had been asleep; and which their Walking does Accomplish. The Powerful
Repetition of former Duties must needs awaken more and more, especially when
there are fresh Additions of a Rouzing Nature, such as this Second Going Out
affords. He that Walks out at Midnight, w^^ ^ub his Eyes, especially when
going in untrodden paths, and lying open unto utmost Danger. He also must needs
be Thoroughly wakened, whose way is up-hill, and full of stumbling stones; such
as that eminently is (if rightly Walked in,) which leads out of these Old
Heavens, and Lower Good seize.

2. That so his Coming Now might herein (as in other things) Resemble his
Personal Coming at the last; when those Alive shall be caught up into the Air
to Meet him, 1 These. 4. 17. and in the Clouds, together with those Newly Raised
from the sleep of Death, v. 16. being strangely Changed, 1 Cor. 15. 52. There
must be a Meeting Now, as will be Then: which Meeting is Now at Midnight, as it
will Then be in Clouds and Darkness: Sleepers will Then awake, so will they
Now, some unto shame, and some to Everlasting Life, Dan. 12. 2. Christ will
Then Come in Person, and with the Last Trump of All, 1 Cor. 15. 52. as Now in
his Returning Witnesses, and with the Last Trump of Seven, Rev. 11. 15. There
must be Now a Going Out of Lower things, as will be Then a being caught up into
the Air, out of what is Designed to the Flames, and into an Higher, Clearer,
Purer State, and more immediate Communion with the Lord, till these Old Heavens
and Earth be done away.

3. That so his Coming might be with greater State, which ever was, and will be
Glorious, from first, John 1. 14. to last, Titus 2. 13. and which is partly
thus evinced. Eglon put Honor upon Ehud's Message from the Lord, when he
aros^, in Order to his Receiving of it, Judge. 3. 20. And on the same Account,
those Stately Pharisees demanded the Blind Man's Repetition of what he had said
before, John 9. 26. Christ also had Honor put upon him, when Peter (at his
word) did Reassume that Work which had been laid aside through former
Disappointments, Luke 5. 5. Yea, bare Going out to Meet another, does Evidence
Respect and Longing to behold him; both which are Signs of Honor. Especially
when such Go out, not only from Satan and the Man of Sin, but also from
dearest self-concernments, both Natural and Spiritual; or when that is
Accounted Loss for Christ, which formerly has been Accounted Gain, Phil. 3. 7.
such as our Outward Interest is, much more some Higher Privileges.

4. That so his Harbinger might not outshine himself, in that Regard. The
People went Out of Old Jerusalem into the Wilderness to Meet John Baptist, Mat.
3. 3. 5. So did these Virgins at their first going out, supposing John to have
been Christ himself, John 1. 25. Yea, Israel went out of some Accommodations,
when they went out of Egypt, Numb. 11. 5. who yet fell short of Canaan, Numb.
14. 29, 30. Now, shall the Servant be above his Lord? Or shall the Morning Star
seem brighter than the Sun? Shall we Go Out to see a shaken Reed, Mat. 11. 7.
and not much more to Meet this Rock of Ages, who never failed, Isa. 42. 4?
Shall we go out of Egypt to Moun, Sinai, and not from thence to Sion, the City
of the Living God, there Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22? Thus we are apt to
prefer Inferious Governors before this King, Mal. 1. 8. 14. but he now
stands upon his terms, and will count those unworthy of him, who Love ought
More than him, Mat. 10. 37. who leave not All when he Calls for their going out
to Meet him.

5. To save them from that Harm which those lie open unto who keep within at
such a time, in Competition with this Going out. Sleep in a Moral sense is
always Dangerous, and much more Now, Mark 13. 36. therefore he would awaken them
by Going Out. And their first going out, would only Aggravate their Present
sitting still, Gal. 5. 7. therefore he puts them upon this Necessary
Repetition. The Death of Hope betrayeth into slumbring; therefore he would
Revive their former Expectation of Meeting with him, upon their going out this
Second time. They who Despise him, will lightly be esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
therefore he Calls for their Respect, by Going out to Meet him. He that is
Wicked at that time may justly then be given up, Dan. 12. 10. and as it was
ever Dangerous to keep in Babylon's sins, so (at some such a time) in Old
Jerusalem's state, Jer. 21. 9. Yea, Babes may then not be Admitted into the
Temple Opened, much less self-loving Privateers. Therefore Christ Calls for
Going out to mee^ him in every of those regards.

6. That so he might consult for their being Crowned at his Coming (and in a
way of seeming Righteousness) because of their being the^ found Working, who
formerly had been asleep. Satan Rocks me^ asleep; Christ bids them Watch: and
he that sets on Work will Pay the Workman's Wages, as such are Actually
employed, just at the time of Payment. The Bridegroom's Favors will be very
Rich; bu^ none shall Wear them, because of former Service, save as they No^ go
out afresh, and thereby evidence their Love of his Appearing, who^ then the
Righteous Judge will Crown therewith, 2 Timothy 14. 8. Therefore this Isaac Calls
for Going out, Genesis 27. 3. and not so much from Love of what is brought, as
that his Soul might Bless the Bringer, v. 4* And Jacob's timely Kid, v. 9. will
be more Acceptable and Effectu^^ v. 27. than Esau's Venison Afterward, v. 30.
33. though sauced with Tears, v. 34. This will clear up the Righteousness of
his Rewarding Wiser Virgins, and Waving others, who do not then go out ^
heretofore.

7. To Interest Obedient Virgins in the Benefit of their very Goi^^ out to Meet
him, whose Labor and want of sleep will be sufficient^^ Requited by their very
Walking. How cheerful is an Active Spir^^ when rouzed up, whom sleep or sitting
still makes dull and sad! A^ if one single Act of Duty does Refresh, much more
will Repetitions ^^ that Nature Cheer a Gracious Heart. It also eases a
Spouses Heart^ if her being sick of Love may any way be evidenced, or made
know^ to her Beloved, Cant. 5. 8. which Going out to Meet him does evince^ Yea,
One's very going out to Meet him as he Comes, is to be caugh^ up from Earth
into the Air, or part of One's way to Heaven. There can be no Peace in sin; nor
Singing, till out of Babylon, nor grounde^ Satisfaction in sinful Privacy; nor
in Christ's Temple, if he be Absent; nor in a Childish Spiritual state,
Compared with the fullness of that Joy* which does Accompany one's being Called
out from thence into a nearer Union and Communion with the Bridegroom, by going
out to meet him.

8. To Work them for that Thing, 2 Cor. 5. 5. or make them Meet to be Partakers
of that Inheritance, Col. 1. 12. which he has then to give. Then every Eye
shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. therefore they must be wakened. Their Privileges
will be then Restored; therefore their Duty also must be Repeated, and Hope
Revived. That Heavenly Kingdom will not be Inherited by Flesh and Blood, 1 Cor.
15. 50. therefore they must be Changed, v. 52. by Going out. They will be then
Clothed with Change of Raiment, but therefore their filthy Garments will first
be taken away, Zech. 3. 4. Then Babylon will be no more, Rev. 18. 21. to their
Rejoicing, v. 20. who are come Out from thence, v. 4. They will be then
Confessed by him, Mat. 10. 32. therefore they must not be Deniers of him by
sinful Privacy. They must be emptied of other things to make room for what is
more Excellent. And if they were not got above what is combustible, they would
not so Glorify God in the Fires as they shall then do, and Sing because of his
dreadful Majesty, Isa. 24. 15.

9. Because he Longs to see them (and their Graces) with the first: therefore
he comes to meet with them, and puts them upon Going out to meet with him. He
does long bear in mind the Kindness of on's Youth, Jer. 2. 2. because such are
the first Ripe in the Fig Tree, at her first time, Hos. 9. 10. especially when
little Children (in their Bravery) go out at Midnight to Meet their Father, who
has been long Absent from them. He fain would hear his Spouses Voice, and see
her Comely Countenance, Cant. 2. 14. therefore he bids her Rise and come away,
v. 10. affectionately protesting unto Joshua, Zech. 3. 6. when lately come out
of Babylon, v. 2. and Gloriously Attired, v. 4. what he will then do for him,
if Persevering in those ways, v. 7. Now, their Going out to Meet the
Bridegroom, does give him both to see them sooner, and in the Glory of that
Beautifying self-denial, which otherwise had not been seen if they had kept
Within.

10. That so he might thus Try the Measure of their Strength, and Nature of
their Oil, in Order unto a plain Distinguishing between the Wise and Foolish
Virgins, who hitherto were in Appearance all alike. They all went out at first,
with Lamps and Vessels, wherein the Special Oil was yet an hidden thing. And
while the Bridegroom tarried they did all of them sleep and slumber; so that no
visible Difference yet ap-appeared. Yea, when the Cry is made, they All Arose
and Trimmed their Lamps; nor do they seem to Differ, until their Going out
this Second time, and then they Part. This Second Transplantation will
thoroughly Try the Nature of that Root, whose Leaves (yea, and some kind of
Fruit) were formerly as fair as any other. This Casting of the Corn will fully
sever it from Lighter Seed as well as Chaff; and therefore Christ takes this
Course to make that Precious, wherewith he then will sow the Earth afresh.

Use 1. Although the Bridegroom tarrieth beyond the Virgins Expectation, yet at
the last it will be truly said by some, Behold, be Comes. The Truth of a
Promise may not be therefore called in Question simply because it is Prolonged,
and Mis-timed by the Generality of Professors. Christ has thus wisely Ordered
it, to stumble some, to Humble the most Knowing Men; and to Try all, whether
their Faith be grounded on his Word, or on their own and others Apprehensions.
But yet the Vision will not Lie, which does Oblige ou^ waiting for it, because
it will come surely and not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. Nor may a former Expectation have
been a mere Delusion, save as John Baptist has been thought (by his Disciples)
to be the Bridegroom, who only was the Bridegroom's Friend or Harbinger, John
3. 26. 28, 29. However, let God be True, though every Man should prove a Liar,
at least in part mistaken, as being the Fruit of Darkness and Over-hastiness.

2. That Dispensation of the Bridegroom's Coming is very Notable, or much to be
Observed, as does appear from Christ's prefixing that Word [Behold] unto his
Signification of its Near approach. And if that Night was much to be Observed,
in which God brought his People out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 42. much more this Day,
in which the Lord our Righteousness will lead the Seed of Israel out of the
North to their own Land, Jer. 23. 6, 7, 8. That was their first Redemption;
this will be the same a Second Time, Isa. 11. 11. Now, as Relapses are most
Dangerous, so Restaurations are most Remarkable. That was attended with
following Checks and fore Temptations in the Wilderness, but this will put the
Gentile-Saints in full possession of their own Land, until the Jews
Conversion. That only was Afflicting to Egyptian Dragons, and not to any of
the Israelites; but this will sadly fall upon the Goats, or slothful Servants,
and Foolish Virgins; which therefore is much more to be Observed by all sorts
of Persons.

3. When all the Virgins have done looking for the Bridegroom, then is the
surest ground for our concluding his Near Approach, for then does Christ
himself affirm it, which formerly had only been presumed. Therefore he
tarrieth until some kind of false Alarm has made the Generality to be Secure;
and then, Behold, he comes indeed. What cause have all to stand continually
upon their Watch, unless they mean to be surprised by him, whose very Coming is
not known, save that it will be at the most unlikely time. How weak are they
who therefore think the Time is not so nigh at hand, because the present
Expectation of it is not so General as heretofore it may have been. This does
bespeak our Harkening to that Cry, which gives Notice of the Bridegroom's
Coming when all the Virgins are fast asleep, at leastwise not to count it
therefore of no weight, since at some such a time the truest signification that
yet ever was, will then be made.

4. Christ here does give some further Notice of his present Coming besides
that of his Harbinger, which seems to be more than was at his first Coming in
the Flesh, and which is worth our taking Notice of. He came not then to Judge
the World, John 12. 47. as now he does, Rev. 11. 18. And shall a Judge show
more of Gentleness (as this Redundant warning hinteth) than did a Savior? But
though he now will Execute the Judges Office, yet does he enter on it with a
Saviors Heart: And therefore he doubly warns Now, because his present Work
will be more Dreadful. How loath is Christ that any at this day should Perish, 2
Pet. 3. 9.! How are we more engaged to him than were the Pharisees, who only
had John Baptist's Cry: And if the Despisers of that single Invitation were
then shut out for ever, Luke 14. 24. how can those Foolish Virgins hope to
enter, who have out-stood a Second Notice. Therefore this Cry had need be
heeded, which else will doubly call for Wrath and Vengeance upon its Disobeyers.

5. This Cry is made at Midnight, or when the Virgins are asleep: which further
shows the Riches of his Grace, who waits for the fittest Time wherein to make
its freeness Evident, especially since they had been Aakened once before, or
when they first went out of Babylon, as is evinced from their Dreaming then,
Psalm. 126. 1. Indeed Christ bad Relapsing Slumberers to sleep on now, and take
their Rest, to show what they Deserved: But yet (to evidence the Riches of his
Love) he also bad them to Arise, Mat. 26. 43. 45, 46. as here he deals with
these Virgins Lest Men should boast of Congruous worth, with reference unto the
Grace of God in Christ, it therefore is bestowed on them, when in the height of
Incongruity or unworthiness to receive it. Thus did Christ Personate a
Macedonian, entreating Paul to come and help them, Acts 16. 9, 10. Yea, thus
unloveliness is his Time of Love, Ezekiel. 16. 6. 8. who then is moved to Heal,
when nothing but Discouragements are to be seen, Isa. 57. 17, 17. The Voice of
that Cry had need be hearkened unto, which otherwise does so abound with
sin-accenting and sorrow-heightning Grace.

6. How sadly are they Mistaken who think a going Once out will serve the turn,
which is that great Soul-ruining Mis-apprehension among the Virgins or
Professors. The World lies still in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and does not stir
at all: But Virgins are such as have gone out at first, and then they Rest, who
Generally perish in that state. When Israel first went out of Egypt they went
out All together, Exodus 12. 41. whose Carcasses yet Generally fell in the
Wilderness, Numb. 14. 29. because they were not also free to go out Thence into
Land of Canaan, when called thereunto by those of another Spirit, v. 24. 30.
Thus also All the Jews went out of Nature into Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2. but not
from Thence into the Righteousness of God in Christ, Romans 10. 3, 4. (which is
Revealed from Faith in Moses to Faith in Christ, Romans 1. 17.) and therefore
they were not saved, Romans 10. 1. And thus one may have (virtually) forgotten
that he was purged from his Old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 9. who having escaped grosser
Lusts, is not a Partaker also of that Divine Nature, v. 4. whose first
appearance is Gospel-Faith, v. 5. All are partakers of the Earthy Adam's Image,
but they must bear the Image of the Heavenly also, 1 Cor. 15. 49. or not
Inherit his Heavenly Kingdom, v. 50. nor yet be saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. save as they
are God's Workman-ship Created in Christ Jesus, v. 10. Let us therefore (at the
first) Go out of Ignorance into Knowledge; and then (a Second time) Out of the
Form of Knowledge into Practice, Romans 2. 20, 21. Let us (at first) Go out of
Disobedience into Duty; and then (a Second time) out of Material Legal Duty, or
the Letter, into the Newness of its Spirituality, Romans 7. 6. Let us (a^ first)
Go out of Superstition into Godliness or Right Worship; and then (a Second
time) out of the Accidental Form of this Right Worship, or Notional Profession
of it into its Life and Power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Thus in the General.

And as to such a Particular Duty and Time, peculiarly referred unto in this
Parable; those are much mistaken, who think a former going out will serve
Christ's turn at Present. He speaks Now, with reference unto the Virgins
Present state, which intimates his Expectation of their Progress beyond or out
of those seize, which in their Time and Place were not to be Despised. He
is for Adding unto his Peoples Privileges, John 10. 10. who therefore may
expect the like from them in point of Duty, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Nor do such properly
walk in any of his ways (as all the Saints are said to do, Psalm. 119. 3.) who
only take one step therein, and so desist. However, such as do only Go from
the Pharisees unto John the Baptist, and not from John to Christ, will be
Inferior unto the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 11. 11. if not in
danger of Reverting unto the Pharisees again. Therefore if we have formerly
gone out of Babylon or Old Jerusalem which Then was, we Now must Write that
Copy over a Second time, with reference unto what is Now in Being, above what
formerly has been departed from.

And that we may thus fully follow God, in Answer to this Cry, these following
Motives will be of Use.

Mot. 1. The Call is clear to each of these forenamed steps at such a Time.
The most of which were Duties from the first; but Now, by way of Eminency. Sin
was Defiling always, but Now Jerusalem will be searched with Candles, Zeph. 1.
12. Woe therefore to the Filthy and Polluted then, Zeph. 3. 1. It ever was
unlawful to Comply with Spiritual Babylon, Dan. 1. 8. and 3. 12. but now some
further self-delivery is enjoined, Zech. 2. 7. which formerly was not ^ Duty,
Jer. 29. 4, 5, 6, 7. Christ never warranted the Privacy of Solemn Worship; but
now the Re-assuming of surceased Temple-work is urged from the Lord himself,
and by his Messenger in his Message to the People, to show the clearness of
their Call unto it, Hag. 1. 12, 13. At such a time the Ancient Priests must be
New Consecrated, and the Old Altar purged before God will Accept their
Offerings upon that Altar, Ezekiel. 43. 26, 27. And Spiritual Growth is Eminently
Now expected, the want whereof will sadly signify, since as the House of David
will Then be as an Angel, so will the Feeble be as David in that day, Zech. 12.
8.

2. The Way is safe, and more especially at such a Time. He Walks Surely who
walks Uprightly, Prove. 10. 9. Since Angels are charged with him in all such
ways, Psalm. 91. 11. and a clear Call to Duty, turns Night, (yea, Midnight) into
Day, or seeming Danger into Security, Isa. 11. 8, 9, 10. However, the greatest
Suffering is that of Sin, Hos. 4. 14. All outward Tribulations are nothing to
inward Peace, John 16. 33. God's Loving Kindness is better than Life it self,
Psalm. 63. 3. The Soul is of more worth than all the World, Ma. 16. 26. and
present light Afflictions (in the way of Duty) are most at Work, as to the
Crown of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Yea, at This Time the Holiest ones are likeliest
to be hid from outward Dangers, Zeph. 2. 3. God will be for a Sanctuary unto
self-hazarding Non-consederates, Isa. 8. 12. 14. The Timely returners to
Temple-work shall have no cause to fear, Hag. 2. 5. And he that goes out of
Old Jerusalem (both City and Temple) at such a time, may thereby save his Life,
Jer. 21. 9.

3. The Walk is Recreating. Sin makes the Soul to Cry, Who shall Deliver me,
Romans 7. 24. and to thank God, through Jesus Christ, so far as it is Obtained,
v. 25 And who would not be glad to lose his filthy Rags for Change of Raiment?
What merry singing is there in the ways of God, Psalm. 138. 5. as his Redeemed
come to Sion, Isa. 51. 11. from out of Melancholic Babylon, Psalm. 137. 1, 2,
4. The Open Field is far more sweet and chearing than to be self-shut up in
sinful Privacy; yea, suffering in such a way does yield the Matter of
Rejoicing, Acts 5. 41, 42. Christ Spouses also are sometimes more Delighted in
the Fields and Villages than in Jerusalem, or any of its Gardens; especially
when likely (there) to have more sweet Communion with their Beloved, Cant. 7.
11, 12. And what a Recreating toil it is to mount with Singing to the Height of
Sion's Hill, Jer. 31. 12. from whence a Breathed Traveller may see the more of
Heaven, and all these Earthly Lower things beneath him.

4. Thus shall we sooner see the Bridegroom by Going out to Meet him, than if
we stay behind. Follow Holiness, without which no Man shall see God, Hob. 12.
14. as shall the Pure in Heart, Mat. 5. 8. for unto such Christ Promises the
Manifestation of himself, John 14. 21. Nor is he to be seen in Babylon, save by
some Extraordinary way of Revelation, Dan. 10. 1. but they shall see Eye to
Eye, whom God shall bring again from thence to Sion, Isa. 52. 8. Then also was
the Spirit poured out, Acts 2. 4. when those were all with one accord met in
One place, v. 1. where all might come, v. 6. and therefore the Doors were not
then shut for Fear, as formerly they were at Evening, John 20. 19. or when at
Supper, Mark 16. 14. And at this time a Spouse may seek Christ long enough, in
Bed, or in his Ancient Temple, and yet not find him, Cant. 3. 1. nor in the
City or Old Jerusalem, v. 2. nor till she has passed from the Watchmen, v. 3,
4. And since Christ comes from Heaven, 1 These. 4. 16. the Higher that we go,
the sooner we shall see him, v. 17.

5. Such only will go with Christ unto the Marriage, who thus Go out to meet
him, because none else will then be ready, before the Door is shut, Mat. 25.
10. He who then has not his Clean or Wedding Garment on, will only have that
silencing check, How came thou hither, Mat. 22. 12? therefore go out of
sinful Defilements. This Marriage Feast and Babylon's Funerals will
contemporize, Rev. 19. 2. 9. 17, 18. therefore Go out of Babylon, for fear of
being not then alive. Christ then will be ashamed of Them, Mat. 10. 33. who
formerly have been ashamed of him, or have denied him, by letting fall their
Open Testimony, v. 27, 38. therefore go out of sinful Privacy. This same New
Earth and Heavens will be laid upon the Old ones Ruins, Isa. 65. 17. therefore
go out from hence, for fear of perishing in that Rubbish. And if we look for
those, what manner of Persons should we be, 2 Pet. 3. 14. in point of growth,
v. 18. therefore go out of Lower good Seize. In Order whereunto, these
following Helps may be of Use so far as there is yet room for such a Practice.

Help 1. Let not your Oil be then to Buy, which is the undoing of Foolish
Virgins at such a time: Endeavor to be satisfied (with all preventing speed)
as unto what the Cry requires; and please not your selves with pleading Now,
that you want Light, and therefore cannot Go. Trust not to Trimmed Lamps, (or
some Revived good Affections;) but get Oil into your Vessels also, or in a
Spiritually enlightened Judgment; else woe be to the Virgins also as well as
others. The first Adam's Legs are good at Hand, but not at length; or will not
bear Men fully out this Second time. The Pharisees could go as far as John,
Mat. 3. 7. but not to Christ himself, from want of Light, John 9. 29. Some may
Cry up the Light and Strength of Nature as they please, but nothing short of
Gospel Grace will make Men Run and not be Weary, or not to saint with Walking,
Isa. 40. 31. when Youths will fail, v. 30.

2. Let us be Searching what manner of Time the Spirit of Christ here
signifies; as did the Ancient Prophets, with reference to his first Coming, 1
Pet. 1. 11. unless we think the Time is come, we shall have no more mind to
Walk (at such a Midnight) than had those Jews to Build, Hag. 1. 2. Some may
suppose the Virgins first going out was in the Days of Constantine, and that
the Bridegroom's Coming here will not be till the Jews Conversion, at Christ's
Personal Coming, or John's New Jerusalem. But they who first went out, and
after fell asleep, are they who are bid Now go out again: therefore the First
and Second going out cannot be so many hundred Years asunder, as from the Time
of Constantine until Christ's Second Coming. The Jews must also be Converted
before Christ's Personal Coming, or else that sudden Change then, 1 Cor. 15.
51, 52. would leave no room for Mourning, Zech. 12. 10. or Building Houses,
Isa. 65. 21. which Jews will also not be Converted, until the sixth Viol be
poured out, Rev. 16. 12. before which time the Temporal Kingdom will be
Restored, Rev. 11. 15. therefore the Bridegroom will first come unto the
Gentiles, who will prepare the others way by drying up Euphrates, Rev. 16. 12.
or casting out the four Monarchs, Zech. 1. 21.

3. Labor to be Awakened Thoroughly, which is the first step in going out, and
makes way for all the rest. Christ does design their being thus Awakened, by
Calling for their Going out; and he would have them to Awake, in Order to their
going on, as being both the first Beginner, and Means of Perfecting that Work
begun. One May sit still who is Awake, but Must sit still, if fast asleep: who,
till awakened Thoroughly, will go but somewhat Odly and Unsteadily. And as Men
would awake, so they must unfold their Hands, Prove. 16. 10. and Open their
Eyes, Prove. 20. 13. and draw the Curtain, or give way unto the Light, Ephesians. 5.
14. Such also may not be Offended with a Friendly Touch, Mat. 17. 7. nor with
some Louder Noise, or gentle Nip, if need requires, Mat. 26. 40. Such also
must Arise, as do these Virgins, and not lie still in such a Tempting Posture.
Yea, they must Rub their Eyes, and shake themselves, Judge. 16. 20. or Offer
some Holy Violence unto their sluggish Frame: Nay, they must also be at Work,
or fall upon the Trimming of their Lamps, and entering ^^ their going out, else
will they sleep again, Mat. 26. 46.

4. Gird up your Loins (or Go with a good Courage, Jer. 1. 17.) and let your
Lamps be Burning, Luke 12. 35. or your Affections flaming; so will you Open to
Christ's Knock, v. 36. or Answer to hi^ Cry. He that abhors not Evil, will be
devising Mischief on his Bed, and never set himself in a way, save that which
is not good, Psalm. 36. 4. Go out of the midst of Babylon, Delivering every Man
his Soul from God's fierce Anger, in this day of her Destruction, Jer. 51. 45.
And though a Lion may be abroad, yet (to prevent our sinful Privacy) let us
Remember, the far worse Biting Serpent is within at such a Day, Amos 5. 18, 19.
Plead with your Mother, Plead; who Now is no^ the Wife of Christ, as formerly
she may have been, Hos. 2. 2. An^ stand not Mincing of the Matter, as you would
not deprive your selves of Mercy, v. 4. And he that does not Grow or Multiply
his present Talent, will have it taken from him at Christ's Coming, Mat. 25. 28.

5. Expect to lose your Company, at least, one Half, or All the Foolish Virgins
at this Second Going out. Noah was very singular i^ point of Righteousness,
Genesis 7. 1. or Going out of sinful Defilements* wherein the Generality Perished.
At Babylon shall fall the slain of all the Earth, Jer. 51. 49. excepting some
few, who then will Go away, v. 50. Haggai and Zechariah were the only Two
remaining Witnesses for Temple-work in their Day, Ezra 5. 1. And Jeremiah was
much alone in stirring up others to Go out of Old Jerusalem into Babylon or
Confusion. And when the Harvest (or time of Cutting down) is come, the Corn is
Generally Dead at the Root, or has done Growing, save here and there a single
Ear. Few Trees can bear a Transplantation, few seek the things of Jesus Christ,
few will endure to Walk in this Narrow way, few persevere unto the End; and who
shall Live when God does this? Therefore he now that stays for Company, will be
shut out with his Companions.

MATTHEW XXV. 7. Then all those Virgins Arose and Trimmed their Lamps.
IN this Verse we have an Account of that which followed upon the forenamed
Cry, viz. All the Virgins Arising thereupon, and Trimming their Respective
Lamps. By which word [All] we are not Necessarily to Understand each Individual
Virgin before mentioned; several of which might Now be Dead, both in a Natural
and Mystical sense: but only All, who Now Remained, and had not lost their
Appellation by some more gross and late Pollution since their first Going out.

From whence the Observation is as follows.

Observe. Upon the forenamed Cry, All the Remaining Virgins (both Wise and
Foolish) are made to Rise and Trim their Lamps.

Quest. 1. What is the Meaning of that word, Arose?
Answ. 1. Their Rising (upon this Account) does intimate Their being made to
Hear that Cry, in Answer unto which they do Arise. This signifies the Cry to
have been very Loud, else would it not have been Heard by so many Persons fast
asleep. Now, have they not heard? Yes verily, Romans 10. 18. although they have
not all Obeyed, v. 16. for who has so Believed our Report? That Everlasting
Gospel, Rev. 14. 6, 7. does seem to have been Preached before these Virgins
fell asleep, as also, that Double Notification of Babylon's fall, v. 8. the
first whereof was then Accomplished: Between which First and Second Fall there
is a Warning given, v. 9. which seems to be the Cry here made, and also to
have been made already. All sorts of Complyers with the Beast, and with his
Mark (in Foreheads or in Hands, that is to say, with reference to more Apert
Commands or Covert Prohibitions) have been forewarned, and they have Heard it.

2. Arising intimates their being Now in a Capacity of Speaking, Hearing,
Seeing, Weighing, and Going out, if they had pleased, more than before, while
fast asleep. And have they not already been in that Capacity? Could they not
have Discoursed what was Offered, and heard Replies, and see what he that Runs
might Read, Hab. 2. 2? Could they not have Considered what formerly they had
not heard, Isa. 52. 15. before it was Condemned, John 7. 51? Yea, could they
not have walked out, as unto any visible Rub, save what was of their own
Creating? It Is true indeed, Man can do nothing of himself, Acts 17. 28. at
leastwise not in Spiritual Cases, 2 Cor. 3. 5. but Men forbear not upon that
Account; and Common Influences might suffice as to the Matter (or more External
Part) of such a work. And in that Case Affected Ignorance is not Invincible,
nor will Pretended inability Excuse, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. when Blind and Maimed
ones shall be brought in, v. 21.

3. Arising (hereupon) does intimate their Understanding and Approving (in part
at least) what is Declared and Required by the Cry. One may be thoroughly
wakened by that which vexes, who then endeavors to sleep again: But being
told, the Bridegroom Comes, and being bid Go out to meet him, he will not
Rise, who does not competently understand the Notice, and like the Motion. And
has not this also been to be seen of late among the Virgins? Have not their
Swooning Expectations been Revived, as Tabitha, so as to sit up a little, Acts
9. 40? Have not some Heard, that Christ (in his Witnesses) is both Alive and
Risen, Luke 24. 23? Yea, have not some of Themselves been Plausibly convinced,
because his Dead Body was not to be seen, although they saw him not Alive, v.
24? Yea, have they not Approved in their Hearts and Consciences, at least, some
part of what the Cry requires? Which further proves its having been already
made; though with submission.

4. Arising intimates the Sleepers Moving out of his former Place and Posture.
Some Men can slumber as they stand, but yet not sleep, till either Laid, or
sitting in some convenient place; both which are inconsistent with Arising. And
has not such a variation been Apparent? I mean, some kind of Rising up (with
Arms unfolded) from easier Seats and self-indulging Postures? Some have been
strengthened, as Jacob was, to Rise and Sit, though only upon the same Bed
still, upon the Hearing of Joseph's Coming, Genesis 48. 1, 2. and his not being
able to leave his Bed, was from his present Weakness, and Near approaching
Death, Genesis 49. 33. Others have also Risen out of their Seat, as Eglon did,
upon his Hearing of a Message from the Lord, Judge. 3. 20. who yet then
Perished, v. 21. because of his former evil Practices. But some have also left
their Bed and Walked, as did that Damsel, upon Christ's speaking to her, Mark
5. 41, 42. who formerly had been asleep, v. 39.

5. Arising upon the Cry, does intimate their getting in a readiness for some
further Action, as Josh. 8. 3. Mat. 8. 15. and as is evident from the joining
of their Rising, with the Trimming of their Lamps: Which leads to the next
Enquiry.

Quest. 2. What seems to be meant by the Trimming of their Lamps?
Answ. 1. Trimming of Lamps does intimate (by Necessary consequence) the taking
Notice of their present state, in point o^ Oil or Light, which could not but be
then perceived, and as the Issue evidenced. While Men are fast asleep, (yea,
till they Rise and are at work) they know not clearly what they Have or Want,
which should encourage us to be upon our constant Watch, as we would know our
Happiness or Misery. Sleep does Benight the Understanding, and only fills the
Head with Solacing or Frighting Dreams, for which there is no Real cause, as
upon wakening does appear. And have not the slumbring Virgins been thus
undeceived upon the fresh stirring of their Affections, Typified by these
Lamps? Some have been only Frighted into the Exercise of their Remaining
strength, as Sampson was, upon his first Awakening, by a Cry, Judge. 16. 9. But
others have found, that shaking of themselves could do no good, no more than it
did him at last, Judge. 16. 20, 21.

2. Trimming of Lamps does intimate their being Cleansed from that soil, which
formerly has been Contracted by length of Time, or falling snuffs, or burning
too near the bottom. Lamps will contract Pollution merely through
discontinuance of constant Dressing: And so will good Affections, when not
constantly looked after, 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. 9. 18. Much more will un-removed
snuffs defile; or that more Gross and Earthy part, which does Attend our best
Affections; Especially when Lamps are suffered to burn too Low, or when our
very Light is Carnal, which does discolor our Affections, and threatens the
Extinguishing of our Light or Judgment, Romans 1. 21. And have not the Virgins
Lamps been All thus Trimmed? Whilst they were slumbring, their former good
Affections were much Eclipsed from want of Daily Rubbing, from their being
only Snuffed or Reproved by their own Backslidings, and from the Degenerating
of their Wisdom into Carnal Policy, which since has been Amended.

3. Trimming the Lamps does intimate their being also newly Tipped, or Beautified
with some fresh Adorning; the former being now decayed with Age and filth, and
partly, by a present scouring. And have not the Virgins Lamps or good
Affections been lately thus Adorned? Some could not be at Rest until they had
put on again that Coat of Zeal for Christ, which formerly they had put off;
till they had turned unto him, from whom they with the Generality had Revolted,
in Answer to that Call, Isa. 31. 6. Yea, others also have endeavored to set a
fair Gloss or Face upon their fading Lamps, or Dying good Affections, by
wishing that it had been otherwise, and witnessing unto the betterness of
others Practices. Thus have these sought to Paint their Faces, whereas the
former have Recovered their Native Luster; though both are in Appearance very
Trim to what they sometimes were, themselves and others being Judges.

4. Trimming the Lamps does intimate their making show, of getting fit to
March, or to Go out and Meet the Bridegroom; which partly their Arising
promised, much more this Super-added Preparation. And has not such a show been
made? Yea, have not some begun to March? Whom others also have Accompanied, so
far as Oil or Light has lasted. Some have Reformed many Moral Evils of a
Common Nature. Some have Repented of more gross Compliances with Spiritual
Babylon. Some are more Open (yet) in their Religious Worship, but are not free
to Promise it for the Future, nor yet to Confess a former failing. But most are
stumbled at Going out of this Old Earth and Heavens, or Lower good Seize,
desiring first to Bury their Aged Parents, Mat. 8. 21. or Friendly to Part with
them, at least, Luke 9. 61. and to fetch something out of their Old House, at
least their Clothes, Mat. 24. 17, 18. not being able to go out of Lower things.

Quest. 3. How comes this Cry to be so Generally Rouzing?
Answ. 1. Because it is so very Loud; in which Case Baal must needs have heard
if he had only been asleep, 1 Kings 18. 27, 28. as God did Rabshakeh, Isa. 37.
23. The Lord has lately Cried aloud, both by his Providence, and by some
Public Testimonies. How did the late Plague Alarm all our Virgins, among whom
it Raged most Remarkably? Yea, how were Harlots Frighted with the Fire, and
much more others? The Meaning whereof has been made out unto some Men of
Wisdom, Mic. 6. 9. and partly, unto some Foolish Virgins also. And does it not
conclude them Dead, who are not yet at all awakened? Nor will continuing
Sleepers be Excused, by their pretending Not to have Heard; since all Men shall
be Judged by that Law which has been once Proclaimed, though not particularly
sent to every one who should have Enquired after it, which yet has been so
loud, as Generally to Raise the slumbring Virgins.

2. Because it is undoubtedly Divine, the Hearing whereof made wicked Eglon to
arise, Judge. 3. 20. and those to be Obedient, who had surceased Temple-work
through Slavish Fear, when once they understood the Lord's own Voice and
Message by the Prophet, whom God himself had sent as his own Messenger, Hag. 1.
12, 13. The Voice of God can break the Cedars, or stout-hearted ones, Psalm. 29.
5. Yea, it can make the Hinds to Calve, v. 9. or Fearful Creatures (such as
Hinds are, Cant. 2. 7.) to bring forth, although with much Pain, as does that
Creature, Job 39. 3. The word of Man may be (and in some Cases should be)
Dis-regarded, Gal. 1. 8. but if it be received as the Word of God, it works
Effectually in them who do Believe it, 1 These. 2. 13. Now, all the Virgins do
believe this Cry is Christ's; and it is self-evincing, because it is Scriptural;
and then they must be one day Judged by it, who therefore Now cannot but be
awakened.

3. Because this Cry Without is Seconded by Conscience from Within, which
makes room for its Reception. Conscience is in the Soul of Man, as is the Drum
within his Ear, which does receive an Outward sound, and so transmits it to the
Brain, or Understanding, unless that Drum be spoiled, and then no Cry Without
is Understood. Science alone is ineffectual, but Conscience is knowing Together
with, or Co-attesting unto the Truth and Weight of what is Offered by another.
Now, that which is here Notified by the Cry, is readily Ecchoed unto by
awakened Consciences, which do Remember, Christ May be Coming, and then it is a
Duty to Go out and Meet him. And when a Cry without is Answered by a Cry
within, the deepest sleeper must needs awaken, and do something, until the Ear
be Deasned, and Conscience some way satisfied, so as to cease its Bawling Noise.

4. Because the Persons cried unto are Virgins or Professors, and so more easy
to be awakened than others are. These were not Dead, but only fast asleep, who
therefore were more likely to Rouzed up, at leastwise by some Louder Call.
Professors are Described also by their Nearness unto Christ, Ephesians. 2. 17. which
is a great advantage, in point of Hearing, above what others have. The Cry is
also more Particularly Directed to the Virgins here, which promises a suitable
Entertainment, Prove. 22. 19, 20, 21. and in which Case, a Jehu will arise, 2
Kings 9. 5, 6. And though Proud Pharaoh Knew not God, upon his Hearing of a
Message from him, Exodus 5. 1, 2. Yet none of these Virgins are so Atheistical,
as to Reject what seems to be Divine. And though some former Professors may
have made away their Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Yet Virgins (whilst Remaining
such) have something of a Tender Spirit in them, which does Oblige their
Hearkening thereunto.

5. The Wiser Virgins might be concluded light of Hearing, and of an Obedient
Disposition, with whom the Foolish Yet were in Communion; and if but one of a
Company be awakened, he may awaken all the rest. Spouses are never so fast
asleep, but they both Hear and Know the Voice of their Beloved, Cant. 5. 2.
Christ's Sheep are to be known by such an Ear-mark, John 10. 3. who thereupon
do also follow him, v. 4. And Philip being Called, will call Nathanael, John 1.
43. 45. Yea, frighted Mariners will not let Jonah sleep, Jonah 1. 5, 6. if in
their Company. This is the benefit of Fellowship with Real Saints, though
Laboring under strong Temptations; what is it then to be in Communion with the
Watchful? And though no Oil could be afforded by the Wiser Virgins, yet might
the Foolish be thus awakened, who otherwise, perhaps, had not been much
Affected with the Cry, save as some of their own Companions did enliven it by
their Example, which are more Prevalent with some than Precepts.

Quest. 4. Why do the Foolish Virgins (also) Rise and Trim their Lamps, who had
no Oil to lead them further, as had the Wise?
Answ. 1. These being at the present wakened, must needs do something, who
scarcely could do less than Rise and Trim their Lamps. They were awakened by
the Cry, whether they would or no; and to lie still with Open Eyes, or to Rise
up and to be altogether Idle, would only make their Consciences Rage the more,
till it be made to sleep again. Thus are some Hurried in that, which as they
never Thought to have Begun, so neither do they mean to Prosecute it, save till
some fair Occasion be afforded of Quarrelling therewith, and of Returning into
their Former state. This is the Fruit of Injudicious good Affections or Rash
Engagements, whereof Men soon Repent, Mat. 21. 30. and which are easily
desisted from, without much inward real conflict, Ruth 4. 4, 5, 6. Trust not
unto the Force of Natural Conscience, no more than to the hasty springing up of
Seed in Stony Ground, which has no Root, Mat. 13. 5, 6.

2. They possibly might not Yet perceive their want of Oil, until their Lamps
were Trimmed, Laboring still under that Mistake, which made them at the first
to venture out, through sleightiness and self-conceit. They who seek not to
un-deceive themselves in Time, may justly be given up to strong Delusions, that
they shall verily believe a Lie; and they who sleep with Empty Vessels, will
scarcely Dream of ought but Fullness; nor yet awake (in Spiritual Cases) with
any other (Timely) apprehensions. When Souls fall once in Love with Naked good
Affections, they seldom prize a Spiritually enlightened Judgment, until it be
too late to Rectify that Fundamental and Soul-damning-Error. It is with
Spiritual Pride, as with a Tympany, which (being Chronical) is hardly Cured,
especially in Case of a Relapse, or when a Soul has formerly been warned of
it, as all the Virgins or Professors were, when first enlightened.

3. They fain would go as far as might be with the Wiser Virgins, with whom
they first went out, and having slept together, they suitably endeavored to
Arise and Trim their Lamps, in Answer to the Cry, as do the other: Great is the
single Force of Pre-engagement, and as with reference unto sin, Jer. 2. 25. so
with Respect unto some kind of good, John 19. 22. Yea, Jephthah (rather than he
would go back) chose to Deny himself in Sacrificing his only Child, Judge. 11.
35. Pride also is Predominant in Foolish Virgins, who therefore may do more
than otherwise they would have done, because they scorn to come behind their
Fellows. Communion also begets Love; and Love constrained Ruth (who yet had
not a better Principle) to keep her Mother Company, Ruth 1. 15, 16. Yea,
Natural Conscience will Regret, to Part with Ancient Precious Friends, when
barely put upon Repeating their Joint former Practice, until some more than
Ordinary Let does intervene, and till a plausible pretense or color shall be
Offered for such a Parting.

4. They might do This without any Prejudice to Themselves; and in that Case,
some easier work will not be stuck at by a Foolish Virgin. It Is nothing (in
Comparison) for one Awakened to Arise: Nor can the Trimming of One's Lamp (or
stirring of some good Affections) much Disquiet any Man whose Principal
Interest, or Corruption is yet untouched. Thus Satan is content to Gratify the
sinner's bawling or a wakened Conscience, by giving him a Dispensation to Hear,
and Read, and Pray sometimes, until that Crying fit be over. Nor is a Worldly
Interest endangered by what this Trimming of the Lamps imports, no more than
Nicodemus his Coming unto Christ (by Night) did him; since he was yet within
the Compass of that Law, John 9. 22. And though an Harlot will not do thus
much, yet is the most Foolish Virgin Wiser than to distaste a Bosom Friend, by
Grudging that which may be safely granted.

5. They might think (being Foolish) this was All; until the Cry is, as it
were, Expounded by the Wiser Virgins Going further: So prone are Hypocrites to
Magnify their own Performances. Or they might think this would suffice at
least; either to carry them out, as at the first, or to Excuse them, in Case
they did not Go, having thus shown their good Affection by Trimming of their
Lamps.

First, they might think their Trimmed Lamps would be sufficient to carry them
out this Second time, as well as at the First, when they did only take their
Lamps, but no Oil with them; not minding the Difference that Now was, both as
to the Work it self, and also the strength of their Affections. The Work it
self was Then more Easy, and their Affections were more Lively, than at the
Present: But when poor Sampson's Hair was cut, he still was apt to Fancy that
shaking of himself would serve the turn, as heretofore at other times, Judge.
16. 19, 20. This trusting unto fore-Experiences is many times the Ruin of
unsound Professors, who Argue from a former Practice, unto their Future
perseverance, and so betray themselves into the Tempter's hand through their
Presumptuous Confidence. David indeed might safely Argue his following Success
from what he formerly had met with, 1 Samuel 17. 37. because he went in the Name
(or Strength) of God, v. 45. which Hypocrites do not pretend unto; and
therefore, since their Good is not in their Own Hand, Job 21. 16. it is no
wonder if their Lamp or Candle be put out, v. 17.

Secondly, they might (at least) suppose, This would Excuse them, in Case they
went no further; having thus shown their Willing Mind, or good Affections, by
Trimming of their Lamps. Thus some poor Creatures are apt to Fansy, that good
Desires will serve the turn, who therefore plead a Love for Christ, such as
those Virgins had, Cant. 1. 3. who yet were not Espoused to him. These Good
Affections are the Bane of Hypocrites, who think to Borrow upon Practice, by
their Presenting Christ with good Desires; but he will not be Mocked. Only
themselves are fully satisfied, if they have but a liking of Christ's ways, a
Love for Walkers in them; especially if they are Up and Doing, to the Height of
their pretended Light. Indeed Christ sometimes does Accept a Willing Mind, but
that Relates only to Invincible Inability, and not to Foolish Virgins, but
the Wise, 2 Cor. 8. 11, 12. both which are sadly mis-applyed by them to
themselves.

6. This Work is of a self-paying Nature, as well as safe: and Ephraim (that
silly Creature, Hos. 7. 11.) is willing to Tread out the Corn, Hos. 10. 11. or
Work and Eat together, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. so is a Foolish Virgin. The first Going out
was attended with present Pay, wherein the Foolish Virgins therefore Joined; so
is their Second Rising and Trimming of their Lamps, though not their Second
Going forth: And Carnal Jews will follow Christ whilst they are filled with his
Loaves, John 6. 26. who Walked no more with him, v. 66. when nothing but
Spiritual (or invisible) Bread and Flesh is promised to them, v. 51. But Rising
does Refresh the Conscience much, so does the finifying of Affections: Since it
is Natural unto Maids or Virgins to think more on their Ornaments than on their
Rest. Jer. 2. 32. Yea, they would not else be accounted Virgins; the
Preservation of which Name or Title does Plentifully Recompense the Foolish
Virgins present Labor, who therefore are thus at Work.

Use 1. As none were to be counted Virgins Heretofore, save they who at the
first went forth to meet the Bridegroom; so when the Cry is made, none are to
be Accounted Virgins Then, save they who thereupon Arose and Trimmed their
Lamps; since All the Virgins (at such a time) are said to do so. And so long
only does the Warrant of Communion last with such, and of their being Owned as
Professors; who Differed from the Wise at first, as to Reality; but from This
time they cease to have the Name of Virgins given to them, and as that Name is
Common to the Foolish with the Wise, in point of Visibility. This shows the
sadness of their visible State, who are not moved with the Cry, since they have
thereby forfeited the Name of Virgins; in Christ's Account, as having slept the
sleep of Death. Yea, they who are not Parted Now from such as These, will not
themselves be counted Virgins.

Use 2. Here we may see one sad Effect of sleep or slumber, viz. the marring of
our Lamps at least, as their being Trimmed (by awakened ones) evinceth. Now,
Virgins usually are very Neat; therefore this consideration might suffice to
keep such ever waking, as they would not spoil their Trimming. How Glorious was
their first Love, when shining with a Lively Exercise thereof, and Burning with
an Holy Zeal for Christ at their first Going out, together wherewith their
Glory also has been lost. Man's Eye is eminently the Seat of Beauty, which
therefore needs must be Eclipsed, together with the Closing of his Eye with
sleep, which is Death's Image. In point of visibility, Darkness it self is
staining, Job 3. 5. and sleep will Ruffle the finest Ornaments in Reality;
therefore none would be seen in their Night-Habits, nor will they lie down to
slumber, till they have either put off their Bravery, or ceased to be studious
about its Preservation.

Use 3. Hence we may Learn, how far the Wiser and Foolish Virgins may go
together. They All went out at first, they All were overtaken with a slumbring
Spirit; and now they All Awaken, Rise, and Trim their Lamps together. It is a
Mercy to be Awakened, but many are so, to their shame, who either sleep again,
or only Muse and Talk a little, and to less purpose, if that be all. It is
some further Mercy to be Raised up, which yet an Hypocrite may be Interested
in, who may not only Hear Christ's Voice, Luke 13. 26: and be in a Capacity of
doing more, but also may Approve what is more Excellent, Romans 2. 18. Yea,
Foolish Galatians may Begin to Run, Gal. 3. 3. and 5. 7. Nay, such may also
Trim their Lamps, as do these Foolish Virgins; an Empty House may be both Swept
and Garnished, Mat. 13. 44, Such may do many things, Mark 6. 20. and Promise
more, Mat. 21. 30. No Judgment can rightly pass upon Professors, till we shall
see who have Gone out, by their Admission to the Bridegroom's Marriage.

MATTHEW XXV. 8. And the Foolish said unto the Wise, Give us of your Oil, for
our Lamps are Gone, or (as the Margin has it) are Going out.
IN this Verse we have the first visible Difference between these Virgins; and
by the Foolish Virgins own Confession. From whence the Observation is this.

Observe. Upon the Virgins being (All of them) Raised by the Cry at Midnight,
the Foolish do acknowledge their want of Oil or Light, who therefore Call upon
the Wise to give them of their Oil.

Wherein we have presented to us their seeming sense of wanting Oil, their own
Confession of it, and Desire of Supply, together with the Cause of both, viz.
the failing of their Lamps. All which do fairly offer these following Questions
to be considered of.

Quest. 1. What is that sense of wanting Oil, which does here seem to be in
Foolish Virgins, with reference unto themselves?
Answ. 1. It is a sense at Last, but not in Time, viz. not in Due Time. They
should have looked to this at first, but were too Hasty then, having enough to
serve their present turn, and not desiring to have more, till mere Necessity
does enforce it. And thus, when Flesh and Body are consumed, a Foolish Man may
mourn at Last, and be convinced of his wanting Wisdom, Prove. 5, 11, 12. Thus
did the light of Hell's Fire (at Last) make Dives see his want of Care, which
he himsellf Despaired to Redeem, only would have his Brethren to be warned by
him, Luke 16. 27, 28. Yea, thus poor Living Esau did perceive at Last, how
Foolishly his Birthright had been Sold by him, when it was now too late to
gain the Blessing, Heb. 12. 16, 17. It Is not the depth of Sense, save as it
also is in Time, which can Advantage late enlightened ones, or make it out, that
such Impressions are any other, but what a Natural Man may have and perish
with. Untimely self-sowing and appearing Corn is Ploughed up, because it is not
seasonable.

2. There may be (in such) a sense of want, but not of any Proper or
self-worth, Relating to this Special Oil. A Natural Man may be in Love with
Grace's Portion, but does not see the Native Beauty of her Person, abstracted
from the other. These Foolish Virgins saw they could not Go without the Wiser
Virgins Oil, else would they not have Mourned in its Absence, till Interest did
show it to be Necessary. Whereas a Gracious Soul would have A^l Grace at
Present, and consequently some whereof there is no present Need; such as is
Suffering Grace in times of Peace; and such a Degree of any Grace which is not
Absolutely Necessary to Salvation. This sense of worth appeared in these Wiser
Virgins, who took Oil with them at the first, although that present Expedition
might have been made without it.

3. It is a Passive sense, or from a Foreign Evidence, rather than from an
Active self-enquiry. They did not search their Vessels, as they should have
done, until their Lamps were Going out, which did Necessitate the Present
taking Notice of their wanting Oil, else had they still been Ignorant. Thus one
may Accidentally be Made to see, what otherwise he would not have Enquired
after, no more than Ahab did Elijah or Micajah, if he could fairly have avoided
them. Spiritual Convictions are cross to Flesh and Blood, which Felix had no
time to hear, Acts 24. 25. which Pilate ran away from, John 18. 38. and Balaam
would have shunned if he could: Yea, some Professors stand in need of being
urged unto self-examination, 2 Cor. 13. 5. which yet a Gracious Heart is Active
in, Lam. 3. 40. but very few others. And though an Hypocrite may Go exceeding
far, yet Generally he is no Voluntier in such a Service, save as that Young
Man's self-conceit made him ask Christ, What lack I yet, Mat. 19. 20?

4. It is a sense of Consequents, but not of a Procuring Cause. They saw into
the Emptiness of their Vessels, but not their wretched Negligence, who else
might have Prevented this before. It Is rare to find a Cordial self-condemning
Hypocrite, with reference to self-contractions of a Moral Nature, who yet are
deeply sensible of wanting Care in other Cases. Cain was sensible of his
Punishment, Genesis 4. 13. and Pharaoh (in that Respect) of sin, Exodus 10. 16. and
others also of their wanting Grace, but not of being Accessory thereunto,
through wretched sleightiness. Such either lay that Cause at Satan's Door, Genesis
3. 13. or falsely charge it upon God, James 1. 13. or else Translate it unto
others, 1 Samuel 15. 24. but sin is a Brat disowned by its Natural Mother, save
where Grace also is. Whereas an Holy Heart is chiefly sensible of his being
Active unto (or an Occasion of) that want of Oil, which otherwise could be more
easily endured by him, if it were only in a way of Suffering, and not of sin.

5. It is a Natural sense, but no way Spiritual. Grace is not Spiritually to be
discerned in its Total Absence, as it now was with These, who took No Oil with
them, and so could not be Spiritually Affected toward it; else might one
Exercise Grace before he has it. The Spirit of a M^n may know what is in him,
yet with respect unto the things of God, that knowledge is nothing which is not
from his Spirit: And so the deepest Natural sense is Spiritual Nonsense, 1
Cor. 2. 11. Whereas a Gracious Soul sees what he has or wants, by virtue of
an Heavenly Beam, Comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13. So
that (in such) a sense of Absence is both more clear and less Afflicting,
because it Argues some kind of Presence. Convictions issuing from Natural
Conscience, are either Flashy or Enraging: But Heavenly and Spiritual Light is
to be known, as by the plainness of its Demonstration, John 16. 8. So by the
Dueness of that Composure which does Accompany the deepest sensibleness
Occasioned by it, Acts 9. 3. 6. Compared with Judas his Conviction, Mat. 27. 3.
5.

6. It is a sense of wanting Oil in Lamps, but not in Vessels; the Latter
whereof is of far greater Consequence, as is a sound Mind (or Honest Heart)
Compared with the best Affections. Thus were the Pharisees Apprehensive of some
Lesser failings, but not more Weighty Matters, Mat. 23. 23. as some are
sensible of Actual sins, but not Original; or of their wanting such Particular
Fruits, but not the Root of a Renewed Principle. Whereas good David did bewail
his being shapen in Iniquity, Psalm. 51. 5. and begged the Renewing of his Heart
and Spirit, v. 10. as Paul did most Lament his Body of Death, Romans 7. 24. and
took more Notice of his Mind than of his Members, v. 23. 25. But if an
Hypocrite may have some Present stirring of Affections in him, his Conscience
is so weak, as to be satisfied without a Change of Mind, or Spirit of Grace,
which is the only Conservator and Ennobler of good Affections. This is the
utmost of that sense, (Relating to the want of Oil) which may be in a Foolish
Virgin, or unsound Professor.

Quest. 2. What is the Nature of that Confession which is here made by Foolish
Virgins, as to the Failing of their Oil or Light?
Answ. 1. It must be only in a way of Counterfeit, or of Pretending the want
of Present Light, because they had no mind to Walk, as was exhorted unto by the
Cry. Thus one of those Invited Ghests made show, as if he Could not Come, Luke
14. 20. whose want of Will was all the Cause, else might his Wise have come
with him, and both of them should have been Welcome. Indeed good David once did
feign himself berest of Reason, 1 Samuel 23. 13. and Peter made as if he knew not
Jesus, Mat. 26. 27. but neither of them did persist herein, as do these Foolish
Virgins. And thus, as some are willingly Ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. so others scorn
to be Accounted Blind, John 9. 40. who yet will seem as if they did not see
that which is Manifest in their Conscience, 2 Cor. 5. 11. and want not Light,
but only Grace to use that Talent, the Hiding whereof will not excuse from
being cast into that outer Darkness, where they shall weep in vain, Mat. 25. 30.

2. They here Confess a Weighty Failure without Affection suitable thereunto.
The want of Oil (at such a time) is of the saddest consequence, yet do not we
read of their Lamenting, but only saying Our Lamps are Gone, or Going out. Man
is endued with Affections, which (since the Fall) are Dislocated or Mis-placed,
as to their Proper Objects. An Hypocrite is never Moderate save with Respect to
Spiritual Losses, which he can signify without Complaining. Thus some confess
their want of Light, whose Gummed Eyes are not so much as washed with Natural
Tears. Affections are both the Outward Evidence, and stirrers up of Inward
Sense; which they who Bridle now, when need requires such a vent, will Weep
the more hereafter, unto the multiplying of their fruitless sorrow. Unsound
Professors may be Affectionate, 1 Samuel 24. 16. but unaffectionate Confessions
(in Momentous Cases) have small appearance of their being sound, but like the
Foolish Virgins.

3. Much Partiality may be Observed in their Confession.

1. They confess their Want, or Suffering only, but not their sin, or want of
Care to be supplied at the first. Most Bodily Sicknesses are from Intemperance,
yet few Complains of the one, are truly sensible of the other; much less will
they Confess it, save in a Case of Gross Exorbitancy. The bare acknowledgment
of one's Suffering transfers the Cause upon another; but the confessing of its
in bred-Root does add Disgrace unto the Plaintiff's sorrow. Thus some bewail
their want of Spiritual strength, as being an heavy Portion from the Lord; but
take no notice of their sluggishness, as being Accessory to their own
enfeebling. And it is easier to be Convinced of a sin, than to Confess it, as
David found, Psalm. 32. 3. and much more Saul, till he was forced thereunto, 1 Samuel 15. 30. Indeed it is Folly to complain of Punishment, and not of Sin, which
is the Cause, Lam. 3. 39. but yet it is very Natural, and more especially to
Foolish Virgins.

2. They do Confess the Present Failing of their Oil, but not their taking No
Oil with them at the first, as Christ had truly said concerning them, Mat. 25.
3. They would be thought to have had that, which now they do confess was Gone,
or Going. How weak are they, who ground the Fallible Nature of Holy Oil, upon
these Foolish Virgins false Pretension; as if They were to be believed more
than Christ. But thus an Hypocrite would save the Reputation of his former
state, when forced from his present Claim. What Paint do such bestow upon
Professed Tombs, by seeking to Embalm that which they do acknowledge to be
Dead. But thus, a wrong Foundation is not owned, together with the failing of a
Superstructure; and though some less miscarriage may be confessed, yet is
self-honour (in an Higher case) consulted for, in such Professors deepest
self-condemnations, as was apparent in Readiness Example, 1 Samuel 15. 30.

3. They only do Confess the Failing of their Lamps, and merely with Respect
unto this present Expedition: But not so Plainly, their want of Oil; at
leastwise, not their having (Now) No Grace at all. All have their Failings,
says an Hypocrite, and I have mine: making no Difference (in point of kind)
between himself and others, but only in Degree. Agur confesses himself to be
Beneath a Man, Prove. 30. 2. and David himself, to be Behemoth, or a Beast of
the Plural Number, Psalm. 73. 22. whilst Hypocrites will call themselves of the
Holy City, Isa. 48. 2. the Seed of Abraham, John 8. 33. the Temple of the Lord,
Jer. 7. 4. Thus some confess their want of Light into a Duty urged unto; but
Judge that Ignorance to be consistent with the Main, and are offended with the
Questioning of their Spiritual state, merely because that Oil is wanting. It
would be well if All were thus Ingenuous: But Ananias and Sapphira would rather
Dye, than make a full and free Confession; and of this Nature is that
Acknowledgment which is here made by Foolish Virgins.

4. They do not Deny this Going out to be the Wiser Virgins Duty; yet will they
not confess their own sitting still to be their sin; but Judge their want of
Oil or Light, sufficiently to Vindicate them from that Charge. A Gracious Heart
is sensible of unknown Errors, and does desire to be cleansed from secret
faults, Psalm. 19. 12. not counting himself to be therefore Justified, simply,
because he knows Nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4. 4. but Foolish Virgins are not
Careful (at least, not self-condemning) in such a case. It satisfies such, if
they can say, We have no Light into some-kind of Practice; the total Neglect
whereof is therefore not Accounted sin, till they shall come to be Convinced.
Particular Actings of this Nature may sometimes be in Wiser Virgins; but yet
this is the Principle of Foolish ones, which therefore should be Cautelously
Pleaded by us in any case whatever. But this may need to be further cleared up,
in a Question by it self.

Quest. 3. How far does Want of Oil (or Light) Excuse from Sin?
Answ. 1. We may not Dispute the point with God, as to his Sovereignty and
Dominion, Job 25. 2. by virtue whereof the Stars are said to be Not Pure in his
sight, v. 5. nor yet the Heavens clean, J^b 15. 15. Yea, who may therefore
charge his sinless Angels with some kind of Folly, Job 4. 18. because of their
Ignorance compared with his Infinite Omnisciency. And if Man justly may impute
the Father's sin unto his Innocent Child, much more may God impute the first
Man's Disobedience unto others, Romans 5. 19. whose Ignorance (in that Respect)
was Absolutely Invincible. And into which Reason, (viz. the Sovereignty of his
Will,) the Righteousness of Adam's Fall is Ultimately to be resolved, together
with the Hiding of his Mind from others. Mat. 11. 25. because it seems good
to him, v. 26. This is enough to silence the Subtilest Disputant, who else
might be too hard for his Opponent, as to the Equity of God's finding fault, at
leastwise in some Cases, or with Respect unto Man's being Hardened by the
Lord, Romans 9. 18, 19, 20.

2. Pretended or Willing Ignorance is so far from Excusing any one, as that it
sadly Aggravateth a Neglect of Duty. If some were truly Blind, they would
Comparatively have no sin, John 9. 41. but either Themselves disdain to be so
called, v. 40. or else it is Apparent otherways, that either they do falsely
Pretend unto the want of Knowledge, John 7. 27, 28. or that (at least) they
Might Know if they Would, 2 Pet. 3. 5. This kind of Ignorance is of a Lying
Nature, Lev. 6. 3. which is not Expiated, but by a deeper Humiliation, or
Greater Offering, v. 6, 7. for any Soul or Person, v. 2. than if his Ignorance
were Real, Numb. 15. 27. This seems to be the Case of all these Foolish
Virgins, or some of them, at least, who would think scorn to be accounted
shallow; yea, who presumptuously Neglect those Means of Light which are
afforded to them, and thereby are in danger of being cut off, Numb. 15. 30, 31.
and Now by God himself, who has the Present Execution of such Laws, Heb. 10.
28. 31.

3. Invincible Ignorance may be sufficient to Excuse from Actual sin; but not
when Means of Light are Ministered, though not Convincingly understood. Original
sin (as all confess) is chargeable upon Infants, whose Ignorance is yet
invincible: But Actual sin is not imputed, save with Respect unto a Law
Proclaimed, which also may be understood. Thus Heathens who are Ignorant
Invincibly of Gospel-Laws, shall not be Judged, save by the Law of Nature, Romans
2. 19. or that which is written in their Hearts and Consciences, v. 15. But
Persons Living under the Gospel's sound, Romans 10. 18. shall be Condemned by
that positive Law, v. 1. though not submitting thereunto, by Reason of some
kind of Ignorance, v. 3. Therefore the Dispensation of the Gospel is oft-times
called a Kingdom, because they who Live under it, are Equally (for kind)
Obliged to take Notice of its Laws; which also Might be understood, were they
but careful in the use of Means.

4. One may be at the present Guilty of a sin, Lev. 4. 13. who yet is not
Obliged to Confess it, (or offer a Particular Sacrifice for it) until he is
Convinced of it, v. 14. Lev. 5. 4, 5, 6. save only in a General way, or from
an easy supposition of its being Possible, Ezekiel 45. 20. One may confess a Real
sin, who yet may therein Lie against himself, unless he also is Convinced of
it; therefore Conviction must g^ before Confession. Yet is that Person Guilty
before the Lord, and consequently bound from Peremptory self-acquitting, though
not engaged to make a Positive Acknowledgment. Such therefore ought to Grant
that in the Notion, which they are not yet bound to charge upon themselves, as
to a known Particular Application. Yea, such ought also to be self suspicious,
and to confess the Possibility of their failing, though none should urge them
to any more than barely ^eneral selfcondemnation, unless such seem to dally
with their Light.

5. One may Transgress at Present, in his Not Doing such a thing, who yet is
not immediately engaged Now unto the Practice of it, till he shall be
enlightened thereinto. Though an Erroneous Conscience does not Affirmatively
bind me unto sin, Acts 26. 9. 15. yet does it Negatively bind from Duty, until
that Duty is cleared up, and yet my present Nonperformance of it may be
sinful. God will be first Served with the Head (or Knowledge) in every
Sacrifice, Lev. 1. 8. and would have every Man to be Persuaded in his own Mind,
Romans 14. 5. else Real Duty may Rationally (or unto such a Man) be sin, v. 23.
Yet his Not Doing of it (from Erroneous Doubting) is also sinful; because that
Ignorance is self-contracted, where Means afforded are not convincing.
Self-blinding Men are not first bound to see, but to anoint their Eyes, Rev. 3.
18. Yet their Not Acting from want of Sight, is to be charged on them as a sin
whilst they are Blind.

6. One's self Contracted (Real) Ignorance, may somewhat lessen both Guilt and
Suffering, but does not Take them quite away. He that does not his Master's
Will through lack of Knowledge, shall be yet Beaten, although with fewer
stripes, Luke 12. 48. which Argues his being somewhat Guilty, because
forewarned, v. 46. though he had now forgotten it. And though there is little
Difference between the Guilt of Ignorance in Rulers, Lev. 4. 22, 23. and
Inferior Persons, v. 27, 28. yet is a sin of Ignorance i^ Prie^ts (or Eminent
Professors) v. 3, 4. Equivalent to that of All the Congregation, v. 1^, 14.
Yea, with Respect unto the same sort of Persons, some sins of Ignorance
(according to the Worth of Duty) are of a Deeper die, Numb. 15. 24. than are
some other, Lev. 4. 13, 14. And so far is a Multitude from less^ning the Guilt
of Ignorance, as that it is the greatest Guilt of all; appearing from the
Sacrifice required in that Case, viz. A Young Bullock and a Goat, Numb. 15. 24.
which Goat (in such a case) was more than was required from any other sort of
Persons (save the Multitude) for any sin of Ignorance whatsoever.

Quest. 4. What kind of Desire is that (Relating unto Oil or Light) which is
here signified by the Foolish Virgins to the Wise?
Answ. 1. It is a Partial (but not Complete) Desire, and therein suitable to
their forementioned Confession. They do not say, Help us to such a Measure of
this Oil, as you seem to be furnished with; much less do they Desire to have
their Vessels filled with it; but only, Give us [Of] your Oil; as if some
Lesser quantity would serve their turn. An Hypocrite may crave some Part of
Grace, or just so much as Conscience and Occasion does require, who yet is
loath to bear the whole, for fear of being too much burdened. Thus some would
have Restraining Grace, Numb. 22. 34. and Saving Grace at last, Numb. 23. 10.
Others are for the Highest Notions of Spiritual Knowledge, Prove. 18. 1. A third
is for that Good by which Eternal Life may be Obtained, Mat. 19. 16. together
with the saving of his Earthly Interest, but not otherwise, v. 21, 22. This
Argues that Water is not Elementary, save unto Fishes; since other Creatures
when most athirst, are yet afraid of being Drowned in its Abundance.

2. It is not a Desire of Oil (at all) in Vessels, but only to supply their
Fading Lamps, as the subjoyned Reason of their Desiring it does Evidence. An
Hypocrite is most sollicitous about his Lamps or good Affections, which if he
can but competently keep from Going out, the Deadness or Extinction of his
Principle and Judgment is not the Matter of his Lamentation. Such mostly are
Delighted in that kind of Preaching which works most upon Affections, how
ever dark the Mind is left; yea, possibly Mis-guided, by Reason of a Zeal for
God, but not according unto Knowledge, Romans 10. 2. This is too Natural unto the
Best, so far as Folly is remaining in them; but is Predominant in Foolish
Virgins, who altogether are deprived of Heavenly Wisdom. But yet these wiser
Virgins took Oil in their Vessels; nor are such satisfied with others Oil in
that Respect, as these poor Foolish Virgins would have been; but are for being
taught by their Anointing, and not by any Man whatever, 1 John 2. 27.

3. It is a Desire of Oil from Man, (or from the Wiser Virgins) but not from
Jesus Christ. Means are not to be Dis-regarded; but yet, if any Man lack Oil or
Wisdom, he is first bid to Ask of God, James 1. 5. as Solomon did, 2 Chronicles. 1.
10. but so did not these Foolish Virgins. An Hypocrite will not Delight himself
in God, Job 27. 10. A Common Jew will first spend all upon Physicians, Luke 8.
43. and Carnal Hearts content themselves with Applications made to Instruments.
How few add Prayer unto their Hearing, save in a Formal way of doing both; and
thence it is they are no more Advantaged by either. Whereas a Gracious Heart
does know Christ only has the Key of David, Rev. 3. 7. both as to the
Speakers Utterance, Col. 4. 3. and Hearers Entrance, Acts 16. 14. therefore
such chiefly sue to him. And if a Man may Hypocritically Desire Light of God,
Numb. 22. 19. much more of Man, who is less Dreaded, and who cannot detect his
close Dissimulation.

4. It is not Properly a Desire, but rather a Demand, made up of much appearing
Pride and Discontent; as those words [Give us] do import. Abraham's Servant
could Humbly say unto a Virgin, Give me [I pray thee] a little Water, Genesis 24.
43. But Israel (in a way of Chiding) said to Moses, Give us Water, that we may
Drink, Exodus 17. 2. So do these Foolish Virgins speak unto the Wise, as Jacob
bad Laban to Give him his Wife; not in a way of Supplication, but Demand, Genesis
29. 21. Give me thy Son, said he unto that Woman, in a way of Courtesy, not to
himself, but her, 1 Kings 17. 19. So say these to the Wise, else they must
Part, as if Continuance with them were a kindness to the Wise. Yea, these bid,
Give us of your Oil, as Israel (Atheistically) said to Moses, Give us Flesh,
Numb. 11. 13. which was not in his Power to do; no More than Man can give Light
to another. Thus is an Hypocrite's Desire made up of Pride and Passion, instead
of Virtue, Grace, or Common Reason.

5. It is a Lazy Desire this of having Light freely Given, without any store of
Cost or Pains. We may not Sell the Truth, but yet are bid to Buy it, Prove. 23.
23. And as with our Laborious Searching for it, Prove. 2. 4. so by our Cheerful
Suffering the Loss of all for that Excelling Knowledge, Phil. 3. 8. But Man (as
Man) knows not the Price of Oil or Spiritual Wisdom, Job. 28. 13. Nor will an
Hypocrite Give ought for Truth, at least not hazard the Loss of All, as does an
Heavenly Merchant for this Pearl, Mat. 13. 45, 46. An Hypocrite is free to Hear
what may be understood by one that is half asleep, and could do something, if he
might not Suffer; but otherwise he pleads Poverty and Weakness of Capacity in
this Case, though not in other Matters of Equal Difficulty and Expense. If
Light be darted in upon them, or if they might but save their Money, some would
accept of Given Oil, who else will neither Buy nor Walk, till forced to it; and
not then neither, save only in a way of outward show.

6. It is a cold Desire this, not uttered with any sign of Earnestness, as Acts
2. 37. nor Seconded with Importunity, as Mat. 15. 23. although the other did
not plainly say, Not so, (which words are added by our Translators;) nor do
they Absolutely gainsay the Motion made, but only bid them [rather] go to
them that Sell, Mat. 25. 9. Paul Thrice besought the Lord for Grace until he
had it, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. and Jacob said unto the Angel, I will not let thee Go,
except thou Bless me, Genesis 32. 26. Nor is the Cordialness, much less the Grace
or Spirit of Supplication evidenced but by an Holy Violence and Perseverance,
Ephesians. 6. 18. One might have thought, in such a Weighty Case, the Foolish Virgins
would have Repeated their Desire, and then have Prosecuted it with cogent
Arguments, at least, have bitterly lamented their Repulse, instead of silent
Acquiescing in a first Denial. But Hypocrites do either Counterfeit a good
Desire, or at the best are only pressed thereunto by that which is too Weak to
bear them out until it be obtained.

Quest. 5. How came the Foolish Virgins Lamps (or good Affections) to go out,
before their Work was done?
Answ. 1. Because they were not fed with Oil out of their Vessels, or from a
well-informed Judgment. It Is said, they took No Oil at first; and then, Not in
their Vessels, to be sure: Therefore their Lamps could not be Lasting. Life in
Affections only is but like unto Sap residing in a Branch, which being severed
from its Root, may sprout a little (especially if thrust into some Moister
Ground) but in a short time will come to nothing. Indeed there is a Gradual
Difference (in point of Lastingness) between some Natural Men's Affections,
compared with others, as is between their Bodily Constitutions; but though some
may Live longer, yet all are Mortal, save as they are Preserved and Animated by
an Immortal Soul or Judgment; and Violence of Exercise does only shorten their
continuance. As we would therefore have our Lamps not to go out, so let us take
heed of Empty Vessels.

2. Because the very Lamps of Foolish Virgins (or their Affections, as in
Themselves considered) are much Inferior to the other's in point of
Lastingness. Saints are compared to Green ^i^^-Trees, Hos. 14. 8. whose very
Boughs (which answer unto Spiritual Affections) retain their Greeness Long: But
Hypocrites Affections at the best are only Carnal; and if a Carnal Mind be
Death, Romans 8. 6. much more are such Affections Mortal. They also that are
Christ's, have Crucified that Inordinacy of Affection which others still Labor
under, Gal. 5. 24. and Violent P^ssions are of no long continuance. Yea,
Hypocrites Affections are like those Lamps or Candles, which have some swailing
Thief in them, or some Particular Object fixed upon, which (as a Sucker) makes
the Branch to wither: whereas a Good Man guides his Affections with
Discretion, Psalm. 112. 5. which therefore last the longer. Thus we may Learn,
both why the Foolish Virgins Lamps go out, and how we may secure our own, viz.
by getting our Affections Sanctified.

3. Because the very Oil wherewith the Foolish Virgins Lamps are fed, is also
differing from the others in point of Fatness, Purity and self-multiplying; all
which are Influential to its Lastingness. The Foolish Virgins Oil was only
Common at the best; and Nature's Oil (compared with that of Grace) does quickly
spend it self, and upon those forementioned Accounts, as may be thus made out.

1. Spiritual things are also Fat, and consequently not so apt to wast. Such is
the Moisture of the Olive Tree, Judge. 9. 9. especially of Christ, Romans 11. 17.
and of those Blessings obtained through Faith on him, Isa. 55. 2. and through
Communion with him, Psalm. 36. 8. and 63. 5. Jer. 31. 14. Therefore Affections
fed with such like Considerations are of a more lasting Nature; and thence it
is that True Believers are not so subject to Back-slide, because their Motives
to continue still are of a more Lively and Eternal make, John 6. 67, 68. But
choicest Earthly Delicates, in point of Moral Nourishing, are very Lean, Psalm.
106. 15. which leave the Earer's stomach always Craving, Psalm. 78. 29, 30.
therefore Affections fed therewith, are apt to saint upon their being
discontinued; and he that only Drinks of such Water will Thirst again, John
4. 13, Yea, Lower things are no way satisfying, Isa. 55. 2. while they
continue, Eccl. 1. 8. and Increase, Eccl. 5. 10. Therefore Souls Acting upon
that Account (in ways of Duty) are at the best uncertain, compared with others,
Prove. 19. 23. and 14. 14.

2. That which is Spiritual, is also Pure, 1 Timothy 4. 12. and Purest Oil (at
leastwise in a My^tical sense) will burn the longest time; therefore that
Sacred Lamp which was to be always burning, was Ordered to be fed with pure
Oyl-Olive beaten, Exodus 27. 20. Now, a Divine Command is Pure, Psalm 19. 8. so
is that Wisdom from above, James 3. 17. yea, so is a Believers Hope of Future
Glory, 1 John 3. 3. therefore Affections fed with such like Arguments, are of a
long continuance. Since God's Command endures for ever, so does his Duty whose
Outward Peace gives place to Purity, and whose very Hope is of a Soul-purifying
Nature. But Earthly Lower Motives are Compounded, as is the Matter whereof some
Lights are made, which therefore quickly spend themselves with spitting, and
leave a Noisome Snuff behind them. Therefore the Foolish Virgins Lamps go out,
with an Offensive smell unto the Wise, who thenceforth cannot bear to have
Communion with them any longer, but wish them also to be Gone, Mat. 25. 9.

3. That which is Spiritual, is of a self-multiplying Nature also, wherein the
Wiser Virgins Oil is like that of the Widows, 2 Kings 4 3, 4. and that which
Multiplyeth in its pouring out, must needs be Lasting. Inherent Grace is
(partly) therefore Everlasting, because it is always Growing, Psalm. 92. 12. 14.
so is a Suffering Saints future Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and Present Consolations,
2 Cor. 1. 5. yea, his Faith also, 2 These. 1. 3, 4. therefore Affections fed
with such a kind of Oil, are as a well watered Tree, whose Fruit and Leaf
continue in a Time of Heat and Drought, Jer. 17. 7, 8. But Lower things are of
a Passing Nature, 1 John. 2. 16, 17. uncertain at the best, 1 Timothy 6. 17. and
at the last will come to Nothing, v. 7. yea, Perish with the Using, Col. 2. 22.
therefore Affections sed therewith must needs be of a fading Nature; especially
since Lower Motives are apt in time to Deaden Men's Affections unto Spiritual
Objects: whereas that which is Spiritual, is also the Preserver and Embalmer of
that Affection, which is thereby maintained.

The Truth of all which may yet more fully be made out, by taking a Particular
Notice of those Motives (or that Oil) wherewith the Lamps or good Affections of
unsound Professors unto Duty, are maintained. All which are Fading. As,

1. When Duty is Affected for its Novelty, which may not be so easily perceived
at the first, as afterward. Athenians spent their time in nothing else but
telling and hearing some New thing, Acts 17. 21. who therefore had some
Affection for Paul's New Doctrine, v. 19. which afterward was Mocked by them,
v. 32. Thus did the Jews Affect John Baptist's Light, though only for a
Season, John 5. 35. or during its Prime and Flower, as (...) signifies, from
whence (...) is derived, signifying Beautiful, Romans 10. 15. because a thing in
Season is so, Eccl. 3. 11. And upon this Account the Foolish Virgins might Go
out at first; but therefore were their Lamps or good Affections soon
Extinguished. Whereas a Gracious Heart Affects the Nature of his Duty, who
therefore stores up All, both New and Old, Mat. 13. 52. and Loves it to the
End, as Christ does him, John 13. 1. But he that Marries a Woman for her
Beauty, is often a Widdower before his Wive's Decease; and upon that Account poor
Foolish Virgins are soon Divorced from that Duty, which was Espoused only for
its Beauty.

2. When Duty is undertaken from a Passionate Pang, or strong Impulse upon
their Spirits thereunto, which does petray some into Error, and makes all to
faint in ways of Truth. Impulses are uncertain things, which therefore never
can beget a fixed Frame; as in those Ancient Prophets, whose strange and sudden
Variations from themselves did thence arise. Impulses are suspicious things,
especially since the Perfecting of a surer Rule: And when a Call is not
Exceeding Clear, Danger will represent it as a mere Temptation, unto the
Failing of ones Real Duty. Impulses also are oft-times Contradicting; and
Interest in that Case, will have a Casting Voice, as being always Next to
Conscience, and in its silence evermore supreme. Whereas a Gospel-Saint is
Taught to Heed that Written Word, 2 Pet. 1. 19. which is both certain, safe,
and self-agreeing: Therefore his Duty (Built upon that Rock) will stand, when
other Bottoms fall together with their Buildings.

3. When such a Path is Walked in, not for the way it self, but for the sake of
One's Companions, in point of Quality, Respect, or Number; it being Natural to
have Men's Persons in Admiration, Jude 16. And thus a Ruler's Faith, or
Practice of the Pharisees, is by some Men Accounted the strongest Argument,
John 7. 48. Others will Serve that God who is the God of their Respected
Friend, Ruth 1. 16. Others will be concluded by the Generality of Professors,
right or wrong, 2 Samuel 16. 18. But as few Men of Rank are Called, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
So fewer of them will continue Faithful in a Trying hour, Jer. 5. 5. and Love
unto One's self will hazard a Parting with Dearest Friends in times of Danger,
Mark 14. 50. and as the Generality are never Right, Mat. 7. 14. so few are free
to Die for Company, or Persevere in Duty upon that Account, whatever they
Profess, Mat. 26. 35. Whereas the Righteous holds on his way, Job 17. 9. as
does a Traveller upon some earnest Business, though all forsake him, 2 Timothy 4.
16.

4. When Duty is Affected (Mainly) for it is suitableness to Common Reason.
Reason is good, as is the Law, if used Lawfully, 1 Timothy 1. 8. else Duty needs
must be imperfect in point of Lastingness, as well as Form and Matter. Right
Reason (as the first) did show the Equity of Man's Obedience to the whole of
his Creator's Will, as it was Then signified, or might be afterward; but
Reason is much Impaired by the Fall, as is the Law, Romans 8. 3. save as fallen
Man is under it to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 21. Faith is the proper Form of
Gospel-Duty, which therefore (as in the Greek) is called the Obedience of
Faith, Romans 1. 5. and therefore Duty bottomed upon Reason, must needs be apt to
Putrify, as is Man's Body when severed from his Soul, or its Substantial Form.
Natural Reason does Oppose some part of that Material Duty which is required,
Mat. 16. 21, 22, 23. therefore that Rational or Legal Man, Mat. 19. 20* could
not go on unto Perfection, v. 21, 22. Whereas a Gospel-Saint sees that by Faith
alone, which might have been known by Reason, Heb. 11. 3. who therefore sees
also that which Reason never would have Evidenced, viz. the Duty of his Losing
all, in ways of Proper Gospel-Duty, Luke 14. 26. Acts 21. 12, 13. Heb. 11. 24,
25, 26.

5. When Duty is performed in the strength of Resolutions, or mere Natural
Courage, which are a Means and Mercy not to be Despised, but yet not to be
Trusted in, as Peter's instance sadly shows, Mat. 26. 35. 74. Courage may
carry through a Natural Undertaking, 2 Samuel 10. 12, 13. and Vows of Old were of
Religious Force, Judge. 11. 39. but other Armor is prescribed in Gospel Times,
Ephesians. 6. 10, 11. Christ having chosen what is Weak, that so no Flesh should
Glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27. 29. Courage is under the Command of
Reason, and when the Captain Runs, (as Reason will, in Spiritual Cases) the
stoutest of his Soldiers cannot stand, for lack of Conduct: And Resolutions
are depending upon Courage, which therefore needs must Run together with it.
Whereas a Gracious Heart is not so much for saying what he will do, as
Laboring to set Duty home upon his Heart, Psalm. 44. 20, 21. and waiting upon
God for Light and Strength, Psalm. 25. 4, 5. Opposing Faith to Natural Fear,
Psalm. 56. 3. who therefore is not Moved, Psalm. 16. 8. and 62. 2.

6. When Duty is affected in a time of Safety, and upon that Account. Birds
hatched in a Summers Season are Generally Gone (at leastwise will not sing) in
Winter: Whereas those Primitive Christians were most Faithful, who were
Converted in a Time of Persecution. Men walking in the Fields for Recreation,
are driven back by an appearing storm: but therefore such will neither Sow nor
Reap, Eccl. 11. 4. Peace is a Mercy, Acts 9. 31. to be Prayed for, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
but he that is not an hardy Soldier, will never be a Faithful Christian, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Therefore a Gracious Heart is not for Lingering till the storm be
over, because he longs to be Master of that great Temptation. Yea, therefore
God inureth His unto some kind of daily Trials, lest (being over-tender) they
should give back upon a sudden change. And though such Possibly may have a
Pleasant Journey, yet it is not depending thereupon, but fully purposed, though
it should Rain from first to last, because their Business requires ha^te and
hazard.

7. When Pride is the Main Impulsive unto Duty, as to its being either first
undertaken upon that Account, or therefore (chiefly) Persevered in. Thus Honor
did excite the Pharisees to be Obedient; and others (having once ^egun) will
not Desist, for fear of being Mocked: Both which are of Inferior Use, but not
fit to be trusted with the Chief Command in a Religious Service. The Lust of
the Flesh, (or Worldly Pleasures) and the Lust of the Eyes (or Worldly Riches)
do seem both of them (Generally) to be preferred before the Pride of Life, or
Worldly Honor, 1 John 2. 16. to show the Weakness of this Latter Motive,
compared with the other Two, though All of them are Worldly, and consequently
of a Passing Nature, v. 17. Few will Begin to Run in Wisdom's Paths, if Honor
be the Only Prize; much less will they Persist herein, if Pleasures and
Profits be thereby Hazarded, through Fear of Persecution; since in that Case,
it is accounted One's greatest Honor to consult for such a Principal
self-preservation, though by Disgraceful self-contradicting Practices.

8. When Duty and Affections are Contracted, merely because of Present wages
expected thereupon. Those never will be Faithful Soldiers unto Christ, who are
not satisfied with the public Faith of Heaven in that respect, and present
Necessaries, 2 Cor. 4. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 8. These Foolish Virgins (at their first
going out) had store of such Encouragements, together wherewith their Lamps (or
good Affections) are Now Extinguished. An Heart that is Taken with the World,
does ever incline, as does a Needle, to that Lodestone wherewith it has been
Touched; and Go^pel-Duty is yet directly Opposite thereunto, as is the South
unto the North. Therefore Christ does Prepare his Volunteers with such like
Proclamations at the first, Mat. 8. 19, 20. showing the inconsistency that is
between Love of the World and of the Father, 1 John 2. 15. at leastwise in
Respect of Lastingness, Mat. 5. 24. There is some Fatness in Earthly Blessings,
which yet will Fade, if not bedewed daily, Genesis 27. 39. so will those Lamps (or
good Affections) which Mainly are maintained with that kind of hungry Oil.

9. When Duty is under the Sole or Principal Command of Natural Conscience, and
slavish fear of Condemnation entailed upon Disobedience. This also is a
Serviceable Under-Officer, Commissionated by Christ himself, Mark. 16. 16. and
therefore all Fear of Suffering is not Diabolical, save when it is Supreme,
James 2. 19. But Natural Conscience is subject to be seared in some, 1 Timothy 4.
2. and in all Unbelievers to be Defiled, Titus. 1. 15. yea, to be weakened in
the Best, 1 Cor. 8. 7. therefore not fit to be confided in, save as it is
Accompanied or backed with Faith unfeigned, and without which it is not good, 1 Timothy 1. 15. And as Christ's Future Promises are nothing (with a Demas) to this
present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. so present Suffering (in the way of Duty) will
eas^ly be too many for an Hypocrite's future fears of such a Nature. Therefore
Christ does not trust Conscience with his People's Guidance, but does Himself
dwell in them by his Spirit, and which In-dwelling Spirit does enable them to
keep what is Committed to them, 2 Timothy 1. 14.

10. When our Affections unto Duty are merely bottomed upon the sense of
highest proper Privileges from the Lord himself, which are believed to be had
in such a way. It Is true indeed the Love of Christ (for what he has already
done) is of a Soul-constraining Nature, 2 Cor. 5. 14. next unto which is Hope
of Future Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. but as the Saints Duty is not proper, so neither
can it be ensured, save as it issues chiefly from a Nobler and more Lasting
Principle. A Child of Light may walk in Darkness, Isa. 50. 10. whose Duty (in
that Case) would fail, if he were only animated by a sense of Privileges.
Therefore so many stumble in the ways of Christ, because they meet not with
those In-comes from him which were too peremptorily Expected, and too much
Leaned on. Christ was Delighted in God's will, as such, Heb. 10. 7. therefore
he Fainted not, though seemingly forsaken by his Father, Mat. 27. 46. and
nothing short of that same Oil (wherewith he was Anointed) viz. the Love of
Naked Duty, will keep our Lamps from Going out.

Use 1. God always can, and in due time he will constrain the Foolish Virgins to
confess their being Inferior to the Wise, in point of Oil, or some more choice
Accomplishments. Thus Pharaoh was enforced to confess, that Moses was more
prevailing than Himself with God in Prayer, Exodus 8. 8. and Balaam also, that
his Present state was not so Happy as that of Israel, Numb. 23. 10. Yea, Saul
at last was made to signify that David was more Righteous than himself, 1 Samuel
24. 17. As God can punish the stoutest Heart, Isa. 10. 12. and cause the
Arrogance of such to cease, Isa. 13. 11. So he can make the proudest Pharisee
to call himself the chiefest sinner, 1 Timothy 1. 15. who sometimes thought he had
wherein to Trust, Phil. 3. 4, 5. Ahab's false Prophet scorned to be thought
Inferior to Micajah, 1 Kings 22. 24. until he went into an inner Chamber to
Hide himself, unto the shame of his Profession, and then he saw it, v. 25.
Compliance with an Ahab's will, and base unworthy self-withdrawing fear, evince
the Absence of God's Spirit in Men, and will at last convince such of their
false Pretending thereunto in Times of Peace.

2. Those are not worthy to be called Virgins, who are Condemned by these
Foolish Virgins Carriage to the Wise, in such a Case and Time. These do not
call the other Desperate, Schismatical, or selfconceited, for Offering to go
out without their Company: Eliab therefore was an Invidious Fellow, who neither
would Engage (himself) with that Goliath, nor yet let David go without a
Censure, 1 Samuel 17. 28. These do not call their Darkness Light, nor boast of
their New Trimmed Lamps, but do Confess their going out: Saul therefore was
exceeding Impudent, who did assert his having been Obedient, against both Sense
and Conscience, 1 Samuel 15. 13, 14. These do not scorn to be Instructed, nor
Totally Neglect the use of Means, but freely come unto the Wise, to be
partakers of their Oil: Therefore proud Amaziah was near his End, who scorned
to be Taught by his Inferior, 2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16. So were Eliab's Sons, who
causelessly Railed upon Moses, but scorned to come up unto him, to have the Case
Decided in a Friendly way, Numb. 16. 12, 13, 14. 32.

3. The Foolish Virgins Lamps are always apt to fade, and will at last Go out,
especially at such a Time, or when the Cry is made. They are (at best) but as a
Morning Cloud, Hos. 6. 4. unrooted Seed, Mat. 13. 5. Houses upon the Sand, Mat.
7. 26. Professors, Deuteronomy. 5. 28. without an Heart, v. 29. and of an Earthy make,
1 Cor. 15. 45. or without strength, Romans 5. 6. all which evince their being apt
to fail. Yea, such will (at the last) come down indeed, since Hypocrites will
not always Pray, Job 27. 10. nor yet Believe but for a while, Luke 8. 13. but
will be choked with the World, Mat. 13. 22. being only Zealous for Men's
Traditions, Mat. 15. 2. or merely Counterfeiting Good Affections, Mark 7. 6.
And more especially at such a time, when God will lead Back-sliders forth with
workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 125. 5. Discovering Foundations unto the Neck, Hab.
3. 13. when two third Parts shall be cut off, Zech. 13. 8. and Chaff shall be
b^rnt up, Mat. 3. 12. in Order to the Purging out of Rebels from among his
People, Ezekiel. 20. 38.

This is a Failure of High Concernment, which I shall therefore a little show
the Symptoms of. And so the Symptoms of Decaying good Affections (or Fading
Lamps) are briefly these.

Sympt. 1. When only in an hour of Temptation there seems to be a want of
Light into that Truth or Duty, which formerly (and in cool Blood) was never
Doubted of. If Peter knows not Christ, Mat. 26. 72. nor Nabal, who Famous David
is, 1 Samuel 25. 10. nor Israel, what is become of Moses, Exodus 32. 1. It is not
so much from Ignorance, as want of Love. That Lamp (and not its Oil) is to be
blamed, whose Light is always clear, until some Nip or Gust of Wind does put it
out: and in that Case Men wrongfully complain of Darkness. It Is true,
Back-sliders never were Judicious; and yet their not Continuing in the Truth,
is nextly caused by the failing of their Affections, and is a sign thereof. A
Real Friend does Love (a Thing or Person) always, Prove. 17. 17. therefore
Adversity will make no Alteration, so long as Friendship does continue, however
injudicious that Affection is. And let no Man deceive himself, his Turning
aside from Christ cannot be from a Better Light, but want of Love.

2. When every small Occasion is improved by Professors, whereon to fall, or be
Offended. Love covers a Real Sin, Prove. 10. 12. and Charity beliveth all
things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. especially when there is Ground for Confidence (as in
this Case there is) that such a Thing or Person is not Culpable, when most
suspected. But when the Foolish Virgins Motion (for Oil or Light) is soon
Denied, especially when Haman's suing for his Life is most unreasonably
misconstrued, Esth. 7. 8. Yea, when a Man is therefore called an Enemy, for
telling that which cannot be denied to be a Truth, Gal. 4. 16. Such Men's
Affections certainly are Altered. Well might they be Concluded to be Envious or
Disaffected, Mat. 27. 18. who could not say, what Evil Christ had done, and
yet Cried out to have him Crucified, v. 23. Whereas he that does Love his
Master, will not Accept of Freedom Offered, Exodus 21. 5. Nor will Ruth leave
her dearly Beloved Mother, although she has a fair Occasion Ministered, Ruth 1.
15, 16. nor will ought separate a True Believer from his Love of Christ, Romans
8. 35.

3. When Means afforded for Satisfaction (as to the Truth of such a Duty) are
very slightly attended unto, if at all. He daily Meditateth in the Law of God,
who dearly Loves it, Psalm. 119. 97. and he that Cordially desires Heavenly
Wisdom will separate himself (from other Business) to seek it, Prove. 18. 1. Nor
is a Lovesick Spouse Discouraged (by what she meets with) from the Pursuance
of her Beloved, Cant. 5. 6, 7, 8. But Dilatory Hearers, who feignedly are for a
more Convenient Season, Acts 24. 25. and such as put a Question, but stay not
for its Answer, John 18. 38. especially they who will not so much as come unto
the Light, John 3. 20. Yea, they who Perfunctorily converse about Enquiries of
this Nature, or do not Hear in Hearing, Mat. 13. 13. do plainly evidence their
want of Love unto the Truth, 2 These. 2. 10. Thus some are easily convicted of
Decaying good Affections, because the strenuousness of their Endeavor does no
way suit the show of their Desire.

4. When Ordinary Light is not sufficient, without some more than Necessary
Demonstration; which yet in other like Cases is by such Persons thought to be
unreasonably expected by another. God made Man upright, or Plain-hearted, but
he has found out many bad Inventions or Evasions, Eccl. 7. 29. and out of his
own Mouth shall he be Judged, Luke 19. 22. Some things of Old were Darkly
hiated, much more in Gospel Times, Psalm. 49. 4. Mat. 13. 34. to Try Men's
Ingenuity, Mat. 15. 15, 16. or who are of that Chosen Number, that will Obey as
soon as they shall Hear, Psalm. 18. 44. Love made the Spouse (when half asleep)
to Hear the Voice of her Beloved, Cant. 5. 2. And David's Delighting in the
Will of God, did make him light of Hearing, Psalm. 40. 6. 8. And if Elisha had
not been very Candid, he ^^u^d not so readily have known the Meaning of
Elijah's Mantle c^^ upon him, 1 Kings 19. 19, 20. It Is true, Man's Reason may
not Dict^^e Gospel-Dut^^s, yet is there room for Candor in such Cases; and
Persons Dull of Hearing, Mat. 13. 15. have not the Love of God in them, John 5.
42.

5. When clear Convictions are not Accompanied with speedy Actions: it being an
undoubted sign of Weakness in that Child, which stays long in the place of
breaking forth, Hos. 3. 13. A strong Affection is rather apt to be too forward,
as Moses was, to have his Sister healed, Numb. 42. 13. as David was to Bu^ld a
Temple, 2 Samuel 7. 2. 5. and as the People were to make Christ King, John 6. 15.
however such are in Pain, till they have Vent, and then are most Refreshed, Job
32 19, 20. ^ai^h is not Ha^ty, Isa. 28. 16. and Hope can wait, Romans 8. 25. but
Love ^s all upon the Spur, and if there be nothing from Without to hinder, one
D^y is then Accounted a Thousand Years, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Therefore such ^re for
making Ha^te, Psalm. 119. 60. and not conferring with Flesh and B^ood, Gal. 1.
16. but do immediately endeavor to comply with signifi^d Duty, Acts 16. 10.
Whereas Lot's Lingering still in Sodom, Genesis 19. 16. after a double Item given,
v. 12. 15. did plainly evidence he had no great Affection to be gone.

6. When Souls are glad of being Hindered, and who are therefore Catching at, or
readily at least improve the first Advantage fairly Offered for such a Purpose.
As Hatred watches for another Halting, Jer. 20. 10 and Envy seeks for
Occasions, 2 Cor. 11, 12. or false Witnesses, Mat. 26. 59. so Love Devises
Liberal things, Isa. 52. 8. and waits to be Gracious, Isa. 30. 18. David was
Glad when others did invite him unto Duty, Psalm. 122. 1. whose Soul did break
with Longing for it, Psalm. 119. 20. and 41. 1, 2. Nor would Paul be dissuaded
with Heartbreaking Importunities, Acts 12. 13, 14. but did what in him lay, to
shun Obstructions, Gal. 1. 17. and sadly Bewailed, Romans 7. 24. his being
sometimes Captivated, v. 23. or H^ndr^d from that good which he fain would have
done, v. 19. Whereas they have but small Affection for their Duty, who wait but
for a Wind to carry them off, John 6 65, 66. or willingly Obey Man's
countermand, Hos. 5. 11. yea, they who do not cast about to be Delivered from a
forcible Captiv^ty, Jer. 41. 13, 14.

7. When any thing is loved More than Christ or Duty, Mat. 10. 37. A Child may
truly Love his Parents both alike, and Christ did duly Love All his Disciples,
John 13. 1. though John was Eminently his Beloved, v. 23. but Christ is not
Beloved Duly, if Life it self (as well as our Relations) be not Hated by us in
Competition with our Duty unto him, Luke 14. 26. David Desired Nothing upon
Earth, Compared with God, Psalm. 73. 25. Nor was Paul moved with the fear of
Losing All, if what he had to do for Christ might be but finished, Acts 20. 23,
24. and nothing short of this, will cl^arly Evidence a True Disciple's Love,
John 21. 17, 18. And though a Temporary failing of this Fruit in Peter, Mat.
26. 34. might be consistent with its Never failing Root, Luke 22. 32. yet they
who fall with him, and do not also Rise again, will not be Credited, as to the
Truth of their Professed good Affection. An Hypocrite may Suffer much, but yet
their Lamps are quite Gone out, who do Habitually Affect ought more than
Christ, and do thus Evidence it.

8. When that Reproach which some Men cast upon the ways of God, is Lightly
born by those who do Profess to walk therein. How would the VViser Virgins have
been Moved, in case the Foolish had Reviled them, because of Going forth. Love
is made up of Sympathy, and as in Christ, Acts 9. 4. so in his People, Psalm.
69. 9. And though Paul would have some Opposers to be Taught with Meekness, 2 Timothy 2. 25. yet could not he bear Blaspheming Jews, Acts 13. 45, 46. Yea;
David's Love to God made him Hate the Haters of him, and to be Grieved with
them, Psalm. 139. 21. as with his greatest Enemies, v. 22. Two contrary Masters
cannot be served with the same Affection, Mat. 6. 24. and next unto a Saint's
being Angry with himself, 2 Cor. 7. 11. he cannot but Declare against the sins
of others, Mic. 3. 8. Passion is to be watched over, Ephesians. 4. 26. and Personal
Cases call for Moderation, Numb. 12. 2, 3. but let us have a care of smothering
Zeal by our Discretion, so as to make our Love for Christ a Matter Disputable.

9. When Souls are Satisfied with Ignoble and Dull Performances of that Duty
which God requires. Love scorns to be affrighted into Duty, 1 John 4. 18. or
basely to be Hired thereunto, Dan. 5. 17. yet will it Act unto its utmost, as
that which David did with good Affection, 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. he also did with all
his Might, v. 2. Some Pray and Hear, as they should Buy and Marry, 1 Cor. 7.
29, 30. and as the manner of their Acting is, such is the Measure of their
Affection, and suitable thereunto (at last) will be the Nature of their Pay, 1 Samuel 2. 30. The weakest Creature has an Heart, and Soul, and Mind, and
Strength, wherewith God (in the first place) should be Loved, Mark 12. 30. and
may not Christ justly say to thee, as Delilah did to Sampson, Judge. 16. 15. How
can thou say, I Love thee, when thine Heart (in a Duty) is not with me, but
have often Mocked me, and not yet told me wherein thy great strength lies? A
Customary Yawning, Drouzy, Wandering, Sleighty Worshipper of God, is one whose
Lamp (or good Affection unto Duty) is either Gone, or Going out.

10. When Souls are not Affected duly with another Duty, wherein Themselves
are not so properly concerned. Indeed some will Commend that Duty unto others,
wherein Themselves would be Excused, Mat. 23. 4. This is a self-condemning
Approbation, Romans 2. 18. 21. But others only Cry that Duty up wherein
Themselves are Eminently Engaged: But this is self-Love, and not a Proper Love
of Duty. Love is commensurated by its Object, therefore Christ does not call
that Love or Friendship which is not both Indefinite, John 14. 15. and
Universal, John 15. 14. forbidding his Disciples to fault that Good which
others did who walked not with them, Mark 9. 38, 39. Moses Desired, that all
the Lords People were as he, Numb. 11. 29. and others stedfastness was that by
which Paul was Preserved alive, 1 These. 3. 8. Yea, John Rejoiced in Christ's
out-shining him, John 3. 26. 29. The Spirit in a Saint may Lust to Envy, James
4. 5. but Men of an Habitual Invidious Spirit (approving naught but what is in
themselves) are void of Love to Christ or Duty.

These are the Symptoms of Decaying Lamps, or good Affections; in Order unto
the keeping whereof Alive, (for Christ and Duty,) these Motives may be of Use.

Mot. 1. Affections in Man are Noble Faculties, and Spiritual Objects are the
Highest, which God has therefore aptly joined, Col. 3. 1. and such no Man
should put asunder, Mat. 19. 6. Adam in Paradise had all the Creatures in their
Prime, yet could he not find an Help meet for himself among them all, Genesis 2.
20. that shows the Nobleness of Man's Affections, whose Nature is still the
same, but that Man's Foolish Heart is Darkened, Romans 1. 21. Ephesians. 4. 18. Will
any wise Man stitch Rags together with Silver Threads? Or spill Rosewater upon
the Ground? Or cast away his Love and Person upon a Foolish Woman? Such are
these Lower things, Beggarly, Gal. 4. 9. Earthly, Phil. 3. 19. and Foolish, 1 Timothy 6. 9. What Pity it is, that Princes Daughters, Cant. 7. 1. should Marry
so much beneath themselves, when Courted or Desired by him, v. 10. who is the
King of Kings, Rev. 19. 16. the Treasury of wisdom, Col. 2. 3. the greatest
Heir imaginable, Heb. 1. 2. and chiefest of Ten Thousand in point of Beauty,
Cant. 5. 10.

2. Affections in Man are Lasting, especially his Love or Charity, which will
Abide when Faith and Hope shall fail, 1 Cor. 13. 13. and Spiritual Objects are
the most Incorruptible, Romans 1. 23. whilst Earthly things are of a Fading
Nature, Isa. 24. 4 why should our Eyes then be set thereupon, Prove. 23. 5?
Will any wise Young Man lay out his whole E^tate upon a falling House, when he
might have a better? How sweet are Christ's Embraces, Cant. 2. 6. whose Arms
are Everlasting, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. compared with other Lovers, whom we must be
Divorced from by Death, 1 Timothy 6. 7. if not before? Affections will continue
with us unto all Eternity, but not their worldly Objects; and how will Sinners
grieve in Hell, who (through mere Foolishness) will then have Nothing to fix
their Love upon. Whereas they whose Affections Now are wholly given up unto
the Lord, will be so far from wanting what to Love Hereafter, as that Love (in
its Happiest Exercise) will be the Chief (if not the Sole) Survivor of their
Affections.

3. Love is of God, 1 John 4. 7. who therefore is called the God of Love, 2
Cor. 13. 11. and in a Natural sense as well as Spiritual, since he is the
Father of our Souls or Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. and consequently (also) of our
Affections. Now, shall not he that Plants a Vine, Mat. 21. 33. Receive its
Fruit, v. 34? Shall he that Feeds a Flock, not eat the Milk thereof, 1 Cor. 9.
7? Shall not a Father be first Served with his Child's Activity? Houses are
firstly at their Builder's Service; Rivers return unto the Sea, from whence
they came, Eccl. 1. 7. Trees shed their Leaves upon the Ground that bears them:
And then shall Israel only bring forth Fruit unto Himself, Hos. 10. 1. Is it a
small thing with us to take God's Jewels, Broidered Garments, Oil and Honey;
yea, his very Sons and Daughters, and give them (from himself) to others, Ezekiel.
16. 17, 18, 19, 20? To Love ought more than him without whom nothing could be
Loved, is most unworthy, and the just matter of greatest self-abhorring.

4. Affections seem to be the clearest Evidence of God in Man, as to his
Infiniteness; in which regard, Low finite Objects are no way Adequate
thereunto. There may be a Desire in Man of More than is attained by him, or
clearly understood, or can be had, or should be Aimed at, yea, more than he is
able to Receive, so Boundless are his Affections, and therefore Meet for none
but Christ. Somethings may be desired, which are forbidden, Genesis 3. 6. and
sinful Objects should not be Loved, Romans 12. 9. but let him be Anathema
Maranatha, who Loves not Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Some Die of Love unto the
Creature, because they cannot have it: but none are more than Sick of Love for
Christ, Cant. 5. 8. who at the last, will be self-manifesting unto such as Love
him, John 14. 21. No Earthly thing should be Affected overmuch, but Love to
Christ will never turn into a Lust, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Yea, Spiritual Objects will
make room for their Reception and Comprehension, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18. and as the
Lord is satisfying, Psalm. 73. 25. so he that Loves him, Loves other things in
their due manner, Mark 12. 30, 31. All which bespeak our Love for him.

5. Affections are the Gloss of Actions, and without which the greatest Doer,
and utmost Sufferer is as nothing in God's Account, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. the first Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.
whose Sallet is better than a stalled Ox, Prove. 15. 17. and a Man's Kindness is
his Desire, Prove. 19 22. Yea, all the Substance of his House (compared with
Love) is utterly to be contemned, Cant. 8. 7. Christ's Love is better than
Wine, Cant. 1. 2. and his Loving kindness, than Life it self, Psalm. 63. 3. nor
does the Cedar Wood, or Silver Pillars, or Golden Bottom, or Purple Covering,
so much set out his stately Chariot, as that its Midst is Paved with Love,
Cant. 3. 9, 10. Yea, Christ does also count his People's Love much better than
Wine, Cant. 4. 10. remembering Israel's Kindness, Jer. 2. 2. whom he often proved
to know their Love, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. his Valuation whereof appears by what he
has prepared for such as Love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. and therefore David Desired to
greater Mercy than what he had for such, Psalm. 119. 132.

6. Affections are the Bringers forth of Actions; and as no Work is done at
all, in Case Affections be wholly wanting; so where ^h^se are not strong and
Lively, nothing is done with Joy, or without D^fficulty. Judgment is as the
Head, and our Affections as the Fe^t: Ther^^ore he cutteth off the Feet, who
sends by a Fool, that wants both, Prove. 26. 6. At leastwise, our
Affections are as the Wheels unto a Chariot, which Drives Heavily when those
are taken off, Exodus 14. 25. Love is the sleight of Acting, which does not call
its D^ty Grievous, 1 John 5. 3. nor is it Quenched with many Waters, Cant. 8.
7. but does constrain, 2 Cor. 5. 14. in spite of all Discouragements, 2 Cor.
12. 15. Whereas Men void of Love to Christ complain of Weariness, Mal. 1. 13.
wishing the Work were over, Amos 8. 5. and waiting for an Opportunity of being
Discharged from it, which he who Loves his Master will not Accept of, Exodus 21.
5. Let us therefore keep up Affections, unless we have a mind to cast off Duty.

7. Affections have a re-acting Infl^ence upon the Judgment, as they are Weak
or Lively, which should provoke our C^re in that regard. Lamps in the Letter,
do only spend their Oil or Light, which (in the Mystery) is Multiplied by a
flaming good Affection, and Dries up together with its Going out. Nay, though
Oil may be in the Vessel, yet is there no Prop^r Light, save as that Oil is
fired in the Lamp or good Affection. Therefore Men never want sufficient Light
for that which they Affect, but Generally do complain of Darkness, together
with the setting of their Love. Those Jews had not the Love of God in them,
John 5. 42. who therefore said, they Knew not Christ, John 7. 27. although they
Knew him well enough, v. 28. Nor is it to be wondered at, since Things or
Persons not Affected are no^ much Heeded; yea, most Men's Judgments are
Commanded by Affections since the Fall: Therefore if once our Lamp^ go out, we
shall no longer see our Way into a Disaffected Duty.

8. Affections also are very Tickle, and therein like to Lamps, which (if they
be not Guarded) will soon Blow out. A Garm^nt may have lost its Gloss, whose
Substance is not yet Consumed; a Razor may-have lost its Edge, which is not yet
Gap't or Broken; a Flower may have shed its Le^ves, whose Root and St^lk do
still continue: Such is the Fading Nature of Men's Affections. The Spouses
H^^r^ (or Judgment) was Awake when her Affections were asleep, Cant. 5. 2. and
there may be Love in the Root for Christ, as was in Peter, whose Fruit or
Exercise was wholly gone when he Denied him. Yea, one may Act for God, and yet
without Affection; Witness not only Zipporah's Angry Duty, Exodus 4. 25. and
others snuffing at it, Mal. 1. 13. but also the Consistency that is between
One's giving Alms, Mat. 6. 2. and yet omitting Mercy, Mat. 23. 23. yea, all a
Man's Goods un^o the Poor, yet without Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Affections are
like Crystal Glasses quickly cracked, but not by Man to be Amended.

9. If our Affections be not fixed upon Christ, they will then fasten
otherwhere unto our Dis-advantage. One may have Power over his own Will, in
point of Marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 37. who yet must needs Affect something or other;
and if not Christ then either Sin or Creature Comforts will have all. Incline
my Heart unto thy Law, (says David) and not to Covetousness, Psalm. 119. 36. q.
d. if Thou do not secure me for thy self, then Mammon will be sure to have
me. Affections cannot keep their Virgin-state, but will Espouse some Early
Object: And when Souls are not always Ravished with Christ's Love, the Serpent
will creep in upon them. Yea, if ought else be Master of our Affections, God
will be Hated by us, Mat. 6. 24. there being no Middle kind of Abnegation (on
either part) between him and the Creature, as is between one Creature and
another. Therefore let us Affect Christ and our Duty, else will it not be long
before we Hate them both.

10. God's Love unto his People does provoke their suitable Return, else will
they be Inferior unto Publicans, Mat. 5. 46. and Sinners, Luke 6. 32. He Loved
them first, which does prevent Upbraiding, but calls for after-love, 1 John 4.
19. His Love to them surpasses Knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. and shall their Love to
him not be made known at all, or very little? He Loves them with an Everlasting
Love, Jer. 31. 3. And did a stream yet ever fail (without a wonder) whose
Spring continued? No Man has Greater Love from any, than have the Saints from
Christ, John 15. 13. and are they not then unworthy of him, in case they Love
ought More than him, Mat. 10. 37? He loved them, when in their Blood, Ezekiel. 16.
8. whilst they were Sinners, Romans 5. 8. and shall not they love this altogether
lovely one, Cant. 5. 16. whose sharpest Rebukes are big with Love, Rev. 3. 19?
especially such who have had much forgiven, Luke 7. 42. Nothing can separate
them from the Love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 39. who then shall separate Christ
from their Love of him, v. 35, 37, 38?

11. Love is the greatest Factor, and many times with very little Charge, which
should Encourage us to keep it up (for Christ) with utmost care. A good Man
sets his Love upon the Lord, therefore God Promises to Deliver him, because he
thereby seems to know his Name, Psalm. 91. 14. whereas bare want of Love (to
Christ) incurrs the saddest Excommunication, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Yea, David's Love
was amply Recompensed, when it was only in his Heart to Build an House for
God, 2 Samuel 7. 11. 1 Chronicles. 28. 3. therefore the Poorest Saint shall be
Rewarded for their Benevolence, which some could never Evidence, save by their
good Affection, Mat. 25. 34, 35. And if Saints shall be dealt with by the Lord,
according to then Love, their Portion then must needs be Endless, for such has
been their good Affection, however short their Actions be. Yea, therefore both
Their Happiness and others Misery will be Eternal, or Answerable to their
Endless Love.

12. Saints do Profess much Love for Christ, Soul-love, Cant. 1. 7. and their
being Sick thereof, Cant. 2. 5. yea, their being always ready to break with an
Indefinite Longing after his Judgments or their Duty, Psalm. 119. 20. If Peter's
Question were put by Christ to any here, John 21. 15. their Answer would be
like his, as to the Truth (if not the Measure) of their Affection; and would be
Grieved (as he was, v. 17.) if their Profession of that Nature be not Credited;
yea, all the People would say Amen unto that Curse, 1 Cor. 16. 22. as Israel
did of Old unto those Comminations, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Therefore these Foolish
Virgins would be thought to have so much Affection still, as to Desire more; or
rather they only meant the want of Light, (and not of Love,) by this
Confession of Lamps going out. O therefore Love the Lord, al ye his Saints,
Psalm, 31. 23. and do not only make a show thereof, Ezekiel. 3^. 31. but let it be
without Dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. and not in Word, 1 John 3. 18. since Grace
is only like to be their Portion who Lov^ Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24.

13. There can be no true inward Peace or Satisfaction so long as there is a
Restraint upon Affection toward Christ and Duty. As Anguish shut up is
strangling, Job. 7. 11. so is a Gracious Heart in Pain while its Affections are
unduly stopped, in point of Godly sorrow, Psalm. 32. 3. Strong Desire, Job 32. 19,
20. and Holy Zeal, Psalm. 39. 2. Jer. 20. 9. Psalm. 119. 20. It therefore is good
to be Zealously Affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. Yea, a good
Conscience (if Awakened) is not at quiet, nor does enjoy it self with Comfort
so long as its Affections for Christ are Dead; and therefore David Prays for
being Quickened in God's way, Psalm. 119. 37. according to his Word, v. 25. and
for his Names sake, Psalm. 143. 11. so would he call upon him, Psalm. 80. 18. And
with what Faith can they (who Love not Christ) exp^ct the Manifestation of his
Love to them, which is so promised only, John 14. 21? Yea, with what Face can
they Desire it otherwise, as if it were not all the Reason in the World, that a
Wive's and Husband's Love should be Reciprocal, Hos. 3. 3*

14. The Going out of Lamps (or Failing of our Affections) is one sad Sign of
Foolish Virgins, and more especially at such a time, or in these latter Days.
Poor un-espoused Virgins may have a Love for Christ, Cant. 1. 3. what shall we
then think of such who Love him no^, since all the Upright are there said to
Love him, v. 4? The best Material Actions are not so Characteristical (of
visible Saint-ship) as Affections; and Filial Duty is thus Distinguished from
that of Servants, Phil. 2. 20. 22. therefore the shedding of this Flower
exceeds the Falling of that Fruit, in point of Spiritual Discrimination. The
Cooling of Professors Love is said to be the Predominant Distemper of such a
Time, Mat. 24. 12. and Time-Temptations are dreadful Symptoms. Thus are the
Wise and Foolish Virgins (here) Distinguished: And Typical Ephesus is Threatened
with un-churching (and consequently, with being visibly un-Sainted) for leaving
her first Love, Rev. 2. 4, 5.

15. Extinguished Lamps (in such a Day as this) will hardly be ever Lighted
more until the Door be shut. The Nearer that any Union is (as that of
Brethren) the Greater is its Division upon a Breach, and so much the more Hard
is its being reunited, Prove. 18. 19. And as Affections are Enobled by their
Objects, so love for Christ Degenerating into sleightiness, does therefore
enter into the Depth of Putrefaction, as Best things do, when fallen into
Decay, which consequently are most irrecoverable. Thence is it, that so few
Adulterers (or Backsliders) do Return, Prove. 2. 19. so Boisterous is that
Affection which is not kept within the bounds, of its allowed Object. And
Time-Temptations (such as this is at present) are more especially Malignant or
Incurable, because they are a Spiritual Plague or Token of God's Displeasure,
by which his Own are separated from the World, Psalm. 12. 7. Therefore let our
Affections be well Guarded Now, unless we mean to have those Lamps put out for
ever.

16. Let us duly weigh that dreadful Sentence passed upon such as love not
Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. There was of Old, and there still is a Twofold Ordinary
Spiritual Censure upon Offenders; the one of which was, to be shut out of the
Camp for so long time, Deuteronomy. 23. 10. which was a Type of that Withdrawing, 2
These. 3. 6. 14, 15. The Other was, to be cut off, Exodus 12. 15. which Answers
unto Gospel-Excommunication, Gal. 5. 12. Yet might a Person (so dealt with) be
Taken in again, 2 Cor. 2. 8. But some were not to be so much as Prayed for, 1
John 5. 16. as being never to be forgiven, Mat. 12. 32. but to be called
Anathema, or set aside, until the Lord shall come, which Maranatha signifies;
the former of which is a Greek word, the other Syriack, which latter was the
common Language of the Jews at that day: To intimate, that he who loves not
Christ, was to be Cursed by Jews and Greeks (or Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1. 24.) till
Christ shall come and say, Depart ye Cursed, Mat. 25. 41. Not but that every
sin deserves Death, Romans 6. 23. nor but that sinners (of this kind) may be
Recovered; only to Represent the Danger of not loving Christ, next unto that
of sinning against the Holy Ghost.

And as we would keep our Affections up for Christ and Duty, these following
Helps may be of Use.

1. Let us stand Gazing upon these Objects, as those Apostles did, when Christ
Ascended, Acts 1. 10. nor shall we need to fear our being therefore checked, as
they were then, v. 11. because their steadfast looking Terminated upon his
Flesh, unto our Admonition. As is the Sight, so is Impression; Beholding
Changes, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and Vision does Assimilate, 1 John 3. 2. Yea, Job
concluded the working of his Friends Affections toward him, in case they would
but look upon him, Job 6. 28. as looking upon Christ does make his Piercers
mourn, Zech. 12. 10. with Supplication. Therefore Job made a Covenant with his
Eyes, Job 31. 1. and Drunkards are bid to take heed of looking upon the Wine,
Prove. 23. 31. Yea, when Christ would not be Overcome, he bids the Spouse to
Turn away from him, Cant. 6. 5. So Powerful is Sight upon Affection. And if Ten
Thousand Objects were in View, Christ would appear to be the chiefest of them
all, Cant. 5. 10.

2. Let us endeavor also to Trim such Objects, since our Affections unto
Things and Persons are much Inflamed by the Bravery of their Adorning, as
Harlots too well know, Jer. 2. 33. Nor does Christ need to be set out by us,
save as an Eye of Faith can Dress him with his Own, or rather see him as he is,
or as he (at the least) will at the last appear in Glory. Men therefore Hide
their Faces from him, Isa. 53. 3. because his Visage is first marred by them,
Isa. 52. 14. either by stripping him of his stately Robes, or by discoloring
them with their Evil Eye. Could we but look at Jesus, as he is Now set upon his
Father's Throne, Heb. 12. 2. how should we Run with Patience the Race that is
set before us, v. 1. Since Duty has the same Debentur's, and which as surely
will be discharged. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Yea, how would Duty at the Present Ravish,
could we but Eye its Native Beauty, our being therein most like to Christ,
together with that Peace which does attend it.

3. If any One Duty would be always loved by us, so let our Love be Universal,
and let us not Despise the least; at leastwise not the Greater Branches of it,
such as Time-Duties are by way of Eminency. He that Despises any of his ways,
shall Die, Prove. 19. 16. his Love thereunto will Decay; it being with
Obedience, as with a Faggot, the smallest of whose sticks (when plucked out)
does loosen all the rest. A Killing Cold is oft-times got (in tender Bodies) by
leaving off a Thinner Garment; yea, by not having it closely Girt about us.
Much more if Weightier Matters are Dis-esteemed; it being with our Affections,
as with a Civil State, which soon will come to Naught, when Babes and Children
are in Chief Command, Isa. 3. 4. Time-Truths are as the Bond of Duty, which
being once slackned, does hazard the Dissolution of our Love in General, as
both Experience and the Scriptures Witness; and without Love to which no True
or Lasting Love to any other can safely be concluded otherways.

4. Let our Affections unto Christ be Genuine, or Kindly, and not Enforced. One
may be Overawed to Love another, but Soldiers Pre^t into a Service are not to
be Confided in; therefore Christ only is for Vo^untiers. How hard a Matter it
is to keep Affection up (in a Religious Duty) unless the Spirit be kindly
raised! Whereas Enlarged Hearts can Run, Psalm. 119. 32. and spend themselves, 2
Cor. 6. 11. without being Wearied, 2 Cor. 12. 15. Spontaneous Earthly Fruits
are mo^^ Abiding, so is that Love which is most Natural: God's Love is
therefore Ev^^la^tng, Jer. 31. 3. because he Loves Freely, Hos. 14. 4.
Therefore God and his People are called each others Portion or Inheritance,
Jer. 10. 16. because the Naturalness of their Affection (each unto other) is
like an Estate in Land, which is not Subject unto C^^ualties, as Money ^s. An
Arrow forced out of a Bow, will fall within a while; whereas Beams Darted from
the Sun, continue in their Strength and uncon^rained Vigor.

5. Let not our Love be over-violent, I mean, not so, as to be Supreme, in
Competition with our Judgment. A Sober Traveller will soone^t come unto his
Journeys end; whilst he that is all upon the Spur will quickly Tire, both Horse
and Man, Gal. 5. 7. They who receive Man as an Angel, Gal. 4. 14. are apt (ere
long) to count him as an Enemy, v. 16. therefore, unless such could be
Zealously Affected always; v. 18. it is better to be Moderate, 1 Cor. 4. 6. Some
(in our Days) have been too fierce to hold. So Run, as that we may Obtain, 1
Cor. 9. 24. and he that striveth for the Mastery, is Temperate, v. 25. which
seems to be meant by Lawful striving, 2 Timothy 2. 5. We should Love God with
all our Heart and Soul, and Mind, and so with all our Strength, Mark 12. 30.
else as an injudicious love is always Carnal, (though fixed upon a Spiritual
Object,) so it will never last; and violent Exercise does only Post a Mortal
Body so much the faster into its Grave.

6. Let our Affections unto Duty be kept up in their constant Exercise, as we
would have them to continue. That Lamp which is not always Burning, will go
out. If (in this case) we cease to Love, Affection will soon Die, as does Man's
Body without continual Breathing; Loves Breath and Life is in the Nostrils of
its Exercises. He that would row against the Stream, (as every of Christ's
Lovers does) must have a Care of Missing any one stroke, for fear of being
Turned quite away. This some have found to be the Issue of Religious
Intermissions, under pretense of waiting for the Spirit, till Love unto that
Duty has been quite Extinguished. And as indulged sluggishness is one Symptom
of our Dying Love, so is it a Cause thereof; as stirring up this Heavenly fire
(by a Lively Exercise) is likeliest to prevent its Going out. When we have
once Raised the Bell of Duty, a steady pull may keep it up with ease, which
else will Fall, and may not Rise again.

7. Let us not Hanker after other things. Sin Kills our Affections quite, and
if the Creature has too much, Christ will have none at all, 1 John 2. 15. A
right up burning Lamp will last the longest; but when its Light does waste on
either side, it swaileth much, and hazards an Extinction. Christ sits light,
Mat. 11. 30. but Mammon (got up behind him) Tireth us, in ways of Duty. Could
we but lay aside these heavy Weights, how should we Run with Patience the Race
that is set before us, Heb. 12. 1? How can some wonder at the Cooling of their
scattered Love! It being therewith as with Sunbeams, which are not burning,
save as they are United, Psalm. 86. 11. We cannot Approve our selves to God,
unless we study, 2 Timothy 2. 15. and studying is inconsi^tent with Diversions,
until our Eyes are turned from beholding Vanity, Psalm. 119. 37. This favoring
so much what is of Man, (though only in a way of Longing for them) destroys
our Taste of better things, Mat. 16. 23. and our Desires thereof.

8. Let our Affections (unto Christ and Duty) be of the Noblest Kind, both as
to their Rise and Maintenance. Christ may be Embraced by Carnal Arms, and in
that case, the Ivy (about an Oak) may wither soon, because its Root is of a
Weak Decaying Nature. Professors (Generally) are only careful to fix upon a
Spiritual Object; Whereas the Suitableness of their Affections is as
Essentially required of them, else are they neither Holy, nor will be Lasting.
And though there is an Holy Driving Terror, 2 Cor. 5. 11. and other Drawing
Considerations, Hos. 11. 4. yet will our Motion never be Perpetual, save as our
being Wisdom's Children, Mat. 11. 19. is evinced by the Naturalness of our
Affection to its Naked Ways. And to that end, let us not too much eve
Encouragements in such a way, lest by that means our Love should be Debased:
But let those Chambers (or Accommodations) be so joined to the Temple of our
Duty, as that their Beams may not be fastened into its Wall, according to God's
own Order, 1 Kings 6. 6. else will it Threaten both the Weakening and Defacing
of that House, in case those Chambers be taken down, which otherwise is no way
Dis-advantaged.

9. Let us be careful with whom we Ordinarily (at leastwise Intimately) do
Converse, since though Communion with the Wise cannot secure the Foolish
Virgins Lamps from Going out; yet are Companions apt to Influence, Prove. 13.
20. Saul (if among the Prophets) will also Prophesy, 1 Samuel 19. 24. And Joash
his good Affection was Preserved, so long as good Jehoiada Lived, 2 Chronicles. 24.
2. but otherwise Love will cool, Mat. 24. 12. Affection for Duty (since the
Fall) is very crazy; and Persons (Aguishly Disposed) upon the sight of others
so Affected, are apt to shake. Thus many Hopeful Virgins (of later Years) have
Buried their Ancient Love (for Duty) in the Bosom of a Disaffected
Yoak-fellow; which is a fair Warning unto Others to Marry in the Lord, 1 Cor.
7. 39. Come out of Babylon, for fear of being Touched with her Sins, Rev. 18.
4. Since any one Root of Bitterness is apt to Trouble and Defile, Heb. 12. 15.
though it be but a little Leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Consult Experiences, and let us
Act accordingly.

10. Let us endeavor to ashame our selves, both by our Own and Others
Practices, provoking hereunto. Oh how Affectionate are sinners in their way,
Doting upon their Lovers, Ezekiel 23. 10. and seeking to out-vye each other in
their Inordinacy, v. 11. Yea, falling in Love with Pourtraitures upon the Wall,
v. 14. 16. and being inflamed with the Remembrance of former Lewdness, v. 19.
21. And is it not a shame that Christ should have less Love than Satan? Nay
Saints themselves have heretofore been Zealous in an Evil way, as Paul had
been, who therefore (when he was Converted) followed after Holiness in himself,
as he had sometimes Persecuted it in others, Phil. 3. 6. 12. Yea, all these
Virgins had been full of seeming Love for Christ, as those for Paul, Gal. 4.
15. And is it not a shame that Israel should come short of Heathens, in point
of Lasting, Jer. 2. 10? Nor can it be denied, but that Saints have Affections
still, who can give no good Reason for their Abatement toward Christ, Jer. 2.
5. 31. and in that case, as Christ will not Accept the Creatures Leavings, Mal.
1. 8. so does he sadly Curse such a Deceitful Sacrificer, v. 14. and such a
puff upon a Candle new blown out, may be of use to blow it in again; yea with
the Help of Christ's Breath therein, and of his Hand behind it, this may regain
the deadest Lamp.

11. Let us be deeply Humbled in the sense of our Decaying Love for Christ, as
we would ever get it up again, and keep it Lively. Cold peccant Humors lie
exceeding Low, as Melancholy in the Stomach, which makes Heart-sick before it
will come up; as she Experienc^d, Cant. 5. 8. upon the Cooling of her Love, v.
2, 3. And Peter eminently, till he had Wept most B^tterly, Mat. 26. 74, 75. and
then he Loved Christ (ever after) to the Death, John 21. 17, 18. Christ would
be glad to hear B^ck sliding Ephraim to bemoan himself, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
Such Breakings forth upon our Lips would comfortably Evidence somes hopes of a
Recovery, v. 20, 21. These Foolish Virgins do confess their Fading Lamps with
un-affected Hearts, who Go to Buy more Oil, Mat. 25. 10. but not with Weeping,
as Jer. 50. 4. nor do they Return with self-condemning, Mat. 25. 11. that shows
their Hopelesness, v. 12. Remember whence we are fallen, and Repent, as we
would Rise again, Rev. 2. 5.

12. Let us be much in Prayer, that God would Direct our Hearts in the Love of
him, 2 These. 3. 5. and that he would incline them to his Law, Psalm. 119. 36.
and not to any Evil thing, Psalm. 141. 3. As he is the Father of Lights, James
1. 17. so his Almighty Hand must Guard our Lamps, as does a Lanthorn, else
every Gust of Wind will blow them out. He turns the Heart to Hate, Psalm. 105.
25. and Esau's Hatred into Love, Genesis 33. 4. who also can prepare the Heart
unto himself, by keeping that Affection up (for ever) which else is Subject to
Decay, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. This Fire first comes from Above; and though forenamed
Helps may lay the sticks together, yet Prayer must Blow it up, else will it
soon go out. Had these Poor Foolish Virgins gone to Christ, (who only went to
their Companions,) they might have gained from himself, what neither was in
their own Power to keep Alive, (viz. their Lamps,) nor in the Others to Restore.

MATTHEW XXV. 9. But the Wise Answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not
enough for us and you; but Go ye rather to them that Sell, and Buy for your
selves.
IN these words we have the Wise Virgins Answer unto the Others foregoing
Motion. Wherein we may Observe, First, a Gentle Denying of them, rather Employed
in that word [but] than plainly signified; those word [Not so] not being in the
Greek. Secondly, a Satisfactory Reason rendered; Lest there be not enough for us
and you. Thirdly, a Giving them (yet) what Help they can, by way of Exhortation
and Direction, to Go and Buy of such as Sell.

From all which, the General Observation is as follows.

Observe. In Answer to the Foolish Virgins Motion, for Oil or Light, the Wiser
(in these latter days) will rather wish the Others going unto such as Sell, in
Order to their Buying of it for themselves.

Quest. 1. How came the Wise Virgins to be so Calm, considering the Others
great M^scarriage, whose Lamps were now Gone out, through want of Care to take
Oil with them at the first?
Answ. 1. These Foolish Virgins here do not Provoke the Wise unto their Faces
by any unhandsome word or carriage: and in that Case, few will Begin to Quarrel
upon Christ's Account, till Passion is stirred up by Personal Provocations.
There is a great Fault among Professors in that regard, who count Plain dealing
Passion, and so Desist therefrom, until themselves are thoroughly vexed, or
Passionate indeed; and then such will speak out. We ought to follow Peace with
all Men, Heb. 12. 14. but not to Purchase it by Theft and Murder, such as Man's
sinful silence is, to Christ and to his Brother, Jer. 23. 30. Ezekiel. 33. 8. Thus
does self-love dispense with Duty, under a Pretense of studying Peace, till
Interest has made such Furious, instead of being truly Faithful, which seldom
is of any use, James 1. 20. save only to Discover those Passionate Reprovers
Dissimulation.

2. The Wiser Virgins might Perceive the others inability to bear plain
downright dealing at the present; and this might cause their being silent.
Rebukes are Pearls too good for Swine, Mat. 7. 6. Not may a Scorner be
Reproved, Prove. 9. 7, 8. And when that Prophet was ^id forbear, he Warrantably
did so, as a Token of the others Ruin, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. As Men would not be
cast out, so let them take heed of Mocking, Genesis 21. 9, 10. and as they would
not be let alone, so let them take heed of being Joined to their evil ways,
Hos. 4. 17. Yea, let them Encourage others as they would Healingly be Reproved
by them, Psalm. 141. 5. Saints have not so many smiles from Christ (as yet)
because they cannot bear them; nor others (upon that Account) some fructifying
showers from his Clouded brows. And though (at such a time) Gentiles may be
compelled to come in, Luke 14. 23. yet Old Professing Jews will soon Discourage
their Inviters, v. 24.

3. These very Wise Virgins were lately wakened out of their sleeping with the
other, which might Occasion their want of Zeal. Distempered sleep (such as this
was) does Naturally tend to make the Spirits dull; and much more in a Moral
sense. Conscience in David was fast asleep when he could be so fierce against
that in Another, whereof himself was then so Guilty, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 6, 7. It Is
meet for Slumberers to Rub their Eyes, before they can Discern (at least
Reprove) another's sluggishness. Christ's Teaching was Authoritative, in
Competition with that of Hypocrites, Mat. 7. 29. whose guilty Conscience (when
Appealed unto) made them Desist from prosecuting their Impeachment of another,
John 8. 7. 9. And as those Typical Snuffers were made of purest Gold, Exodus 37.
23. so Persons Newly Raised from a Fall, have seldom so much Confidence, as to
Rebuke their fellows, till thoroughly purified from Enfeebling guilt.

4. They might be Tender in Judging upon the present case; how far a failing of
this Nature was their sin; or how far such a sin might be consistent with the
Main; or whether their Lamps were not Recoverable: And therefore only might
Exhort instead of sharp Rebuking. Christ did more deeply Censure the Foolish
Virgins of his Time, than his Disciples could well bear, Mat. 15. 12. and some
Wise Virgins (at this Day) like not such kind of Tartness. Few are Convinced,
that Ignorance does not Excuse from sin, or that Time-Duties are of such
Importance, as to have Saint-ship gathered up thereinto: who therefore dare not
Judge Men upon that Account. And since the Scripture so much calls for
Gentleness, it is a thing so grateful of it self, as that few Men can bear it is
Contrary in any case, though every whit as plainly Warranted, especially among
Back-sliders. But those Tormenting Witnesses were only Two, Rev. 11. 10. the
Generality are Moderate.

5. Wise Virgins always are Inferior to the Foolish, in point of Interest;
which is a sore Temptation, not to Irritate, and which but few can overcome.
Soundest Professors generally are Poor, compared with others, 1 Cor. 4. 8. and
Poor Men use Entreaties, leaving rough Answers to the Rich, Prove. 18. 23. who
seldom themselves are so dealt with, save by a more than Ordinary Prophet, as
of Old. Soundest Professors also are but few: And where is that Micajah, who
dares to Rebuke four hundred Lying Flatterers? Yea, Foolish Virgins are of the
first Magnitude, unto the dwellers upon Earth, as is the Moon, because of its
being nearer unto sense: And as Proud Pharisees deride Plain dealing, Luke 16.
14. presuming upon their high Esteem, v. 15 so none but Christ and John durst
roughly handle them, until the Spirit was poured down, Acts 2. 17. 23. and when
that Dispensation comes again, Isa. 32. 15. then stammerers will speak plainly,
ver. 4.

6. The Lord himself might have a Righteous Overruling Hand, in their being
silent unto such, at such a Time. He has the Key of Utterance, Col. 4. 3. and
when he Shuts, no Man can Open, Rev. 3. 7. A Moral (or Preceptive) Bar is
always laid upon his People's Reprehensions, in some Cases, or when clear Duties
are Disputed; Hos. 4. ^. and sometimes an Effectual (or Physical) Bar does
force them to be dumb. Thus Naaman's halving it with God, (after so full a
Conviction and Obliging Mercy,) was justly Punished with Elisha's silence and
seeming Approbation, 2 Kings 5. 17, 18, 19. The Time is Now hastening, for God
himself to Answer such Hypocritical Enquirers of him, Ezekiel. 14. 4. who
therefore will not let his Servants speak, v. 3. And thus some are not Plainly
spoken unto, Mat. 13. 13. least they should See and Hear, and Understand, and
be Converted, unto their being Healed, v. 15.

Quest. 2. What is the Meaning of that Denial which is here made (by these Wise
Virgins) unto the Foolish Virgins Motion for Oil or Light?
Answ. To which I Answer.

First, Negatively.

1. It is not to be understood, as if the Wise Virgins were (in the least)
unwilling to have lent what Help they could, in case the Other had been truly
serious. This would not have consisted with their Wisdom, but would have
signified their being also Foolish; since the Lips of the Wise Disperse
Knowledge, but the Heart of the Foolish does not so, Prove. 15. 7. A Gracious
Heart Longs to Impart that Spiritual Gift, whereof he does partake, Romans 1.
11. doing therein to Others, as he would be dealt with by them, v. 12. Oil is
Diffusive, especially where Gifts and Graces are in Conjunction: therefore it
sadly signifies, when utmost Spiritual Help is not Afforded, from Envy,
Sluggishness, or Spiritual Pride: Satan may Hinder, once and again, 1 These. 2.
18. so may Diversions otherways, Romans 15. 22. Yea, sometimes Paul was Hindered
by the Holy Ghost, Acts 16. 6, 7. who else did count himself a Debtor unto All,
Romans 1. 14.

2. Nor is it meant, as if the Wise Virgins (absolutely) were unable to have
given Oil unto the Foolish. It Is true, all Man's sufficiency (for such a work)
is of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 5. as well as Efficacy, 1 Cor. 3. 7. yet are Men
workers together with him, 2 Cor. 6. 1. who therefore have this Oil or Treasure
in their Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. Paul could Beget, in Bonds, Philem. 10.
and he that is not Able to be a Spiritual Father, was Typically of Old debarred
from that Priesthood, Lev. 21. 20. which was a Type of Gospel Saint-ship, 1
Pet. 2. 9. nor might such enter into the Congregation, or be Accounted
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 23. 1. Nor will the Saints Oil (in this Respect) forbear to
Multiply, so long as there are any chosen Vessels left for it to overflow
into, as 2 Kings 4. 6. or not until Election has done bearing Children; and
then this Oil will stay, as did that Widows, serving to pay its Owners Debts,
and for Subsistence, 2 Kings 4. 7.

3. Nor is that Cautionary Reason [Lest there be not enough for us and you] to
be Interpreted, as if this Spiritual Contribution would Exhaust the Wiser
Virgins store, as at the first blush it seems to import. There was no
Lessening of Christ's Virtue, by what went from him, Luke 8. 46. nor is the Sun
darkened by its shining: Nor is a Saint the Poorer for his Spiritual
Liberality. Yea, Grace is thus kept Bright with Use, which otherwise might
gather Rust, and so Corrupt, as Gold it self is apt to Canker, James 5. 3. unto
its Owner's Disadvantage. And as unmeet with holding tends unto Poverty, so
he Increases, who duly scatters, Prove. 11. 24. and waters himself by
watering others, v. 25 as Talent-Occupiers do Experience, Mat. 25. 20. Lamps,
in the Letter and Mystery, herein Agree, that neither of them are Diminished by
Lighting Others: Mystical Lamps herein are singular, because their Oil is
Multiplied by Distribution. Thus much as to the Negative. But then,

II. Affirmatively. They might thus speak unto the Foolish Virgins.

1. To prove the Cordialness of their Desire, if not to check their
sleightiness and Carnality therein. When that Samaritan Woman sleightily and
Carnally desired Christ's Ever-living water, John 4. 15. he only Answered her
with a Diversion, v. 16. q. d. I will be otherwise sought unto before a Motion
of that Nature shall be satisfied. However Cordialness is thus Expreimented.
Thus Joshua tried the Truth of Israel's Professing to Serve the Lord, Josh. 24.
16. by his Rejecting of it, v. 19. till they had Doubted it, v. 21. and then he
let it pass, v. 22. Thus Naomi refused Ruth's first Resolution to Accompany
her, Ruth 1. 10. 15. merely to prove her stedfastness, v. 16, 17, 18. as did
Elijah to Elisha, 2 Kings 2. 2. and Christ himself unto those two Disciples,
Luke 24 28, 29. Had not the Foolish Virgins been indifferent, so Modest a
Denial would have wrought another way; therefore this Trial was not unwisely
made.

2. To Check the Foolish Virgins coming Only unto them for Oil, without any
further Pains or Cost, who therefore bid them (rather) Go to them that Sell,
and Buy. Thus Naaman was bid to Go and Wash in Jordan, 2 Kings 5. 10. and those
Ten Lepers to Go and show themselves unto the Priest, Luke 17. 14. and Israel,
to Buy of Esan, Meat and Water, Deuteronomy. 2. 6. not from unwillingness to Gratify
them upon other terms, but to Rebuke self-love. And though a Gracious Heart is
free to do for others what he can, yet does he send such to Christ, as without
whom he can do nothing; and who does chiefly seek his Glory. Thus to dissuade
from Terminating upon Instruments (after a work is done) was Peter's Virtue,
Acts 3. 12. and thus to send (before hand) the Foolish Virgins unto Christ, was
the Wise Virgins self-denial. It is our Grace and Duty not to satisfy another
wish, when either God is likely to be Robbed, or some more sad Distemper to be
Indulged.

3. To show the Wise Virgins sense of having Oil little enough, and none to
spare, as (in Propriety of Speech) the Other's Motion did import: Therefore
these Answer, Lest there be not enough for us and you. As he that Loves
Silver, is not satisfied, Eccl. 5. 10. So he that Loves Oil (or Grace, and
Spiritual Light,) is as the Sea, which is not Full, though all the Rivers run
into it, Eccl. 1. 7. Thus is a truly Gracious Heart Distinguished from
Hypocrites, by his being always fearful, lest he should not have Oil enough,
which others are afraid of having too much of. And more especially Wise Virgins
are sollicitous, with reference unto Time-Truths and Duties; which are
Expensive, and therefore need the greater S^ock: Yea; which are also very
Curious, and therefore need the clearest Light. It Is true, their Lighting
others is no way self-diminishing; but their Denial here may only intimate
unto the other, how Low they were in their own Eyes, and what an High esteem
they had of Oil, as to its Worth and Use.

4. To signify (perhaps) how Difficult it was for them to make this Present
Duty out, unto another, above Most other Duties. It Is true, Time-Truths are
very Plain, as Excellent things are, to him that Understands, Prove. 8. 6. 9.
yet are they hardly to be understood by Others, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and to be uttered
by the Best, Heb. 5. 11. Few at this Day perceive that More is in this Second
going forth, than at the First: Nor can it be yet made out, but with a
stammering Lip, as was foretold, Isa. 28. 11. or with a strange Tongue, as
Paul explaineth it, 1 Cor. 14. 21. Truths are but rarely seen, at their first
coming up, till God (in Time) shall make some clearer Revelation, Phil. 3. 15.
or till the Customary Practice of Sober Christians, shall silence them who seem
to be Contentious, 1 Cor. 11. 14. 16. Let not the Foolish Virgins wonder, in
case the Wise (at first) have no more Light into untrodden Paths, than will
just serve their turn; as is here hinted.

5. These bid the Other go, and Buy Oil for Themselves; because they would have
them see with their Own Eyes, and not with Others, in Matters of this Nature.
Unsound Professors (like some bad Husbands) Live most upon Borrowing: But
Gospel-Saints are for the Proving of their Own work, Gal. 6. 4. and working
with their Own Hand, 1 These. 4. 11. and being persuaded in their own Heart,
Romans 14. 5. Thus shall Men have Rejoicing in their own selves, Gal. 6. 4. Thus
shall they have Reward, according to their own Labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8. thus Trees
are to be known by their own Fruit, Luke 6. 46. nor will the Best Seed abide
with him, which has not Root in Himself, Mat. 13. 21. Therefore Wise Men are
only for the Use and Distribution of what is their own, Prove. 5. 15, 16, 17.
and they who make the Truth their own, have right to call Heaven their own
also, though Earthly Mammon be Another's, Luke 16. 11, 12. and this is Buying
for ones self.

6. They might thus speak to get rid of the Others Company, whom they now had
no Pleasure in, so much as to Discourse any longer with them.

1. Partly, Because of their Backsliding from a former Practice and
Profession. They had gone out Before; but now their Lamps were Gone, or Going
out, and with a Noisome smell unto these Wiser Virgins, which might Occasion
this Quick (though Fair) Dismission. God has no Pleasure in him that draws
back, Heb. 10. 38. because Apostates are as Smoke unto his Nose, Isa. 65. 5.
therefore Christ will not Parley with these late Returners, Mat. 25. 12. no
more than do these other now. Nor is it to be wondered at, since Mystical Lamps
are apt to go out for Company, Mat. 24. 12. yea, their very Snuffs are most
Offensive, like Dead Men's Carcasses, which do Occasion those Alive to stop
their Noses, Ezekiel. 39 11. and so their Speech must needs be Hindered. As Men
would have Discourse (with Christ, or with his People) to be Convinced; so let
them take heed of wearying others with such bad Savours, or Dead Affections.

2. Because the Wise Virgins might perceive their being unlikely to Convince
the other, by any thing Offered for such a purpose. These Foolish Virgins
(Doubtlesly) had already heard, what could be said, and wherefore should they
hear the same again, who had no mind to be the Truth's Disciples, John 9. 27?
The Cry had cleared up the Nature of this Duty: Nor do they Complain of wanting
ought, but Lamps, or good Affections thereunto; and when the Judgment is not
Supreme, it is but in vain to Reason with Men's Affections. It was an Argument of
Abigail's Wisdom, to be silent, till Nabal's Reason was Restored, 1 Samuel 25.
26. 27. nor will Men Plough upon the Rock, Amos 6. 12. yea, Saints are bid
withdraw from strifes of Words, and from Perverse Disputings, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.
If Men will not Believe, Christ will say little, Luke 32. 67. And if Wise
Virgins be not like to Profit Others, they will not vex Themselves with vain
Discourse.

Quest. 3. Who are these Sellers of Oil or Light, and why are they so called?
Answ. It must be meant of Christ, or of his Servants, there being no other
whom these wise Virgins would bid the Other Go unto.

Now, as to Saints, the Generality of Professors are intended by these Virgins;
therefore They cannot be the Sellers here, since half of them do bid the other
half, to Go and Buy elsewhere.

It Is true indeed, there have been Two Anointed ones (or Sons of Oil) by way of
Eminency, Zech. 4. 14. who (with Respect to Christ) are termed Olive-Branches,
v. 12. but Olive Trees, with reference unto others, v. 11. and these are said
to Empty the Golden Oil out of Themselves, through their Two Golden Pipes, v.
12. or Sanctified Mediums, viz. the Word and Prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. And this is
(in Effect) to Sell; so that such Eminently enlightened ones (or the Maintainers
of others Lamps with Oil, Zech 4. 2, 3.) may fitly share (with Christ himself)
in such a Title, above the Generality of Professors. Only it thence will
follow, that slumbring (wise) Virgins are no Proper VVitnesses; since (when
Awakened) they do not Challenge to themselves the Name of Oyl-Emptyers, (or
Sellers of it unto Others,) which yet is given by Christ unto the VVitnesses,
Rev. 11. 4.

But yet I rather choose to give this Title (here) to Christ alone, who is the
Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. and consequently, the sole Proprietor, or Proper
Seller of this Commodity. Yet may his single Person be Represented here, by
that word [them;] not only, because he has his under Servants, but also those
Seven Spirits of God, Rev. 3. 1. by whom he Sells these Commodities in his
stead, and with his Approbation, John 16. 13. And so we read of several things,
wherewith Christ's Shop is Furnished, and under the Nation of their being put
to Sale. In which regard, I stand here at his Door, (like some Apprentice)
inviting Passengers to come and Buy.

1. Do you lack any Meat or Drink, poor Hungring, Thirsty Souls? Come Buy and
Eat, Isa. 55. 1. here is Meat and Drink indeed, John 6. 55. This water will
prevent your future Thirst, John 4. 14. and he that Eats of this Bread, shall
never Dye, John 6. 50. whereas you will be Cheated otherwhere, Isa. 55. 2.

2. Do you lack any Wine, poor Drooping Hearts? Come hither, yea, come Buy
Wine, Isa. 55. 1. this Wine is well Refined on the Lees, Isa. 25. 6. Old
Wine, which is the Best, Luke 5. 39. yea, that which is better than any Wine
whatever, Cant. 1. 2. nor is it measured out by Cups, but Flaggons, Cant 2. 5.
whereof one may with safety (as well as freedom) Drink abundantly, Cant. 5. 1.

3. Do you lack any Milk, poor little Children? Come hither, yea, come, Buy
Wine and Milk, Isa. 55. 1. both which may safely be Drunk together, Cant. 5. 1.
and this Milk is sincere, which therefore is to be Desired, 1 Pet. 2. 2. that
Newborn Babes may Grow thereby: It is the Milk of that Red Heifer, Numb. 19.
2. and of that Goat, Lev. 16. 20. both which are very Nourishing: This Milk is
under the Spouses Tongue, Cant. 4. 11. because she lies sucking at Christ's
Breast.

4. Do you lack any Clothes or Money, poor Naked Beggars? I Counsel thee (says
Christ) to Buy of me Gold Tried in the Fire, and White Raiment, that thou may
be Clothed, Rev. 3. 18. His Gold will never Rust, nor will his Garments
Moth-eat: his Robes will cover all your Nakedness, so will his Money pay your
Debts: His Clothes will add Inherent Beauty, his Money answers all things,
however poor its all Possessor seems, 2 Cor. 6. 10.

5. Once more; Do you lack your Sight, poor Foolish Virgins? Christ also has
Eye Salve to Sell, which he does Counsel you to Buy of him, Rev. 3. 18. That is
the Oil here spoken of, (or the Commodity now in my Hand) with reference unto
which, Christ is here called a Seller. The Nature of which Oil has formerly
been cleared up: It only now remains to show, why Christ is called the Seller
of it, or wherein he is like a Tradesman? which thus appears.

1. Tradesmen have store of what they put to Sale, and so has Christ. Here is
enough for him and others; therein he differs from these Wise Virgins. He
has the Treasury of Wisdom, Col. 2. 3. in whom all fullness dwells, Col. 1.
19. and such a Fullness as is to be Received from, John 1. 16. As none have
cause to wave his Offer, from their pretending to have enough, Genesis 33. 9. so
none has cause to fear his being Prejudiced by it, since he has all, as Jacob
said, v. 11. and as the Hebrew word there signifies. He promises to fill the
widest Mouth, Psalm. 81. 10. and has enough for all the World; yea, satisfies
ever Customer, and yet he is the same for ever. His uncreated Oil can Make
(with one word speaking) whatever Oil the Creature needs; therefore his stock
must needs continue.

2. A Tradesman has Authority to Sell, and so has Christ. He is the
Proprietor of what he has, by Virtue of the Father's Gift, Mat. 28. 18. and
his own Purchase, Phil. 2. 8, 9. and is it not Lawful for him then, to do what
he will with his own, Mat. 20. 18? He can produce his Letters Patents;
therefore fear not to Trade with him, for him has God the Father Sealed, John
6. 27. Buy what you please of him, it never shall be Taken from you, if Good
and Needful, Luke 10. 42. Yea, though his Servant (Isaac) did mistake the
Person, yet Jacob had the Blessing still, because the Master did so Order it,
Genesis 27. 33. Robbers, John 10. 1. may Sell what they have stolen, Jer. 23. 30.
but shall not therefore Profit others, because not sent, v. 32.

3. Tradesmen are Free to deal with any, and so is Christ. Ho, every one that
Thirsts, Isa. 55. 1. and whosoever will, Rev. 22. 17. Rich or Poor, Old or
Young, Good or Bad, one or other, let him come. His Voice is to the Sons of
Man, Prove. 8. 4. and unto Thee, yea, even to Thee, Prove. 22. 19. And he that
comes to him, shall in no wise be Cast out by him, John 6. 37. He only
finds fault with Men's unwillingness, John 5. 40. nor does he Turn away from
any, till they have Judged themselves unworthy of his Gracious Offer, Acts 13.
46. Yea, former Provocations are no Let to Persons pricked in their Hearts; for
unto such the Promise is, by way of Tender, as well as others, Acts 2. 37, 38,
39.

4. That which a Tradesman Sells, is the Buyers own, between them two; so is
it between a Soul and Christ. Therefore his Gifts are said to be without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29. because they are Sold, as to Assurance, though freely
Given, Romans 8. 32. as to any Proper Price, Isa. 55. 1. A Gift bestowed upon
Servants, is only theirs till such a Time, Ezekiel. 46. 17. before which Time, it
may be Taken away, if mis-improved, Hos. 2. 8, 9. but Spiritual Riches are a
True Believers own, Luke 15. 11, 12. who is a Son, John 1. 12. therefore his
Gift is a Possession by Inheritance, Ezekiel. 46. 16. It Is firmly Promised, 1 John
2. 25. and with an Oath, Heb. 6. 17. before sufficient VVitness, ^ John 5. 7.
an Earnest whereof is also given, Ephesians. 1. 14.

5. Tradesmen Invite their Customers, but do not offer to Enforce them, save
only in a way of Moral suasion; and so does Christ. He only hinteth the
Happiness of being Interested in his Offers, together with the Danger of
Refusing them, Mark 16. 16. and that is the whole of his Compelling to come in,
Luke 14. 23. He may be Heard to say, How long will ye Love Simplicity, Prove. 1.
22? When will ye be wise, Psalm. 94. 8? Why will ye Die, Ezekiel. 18. 31? but else,
be at your Choice, whom you will Serve, Josh. 24. 15. The Man of Sin is for
Coercion, Rev. 13. 16. but herein partly does the easiness of Christ's Yoke
appear, because it is not Put upon a Person's Neck, till he is willing to Take
it up, Mat. 11. 29, 30,

6. Tradesmen are wont to Part with no Commodities, but upon such proposed
terms; no more does Christ. Only Christ herein differs much from other
Tradesmen, because Himself is not Advantaged, nor is the Soul at all
Impoverished by any of those terms insisted on. Which are as follows:

1. You must Come unto him. His Chapmen are oftener bid to Come, than Buy, Isa.
55. 1. to intimate, that if they mean to Buy, they must be sure to Come. He May
be found of such as do not seek him, Isa. 65. 1. but Ordinarily he will be
first Enquired of, Ezekiel. 36. 37. Joseph had Corn enough, yet must his own
Brethren Come and Buy, Genesis 42. 2. yea, they must come again, or starve, Genesis
43. 2. And then he has his Price, although they had their Money still, v. 22,
23. Yea, they must Come to Him, Mat. 11. 28. and not unto their Fellows only,
as did these Foolish Virgins. The Father has Committed all to him, John 5. 22.
as Pharaoh did to Joseph, Genesis 41. 55. such also must Come, as Coming does
import Believing, John 6. 35. not Absolutely with Respect to full Assurance, in
point of Present or Future Interest; but yet with reference to his Ability and
Will, upon such terms as are propounded by him, James 1. 6. Heb. 11. 6. and by
a Special Faith, Ephesians. 3. 8.

2. You must come Mourning over all your former sleightiness and Provocations.
Acknowledge your Offense, till when he Goes from you, Hos. 5. 15. but humble
your selves, then will he Hear, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. take with you Words, Hos. 14.
2. as did that Prodigal, Luke 15. 18, 19. so will this Father Run and Meet you,
v. 20. Thus must Transgressors come, Going and Weeping, Jer. 50. 4. which does
evince their being led by him, in a straight way, and their being welcome to
him as a Father, Jer. 31. 9. Pour out thine Heart like Water before his Face,
Lam. 2. 19. which is a Secondary kind of washing, Isa. 1. 16. Then Come (says
he) and let us Reason, v. 18 and Self-bemoaners are Affectionately remembered by
him, Jer. 31. 18. 20. Money in water, is (in Appearance) double; only this
water must be clear, 2 Cor. 7. 10. and you must put no value thereupon, however
Christ accounts of it.

3. You must reduce indefinite desires into Particulars. When Chapmen come into
a Shop to Buy, they are first asked, What would you have? Blind Bartimeus cried
unto Christ, (Indefinitely at first) Thou Son of David, have Mercy on me, Mark
10. 47. but when he came to Jesus, v. 50. Christ asked him, What (in
Particular) he would have done-unto him, v. 51. Christ only Echoeth unto the
Creatures Voice; which (if Particular) is suitably replied unto, Mark 10. 51,
52. till when, his Call is as Indefinite, v. 49. as is the others Cry, v. 48.
And therein have a Care to pitch upon what is of greatest Worth and Need; so
will Inferior things be added, Mat. 6. 33. without asking, 1 Kings 3. 11. 13.
You would have Oil, (says Christ,) what kind of Oil? The very Best (say you)
the Purest Oil: So may you have both it, and what is Common also.

4. His Offer must be duly Prized. It may be Tendered unto All, but is not Sold,
save unto such who thereto Eminently are Invited, Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28.
There must be so much sense, both of its Worth, and of our Need thereof, as to
Provoke the Will, Rev. 22. 17. else shall we never Buy it of him. It Is true,
there is a Passive Union first, (or pre-communication of Christ's Commodity)
which does Beget Desire; but till there be an Active cloze, (proceeding from
that Desire Exercised,) there is no Full or Proper Interest. It is a
Marriage-contract this, wherein the Man first takes the Woman, but she must
also take the Man; till when, the Marriage is not Completed: Nor can ought
else be Sold or Bought.

5. You must receive this Oil into your Vessels, else will Christ never Sell
it, merely to feed your Lamps, or flashy Present good Affections. It was not
desired by these Foolish Virgins, save only with respect unto their Lamps; and
therefore (Possibly) the Wise Denied them; so will Christ certainly. In case
you would have Oil (says Christ) where is your Vessel? Give me thine Heart,
Prove. 23. 26. and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. If there be no Vessel, his Oil
will stay, 2 Kings 4. 6. and it is Absurd to think, that Oil (or Wisdom) can be
Subjected, save in the Judgment. Some only would have Oil applied to their
Itching Ears; others, unto their Tongue, to make it Nimble; others, unto some
VVound, till it be Healed: But Grace or Wisdom is not Thine, unless it enters
into thine Heart, Prove. 2. 10. no more than sinful Temptations are, until the
Heart be therewith filled.

6. Your Vessels also must be Emptied, else can you not Receive his Oil, which
is not Sold by him, until it be immediately Delivered. Some other Liquors will
Incorporate; but Darkness will as soon Agree with Light, as Sin with Grace.
Some fain would keep their Puddle-water still; and so Christ's Oil should spill
upon the Ground, which he will not endure. And what a Fool is he, who does
refuse Christ's stately Robes, because he may not have them put upon his Filthy
Garments? Let go your Airy self-conceit; else that alone may be sufficient to
Obstruct the best Replenishment: As in a Stomach filled with wind. Yea, Christ
will not be won, save with the Loss of Common Oil, and all those things which
heretofore have been Accounted Gain, Phil. 3. 7, 8.

7. You must receive the whole of his Commodity. Christ is an Wholesale
Merchant only. He is a Vine, whose Fruit is Clustered. He does not Sell his
Oil by Drops or Spoonfu^s; you must have All or None. His Water is not to be
had, but by a Quill united to his Couduit-Pipe. Some are so Moderate, so
Partial in their Desires, as that Christ has no mind to Parley with them. Yea,
his whole Shop and Person too must go together, to every of his Speeding
Chapmen; Ruth and her Land might not be separated, Ruth 4. 5. And what a Mercy
is it unto Saints, that Christ and all his Spiritual Blessings are thus United,
Ephesians. 1. 3. unto their being made Complete in him, Col. 2. 10. How readily is
this Accepted of, in other Cases, save with Respect to Christ's Commodit^es!

8. You must be content to take it as it Comes; which (at the first) may not
be so Delightful, as afterward. If any part of Christ's Commodities may be
called worse than other, the Best are Last; but you must take them as they
Rise, that being the Custom of his Shop. There is a Teaching and a Crowning
Oil; an Oil for Light, and Oil of Gladness; Oil for a Sacrifice, and Oil for
Food: But Leah must first be had, Genesis 29. 26. and Supper is not until the Work
be over, Luke 17. 7, 8. nor may we receive the Promise, till we have done the
Will of God, Heb. 10. 36. Those never will go Through with Christ, who will not
Buy, save what is clear (unto an Eye of sense) at its first running; who will
not learn the Christian's Primmer, because his Cross is the first Letter in
that Row, Mat. 16. 24. who would have the Bottom of C^rist's Oil first poured
out, which cannot be expected.

9. You must be willing to lay all down, both in a Mystical and Literal sense,
giving him leave to Take it if he pleases, and without grudging. He only
deals with Generous Chapmen, who value him above their All, in any Respect
whatever. Those are not worthy of him, who Love ought More than him, Mat. 10.
37. nor shall those Comers speed with him, who Hate not what is Dearest to
them, in case he calls for it, Luke 14. 26. His Terms are these; thy Gold and
Silver, and Wife and Children, (the Goodliest of them all) are Mine, as
Benhadad said to Ahab: 2 Kings 20. 3. nor will he be satisfied with thy bare
Assenting hereunto, v. 4. unless they be Delivered up, when called for, v. 5,
6. Indeed he either will not take this Money, as Genesis 42. 25. or will restore
an Hundredfold, Mark 10. 30. but yet it must be all laid down, as Genesis 43. 21,
22. yea, Spiritual Privileges also.

10. You must be also very Thankful, with reference unto (at leastwise,
notwithstanding) the hardest terms which have been signified. This will Evince
its being Given, in your esteem, as it so is, in his account; whose being
called a Seller here, yea, whose forenamed Price insi^ted on, does no way
Interfere with the Freeness of his Gift. His great Design is to set forth the
Glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. which is Eclipsed by Men's unthankfulness, or by
a Cloud upon their Brow. This has been the Practice of all his speeding
Chapmen; this you must do, or he and you will not Agree: And though a Cheapner
may think much, yet is Dis-satisfaction inconsi^tent with its being Sold.
Therefore say not, It Is Naught, It Is Naught, as many Buyers use to do; since,
when thou have it, I dare be bold to say, thou will Boast of it, Prove. 20. 14,

11. You must be sure to hold your Purses. That Is one of this Seller's Terms;
Come buy, yea, come, but without Money, Isa. 55. 1. Plead not for more, because
of what you have; plead not for any, because of your Deserving it, or being
Worthy to receive it. Count not your Duty Payment, stay not till you have got a
Price, or Present in your Hand: But come as Poor and Vile in your own Eyes as
may be; Christ only deals with Spiritual Beggars. Some hope to speed, because
they are full handed; thy Money Perish with thee: Some dare not come, they are
so Poor; but if thine Heart be willing to Accept him, as aforesaid, come and
Welcome. I do not say, that Christ is thine, but thou may freely come and
Buy; yea, none but Nothings are Traded with.

12. You must Engage to keep this Oil; which as he will not Take away, Luke 10.
43. so neither must you Let it Go, Prove. 4. 13. He Sells by Indentures,
putting his Fear into the Heart (his Oil into the Vessel) upon those Terms,
Jer. 32. 40. Jer. 50. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 14. That which is subject (wholly) to be
Lost, is neither any special Oil, nor was it ever Sold by him: Yet shall a
careless Loser (of Common things) pay more for what is Lent, than does the
Buyer, Exodus 22. 7. 9. But he that bids you Buy the Truth, does also charge you
not to Sell it, Prove. 22. 23. And since his Commodity is your Life, Prove. 4.
13. you would be a Loser by its Sale, though all the World should be Exchanged
for it, Mat. 16. 26. Esais had not the Blessing, because he was Free to sell
his Birthright, Heb. 12. 16, 17. which Jacob would never part with more, and
thereby evidenced his having Bought it.

13. You must Improve this Oil for him, and not Receive his Grace in vain, 2
Cor. 6. 1. or turn it into Lasciviousness, Jude 4. It Is not else sold; nor is
that Holy Oil, which is thus apt to be Abused. There is some kind of Oil which
may be set before an Idol, Hos. 2. 8. but that is Common, and likely to be
taken away, v. 9. which does evince its being not sold, but Lent. Let your
Design be good, in your Desiring Oil or Light, and you shall have it: Oh what
an easy Price is this! And as a Demonstration of its being thus improved, he
does expect to be first served by you, in a way of self-denial, or first
Fruits; leaving the Residue for you to gather. Nor will a Wise Servant grudge
to Occupy that Talent for his Master's Use, which does redound at last unto his
own Advantage.

14. As you would Buy, or Lastingly partake of the Root and Fruit of this good
Olive Tree, Romans 11. 17. take heed of Boa^^ing, v. 18. with reference unto the
Root or Branches, or with respect unto the Thing it self. Boast not, as to the
Thing it self, which is not Theirs who are not Humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5. it being
the Nature of this Oil to keep all other things below it self. Boast not
against the Branches, or such who Now may want this Oil; but carry your selves,
in that respect, as these Wise Virgins do unto the Foolish; which did more
fully evidence their having Bought it, than did the others Motion for some part
thereof. Boast not (especially) against the Root or Christ, as if he did not
Bear thee: As if he were Beholden to thee for thy Fruit; as if it were not His,
while it is Thine, which that wise Servant did confess, Luke 19. 16. and by
that means he had the whole, with some Addition, v. 24.

15. You must not Trifle, but see unto this work betimes. There is a Time of
Finding, Psalm. 32. 6. And those that seek we Early shall find me, says
Essential Wisdom, Prove. 8. 17. When once the Master of this Shop or House has
shut the Door, some Men will seek to enter in, but not be able, Luke 13. 24,
25. Oh seek him therefore, while he may be found, Isa. 55. 6. while he is
Calling, while you are waking; while sin is Modest, while you are somewhat
Tender; while Satan is Restrained, and Christ at work, whether by his Spirit,
Word, or Providence. I would Discourage none, by telling them my Present
Fears, as to the Foolish Virgins Case; but it is high time to Run and Cry,
Lord, Oil for me, before the Door be shut.

16. You must be willing to Communicate this Oil (or Light) to others also, as
you are able, and as Occasion is afforded; unless the Scripture gives a
Dispensation. The wise Virgins (here) do seem unable; and scorners are not to
be Instructed, Prove. 9. 8. but otherwise you are Receivers, that you might
Give, Mat. 10. 8. Your Light must shine before the World, Mat. 5. 14, 15, 16.
and not be Covered, or in a secret place, if you would have your Candle Lighted
(or sold) by Christ, Luke 11. 33. When thou art Converted, strengthen others,
Luke 22. 32. whose Due it is, when in thy Power, Prove. 3. 27. This is to Occupy
thine Oil for Christ, which is one of his Terms insisted on. This is the best
way to have it Multiplied, Luke 6. 38. else is it not Sold or Given to you, no
more than he is (in Reality) Forgiven, who does not also Forgive another, Mat.
18. 35. Nor does Obnoxiousness to Persecution (in a Common Case) dispense
herewith; this being that Case, wherein thine All is called for, Mat. 10. 27,
28. without submitting to which Term, this Oil is never Sold to any, Mat. 13.
46.

Quest. 4. Why does Christ choose to Sell his Oil?
Answ. 1. That so it might be Represented sure; as being fairly Bought and
Sold. Gifts are depending upon the Givers good Affections, Hos. 13. 11. but
Jacob kept the Birthright still, which he had Bought, (and consequently, the
Blessing also) though Esau Hated him, Genesis 27. 41. And though God's special
Gifts are said to be without Repentance, Romans 11. 29. yet is a Doubting
Conscience better satisfied with Christ's being said (as here) to Sell it,
according unto Common Rules of Judging. Therefore God Buys his People with a
Price, that so they might be His, without Dispute, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Yea, therefore
he sometimes Sold them unto others, Judge. 2. 14. to make those Buyers think,
they had a Lawful Title to them, Isa. 49. 24. Now, God is willing to show
abundantly his own Immutability unto the Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6. 17. who
therefore calls his Gift their Purchase.

2. To hint the Worth of his Commodities. Gifts usually are lesser things; as
Thread and Paper: But things of Worth are Evidenced by a Price demanded. Indeed
Christ is Invaluable, Prove. 8. 11. therefore he must be Given, or not be had:
But yet the Soul must Buy him with his All, Mat. 13. 44. to show his Worth as
much as may be. Men will not Run and Cry for Apprehended Trifles; therefore
there doing only so for Christ, does intimate his being Valued by them.
Especially when Paul did freely suffer the Loss of All things for his sake,
Accounting his former seize Dung, Compared with him, Phil. 3. 8. And
though a sinners sin is nothing, because it wants the good of Being; yea, worse
than Nothing, because that Soul had better not have Been, Met. 26. 24. Yet is
it his right Eye, Mat. 5. 29. the Loss whereof does Argue Highest Valuation,
Gal. 4. 15.

3. That so his Chapmen's Honor (as well as Satisfaction) might be consulted
for, by him, (and by this means) together with his own. He has made all things
(Firstly) for Himself, Prove. 16. 4 because there is no Higher End; which
therefore does accordingly Oblige his Creatures in all their Actings, 1 Cor.
10. 31. who also are Encouraged to Honor him, by his consulting for their
Honor, in a Second place, 1 Samuel 2. 30. He does put Honor upon Himself, by
standing upon some kind of Price: His People also do much Honor him, by their
Accepting him upon his own Proposals: And he will therefore also have them Buy,
that so their Generousness might be thus Evidenced (as was by David, 2 Samuel 24.
23, 24.) And seeming Riches, who can thus Purchase their very Purchaser, by
that precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. which is so All-commanding, Mat. 15. 18.

4. To signify its being not to be Challenged, as a Debt; nor upon Terms, save
with its Owner's Leave. That which is fairly Sold, may be Demanded, in way of
Righteousness; therefore if Saints confess, The Lord is Just and Faithful to
Forgive, 1 John 1. 9. because (in Christ) they have laid down his Price; till
when, both Parties are at Liberty. A Tenant's Rent may be Required, but not a
Tradesman's unbought Ware: Nor can such be Constrained to Sell, no more than
Chapmen are to Buy. No Flesh must Glory in His presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. which as
the Freeness of his Gift consulteth for, Ephesians. 2. 9. so does his Sale: That so,
his being Dis-obliged might Appear, both as a Benefactor, and as a Tradesman;
which does Exclude all kind of Boasting.

5. That so his Commodity might be the more Endeared, as Bought things are.
Propriety (though merely from a Gift) does much Endear, 1 Kings 21. 3.
especially when it is purchased; as that Ew-Lamb was as his Daughter who had
bought it, 2 Samuel 12. 3. Thus Jacob would be Buried in that Field which Abraham
Bought, Genesis 49. 29, 30. He that had Bought a piece of Ground, must needs go
see it, though at a Costly Rate, Luke 14. 18. And Sion's prime Argument with
God, to be remembered, was, her having been his Ancient purchase, Psalm. 74. 2.
Mothers (usually) are most Affectionate, because their Children cost Them
Dearest, Prove. 4. 3. and 31. 2. and God is very careful of those whom he has
purchased with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. So was Christ unto Paul, whom he had
won (or Bought) with Losing all his former Gains, Phil. 3. 8.

6. That Foolish Virgins might be Discovered, who fain would have Oil Freely
Given, and keep their Money still, from sinful sleightiness, and base
self-love, if not from Envy, and for a wicked End. The poorest Chapman has
some Money, Isa. 55. 2. which he might keep, if it would either profit him, or
not be vainly spent elsewhere: And in that Case, he does but show his own
unworthiness, who Grudgeth Christ the having of it. Those Men deserve to be
uncased by him, who will not give (for his Commodity) what does not profit them
to keep; and from a Design thereby to Act unto his Dis-advantage. Thus also
will their Mouth be stopped, with reference unto their being Denied, and others
Speeding, since his Commodity is at the Buyers Service.

Quest. How is that Freely Given, Romans 5. 15. which yet is Sold? Either by God
or Christ.
Answ. 1. The Father Sells, because the Son laid down his price, unto the
full, in point of Matter, for his Elect; both as to God's vindictive Justice,
and Distributive. Vindictive Justice had her Full payment from him, for the
sins of his Elect; because he was made sin for them, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and was not
Spared or Remitted, Romans 8. 32. Distributive Justice had her Full, because he
did whatever the Law required, Heb. 7. 26. whose Universal Righteousness
(without Restraining it unto his Death) is that by which his people Reign in
Life, Romans 5. 17. Yet is it also There called a Gift, because the Benefit of
his Obedience is made over unto Others, which Rigorous Justice does not Admit;
and therefore it is only pleaded at the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. Thus
Selling and Free Giving are consistent, with Respect unto the Father.

2. The Son does also Freely Give, though he is here said to Sell.

1. Because the price (insisted on) is Nothing, Compared with the Worth of his
Commodity. This Oil (or Wisdom) is Invaluable; man knows not the price
thereof, Job 28. 13. it cannot be got for Gold or precious Stones, v. 15, 16.
yea, all the things to be Desired are not to be Compared with it, Prove. 8. 11.
How then can those forenamed terms be called a price? Which either Relate to
filthy Rags, or Matters of no Real worth at all, save in a person's Estimation.
Now, if a Pepper-corn be paid, it has the Name of Price, in Law; but if an
Earldom should be Sold for one brass Farthing, would it be therefore said, Not
to be Given? Therefore Christ's proper Name must needs be Giver; however,
Commonly, he may be called a Seller: His Name is Wonderful, Isa. 9. 6. or a
Free-Giving Tradesman.

2. Because Himself is not Advantaged by any of that foresaid Money, or as the
Buyer is, by his Commodity; which therefore (as to Him) is Freely Given. What
gets He by thy Coming to him? He Bottleth up his people's Tears, not for Their
VVorth, but as his Memorandum, Psalm. 56. 8, 9. The Emptyings of thy Vessel are
no Gain to Him, as thy partaking of his Fullness is to Thee. And as thy Praises
add no Real greatness to him; so what Receives he of thy hand, if thou be
Righteous, Job 35. 7. Nehem. 9. 5? Yet will no Man be at this Cost and pains,
who does not Value this Commodity above those Terms. From whence it follows,
that as the Creature is a Buyer, so Carist is properly a Giver, though called a
Seller.

3. Because the Chapman is not Damaged, but much Enriched by his very parting
with this Money, as well as by what is Exchanged for it. Thy very Coming unto
Christ, is both a Labor and Recreation, Mat. 11. 28, 29. Thy Godly sorrow is
not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. no more than sweating in a Fever. Thy
Thirsting after him, does make his Taste the more Delightful, Prove. 27 7. It is
a Mercy to have thy Vessel Emptied of what is in it; and yet a greater Mercy to
have it called for, in Order to its being filled with Grace, Psalm. 81. 10. Yea,
it is not for thine Advantage, to have his Oil run somewhat Thick at first, and
Clearer afterward, Luke 16. 25? Its being Improved for Him, will prove thy
Gain at last, Luke 19. 16, 17. so will thy greatest Losses for its sake, Mat.
5. 10. the Expectation whereof does only make continued Enjoyments so much the
more safe and sweet, Heb. 11. 17. 19.

4. Because he is the Sole Proprietor, as of his own Commodity, so of the
Buyer's Money also: And in that case, self-payers are Free-Givers. Thou can
not check him with thy Coming to him, because thou Live and Movest in him,
Acts 17. 28. Thy sorrow is an Affection in thee, of his Creating; the Exercise
whereof thy sin has also made to be a Moral Debt. What have thou (as to
Outward Blessings,) which thou have not Received from him, Ezekiel. 16. 10, 11,
12? And may he not then Require their being All laid down, without a
Commutation? Thine whole Activity is from himself; thy Praises and Improvements
are his Due: Yea, he it is who works in thee, to Will and Do, according to
the Terms proposed, Phil. 2. 13. therefore if Abraham were Justified by works,
he has whereof to Glory, but not before the Lord, Romans 4. 2. for who has
first given to him, and it shall be Recompensed, Romans 11. 35. else paying him
with his own, does only evidence the Freeness of his Gift.

Use 1. Wise Virgins have very Low and Jealous thoughts of their own Spiritual
stock, as is here signified; and more especially, when Newly wakened out of
their sinful slumbring, for which there is sufficient Reason. Sleep is
Expensive, as Sickness is, whereof this is one kind; and therefore Love it not,
for fear of coming unto Poverty, Prove. 20. 13. However such are apt to be
suspicious, beyond their Ground; Departure from the Lord, being both the Fruit
of unbelief, Heb. 3. 12. and cause of suchlike Doubting. Yea, a Returning
Prodigal is to be known by Holy humble Apprehensions of his worth, Luke 15. 19.
and Oil or Wisdom, Eccl. 7. 23. Indeed, the truly wise are ever Lowly, Prove.
19. 2. whilst others think they have Enough, not only for Themselves and
Others help, but also to spare some part for Satan, who therefore are bold to
dally with his Temptations; but such Men's Folly shows their Real want of Oil,
or wisdom.

3. Wise Virgins are (in the first place) for Themselves, with reference unto
their Spiritual Interest. It is not only warrantable, but (in this case) it is
their Duty and their Wisdom. In Outward things Man ought to Love his Neighbor
as Himself, in Opposition unto Malice, Lev. 19. 18. and in Respect of Truth,
though not Degree, save in some more than Ordinary Cases, 1 John 3. 16. but not
in Spirituals. And though Paul wished himself accursed from Christ (for others)
in point of Spiritual Privileges, Romans 9. 3. wherein he also might have a
Special warrant; yet did he not wish his being a Transgressor for their sake,
save as Christ was by way of Imputation. God's Glory should be preferred by us,
before our own Salvation; but let us not do Evil, though Good may come, Romans 3.
8. in that Respect, v. 7. Therefore, with reference unto Duty, it was the
Spouse's Grief, that she had kept others Vineyards, and not our own, Cant. 1. 6.

3. Wise Virgins are very loath to say, Not so, unto a Motion made for
Spiritual help, in any case whatever. Those words [Not so] are not in the
Greek, but added by our Translators, as being grounded upon the wise Virgins
silence. Nor do they Absolutely bid the other Go elsewhere, but only rather;
and with Respect unto the Foolish Virgins greater benefit, who by that means
might have Oil without borrowing. Some do withold another Due, when it is in
the power of their hand to do it, Prove. 3. 27. but Saints are forward to be
Charitable, Psalm. 112. 5. save as mere Duty does forbid them: Christ had
Compassion upon others, and as with reference unto their Bodies, Mat. 15. 32.
so much more with Respect unto their Souls, Mark 6. 34. And Christians have
their Name from him; nor are Men worthy to be so called, in case they be of
Nabal's Churlish Disposition, 1 Samuel 25. 11.

4. Wise Virgins are for giving satisfaction unto others, with reference unto
their very Negatives. Some will not hear the strongest Reason Offered against
themselves, Zech. 7. 11. these Men are Beasts, 1 Cor. 15. 32. Others will give
no Reason for their Practice, but their Will, Exodus 15. 9. these are not
Prudent Men, Prove. 26. 16. Others expect that every Light Excuse should serve
the turn, Luke 14. 18. but those were Carnal Jews, or Foolish Virgins. How
shamefully have some endeavored to silence those with Childish Answers, who
have been serious in desiring Oil, or Spiritual help. But Grace is not for
Dallying, especially not in Momentous cases, but always is provided of a
Rational Answer with Holy fear, 1 Pet. 3. 15. expecting that Christ will one
day call for an Account (or Reason) of Idle words, Mat. 12. 36. Nor can they be
supposed to have Faith, who are unreasonable or Absurd, 2 These. 3. 2.

5. Poor Foolish Virgins are not likely (in these latter days) to gain Oil from
the Wise by their Communion with them, or addresses to them. Together with the
Rising of God's Light and Glory upon Sion, Professors of an Earthy Spirit will
be covered with Gross Darkness, Isa. 60. 1, 2. None of the wicked at such a
time shall understand, Dan. 12. 10. the Matters of their Peace will then be
hidden from their Eyes, Luke 19. 42. and as the unlearned (then) so will the
Learned be, in point of Ignorance, Isa. 29. 11, 12. Christians Communion
(heretofore) may have been both Preventive and Recovering; but henceforth no
more of that Vine, until its Fruit shall be renewed, Mat. 26. 29. Newly
Awakened ones love not to stir; Helps ready to be laid aside are very weak, and
when the payment is, the work is over: Therefore this Dispensation must needs
be fixing. I would not Discourage from the use of Means, but Doubt their
Efficacy at this Day, with Respect unto Foolish Virgins.

6. It may not be wondered at, if Wise and Foolish Virgins be Observed (in these
latter days) to have but little Intercourse, as is here signified. There is not
any thing considerable does befall us, but is Revealed, Amos 3. 7. if Men did
but consult the Scriptures, Luke 24. 27. Thus, as to this particular, between
the time of Christ's Ascending, (which Answers unto that of of his
VVitnesses, Rev. 11. 12.) and the Descending of the Holy Ghost, (which
Answers unto the Seventh Trumpets sounding,) Christ's Party were alone, Acts
1. 13, 14. choosing some other instead of Judas, v. 15. and did not meddle with
the Jews till afterward, Acts 2. 1. which Answers unto the Viols
Dispensation. And thus, until the Spirit (in these latter days) is poured from
on High, the Fruitful Field (or Old Professors) is counted for a Forest, Isa.
32. 15. not sown with Exhortations, nor Ploughed with Reproofs. This Interval
is rather a time of Prayer and silence, Rev. 8. 1. alluding unto that, Luke 1.
9, 10.

7. Wise Virgins (at such a time) are freely willing to let the other Go from
them, for mutual good. What shall we then judge of them, or by what Name must
they be called, who cannot bear a separation from their Old Companions by any
means? Some count it strange, that others do forbear their wonted Intercourse:
But can a wise Man delight to Reason with unprofitable Talk, Job 15. 2, 3? Such
are Exhorted to save Themselves from that untoward Generation, Acts 2. 40. who
are Offended with plain downright dealing, and Noncompliance with a sinful
Prohibition, Acts 5. 28. Nor can the Foolish Virgins Go and Buy Oil for
themselves, unless Communion with the wise be discontinued, as is here hinted.
The only way to Benefit Apostates, is to let them Go; who otherwise are apt to
Bless themselves with being so far owned, therefore withdraw; 2 These. 3. 14.

8. Wise Virgins lend what help they can, by way of Exhortation and Direction
unto those whom they may not be able to Instruct. This is the Last Remedy to be
used; a bidding Ordinary means farewell; like that last digging about a Barren
Fig Tree, Luke 13. 8, 9. or bringing the Matter unto Moses, Exodus 18. 26. Thus
is the Spirits willingness Evinced, together with its weakness; thus is a
Departing Saint's breath sweet unto the last: thus is Christ Evidenced by them
to be above them, and this is Grace's Valediction unto far-spent sinners.
Indeed Man's utmost help is only Ministerial; and Christ reserveth some
peculiar work unto himself, Mar. 9. 18. whom therefore these wise Virgins send
the other unto. When Instruments are out of Breath, and Ordinary Means have
tried their utmost; yet is there hope in him, who can recover from the Grave:
And thus far Grace is willing to Accompany a Dying Creature, which is the Last
Office to be performed.

9. Christ will be (now) Gone unto, by such as want his Oil or Light, and will
not come to them, as heretofore his manner was, Ephesians. 2. 17. He will be Enquired
of at such a time, Ezekiel. 36. 37. and will be sought for, Hos. 3. 5. till when
he Goes and returns to his place, Hos. 5. 15. or Heaven, 1 Kings 8. 30. The
Temple sometime was his dwelling place, Psalm. 76. 2. but now his Glory is
removed thence, Ezekiel. 11. 23. until it shall Return, Ezekiel. 43. 4. Therefore he
must be followed by such as mean to find him, Cant. 3. 1, 2. This is the Fruit
of sinful Dallying, viz. the Hiding of his Face, Deuteronomy. 32. 20. or
self-with-drawing, Cant. 5. 6. and in that case, self-stirring up is Necessary,
Isa. 64. 7. it is well if that will serve. Time-sinners must not only seek, but
also strive, Luke 13. 24. and such do but deceive themselves, if they conclude
their having of this Oil (which formerly has been Neglected) without some more
than Ordinary Cost and Pains, as is here signified.

10. Oil [for our selves] was always both our Duty and our wisdom to be
Laboring after, which in these latter days will eminently be urged unto and
insisted on by all wise Virgins. Foundations (now) will be Discovered, Hab. 3.
13. there will be no room for Borrowing; nor will Professors be Advantaged,
save by what is their own. Their Motion here does evidence Christ's Design,
which is, to have Men Principled for their Duty, and not to satisfy themselves
(as these poor Foolish Virgins would have done) with bare Revived Lamps or good
Affections, wherewith Christ is not satisfied, nor his People. Wise Virgins may
be known by this, their putting others upon self-enquiries; who therefore will
not lend a Form of Knowledge, lest that should satisfy without its Power. Such
may be thought to be reserved; but as Christ has a Righteous Hand therein, so
they may have an Holy Aim, viz. the others greater Benefit.

11. There are Oyl-Sellers still, whom Men are bid to Buy it of, as they would
have it for Themselves. Christ only can Estate a Soul in Light, and by that
means secure it; which else is apt to be Removed; nor will he Recompense a Man,
save with Respect unto what is his own, 1 Cor. 3. 8. But you must Buy it, and
its Price has been already set; nor will one Farthing be abated: Therefore let
none presume his Interest therein, who has not (does not) come up unto those
forenamed Terms. And it is a Mercy that it may be had; which these Wise Virgins
do suppose, else would they not have bid the other Go and Buy: Nor is the Door
said to have been shut till afterward, Mat. 25. 10. The near Approaching of
which Day does call for Mutual Exhortation, Heb. 10. 25. while it is called, To
Day, Heb. 3. 13. before it be too late. And as a Bargain of this Nature would
be struck up, these following Directions may be of Use.

1. You must be content to Go, or (in some sense) to Part with those Wise
Virgins, whom (heretofore) a Right of walking with (in point of
State-Communion) has been Challenged. Keep with them still, as Precious
Friends; but cease from any Higher Claim, or from pretending unto the sameness
of your Spiritual Case and State with theirs. There is that Makes himself
Rich, who yet has Nothing, Prove. 13. 7. and as that Man is not Relieved by
another, so neither will he work himself, till eased of that foolish Fancy.
The Pharisees were not Baptized of John, Lu. 7 30. because unwilling to confess
their sins, Mat. 3. 6, 7, 8. Nor would those Jews come unto Christ, John 5. 40.
who boldly called God their Father, John 8. 41. no more than Persons
unconvinced of their Blindness, will Buy Eye Salve, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Oh let us
rather Buy Oil twice than be without it, from Groundless self conceit.

2. Set out his Oil with highest Commendations, as to its Virtues, Worth, and
Need. Think not to have its Price abated by your sleighty undervaluings, as in
your dealing with other Tradesmen. Others bid See for Love, and Buy for Money;
but here, your Money is your Love: Therefore he bids most for Oil, who does
most Prize it. Wise Virgins Hide their Love from Men, lest they should else be
slighted by them: But Christ's Admirers have learnt the Art of Gaining upon
his Affections. Children will Cry for what they would have, and so must you for
Spiritual Knowledge, Prove. 2. 3. Oh that thou were my Brother, says she to
Christ, Cant. 8. 1. And say you unto Wisdom, Thou art my Sister, Prove. 7. 4.
Get Understanding with all thy Getting, Prove. 4. 7. Exalt her, v. 8. who Loves
him that Loves her, Prove. 8. 17. Our Estimations, Sighs, and Tears, are
Current Gold with Christ, though nothing Valued by other Tradesmen.

3. Take heed by any means of Dallying with him. Make not Two words, for Fear
of a Denial. He came no more unto those Gadarens, who did but once desire him
to be gone, Luke 8. 37. nor would he ever after deal with those who had
Rejected his first Offer, Luke 14. 24. Were it not to Befriend you, (to
Pleasure You more than Himself) he would not Sell it: And Love Despised is the
most Provoking. Yea, he who fell not in with Paul's first Offer, never desired
more the sight of that Commodity, Acts 24. 25. However this Tradesman's Lowest
Price is at the first, as Late Repentants do Experience, who formerly have
Dallied with his Offers: How Cheap did Lydia Buy, Acts 16. 14. Compared with
those Second Comers, Acts 2. 37. You cannot be without his Oil, nor does your
Conscience think it is too Dear; therefore Accept it with Thanksgiving: And
when you have it, your having been so long without it will be your only Grief.

4. Have Patience though, and do not hastily fling away: Christ deals with none
(as an Eventual Seller) but Sober Chapmen. Inordinacy of Desire is a Lust which
he will not indulge in any: Men either do not Ask, or Ask amiss; who therefore
have not their Desire, James 4. 2, 3. Your Time is always ready, so is not his,
John 7. 6. who will not Serve his Mother, till such an Hour, John 2. 4. And
Moses was made to tarry one week longer, whom nothing else would serve but Now,
Numb. 12. 13, 14. Thus many poor Creatures want their Oil, because they cannot
wait, 2 Kings 6. 33. but fling out of Christ's Shop (with Saul) into the
Devil's, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7. and there are Cheated, v. 14. You are but Beggars, in
the Form of Buyers; therefore demean your selves accordingly. And do not
Passionately retort or turn away, though his first Answer should be rough; but
give good words, Psalm. 22. 2, 3. and wait his Leisure, Psalm. 123. 2. whose Oil
cannot be had else where, and is thus given, Psalm. 27. 14.

5. Be sure you do Design it for your selves, (next unto him,) and for your own
best good, as these Wise Virgins Exhortation hinteth. Expect the first Question
put (next to What do you lack) will be, Whom is it for? Would you have Oil,
merely to Boast thereof, or to Instruct another; or only to Accommodate a
Worldly Interest? There Is other Oil good enough for such a purpose. This Holy
Oil must not be put unto a Common Use, Exodus 30. 31. 33. Some would have
Healing Oil, to sin more freely; and Fragrant Oil, to gain the Virgins good
Affections; and Lightsome Oil, to make a show: But Holy Oil is not put into
such polluted Vessels. Abraham had more than Ordinary Light, and he was careful
to Improve it, Genesis 18. 17. 19. And Paul, together with his filled Vessel, had
something given to secure it, 2 Cor. 12. 7. And though Grace makes the Change,
yet the Indulging of Lower Aims is inconsistent with a Grounded Hope of ever
Buying it.

6. Consult not with Flesh and Blood; our own, or others. The Flesh at best (or
in a Natural Respect) is Weak, Mat. 26. 41. much more in a Moral sense, Gal. 5.
17. and therefore Flesh and Blood cannot Inherit, 1 Cor. 15. 50. for these will
never Buy. Dull Flesh has no great mind to Go, Prove. 6. 10. Proud Flesh thinks
scorn to have the easiest Terms Imposed, 2 Kings 5. 11. 13. Self-loving Flesh
would part with Nothing, much less with All, Mat. 19. 21, 22. therefore this
self (or Flesh) must be Denied, before Christ will be followed, Mat. 16. 24.
Consult not herewith in others neither, as Absalom did with Hushai, and
Rehoboam with his Companions, unto the Ruin of them both. The Serpent will
tell thee, Christ is too Dear, and may abate, Genesis 3. 4, 5. Relations will bid
thee (first) to provide for Them: And Carnal Friends will break thine Heart
with their Disswasives, Acts 21. 13. Peter took Christ to do, for being too
forward, Mat. 16. 22. whom therefore Paul would not consult with at the first,
Gal. 1. 16, 17, 18. Nor will a Bargain of this Nature be concluded, till such
are silenced by us, as Peter was by Christ, Mat. 16. 23.

7. Mind his Commodity before you do Refuse it; and under this single
denomination (here) of its being called Oil; yea, merely with Respect to that
Particular use of Oil intended here, viz. its being Serviceable in point of
Light; which may induce your Buying of it.

1. The Light is sweet, Eccl. 11. 7. and does Rejoice the Heart, Prove. 15. 30.
therefore the Light is put for Joy and Gladness, Esth. 8. 16. Psalm. 97. 11. by
which the Heart-chearing influence of a Godly Ruler is described, 2 Samuel 23. 3,
4. Yea, God's own Love (which is the choicest Cordial) is called the Light of
his Face or Countenance, Psalm. 4. 6. Now, would you not be glad of Joy? Come
then, yea, come and Buy this Lightsome (and this Gladsome) Oil. When Sampson
had lost his Eyes (or Light) how did he Grind in the Prisonhouse, Judge. 16.
21. it may be his Teeth together, in way of Indignation and Vexation, choosing
to be Avenged upon others for his Two Eyes, by Losing his very Life, v. 28. 30.
which Now was not Desirable. Yea, therefore Hell it self is Represented by a
place of Darkness, where Grinders are, Mat. 8. 12. as Heaven is a place of
Light, Col. 1. 12. and Joy, Psalm. 16. 11. to show the Pleasantness of Light (as
in it self considered,) and Dolefulness of being in the Dark.

2. Light gives Life and Being unto visible Objects, which otherwise are as if
they were Not, as to our being Solaced with their sight: Yea, we had better Not
to hear of Beauty, than to want Eyes or Light, by which to see it. Man sees
not (at least not chiefly) by Extramission, as Owls and such like Creatures do;
therefore His very Eyes are useless, if in the Dark; who only Hears, what
others See. Death and Destruction have heard of Wisdom, Job 28. 22. but sinners
know not that Eminent Gift, John 4. 10. because there is no Light in them, Isa.
8. 20. How marvellously would it Affect, could Men but see the Amiableness of
God's Tabernacles, Psalm. 84. 1. the many Flowers in Sion's Land, Cant. 2. 12.
much more the Glory of God himself, as it appears in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.
2. John did behold Christ's Glory, in his Lowest state, John 1. 14. but others
saw no Beauty in him, who therefore did Despise him, Isa. 53. 2.

3. Else will you not have the Comfort of what you do Enjoy. Souls in a state
of Darkness may Really be Interested in Electing Love; but till Christ gives
them Light, Ephesians. 5. 14. such cannot know it: without his Holy Enlightening
Spirit, there is no Joy of his Salvation, Psalm. 51. 11, 12. Thou have the
Scriptures, but till thine Eyes are Opened, thou can not understand them, 2
Cor. 4. 4. because they are Spiritually to be Discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Thou
have the Tender of that Mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. the Sun of Righteousness
does shine upon thee, but yet thy Darkness cannot Comprehend it, John 1. 5. God
is not far from every of you, Acts 17. 27. yet can you not see or know him,
until the Son Reveals him, Mat. 11. 27. therefore such Groundedly cannot
Joy, save in the Creature. Nor can you see the Creature Neither, so as to
Rejoice therein aright, save as this Sun does make that Moon conspicuous, Psalm.
16. 5, 6. or as God's Light does show the goodliness of that Inheritance.

4. You will not else be apt to Blush or be Ashamed, whatever cause there may
be of it. It is a shame to speak of those things which are done by some in
secret, Ephesians. 5. 12. because all Manifestation is by the Light, v. 13. How did
Enlightened Ezra Blush, to mention the sins of others, Ezra 9. 6. much more to
stain his own Profession with the least unseemly Motion, Ezra. 8. 22! Light is
Subjected in the Eye, Mat. 6. 22. which Eye is therefore apt to water with
every Mote, and will not suffer spots to rest upon the Garment: Thence is it,
that Enlightened ones are always Neat. But sinners are in Darkness, Mat. 4. 16.
who therefore cannot be Ashamed, Jer. 6. 15. Sin being Virtually upon their
Back, where vilest Spots may be (and be Continued) with utmost Confidence, till
they shall be Ashamed and Consounded both together.

5. You will not else have any Spiritual Heat or Warmth; which always is
Accompanied with Spiritual Light. The Natural Sun may warm him who is Blind, as
to his Bodily sight; but so does not the Sun of Righteousness, save whom he
also does Enlighten. There may be true Spiritual Light o^ Grace without any
Apprehended Warmth or Comfort, Isa. 50. 10. but there can be no Grounded Peace,
where Grace is wholly wanting, Isa. 57. 21. This is that Oil of Joy, Isa. 61.
3. and without which there is no Laughter, save what is Mad, Eccl. 2. 2.
Darkness and Sorrow are Co-incident, and both of them are Consistent with the
Light of Earthly Sparks, Isa. 50. 11. All Wisdoms Paths are Paths of Peace,
Prove. 3. 17. which is a way that others know not, because their Paths are
crooked, Isa. 59. 8. and therefore their Case must needs be sad.

6. You will not else be Spiritually helpful unto others; at least, there is no
Promise for it upon other Terms, Jer. 23. 22. Christ was Anointed first, and
with this Special Oil; and then his Preaching was Effectual, Isa. 61. 1. but,
What have thou to do (says God unto the Wicked) to Declare my Statutes, Psalm.
50. 16? whom others are bid to let alone, and with Respect unto their
Blindness, Mat. 15. 14. Lips may Salute the Ear; whereas Heart Answers unto
Heart, Prove. 27. 19. nor can it be Expected (in an Ordinary way) that Nature
should work Grace; or that a sinner should Beget, save in his own Likeness, as
Genesis 5. 3. Christ's Image (in a true Believer's Conversation) is a Preaching
Picture, 1 ^et. 3. 1. while Graceless Gifts are but a silent kind of Speaking,
John 6. 63. nor can the Flesh Reveal that which is Spiritual, Mat. 16. 17. no
more than Nature can Receive it, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Since Darkness Comprehends not
this Light, John 1. 5.

7. You will not else be able to prevent your doing Mischief unto others and
your selves. Paul was Injurious, and yet Ignorant, 1 Timothy 1. 13. until he was
enlightened from Above, Acts 9. 3, 4, 5. Nor can Men (in the Dark) Discern,
although the Prince of Life be Killed by them, Acts 3. 15. 17. How will
Christ's Piercers Mourn when they shall see him, Zech. 12. 10. perceiving how
they have broken his Commands, by Rushing on them; and how they have trod him
under Foot? Yea, as to ones self, Wise Men (or Virgins stored with Oil)
foresee the Evil, and Hide themselves, Prove. 22. 3. while others Pass on, as
Balaam did, upon the Swords point, until his Eyes were Opened; Numb. 22. 31.
Thence is it, that such are apt, either to be snared, Isa. 8. 15. or else to
kick against the Pricks, Acts 9. 5. and run upon the Bosses of God's Buckler,
Job 15. 26. if not to stumble and fall upon that Breaking Rock, Isa. 8. 15.
because there is no Light in them, v. 20.

8. You will not else find the way, wherein you ought to Walk; and so be
subject either to sit still for want of Light, or ^o go wrong, if not Turn
back; or at the least, to walk uncomfortably, and unacceptably, though possibly
in a Right Path. Darkness disposes more for sleep than any kind of Action,
Psalm. 104. 23. which will be sad for him whose Necessary work requires utmost
speed, Heb. 3. 7. And in the dark, Men (if they walk) are apt to Wander, John
12. 35. save in a broad and Beaten Road, which Christ's is not, Mat. 7. 14.
Yea, such are prone to wheel about into their bad Old way again, and so (being
Giddy with frequent Turning) to Fall and Rise no more. Nay, though by chance
such may hit Right, yet are they subject to be drawn aside, Prove. 9 15. and
though they should go on, yet as it is uncomfortable, so they were
Superstitious still, who Worshipped the True, but unknown God, Acts 17. 22, 23.

9. You will not else Go forth to Meet the Bridegroom, no more than do these
Foolish Virgins for lack of Oil or Light: and so you will not enter with him to
the Marriage. Christ's Coming is unto Sion, Isa. 59. 20. and Sion's way is
Narrowest at the last: Therefore Men (in the Dark) will There be most subject
to Mistake. This Going forth is a Time-Truth and Duty; and but Two Hundred (of
Israel's Thousands) have Understanding of the Times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 22. therefore
without peculiar Light Men are not like to hit this way* The greatest Robberies
(as in the Letter) are Near this City, especially when Travelers are
Benighted: Therefore (in such a Case) none will stir out. And if you Go not
forth to Meet him, you will not come with him unto the Marriage, which will be
very sad, as may be made out afterward.

10. You will not else be fit to hold Communion with the Wise; as being
Convicted to be Foolish Virgins, by wanting Oil or Light at such a Time. I
wonder how any can imagine that Light and Darkness should Agree, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
or why they are Offended with Dividing upon that Account, which is as Old as
since the first Creation, Genesis 1. 4. True Israelites have Light, and in their
Dwellings, by which they are Distinguished from Dark Egyptians, Exodus 10. 23.
and not to be enlightened is a sign of Death, Job 33. 30. Nor was the first
Creation Perfected, (much less the Second) so long as Darkness was upon it,
Genesis 1. 2. So that both State-Communion with the Wise, yea, and Communion with
their State, depend upon your having of their Oil or Light: Nor will you else
Partake of their Inheritance in Light, Col. 1. 12. or Light of Life, John 8. 12.

MATTHEW XXV. 10. And while they went to Buy, the Bridegroom came; and they
that were Ready went in with him to the Marriage; and the Door was shut.
THis Verse refers to the Time of Christ's own Coming as a Bridegroom, with
reference unto the Perfecting of that Redemption, which Gentile Saints must
first be Interested in, as has been cleared up before. Whose Coming then, is
Amplified here; 1. By the Nick of Time, or while the Foolish Virgins went to
Buy. 2. By the Qualification of those who are Admitted to the Marriage, [They
that were Ready. 3. By the Exclusion of all others, against whom the Door was
shut.

The sum of all which may briefly be comprised in this General Observation
following.

Observe. While Foolish Virgins Go to Buy their Oil or Light, the Bridegroom
Comes; together with whom they who are Ready go in to the Marriage: and
thereupon the Door is shut.

Quest. 1. How do these Foolish Virgins Go to Buy?
Answ. 1. Negatively; Not in a Right or Serious manner, which never is in vain,
Isa. 45. 19. as is their seeming Labor here, because they were not Ready in
due time. Those went to see John Baptist's Light, Mat. 11. 9. with seeming Joy,
John 5. 35. who had no mind to Buy it, (at least some of them, Luke 7. 30.)
upon his Terms, Mat. 3. 8. Ezekiel's Hearers came to Cheapen his Commodity,
(and with a show of Lo^^) but had more mind to Buy a Worldly Interest, Ezekiel.
33. 30, 31. which was enough to silence them, v. 3. 3. when their Desolation
came upon them, v. 29. Poor Zedekiah was content to Hear what Jeremiah would
say unto him, Jer. 38. 14. but was afraid of being seen (by others) in that
Shop, v. 24. nor did he Buy. Thus might these Foolish Virgins Pray for Light,
but with Dissimulation, as Jer. 42. 20. or stumbling blocks set before their
Faces, as Ezekiel. 14. 3.

2. Affirmatively: Their going to Buy does rather seem to intimate their
staying otherwhere, (under a false Disguise) till such a Time.

1. Till that Practice, of Going out (to Meet the Bridegroom) is grown more
General among Professors. I am persuaded this is the Case of many, who have no
mind to see the Light of a Command, till they shall have the Light of Company.
When diverse Torches are abroad, some Men Delight to walk at such a Time, and
spare the Cost of Buying for themselves: But single Lights are not sufficient
to guide Dim-sighted Hypocrites in Narrow ways. When Christ himself was left
alone, then Peter did not seem to know him, Mat. 26. 74. until the Mist before
his Eyes was (by a Beaming Look from Christ) dissolved into a shower, Luke 22.
61, 62. but if Sobriety be the Fashion, a flanting Courtier will be Sober,
(though merely indeed for Fashions-sake;) and if Christ's Way be once a Common
Road, then Foolish Virgins have Bought their Oil, or want no Light.

2. Till it be safer walking in such a way. Darkness is sometimes put for
outward Danger, and Light for Safety, Job 29. 3. Nor has a Foolish Virgin
Light in the way of Duty until its Danger is Removed. A Godly Man is sometimes
Tempted to sit still, at such a Time, Psalm. 39. 1. but yet (Habitually) he is a
God-like Man, to whom the Night shines as the Day, Psalm. 139. 12. nor does he
stumble in his way of Duty, although it may Expose him unto Danger, John 11. 8,
9. But Sufferings are the sinners Only (Apprehended) Darkness; who therefore
cannot see their way until that Cloud be Taken up, which gives Light to all
True Israelites, Exodus 14. 20. So long as those were in a strait or Visible
Danger, they Hid themselves in Caves and Thickets, 1 Samuel 13. 6. in Mount
Ephraim, until the Enemy began to Run, and then they also had Light enough to
follow hard after, 1 Samuel 14. 21.

3. Till Goers out to Meet the Bridegroom are seen (by them) to be Rewarded; or
to Go in with him unto the Marriage. Great is the Light of Earthly Recompenses;
the Expectation whereof made purblind Judas hit the way to Christ, until he
missed of them, and then he Lost his way again, John 12. 6. Mat. 26. 14. How
strongly did Balaam's Wages make him see that way, the Dangerousness whereof
was Obvious unto an Asse's Eye, Numb. 22. 23. and therefore a sinners way seems
Right unto himself, although its End is Death, Prove. 14. 12. This Recompense of
Reward enlightened Moses into the way of Suffering Duty, Heb. 11. 25, 26. and
when the Bridegroom's Favors are bestowed upon his Followers, Mat. 19. 28.
that Glory will Discover others having Gone aside; who will not then want
Light, (had they but Leave and Time) for their Returning; till when, they do
Complain of Darkness.

4. Until some Greater (Apprehended) Danger does Accompany their sitting
still, than was in going forth to Meet the Bridegroom. The Old Heavens shall
pass away with a great Noise, 2 Pet. 3. 10. which may Awaken these Foolish
Virgins out of their Loytering slumber, and so may give them Light. The
Clapping of Christ's Door (when it is shut by him in Anger) may startle all
that are without, and make them Run, to be Admitted in, who formerly Pretended
Ignorance, as to their Going out When Houses are on Fire, then Blindest
Sluggards will have Light sufficient into that way, wherein a Lion (formerly)
was said to be, Prove. 22. 13. When Life will be Endangered by sinful seeking
to Preserve it, Mat. 16. 25. while God will be a Sanctuary to his Faithful
Non-complyers, Isa. 8. 13, 14. then will the Foolish Virgins seem to have got
Oil or Light.

Quest. 2. Why will Christ Come at such a Time?
Answ. 1. In Answer to his People's Prayer, Luke 18. 7. which is Effectual,
Jam. 5. 16. sometimes to alter his seeming Purpose, Exodus 32. 14. Isa. 38. 1,
2. 5. and then much more to Hasten his Promised Coming, 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.
Prayer will not let him Rest, till he does Come, Isa. 62. 6, 7. and in that
Case, it is Commissionated to Command him, Isa. 45. 11. Yea, single Importunity
(distinct from Friendship) is Represented by him, as most Prevailing, Luke 11.
8. Sion may say (at such a time) God has forgotten her, Isa. 49. 14. But can a
Woman forget her Sucking Child, v. 15? Can she endure long to Hear it Crying?
Therefore he does forbid his People's Praying when he is purposed not to Hear,
Jer. 7. 16. since else he could not be in quiet. Now at this time a Spirit of
Supplication will be poured out. Zech. 12. 10. which (like Reversed Thunder)
will shake the Earth and Heavens; so will Christ Come, Hag. 2. 7.

2. To satisfy the Expectation of his Poor; which shall not Perish for ever,
or always be forgotten, Psalm. 9. 18. These Virgins had Expected him before at
their first going out to meet him; and then his Messenger came: But since the
Cry was made, Himself was verily Expected by them; therefore he Now will Come.
Prayer is some Ground for Hope, but Earnest Expectation, (though only of the
Creature, much more of Saints) is said to be an Argument (or Proof) of Glory to
be Revealed, Romans 8. 18, 19. 23. God takes Pleasure in his People's Hope,
Psalm. 147. 11. and Christ does know what fore Temptations Disappointments are,
Mark 11. 12, 13, 14. therefore if it were otherwise, he would have told them,
John 14. 2. to Difference his People's Hope, Romans 5. 5. from that of
Hypocrites, Job 8. 13. else would the Saints Persuasion (in Matters of Duty
also) be Despised by the World.

3. To make good his own Promise, signified by the Cry, as in Relation to his
First Coming, Luke 1. 72. who therefore bad it to be Written, because these
things are True and Faithful, Rev. 21. 5. yea, plainly written upon Tables,
because the Vision will surely come, and will not Lie, Hab. 2. 2, 3. There is a
Promise of his Personal Coming at last, Acts 1. 11. before which Time there is
a Promise also of his Coming to the Gentile Saints, as has been cleared up;
and he is ever Mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. He therefore brought his
People out of Egypt, for he Remembered his Holy Promise, Psalm. 105. 42, 43. he
therefore laid afide the Jewish Covenant, that so his Promise might be sure,
Romans 4. 16. which also (therefore) is Confirmed with an Oath, Heb. 6. 17. nor
will an Abraham therefore stagger at it, Romans 4. 20. or Sarah, because he is
adjudged Faithful, Heb. 11. 11.

4. To make the shadows flee away, as at his first Appearing, Col. 2. 17. which
also will be Resembled by his After-Comings. Shadows of Old were of God's own
Appointing, Heb. 8. 5. and were continued, until they grew unreasonably long,
compared with the Substance, and then Christ came to Take them quite away, Heb.
10. 9. So in these Gospel Times, some kind of Shadow (Form, or Type) is Now
required, Romans 6. 17. and suffered to continue (in such an Individual
Appearance of it) till Power and Form are shamefully Disproportionable; then
such Appearances are to be turned from, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Yea, Christ himself will
Come, Isa. 25. 9. to swallow up such Covering Vails, v. 7. and once more will
Discover the true Substantial Forms of Gospel Worship, Ezekiel. 43. 11. He
therefore will Come at such a Time, that so the Ark of his Testimony may be
seen within his Second Temple Opened, Rev. 15. 19.

5. To take unto Himself his own great Power, and Right of Reigning, Rev. 11.
17. Indeed his Throne was Stablished of Old, Psalm. 93. 2. who was the King or
Lawgiver unto Israel, Acts 7. 38. and as his own (Spiritual) House was first
Erected at his first Coming, Heb. 3. 6. so was his Temporal Kingdom also, in
the Days of Constantine, Rev. 12. 5. both which (viz. the Temple and the City)
will be Restored (as of Old) together with the Full Return of Babylon's
Captivity, Zech. 6. 13. Then she that Halted shall be made a Remnant, Mic. 4.
7. and David's Tabernacle shall be Raised up, Amos 9. 11. and then it shall be
said, Thy God, O Sion, Reigns, Isa. 52. 7. He will be King, Hos. 13. 10.
sought for by all True Israelites, Hos. 3. 5. it shall be Given him, whose
Right it is, Ezekiel. 21. 27. And he will then Come to take possession of it,
first in his Saints, the High ones, Dan. 7. 27. or such as Joshua was, Zech. 6.
11.

6. To Judge the Dead, Rev. 11. 18. which may be Construed diverse ways.
Possibly with reference unto All sorts of Persons; who will be then virtually
Dead, and after that comes Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. Or thus; To Judge the Dead,
that is, the Wicked; who will be then (Mystically) Awakened unto their
Everlasting shame, Dan. 12. 2. Or rather thus; To Judge the Dead, that is, to
Judge Things over again, which have been long since Dead and Buried, in Order
unto the passing of a Righteous Sentence thereupon. Then will some principles
be Generally Embraced, which have been thought to be Seditious: Then will some
Truths be fully Vindicated, which have been called Errors, if not Heresies:
Then will some Practices Appear to be Traditional, which have been said to be
Christ's own Apointments. Men's turning things up-side down, shall be esteemed
as the Potters Clay, Isa. 29. 16. for God will then Alter them, v. 17.

7. To give Reward unto his Servants, both Great and Small; viz. his Prophets,
Saints, and such as Fear his Name, Rev. 11. 18. or Fathers, Young Men, and
Little Children, 1 John 2. 13. Typified by the Ancient Highpriests, and
Priests and Levites. Then will be the Time of Paying off his Hired Laborers,
Mat. 20. 8. of giving double unto Sufferers, for their shame, Isa. 61. 7. and
of Convincing others (by this means) that verily there is a God, who Judges in
the Earth, Psalm. 58. 11. Then will the Pelican, Psalm. 102. 6. be turned into a
Flock of Doves, Isa. 60. 8. or Solitary ones be set in Families, Psalm. 68. 6.
Then will the Sons of Zadock have their Right of Priesthood, Ezekiel. 44. 15. or
Faithful ones, the Chiefest Name among Professors: Then will the Saints (the
High ones) have the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 27. and the Chief Priest (or Eminent Saint
among them) shall be their Prince, Ezekiel. 44. 3. Compared with Lev. 8. 31. Rev.
3. 11.

8. To Punish Transgressors, and to Destroy them that Destroy the Earth, Rev.
11. 18. Then Wise and Foolish Virgins will be severed, in a Providential way,
Mat. 25. 12. Then will Backsliding Priests (or Eminent Old Professors) be at
least Degraded, Ezekiel. 44. 10. 13. and those will have the Lowest place of all,
who have unfruitfully enjoyed Greatest Means of Light, as Capernaum (in
Christ's Day) is threatened, Mat. 11. 23. which was the Metropolis of Napthali;
and therefore Napthali his place is Last (or Lowest) in Ezekiel's City, Ezekiel.
48. 34. which Answers unto This Coming of the Bridegroom. But as to Persons
more Grossly Vicious, Christ will then Come to Cut them off, for all their
Cheating and False Swearing, Zech. 5. 3. for all their Revellings, Amos 6. 7.
Whoredoms and Oppressions, Mal. 3. 5. and more Especially for their
Persecutions, Psalm. 79. 10. who then shall be drunk with their own Blood, Isa.
49. 26.

9. To Cease Disquietments, and settle Peace, with Truth and Righteousness
among the Professors upon Earth. Christ will then Come as King of Salem, Heb.
7. 1. and Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. being his peoples Peace, when the
Assyrian comes, Mich. 5. 5. and give them Peace in his Second Temple, Hag. 2.
9. in way of Covenant, Ezekiel. 34. 25. Yea, he will speak Peace to the Heathen
also, Zech. 9. 10. nor shall they Learn War any more, Mic. 4. 3. This King of
Salem (also) is Melchisedec, Heb. 7. 1. and he will Reign in Righteousness,
Isa. 32. 1. which shall look down from Heaven, Psalm. 85. 11. then will
Oppressors be consumed, Isa. 16. 4. and following Exactors will be Righteous,
Isa. 60. 17. Yea, he will then Display the Banner, because of Truth, Psalm. 60.
4. Determining Matters Controversal, in his Valley of Decision, Joel 3. 14. and
turning a pure Language to the People, Zeph. 3. 9. that he may be One Lord, and
his Name One, Zech. 14. 9.

10. To Ease the Creature of its present Bondage, perfectly at his Last Coming,
Romans 8. 21. a Taste whereof will Now be given. The Creature groaneth yet,
because of its unfruitfulness, and cruel Usage, and sinful Mis-improvement; all
which shall then be much Rebuked. The Rivers of Judah (then) will flow with
Waters, and Hills with Milk, and Mountains with New Wine, Joel 3. 18. God will
Then hear the Heavens, and they the Earth, and it the Fruits thereof, son
Jezreel's sake, Hos. 2. 21, 22. The Righteous will (then) be Merciful to his
Beast: the Creatures may not Prey so one upon another, Isa. 10. 6. nor will
they be Destroyed superfluously, as Now they are. Men shall not Drink Wine with
a Song, Isa. 24. 9. or sinfully abuse the Creature, but fear the Lord and his
Goodness, Hos. 3. 5. therefore the Heavens, Earth, and Sea, are bid then to
Rejoice, because of Christ's Coming to Judge the World, Psalm. 96. 11, 12, 13.

Quest. 3. Why does not Christ stay until the Foolish Virgins do Return?
Answ. 1. Because his own set time was fully come, beyond which it is not fit
that he should Tarry for any sort of Persons whatsoever. Himself is Ready, so
is the Bride; yea, all the Wise Virgins also: And can it be Expected then, that
he should Tarry for some few Foolish Loyterers? He lately had Engaged for his
Speedy coming, Mat. 25. 6. and Mercy must give way to Truth; yea, All his Name
(or Attributes) unto his Word, Psalm. 138. 2. The five Wise Virgins are for his
Present Coming; and though the other five would have him stay, yet shall not he
Then have a Casting Voice, upon his own Account? If Time and Tide will stay for
none; much less will their Creator: Especially since his Present Coming is with
State; and Earthly Kings will scorn to Tarry till sluggish Servants get them
ready.

2. Because he else might Tarry long enough, or rather, Not come at all, if not
until these Virgins have bought Oil: Therefore that can be no Let unto him. As
Oil is put for Special Grace, so Foolish Virgins (in that Day) will never Buy
it, (as their Exclusion Evidenceth;) nor as it is put for Spiritual Light into
this Duty, of Going out to meet the Bridegroom. Nor will they have Light into
the Matter of that work before his Coming; because their Light is wholly
Borrowed from that which follows upon his being Come. Now, if he must come
before they will have Oil, then if he means to come at all, he must not stay
for them. They will have him come first, with reference to their Enlightening
Motives; therefore he will not Tarry for them, although by that means they are
shut out for ever.

3. Because the time of showing Mercy (unto such, and in some sense) is Now
Expired. The Attribute of Mercy is inseparable from God's Essence, Exodus 34. 6.
yet is its Exercise Commanded by his Will, Romans 9. 18. And though he Delights
in that Exercise, Jer. 9. 24. yet has he Bounded it by such a time, beyond
which time he will no more have Mercy, Hos. 1. 6. Now, when the Seventh Trumpet
begins to Sound, Rev. 10. 7. then Time shall be no longer, v. 6. and partly in
this Respect, for that contemporizes with the shutting of this Door. These
Virgins are Dead before that Time; and though Christ is so Civil, as to wait a
while, yet when their being Dead is out of Doubt, (as now it is) he then will
stay no longer. His Patient Spirit will not always strive with sinful Man, Genesis
6. 3. but has its Limits set by him, who can make way for Anger, Psalm. 78. 50.

4. Because they have had Warning, Means, and Time enough. What could they
Reasonably desire more? They had the Scriptures from the first, which show the
worth and Need of Oil: And it is but the Fancy of some in Hell, that other
Applications would be more Effectual, Luke 16. 31. They had the Benefit of
Conversing with the wise, by whom Christ works Now, as if Himself were
present, John 14. 12. At their first Going forth they should have taken Oil
with them: And Errors in the first Concoction are not wont to be Corrected in
the Second. They had been wakened by the Cry; and Repetitions seldom profit
them who are not benefited by the Preacher's Voice, John 9. 27. They did
confess their want of Oil, and made a show of going to procure it, but did not
Act accordingly; and so had nothing to Object against the Justness of Christ's
being wearied with such kind of Dallyers.

5. Because they are not worth the waiting for. They only stood in need of
being Buried, for which Christ will not stay at all, since he would not have
others do so, upon that Account, Mat. 8. 22. They seem to be Mad, or Fools in
Grain; and if an Achish had no need of such, 1 Samuel 21. 15. much less has
Christ, so as to Tarry for them, they had sufficiently Despised him, by
disregarding all his counsel, who therefore are not worthy to be so much
Honored by him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. They did but cheat the other Virgins all this
while with flattering words; And therefore neither Christ nor They would be
Abused by them any longer. Nor would they ever have been good for ought, in
case they should have come by being tarried for; therefore Christ might design
their being turned off by Coming, while they were Parted from the Wife.

6. Because he else would miss of his Main Purpose; which is, to Cast some out
for ever, Mat. 8. 12. by coming on them unawares, Luke 21. 34, 35. An Absolute
Decree of some Men's sad Exclusion, is easily consistent with a present
(visible) Possibility of their Admission; both which are hinted in those words,
The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out, Mat. 8. 12. And though Christ
has enough for All, Mat. 22. 4. yet but a Remnant only shall be saved, Romans
9. 27. Since Tophet also is Ordained for some, Isa. 30. 33. and Everlasting
fire, Mat. 25. 41. as is the Kingdom for some others, v. 34. And therefore
(chiefly) Christ is Resolved thus to come, while such (who are Ordained to this
Condemnation, Jude 4.) are either Revelling, Mat. 24. 49. or minding Earthly
things, v. 37. or fast Asleep, v. 43. or (at the least) out of the way, as
these poor Foolish Virgins will then be.

Quest. What is the Import of that word, Ready? They that were Ready.
Answ. 1. The same Greek word does elsewhere signify, Foreordained; and is
Translated (in that sense) Prepared, Mat. 25. 34. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Heb. 11. 16. and
thus it is here partly meant, with reference unto the Persons Interested in
this Privilege, of Going to the Marriage. Such as were Ordained to Eternal
Life, ('it is said) Believed, Acts 13. 48. and none (hereafter) will be
Glorified, save they who (through foreknowledge) were of Old Predestined,
Romans 8. 29. All are Invited, but none will come, save whom the Father draws,
John 6. 44. or who are Given by him to the Son, John 17. 2. Those must Expect
to be put by, whose Names cannot be found upon Record, when Ancient Registers
will be enquired into, Ezra 2. 62. Let us therefore make our Calling and
Election sure; Election by our Calling, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and This, by adding unto
Faith all other Virtues, v. 5. and in Abundance, v. 8.

2. The same word also elsewhere signifies a Thing, or Persons being Purely
Ordered (or Prepared) by the Lord himself; and in a way of singular
Discrimination. Thus sitting at Christ's Right Hand and his Left, is said to be
Prepared (or made Ready) by the Father, for some Persons above others, though
of the same kind with them, Mat. 20. 23. And thus [They that were Ready] may
Import, those whom the Father has peculiarly Designed hereunto, Above their
Fellows, who (in their Day) may possibly have drank as Deeply of Christ's
Bitter Cup as these. This lays the Dust of self-conceit in any, who are
Admitted to the Marriage; and will Occasion their Crying, Grace, Grace, at such
a time, Zech. 4. 7. This is of Use to Moderate our over-earnest Expectations
and Desires of sharing in that special Privilege: And this does Eminently
Declare, that Foolish Virgins shall never Enter; since many Wise ones will not
be suffered to see that day, as Mat. 13. 17.

3. The word (here used) does most commonly Import One's being Prepared for
such a work, 2 Timothy 2. 21. or in a present Readiness to set about it, 2 Cor.
10. 6. And in a Threefold sense.

1. With Respect unto a Person's Will. Thus Peter was Ready to go with Christ
to Prison, in point of present (Apprehended) Willingness, Luke 22. 23. And Paul
was Ready, not only to be Bound, but also to Die for the Name of Jesus, Acts
21. 13. And thus, None but the Wise Virgins were (at present) willing to go
with Christ unto the Marriage; since whosoever will, may freely Drink those
Living Waters, Rev. 22. 17. The Foolish Virgins were Habitually willing, as is
evinced by their Coming afterward: But yet not Actually; for then they would
have made more Haste. They had a sluggish will, but not Industrious, Prove. 13.
4. until the Summers Heat was over, which is the only Time for Harvest-work.
They had a will unto the Place, but not unto the way that led thereunto: And
such are said to have no will for Life, John 5. 40. which yet All do Desire.

2. With reference unto a Person's Freedom otherways, or having Nothing else
to Do. Thus were the Jews Ready to have killed Paul, and waited only for an
Opportunity, Acts 23. 21. Thus also are the wise Virgins Ready, at such a Time,
as having laid aside all other business, (or being at a Moments warning,) and
only waiting for their Lord's Appearing, Luke 12. ^6. But Foolish Virgins are
not yet at Leisure. How long will it be, before a Sluggard thinks it time to
Rise, Prove. 6. 9, 10? And when the Drunkard does Awake, he yet will at the same
work again, Prove. 23. 35. To Morrow shall be as this Day (says he) and more
Abundant, Isa. 56. 1^. Such think there is time enough; therefore they will take
the other Cup, Luke 12. 45. and must p^rt civilly with their Old Relations,
Luke 9. 61. at leastwise fetch their stuff out of an House on Fire, Luke 17.
31. and so are not yet Ready to follow Christ.

3. With reference unto a Persons Fitness (every way) for such an Undertaking.
Thus Saints are bid to be always Ready to give an Answer to every Man, 1 Pet. 3.
15. that is, to be Prepared for it. And in this sense it is here Chiefly meant.

Which kind of Readiness (for the Bridegroom's coming) consi^teth (as the
Scriptures signify) in these Particulars.

1. Sobriety is Required, with reference unto the Near approaching End, 1 Pet.
4. 7. such as this Dispensation is. Thus are we to be Sober in our Speech, not
being vain or over-talkative: In our Behavior, not being Light or Indiscreet:
In using the Creature, not Exceeding our Estate or Comeliness: In worldly
Employments, not being Covetous or C^rking: In Judging others in a Doubtful
case: In minding others Judgments of us, since the great Judge is at the Door:
In Relation to others Prosperity and our Affliction; not to Repine or Envy: In
Matters of Revenge, not to prevent the speedy Recompenser: In D^sputable
self-justifyings, not to be Peremptory: And in Relation to the Bridegroom's
Coming, not to be overhasty in our Expectations or sad Conclusions. Thus are
we to be very Sober, both as to our Inward Frame, and Outward show.

2. Such must not have their Oil to Buy; as Oil imports Special Grace, or
Spiritual Light into their Present Duty. For want hereof, the Foolish Virgins
are shut out, as being not Ready. There is Oil to be had, just till that Time;
but when the Bridegroom comes, his Shop is (for a while) shut up; as it will
be, for Ever, at his last Coming, Rev. 21. 11. How should this Quicken, to
Improve the Present Respite; especially, since future Converting Grace is like
to be the Portion of the Gentiles, Mal. 1. 11. or another sort of Persons. And
Light into the Present work (of Going out to meet the Bridegroom) is here
Particularly meant by Oil; as that which is Expressly Requisite, and without
which, the Having of Grace will hardly be made out. Were this Believed, how
would it startle some, who make light of their being (yet) in the Dark.

3. Such must have gone forth a Second time to Meet him. Therefore the
Bridegroom Tarried, because the Wise Virgins were not Ready (then) in that
Respect. They had (indeed) Gone out Before; but Christ Now comes in Kingly
State: And King Ahasuerus had his Virgins Doubly Purified, six Months with Oil
of Mirth, and other six Months with Odours, Esth. 2. 12. Those never will be
Ready to go in with Christ, who are contented with a Separation from more Gross
Pollutions. Men use to pass through several Rooms before they come into the
Presence Chamber: Nor can it be Expected, that a Child's First Coat should ever
suit a Manly Growing Dispensation. If we believe that all these things shall be
Dissolved, What manner of Persons should we be, 2 Pet. 3. 11? Or with what Face
can we suppose, that Nothing more should be required Now, than what has
sormerly been done by us?

4. Such must have Mourned over all their former failings; and not content
themselves with bare Reforming. Christ comes with the Clouds, Rev. 1. 7. and
we must Go with Rain, or Weeping, Jer. 31. 9. as for an only Son, Zech. 12.
10. Covering our selves with shame, for we have sinned, Jer. 3. 25. and sad
Bemoaning for our Evil ways, Jer. 31. 18, 19. Yea, and this Mourning must be
Apart, Zech. 12. 12, 13. with reference unto Secret faults, and Freedom for an
Holy Roaring, and as an Evidence of our being upright. And as a Proof hereof,
our former Idols must be cast away with Detestation, Isa. 30. 22. Yea, we must
Bear God's Indignation, Mic. 7. 9. Acknowledging it as the Punishment of our
Iniquity, Lev. 26. 40, 41. and not confess the sins of others only. There are
yet few Reformers, but fewer Mourners between the Porch and Altar, Joel 2. 17.
and yet till then, we are not Ready for Christ's wiping at his Wedding, Rev.
21. 2. 4.

5. Such must be Holily Resolved (in the strength of God) to be more Faithful
to him for the time to come. Though other Lords may have been owned by us, Isa.
26. 13. though other helps have been confided in, Jer. 3. 23. yet shall it be
so no more, Hos. 14. 3. Some are more Open for Christ, than heretofore; who yet
will promise nothing, if a fresh Temptation comes: These are not Ready, they
want the Girdle of an Holy Resolution; nor will they confess a former sin. But
we must join our selves unto the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant, Jer. 50. 5. or
be One Spirit with Christ, which joining to him does Import, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
Bound in the Spirit, as Paul was, whatever might befall him, Acts 20. 22. Thus
he that Loses his Life, shall save it, Mat. 16. 25. and none will Reign with
Christ on Earth, save they who are thus (virtually at least) beheaded for him,
Rev. 20. 4. or are full Followers of him, Numb. 14. 24.

6. Such must be made up of Earnest Wrestling, and patient Waiting; which is a
Rare Conjunction, at such a time. Some may be content to wait, but from the
want of Holy Earnestness, or from a sinful Indifferency and slightiness of
Spirit, Relating unto such a Mercy; as is evinced by their Negligent Use of
Sanctified Means. Others are Earnest enough, but yet unable to VVait, 2 Kings
6. 33. Ready to Give up all, if not Relieved by such a time, as 1 Samuel 11. 3.
But where shall we find a silent Crier, Exodus 14. 15? A Submissive pleader,
Jer. 12. 1? Or Lawful Striver, 2 Timothy 2. 5? Yet are we not fit to Drink till
very Thirsty, and yet duly Cool: till furnished with a Spirit of Supplication,
Zech. 12. 10. and yet willing to wait, Isa. 8. 17. Micah 7. 7.

7. Such must be able to Bear the Manner of Christ's Appearing, which will be
very strange; and therefore Blessed will they be, who are not then Offended in
him, Mat. 11. 6. He will Come in the Night, Rev. 16. 15. and some will
therefore think he means to Steal, or take by Violence; wherewith weak ones
will be Offended: as in a Spiritual case, the suddenness of a Convincing word
makes some poor Creatures the more Averse. His Coming will be Terrible; and
therewith Children will be Offended; as some poor Childish Creatures are with
Threatening Calls unto Repentance. His first Appearance will be small, and
therewith some will be Offended, Zech. 4. 10. as Judas was, and others are,
because Christ's Present Pay is mostly Spiritual. And therefore Blessed is the
people who know his Joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15.

8. Such (now) must be upon their constant VVatch; who formerly, perhaps, had
been Asleep. Christ here concludes with that Exhorta^^on, Mat. 25. 13. to show
wherein this Readiness does consist; and that (...) ^ready Virgins were now
fallen into a Second slumber, under a pretense of Buying Oil. The slumbring
Spouse, Cant. 5. 2. was all undrest, v. 3. to hint, that being Ready, and
Asleep, are inconsistent. Christ will not come Now (as heretofore) to waken
any, Mat. 26. 40. but in good earnest will bid such, Sleep on now, and take
your Rest, v. 45. Those must not sleep, who mean to see the Rising Sun: Nor
will an Heavy Head be lifted up, as it must be, by sharers in this Privilege,
Luke 21. 28. Death's picture (as sleep is) must not then be upon a Living Man;
but Gracious Habits must be Actuated: The Flowers must appear, Cant. 2. 12. and
Spiritual Beauty must want Nothing but that Light to make it Manifest.

9. Such must have on their Wedding Garment; else will they not continue
there, however (possibly) they may come in, Mat. 22. 12. 13. which Wedding
Garment plainly hinteth some kind of Spiritual Bravery, in the General,
(whatever its particular import may be;) or something of a more than Ordinary
Nature. Then Joshua must be clad with Change of Raiment, as well as have his
filthy Garments taken from him, Zech. 3. 4. Yea, a fair Mitre also must be set
upon his Head, v. 5. which (in a crowd) will evidence his being a High Priest,
or a Professor of the Highest Rank. Then will the Defense be upon all the
Glory, Isa. 4. 5. or outward Privileges and Eminent Graces will go together.
Then will there be a Glympse of Heaven upon Earth, (that Dispensation being
called the Kingdom of Heaven;) and therefore Flesh and Blood, (or what is short
of being Spiritual) will not Inherit that Heavenly Kingdom, as at the last, 1
Cor. 15. 50.

10. Such also are bid to have their Lights (then) Burning, Luke 12. 35. or all
their Graces in the Highest Exercise. Saints must not only (then) be truly
Spiritual, but Zealous also, Rev. 3. 19. or serving the Lord with spiritual
Fervor, Romans 12. 11. Flame is the Form of Fire, and therefore Flaming Lamps
(or Burning Lights) does Evidence, not only the Having of Oil (or Truth of
Grace;) and Oil both in the Lamp and Vessel; But Holy Judicious Affections
(also) Exercised in their Height and Glory. Lukewarm Professors (then) will be
cast out; and nothing but this Sacred Flame will then secure from being (in
some Measure) Burned. Affections (then) must be called off from all combustible
(or Lower) Objects; and (being Fired) must be fixed upon Christ; who will then
come in Flaming Fire, (as at the last, 2 These. 1. 8.) and therefore will be met
with burning Lights by all his Bride-Maids.

11. Such must be Doubly Clothed then, with both an Under and an Upper
Garment; or something on them (viz. Imputed Righteousness) as well as in them,
viz, Inherent Grace, Psalm. 45. 13. Christ Graces [In] a Soul, are fine and
white, or shining but yet not Clean or Pure, Isa. 64. 6. Prove. 20. 9. and
therefore Clean (or Pure) fine Linen must needs import, what is Imputed
through Believing: And both these sorts of Righteousnesses are required unto
One's being Ready for the Marriage, Rev. 19. 7, 8. It Is true, these always go
together in Reality, 1 Cor. 6. 11. but yet they may be (and are) severed in
Men's Fancies, though sinfully, since God has joined them, Mat. 19. 6.
Absurdly, since Duty is the Fruit of Faith. And self-undoingly, since none will
be Admitted, with Christ's Approbation, Rev. 7. 15. save they whose Robes are
washed in his Blood, v. 14. Woe then to them, who call Imputed Righteousness an
Airy Notion,

12. Such also are then bid to let their Loins be Girt, Luke 12. 35. as being
one undoubted Branch of Readiness for any Service, 2 Kings 4. 29. Which Girting
(in a Spiritual sense) must be with Truth, or Uprightness, Ephesians. 6. 14. a very
Rare Girdle at such a time, Mic. 7. 4, 5. Formality (then) will be Predominant,
2 Timothy 3. 5. but Christ will utterly abolish Idols (or Appearances) in that
Day, Isa. 2. 18. Though Jezebel's Face was Painted, 2 Kings 9. 30. yet Jehu bad
Throw her down, v. 33. much more will Jesus (at his Coming) cast such Jezebels
into a Bed of Sickness, Rev. 2. 20. 22. Wood is Combustible, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
though never so fairly Gilded: and therefore Hypocrites (then) will be
surprised with Fear, because they cannot dwell (as can the Upright) with
Everlasting Burnings, Isa. 33. 14, 15. Be therefore sincere, Phil. 1. 10. or
such as will abide the Judgment of the Sun.

Quest. 5. What are we to Understand by this word, Marriage?
Answ. Thereby is planly meant Christ's Union with his Kingly Dispensation upon
Earth; which will Resemble that of Marriage, in all these following Respects.

1. Marriage is not Convenient in a time of Persecution or Distress, 1 Cor. 7.
26. though it is Lawful then, v. 28. The Absolute prohibiting whereof is that
first Act, by which the Man of sin is to be known, 1 Timothy 4 3. since it is
Honorable in All, Heb. 13. 4. And thus, Christ always had a Power of Marrying
in this sense, (as Paul and Barnabas had in the Letter, 1 Cor. 9. 5.) although
he Takes not that Power to himself till such a Time, Rev. 11. 17. He had All
Power given him, at his first Coming in the Flesh, Mat. 28. 18. the Absolute
Denying whereof is therefore a Denial of his being Come, by which the
Antic^ri^t is to be known, 1 John 4. 3. Only he would not then improve his
Power in that Respect, lest he should give Offense at such a time, (...) ^5,
26, 27.

2. The Ancient High Priest might not Marry with an Harlot, or one Divorced, or
Profane, Lev. 21. 14. Nor might an Israelite Marry with an Heathen, Deuteronomy. 7.
3, 4. Nor may Saints Marry in Gospel Times, save in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39. or
in an Holy, Meet, and Honorable way. And thus is Christ's Dispensation
Ordered. He will not Marry with one Divorced, therefore the Jews, Old
Ministration will not be Restored for ever, Ezekiel. 16. 61. especially, since he
is (Now) Divorced from that Wife a Second time, which is the utmost of his
Indulgence, and more than usual, Jer. 3. 1. He will not Marry with an Harlot;
and therefore Antichrist's Dispensation is Blasphemously called Christ's, Rev.
17. 3. 5. He will not Marry with one that is Profane, or Heathenish; therefore
his Kingdom is not of this wicked World, John 18. 36. The Kingdom of Heaven
(strictly taken) is Reserved for his Father, 1 Cor. 15. 28. therefore Christ's
Bride is upon Earth, Rev. 21. 2. when fit for Marriage.

3. Marriage consi^teth in the Husbands Taking, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. and in the Woman's
being Given by her (Living Father) Deuteronomy. 22. 16. So is Christ Married to his
Kingdom, which he Received of his Father, Luke 19. 12. and does not Take it,
Rev. 11. 17. till it is Given him, Ezekiel. 21. 27. As in Relation to Particular
Souls, he Marries none, save whom the Father Gives, John 17. 2. So it is with
Respect unto his Kingly Power. He Comes as a Thief, unto the World, Rev. 16.
15. but by the Door, as to his Father's Approbation, John 10. 1, 2. He will not
Marry without his Father's Full Consent, wherein he is a Pattern to his
Children. Nor do the Saints (the High ones) Take the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 18. till
it be given them, v. 27. though others may exalt themselves, (pretending
thereby) to Establish the Vision, but they shall Fall, as heretofore such did,
Dan. 11. 14.

4. Espousals were wont to be before a Marriage, Mat. 1. 18. Deuteronomy. 20. 7. which
is of great Use, if not a Duty still. And thus, Christ was Contracted, or made
sure unto his Throne of Old, Psalm. 33. 2. in which regard, that Dispensation is
his Wife in Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 24. and therefore woe be unto him that Forces her,
v. 25. as worldly Powers have done, (especially ever since John Baptist's
Coming in the Mystery,) whom therefore Christ will put to Death, though nothing
shall be done unto the Humbled Crying (although Betrothed) Damsel, v. 26. John
Baptist's Coming was to Prepare the Bridegroom's way, Mat. 3. 3. and whose
Espousing Testimony therefore was of Use; John 5. 33. which Custom also is
Observed, in a particular Soul's Uniting unto Christ, Hos. 2. 19. only there
must be some further Progress made; therefore they hinder the Lamb's Marriage,
who could be satisfied with John Baptist's work.

5. Princes are wont to Marry (first) by Proxies; or by some other Persons
Representing them, and so does Christ. He was an Husband unto Israel, Jer. 31.
32. yet were they Married (first) to Moses, being Baptized into him, 1 Cor. 10.
2. Thus are Saints Married (or Espoused) Now by others unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.
2. Thus also Sion is (first) Married by her Sons; although Christ is the
Bridegroom, with Respect unto that Dispensation, Isa. 62. 5. Christ has a
Throne (or Kingdom) of his own, Rev. 3. 21. which Dispensation (at the last) is
called his Bride, Rev. 21. 2. with reference unto his Personal Marrying of it:
But yet this King will Honor some of his Saints, by letting Them Marry that
Ministration first, Psalm. 149. 9. that he might first Sup with Them, Rev. 3.
20. thence all Dominions ('it is said) shall Serve and Obey Him, when yet his
People (chiefly) do Possess the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 27.

6. Marriage Creates the Nearest Union, and fullest Communication, or most
sweet Communion. So is it here, since Christ will then Rest in his Love, Zeph.
3. 17. or Center in a sweet Deportment toward All, but more especially his
Chosen ones, whom he will then Evidence his Conjugal Affection unto, his
Everlasting kindness, Isa. 54. 8. Affected with their former Sufferings from
others, Zech. 1. 15. and from Himself, Isa. 40. 2. Jer. 31. 20. Accepting what
they Offer, Mal. 3. 4. and satisfying their Desires, Zech. 13. 9. as Esth. 5.
6. Paying their Debts, Mat. 25. 34, 35. 40. and deeply Revenging all their
Injuries, Zech. 2. 8.

7. A Marriage cannot be, unless the Bride and Bridegroom be there Present, at
leastwise in their Representatives. Thus Christ was Present when he first
Married Israel, Acts 7. 38. thus it is also from the Presence of his Spirit (in
an Instrument) if any Soul be Married to him, or Discipled, Mat. 28. 20. and
when his Kingly state shall be set up, its Name will be, The Lord is there,
Ezekiel. 48. 35. His Personal presence is reserved till the Last; but yet the
Bridegroom will Now come, else could there not be a Marriage. Prepare for his
Appearing then, so as that Saints shall say, Lo, This is He, Isa. 25. 9. Yea,
others then will Look upon him, either with weeping Eyes, Zech. 12. 10. or with
self-hiding from his Face, as Rev. 6. 16. His spiritual Presence has been
suspended; but he will come again, in that Respect, to fill the second Temple
with his Glory, and Constitute a proper Marriage.

8. Increase is wont to follow upon Marriage, in way of Blessing from the Lord,
Genesis 1. 28. so does it upon Christ's. Thus Israel Multiplied more than others
after her being Married unto Christ, Ezekiel. 5. 7. unto the Aggravating of her
Adultery. Thus also, Gospel-Saints are therefore Married unto Christ, that so
they might be Fruitful unto God, Romans 7. 4. and it was foretold, that
Gentile-Saints should Multiply more (in point of Number) than did the Ancient
Jewish Wife, Isa. 54. 1. And when Christ shall be further Married to his Kingly
Dispensation, Israel and Judah will be sown with the Seed of Man, Jer. 31. 27.
they shall be Increased like a Flock, Ezekiel. 36. 37. unto their own Admiration
Isa. 49. 21. and Place shall not be found for them, Zech. 10. 10. The Children
that Sion will then have, shall call for Place wherein to Dwell, Isa. 49. 20.

9. Marriage is during Life, since God hates Putting away, Mal. 2. 16. save in
the case of Adultery, Mat. 5. 32. therefore to have been the Wife or Husband of
more than one, (by Reason of unmeet Divorce) is such a scandal, as
incapacitateth for a Gospel Church-Office, 1 Timothy 3. 2. 12. and for the Place
of a Widow, 1 Timothy 5. 9. Thus Christ's Betrothing is for ever, Hos. 2. 19.
whose Marriage-Covenant with Particular Souls does undertake for their being
Loyal to him, who therefore Never will be Divorced, Jer. 32. 40. And though
Christ Now Disowns the Jews (his Ancient Wife) Hos. 2. 2. yet did she first
play the Harlot, Jer. 31. 32. as the Bill of her Divorce will Evidence, Isa.
50. 1. Nor will he put away his Wife, as to the Gentile-state, till they prove
False to him, Romans 11. 22. nor ever alter his Married Dispensation (with them,
or with the Converted Jews) but upon their Departing from him first.

10. Marriage does not Necessitate the Husband's Constant Presence though; but
is consistent with his (sometime) Discontinuance, unto the
Bride-Chamber-Children's Mourning, Mat. 9. 15. though Harlots are Glad thereof,
Prove. 7. 18, 19. Particular Souls Experience this, unto their sorrow; though as
the Fruit of their Apostasy, as in Relation to the present Jews, Cant. 8. 1. or
Sensuality, as in the days of Constantine, Cant. 5. 2. or sad Formality, as
after the Return of Babylon's Old Captivity, Cant. 3. 1. according unto
Brightman's Casting of those several Times. And with Respect unto Christ's
Marrying with his Dispensation; some think his Second Personal Coming will be
Discontinued: Though I am not of that Opinion, since Saints will then be ever
with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. But yet, his Glorious presence, with Restored
Gentile-Saints (if not the Jews) will be (I think) but for a Time; to make Room
for his After-coming, to wit, in Person.

11. Marriages of Old were Solemnized in such a way; wherein Christ's Union
with his Dispensation does Resemble Marriage. As thus,

1. It was most Honorable, that a Marriage should be known; and so is Christ's
Coming (as a Bridegroom) Notified here before hand, for all the World to speak,
if they have ought against it. He never used to steal a Marriage, by Creeping
into Houses, as Suspicious Persons do, 2 Timothy 3. 6. but published his Purpose
unto Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 1. and the King of Babylon, Jer. 51. 61. Thus was his
Personal Coming Published, Mat. 2. 2. and 3. 3. thus is his Spiritual Kingdom
to be managed, Mat. 10. 27. thus was his Temporal Kingdom first set up, Rev.
12. 4, 5. and thus (I am persuaded) it will be Restored, as in the Type, 2 Samuel
2, 7.

2. Marriage is a time of more than Ordinary Joy to all there present, as well
as to the Bride and Bridegroom; which is of Use still among the Jews, as faith
Buxtorfius, Synag. Juda. Therefore the Rising Sun is Represented by a
Bridegroom's Coming out of his Tent or Chamber, with others Joyful
Acclamations, Psalm. 19. 5. And thus John Baptist (who was the Bridegroom's
Friend) Rejoiced greatly, because of the Bridegroom's Voice, John 3. 29. And as
there is Joy in Heaven, upon a Souls Marrying unto Christ, Luke 15. 10. so does
it make those Glad on Earth who are that Bridegroom's Friends, Acts 11. 23. And
thus Christ's Coming here, will be Received with many shoutings, Zech. 4. 7.
and all kind of Music, Rev. 15. 2, 3. and holy Dancing, Jer. 31. 13. And as
the Bride has cause to Joy (especially considering what a Match this is) so
Christ will then Rejoice as does a Bridegroom, Isa. 62. 5. whose Heart is then
most Glad, Cant. 3. 11.

3. Marriage also is a Time of Feasting; especially when Kings are Married, as
when Ahasuerus Married Esther, Esth. 2. 18. for which some Poor (no doubt)
might fare the better. Thus Israel's first Marriage was called a Feast, Exodus
5. 1. in which regard, their Flocks and Herds must all go with them, Exodus 10.
9. And therefore God's making a Feast for Christ (in Gospel Times) is called a
Marriage, Mat. 22. 2. And as that Publican made a Feast, upon his being Married
unto Christ, Luke 5. 29. So will Christ make a Feast of Wines and Fat things
full of Marrow, Isa. 25. 6. when he shall come, v. 9. as when he first came in
Person, Mat. 22. 2. and when his Temporal Kingdom was first set up, Cant. 5. 1.
according unto Brightman's Notion. And he who bids the Poor to be then called,
Luke 14. 13. will then Relieve the Poorest Creatures with some of his Servants
broken Meats; yea, all the People, Isa. 25. 6.

4. Much Company is wont to be at all Marriages; so will there be at such a
time. When Souls are Married unto Christ, the Angels flock to see Repenting
Sinners, Luke 15. 10: So when the Church in Corinth was Espoused, 2 Cor. 11. 2,
the Angels came to their Solemnities, 1 Cor. 11. 10. How great a mixed
Multitude there was, Exodus 12. 38, when Israel was Espoused in the Wilderness,
Jer. 2. 2: and when Christ wedded his Dispensation in Gospel Times, his
Chariots were twenty thousand, even Thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68. 17. Thus in
the days of Constantine, we read of an innumerable Multitude, Rev. 7. 9; and a
great Voice of much People afterward, Rev. 19. 1, together with the Fall of
Babylon, verse. 2. Then All will gather themselves to Sion, Isa. 60. 4; as all
the City did to Naomi, at her Return, Ruth 1. 19: and whose Thundering Voices
will evince the Second Temple's being opened, Rev. 11. 19.

5. All sorts of persons (Then) are in their greatest Bravery; so is it at
Christ's Marriage. Then Solomon is crowned with a stately Crown, Cant. 3. 11.
The Bride is brought, in Clothing of wrought Gold and Needle Work, Psalm. 45.
13, 14. yea God will Then appear in Glorious Greatness, Tit. 2. 13. as Earthly
Parents are most fine upon their Childrens Wedding Day. Bridegrooms are wont to
Deck themselves with Ornaments, and Brides with Jewels, Isa. 61. 10. so will
Christ come with Power and great Glory, Mat. 24. 30; and part of that Bride's
Ornament will be, her Numerous Train, Isa. 49. 18; but chiefly, the Garment of
Salvation and Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. Then also will the House be
Garnished, Isa. 4. 2; and Meanest Servants will be finisied with Outward
Blessings and Moral Virtues, as Rev. 22. 2; ^t more especially, the Brides
Companions (or all wise Virgins) will then be Honorable, Psalm. 45. 9, 14.

6. Marriage-Solemnities (of Old) were in the Night; which Christ does here
allude unto; And so are all his Marriages. He married Israel (at leastwise
called them to be married) in the Night, Exodus 12. 42: and Married (or
Betrothed) Souls are called out of Darkness, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and in the Night he
will come as a Bridegroom, in this Parable. He was Betrayed in the Night, 1
Cor. 11. 23; and in the Night will he Return. The Natural Day began at Evening,
Genesis 1. 5; so will this Day of the Son of Man, Zech. 14. 7. as ancient Visions
were wont to be in the Night, Job 4. 13. Christ's Kingdom comes not with
Observation; therefore Not in the Day; but as the Lightning, which shines out
of Darkness, Luke 17: 20. 24. This shows His Affection to that Dispensation;
and will try who love sleep above it. It will be a Night of Rioting unto the
Wicked, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7. and Sorrow to the Saints, Psalm 30. 5. and Drowziness
unto all, save them who set themselves to watch.

7. Bridegrooms are wont to be Met (of Old) and so to be conducted to the
Marriage; which also Christ requires here. Thus Israel Met him in the
Wilderness, Jer. 2. 2. for There he found her, Hos. 9. 10. Thus a Betrothed (or
Believing) Soul, must Come unto him, John 6. 35. and thus his People must
prepare to meet him in the latter days, Am. 4. 12. When Abraham had overcome
those four great Kings, then did the King of Sodom go out to Meet him, Genesis
14. 17* and when Christ fully has subdued the four Monarchs, then Abraham's
Seed must go and meet with him. Thus when he comes to his People (in the
latter days) he will be found of them without, who must then Lead him into
their Mothers House, Cant. 8. 1, 2. Who must be then Ready also with Oil
prepared, and Strength to bear his terrible Appearing, 1 John 2. 28. so as to
meet him with Thanksgivings, Revel. 11. 16, 17.

Quest. 6. How can Christ's Union with his Dispensation (in these Latter Days)
be called a Marriage, since it is granted, to have been Once set up Before?
Ans. 1. Because this Restoration follows a former Just Divorce. Christ
married the Gentiles (at his first Coming) as he had done the Jews before, Romans
11. 22. Now as Gods Ancient Israel comm^tted Whoredom before their going into
Babylon, so did the Gentile-Churches before the Man of Sin arose, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3. And as those Israelites were put away for their Adultery, when they were
first carried Captive, Jer. 3. 8. so must the Gentile-Churches (and Professors
generally) be Divorced (by a parity of Reason) at their first going into
Babylon. The^^ is it, that as the Temple was then shut up, so was the City (or
Temporal Dominion) also, Trodden under foot, Rev. 11. 1, 2; as in the Letter,
of Old. And therefore the Return of that Captivity (with reference unto them
both) may well be called a Marriage, (as it is, Hos. 2. 19, 20. Jer. 3. 14.
Isa. 62. 4, 5.) because it follows a Divorce, with reference to that
[Numerical] Dispensation, although Once more Restored in Kind. And this Return
is not complete (with reference unto us Gentiles) until the Bridegrooms
coming, in this Parable, whatever show thereof (like that of Betrothing or
Espousals) may go Before. Now if Christ's Union with his Kingly Dispensation in
these Latter days, does follow a Just Divorce from what had been Before; such
do but then plead an Harlots Cause, who Argue for his Ecclesiastical or
Temporal Kingdom, from what has been Before (or since) the Rising of the Man
of Sin; save only in a late Preparatory way to this ensuing Marriage, from
what of Later years has come to pass, in order thereunto.

2. Because the Glory of this Latter House (or Dispensation) will be Greater
than of the Former, Hag. 2. 9. Now when the New Heavens and Earth shall be
created, the former shall not be remembered, Isa. 65. 17. Christ Married (at the
first) when he was Young, (as some Great Persons use to do.) Who, (in relation
to his Spiritual Kingdom, when it was first set up,) was Therefore called a
Child, Act. 4. 27. and a Man-child, with reference unto the first Erecting of
his Temporal Kingdom, Rev. 12. 5. both which must needs be Mystically
understood. Now Infant-Marriage is not taken notice of, when one is married
Afterward at his full Age, as Christ is at this time; from whence the Name of
Marriage therefore (ever after) does Commence. This second (also) will Eclipse
the former, because the Glory of Christ's Spiritual and Temporal Kingdom (Now)
will be united, which Heretofore were severed. Now as Christ's ancient Marriage
with the Jews, was to be quite forgot in Gospel Times, Jer. 3. 16; so will his
Second Marriage with the Gentiles, quite Destroy the former, by reason of that
Glory which Excels, as 2 Cor. 3. 10: therefore this Latter only has that
Name.

Quest. 7. How may we Reconcile Christ's coming (here) To the Marriage, with
that Returning [From] the Marriage, Luke 12. 36?
Ans. 1. By varying the Circumstances of Time and Place, with reference unto
the same Wedding in point of Substance. Christ went to Receive his Kingdom,
when he Ascended, and after the Receiving of it to Return, Luke 19. 12: and
yet, at his Return (together with the seventh Trumpet's sounding,) he is then
said to Take it, as if he had not Taken it before, Rev. 11. 17. which plainly
shows, a Double Taking of his Temporal Kingdom; the one, in Heaven; and (...)
other upon Earth; yet does he not Take it, in the second sense, till his
Returning from having taken it in the former. And in like manner, he may be
said to have been Married [First,] in Heaven, when he Ascended, (since Marrying
and Receiving are the same;) and yet he does not Take (or Marry that
Dispensation upon Earth, till his Returning from that former Wedding. And so,
his Knocking (Luke 12. 36.) must only intimate his sudden Coming, consistent
with a going out to meet him.

2. By altering the Translation of that Greek word ['Ex] which is there rendered
From, Lu. 12. 36; but yet it may be read [by reason of] and so that Place and
this will nothing differ, although forenamed Circumstances be not varied. And
thus, the same Greek word is rendered [of] Romans 9. 11. 30; with reference unto
Works and Faith and Him that Calls; that is, [because] or [by reason of] as
easily may be collected. And in that sense Christ's coming [To] the Marriage
here, and his Returning (in Luke) by reason of the Wedding, may well agree;
since his Return, (viz. from Heaven,) will be [because of] his Wedding upon
Earth. Nor need we stick at the word Return, if we refer it unto Heaven,
which He is now Gone into, who sometime was on Earth; especially since his
Marrying is so Desirable, as that Earth therefore may be called his Home; and
so his Coming* (for such a purpose) may well be called Returning, in the
strictest sense; yet does the Greek word only note Removing.

3. By varying the Case, in Luke and Matthew. The Latter of which (or this in
my Text) does plainly relate unto Christ's Marrying with his Dispensation. But
that in Luke may possibly refer unto another Parable, by which the Virgins
are exhorted to be Watchful, as Servants are, for their Lord's Coming, when he
shall Return from Feasting at some Persons Wedding. In which last sense, Christ
does compare himself (in Luke) unto an Householder, who takes liberty (Himself)
to Feast abroad, or to be at another's Wedding in the Night; yet does he
expect, his Servants should be well employed at home, and ready to Open at his
first Knock. Christ is Now Feasting upon his Fathers Throne, Rev. 3. 21; yet
will he have his Servants (upon Earth,) to watch, that when he shall Return
from thence, (which in regard of Feasting is called a Wedding,) unto his proper
Marriage here, they might immediately receive him. Thus Luke and Matthew are
Reconciled.

Quest. 8. Wherein consists the Privilege (hinted here) of Going with Christ
unto the Marriage, at such a Time?
Ans. 1. ^^ch will enjoy more Intimate and Near Communion with the Bridegroom;
which is a precious Privilege. Christ then will only have the Bride, as Joh.
3. 29; but all his Friends will have his Presence: So as to see his Face, Rev.
22. 4; and hear his Voice, Joh. 3. 29; and have their fill of his Embraces,
Cant. 8. 3. Their Eyes shall then behold him in his Beauty, Isa. 33. 17. and if
the Bride be worth one's Coming to have seen, Rev. 21. 9; much more the Crowned
Bridegroom, in that Day of his Espousals, Cant. 3. 11. The Saints future
Happiness consists in their being with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17; which therefore
Paul so much Desired, Phil. 1. 23. the Fullness of Joy being in his Presence,
Psalm. 16. 11. which therefore does forbid his Peoples Mourning, Mat. 9. 5. How
did good David's Soul and Flesh thirst to behold his Glory in the Sanctuary,
Psalm. 63. 1, 2; which will be then so fully Opened, as that his Hidden Ark will
then be seen, Rev. 11. 19.

2. Such will then Clearly see the Bride in all her Glory; which is a great
Privilege, Rev. 21. 9, 10. She will be then Visible unto All, as was Christ's*
spiritual Glory at his first Appearing; which yet was Actually seen but by a
Few, Joh. 1. 14. Others may see her at a Distance; as will the saved Nations,
the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 24. but these shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord
shall bring again Sion, Isa. 52. 8. And if the Promises were Embraced (or
Joyfully beheld) when they were yet far off, Heb. 11. 13; much more when Sion
shall be Reared up, will it be worthy to be Looked on, Isa. 33. 20* Much less
will such Mistake the Bride, as others will, who therefore will Despise that
Dispensation, as some men do those Books whose Author is not known. Nor can
the Saints know what they Ought to do, save as they have knowledge of the
Times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. or of their proper Dispensation; which therefore is a
Privilege.

3. Such will be Witnesses of that Solemnity; or of the mutual Taking and
Giving, that will then be between the Bride and Bridegroom; which will be both
their Honor and Advantage. What running is there, to see Two (Earthly) Princes
meet? much more, when both the Bridegroom and the Bride come down from Heaven,
Rev. 21. 2, 3; or when this Moon and Sun shall meet, without Eclipsing each
others Light: then will the Morning Stars sing, and all the Sons of God will
shout for Joy, as at the first Creation, Job 38. 4. 6, 7, and they Alone. Much
of Gods Majesty will appear, Isa. 24. 14. which yet will not occasion Singing,
(or comfortable Satisfaction) save to this little Remnant, v. 13. Strange
things will then be done, the Righteousness whereof will only be resolved into
Sovereignty, Psalm. 75. 7. or into Christ's Taking, by virtue of the Father's
Giving, and Blessed is the Non-offended Person in Christ's Day, Mat. 11. 6. or
such as know the Joyful Sound, Psalm. 89. 15.

4. Such then will be the Brides Companions, or Maids of Honor, Psalm. 45. 14.
and which Kings Daughters will then be Ambitious of, v. 9. That Bride will deal
well with all her Servants; but these will be her Fellows, rejoicing with her,
Isa. 66. 10. and being Dandled upon her Knees, v. 12. and Eminently Delighted
with the Brightness of her Glory, v. 11. These will have liberty of coming with
the Bride unto the King, Psalm. 45. 14. these Friends shall Eat and Drink
together with them both, Cant. 5. 1. and it will be their Joy, that Christ
himself shall have the Bride, Joh. 3. 29. whilst others are unsatisfied with
their Portion, v. 26. These will be the greatest Favorites, as Joseph was next
to Pharaoh, Genesis 41. 40. yea, These will be both Sion's Children and her
Husband, in Christ's stead, Isa. 62. 5. and thus Eliakim (having the Key of
David's House) shall be a Father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Isa. 22. 21,
22. and be the Ruler of Christ's Household, Lu. 12. 42.

5. Such then will have the Comfort of their Garments of Salvation, Isa. 61.
10. or of those Ornaments, which Maids cannot forget, Jer. 2. 32. It is their
present Duty to be getting Ready, in that regard; but yet their Change will not
be till that very Moment of the Bridegroom's Coming, as 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Then
will God sprinkle clean water on them, and cleanse them from all their
filthiness, and put a New Spirit in them, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. which will Refresh,
as well as Beautify, Isa. 61. 10. when Israel shall be brought again from
Egypt, Psalm. 68. 22. where they have lien among the Pots, then will they be as
Doves with silver wings, and Feathers of Yellow Gold, v. 13. The Remnant of
Israel shall not do Iniquity, Zeph. 3. 13. no other Lord (but Christ) will then
be mentioned, Isa. 26. 13. nor will their Garments then be stained with
Reproaches, as hitherto they have been; but Others (or they with whom they do
converse) shall call them in a serious way, the Holy People, Isa. 62. 12.

6. Such then will be uncloathed of their filthy Garments, Zech. 3. 4.
Corruption must not Inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Their stony Heart will
then be Taken away, Ezekiel. 11. 19. and wickedness will be carried (in a covered
Ephah) to be Established in the Land of Shinar, upon her own Proper Base, Zech.
5. 8. 11. Nor will they only have got Victory over the Beast, but over the
very Number of his Name at such a Time, Rev. 15. 2. viz. Compliances of the
most Refined Nature. This will Occasion them to sing the Song of Moses and the
Lamb, Rev. 15. 3. viz. more fully and Distinctly (as this Particularized
Duplicate imports) than when the Virgins first went out, Rev. 14. 3. The Best
(till Then) will have Iniquity (in Principles or Practices) Reproachfully
abiding in them; which Eminently (then) will Pass away, Zech. 3. 4. unto their
Honor and Refreshing. Such then will be Enlightened (as the Margin has it)
when their Light is come, Isa. 60. 1. Abandoning what formerly they did Esteem,
Isa. 30. 22. Yea, shaking off their Dust, and Loosing themselves from all the
Bands of their Captivity, Isa. 52. 2.

7. Such then will Eat and Drink, Isa. 65. 13. or Feast it with the Bride and
Bridegroom, at Wines and Fat things full of Marrow, Isa. 25. 6. yea, he will
then come forth and Serve them, Luke 12. 37. who therefore cannot Fast or
Mourn, Mal. 9. 15. That Chamber (or Accommodation) whose Prospect is toward the
North (which was the most Honorable side of Old, 1 Kings 7. 39.) will be for
the Sons of Faithful Zadok, Ezekiel. 40. 46. God will then make it known, the
Silver and Gold are His, Hag. 2. 8, 9. when they from Sheba shall bring Gold,
Isa. 60. 6. and Iron shall be turned into Silver, v. 17. for in the Gentiles
Glory will the Saints then boast themselves, Isa. 61. 6. But yet the Prime
Dishes (at this Feast) will be the Full Discovery of their Duty, Ezekiel. 43. 11.
and Grace to Practice what formerly has been Neglected, as in the Type, Nehem.
8. 17. together with their Hearty Welcome to that whole Provision, Jer. 32. 41.
and their Being satisfied with the Consolations of that Bride, Isa. 66. 11.
yea, Flourishing like an Herb, v. 14. or Thriving by them, increasing Holy fear
together with Enlargement, Isa. 60. 5.

8. Such will (thence-forward) be secure from Grosser Persecutions or
Oppressions. Destructions (then) will come to a Perpetual End, Psalm. 9. 6. when
Christ shall have prepared his Throne for Judgment, v. 7. which at this time
will be, Rev. 11. 18. As such shall walk with Christ in white, Rev. 3. 5. and
eat of the Hidden Manna, Rev. 2. 17. so will they not be hurt by any such kind
of Second Death, Rev. 2. 11. for they shall eat of the Tree of Life, v. 7. Then
will the four Horns be frayed away, Zech. 1. 21. and the Assyrian also smitten
with a Rod, Isa. 30. 31. there shall be no more a pricking Bryar to the House
of Israel, Ezekiel. 28. 24. such Enemies being either wasted, Isa. 60. 12. or
brought (at least) into a Full subjection, v. 14. The Saints Heart (then) shall
Meditate Terror, with reference unto their Old Oppressing Officers at Home, and
Foreign Adversaries, Isa. 33. 18. but Violence shall not be heard, for all
such Officers, will be made Peace, Isa. 60. 18 nor shall they see a sierce
(Besieging) people any more, Isa. 33. 19. but will (in that regard) have
Liberty to walk Abroad (which formerly they could not do, v. 8.) or to behold
the Land that is far off, v. 17. viz. the uttermost of their Borders, in peace
and safety, v. 20.

9. Such then will be Discharged from any kind of Future Toyling whatever.
Their Oil, or their Anointing (then) will have Destroyed the Assyrian Yoke,
Isa. 10. 27. and then Christ's Yoke (when severed from the other) will be
easy. Their Garment of praise, Isa. 61. 3. will then Excuse them from servile
work, v. 5. save what is suitable unto their Royal Priesthood, v. 6. the
meaner part of which Employment (also) will then be put upon the Better sort of
Late Back-sliders, Ezekiel. 44. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Nor will they be so weary
(then) with Running in the way of Duty, nor faint with walking; but shall renew
their strength, yea, seem to Mount up with wings as Eagles, Isa. 40. 31. Such
will Abound with Service then, Isa. 66. 23. but yet without Complaining; the
Labor of a Duty being then removed, when they shall get shut of Clogging
Humors, and have a New Heart bestowed on them. Thence is that state Described,
by their constant singing, and sitting at a Feast, Isa. 65. 13, 14. and yet by
serving God (in his Temple) Day and Night, Rev. 7. 15. because that Service
(then) will be their Meat and Drink, or Matter of Delight; not saying (as those
of Old) When will the New Moon be Gone, Amos 8. 5? But, Let us Go speedily to
Pray before the Lord, Zech. 8. 21.

10. Such will have the Comfort of each others Company. Then all the Precious
ones will be together, Zech. 14. 5. like so many Jewels made up into a
Bracelet, Mal. 3. 17. which as an Ornament that Bride shall wear, Isa. 49. 18.
for wheresoever the Body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together, Luke
17. 37. Then will those Saints be also of One Heart and Way, Jer. 32. 39. as
were the Primitive Christians, Acts 4. 32. not Envying or Vexing one another,
Isa. 11. 13. but Serving the Lord with one consent, and jointly calling upon
his Name with a Pure Language, Zeph. 3. 9. whose Name will then be One, Zech.
14. 9. Yea, these Wise Virgins then will be Divided from the Foolish, as Sheep
from Goats, Mat. 25. 32. no stranger uncircumcised in Heart shall enter (with
Israel) into the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44. 9. but Jerusalem shall be Holy, Joel 3.
17.

11. Such then will there continue, none being Cast out, Mat. 22. 13. but he
that wants his Wedding Garment, v. 12. which shows the Possibility of some
Hypocrites creeping then in, as heretofore, Gal. 2. 4. But Sons will abide in
that House for Ever, John 8. 35. and Faithful Overcomers will be as Pillars in
God's Temple, who shall no more Go out, Rev. 3. 12. Indeed God's People (in the
General) will from that time be no more termed forsaken, Isa. 62. 4. nor will
they have any more to do with Gross Idolatry, Hos. 14. 3. which yet may be
consistent with their Gradual declining in the General, till Christ himself
shall come in Person, 1 These. 3. 13. But yet particular Saints (who come at
first with Christ unto this Marriage) will be an Earnest of that more Universal
fixing afterward. Yea, such will Grow, Hos. 14. 5. passing with Christ from
one Room to another; and reaping the Benefit of that Increasing Dispensation,
all their Time.

12. All this will then be Accented unto the Saints, by their Peculiar sharing
in it; or by the quite contrary Portion of the Generality at such a Time.
Darkness shall cover the Earth, when Sion's Light will Rise upon the Saints,
Isa. 60. 1, 2. when Christ shall bid [These] Come, in Order unto intimate
Communion with himself, Mat. 25. 34. He then will say to Others, Depart from
me, v. 41. The Nations will be Angry then, Rev. 11. 18. whilst These are giving
Thanks, v. 17. who see the Justness of Christ's ways, Rev. 15. 3. or who will
be Witnesses of that Solemnity. When Saints will be the Bride's Companions,
Psalm. 45. 14. then others shall entreat her Favor, v. 12. as Haman did
Esther's. The Best of Hypocrites will want their Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 11.
when these Wise Virgings will be Ready. Yea, when these shall be white; Those
will do wickedly, or be filthy still, Dan. 12. 10. When Saints shall Eat, then
Others will be Hungry, Isa. 65. 13. and Howl, while Saints are Singing, v. 14.
The Seventh Trumpet sounds Peace to These, and Woes to Others, Rev. 11. 14,
15. And when the Saints are gathered together, Zech. 14. 5. then will the Mount
of Olives (or their Adversaries) be Divided, v. 4. And as Sons will continue in
this House; so others will be heard to Knock in vain.

Quest. 9. What does this shutting of the Door Import?
Answ. 1. The securing of those within; partly, from Going out Again, as 2
Kings 6. 32. but chiefly from harm without. Thus did the Disciples shut the
Doors, although from sinful Fear, as Calvin notes, John 20. 19. Thus was
Nehemiah Tempted to Meet some others in the Temple, with its Doors shut upon
them, but would not yield thereunto, Nehem. 6. 10, 11. thus did those Angels
(Lawfully) pull Lot in, and shut the Door against those wicked and Miscievous
Sodomites, Genesis 19. 10. And so it may be here. Admitted Virgins shall not
Depart, for Christ has shut them In: Nor shall any Enter, to do them Hurt, for
he has shut them Out. Thus Sion shall no more be. made to Drink the Cup of
Trembling, Isa. 51. 22. her uncircumcised Enemies shall no more come in to her,
Isa. 52. 1. Christ will be no more wroth with her, Isa. 54. 9. and in her Land
there will be no more Violence heard, Isa. 60. 18. Yea, Satan will then be in
some Measure Bound, or signally Rebuked, Zech. 3. 2. till such a Time; as at
Christ's Personal Coming.

2. The shutting of this Door imports chiefly, the Keeping of Others out,
from sharing (...) the Privilege of those within, which will be sad.

1. Since this Door is shut against Professors, who have been wont to be
within. Dogs are shut out, and no Man heeds their Howling: But when some kind
of Children are cast out, what weeping and gnashing of Teeth must needs then
be, Mat. 8. 12. What means this Noise, said poor Presumptuous Joab, 1 Kings 1.
4? So will the Foolish Virgins say, when they shall hear the Clapping of this
Door against them. The Top-stone of Ishmael's Misery was, that he (a Son)
should be cast out, Genesis 21. 10. to Die in a Barren Wilderness, without a
Miracle. Such will then Cry, as sometime Sion did, Jer. 8. 15. We Looked for
Peace, but no Good came; and for a time of Health, and behold Trouble. This
Virgin-troop will then be more Confounded, because they Hoped and were Ashamed,
like the Troops of Tema, Job 6. 19, 20. which will rejoice Hell from beneath
(or Men more Grossly wicked) that Virgins are Excluded as well as Harlots, Isa.
14. 9, 10.

2. Since they are shut out from the Marriage; which Feast their Teeth will
water at, who had no stomach to their work of Going forth to Meet the
Bridegroom. If these were only Excommunicated from the Service there, they
would no more value it, than many do (Now) the Prelates Censures; in case that
Lightning went alone. But they must neither Eat nor Drink, Isa. 65. 13. nor
Taste of Christ's Marriage Supper, Luke 14. 24. nor be the Br^de's Companions,
as was Desired and Expected by them. And though Hell may see into Heaven, (as
through a Cranny of that Bolted Door) yet will the sight of water there, but
only Aggravate those Seers Torment, Luke. 16. 24. and so the Hearing of that
Heavenly Music, will but increase the others Howling, Isa. 65. 14. An
Hypocrite (chiefly) is in Love with Privileges, (as Harlots are with Gifts;)
the want whereof will therefore lay the Top-stone of their Misery, when that
Door shall be shut upon them.

3. Since it is shut by Him, who shuts, and no Man Opens, Rev. 3. 7. Indeed
his Opening is first mentioned there, Rev. 3. 7. because his Prime Design (at
his first coming) was not to Condemn or shut, but Save or Open, John 3. 17. but
he Now comes to shut that Door which had been Opened by him heretofore. And
well may he make bold to shut the Door, because he is the Master of that House,
Luke 13. 25. which therefore none may Open without his Order. Nor is it like,
that any other would have shut it of their own Accord; Saints being rather
over-tender: But when it is shut by Him, they Dare not (will not) Open it
without his Leave. ^^y, when he shuts, no Man Can Open; as when He Opens,
no Man Can Shut, Rev. 3. 8. This Door is not upon the Latch; therefore uncivil
Persons cannot enter: And none but Eliakim has the Key, Isa. 22. 22. therefore
it is but in vain to hope from others: This Door is also Everlasting, Psalm. 24.
7. therefore not to be Broken through.

4. Since shutting out, and being Cast into ut^ter Darkness, go together, Mat.
8. 12. The Punishment of [Loss] would be the less, if this of [Sense] did not
accompany it: nor is it so bad to Die of Fasting (much less to want a Feast,)
as to be Fed upon (Alive) with gnawing Never dying Worms, Mar. 9. 48. Nor is
the want of Greater Light so much afflicting, as to be cast out into the Outer
Darkness, a Place of darkness as Darkness it self, and where the Light is as
Darkness, Job 10. 22. How great must needs that Darkness be, Mat. 6. 23.
compared wherewith, the Inner Darkness is some kind of Light. This needs must
be a Place of Weeping, to which is added, Gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 8. 12. not in
a way of Deriding Saints, as heretofore in their Afflicted State, Psalm. 35. 16.
or of Insulting over them, as Lam. 2. 16. much less of being Ready to Devour
them, as Job 16. 9. but in a way of being Vexed, as Psalm. 112. 10. and
grievously Tormented, as Mark. 9. 18.

5. Since others will be then Within. The Misery of Man, (arising from some
kind of Want) is merely grounded upon his Fancy: if None had stately Houses or
rich Fare, then every one would be Content without them: but Envy slays silly
Ones, Job 5. 1. Nor would the bare want of Necessaries so Afflict, in Case that
Want were Universal: but it must needs Increase poor starving Lazarus his
Pain, to Know, that Dives fared Deliciously, Luke 16. 19. 21. whose Scale was
therefore Justly turned afterward, v. 25. but very Heavily, as Dives though v.
24. This will be the Foolish Virgins Case; whose being cast out, will make them
VVeep; but Others being In, will cause the Gnashing of their Teeth, Mat. 8. 12.
and m^erly for want of being Ready, which they had Timely Notice of, but lost
the Blessing as did Esau.

Use 1. The Virgins will part with mutual Freedom, before the Bridegroom's
Coming. Indeed, the Wise (first) Bid the other go; but yet the Foolish
(Readily) Accept the others Motion* Which [Bidding] is, for spiritual Gain; but
this [Accepting] is for a Carnal Interest, as has been opened. Now they will
part, at leastwise in Affection: not so Delighting each in other, as
heretofore: Since Differences in Opinion (especially with reference unto Time,
Truths and Duties,) are apt to Alienate if not Provoke, Numb. 14. 6. 10. Yea,
such will part in point of Practice also; the One sort going out to Meet the
Bridegroom, the other going to Buy Oil: As Ruth and Orpah did, with reference
unto their Mother Naomi, Ruth 1. 14, 15. Nay they will Part in point of wonted
ordinary Communion also: as Paul and Barnabas did, because of Mark, who had
Deserted his bounden Duty, Act. 15. 38, 39. This Parting (probably) will be
Gradual: but let it Certainly be Expected, and not be Wondered at.

2. The Foolish Virgins only (and not the Wise) are said to Go, or Leave the
Others Company: which is Observable. The Name of Separation has been always
Infamous, although the Scripture clearly Owns it, 2 Cor. 6. 14. but at this Day
the Foolish Virgins are the Separatists, however Apt to charge it upon others.
There has been formerly, a Lawful (Proper) Separation made by Saints, from
Others: as when the Jewish Way was separated from, by those Act. 19. 8. who
sometime were Obliged to walk therein. But yet, Backsliders (Returning to their
Ancient Duty) cannot so Properly be said to separate from their bad Companions,
since there was never any Lawful Union, and so no need of a Divorce. However,
the present case is Plain: the Foolish Virgins separate from the Wise, as to
their former Joint Practice, of Going out to meet the Bridegroom. Let no man
therefore Check wise Virgins by that Name, which is not Theirs, nor
(Absolutely) Infamous.

3. It is here said, They went to Buy, who (as it has been Proved) went to
Sleep: from whence is hinted, that sinful Actions are Covered over with fair
Pretenses; and more Especially in these Latter days. Herein consists much of
that Deceitfulness which lurketh: in the Heart, Jer. 17. 9. and Sin, Heb. 3.
13. Thus bold Complyers are termed Wise in Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 10: and Wantonness
is called Love, Prove. 7. 18. yea, Persecution is counted Wisdom, Exodus 1. 10,
Zeal, Phil. 1. 6. and Duty, Act. 26. 9. Some men Declare their Sin, as did Lots
eldest Daughter, (having learnt that in Sodom, Isa. 3. 9.) in calling her
incestuous infant, Moab, which signifies, Of her Father, Genesis 19, 37: but
Others are more subtle, such are the Foolish Virgins. Conscience (in such)
will not permit a full Profession: and as That would have cracked their Credit
quite, so would it have stopped their mouths from ever Claiming a Right of
Entering afterward.

4. Their false Hypocrisy is not Detected, (by any Word Discovering it,) but
as they did Pretend [to go and Buy] so is it here Delivered. They did profess
('it is like) this was their End: and Eminent Professors are not Hastily charged
with Lying. However, Christ may (yet) let it pass for Current: to Harden them
in their (undiscovered) Sin: to learn us Moderation in a Disputable Case: and
to Reserve their Manifestation till his Coming, unto the Heightning of their
Confusion, by shutting them out, who (till that time) were not Convicted: or,
by their being Apprehended, Tried and Executed all at Once. Methinks I see the
Reason here, of some men's Confident self-justifying; of others unaccustomed
forbearing them in way of Censures, and of God's Ordering it to be so: Others
will be more fully satisfied, when they shall see that following sudden
Revelation of God's righteous Judgment at the Bridegrooms Coming.

5. Deceitful Shows will not Advantage in this Day of Christ; since he will
Come, while Foolish Virgins are gone to Buy, (as they Dissemblingly pretend)
unto their being shut out for Ever. Some may seek Deep to hide their Counsel
from the Lord, Isa. 29. 15. but this shall be esteemed as the Potters Clay: for
shall not their Creator know, v. 16? He searches the Heart, to give to every
Man his Due, Jer. 17. 10. Therefore Ought got unjustly, will not Prosper, v.
11: and this the Churches (or Professors) shall be made to Know, Rev. 2. 23.
Yea, when it is thus, in point of Turning things upside down, Isa. 29. 16.
within a very little while, the Lord will turn such seeming fruitful Field,
(or Glorious Hypocrites) into a Forest, v. 17. Those do but Hasten his
Appearing to their shame, who seek to cover evil Actions with fair Disguises,
Isa. 66. 5. as Christ Then comes here, upon the Foolish Virgins, for our
Warning.

6. Peculiar Service (done for Christ) will suitably be Rewarded (by him) upon
Earth, since all the Wise Virgins will be Admitted to the Marriage. Then Christ
will gird himself, Luke 12. 37. and serve them: his Feast of Wines, Isa. 25. 6.
will make them to forget their former Misery, as Prove. 31. 7. Yea he will then
swallow up Death in Victory, Isa. 25. 8. and take away their Rebuke from off
the Earth. When apt to faint (by reason of some Wilderness-temptations) in
fleeing out of Babylon, let this Jerusalem come into our Mind, Jer. 51. 50. or
what God has Prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64. 4. Then will
their Foolishness appear, who have desired to be Excused from this Supper, Luke
14. 18. when they shall see, Luke 13. 28. how Blessed a thing it is to have
been Called thereunto, Rev. 19. 9. the Truth whereof is signified there, by its
being ordered to be Writ, and by a superadded Testimony.

7. This Feast may not be Tasted though, until the Bridegroom's Coming; since
these wise Virgins are here said to go [with Him] unto the Marriage. We
therefore have need of Patience, Heb. 10. 36: yea therefore Christ may put his
Knife unto our Throat (or Exercise us with Delays) because we are so given to
Appetite, Prove. 23. 2. And since Himself Expects, Heb. 10. 13: shall not we
watch with him, Mat. 26. 40? those have no Faith, nor yet good Manners, who
cannot Feed upon a Pr^mise, nor be content to fare as does their Ma^t^r, Joh.
13. 16. It Is for Our Interest to have Him with us; whose Presence at the Table)
make's our Spikenard smell, Cant. 1. 12; and in whose Absence, the very
Bride-chamber Children Fast, Mat. 9. 15. Let us not therefore be too Hasty:
especially since they who Now are Full, will then be Hungry, Luke 6. 25. as
having had their Portion.

8. There is a Readiness required for this Feast; and without which, none are
Admitted to the Marriage. Some kind of Duty is Immediately incumbent on us,
while in the Gall of Bitterness, Act. 8. 22, 23; but yet All (proper)
Privileges have their Fitness pre-required. We must be wrought for Glory, 2
Cor. 5. 5: nor will the Blind and Lame, (or Men defective mainly in their Light
and Walking) ever Enter into David's House, 2 Samuel 5. 8. Though Duty is
required, apart from Privilege; yet Privileges may not be Expected without
suitable Duty. Indeed, this Marriage will be as Burdensome to Unready Persons,
as such themselves will be to Christ and his Companions; as Heaven it self
would be an Hell to Sinners. And uppermost Seats will be Reserved for the
greatest Gallants in that Day; or she shall stand at Christ's Right Hand, whose
Clothing is the Gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45. 9.

9. The Marriage Feast (at such a Time) will be in some Place which has (as it
were) a Door; as its being [shut] imports. All may be Invited thither, but
none will share therein (as Guests) save they who are Admitted with
Approbation. This will be a peculiar Privilege; which they shall know, whose
Carelessness (in point of fore-required Duty) will Exclude them. The New
Jerusalems Gates shall not be shut at all, Rev. 21. 25; to show the
Absoluteness of its Security: yet will there be Angels standing at them, v. 12,
to keep those Out who have no Right to Enter, v. 27. so will it be Now. And as
there shall be faithful Keepers of the Sanctuary then, Ezekiel. 44. 16; so
Careful Eliakim will have the Key of David's House, Isa. 22. 22; by Means
whereof, Communion-Acts (relating unto Privilege as well as Duty) will be
secured.

10. The Door of Mercy will (in some sense, and unto some) be shut on Earth; or
in this lesser Day of Judgment. It is (Insensibly) so at Present, unto
particular Souls, as to Christ's striving with them by his Spirit of Grace: but
it will Then be so more Evidently, in point of Privileges; yea, though some
(at that time) will seek to Enter, Luke 13. 24. Nor will it be to be Wondered
at, since all the (Intended) Guests will be then Come, an^ set at Supper; and
in that case, the Gates (in Great Houses) are always shut. And as there will be
no scaling of that high Wall, Rev. 21. 12; nor strength to force a passage
through this Door: so neither will late-got Oil or Tears be able to shoot its
Lock for Ever. Those are mistaken sadly, who do conclude the standing Open of
Christ's Door till Death; and more especially in these Latter Days, as Foolish
Virgins will Experience.

11. It therefore highly does concern the Virgins or Professors of our Days to
get themselves Ready as fast as may be. And in the Pressing whereof, I shall
content my self with urging hereunto, as that word [Ready] appertains unto
Virgins in the Letter; and as the same Greek word is used, Rev. 19. 7. with
reference unto the Bride at such a time. In Order unto the setting home of
which Exhortation, these following Motives may be of Use.

Mot. 1. This getting Ready is that Great work of Time incumbent on us, which
therefore had ^^d be chiefly minded by us always, and much more Now. What is
required of the Bride, but to be Ready, Rev. 19. 7? What of each Guest? but to
have on his Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12? Yea, what does God require, from
first to last, but to Put off Old former Clothes, Ephesians. 4. 22. and that we Put
on New, v. 24? The only thing required of Spouses (by their Husband at this
Feast) will be, to make themselves as Fine as may be; as once a Person told his
Lady, upon a like Occasion. Nor came we (indeed) into this World to Eat and
Drink, or Buy and Sell; but to get Ready for our Change. Earth is a Trimming
place for Heaven, and Time should be Employed for Eternity. He that is Ready in
this Spiritual sense, has done the work belonging to his Day. Therefore we
cannot be too Early up at such a work.

2. It is the Property of Virgins to be self-adorning; Can-Maids forget their
Ornaments, Jer. 2. 32? Such kind of forgetfulness seems to be inconsistent
with their state; next to their being termed Harlots, such cannot bear to be
Reproached with their want of Neatness; whom if we Differ from (in this
Respect) as to their Nature, how can we take it ill, not to be called by their
Name? Harlots of Old were to be known by some particular kind of Vail, Genesis 38.
14. and Spiritual Sluttishness is such a Vail or Covering which shows Persons
to be no Virgins. All sorts of Professors therefore have disowned their
Companions, as they have seen them to be careless in their Habit, Compared with
their Fellows. So that Remisness in our Holy self-adorning will very much
Darken the visibility of our being Virgins or Professors, and Hazard the Total
Loss of our Repute.

3. Unready Virgins (to be sure) are not wise, or truly Gracious, at least not
in Appearance; since all the wise Virgins are Described here, by their being
Ready; as if those terms were Convertible. There is much wisdom required unto
this work of Dressing one's self aright* And Heavenly wisdom is much evinced,
by One's being daily Conversant thereabout. Fools Pride themselves in some one
single part of man's Attire; but wise Men are ashamed to be seen till they have
All, Psalm. 119. 6. Fools are not Careful, as to the manner of their being
dressed: But Holy wisdom makes to be Curious; not only in having All one's
Garments on, but every thing also in its Place; and so Preserved from being
Loose or stained. Children and Fools are chiefly for their Food and Play; but
spiritual Neatness is both the wise Man's Work and Recreation, his Meat and
Drink; who therefore always is at his Brush and Looking-Glass.

4. Professing Spouses are Princes Daughters, Cant. 7. 1. which does Oblige
Professors (Eminently) t^^^e sollicitous in this regard, as such are in the
Letter. Ordinary Garments may Become a Beggar, (as Moral Virtues do a Carnal
Man,) but not the Children of a King; who are forbidden strange Apparel, Zeph.
1. 8. but not Complete, at least, not in a Spiritual sense. Did such consider
the Nobleness of their Descent, John 1. 13. the Nature of their High Calling,
Phil. 3. 14. The Glory of Kings Daughters Clothing, Psalm. 45. 13. it would
ashame them into an Evidencing of their Heavenly Breeding, by laying out their
time in getting Ready. If Earthly Gallants will not have one Hair amiss, much
more should Heavenly Courtiers Hate a spotted Garment, Jude 23. and be
continually Adding to what they have; since spiritual Fashions (also) Alter;
and Joshua (Now) must have his Change of Raiment, Zech. 3. 4.

5. Thus shall we have more Love and Honor from Christ and others. How very
plain are some in their Night Habit; yea, how did Michal Despise her Husband
David, when he was stripped of his stately Robes, 2 Samuel 6. 20. Nor was the
self-undressing Spouse's Fairness witnessed unto by her Companions, Cant. 5. 9.
till she had first put on her Coat again, v. 3. 5. But when a Child is Neatly
Dressed, how is it Dandled by its Father; so will the King Desire his Spouse's
Beauty, Psalm. 45. 11. when Clad in Gold, with her Retinue, v. 9. Thus shall we
also be more Amiable in the Eyes of others; both Saints and Sinners. When
Ephraim and Judah shall be Neat, or Clean from their Defilements, Ezekiel. 27. 23.
then will they Unite in Love, v. 19. and be no more Divided, v. 22. Yea, Carnal
Creatures will then Respect us, if not Love us; such being apt to honor
others, merely because of their Apparel, whom otherwise they do not much Regard.

6. God will be Glorified in us by this means, which is a self-sufficient
Motive to get Ready. Saints Dress themselves and Christ at once; as their
unhandsomness disgraceth him, whom they call Husband. Their Change of Raiment
shows the fullness of his Wardrobe; their washed Robes, the rinsing Virtue of
his Blood; their Curiosity, his Disposition, Purity, and Greatness. The comely
sitting of each piece in its due place, does Evidence the Trueness of his
Glass, viz. the Scriptures; yea, every fresh Addition makes them look more like
to Christ, Grace being his very Image, Col. 3. 10. and therefore self-adorning
Saints are said to put on Christ, Romans 13. 14. And thus will Christ be
Magnified in our Bodies, Phil. 1. 20. as God was Manifested in Christ's Flesh,
1 Timothy 3. 16. because the Father's Glory was to be seen in him, John 1. 14. as
His in Us, when we are Ready.

7. Thus shall we be more useful (at the Present) unto others, with whom we do
converse; which is a Motive (strong enough) to make us Hasten. All are more apt
to mind Examples, than a Rule: Although God's Law was still the same, yet when
there was no King (or Judge) in Israel, to put that Law in Practice, then every
one did what seemed good unto him, Judge. 17. 6. So is it in the want of
Exemplary Saints. Children will gather Wood, when Fathers make the Fire, and
Mothers knead the Dough for an Idolatrous Use, Jer. 7. 18. Some are Adventurous
to be Offensive i^ their Habits, etc. because they see Professors so altered.
How ready were the People to withstand the Prohibition, when they had Leaders
to go before them, Hag. 1. 12. Now, Paul was willing to be from Christ (a
while) for others good, Phil. 1. 23. 34. much more should we get Ready
therefore; which is indeed the way to be with him, at leastwise sooner than
can be else expected.

8. Else shall we ill Requite his Love, in Tarrying all this while, for such a
purpose. Christ is Affectionate, unto the Height: who did Exceedingly Desire to
eat his Last (or Death-importing) Passover, Luke 23. 15. much more to see this
Wedding day, as ever did a Youthful Bridegroom, Isa. 62. 5. whose waiting
therefore, is like that of a Dropsy Man for Drink, which Exercises Patience
to the utmost. Now, as he partly tarrieth, until the Vintage (viz. the wicked)
be fully Ripe, Rev. 14. 18. So more especially, until the Wheat (or Harvest)
be so, Mat. 13. 30. or till the Bride be Ready, Rev. 19. 7. whose Readiness
consists (Mainly) in the Readiness of her Companions. And if for our
Expediency, he Tarrieth Now, as he did sometime (therefore) Go away, John 16.
7. shall we then Trifle? Would not that be, as to His Grief, so to Our shame,
if not the Aggravating and Occasioning of our Exclusion.

9. Thus shall we hasten (what in us lies) the Coming of this day of God,
which is a Duty, 2 Pet. 3. 12. and that which All (in words) Desire, Mal. 3. 1.
And as we are to Hasten it by our Prayer, Isa. 62. 7. so (more especially) by
our getting Ready, 1 Pet. 1. 13. else shall we not Completely Hasten it. As
Christ is therefore slack, to Evidence his willingness, that none should
Perish, 2 Pet. 3. 9. so is he purposed to Wait until his Precious ones be
Ready; as he could not Destroy the Sodomites, till Lot was come to Zoar, Genesis
19. 22. so will he now do for his Servants sake, Isa. 65. 8. But if his Jewels
were all made up, such would not then be faulted for his staying: Till when,
Christ's Spirit in them (whilst they are Praying for his Coming) cannot but Tax
them, as being the Cause, why he yet cannot Come: And it will be exceeding sad,
if we shall be thus Accessory to our own and others Misery.

10. Thus will his Coming be more Comfortable to us, than otherwise can be
expected. Christ in his People, is the Hope of Glory, as to the Groundedness of
such an Hope, Col. 1. 27. and is its sweetness also, since all Delight arises
from the Union or Conjunction of things suitable each to other. They who are
fully Ready, will have the clearest sight of all that Glory; the finest Taste
of that Provision, and deepest share in all the other Priviledg^^ of that
Dispensation. Such in whom Love (or Grace) is Perfected, will then have
Boldness, in that Day of Judgment; because as He now is, so They are in this
World, 1 John 4. 17. Whereas that Day will be Confounding unto others, Amos 5.
18. who then will be afraid, Isa. 33. 14. (as Naked Adam was, Genesis 3. 10.) and
therefore call upon the Hills to Cover them, Luke, 23. 30. at leastwise much
ashamed, because they have not kept their Garments, Rev. 16. 15.

11. Else will it be (at least) unto our Loss, so far as Christ will then be
fain to Dress us, or to make up (by his last Instantaneous Change) wherein our
selves were carelessly Defective. It Is true indeed, Christ will have all his
People Ready then, because Himself will Cloth them with His Change of Raiment,
Zech. 3. 4. yet does it concern them to be Doing what they can, since their
Reward will then be suited to their own Labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8. Saints will then
Differ each from other, in point of Glory, Luke 12. 44. as at Christ's Personal
Coming, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. which Difference will arise from hence, because some
will have Labored more, in getting Ready, whilst others have been sleeping,
Luke 12. 40. 43, 44. The Fuller our self-cloathing is at present, the more Gold
Lace shall we Then have from him, whose Recompense will be according unto
works, Rev. 2. 23. although such works will then be Changed by Himself; but
least unto their Loss who are Most Ready Now.

12. Thus shall we (at Present) have the Comfort of our being Ready, as it is
in it self considered, and with Respect unto our selves. It is with Spiritual
Garments, as with Bodily: Which are not satisfying (unto Curious Virgins) till
All be on; nor Easy, until the whole be closely. Girt upon us with that
Girdle of Truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. If that mere Moralist could say, What lack I yet,
Mat. 19. 20. much more is Paul forgetful of that Behind, till that Before is
also added, Phil. 3. 13. Yea, Graces (also) are Odoriferous, Cant. 4. 14. and
every of a Christian's Garments smell like Lebanon, v. 11. whose sweet Pe^^ume
does therefore Multiply together with them. And since this getting Ready is our
Main work, we cannot be too soon a^ (...), when we shall have nothing else to
do; but either to Depart in Peace, or to Go ^^ with Christ unto the Marriage.

13. Thus will Christ's present Tarrying be less Burdensome by far: Or, we
shall be thus better able to wait for his Appearing; and therefore is waiting
joined with Complete Adorning, 1 Cor 1. 7. This VVedding-Garment will supply
the Bridegroom's place, as being the Quintessence of that Comforter, which
Christ has sent for such a Purpose, John 14. 16. The want of Privilege is
least Oppressing unto these, who are most Busied about their Duty. Grace is a
sweet Companion in Christ's Absence, as are that Woman's Children unto her,
whose Husband is from home: Since as the Father was to be seen in Christ, John
14. 9. so Grace is Christ's (Refreshing) Image, Col. 3. 10. as Children
Represent their Earthly Father, unto the Comfort of their solitary Mother. Yea,
Grace will therefore satisfy, i^ ^uch a case; because it is the Creature's
Will resigned to God.

14. Thus shall we also keep Awake, whilst others slumber. Undressing and
Nodding oft-times go Together; but never was Virgin known (I think) to Nod
whilst getting Ready. Infants (indeed) will ofttimes sleep while they are
Dressed by another; which Active self-adorners are not seen to do. Such are
kept waking, for fear of being pricked with Pins, if carelessly put in, more than
if heedlesly plucked out. Yea, self-adorning Virgins are so apt to be in Love
with their Attire, Jer. 2. 32. as not to slumber at such a Time, because of
self-beholding and self-pleasing Fancies then at work. Such also are convinced
of the Near approaching D^y, as Putting on this Armor of Light evinceth, Romans
13. 12. who therefore cannot sleep. And as Activity (in any case) will keep one
waking, so more especially in this, for fear of Ruffling that by sleeping,
which is now putting on with care.

15. Else shall we not Go with Christ unto the Marriage, as is here plainly
signified. As all Things will be Ready then, Mat. 22. 4. so must all sorts of
Persons be, v. 12. and if unsanctified Israel might not eat those Quails, Numb.
11. 18. much less thi^ Marriage Supper. If Spots ought not to be in Ordinary
Feasts of Charity among Professors, Jude 12. much less will such a Glorious
Bride and Bridegroom be Reproached with Unready Guests. Can we then be too
forward at such a work? Persons invited to some Curious Feast, need not be bid
to Dress themselves apace; especially when a second Messenger brings word, that
All is Ready: This is our present case, Mat. 22. 4. Remember what lies at
s^ake, and if we have any Appetite to those forenamed Dishes, (which he that
Eats not of, will Dye for ever;) so let u^ call for Hel^^ and stand no longer
Prating; but on with one thing after another; for fear of being shut out with
Foolish or unready Virgins.

16. This being Ready is of Necessary Use, with reference un^^ our Change by
Death, which may be sudden; although this Coming of the Bridegroom should not
prove so near, as some may hope it is. Were this a Duty merely relating to an
uncertain time, which Possibly may not be this Hundred Years, we might be
Tempted to Dospise an Exhortation thereunto. But if we Judge that Personal
Death may be at Hand, this Holy Readiness will then bestead us; and without
which our Dissolution will be sad: But when our Course is finished, then shall
we be (as Paul was) Ready to Depart from hence with Joy, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. And
though we should not Live to see this Second Marriage upon Earth; yet if we Dye
in such a Ready posture, we shall be at a better Feast in Abraham's Bosom, and
with the Lord himself, Phil. 1. 23. ^^ill called from thence unto his far more
Glorious Personal Marriage.

I shall Conclude with some few Spiritual Helps and suitable Directions, (sti^l
holding to this Metaphor of getting Ready in a Bodily Respect,) which are as
Follows.

1. Let us Eye the Beauty of our being thus Adorned. This Garment does consist
of Finest Linen, Rev. 19. 8. and Cloth of Gold, Psalm. 45. 13. beset with
Jewels, Isa. 61. 10. and all bran New, Isa. 48. 7. which Virgins are Ambitious
of. Thus will our Nakedness and shame be covered, Rev. 16. 15. this Robe being
white and Long, Rev. 7. 13. which also is exceeding Grave, and therefore was
Affected by the Pharisees, Mark 12. 38. Thence is it, that Saints do Love them
most who are most Neat: And if a sinner does not Love, yet does he therefore
Envy such, because out-shining him: Yea, such are therefore Tempted most by
Satan, to become his Harlots, because of their Excelling Beauty. However, as
Christ will thus be most Enamoured with us, Cant. 7. 1. 6. so we shall have
most Comfort in our selves, when thus Adorned; since Man (as Man) would fain be
Fine, though (Naturally) Ignorant of truest Comeliness, Romans 10. 3.

2. Let us consider how Fine the Bridegroom and the Bride will be at such a
time, which may provoke our Laboring to be accordingly. Christ will appear in
Glory then, Psalm. 102. 16. who will be ashamed of Unready Virgins, Mark 8. 38.
but will confess their Name before his Father, Rev. 3. 5. whose Garments (Now)
are undefiled, v. 4. The Bride then also will be Ready, Rev. 19. 7. who Now is
bid awake, in Order thereunto, Isa. 52. 1. and if the Mistress be up, what
shame it is that Maids should be Asleep. That Dispensation will abound with
Privileges, the having of which Precious Promises should cause self-cleansing
from all kind of Filthiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Could we but Eye that Recompense of
Reward, Heb. 11. 26. how would it make us to abound in Duty, 1 Cor. 15. 58. and
we may blush to think of not being inwardly Clothed on, so as to suit that
Outward Glory, which all the Saints will then have put upon them.

3. Did we but seriously enquire, what of the Night, or what a Clock it is,
Isa. 21. 11. the Watchman would inform us how far the Night is spent, and
therefore Hasten our Putting on this Armor of Light, Romans 13. 12. Satan would
fain persuade us, as did that Levites Father-in-Law, that either it is too
soon, Judge. 19. 8. or else too late, v. 9. but as the Door is not yet shut, so
no Man knows how soon it may be; which should provoke our making speed. The
Virgins have had (already) their first sleep, out of Doubt; and such as have
been Thoroughly wakened, can sleep no more, but are self-dressing; and Sluggards
never were more heavy than at present, through Multiplicity of Benign Vapors
inviting them to sleep: All which are Probable Signs of Day being not far off,
And if the Nearness of our Salvation, much more the shortness of that Time
which may be Now behind, wherein to get us Ready before Day break.

4. Let us Observe what Haste poor sinners make to Get them Ready for that
Dispensation: whose being fitted to Destruction, Romans 9. 22. (or filling up the
Measure of their Sin, Mat. 23. 32.) is that for which Christ partly Tarrieth,
as Genesis 15. 16. That Prince (immediately preceding Christ) is therefore
eminently called Wicked and Profane, Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27. that Interest
succeeding the Fourth Beast's Destruction (in the little Horn) is therefore
Represented by the other Beasts, which were more Grossly wicked, Dan. 7. 11,
12. And the Assyrian Party (which is the same) are therefore said to be
Consumed Soul and Body, Isa. 10. 18. That Vintage Ripens most (as in the
Letter) toward the Fall; and is it not a shame, that Wheat should come Behind?
Yea, Real Saints shall Purify, (at such a time) as Others then will signally
be Wicked, Dan. 12. 10.

5. The finest Ornaments are soonest had (with-Christ) and at the Cheapest
rate; yea other things (for Naught) together with them. Trades men will make
him stay who only comes for Thread, to serve Another with Gold or Silver-lace:
and it is not Christ's fault but ours, in Case the Spirit be not had for Asking,
Luke 11. 9. 13; since he made Jairus wait for an Outward Mercy, till that
Believing Woman's Faith was first relieved, though she came last, Mark 5. 22,
23, 25. Yea, Heaven Embraces (as it were) us Dwellers upon Earth, or offers
it self unto us freely; whilst Lower good things require Digging, Job. 3. 21.
which should encourage us to covet earnestly that which is Best. And if we help
Christ off with choycer Graces, he will Throw in what is of Lesser value:
therefore most spiritual Saints have always been most universally endued with
other virtues; and careful Practisers of Time-D^ties, are not Defective
otherwise.

6. Let us Use (or Look our selves in) the Glass; by which the Scriptures are
resembled; in order unto our being Compleatly-Drest, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Men's Words
and Actions are some kind of Looking-glass, but mostly false: the minding
whereof too much, occasions Groundless Self Conceit, 2 Cor. 10. 12. But taking
heed unto the Word of God, is that by which a Young man's Way is to be
Cleansed, Psalm. 119. 9. We Now must see by That, 1 Cor. 13. 12. which though
but Dark (compared with one's seeing face to face) yet is it True, Psalm. 19. 9.
and that by which all other Glasses must be tried, Isa. 8. 20. Did we compare
our selves more with the Rule, how should we Blush, to see our Shame Reflected,
through want of what is requisite unto our being Comely. Bu^ let us not go
away, till that be Rectified which is Amiss; else shall we soon forget what
manner of men we were, whilst self-beholding in that Glass, Jam. 1. 23.

7. Let us not choose to be Alone; which in the state of Innocence was not
Good, Genesis 2. 18; but is Now Woeful, Eccl. 4. 10. The time is coming, when
Saints shall Equalize the Angels, Luke 20. 36; who are Alluded unto in that
Description of those four Beasts (or living Creatures) being full of Eyes
Before and Behind, Rev. 4. 6, 7, compared with Ezekiel. 1. 10: but till that time,
a Friend Behind us may be of necessary use, to rectify what is amiss upon our
Backs. Yea Company (in it self considered) does much provoke to be more Neat
than otherwise; so little know we how to walk, as being always in the sight of
God. Affected Solitariness and spiritual Sluttishness, are mutual Causes each
of other; whatever Curiosity may be Pretended unto. Let me be Left Alone (by
others) in my way of Duty, Joh: 16. 32. but not Affect it; for fear of being
like him who was a wild Ass Alone by himself, Hos. 8. 9.

8. Let us make Choice of our Companions though; else had we better be Alone,
as to our getting Ready. Man is so apt to be as his Companions are, that God
himself is said to be so, Psalm. 18. 26; so far as his Unchangeableness, Jam. 1.
17, is capable of Variation. But Peter put off his Gentile (Genteel) Garb, so
soon as some of the Circumcised Habit came, Gal. 2. 12: and thereby did much
Harm to Others, v. 13: and upon which Account, Paul separated the B^lieving
Gentiles from those Jews, Act. 19. 9. Some call that Pride, which is the Newest
(though Heavenly) Fashion: and if a Council were Now called among Professors,
some kind of spiritual Spruceness in Apparel would be Condemned, as that in
Letter was, by the Fifteenth Canon of the Second Nicene Council. Some are
Enforced to withdraw; yea Others therefore are Cast out, because they Dare not
Touch that Garment which is spotted with the Flesh: and blessed is he who does
Prevent such kind of Censures by his self-chosen Separation, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

9. Let us make haste in Dying unto Chrnal Bravery; So shall we have more Time
and Love for Holy self-Adorning. Some are so vainly studious of Worldly
Fashions, or so Conformed thereunto; as that Transforming (Inward) Renovations
are neglected; these being Inconsistent, Romans 12. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3:
3; 4, 5. Christ finds no fault, (save with the Plaintiff) when Martha (or the
Outward man) complains of Mary, for leaving her Alone, in competition with that
One thing Needful, Luke ^0. 39, 40, 41, 42. Persons in Love with their own
cieled Houses, are soon Prohibited from Religious Building, Hag. 1. 4. and
several would follow Christ, if they had Nothing else to do, Luke 9. 59. 61.
Yea spiritual Neatness is therefore slighted by some Professors, because
Induments of a Moral Nature are so prized: Therefore Paul cries down these
Lower Gifts, which hindered those Babish Corinthians from what was more
Excelling, 1 Cor. 14. 19, 20. 22

10. Let us look chiefly To our selves; but let us take he^d of Looking too
much At our selves, or Trusting in our apprehended Beauty; which does Begin
with Fornications, Ezekiel. 16. 15. and justly Ends with being stripped, v. 39.
Some are so busy in Dressing Others, as to forget Themselves; which in a
spiritual Case is Paradoxal, Luke 6. 42. Others are so in love with some
Particular thing upon them, as to leave Adding thereunto; and so that single
Ornament does but Increase their shame, as does a New Lawn Apron upon a
Tattered Gown. Whereas Humility is both the Gloss of every Garment, and that
which makes unsatisfied until the whole be on: yea, always spying some Defect,
and earnestly Desiring help accordingly. Therefore so Few are Ready at this
Day, because so Many are in Love with former puttings on; not being able to
Forget what is Behind, the sight whereof should only stir us up to Perfect
that which is so well Begun. Then shall we be Ready to go with Christ into his
Second Temple, when all our Women's Looking-glasses are converted into Lavers,
as Exodus 38. 8; or when our self-Beholding shall be turned into self-purifying,
for which that Laver served.

MATTHEW XXV. 11, 12. Afterward came also the Other Virgins, saying, Lord,
Lord, Open to us. And he answered and said, Verily, I say unto you, I know you
not.
IN these two Verses, we have the Foolish Virgins signified, as by their
Practice, so by their Portion: with reference to such a Time, viz. the
Bridegroom's being Come. From whence the General Observation is, as follows:

Observe. Upon the shutting of Christ's Door, then will the Foolish Virgins come,
desiring to have it Opened: but will be Repulsed, with Christ's saying to them,
Verily, I say, I know you not.

Quest. 1. What is the Meaning of these words, Lord, Lord?
Answ. 1. Negatively: They do not Now cry, Abba, Father: whatever formerly
they may have done, from a presumptuous pretending unto that Spirit of Adoption
by which Saints are Authorized so to speak, Romans 8. 15. But Now they only say,
Lord, Lord: to signify (perhaps) the great Abatement of their (sometime)
Confidence. Confident ones (as that word [careless] should be rendered) will
then be Troubled, Isa. 32. 11. Yea Christ will then Evince their being the
Devils Children, as at his first Appearing, Joh. 8. 44: and when his Door is
shut against them, that very thing will Daunt them. Indeed, how can such call
him Father, who are in Bondage unto slavish Fear, Romans 8. 15. who seek their
Own, in serving him, Phil. 2. 20, 21, 22. and do not Love his Son, Joh. 8. 42.
or that which is the Truth and Work of such a Time.

2. As to the Affirmative: the words [Lord, Lord,] import,

1. Their full Knowledge of his Person, as both that Title evideneeth, and his
Disowning Them (in that regard) in his Reply. Thus did that Angel notify his
being Christ, Luke 2. 11. thus Peter signified his Knowledge of him, Mat. 14.
28: and thus Christ hinted (unto Strangers) who he was, Mat. 21. 3. These did
not seem to Know him in his suffering State, Joh. 1. 10: but Now the Blind
shall see out of Obscurity, Isa. 29. 18. such Now Refuse to know Him through
Deceit, Jer. 9. 6. but he will Then cause them to know, he is the Lord, Jer.
16. 21. He will be then Easily to be Known, as by those many Crowns upon his
Head, Rev. 19. 12. so by his Vesture dipped in Blood, v. 13. and this Name [Lord]
upon his Thigh, v. 16.

2. Their Knowledge of his being Present there; as this directing of their
Speech unto him hinteth. This Dispensation has its Name from thence, Ezekiel. 48.
35. and it will be so fairly writ thereon, that Foolish Virgins will understand
it. His Presence will appear, as by the Oneness of his Name, Zech. 14. 9. So by
his People's being Powerful, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25; together with the putting of
all Flesh to silence, Zech. 2. 13. Therefore All sorts of persons (then) will
be Ambitious of Communion with a Jew, Zech. 8. 23; and Foolish Virgins (among
the rest) will therefore seek unto Himself for Entrance, since Fullness of Joy
must needs be in his Presence, Psalm. 16. 11.

3. Their Owning of his Lordly Power; or that Himself, who solely is Jehovah,
is the most High over all the Earth; which Then will be Acknowledged, Psalm. 83.
18. He is the Saints Only Lord, 1 Cor. 8. 6. but Foolish Virgins would not
that he should Reign, Luke 14. 14. as their Disputing his Command (of Going
forth to Meet him) intimates, until This time, and then they yield, Mat. 25.
24. These Now pretend to be his Servants; yea they Now grant him to be Lord of
All, with an Emphatical Reduplication; and in Particular, as to his Right of
Opening here. And what a Glory will it be to Christ and to his People, when
These shall thus submit themselves with silver Speeches, Psalm. 68. 30.

4. The Earnestness of their Desire to be Admitted; as this Ingemination
signifies. Such will then Cry, as sometimes the Disciples did (when like to
Perish) Master, Master, Luke 8. 24. Thus some will seek to enter, Luke 13. 24.
since being Without (at such a time) will argue Men to be Dogs, Rev. 22. 15.
and likely to Die of Hunger, Isa. 65. 13. Whilst there is any Work in hand,
Dogs love to slumber, Isa. 56. 10. and will lie quetly Without till
Supper-time; but then such Howl (if not Admitted in) who could not Bark before.
Such Dogs are also Greedy, Isa. 56. 11. nor can they now sleep as heretofore;
who therefore needs must Howl the more, Isa. 65. 14.

Quest. 2. What is Desired by them in their saying, Open to us?
Answ. 1. That Christ himself would Own them, as (seemingly) heretofore; and as
their desiring Him to Open, Primarily imports. Lord! Some of our former
Raptures from thy self; some of thy Blessings upon our Endeavors; at least,
some Tastings of that Heavenly Gift which formerly had been vouchsafed to us,
Heb. 6. 4, 5. But this will not be granted, in that Day. Self-seeking Preachers
(heretofore) may have been useful unto Others, Phil. 1. 18. but Now, such will
be silenced by Christ, Psalm. 50. 16. who therefore shall not profit the People
at all, Jer. 23. 32. That Light will then be gathered up into the Sun, as in
the first Creation, Genesis 1. 16. which formerly was Distributed, v 3. And
Self-Encompassers with their own Sparks, will then lie down in Sorrow, Isa. 50.
11.

2. That rightly constituted Churches would receive them in; together with the
Second Temple's Opening unto Others. Lord (will such plead) Admit us to thy
Children's Table; let us be under their Inspection; and let us sing thy Praises
with them. But that will not be granted neither. Where Christ hears sway, the
Childrens Bread shall not be cast to Dogs; since it Ought not to be so, by his
Order, Mat. 7. 6. And if John Baptist's Ministration did Refuse those
unrepenting Pharisees, Mat. 7. 8; much more will Christ's, v. 12. Yea, till the
Vials be poured out, this Second Temple will be so filled with Glory, as that
no Man (that is, no such as These, as Rev. 14. 3.) shall then be able to Enter
into it, Rev. 15. 8; since none but Zadocks Sons shall go into that Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 44. 15, 16, 17.

3. That Saints (at least) as Saints, would not refuse Communion with them, in
Religious Actions of a Common Nature. Lord (will these say) let not thy People
turn their back upon us speaking: let them not Grieve to Join with us in
Prayer: let them account us Christian Brethren still, though not in
Church-relation. But neither will This be condescend^d unto. Christ will then
bid, Let them Alone; because Blind Leaders, and not of his Father's Planting,
Mat. 15. 13, 14. Then will there be a Difference put between Paul's praying in
the Presence of, and Joining therein, with others, Act. 27. 35. Then also will
that Phrase be used, of calling such (only) Brethren, according to the Flesh,
Romans 9. 3. by way of Distinguishing them from Isaac's Seed, or Children, v. 7.

4. That Equal sharing (How soever) in Outward Blessings may not be denied to
them, who were sometimes wont to have the Greatest Portion. Lord (will such
Cry, as Esau did) let us be also Blessed by thee, Genesis 27. 34. have thou not
Reserved a Blessing for us, v. 36? although but one, v. 38. But Esau (then)
will not Prevail, as having Sold away his outward Blessing with his
Birthright; however Confident at such a time, Mal. 1. 4. That Fruitful Field
will then become a Forest, Isa. 32. 15. and it shall Hail thereon, when Sion's
City shall be Low, in a Low place, or Fruitful Valley, v. 19. Now, they who are
shut out of Earth as well as Heaven, must needs be in some kind of Hell; which
in Respect of wonted Outward, will be the Foolish Virgins Portion.

5. That such might not (at least) meet with those Positive Hardships, which
Excluded Persons may have cause to fear. Lord (will their Last Petition be) yet
let us not be over hardly used by thy self, or by thy Servants, or by our own
Accusing Consciences. But this Request will not be granted. Christ will deny
them before his Father, who have Persi^tingly Denied Him, by their Departure
from his work, Mat. 10. 33. Such will be Galled with the Name of Hypocrites,
and Workers of Iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. leaving their Name for a Curse unto God's
Chosen ones, Isa. 65. 15. Yea, as such will be Abhorred by All, so will they
have a Gnawing, Never-dying Worm within, (far worse than Death) because they
have Transgrest against the Lord, Isa. 66. 24.

Quest. 3. What should Encourage these to Hope for Entrance; which both their
Coming and their Pleading intimate?
Answ. 1. Because of their being Virgins. Lord (may such plead) we are no
Harlots, and must we yet be Numbered with them? We have refused to hold
Communion with the Strumpets of our Time; and must we Now be made to do so? We
have withstood Humane Inventions in Religious Worship; and are we now Excluded,
with the Beast? But it will then be Answered; you were not (indeed) like those
more filthy Swine, yet are you Goats, who therefore Now must be Divided from
the Sheep, Mat. 25. 32. You were no Downright Babylonians; but being joined to
them is sufficient, Isa. 13. 15. Or rather, you had the Name of Virgins, but
were Harlots; and Christian Babylon must be Destroyed.

2. Because of their Having had Communion with the Wise in former times. Lord
(may such Plead) we have been welcome to thy Table, Luke 13. 26. and are we now
Denied its Crumbs? Thy Guests (within) have been our Fellows; and must we now
be used like Dogs? We can produce their Letters Testimonial; and will not that
Commendamus help us to our Ancient Fellowship? To which Christ then will
Answer, I bad the Tares be let alone until This time, Mat. 13. 30. and though
my People failed in your Admission, yet am not I therefore bound to do so; nor
They, for time to come, Ezekiel. 44. 9. Nay; you are not the same you were, in
point of sometime visibility: However, I now must Judge with Righteousness and
Equity, Isa. 11. 3, 4.

3. Because of their good Service done for Christ, Mat. 7. 22. Such will then
Plead, Lord, have we not Heard Thee Teaching in our Streets, Luke 13. 26? And
was not that sometimes counted worth a Supper, Mark 6. 34, 35. 37? Have we not
Prophesied in thy Name, Mat. 7. 32? And do not thou say, such Laborers are
worthy of their Meat, Mat. 10. 10? Yea, Have we not Cast out Devils in thy
Name, Mat. 7. 23? And will thou Cast us out, unto the Devil and his Angels,
Mat. 25. 41? To which it will be then Replied, but did you not All this unto
your selves, Zech. 7. 5. 6? And in a Deceitful way of keeping back your Male,
Mal. 1. 14? Both as to principal Time-Truths and Duties. You have had your
Reward already, Mat. 6. 2. and selfish Aims have made your work Iniquity, Mat.
7. 23.

4. Because they did go forth (at first) to meet the Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 1.
Lord (may such plead) we sometimes bore an Open Testimony, hazarding our All in
the Maintaining of thy Cause: and does not Half the work Deserve some Part of
Pay? But Christ will then Reply, you did run well, who hindered you, Gal. 5. 7?
Why did you not so run, as to Obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24? My Cross should daily have
been taken up, Luke 9. 23. nor was Salvation promised, but to Endurers to the
End, Mat. 24. 13. You were the more Foolish to Begin, Luke 14. 28. yea, I was
therefore most Reproached by you Apostates, Heb. 6. 6. however, you knew the
Law, that all the Backslider's former Righteousness shall be forgotten, Ezekiel.
18. 24.

5. Because their Not going out (the Second time) proceeded from their want of
Oil, Mat. 25. 8. Lord (will these say) we had not Light unto this Latter work,
and will thou Gather where thou have not Strewed, Mat. 25. 24? Heathens will
not be Judged for the Light they Have not, Romans 2. 12. and shall we Virgins be
more Hardly dealt with? Our Lamps went out, through lack of Oil, and therefore
must we now be cast out into utter Darkness? But Christ will then Reply, you
took no Oil at first, Mat. 25. 3. whose Fault was that? You trusted unto flashy
good Affections, though I had told you of the stony Hearers, Mat. 13. 20, 21.
Nay, the Truth is, you wanted not Light, but Will; and as it now appears by
your coming, but too late.

6. Because of what they had more Lately done, or since the Cry was made. Lord,
(will they say) we presently Arose and Trimmed our Lamps, as well as our
Companions; and is that nothing worth? We came to them for Oil, but were
Repulsed, and must we now Suffer for th^^r unwillingness to help us? Nay,
thereupon we went to Buy, as they Advised us; and was there a Design-upon us in
that Counsel? To which it will be Answered, You did my work Deceitfully; and
that Deserves a Curse, instead of Wages, Jer. 48. 10. You begged coldly at the
best; that Taught my Servants to Deny you, as 2 King. 5. 18, 19. Nor did you
come to Buy of Me; I know you not, it is so long since I saw you.

7. Because of their not having yet had a Legal Trial, or due Conviction before
a Sentence. Lord (will these say,) Thy Servants Generally have not Born Witness
(Hitherto) against us; ask them, and they will not deny it: Nor was the Case
decided (fully) in our Consciences unto this Day: Shall we now be Condemned (by
our Exclusion) before a Trial? Or Excommunicated without a Previous Admonition?
But Christ will Answer, You heard the Cry, as your awakening thereupon Evinced:
You had the Scriptures, clearing up that Duty, wherein you failed: You also had
some Pangs of Conscience, witness the Trimming of your Lamps: Therefore you had
a Threefold Admonition, which is one more than Necessary, Titus 3. 10.

8. Because they have Now Got that Oil (as their Returning intimates) which
heretofore they lacked. Lord (will these say,) we Now are come up to Thy Terms:
We Now have Light into that work of Going Forth: And will thou not Admit
Repenting sinners, yea, at what Time soever? But Christ may Answer, Your
Common Prayer Book has it [at what Time soever] but not the Scripture; nay, I
have often told you, that my Door will not stand always Open. Nor have you now got
Light into your Duty; but only wit to save your Interest, by falling in with
safe and Gainful Service. And if I should forgive you this time also, the next
Temptation would evince your being still the same, as has been often
Experimented.

9. Because of what Encouragement they sometimes had to Hope, as to a Real work
of Grace upon their Hearts, (and consequent^y for Admission) notwithstanding
Lesser Failings. Lord (will these say) Have thou not sometimes Crowned us with
Peculiar Favors? Has not thy Spirit witnessed with ours, that we were Thine?
Yea, had we not the witness of water, as well as Blood, of Duty (Excepting this
Particular) as well as Faith on Thee? And shall this one Blot spoil our former
Evidences? But Christ will Answer, I never Warranted your Thus concluding: You
spoke Peace to your selves, and Fathered it upon me. I gave you Sixpence, and
you thence hoped to be mine Heirs. Time-Duties (also) are that by which all
other is to be Tried, John 8. 24.

10. Because of some Admitted in, who were as likely as Themselves (or rather
more) to be Excluded. Lord (will these say,) There sits one, who is too
Young, to have Deserved such a Privilege; let him give Place to us his
Seniors: Here comes Another, who has been formerly on Old Egyptian, shall he
step in before us Israelites? Yea, those Wise Virgins there (our Old
Companions) have had but a very little Time, wherein to show their being Better
than our selves; why then are we so hardly dealt with? But Christ will Answer,
How Bold are you, thus to Reply, Romans 9. 20. or Bind my Hand, Mat. 20. 15?
These few Wise Virgins came in Time, so did not you: Those Younger ones have
not been Tried, as you have been: However, I have told you, Mat. 8. 11, 12.
that many shall be Admitted, (yea, some Egyptians and Assyrians, Isa. 19. 23.)
when such as you shall be Cast out.

11. Considering the Matter of their Request. Lord (will these say) did we
Desire a Dispensation to Transgress, or did we only beg some outward Mercy,
then might we Justly be Repulsed: But we Entreat Communion with thy self, and
with thy People; and have thou not Promised to give thy Spirit (or Spiritual
Good things) to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13? But Christ will Answer, That
Promise is only made to Children: And Promises are only sure in Me, 2 Cor. 1.
20. whom they who are without, are therefore Strangers from the Promises, Ephesians.
2. 12. save as the Spirit is Promised unto such as do Return at my Reproof,
Prove. 1. 23. Nor do you so much desire Communion with my People, as with their
Privileges.

12. Considering the Earnestness of their Desire; which does evince their being
Cordial and Affectionate. Lord (will these say, as sometimes Job did to his
Friends) Look upon us, for it is evident, if we Lie, Job 6. 28. Our Coming, and
our Pleading intimate that we are (...): Now, will not our Sighs and Tears
Affect thine Heart? Yea; have thou not Engaged to be found, when searched for,
with all our Heart; Jer. 29. 13? But Christ will Answer, Not simply upon that
Account, save as Men seek me Early also, Prove. 8. 17. Esau would fain have had
the Blessing, and sought it carefully with Tears, but was Rejected, Heb. 12.
17. because he came too Late, though with Right Venison, Genesis 27. 33.

13. Considering the Manner of their present Supplication. Lord (will these
say) we do not offer to Enforce a Passage, but only stand here knocking at the
Door: Nor do we call to others, but do desire of Thee, to be Admitted with thy
Leave: Nor do we Claim it as our Right, but Humbly Beg it as a Favor. To which
it will be Answered, You know it is but a Folly (Now) to be Disordersy, as
heretofore, else is your Spirit still the same. The Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against this Door, Mat. 16. 18. Nor will the present Porters Open
without mine Order, Ezekiel. 44. 9. and as your Case will not permit a Claim, so
neither will your Conscience suffer it; yea, Interest alone does make you (in
Appearance) Humble.

14. Considering the Ingenuousness of their Profession; imported by that Title
[Lord] which they Now give to Christ. Lord (will these say,) we Now acknowledge
thee to be our Lord: We do profess Subjection to thy Laws: Nor shall we
henceforth Disobey thee, only this once forgive our sin, as Pharaoh Pleaded,
Exodus 10. 17. But Christ will Answer, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into this Heavenly Kingdom, but he that does my Father's Will, Mat.
7. 21. Nor are you better than your Predecessors, Romans 3. 9. who did but
Flatter with their Mouth, Psalm. 78. 36. and Hasten their Destruction by
Hypocrisy, Isa. 29. 13, 14. all which befell them for Ensample, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
However Now, the Door is shut.

15. Considering his Graciousness, whom they have Now to Argue with. Lord (will
these say at their Last plea,) we do confess thy Sovereignty; but can thou
not evince that, in a way of Mercy, if thou please, Romans 9. 18? Is not thy
Grace Designed for Supremacy in Gospel Times, Ephesians. 1. 6? And will Christ fall
therefrom at Last? How can the shutting of thy Door upon us consist with having
no Pleasure in our Death, Ezekiel. 33. 11. or thy Delight in showing Mercy, Mic.
7. 18? But Christ will Answer, My Tarrying for you all this while does witness
the Truth of what you say; but Grace has had its Time, and I have other
Attributes to show the Glory of. However, the Door is shut; my word is past,
which must be Magnified more than Sovereignty, Grace, or any other Syllable of
my Name, Psalm. 138. 2. And therefore Now (in brief) I know you not.

Quest. 4. What seems to be meant by those words, Verily I say, I know you
not?
Answ. 1. Negatively; Not but that Christ does know them, in some sense, unto
their sorrow; and which They Now shall know, Rev. 2. 23. He knows Ephraim,
and Israel is not hid from him, Hos. 5. 3. He knows their Manifold
Transgressions, and their Mighty sins, Amos 5. 12. He knows (as a Witness)
all their Lying words, which he has not Commanded them, Jer. 29. 23. He knows
the things that come into their Mind, yea, every one of them, Zech. 11. 5. He
knows their Imagination which they go about, even Now before it comes to
pass, Deuteronomy. 31. 21. He knows they are Abraham's Seed, according to the Flesh,
John 8. 37. but yet he also knows, they have not the Love of God in them, John
5. 42. whatever show thereof they seem to make, Ezekiel. 33. 31.

II. Affirmatively. He does not know them in a Comfortable sense;

1. He does (at least) not fully know them, unto satisfaction; as the Greek
word there used signifies, 2 Cor. 5. 1. and that other word, Mat. 7. 23.
compared with John 6. 69. which also is the same with this, Luke 13. 27. Their
Voice is Jacob's, but their Hands are Esau's; and in that Case Christ will not
Bless, as Isaac did, without Discerning, or certain knowledge, Genesis 27. 22, 23.
He does not know them, as he did Abraham, by having made a Trial of their Holy
Fear, Genesis 22. 12. or by his having ever known a Practice suitable to this
Profession. Nor is it to be wondered at, they are so altered (Now) from what
they sometimes were, at their first going out; and it is so long since he ever
saw them, or has Heard of them till Now.

2. He does not know them so, as to allow them, or their Practices: In which
sense Paul knew not (as it is in the Greek and Margin) what he did not allow,
Romans 7. 15. Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord will then
Reject them, Jer. 6. 30. Their best Performances will (then) not be allowed of,
but will be called Iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. Their Persons are unclean by having
Touched a Dead Body; therefore so are their Offerings, and every of their other
works, Hag. 2. 13, 14. They will be now stayed for insufficiency, when putting
up their Supplicate for a Degree in Glory. And how will they Gnash their Teeth,
as did those Jews, Acts 7. 54. when they were called uncircumcised, v. 51.
while Christ stood Looking on, v. 55.

3. He will not know them, so as to Love them: As they who Love not, do not
know the Lord, 1 John 4. 8. or as his Sheep are known by Laying down his Life
for them, John 10. 14, 15. He will not have any special favor for them, as for
others, who will be in his Books, Rev. 3. 5. Nay, his Rebuking and Chastising
Love (to such) does seem to end with Laodicean Churches, Rev. 3. 19, 20. And
whom he does not Love, he Hates, as he did Esau, Mal. 1. 3. whose Seed (at
such a time) are therefore called the People of his Indignation, v. 4. Now, as
Love (at a Banquet) is the Banner, Cant. 2. 4. in point of Excellency, or being
Chief, as the same Hebrew word is rendered, Cant. 5. 10. So Hatred makes a
stalled Ox less worth than Herbs, Prove. 15. 17.

4. As knowing is oft-times put for Understanding. Thus, did not the Disciples
know, (as it is in the Greek,) that which they did not Understand, John 10. 6.
and 12. 16. And thus Christ will then say, I hear a sound of words, but do not
seem to Understand their Meaning. Themselves are strangers, so will their
Language therefore be. They call me Lord, but with an Hollow Voice, or from the
Teeth outward only. They bid me Open, but do not speak distinctly; I
Understand them not. Now, as the Believer's Happiness co^s^^teth in Christ's
knowing what the Spirit Means, Romans 8. 27. So when another's speech cannot be
Understood, that needs must Usher in a being scattered, as Genesis 11. 7, 8.

5. His Absolute Disowning of any former Acquaintance with them, as is more
plainly signified, Mat. 7. 23. I Never knew you. This will Destroy their
sometime Hope of having had a special work of Grace upon them. Christ's having
Never known Back sliders here, and their not having Ever known the Lord, 1 John
3. 6. are two unanswerable Arguments to Prove, that none do finally and wholly
fall from Gospel Grace, And if poor Cain's Countenance fell, upon his Present
Non-acceptance, Genesis 4. 5. much more will Theirs, when All their Bypast Duty
is Rejected. And when the whole House comes down, (as having been laid upon a
Sandy Bottom) how Great must be the Fall thereof, Mat. 7. 26, 27?

6. His being Resolved to Deny them, as was Nabal, when begging David had that
Answer, I know not whence you are, 1 Samuel 25. 11. just as Christ (elsewhere)
tells These, Luke 13. 25. 27. Now, if it is said to have been Roughly spoken
by Joseph to his Brethren, in putting that Question, Whence come ye, Genesis 42.
7? much more thus positively to Determine it for such a Purpose. They sometime
knew not whence he was, John 8. 14. else would they have Believed in him: And
Now he knows not whence They are; therefore they shall not be Relieved by him.
So that, (in brief,) there will be no Door of hope to such, when once this Door
is shut, and their ungrounded Exercise of Hope, will therefore be the more
Confounding, Job. 6. 20.

7. These words import a Positive Sentence, as well as Privative. Thus.

1. By a Direct (or Natural) Consequence. Known unto God are all his Works,
Acts 15. 18. and then whose work are They, whom he Denies the knowledge of? He
knows who are His, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Such then (by Consequence) are the Devil's,
whom he knows not. His Sheep are known by him, John 10. 27. though yet
uncalled, v. 16. therefore such are not His, (so much as by Election,) whom he
knows not. His having no Pleasure in Apostates, Heb. 10. 38. Implies Hating;
his Not Commanding, Jer. 7. 31. Implies Abhorring: Such kind of Negatives are
sad Diminutives, Implying more (by far) than is expressed. Thus will his word be
Magnified (both unto Saints and Sinners) by its being much surpassed in
Performances.

2. By our Observing what does Accompany these words [I know you not] both in
this place, and other Parallel Scriptures.

1. With Respect unto the Positive Matter (elsewhere) Added hereunto. It Is
only (here) Privatively said, I know you not: But other-where it is said,
Depart from me, Mat. 7. 23. and into Everlasting Fire, Prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Those whom Christ knows not, are bid Depart; not
being suffered to continue (so m^^h as) Begging at his Door: And thus the
Hypocrite's Hope shall perish, Job 8. 13. Nor must they only Depart from
Christ, but into Everlasting Fire; and who (among Them) shall Dwell with
Everlasting Burnings, Isa. 33. 14? And if that Fire had only been Prepared for
Them, it might have been Less Hot; but they must Now be fellow-Commoners with
the Devils.

2. With reference to the Persons speaking and spoken To; I say to you, This
shall be Now Received, not as the Word of Man, but as it is in Truth, the Word
of God; which therefore needs must be Effectual, 1 These. 2. 13. I, who know All
things, John 21. 17. Know not you: I, who am Master of the House, Luke 13. 25.
bid you Depart, v. 27. I, who have also the Keys of Hell, Rev. 1. 18. bid you
Go into everlasting Punishment. Thus he who formerly was a Lamb, John 1. 29.
will now roar as a Lion, Amos 1. 2. and then, who will not Fear, Amos 3. 8? Nor
would his Roaring be so Dreadful, if he had only now to deal with Beasts: But
I thus say to you, who have been Virgins, in Communion with the Wise, full of
Good works, etc. this breeds the gnawing Worm.

3. Considering the Manner of Christ's speaking this.

1. With an Angry Appellation, Depart ye Cursed, Mat. 25. 41. Workers of
Iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. If he and they might Part in Love, it would be less
Afflicting; but he will now speak to them in his wrath, Psalm. 2. 5. and which
these Titles Evidence. Instead of Owning any Former Duty, he will now call them
Workers of Iniquity, as David did some Professors in his time, when God had
heard his Prayer, Psalm. 6. 8. And he who bids Saints to Bless their Cursers,
and Pray for their Despitefull Users, Luke 6. 28. will now (Himself) Curse them
who seem to Bless him, at least, to Pray unto him. Thus will the Happiest of
them be Accursed, Isa. 65. 20. and this will be the Topstone of their Sorrow,
to be thus persecuted in his Anger, Lam. 3. 65, 66.

2. With an Emphatical Asseveration, (...), Verily. Which (in relation to his
Not Knowing them) denotes the Certainty of his sad Ignorance; and so the same
word, Mat. 16. 28. is Elsewhere rendered, Of a Truth, Luke 9. 27. And with
respect unto the Residue of their Sentence, it imports, Partly, his sad
Assenting thereunto, as 1 Cor. 14. 16. Partly, his wishing it to be so, as Mat.
6. 13. And in Relation to them Both, the Vehemence of his Spirit in this
uttering of his Mind, as Mat. 5. 26. and 8. 10. and 10. 15. Thus will there be
no room for Questioning the Truth of what is thus Asserted: nor yet for Hope,
as to the Reversing of their Sentence; nor yet for standing any longer before
this Angry and Protesting Judge.

3. In a way of serious Deliberation; as that [I say] imports, Mat. 16. 18.
Luke 7. 47. Joh. 3. 3. Words spoke in Haste are apt to be Repented of, Mat. 21.
29: but Judgment is an Everlasting bottom, Hos. 2. 19. and saying* implies
Judgment. You say, Lord, Lord, as if you knew me, but verily I say, I know not
you: nor do I speak this Rashly, or in a sudden Passion, or upon fallible
Grounds; but upon due Advice and Consu^tation. Thus does the Lord bid, Say to
your Brethren, Ammi, and to your Sisters Ruhamah, I own them not, Hos. 2. 1, 2:
and thus says the Amen, (to Laodicean Churches and Professors,) I will spew
you out, Rev. 3. 14, 16. This saying to them (as before,) will Lock and Bolt
and Bar the Door for ever.

Quest. 5. Why is Christ so Inexorable at this Time?
Answ. 1. Because it is a day of Judgment, Rev. 11. 18; though not That Day, 2 Timothy 4. 8. or the Great Day, Jude 6. nor that Great Day of Jezreel, Hos. 1. 11.
or of the Literal Jews Conversion, Rev. 16. 14: but yet it is somewhat Like them
both; a Taste whereof has been already given, Rev. 6. 17. Act. 2. 16. 20. Now
Wrath and Judgment go Together; yea, Judgment without Mercy, Jam. 2. 13. or
Respect of Persons, 1 Pet. 1. 17. as is to be observed in all former
Dispensations of that Nature. When once the Deluge was begun, no Crying out
would save the Life of any One, Genesis 7. 22. nor was there any Mercy to be
shown, to such as staid in Old Jerusalem, at such a time, Jer. 21. 7. so will
it be, with reference to such like Future days of Judgment.

2. Because these Foolish Virgins Case is very Heinous.

1. They are Virgins, or Professors* which sadly Aggravateth Sin and
Punishment. Such had drawn nigh to God: and therefore Nadab and Abihu had no
Mercy, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. Such has God Known of all the Families of the Earth;
and therefore These must signally be Punished, Amos 3. 2. such have been
Leaders unto others in their Sin, Mal. 2. 8. who therefore Now are most
severely dealt with, v. 9. Little do many think, how much the Garment of their
Profession is like to Cost them, if that be tattered or Defiled. Darkness is
blackest unto those who lately came from a Lightsome place: and after a
Prolonged Summer-season, when it once sets in Rain, Fair-weather is at an End;
so will it be with Virgins, as with Haman, Esth. 6. 13.

2. Their Present failing is not Circumstantial, but very High as to its
Matter. That Notion of Religious Circumstances, (if Commanded by the Lord,)
has ever been Erroneous, and the Betrayer of many Souls into Perdition. Thus
Israel fancyed, their Not Going up to Canaan, (...) such a Time,) was but a
Circumstantial failing at the most; as their Resolving on it (Afterward)
evinced, Numb. 14. 40. but to their Ruin, v. 45. which Failing also kept the
rest from Entering into it for Ever, v. 30. And thus Complyers with the Man of
Sin, have called their Failing Circumstantial, which yet has always been the
Badge of Reprobation, Rev. 13. 8. Christ has no Witnesses save with respect
unto Time-Truths and Duties: wherein these Foolish Virgins fail, and so are
guilty of Denying him.

3. The Manner of their Sin is more than Ordinarily provoking. They had been
often Reproved to no purpose, and that forerun's remediless Destruction, Prove.
29. 1. They had Relapsed a second Time; and Trees twice dead, are plucked up by
the Roots, Jude 12. But more Especially they have persisted in their Evil way,
until the End of Christ's intended Patience, or till the Door be shut: and then
a Less Transgression is sufficient to make their Plea of none Effect. Let
Persons (at this Day) beware of letting slip a present Opportunity, by trusting
unto future Resolutions. Those trifling Israelites were free (at Last) to march
and Fight, Deuteronomy. 1. 41: ^ut it was then too Late. The Timeliness of Man's
Return is as Essentially required to Admission, as the Act it self.

^. These come with too much Confidence: but without being sensi^^e (...)
^ormer failings. They call for Opening, but not for Mercy: ^he^ (...) for
Suffering, but not for Sin: Here is a Prayer, but no Confession. As Nature (in
Paul) was willing to be Clothed upon, but not to be Uncloathed, 2 Cor. 5. 4: so
Foolish Virgins are for a Return, without Repentance. But as John Baptist bad,
Repent, Mat. 3. 2. before he would Admit unto his Ministration, v. 8. just so
did Christ, Mat. 4. 17. else future Zeal is not sufficient, save as it is
Accompanied with Repentance, Rev. 3. 19 And out of their Own mouth will such be
judged, Luke 19. 22. who have maintained this with reference unto Others, and
yet Themselves would have a Dispensation: which does evince their being
self-condemned, together with the Righteousness of their Exclusion, or
Rejection, Tit. 3. 10, 11.

Use 1. This Parable cannot so Properly be Applied (as it is by some) unto
Christ's Personal Coming; since there will then be no such room for Foolish
Virgins Pleading with him, as Here they do. Then will the Earth, and All
therein be burnt up with Material Fire, 2 Pet. 3. 10: excepting some few, as in
the Ark of Old, 1 Pet. 3. 20. and None of which will then come Afterward (as
do these Foolish Virgins) until Christ's Reign is Ended, Rev. 20. 5. so that
we either must refer this to some other coming, or offer violence unto the
Proper Meaning of these words. Whereas his Coming with the seventh Trumpets
sounding, will fairly admit of such a Parley, and Presently upon his being
come, as is here signified. Yet I exclude not his Last comeing (wholly) from a
share herein, so far as it is Capable thereof, or without straining.

2. Poor Foolish Virgins will not Come, until the Door be shut: but then such
may be looked for. This will be the righteous Wages of Carnal Prudence: Thus he
that seeks to save, shall Loose, Mat. 16. 25. Christ has foretold it here,
that none might be Offended, as Joh. 16. 1. and therefore will their Case be
sad who Tarry for the Other Virgins company. This does confirm mine Old
Persuasion, that few professing Jews will find this way until it be too Late,
Mat. 7. 14. But then such will Return, with Open Mouths, unto a Door that will
be shut against them. I see what Haste poor Muck-wet Creatures made unto the
Ark, when God had once shut Noah in; Genesis 7. 16. and how those Eight secured
Souls did then Rejoice, whilst Others were soon washed away.

3. Those may know Christ, and give him Goodly Words, yea seek to Enter; whom
yet He will not Know, nor Open unto. Some kind of Knowledge does not Edify, 1
Cor. 8. 1. Dives in Hell Knew Abraham, but not to his Advantage, Luke 16. 23.
to show how far unprofitable Notions may Accompany. Such also (then) will be
for smoother Language, not Daring to Insult, as Heretofore; prepare for
Flattery, which yet will not Prevail. Yea such will be Dissatisfied in their
Distance from the Wiser Virgins, earnestly Desiring to Build with them, as Ezra
4. 2. but will be shamefully Repulsed, as they were, v. 3. and yet will not be
Able (then) to do the Other any Mischief, as of Old, v. 4. for fear of that
Decree and Curse at such a Time, Ezra 6. 8. 11, 12.

4. Christ is not All made up of Mercy, as some poor Creatures fancy; but Can
(yea, Will) give Terrible words, and unto Virgins as well as Others. He
sometimes was a Patient Lion; but he will be a Roaring Lamb: Yea he was always
for an Intermixture of Threatenings with Encouragements. I am Offended with some
men's Humors, who are Afraid to give one Cutting word unto this Rotten-hearted
Generation of Professors, and have observed what has been the fruit of Dawbing
with untempered Mortar. But this will Aggravate Christ's Rougher speaking at
the last: and it will then appear, how far himself is Bound (from the Necessity
of his Nature) to be Gracious. Christ only now Reserveth Anger, Nah. 1. 2.
which therefore at the Last will turn into the Plague, or when the Vials shall
be poured forth, Rev. 15. 7, 8.

5. Christ will then have the Last word, in Discourse; as is here signified by
their not Replying to his Answer. Thus will himself be Glorified, as was Job,
when After his words they did not speak Again, Job 29. 22. The Pharisees were
often wont to Prate, until Christ put a Question to them concerning his being
David's Lord, Mat. 22. 45. and then it is said, they neither could Answer him,
nor durst they Ask him any more Questions, v. 46. to signify how Silencing
that God-like Kingly State will be, when it shall be Advanced. The Dispensation
(or Appearing) of this King, will be Evinced by the speechlesness of those
unworthy ones whom he Reproves, Mat. 22. 11, 12. Error and Sin may Now be
full of words; but Then all Flesh is bid, be silent, Zech. 2. 13. yea all the
Earth, Hab. 2. 20.

MATTHEW XXV. 13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day, nor the Hour
wherein the Son of Man comes.
IN this Verse, we have an Account of Christ's Design in putting forth this
Parable; or of that principal use which he would have us make thereof, viz. Our
being Watchful. From whence, the General Observation is as follows;

Observe. Since we Know not the Day or Hour in which the Son of Man will come,
we therefore ought to be upon our Watch.

Quest. 1. Why does Christ call himself the Son of Man, with reference unto his
Coming in these Latter-dayes?
Answ. 1. To declare his being still a Man, though now Ascended; and that his
Coming (at the Last) will be in the Humane Nature also. Some would sain have
him turned into a Spirit; though he that is now Ascended, is also He who first
Descended into the Grave, Ephesians. 4. 10. which is not Applicable to the Spirit of
Man, Eccl. 3. 21. Others will grant him (as a Man) to be Ascended, but not that
he will (so) Return; and yet it is said, He shall so Come, and in like Manner,
as he was seen to go, Act. 1. 11. And though his Coming (in this Parable) will
mainly be in a Mystical sense; yet will it be the coming of the Son of Man,
though not his coming As a Man (or in his Person, till Afterward (save as some
Man (or Men) may Represent him Now, as Hezekiah did of Old, Isa. 32. 1, 2.

2. To show the Nature of his Kingly Dispensation (at such a time) in point of
Visibility and Temporality; which is most Aptly shaddowed out by his (then)
coming As the Son of Man. His Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Kingdom was set up
at first: besides both which he had Another Kingdom Then, though it was not
Immediately to Appear, Luke 19. 11; which therefore must be Temporal. Now that
which is merely Spiritual, is fitlyest resembled by the Soul; as Christ (with
reference unto his spiritual Kingdom) is called the Shepherd of his Peoples
Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. but that which is Temporal, by the Man. Thus David's
Temporal Rule was over Men, 2 Samuel 23. 3. and as Christ (at his Personal
coming) is called a Man, Act. 17. 31. so with respect unto the Assyrians coming
before that time, this Man ('it is said) shall be the Peace, Mic. 5. 5.

3. To show the Greatness of his Humility. He was God's Equal upon Earth, Phil.
2. 6; and he (as Man) is far above the Angels Now, Heb. 1. 13; yet does he
style himself the Son of Man. He will Then have that Name [the King of Kings]
upon his Thigh, Rev. 19. 16; but in his Mouth, the Son of Man, which is a Worm,
Job 25. 6. Thus was Ezekiel oft-times called, to make him Humble; and thus
Christ did as often call himself, to show, that he is so. When Israel was come
into the Land of Canaan, they kept no more the Feast of Tabernacles, (or the
Memorial of their former Low Condition,) till Nehemiah's time, but Then it was
revived, Neh. 8. 17. which Dispensation was a Type of this: And when that
self-abasing Feast shall Mystically be Observed in these latter days, then
shall men thereby know, that Verily the Son of Man is come.

4. To hint (perhaps) the Meanness of his First appearing in these Latter
days; according to the Constant Purport of that Phrase, [the Son of Man,] yea
with respect to Christ himself, Heb. 2. 6. That as Himself, who Truly was the
Son of Man, is only said to have been Like him Afterward, Rev. 1. 13. (he is
so Altered (Now) from what he (sometime) was:) so will it be, with reference to
his Dispensation. He will (at Last) come, as the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 30;
because the Whole of his Own Personal Reign will be but Mean, compared with the
Father's Kingdom Afterward, 1 Cor. 15. 28. And so may his Precursory coming
here, be fitly called, that of the Son of Man, because it will be Mean,
compared with his Personal, when he shall Gloriously appear as God, Tit. 2. 13.
or in the Glory of his Father, Mat. 16. 27.

5. To signify (perhaps) the great Humanity, or Familiarity of his Conversing
with the Sons of Men (excepting some) at his Appearing. His Enemies indeed will
be then Burnt up round about, Psalm. 97. 3. but yet his Anger will cease in
their Destruction, Isa. 10. 25. and he will then Rest in his Love, Zeph. 3. 17.
He did Approve himself (on Earth) to be the Son of Man, by suffering his
Disciples to Ask him any thing, Joh. 15. 15. to sit with him at Meat, Joh. 13.
18; Yea, by his Rising to Wait on them, v. 4, 5. and so will it be Now.
Therefore Christ bids his people Ask of him, at such a time, Isa. 45. 11: and
they shall then sit with him, Rev. 3. 21. yea, he will then Rise and Serve
them, Luke 12. 37. This King of Glory will not be stately; but as Himself at
Last, so he Now in his People, will Affably appear to All, or as the Son of Man.

Quest. 2. Why is that called the Coming of Christ, which yet ('it is thought)
will be so long before his Personal or Proper Coming?
Answ. Because of the full Resemblance that is between them, as may be thus
made out.

1. With respect unto the Signs of Both. Christ's Personal Coming will be
notified by many Signs, both in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Earth, and
Sea, and Powers of Heaven, Luke 21. 25, 26: so will This Coming be, We have had
wonderful signs of such a Nature (and in the Letter) of Later years; though we
Now see them not, Psalm. 74. 9. And in the Mystery yet more Abundantly. The
Scriptures (fitly answering to the Sun, or Fountain of Created Light) have been
extremely Darkened, as Mat. 24. 29; and more especially some Part thereof. And
that which Borrows its Light from thence (or Moonlike Preaching) has been
turned into Blood, as Joel 2. 31. at least not given her Light, Mat. 24. 29.
Church Officers are called Stars, Rev. 1. 20; and these have sadly fallen, Mat.
24. 29; at least withdrawn their shining, Joel 3. 15. The Earth (or Civil State
of things) has oft-times Quaked. The Sea (or Many Waters) denotes People,
Rev. 17. 15; whose Waves have roared. The Powers of Heaven also, (or of the
Churches) have been shaken.

2. With reference unto the state of things Immediately foregoing Both. Elijah
must go before the Coming of that Great and Terrible Day, Mal. 4. 5. and such
a Messenger must Prepare Christ's way into his Temple, Mal. 3. 1; something
Like unto which our Eyes have seen. Christ's Personal Coming will be ushered in
with great Oppressions and all manner of Wickedness, Mat. 24. 29: so will his
Present coming be; by means of Hypocritical Professors first, and the Assyrian
afterward, Isa. 10. 5, 6. Yet will all sorts of sinners, Then, be Careless or
secure, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. so will they Now, both in Jerusalem, Isa. 32. 9. and in
the Isles of Magog, Ezekiel. 39. 6. But they will Then be Generally destroyed, 2
Pet. 3. 10. so will they Now, as by an Earthquake, Immediately foregoing it,
Rev. 11. 13, 15.

3. With reference unto the Manner of both these Comings. His Personal coming
will be with the Last Trump of all, 1 Cor. 15. 52: and This will be with the
Last Trump of seven, Rev. 11. 15. That coming will be with a Glorious Train of
Saints and Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 10. and so will This with a Glorious Change
of Church Members, Isa. 4. 3, 4. and Church Officers, Zech. 3. 4, 5. who are
oft-times called Angels. That coming will be on a sudden, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3: and so
will This, Rev. 3. 3. and 11. 14. That Coming will be with Clouds, Mat. 24. 30.
and so will This, Psalm. 97. 2. both in the Letter and Mystery. That Coming will
be with a shout, 1 These. 4. 16. and wailing, Rev. 1. 7. just so will This, with
reference unto a Diverse sort of Persons then, Rev. 11. 17, 18. and 18, 19, 20.

4. With reference to the Effects (and Principal Designed Ends) of both. He
will [Then] raise the Dead, John 5. 28, 29. So will he [Now] Revive his Work,
Hab. 3. 2. and People, Isa. 26. 19. as to their Joy, Psalm. 85. 6. He will
[Then] Reign, and all his Servants with him, Rev. 20. 4. So will he [Now] Rev.
11. 15. 17. before his Ancients Gloriously, Isa. 24. 23. He will [Then] Judge
the Quick and Dead at his Appearing, or at his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. So will he
Now, Rev. 11. 18. He will then Bind the Devil, Rev. 20. 2. and Satan will be
Rebuked by him Now, Zech. 3. 2. whose wrath (a little before) will therefore be
the Greater, as of Old, Rev. 12. 12. That Personal Coming will bring Rest unto
the Saints, 2 These. 1. 7. and so will This, Isa. 10. 27. and 33. 20.

5. With reference to what will follow both a long while after their
Beginning. Christ's Personal Reign will be a Thousand Years, Rev. 20. 4. and
This Dominion is (in some Respect) for Ever, or Everlasting, Dan. 7. 27. That
Coming will Establish All, in their Respective present states, Rev. 22. 11. and
so will This, as to the Generality of Old Professors, viz. the Wise and
Foolish Virgins, Dan. 12. 10. But Satan will be Loosed Then at Last, Rev. 20.
7, 8. So will he Now, as is Apparent from his being Bound (a little after) for
a longer Time, Rev. 20. 2. And as there will be [Then] a further Resurrection,
Rev. 20. 12. so will the Literal Jews be Now Converted, Rev. 16. 12. or Raised
from the Dead, Romans 11. 15. And as Christ's Personal Kingdom [then] will be
given up unto the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. So will the Saints Dominion [Now] be
given up unto the Son.

6. With reference unto the signal Property of both, viz. the Concealment of
that very Time, wherein they will begin: which (in Relation to them Both) is
here asserted, and other-where, Psalm. 74. 9. Mat. 24. 36. 42. Mark 13. 33. 35.
32. This ladeth me to the Next Enquiry.

Quest. 3. What is the Meaning of these words, Ye know not that Day or Hour?
Answ. 1. It cannot be Denied, but that the Apostles themselves are Primarily
intended (here) by that word, Ye, whom Christ Directs this speech unto, in
Answer to their foregoing Questions, Mat. 24. 3. Now, these Apostles were very
Ignorant, in that particular; yea, notwithstanding what Christ had Newly said:
As is apparent, both from his Present Affirmation of it Here, and from their
Question afterward, implying their sudden Expectation of it, Acts 1. 6. Whose
being Ignorant thereof at such a Time, may yet consist with their more clearly
knowing it afterward, and Others also, or since John had his Revelations, and
the Spirit's giving forth. John 16. 13. yet were These (in Their Day) concerned
to Watch, though only with Respect unto the Near approaching Ruin of
Jerusalem, which was an Emblem of Christ's Coming, which John Lived to see,
John 21. 22. and which are therefore intermingled, both in the Disciples
Question, and Christ's Answer, Luke 21. 7. 12. 20. 24, 25. 27. 32.

2. By this word [Ye] may be intended the Generality of Discisciples
afterward, as is Evinced by Christ's saying, John 13. 10. Ye are clean, (that
is, Generally) but not All, that is, excepting Judas in Particular. And so this
may import the General Ignorance (of such a Mystery) among Professors in
following times, which yet may be consistent with a Clearer Discovery thereof
to some Particular Persons; and more especially toward the End. Thus none of
the Wicked (at such a time) shall Understand, Dan. 12. 10. but all the Vision
will be (to such) a sealed Book, Isa. 20. 11. so that no Man or Counselor will
Answer a word, Isa. 41. 28. But yet the Wise shall Understand, Dan. 12. 10. and
there will be some First (or Chief one) with Good Tiding of that Kind, Isa. 21.
27.

3. This may be Universally Interpreted: and so, No Man does Know.

1. When Christ's Personal Coming will be, nor yet the Angels, Mat. 24. 35.
neither the Son of Man himself, Mark 13. 32. Which Personal Coming is not
wholly (here) to be Excluded; and so that sometime is applied to the whole, or
both, Mat. 27. 44. which yet is only Meant, with reference unto the one, Luke
23. 39. And so there may (perhaps) be some more full Discovery, (though it be
little Understood) as to Christ's Coming with the Seventh Trumpet's Sounding;
because there is a seeming Series of Mystical Numbers (in the Scripture)
continued beyond that time, or till the Jews Conversion, as some conceive. But
after which time, (viz. the literal Jews Conversion) no Sober Persons do
Pretend to any such kind of Mystical Numbers; till Christ himself shall Come in
Person.

2. Yet neither is that former Coming known by any Man.

1. In Respect of Punctuality, viz. the very Day and Hour, as is here
Expressed; and wherein (possibly) the Emphasis may lie. Israel's Deliverance
out of Egypt was fulfilled unto a Day, Exodus 12. 41. whereas their coming out
of Babylon, is only said to be in such a Year, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21, 22. And
therefore Gentile-Saints may not Expect to know the very Day of their
Redemption out of Babylon in the Mystery, (much less out of Assyria Afterward)
since this would not be granted to the Jews of Old, who yet are first, in point
of Outward Privileges, Romans 3. 1, 2. But as the Assyrian's Fall was signified
(as some conceive) within the Compass of a Year, 2 Kings 19. 29. and which fell
out that very Night, v. 35. So Time will show the Meaning of those Ten
Prophetical Days allotted unto Satan, Rev. 2. 10. whose Name is never mentioned
in a Revelation sense, but either before the Babylonish Beast came up, Rev. 12.
9. or after the Return of that Captivity, Zech. 3. 1, 2.

2. Yet will I also grant, that no Man knows Certainly, (as (...) here used
signifies,) the Month or Year, (nor possibly a longer time) with reference
unto This Coming of the Bridegroom here. King David's Dispensation was a Type
of Christ's, Amos 9. 11. and though he Knew, or did Believe, that he should see
the Goodness of the Lod (in that Respect) before his Death, Psalm. 27. 13. yet
did he not certainly know the very Year of his Advancement; else would he not
have fled to Achish, 1 Samuel 27. 2. When Readiness Destruction was to come in
little more than one Year after, v. 7. compared with Chap. 29. 1. 11. and Chap.
31. 1. And thus, not any Man does know how long; that is to say, not as a
Prophet, Psalm. 74. 9. or in a way of certain and Infallible Knowledge.

Quest. 4. How comes This to be so great a Secret?
Answ. 1. Because none certainly does know where to Begin the Man of Sin's
first Rise: Else might we certainly know the Ending of his Forty two Months,
or those One Thousand two hundred and sixty Days, Rev. 11. 2, 3. and
consequently might give a better Ghess, as to Christ's Coming with the Seventh
Trumpet. But the Captivity of Mystical Babylon (therein) Anwereth unto that of
Old, which was to continue Seventy Years for certain; yet no Man certainly knew
where to begin; else would not Daniel have been to seek so Near its End, Dan.
9. 1, 2, 3. I am persuaded the Man of Sin was up, when Marriage was first
Prohibited, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3. with 2 These. 2. 3. which was about the Year Three
Hundred and Ninety; and so his Forty two Months must be Expired some Years
ago. And after which the Earthquake comes, which ushereth in the Seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11. 13, 14, 15. But few may (yet) be of my Persuasion, nor do I
pretend unto Infallibility.

2. Because few can Agree who are the Witnesses, and what their Ascending
intimates; much less do any know for Certain, how long the following
Earthquake may continue. I do Believe, the Witnesses are a very small Number
among Professors, who have been Faithful unto THE Truth of such a Time: But
most suppose them to be Magistrates and Ministers; though I conceive not how
Magistrates (as such) are capable of having Prophesied in a Sack cloath-state.
I do believe, the Witnesses Ascending does import their being Taken out of
^ight, and their Receiving of a Kingdom, which yet is not immediately to
appear, as in Relation to Christ's Ascending, Luke 19. 11, 12. But most suppose
it to intend their visible Advancement in the World; the failing whereof (at
such a late Expected time) has cast them back again into the Wilderness.
However, I dare not pretend to any certain knowledge, as to the Duration of the
Earthquake; nor do I know any Man that Does or May.

3. Because the Dispensation of the Man of Sin is full of Darkness; which
therefore is fitly Measured by the Moon or Months, Rev. 11. 2. with reference
unto its Moon-like Light at best. And though Christ's VVitnesses have always had
sufficient Light, as to the Testimony of their Day; yet as Professors have
Relapsed into such a Spirit again, so have they been (therewith) Benighted, as
to their former seeming Light. This is our Case at present. How Evident (of
late Years) was our being Near to Sion: But being overtaken with a Babylonish
Mist, we know not (Generally) where we are. And they who da^ly with their
Light, in point of Duty (as the most of Professors have lately done) are justly
Blinded or Benighted, as to the Matter of their Peace and Privileges, John 7.
28. Luke 19. 42.

4. Because the Generality have no mind to search the Scriptures, nor yet to
Ponder what is thence Offered for their Help, in some more difficult cases.
Daniel understood by Books the Number of the Years of his Captivity, Dan. 9. 2.
and Prophets (of Old) were wont to search what manner of Time the Spirit of
Christ in them did signify, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. and thus is Knowledge to be
gained, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. But as there is no foretelling Prophet toward the
End, Psalm. 74. 9. so neither are there many searching ones: Yea, Ancient
Priests (at such a time) before their being laid aside, Reject that Knowledge,
for lack of which the People are Destroyed, Hos. 4. 6. And as an Hotter Climate
disposes People to be slothful, as in Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. 49. so Israel in Egypt
cannot Hearken to Redemption signified, until they see it, Exodus 6. 9.

5. Because the state of things (a little before the End) will be so likely (in
an Eye of Reason) to Continue still. Thus was it with David in his Time, 1 Samuel
27. 1. and so with Israel in their Captivity, Ezekiel. 37. 11. as well as Babylon,
both in the Letter, Isa. 47. 8. and Mystery, Rev. 18. 7, 8. Faith sees that
Promise Best in Darkest Times, because Christ Comes with the Clouds, Mat. 24.
30. but Faith will not be found on Earth at such a time, and upon that Account,
Luke 18. 7, 8. This will Occasion some to scoff (in these last days) at such a
Promise, for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things (say they) continue as
they were, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and they who grant the Promise in the General, will
therefore yet say to the Last, the Time is not yet come, as those of Old, Hag.
1. 2.

6. Because the Lord has Purposed, this very Time shall not be certainly known
by any Man, as is here signified; which leads to the Next Question.

Quest. 5. Why has the Lord so Ordered it, as that No Man shall Know that Day?
Answ. 1. To show his Sovereignty, by keeping somewhat Secret to Himself. His
Secret (in the General) is with the Righteous, Prove. 3. 32. who are (All of
them) Privy Counselors, Compared with the World, John 15. 15. and some of his
Saints have more Peculiar Secrets hinted to them, Dan. 2. 19. these are his
private Cabal: But as all unrevealed Secrets belong unto the Lord alone, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. and as some of his Judgments are unsearchable, Romans 11. 33. so are some
other things kept secret by him till such a Time, Romans 16. 25, 26. Thus Manoah
might not Know that Angels Name, Judge. 13. 18. and good Elisha had something
Hid from him, 2 Kings 4. 27. nor was it for those Apostles to Know the Time and
Season, which the Father has put in his own Power, viz. this Restoration,
Acts 1. 6, 7.

2. That so Christ's Coming in these Latter Days might Eminently Answer unto
its being a Type or Sign of his own Personal Coming at the last. This seems
to be that Sign of the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 30. Now, Signs must Answer unto
what is thereby signified; and Answering in a Chief Respect (such as This is)
does hint the Eminency of such a Sign. Therefore Melchisedec was the Highest
Type of Christ, because he was most like the Son of God, in that peculiar and
most signal point of Everlastingness, Heb. 7. 1. 3. Some other Dispensation (as
that of Babylon's Fall, Isa. 13. 10. 13.) might Resemble Christ's Last Coming,
in several other Respects, Luke 21. 25. but Absolute Secrecy as to the Time, is
Eminently reserved for this Dispensation, as being its peculiar Sign.

3. To Exercise a Spirit of Enquiry in his most Enlightened ones: As God will be
Enquired of, with reference unto the Matter of Redemption, Ezekiel. 36. 37. so
with Respect unto the Time thereof, 1 Pet. 1. 11. as being of Special use, Jer.
8. 7. Thus Christ often spoke in Parables, to make his Disciples the more
Inquisitive, and to bring Hidden Matters before this Altar, 1 Kings 8. 31.
Those do Mistake his Drift, who argue from a Secrecy, unto their being bound
from searching into it, save when that search is absolutely Forbidden, as Judge.
13. 18. John's Revelations are full of Mysteries; yet Blessed is he who Reads
that Book, Rev. 1. 3. Thus are we taught to Aim at that Perfection, which yet
is unattainable, at least not Actually (or Already) apprehended, Phil. 3. 11,
12.

4. Else that (Immediately foregoing) Hour of Temptation, would be no Trial in
comparison; which yet it is Intended for, Rev. 3. 10, 11. It is there called an
Hour, to keep from sinking: but yet that Hour, is the same with those Ten
Days, Rev. 2. 10. to make it Trying. In case, Late Persecutions should Now
Expire, the Certain foreknowledge of so short a Time would have Prevented
(probably) that which its being Hidden has Experimented. But Abraham's being
Ignorant, how long he might have been without his Isaac, was that which Tempted
him unto the height, Genesis 22. 1. 12. though he was only Exercised with a mere
Affrightment, and but of three days Continuance, v. 4. and this made way for
that Affectionate Blessing afterward, in way of seeming Righteousness, v. 15,
16, 17, 18.

5. Else would not Others be secure, as they must be, at such a Time, Luke 21.
35; but in the sight of any Bird, the Net is spread in vain, Prove. 1. 17. some
cannot Dig, Luke 16. 3. as they must do for Hidden Treasures, Prove. 2. 4. yea
they are Glad of such a Plea for Slothfulness, who therefore Ju^^^y meet with
Parables, Mat. 13. 13. But with respect unto self-preservation, no good man of
the House would suffer it to be broken through, in case he Knew what Hour the
Thief would come, Luke 12. 39. Now if this Day had Clearly been Revealed in the
Scripture, it then might have been Known, unto the Cherishing of a sleighty
Spirit in some, until the last preceding Minute, whom Christ will not so
Gratify; and therefore John wondered, who had forewarned such, as to His Day,
Mat. 3. 7.

6. Else would none Watch; as Christ here signifies: whereof more Afterward.

Quest. 6. Why is the Day (here) set before the Hour? Since in a way of
Accurate and more Emphatical Speech, it might have run, Ye know not the Hour,
nor yet the Day; or not some longer time, before that very Hour?
Ans. 1. To Check (perhaps) that overmuch Curiosity (or Exactness) in
Discourse, which may be too much the matter of some men's Care; the Want of
which in others is oft-times Childishly carped at; and (in Themselves) is
sinfully Afflicting. Too much of some Men's Time is spent in Starching, which
is one Argument of their Effeminacy: and as such are too much Admired; so
others are therefore tempted to be silent, because they are not Men of Words,
Exodus 4. 10. or cannot speak so Well as others, v. 14. But though one may seek
after Acceptable Words, Eccl. 12. 10. Yet Paul was not for Curiosity in that
respect, 1 Cor. 2. 1. whose Speech was therefore Contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
nor does the Spirit of Christ keep unto Grammar-Rules, in many places of
Scripture, as when the Nominative Case is often put Absolute in the Greek, Rev.
2. 26. and 3. 12. 21.

2. Yet may This Order of the Words be most Emphatical and most Proper.

1. Though we take the word [Hour] here, as being Less (by far) than that word
[Day] or in the strictest sense imaginable, as Mat. 8. 13. and 9. 22. and Mat.
20. 6. Luke 12. 12. and 24. 33. Joh. 4. 52. And so [an Hour] may import, the
very great suddenness of Christ's Appearing, unto an Hour, as well as Day;
which adds Force unto the present Exhortation. His Personal Coming will not
be Known, until that very Moment, 1 Cor. 15. 52. nor yet this other Coming,
until the Day, no nor until its very Hour; which should provoke our being
Watchful. Had we a Day to turn us in, some might presume they should get Ready
in a few Hours time: but when they hear, his Coming will not be Known until
that very Hour of its Beginning, those must be sadly Desperate, ^^o do put off
that weighty work, until this Nick of time.

2. If we interpret this word [Hour] here, as it is Elsewhere plainly meant,

1. For a set Appointed Time. Thus did Christ eat the Passover (with his
Disciples) when the Hour was come, Luke 22. 14, 15; or when the Even was come,
Mat. 26. 20. which was the set Appointed time, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 16.
6. This adds an Emphasis unto the Object of our Ignorance, and Force unto the
present Exhortation to be Watchful; since we Know not the Day, nor the
Appointed time, in which the Lord will come. This Coming of Christ (in the
latter days) is every way Determined or Appointed; both as to the Thing it
self, Zeph. 3. 8. and as to the very Time thereof, Hab. 2. 3. which is of that
forenamed use. It is Appointed; therefore it Must be; yea it must therefore be
at such a Time: which since we Know not, we had need to VVatch, because it
certainly will prove according to Appointment, Exodus 9. 5, 6.

2. For some more signal Time, in point of Terror. Thus was Christ's Dreadful
Passion called an Hour, which he desired (if Possible) might Pass from him,
Mark 14. 35. or that he might be saved from it, Joh. 12. 27. This sense of the
word is of the like Import with that before, viz. That we had need to VVatch,
because we neither know the Day (in point of Time,) nor yet the Dreadful
Nature of it, or that Fatal Hour in which the Lord will Come. Who would have
thought, the God of Love could ever have been so Angry with the whole Creation,
Genesis 7. 22. especially considering the First Occasion, Genesis 6. 2. 7? Who would
have thought, that Christ's first Coming would have proved so Fatal to the
Jews, Mal. 1. 11. No more is This Day Known; therefore in stead of Censuring
the Declarers of it, let us VVatch.

3. For some far longer time, than either a Day or Month. Thus is the same
Greek word (some^ime) translated [Time or Season] in the general, Joh. 16. 2.
Philem. 15. and it is Elsewhere put for (certain Years,) as those Ten Days,
Rev. 2. 10. are called an Hour, Rev. 3. 10: yea, it is sometime put to signify
an Age or Dispensation, as when John says, His was the last Time or Hour, (as
in the Greek it is) 1 John 2. 18. And in this sense, (or as the word (Hour) is
put for (certain years) this Order of the words (here used) is both Proper and
Emphatical. If men could be Assured, when this would be, as to some Tolerable
space of Time beforehand, they might be tempted thence to Trifle, till Toward
the End thereof; but since we know not Certainly, the Day or Year (until which
Time it will not be) we had need VVatch.

Quest. 7. But is it not then unsafe, (at least Imprudent) for any man to hint
the possible Nearness of this Time, which is Designed for so great a secret?
Answ. 1. We are not Ordinarily so apt to Antedate, as to put far away the
Evil-day, Am. 6. 3. such as this is: and the Delaying whereof is that which men
are commonly most subject unto, Mat. 24. 48. and is therefore said to be the
Character of Evil Servants. And if I must Needs fall, let me fall rather
forwards, (in a Doubtful Case at least) which is less Dangerous of the Two, as
in the Letter, so in the Mystery. And as to Prudence, Christ witnessed on her
behalf (and to her Praise) who came Aforehand with a Memorial of his
Resurrection, such as the Anointing (or Embalming) of his Body was, Mark 14. 8.
Nor does it so much savor of worldly Wisdom, to be too forward in a Witness of
this Nature, (which is so cross to carnal Interest,) as to hang Back, till
Providence has put the matter out of all Dispute.

2. I see no Danger at all in Early Apprehensions of this kind, when they are
Duly bounded. Those were Presumptuous, who would Go up and Fight (at such a
time,) directly Cross to an Express Command, Deuteronomy. 1. 43. but when the
Scripture does not forbid it, we then may safely Hope unto the End of Plausible
grounds: especially, if matters of Practice (urged unto) are mainly founded on
more substanstantial bottoms. Let any man evince the Interfering of my sober
Expectations with the Scripture, and I shall then cease therefrom: but else,
the Lord takes pleasure in his Peoples Hope, Psalm. 147. 11. Nor have I exhorted
unto any Present Practice, save what does seem to be a Duty, how far soever we
may be from the Bridegrooms coming.

3. Yet is it Therefore meet we should be very sober in our Conjectures of this
Nature: since No man Certainly does Know how long (at least) the Bridegroom may
yet Tarry. And this may partly be intended here; especially since being Sober,
is elsewhere joined with being Watchful; and in relation to This Coming of our
Lord, 1 Thessalonians 5. 4, 6. 1 Pet. 4. 7. The Nearer he is at Hand, the more should
all men Know our Moderation, Phil. 4. 5. and more especially with reference
unto that Time, which he has locked up in his own Cabinet. This I do here
declare to be the Rule by which my former Application (of this Parable unto our
Present time) is to be judged of; and that I have not pretended to
Infallibility.

4. Enquiries (with Sobriety) into this Hidden Mystery, are no where Blamed,
but Encouraged, as being of use, with reference unto these latter days. Indeed
the Primitive Christians were forbid to think, Christ's Proper Coming was Then
at Hand, before the Man of Sin was up, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2, 3. but Now the Reason of
that Prohibition is Removed. Yea we are bid to Argue from such evident Signs,
as to the Drawing Near of our Redemption, Luke 21. 8. and there is an Increase
of Knowledge Promised unto the Runners to and fro, at such a Time, Dan. 12. 4.
nor is there any Danger hinted, save with respect to men's Delaying it, Mat.
24. 48. Nor will it Repent us, if kept Awake, though by Discoursing as Men, or
with Mistakes.

5. Christ's chief Design, in bidding us to VVatch, (because No man does know
that Day and Hour,) is to Provoke our being in a Present Readiness, and to
prevent our putting that Time off, or at some further Distance. This is
Apparent, both from his Explanation of it Otherwhere, Luke 12. 40. and from the
Reason of this Present Exhortation, viz. the foolish (unprepared) Virgins sad
Experience here, who therefore Perish, because of their Presuming upon longer
time. So that Christ's Principal Meaning is, Ye know not [how soon] that Day
will come, and therefore ye have need to Watch. From whence it follows, that
such do utterly mistake Christ's Drift and their own Interest, who are more
fearful of being Hasty, than of Lingering, as to their Sober Expectations of
this kind.

Quest. 8. Wherein consists this work of Watching? To which I Answer.
Answ. 1. Negatively; Not in that which is Competible unto Foolish Virgins;
since we are therefore bid to watch, because of their sad Portion from the Lord
at such a time; and notwithstanding what they had Done or Were. Now, these poor
Foolish Virgins stood (for ought we Read) unto their former Practice, of Going
forth (at first) to Meet the Bridegroom: Therefore one may not watch, and yet
be no Back-slider, unto such an Height; or not turn back again to that which
has been formerly Declared against as Antichristian. Nay, These had sometime
been in Fellowship with the Wise; who therefore (doubtlessly) were pretty
Blameless in their Lives, sound in the Faith (or Main, so called) and very
conversant about Religious Duties: Therefore one may continue Praying,
Preaching, Hearing, etc. and yet not watch. Nay, These are only Taxed here,
for not Going out the Second time, through lack of Oil; which (when Awakened)
they would have Borrowed, and went to Buy it: Therefore one may not watch, and
yet be wakened; yea, very Trim as to ones Lamp or good Affections, nay (in
Appearance) willing and Desirous to be Complete.

2. So much as to the Negative. But then Affirmatively; this watching does
consist in somewhat else, Relating to the Manner and Matter of our Duty.

1. First, to the Manner of it; and so it does consist in being always studious
or intent, with reference unto the Work or Duty which God requires of us.
Thus are we bid to watch in Prayer, Col. 4. 2. or to Consider what we are
about, Eccl. 5. 2. which Duty of Prayer is put for All Religious worship
whatsoever, Mat. 21. 13. and Acts 16. 13. 16. We ought to Rejoice (at such a
Time) as if we Rejoiced not, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30. but yet to Hear, without an
Heart, fore-runs the coming of threatened Desolation, Ezekiel. 33. 31. 33. Great is
the want of Seriousness in Spiritual Exercises; such is the force of Innate
Vanity, when in Conjunction with Diverting Objects from the Tempter. But as an
Holy fixedness (or doing with our Might) is always to be Labored after, so much
more now, or when we seem Hastening into that state, wherein there is no further
work, Eccl. 9. 10. at least for Foolish Virgin^.

2. This Watching does consist in what Relates to the Matter of our Duty; and
as follows.

1. In being Ready, or having All our Garments on; which is the Main thing (in
the General) intended here. Christ's Coat was of one piece, John 19. 23. to
signify (perhaps) his being Dressed at once: But we (poor Creatures) must be
daily Adding, 2 Pet. 1. 5. Graces are called Armor, Romans 13. 12. which does
consist of several pieces, Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. the whole whereof must be
put on by us, v. 11. whose Life is a continual Warfare, 1 Timothy 1. 18. One Open
Guard exposes to a Deadly Wound, and shame may be Discovered by one Naked
place; yea, more unto the shame of some, than Total Nakedness is to others.
Now, all complain of wanting somewhat, and which they see upon the Backs of
others: But yet how Lightly do Professors bear Convictions of their
Imperfections, without a Care and Sense becoming their Complaints.

2. In keeping those Garments close about us, which Christ Declares to be that
wherein our Watching does consist, Rev. 16. 15. Thus let us Keep them from
being Lost, as Christ kept his Disciples, John 17. 12. or that we lose not that
which we have wrought, but that we may receive a full Reward, 2 John 8. And let
us also keep them on our Back, or by our putting them in ure; as Christ is said
to keep his Father's sayings, John 8. 55. because he did according thereunto:
Since nothing will be saved in that Day, save only our wearing Clothes, Mat.
24. 18. Yea, let us keep them without Spot, Jude 23. or, as we are to keep the
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 6. 14. since such shall walk in white, for they are worthy,
Rev. 3. 4. Nay, we must keep them also Girt; else flying Garments may be to our
shame, Rev. 16. 15.

3. In being of a constant Sober Spirit, which is one Branch of Watchfulness,
and therefore is indefinitely required of us, together with our being vigilant,
1 Pet. 5. 8. Thus is a Bishop to be Vigilant and Sober, 1 Timothy 3. 2. and Aged
Men, Titus 2. 2. yea, Deacons Wives, 1 Timothy 3. 11. and every one, 1 These. 5. 6.
which may consist with Hoping to the End, 1 Pet. 1. 13. and with Rejoicing,
Phil. 4. 4, 5. but not with Levity or Excess, 1 These. 5. 7, 8. Indeed Sobriety
is but a Virtue; yet it is so much wanting at this Day, as that a Sober Man is
counted Gracious: and Lightness of Spirit in Professors does Argue both their
lack of Grace and Virtue. Some do so far Indulge their Disposition, as to
forget the Dispensation they are under, which calls for Gravity, without
Dissimulation, or for a Sober Frame, as well as show.

4. In being careful of what is more peculiarly committed to our Trust. Thus
were those bid to Watch, and Keep what had been weighed to them in the way from
Babylon, till they should be Discharged of it at Jerusalem, Ezra 8. 24. 25. 26.
And thus, all sorts of Levites (or Professors) have some things peculiarly
Deposited in their Hand, as those of Old, viz. the Kohathites, Numb. 4. 4. the
Gershonites, v. 28. and Merarites, v. 33. and in the Keeping whereof their
special Watch consisted. Thus was the Gospel of Uncircumcision (by way of
Eminency) committed unto Paul, Gal. 2. 7. as was his Form of sound words to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. who also must commit them unto other Faithful Men, 2 Timothy 2. 2. And thus more Eminently Enlightened ones should Watch and Keep that
which they are Betru^^ed with, or bear the Iniquity of their Priesthood, in
case of any failure, Numb. 18. 1.

5. In our Improving present Opportunities for Service, while they are
continued. Thus Timothy was bid to Watch, 2 Timothy 4. 5. or to be in^tant in his
work of Preaching, v. 2. because the Time was coming, when they would not
endure sound Doctrine, v. 3. but be turned into Fables, v. 4. Thus ought we to
Observe (our selves and Others) as to the Season of an Exhortation, or when the
Heart is most Prepared for Impression. The Wild Ass has her Month, wherein
she may be found, Jer. 2. 24. and therefore Paul staid so long at Ephesus,
because so great and so effectual a Door was Opened unto him, 1 Cor. 16. 8, 9.
Some may Resolve to follow Christ hereafter, Luke 9. 61. but by to Morrow the
Heart may possibly be hardened, Heb. 3. 13. or that Door may be shut, which Now
stands Open.

6. In lying at Catch, for any the least Advantage tending to promote a Good
Design: As Wicked Men are said to watch the Righteous, Psalm. 37. 32. and as the
Jews did Christ, that so they might Accuse him, Mark 3. 2. If Men did Hunger
after Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. how would they watch, as does a Leopard for his
Prey, who tarrieth not until it comes to his Den, but ventureth thence unto
the City, Catching at him that first comes out, Jer. 5. 6. This Lying in wait
is Lawful, and a Duty; but little practiced by those, who Turn upon the Beds,
as does the Door upon his Hinges, Prove. 26. 14. or in a Passive way, as if
Conjured into a Narrow Circle. And if Men were as much afraid of Sin, as
Suffering, they would then catch at Light for Duty, as Benhadad's Servants did
at Ahab's words, for Mercy, 1 King. 20. 33.

7. In standing fast, as to the Truths of Christ, whatever Hardships may be met
with in that way. Thus were those bid to watch, and to stand fast, 1 Cor. 16.
13. as he was bid to watch, and to endure Afflictions, 2 Timothy 4. 5. to intimate
wherein this watching does consist. Back-sliders are no Watchers; however such
may Talk (as some do) in their sleep: Nor they who are so very Tender, (or
sensible of Cold) to what they sometimes were. It is a Night with us at
present; and greatest chilness (or Afflicting Cold) is wont to be at Break of
Day: Therefore let us in this sense watch; And let us stand fast, not Reeling
to and fro, which is the posture of Men half asleep: And let us hold fast that
which we have, since aptness to let things fall, is that by which a slumberer
is to be known from others.

8. In being careful to Preserve the Life of what is Dying; and more especially
in all Momentous Cases. When any one is very Weak, the Friends of such are wont
to Watch; in which regard, the Sardians are bid to watch, and strengthen the
things which did remain, being Ready to Die, Rev. 3. 2. as other things were
Dead before, v. 1. This is the Case of Many in our Days; who seem to have been
Typified by those of Old. Some are quite Dead, as to their Zeal, their
Confidence, their seeming Life and Power: And other things (which yet Remain)
are Ready to die, viz. their Hope, their Form of Godliness, and Moral Honesty;
who therefore had need to Watch. Yea, there is not an Heart (or House) wherein
some Good thing is not very weak; which therefore calls for strengthening: and
therein lies our being Watchful.

9. In minding what God does say; as Habakkuk Resolved to watch and see what
God would say unto him, Hab. 2. 1. and with Respect to such a time, or when the
Enemy does Possess what was not Theirs, Hab. 1. 6. Indeed, we cannot well Hear,
unless we Watch, 1 Kings 18. 27. at least, not some more still (or whispering)
voice, in which the Lord is Mostly present, 1 Kings 19. 12, 13. Thus are we to
Hear what Christ has said unto the Churches, Relating to these Latter days,
Rev. 3. 22. how some of them were Threatened (at the first) if they did not
Repent, Rev. 2. 5. 7. how others were Discovered (afterward) to be mere
Formalists, Rev. 3. 1. 6. and how (at Last) Christ is Resolved to spew them
out, for their luke-warmness, Rev. 3. 16. 22. Thus are we to Hear his Crying
Voice unto the City, Mic. 6. 9. and what he will speak at the last, Psalm. 85. 8.

10. In being able to tell the Time, or What of the Night; which is the
peculiar work of Watchmen, Isa. 21. 11. and wherein Paul presumed those
Believers were Acquainted, Romans 13. 11. 13. And if Philosophers should not
wonder, (as one of them vainly Boasted,) much less should Christians be at a
Total Loss, in this regard; since Providence compared with the Scripture, is
like a Dial shone upon, in case our Eyes were Open, Luke 24. 25. 27. But few
have Knowledge of the Times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. though to their shame who do
pretend to that All-guiding Spirit of Christ, John 16. 13. since (by a Natural
Instinct) the Stork in Heaven knows her Appointed time, Jer. 8. 7. But let us
watch, in this regard; since Ignorance (in that Respect) is very Dangerous,
Luke 19. 42. and a sad Judgment, Isa. 29. 10. if not wilful, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

11. In our Defending others; at leastwise by fore-warning them of what is
Notified unto us; and more especially, those whom the Lord has (by his
Providence) Committed to our Care: Thus has a City its Appointed Watchmen,
Cant. 3. 3. and more especially in times of Danger, who then are to Declare
that which they see, Isa. 21. 6. though such cannot be always Positive, 2 Samuel
18. 27. 2 Kings 9. 17, 20. Some, under a pretense of looking to Themselves,
care not what does become of others: As if the Command of Saving our selves and
others, 1 Timothy 4. 16. were not Divine and self-consistent. Others are so afraid
of being shamed with a false Alarm, as that they have not Heart to speak at
all, Jonah 4. 2. which yet is Ordinary in a VVatch-man. Others put off this
work to some Peculiar ones: as if a Cain were not his Brother's Keeper, Genesis 4.
9. or a Samaritan were not a Neighbor, Luke 10. 36.

12. In being (our selves) aware of Dangers, and suitably provided for them,
before we are surprised with them. Thus are those bid to watch they way, Nah.
2. 1. and those Disciples to VVatch and Pray, for fear of entering into
Temptation, Mat. 26. 41. So those Ephesian Elders were bid to VVatch, Acts 20.
21. with reference unto Wolves without, v. 29. and Perverse Speakers from
Themselves, v. 30. Those are no VVatchers who are Offended with too Early
Items; who are afraid of being up too soon, who have their Oil to Buy, when so
much of the present Night is spent. Without Dispute this is here plainly meant,
as is Apparent, both from the following and foregoing words: Thus therefore
let us watch; and with Respect to Spiritual and Eternal Dangers, more than
Temporal.

13. In being Eminently careful, as to the Duties and Temptations which Relate
to such a Time; in which regard the Porter is bid to watch, Mark 13. 34. and
all the Disciples, for fear of entering into Temptation, Mark 14. 38. This
leads us to that which follows.

Quest. 9. What are those special Duties, with reference unto which we are to
VVatch at such a Time?
Answ. The Principal Duties of such a Time, Relate unto All sorts of Persons.

I. Unto Sinners, both in the World and Sion; and more especially, those whom
Christ will Then call unto his Bar, as having been his signal Enemies, Luke 19.
27. Their Duty is, to get Delivered from their Adversary, in the Way, before
his sitting as a Judge, Luke 12. 58: as Shimei therefore came to meet provoked
David, the First of all the House of Joseph, 2 Samuel 19. 20. and thereby get
some present Pardon, v. 23. Fury is not in God; therefore let such make Peace
with him, and they shall do so, Isa. 27. 4, 5. How unexpectedly was Nineveh
Reprieved, upon the self-humbling of that Assyrian King, Jonah 3. 10? So does
God promise to build such up among his People, could they but learn his Peoples
VVayes, Jer. 12. 16. And if Jerusalem could but Repent, her seeming Sentence
Jer. 21. 10. should be Reversed, Jer. 22. 4: and therefore, O Jerusalem wash
thine Heart from Wickedness, that so thou may be saved, Jer. 4. 14. Think
upon this, you bloody Persecutors, sad Apostates, base Complyers, and sleighty
Unbelievers; this is the great work incumbent upon you, which must be Now done,
or (perhaps) Never.

II. Unto Saints; which are, as follows, Expressly required at such a time.

1. In making our Election sure; which is the Great work of Time, 2 Pet. 1. 10;
and more especially at such a time. Men in a Fire, are Firstly careful to save
their Evidences: now since This Day will be with Burning and fuel of Fire,
Isa. 9. 5. take heed your Evidences be not Burnt. Foundations (then) will be
Discovered to the Neck, Hab. 3. 13: and therefore Hypocrites will then be Known
by their Excessive Fear, Isa. 33. 14; and Others, by their holy Confidence, at
Christ's Appearing, 1 John 2. 28. See therefore to the Ground you Build upon,
and bring your Marks unto the Touchstone; not taking upon Trust; nor Trusting
to what might suffice, as to being held Communion with; since Goats will Now be
set Aside, Mat. 25. 32. which yet were Clean, for Sacrifice, and Food, or
Saint-Communion Acts of Old.

2. Let us Occupy those Talents which Christ has betrusted us with for such a
Purpose, Luke 19. 13. Each one has put into his hand, according to his several
Ability, Mat. 25. 15. and an Exact Account whereof is to be made at such a
Time, Luke 19. 15; who therefore had need to VVatch. Some want Ability, as to
some Kind of Talents; and Others, as to the same Degree, for that, which (in
respect of Kind) is Equally communicated unto all. Thus are the Saints
betrusted with peculiar Privileges; yea, every Sinner with some kind of
Talent; though Gradually Differing (both of them) each from other: and suitable
whereunto, must be their Reckoning. Men must be accountable for their sweet
Illapses, Crosses, Opportunities for Duty, Helps therein, and Outward Mercies;
what they have Gained thereby: whose Duty it therefore is to Trade therewith;
and to wards the End especially.

3. Let us be much in Prayer, that we may not Enter into Temptation, Mark 14.
38. but be accounted Worthy to Escape, and stand before the Son of Man, Luke
21. 36. Now one may be said to Enter into Temptation, when something is that
way done, although not to the Height thereof; when sinful Motions are Parlyed
with, or Satan is heard in a plain Case: When foiled Temptations are not
pursued, but suffered to Rise again: When Opposite Duty is not duly prized;
and when we are not Deeply Humbled for a former Fall: In which regard, Prayer
is of special securing use, as it does bring the Soul into God's Over-awing
Presence; as it enlivens other helps; and as it is the likelyest way to be
Instructed and Assisted from the Lord. Only we must therein be Upright,
Earnest, Persevering, and not Idle Beggars, but free to Work.

4. What manner of Persons ought we to be, as to All Godliness and Holy
Conversation, 2 Pet. 3. 11; so as to be found of Christ in Peace, and without
Spot or Blame, v. 14? Christ will Then come, and his Reward with him, Isa. 40.
10: therefore let us now ply our Work apace; and let us not make light of Idle
words, which then must be Accounted for, Mat. 12. 36. Each Talent (well
Improved) will gain a City, in that Day, Luke 19. 17: and little do many think
how small a matter will be sufficient to Burn This World, as was to Drown the
Other. How forcible (to make us Accurate) would be the constant Expectation of
a Dying Hour, and the last Trumpets sounding unto Judgment? And with what
Cheerfulness does a Tenant hear his Landlord Knock, whose Rent is Ready, and
not to Borrow at such a time?

5. Say not, A Confederacy with Threatening Ashur, Isa. 8. 12; whose Fall, Isa.
31. 8. immediately ushereth in Christ's Dispensation, Isa. 32. 1. Some will
Confederate with him for Mischief to God's Hidden Ones, Psalm. 83. 4, 5, 8. and
others (in Jerusalem) through slavish Fear, directly cross to a Divine Command.
And therefore Hezekiah would not give him Pledges, Isa. 36. 8; although he was
not for Provoking Answers, v. 21. and thereupon was fortified from the Lord,
Isa. 37. 6, 7. What Shame and Horror will then surprise those unrepenting
Israelites, who have gone down for help to Egypt, Isa. 31. 1. or to this King
with Presents, Isa. 57. 9? It Is very Probable, that Shebna was of this
Confederacy, who sometimes had the Key of David's House, but therefore
forfeited his Place unto Eliakim, Isa. 22. 21, before that Siege was raised, 2
Kings 18. 18.

6. Come out of Babylon; as all Gods People are bid to do, Rev. 18. 4. and
more especially at such a Time. Now Babylon is to be Known; Partly, by her
being very Tender and unacquainted with others Hardships, Isa. 47. 1, 2. Partly
by her abounding with worldly Great ones, 2 Kings 25. 28; and men of greatest
Note for Wisdom, Dan. 2. 12: Partly, by making a God of Succoth-benoth, or
Tents of Daughters, 2 King. 17. 30; viz. the Numerousness of their Party,
though only made up of Women: Partly, by her most cruel Persecutions, Jer. 50.
17. and unnatural Oppressions, Isa. 14. 20: and Partly, by her
Incorrigibleness, Jer. 51. 9. This Babylon is to be left, Jer. 51. 45. and all
the Temple-Vessels to be carried thence, which have been there Abused, as was
of Old; since Every one found There (at such a time) will be cut off, Isa. 13.
15.

7. Forsake not the Assembling of your selves Together, and so much the more,
as this Day seems to Approach, Heb. 10. 25. Those are no Watchers,
(especially in these latter days,) who are for meeting Asunder, through fear
of suffering for so clear a Duty. Thus let us therefore VVatch, in case fresh
Persecution should arise, as has often done in former times, and after some
Respite given. And as men would be kept Awake in that respect, so let them take
heed of Trusting in their Former Duty; much more, of pleading for a former
Failing, or making light thereof; which is most likely to betray us into fresh
Temptations. Yea, let us Add mutual Exhortations unto other Means, whereby to
counterpoise the Practice or Manner of some Others, with reference hereunto, as
is there further signified, Heb. 10. 25.

8. Let us be Moderate in our Affections, with reference unto
Creature Comforts; and more Especially, as the Time grows short, or as the
Fashion of This world is seen to pass Away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Which word
translated [Fashion] does signify the Out side Clothing of a thing or person,
thus Christ was found in [Fashion] as a Man, Phil. 2. 8. when he was clothed
with our Nature: so will the Present World be changed (as a Vesture) at his
Coming, Psalm. 102. 25. And that word [short] is thought to be a Metaphor taken
from a piece of Cloth, whose very End is only left unrolled up: Or rather it
does im-import, that Time is Now put into its VVinding-sheet; and so the same
Greek Word is rendered, Acts 5. 6. Therefore it is Time to take our Affections
Off from that, which is Now Dead, and Ready to be Buried.

9. Let us then Flee, out of Judea, into the Mountains, Mat. 24. 16. and much
more out of Old Jerusalem, at such a time, on pain of Death, Jer. 21. 9, 10,
11. It Is something strange, that it should Ever be a Duty to go into Babylon;
but it is True, as Babylon denotes Confusion, (or Going forth out of the City,
into the Field,) and There shall Sion be Delivered, Mic. 4. 10. Thus are the
Lord's Priests (or Eminent Saints) commanded to VVeep between the Porch and
Altar, at such a time, Joel 2. 17; which necessarily implies, their being Come
out of that former Temple, wherein they had been wont to Minister. Which
fleeing to the Mountains does fitly suit with Meeting Christ in the Air at
last, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17; as being a Middle-state, between the Earth and Heaven; or
their being Covered in the shadow of his Hand, till he shall Plant the Heavens,
and lay the Foundations of the Earth afresh, Isa. 51. 16.

10. Remember Lot's wife, says Christ himself, with reference unto his Coming,
Luke 17. 30. 32. whom we are to Remember, as to her Sin and Punishment,
together with the Circumstances which relate unto them both. Her Sin was
Looking Back (to Sodom) or Behind her, Genesis 19. 26. contrary to God's Express
Command, v. 17. which Looking Back unfitteth for an Interest in his Kingdom,
Luke 9. 62. Her Punishment was, her being therefore turned into a Pillar of
Salt, Genesis 19. 26. which Salt does seem to be a Part of Sodom's Judgment,
Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Lot only was spoken to in that Command, Genesis 19. 17; yet his
Wife perished for Disobeying it: therefore take heed of Limiting Commands to
those whom they were only first given forth unto. She also Died without Mercy,
although she was the Wise of Righteous Lot: therefore Trust not to Carnal
Privileges. And though she had Come out of Sodom, yet did she Perish by the
Way, for having an Affection thereunto, or Looking back Behind her.

11. Touch no Unclean thing; but be ye Clean, who bear the Vessels of the Lord,
Isa. 52. 11. By which word [Vessels] are meant, those Gospel Truths which have
been carried into Babylon: the Bearers whereof (from thence) are Priests and
Levites, Ezra 8. 30. who typified Gospel-Saints, 1 Pet. 2. 9: and Touching
denotes Communion, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 17. Thus are we to study, wherein the Purity
of Communion does consist; or what it is that makes Unclean (according to the
Mystical Import of Moses his Law,) by its being Touched. And let us not be made
to think, this Separation is unlawful, if made by a Lesser Number, or a
Particular person; in case the Whole (or Greater Number) be so Unclean; since
the Command is Universal, the Reason is the same for every Part as for the
Whole; nor have Particular persons stuck thereat, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14. 16. Josh.
24. 15. but were Required thus to do, Jer. 15. 19. with an Encouragement from
the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 18. and without Danger, Isa. 52. 12.

12. If we have escaped out of Babylon, let us take heed of standing still on
this side that which is our Resting place, Jer. 51. 50. The same word (in the
Hebrew) is applied to Leah's leaving off to Bear, Genesis 29. 35. and to the
staying of that Widow's Oil, 2 Kings 4. 6. and Joash his smiting at the Third
stroke, 2 Kings 13. 18. and Job's Friends being silenced, Job 32. 16. and the
Sea's ceasing from her Raging, Jonah 1. 15. all which clear up the Meaning of
it. Thus let us not stand, as to our fresh Conceptions, Multiplying, smiting
Answers, and Holy Zeal or Raging: Since Babylon's Plagues may else be apt to
over-take us; and if we stand (in such a Case) we possibly may go no further,
and so fall short of Sion, which is as far from Babylon, as four Months
Journeying can well Accomplish, Ezra 7. 9. Let us not therefore talk of Houses
yet, but only Tents.

13. Remember to keep no silence, ye that make mention of the Lord; and give
him no Rest, till he Establish, and till he make Jerusalem a Praise in the
Earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7. When Christ's Dominion is setup, Psalm. 72. 8. and when
the whole Earth is filled with his Glory, v. 19. then will the prayers of David
(the Son of Jesse) End, v. 20. but till that time, they will (they ought to) be
Continued, and for the Hastening of that Dispensation. That Day of Salvation
will be a time for Praises, Isa. 12. 4. therefore this Hour (immediately
foregoing it) should be the Hour of Prayer. And though God needs not to be
Remembered of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. yet will he be Enquired of for This,
Ezekiel. 36. 37. and therefore let us pray for This; and as we find the Time
Approaching, as he did, Dan. 9. 2, 3.

14. Mind well the Signs of our Redemption drawing Near, and let us suitably be
Affected, Luke 21. 28. Signs are no insignificant or idle things, which none
but Pharisees are Ignorant of, Mat. 16. 3. and All but Carnal Israelites will
Believe them, Numb. 14. 11. And if some do so Magnify their own Invented Sig^
of the Cross, much more should we esteem that sign of Mercy, which is of God's
own giving, as Isa. 7. 14. Now, we have had Many Signs and Wonders in our days;
which show the Nearness of Christ's Name, Psalm. 75. 1. upon the multiplying
whereof, God does conclude his People will Believe, Exodus 4. 8. though without
Signs they will not, John 4. 48. But yet (alas) how soon are These forgot?
Psalm. 78. 42, 43. which is Accompanied with Turning back, v. 57. and therefore
had need to be Remembered.

15. As they that have wrought God's Judgment, are to seek Righteousness; so
are the Meek bid to seek Meekness, in this Day; wherein it may be such will be
Hid, Zeph. 2. 3. Which Meekness (to be sought by Meek ones) does denote
subduedness of Spirit to the will of God, in case Afflicting Dispensations be
continued; and Hearts established with Patience, because his Coming draws
nigh, James 5. 8. We know not certainly how long those signs may go before his
very Coming; therefore let us Rejoice with Trembl^ng, and wait upon the Lord,
Zeph. 3. 8. Himself will (Now) soon Plead our Cause; therefore let not our
Passion rise. But we must look to meet with fiery intermixtures afterward,
Rev. 15. 2. therefore get store of Meekness.

16. Since God will Now bring Evil upon All, let not Great things be sought for
by us for our selves; but let us count it a sufficient Portion, if Life be
given us for a prey, Jer. 45. 5. In case the City be Low in a Low place, Isa.
32. 19. then Blessed are they that sow beside all Waters, v. 20. or such as
have a Spirit suited to their Dispensation. It is Absurd, (as well as sinful)
to look for Canaan in the Wilderness. How Childishly do many wonder at their
present short Allowance, both in Respect of Temporals and Spirituals. Let Milk
and Butter satisfy us in that day, Isa. 7. 21, 22. and that we may Trust in
the Name of God, though without any Light, Isa. 50. 10. or that our Life and
Soul are kept together: since we must be like him, Romans 8. 29. who entered into
Paradise in a Cloud, Mat. 27. 46. Luke 23. 43.

17. Let us Account the Bridegroom's Tarrying, or the Long-suffering of our
Lord, to be Salvation, 2 Pet. 3. 15. It is Designed (by Him) to be so; and it
may easily be perceived (by us) to be of such a saving Nature, both in Respect
to our selves and others. If He is unwilling that any should perish, and
therefore slackneth, 2 Pet. 3. 9. shall we so far indulge our Personal
satisfaction, as to wish harm (by our Impetuousness) to an Elected Brother?
Nay, if we seriously Observe our own unfitness, we shall have cause to say,
that his Long-suffering is our Salvation. The vilest Spirits of Old, and they
who therefore justly perished, were of a Murmuring Disposition, for our
warning, 1 Cor. 10. 10, 11. whereas self-dressing watchers know how to improve
that saving Respite to their Gain, at his Appearing.

18. Remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into mind, Jer. 51. 50.
It chears the wearied Traveller's Heart when he can see his Journeys end. Look
upon Sion, as thine Eyes shall see her in due time, Isa. 33. 20. The Exercise
of this believing Prospect, is both a Privilege and a Duty. We walk by Faith,
and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. therefore we cannot Move without Believing. But
if the Prodigal's Father Ran, upon the sight of him, when he was yet a Great
way off, Luke 15. 20. how will our Affections be enlivened by the sight of
Christ, though at some Distance. Then will our Tears be wiped away, Isa. 25. 8.
and our Blind eyes be opened, Isa. 35. 5. then will our Labors be Rewarded,
Isa. 40. 10. and all our Losses Recompensed, Isa. 61. 7. Thus let us comfort
our selves and others, 1 These. 4. 18.

19. Prepare to Meet thy God, O Israel, Amos 4. 12. with reference unto the
Terror of his work at such a time. The Hearing whereof made Habakk^k to quiver,
Hab. 3. 16. For who shall Live, when God does this, Numb. 24 23? Few know the
Nature of those Clouds, in which the ^on of M^^ will Come: And who shall stand
when he Appears, Mal. 3. 2? Something will be, which shall make sinners
(then) to be afraid, Isa. 33. 14. who are not frighted with merely Spiritual
Judgments: And Saints themselves have need to Tremble in themselves, as they
would Rest in such a Day, Hab. 3. 16. Prepare for Rissing, in the Letter, Zech.
14. 2. and for the trying of your work by Mystical Fire at the least; and
therefore take heed of Building with Stubble, Hay, or Wood, which then will
Burn, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.

20. Take up a Lamentation, (says God unto his Prophet, at such a time of
dreadful Judgment, (for Tyrus, Ezekiel. 27. 2. For Pharach, Ezekiel. 32. 2. And for
the Princes of Israel, Ezekiel. 19. 1. For sinners of all sorts, and more
especially for Foolish Virgins or Professors. Their Case will Then be very sad,
1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. which therefore is the Matter of a Lasting Lamentation, Ezekiel.
19. 17. Nor do they Lament Themselves, who therefore should be wept over by us,
as Ignorant Old Jerusalem was by Christ, Luke 19. 41, 42. And it was time for
Jeremy to be pained at his very Heart for those, Jer. 4. 19. whom (in a while
after) he he was forbid to pray for, Jer. 7. 16. Thus let those (of the
Separation) keep the Passover for All the Children of the Captivity, as Ezra
6. 20, 21. Mourning for those who Ignorantly Desire the Hastening of that
Dreadful Day, Amos 5. 18.

21. Go through, go through the Gates; prepare you the way of the People: Cast
up, Cast up the Highway; Gather out the stones, lift up a Standard for the
People, Isa. 62. 10. All which implies,

1. Our setting an Example unto others, by Going through the Gates before them.
This Practical speaking is likely to be most Effectual, 2 These. 3. 7. wherein
Christ differed, John 13. 15. from the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 3. This is a special
Duty, and Indispensably required of us, though very Difficult, as the
Reduplication [Go forth, go forth] imports. Thus are we to Remove, and be as
the He-Goats before the Flock, Jer. 50. 8. saying, Let us go speedily, I will
go also. Zech. 8. 21.

2. Our calling upon others to go with us, or at least to follow us; which is
the import of Lifting up a Standard for the People, which therefore is joined
elsewhere with Publishing, Jer. 50. 2. and Blowing of the Trumpet, Jer. 51.
27. at which time all the Dwellers upon Earth are bid to See and Hear, Isa. 18.
3. Persons disposed to slumber, cannot endure to hear a Trumpet sound: But tell
them, you are Soldiers, and must Obey the Orders of your General, the Lord of
Hosts; and they had better be Awakened with your Trumpet, than with His. You
Kill us, said those, when kept Awake in the Sweating Sickness; but had they not
been so, they had Dyed indeed. Let us be therefore Crying in their Ears, All
Flesh is Grass, as we are bid to do, Isa. 40. 6. at such a Time, v. 10. or
showing the Vanity of all their Glory.

3. Preparing their way, by casting the Highway up, and (as it is in the
Hebrew) stoning it from stones. Which Casting up (with speed, as the
Ingemination hinteth) denotes the making of a Causey, for their dryer passage
in those Lower Grounds: And stoning imports the making of it firm and smooth,
or without stumbling blocks, as Isa. 57. 14. Thus let us prepare the way for
others, not putting any stumbling block in their way, Romans 14. 13. but Raising
it up in their esteem, and Comforting them with the sight of our way and
Doings, Ezekiel. 14. 22, 23. Our in-offensive Zeal for Christ, and wise deportment
toward others, will much Invite their Coming out of Babylon, who else may be
affrighted back again. Which yet does not imply our Daubing with untempered
Mortar, but dealing plainly in a prudent way; removing the Matter of just
Offense, and Pa^ing their way with solid and substantial Grounds.

Quest. 10. What are the Temptations, with reference unto which we are to
Watch, at such a Time?
Answ. These Time-Temptations are either more Gross, or more Refined. Grosser
Temptations are as follows.

1. Blaspheming. Some in the Last Days will be Blasphemers, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
pretending to be Jews, who are of Satan'^ Synagogue, Rev. 2. 9. Opposing and
Blaspheming the Truths of such a Time, Acts 18. 6. from an Invidious Spirit,
Acts 13. 45. Blaspheming the Holy Ghost, by calling that Spirit unclean, Mark
3. 29, 30. As peccant Humors (in length of Time) often turn into the Plague; so
may Corruptions purrifie (at la^t^) into Blaspheming: And though I will not
positively say, who are Now guilty of that sin; yet do I fear its being
incident unto these Latter Days, as Christ's first Appe^ring from the Digesting
Heat of that Approaching Sun. And it is partly to be known by an Habitual Evil
speaking of Time-Truths, against sufficient Light, and without sense or
Reformation to the Last.

2. Mocking and scoffing at This Day of Christ. There will be Mockers in the
Last time, Jode 18. And Scoffers at the promise of his Coming, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
which is first to be known, or in a special manner to be taken Notice of, as 2
Pet. 1. 20. The Reason whereof is, present visible Improbability of such a
Dispensation, and walking after their own Lusts; both which will (Then) be in
their Prime, and will breed Scoffers. Which will appear, in say^ng, Let him
make speed, Isa. 5. 19. and in a Boyish way of Jeering that Opinion, as the
Greek word Translated [Scoffers, or Mockers] intimates, as some did Christ
himself a little before his being Glorified, by Mocking Gestures, Mat. 27. 29.
Insulting words, Mark 15. 31, 32. and scornful Actions, Mat. 27. 29, 30. But be
not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong, Isa. 28. 22. Hear this, ye
scornful Men, v. 14.

3. Smiting of Fellow Servants, Mat. 24. 49. and dealing Hardly with them after
a promise of doing otherwise, Jer. 34. 15, 16. In which regard, Professors are
forbid to Grudge, or make each other Groan, for fear of being Condemned,
because the Judge stands before the Door, James 5. 9. and Sufferers are
therefore bidden to be Patient, v. 8. implying the Prevalency of this
Temptation at such a time. Thus Faithful Prophets must look for smiting, Jer.
20. 2. and others for being Cast out with Hatred by their Brethren, Isa. 66. 5.
and Manifold Defamations upon known false Reports, Jer. 20. 10. But let such
know, that slanderously Reported Paul was (in the Greek) Blasphemed, Romans 3. 8.
and let them mind that Persecuted Prophets Prayer, Jer. 11. 20. and smiting
Pashur's Portion, Jer. 20. 2, 4.

4. Sensuality; or Eating, Drinking, Marrying, Trading, and nothing else, Luke
17. 26, 27, 28, 30. Yea, Drinking Wine in Bowls, Amos 6. 6. and Feasting it in
a time of Mourning, Isa. 22. 12, 13. Declining Age is Naturally prone to this
Temptation, craving the Creature so much the more, when it is threatened with
its parting, Isa. 22. 13. And Old Men stoop not more (Earthward) in the Letter
than in the Mystery, and in a Moral sense. But as this is a Sign of Dotage, (or
being Children a second time, who are for nothing else but Eat ng;) so is it
the ready way to be surprised, Mat. 24. 49, 50. and Abhorred of the Lord, Amos
6. 8. without Forgiveness, Isa. 22. 14. This has abounded in our Days; which
is one sign of the Son of Man, Luke 17. 30. and of their going Captive with the
first, Amos 6. 7. who have been at ease in Sion, v. 1. as well as in Samaria.

5. Falling from Heaven, (or from an High Profession;) as Stars will do at
such a time, Mat. 24. 29; profaning the Covenant of their Fathers, Mal. 2. 10.
and dealing Treacherously with the Wife of their Youth, v. 14. This have our
Eyes beheld; and not in a Trivial matter, or in some Less Degrees; but Many
have fallen from Heaven unto the Earth, as Rev. 20. 4; yea some to Hell, Isa.
57. 9; and some of Understanding also, as Dan. 11. 35. Fallen Man is subject to
^^s Falling Sickness, and more especially toward the Fall, or in these Latter
days; since Christ is set for the Fall of Many in Israel, Luke 2. 34. But if
one falling from a Window (three Stories high) was taken up Dead, Act. 20. 9;
what hopes of Life can be conceived of him, who is seen failing down from
Heaven u^ to the Earth?

6. Aptness to be Deceived by false Christ's and Prophets, Mat. 24. 24. Prophets
are noted for their Predictions; as Christ was, for the Newness of his
Doctrine, Mark 1* 27. both which will [Then] ^e so far Counterfeited (by
showing great Signs and Wonders,) as to Deceive many, Mark 13. 6; and if it
were possible, the very Elect, Mat. 24. 24. which argues that Deceiving to be
Fundamental. How grossly Erroneous were the Sadduces in Christ's time, Mat.
22. 23; and yet Coordinate with the Priests and Pharisees, or One of those
Three principal Shepherds, Zech. 11. 8: and as there Never was a Spring without
its Frogs and Vermin, so have all greater Revolutions had Old Errors first, on
purpose to make New (following) Light Offensive. But as those Locusts did not
Hurt the Sealed Number, Rev. 9. 4; so neither shall the Elect be Now seduced,
Mark 13. 22.

7. Oppression of the Poor and Needy; whereof Declining Israel is accused
Deeply. Thus Ephraim loved to Oppress, Hos. 12. 7; which Ashdod and Egypt are
bid, Behold, Am. 3. 9: Yea Judah also did Oppress the Stranger wrongfully, Ezr.
22. 20. and her Poor Servants, Jer. 34. 16. a little before her Ruin, v. 21.
Which Poorer sort are Mean as to the World, and small in Number, (in which
sense Gideon's Family is called Poor, Judge. 6. 15.) and These are most apt to
be Oppressed by sordid Worldlings, whilst Others of an Higher Rank are let
alone. Thus solitary Christ, Mat. 26. 56. was Hated to the Death, v. 59. by
Those, who durst not give the Baptist an ill word, his Party was so Numerous,
Mat. 21. 26. But as these Poor are chiefly Fed by Christ at such a time, Zech.
11. 7. and know his Word, v. 11. so will he Arise or Come, for their
Oppression and their Sighing, Psalm. 12. 5.

8. Formality in Religion, (or Form of Godliness without its Power,) is that by
which the last Times are to be known, 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5. Thus typical Sardis had
(at such a time,) a Name to live, and nothing else, Rev. 3. 1: and others are
Taxed for their putting God off with a Corrupted thing, Mal. 1. 14. and
snuffing at it too, v. 13. It is observed, that Aged persons are nothing so
Zealous in their Religion, as when Youths; which holds true, with reference
unto Old Jerusalem's Professors. But such are therefore to be Turned from, 2 Timothy 3. 5: nor will the Lord Accept their worthless Sacrifice, Mal. 1. 14. but
will turn to the Gentiles, v. 11: yea if such do not lay this Sin to Heart,
their very Blessings shall be Cursed, Mal. 2. 2; and their whole Sacrifice
counted Dung, together with their Persons, v. 3.

9. A very great want of Moral Honesty. Some will be Traitors then, 2 Timothy 3.
4; and false Accusers, v, 3: Others will Dally with their Light, 2 Pet. 3. 5;
and be abominably Partial in the Law, Mal. 2. 9; turning the Scriptures into a
Nose of Wax, to serve their carnal Interest. Thus will God lead Backsliders
forth with workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 125. 5. on purpose to abate their Pride
and Insolency. Gentiles and Jews will little Differ at such a time, Romans 3. 9.
that none might quarrel with their being taken in upon a New Account, v. 23.
Why should not Gentiles be admitted (if Repenting) when Old professing Jews
are thus Degenerated? Yea Christ will then unmask those wicked Hypocrites, who
Lie and Rail, and will not understand, and yet Pretend unto their being Gods
Temple, Jerem. 7. 9. 14, 15.

10. Impudent self-justifying. Thus were those typical Pharisees, They (by way
of Eminency and Distinction,) who Justified Themselves before Men, Luke 16. 15;
not by the real Acquisition of a Righteous Quality, as Rev. 22. 11. in the
Greek; but by a bold Pronouncing of that Sentence upon themselves. And thus it
is foretold with reference unto the Latter days, (if Malachy's Prophecy be
not, To us, a naked History,) that Priests and People Then will plead, Wherein
have we despised thee, Mal. 1. 6? Wherein have we polluted thee, v. 7? Wherein
have we wearied him, Mal. 2. 17? Wherein have we robbed thee, Mal. 3. 8?
Wherein shall we return, v. 7? As if the Lord himself had falsely charged them.
Thus in the Last days, 2 Timothy 3. 1. men will be Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers,
v. 3; or apt to Justify themselves, though in a way of Blaspheming God. Age in
Profession, and Darkness of the Time, plausible Pretenses, and Multitude of
Companions, together with their High Esteem, produce this Impudence: but He
will then be their Judge, who Knows their Hearts, Luke 16. 15. Rev. 2. 23.

11. Disregarding the Work of God, and not Considering the Operation of his
hands, Isa. 5. 12: or Inadvertency, with reference to Impending Revolutions
already begun. God uses first to shoot a Warning-piece, and then a single Gun,
before he does resolve to sink his Adversary: but nothing of a Preparatory
Nature is Observed by such at such a time. Some Know not God's Thoughts, nor
understand his Council, Mic. 4. 12: but These do see, and Know; only they do
not Consider or Regard. At least, God's Hand therein is not taken notice of;
but only the hand of Man, or the Matter of such a Providence; and so the
Specialty of a Design is little thought upon. But therefore Captivity is
Denounced, Isa. 5. 12; enough to make All look about them, before it is put in
Execution.

12. Resolvedness in an Evil way; Partly from being formerly Engaged in it,
Jer. 2. 25; partly from Hopes of further Benefit, Isa. 57. 10; and partly from
a Desperate stoutness of Spirit, without any Reason rendered, Jer. 18. 12. Old
Trees will sooner Break than Bow; and when the Heart is Touched with Mammon, it
will stand pointing to that Lodestone: Yea Sin is fallen Man's Byas, whose
Wheeling Influence (upon his Motion) is most Prevailing, toward the End, as in
the Letter. Though some may be kept from Returning, by their false Teachers,
and superstitious Fears, and plausible Arguments or seeming Scripture-grounds.
But if men will not walk in that good way, Jer. 6. 16. nor hearken to the
Trumpet's Sound, v. 17. Others are bid to hear their Sentence, v. 18.

13. Calling one Contrary by the Other's Name; both as to God's Providence,
and men's Moral Actions, Isa. 5. 20: And thus in plainer Cases too; or from
Affected (at leastwise self-contracted, rather than simple) Ignorance. Thus
some Bless God, when prospering in a sinful way, Zech. 11. 5: and Others call
that a Judgment, and are Offended with it, which is a Mercy, Mat. 2. 3. and
15. 12; calling that Evil, which is a Truth, 1 Kings 22. 8. And as to Moral
Actions; when Ignorance is called Light, and Disobedience by the Name of Duty;
and when the Bitter root of Sin is called Sweet, that is to say, Pleasant,
Psalm. 119. 103: Comforting, Eccl. 5. 12. and Strengthening, Neh. 8. 10. This is
a woeful sad Temptation, Isa. 5. 20: exposing unto all manner of Sin and
Suffering; since it is worse than Intermingling Good with Evil; yea worse than
Bodily Blindness (which does not think Darkness to be Light) or a bodily
Distempered Taste, which never counts Bitter things Sweet, as is by some
observed: and as it argues a Reprobate Mind, Romans 1. 28. so is it near of Kin
unto that Sin against the Holy Ghost, Mark 3. 29. 30.

14. Unreasonable self-conceit, and High Pretensions. Pride goes before
Destruction, both as its Cause and Symptom, Prove. 16. 18: which therefore is
more to be Lamented, than to be Wondered at, with reference unto Dying Old
Jerusalem. Tell some men of their Sin, they will Deride you, as those did
Christ, Luke 16. 14. a little before their being Cut off, Zech. 11. 8. Tell
Others of their hastening Downfall; they say, Is not the Lord among us? no Evil
can come upon us, Mic. 3. 11. a little before their being Plowed up, v. 12. Bid
Laodicean Churches, Buy your Gold, Rev. 3. 18. they will tell you, they have need
of Nothing, v. 17. a little before their being spewed out, v. 16. Thus while
the true Children of Light are made to walk in Darkness, others will warm
themselves with sparks of their Own kindling, but shall lie down in sorrow,
Isa. 50. 10, 11.

These are those Grosser Time-temptations; The more Refined are as follows.

1. Affections without Judgment, or Lamps without Oil in Vessels. This is
Predominant in Foolish Virgins as to the Main; and incident unto the Wise, in
some D^gree: both which have therefore need to VVatch, in that regard. Old men
and Children abound with such Affections; which therefore had need to be taken
notice of, as men would shun the Casualties, both of this Fall, and of the next
Spring. Affections raised Above one's Judgment, are like the Speakers Voice
above his Spirit; exceeding Prejudicial to the Matter in point of VVorth, as
well as Acceptance. And yet, we therefore have so many Staggerers, because
they are as it were Drunk with over strong Affections; which therefore men have
need to VVatch against. Only take heed of sinful subtle Moderation, under a
Pretense of Fearing to be Injudicious: but let our Zeal be under the Command of
Knowledge, and let that Knowledge be pursued, then let us be as Hot as Fire.

2. Aptness to Boast of what is Carnal: as being Wise, or men of Parts, Jer. 9.
23. and Abraham's Children, or professors, Joh. 8. 39. full of Religious
Duties, Luke 18. 11, 12. and having the Name of Temples, Jer. 7. 4. Thence do
some boast so of the Spirit: merely because of their many words: especially if
Florid and Affectionate, though such Affections may be merely Natural, if not
Enforced. Whereas the Spir^t in Prayer is to be Known by something which
cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26: and so, in Speaking, by speaking in a way of
Demonstration, 1 Cor. 2. 4: and of Revealing the Deep things of God, v. 10.
which are not Known by the World, v. 7, 8. nor yet Received, v. 14. Nor is the
Spirit (in any) to be Judged of, but by the Spiritual Man; v. 15. John must
Decrease, as Christ gets up; but Lower things are never more Affected by us,
than just upon their being ready to Die. Declining Age (as in the Letter, so in
the Mystery) has least of Substance in it; which therefore most Delights in
Toys and Circumstances, as being most like unto it self. But it is Weakly done,
to Glory in that Flesh, which as it was but Grass at best, so is it (Now) sure
to Wither, Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. Instead of sounding shining Brass, God is Now
bringing Gold, Isa. 60. 17. which Laodiceans have need to Buy, Rev. 3. 18.
since other things will Burn.

3. Spiritual Decays, to what have sometimes been. Thus Typical Ephesus (at
such a time) is charged with Leaving her first Love, Rev. 2. 4. and Sardis lay
at the point of Death, Rev. 3. 2. and Laodicea was worse than Cold, Rev. 3. 15.
Men truly Gracious, are always Growing, Psalm. 92. 12, 14. but Nature has its
stint, and thenceforth Lives upon its former stock, which therefore needs must
waste. This is the more Dangerous, because it steals upon Souls and Bodies by
Degrees; and not so violently, as in a fit of downright sickness. And though
Gray Hairs can talk of a Consumptive state, (as in a Spiritual case some others
do,) yet are they apt to let it Grow upon them, without Resistance. But this
alone had need to make us sick, for fear of being spewed out by him, Rev. 3.
16. who turns not unto his Vomit.

4. Lothness to be Transplanted, though for the Better. As all the Pharisees
stuck fast to Moses, John 9. 28. So, few (if any) of John's Disciples followed
Christ, though by that means they entered not into his Heavenly Kingdom, Mat.
11. 11. Nature would fain be clothed upon, but not unclothed, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
but none save Fools do look, that what is sown should ever quicken, except it
Die, 1 Cor. 15. 36. Most think Conversion to be done at once, which yet is a
continued Act, as Peter found, Luke 22. 32. and without which being born again,
professing Nicodemus might not see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. it being with
Grace, as with the Growing Wheat, which first appears like unto Grass, but
does Exchange (in Time) that Lower Blade for something Higher, viz. the Ear;
and without which it is concluded to be Grass indeed, or little better. Thus
are some Accessory to their Spiritual Leanness, by their not following Christ
into his Greener Pastures: And as Men would facilitate their Removal with him,
so let them take heed of Rooting deeper into other things than into him, which
is a Vanity more common than Discerned.

5. A proneness to be too much in Love with outside fairness, so as to Marry
others (in the Mystery) on that Account; as did the Sons of God with those Fair
Daughters of Men, Genesis 6. 2. a little before the Flood, which Answers unto
this Coming of the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 38, 39. Which outside Fairness does
import what is the first Adam's Luster; which is to have its due, but not to be
a Rival with the Second, in point of Conjugal (or Highe^^) Love. Yet thus did
the Disciples Gaze upon those Goodly Buildings, which in a while were laid
aside, Mat. 24. 1, 2. Such kind of Beauty must be expected then, as in the Face
of some Consumptive Persons, a little before their Change; and wherewith many
will be Ensnared. But let the Admirers of Parts and Moral Virtues know, and
bear in mind, what brought the Deluge.

6. Aptness to be secure, and not to know, till Sufferings come. This will be
the World's Temptation, to be sure; yea, Christ saw need to bid his own take
heed of promising too quick a Period to their Tribulation, Mark 13. 8, 9. I
should be glad, if Sion might be Delivered, without any further pain; but since
she has not yet brought forth, we may conclude, her Last Pangs will be
sharpest. It Is true indeed, when Vermin once begin to Run (as some do at this
Day already) that is one sign the House is Falling; but on the other side, when
Eaves are seen to drop, long after a shower, it is an usual Symptom of more
Rain behind, because it Argues the Air to be still very moist; and some
particular Droppings (of a Persecuting Spirit) are still continued. However,
National Distresses must come at Last, Luke 21. 25. or after-Persecutions, v.
12. therefore let us Prepare for further Sufferings.

7. Depending too much (in ways of Duty) upon Encouragements. Satan did
sometimes put the Question, Does Job fear God for Naught, Job 1. 9? but with
Respect to Satan's Dispensation in these Latter Days, the Lord himself does
Ask, Who is there even among you (Professors) that would shut the Doors for
Naught, Mal. 1. 10? Yea, when the Proud are Happy, and wicked workers are set
up, the un-rewarded keepers of Gods Ordinances count his Service vain, Mal. 3.
14, 15. Old Laborers are apt to Murmr, in case they have not more than
Ordinary Pay, Mat. 20. 11. much more, when these are made to work, and others
only seem to have the Wages. But as a Mercenary Spirit is not Filial, Phil. 2.
20, 21, 22. So Discontent (on that Account) is the Companion of most worthless
Duty, Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5. wherein God has no Pleasure, Mal. 1. 10. and the
Forerunner of such Men's being laid aside, v. 11.

8. Humane Traditions in Matters of Religious Worship. We Read of Old Wives
Fables, 1 Timothy 4. 7. and Jewish Fables and Commandments of Men, Titus 1. 14. to
signify, what Old Professors (in their declining state) are subject to. And
when Christ was about to Change that present Dispensation, the Pharisees are
chiefly Noted for their own Traditions, by which the Commands of God were made
of none effect, Mat. 15. 6. And which Traditions were their understanding the
Scripture, according to the Judgment of their Ancients, right or wrong, Mat. 5.
43. their pressing outward washing, (or Baptisms, as in the Greck,) as
Necessary to go Before Communion, Mark 7. 4. And self-imposed Fastings, wherein
the Disciples of John agreed with them, Mark 2. 18. such like Traditions of a
more Refined Nature, (for which there also is some Color from the Scripture,
as then was) are to be watched against.

9. Misunderstanding the Manner of Christ's Coming in his Kingdom, as if it
would be with Observation, or of a stinted Nature, or without Interruption; all
which Mistakes Christ clears up at large, Luke 17. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. It
will not be with Observation, as many will be apt to Fancy, Luke 17. 20. That
is to say, it will not be with any Ignoble kind of secret lying in wait, or
Plotting in an unworthy way; as the same Greek word is oft-times used, Luke 6.
7. and 14. 1. and 20. 20. Acts 9. 24. therefore let no Men of a Private,
Passionate, or Revengeful Spirit look to Prosper, in their pretending to
Advance that Kingly Dispensation; no more than did the Jew^sh or Religious
Robbers, Dan. 11. 14. Since Sion must be Redeemed with Rig^teousness, Isa. 1.
27. which is not wrought by the wrath of Man, J^mes 1. 20. and as an Humorous
Personal Reformation, is nothing like unto a True Conversion. Nor will this
Kingdom Come, with any kind of Heathenish or Superstitious Observation, such as
the Jews or Gentiles used, with Respect unto their Days, and Months, and
Times, and Years, Gal. 4. 10. where the same Greek word is also rendered, Ye
Observe. That is to say, this Kingdom will not Come, with outward show, or
Childish Pomp; so as to Occasion saying, Lo Here, Lo There; this Kingdom being
of an Inward Nature, or within us, Luke 17. 21. as is Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom also, Romans 10. 8. to show the Inwardness of its Nature, and Not its
being (then) in those Pharisees, Luke 17. 21. no more than was that word of
Faith (at such a time) in Israel, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. In such a Manner will Christ's
Kingdom Come; not in a way of Worldly state, but of true Holiness and
Righteousness, or Inward Glory, more than of Outward Greatness, Psalm. 45. 13.
wherein his Spiritual and Temporal Kingdom will Agree, at first especially. Its
Coming also will be self-diffusive, not Limited unto (although beginning in)
some little Corner; but will be a the Lightning, out of the one part under
Heaven, unto the other Luke 17. 24. Such was the speedy self-extending Nature
of his Spiritual Kingdom in the World, Romans 10. 18. Such is its Nature in a
particular Soul, Extending to the whole Man, Body, Soul, and Spirit, 1 These. 5.
23. such also will be the Nature of his Temporal Kingdom, Psalm. 72. 8.
Therefore Christ bids his Disciples not to follow (or go after) those who
are of a poor Narrow Spirit, Luke 17. 23. Confining his Work or Dispensation to
some Lesser Compass; as Partial Reformists do, in a Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical sense, and others in a Civil or Political, as did those Jews of
Old unto Judea: Since the whole of his Government is endlessly increasing, Isa.
9. 7. though first heard of in Bethlehem Ephrata, Psalm. 132. 6. the least among
Judah's Thousands, Mic. 5. 2. Nor will that Kingdom be without its
Interruption, as Christ there signifies, Luke 17. 22., by his Disciples
defiring (in vain) to see one of his Days, who was Then with them. So will it
be, with reference unto his Temporal Kingdom, (which has been formerly proved
at large;) as in Relation to his Spiritual: In which Regard, Souls must look
for a fresh Conversion, upon some Greater Fall or Revolution, Acts 3. 19. The
not Understanding whereof made his Disciples to Rebuke the Bringers of Little
Children to him, Luke 18. 15. and is the Cause why others cannot Enter into his
Kingdom, v. 17. which does consist of none but such, v. 16. Therefore let not
us (or the Churches) be Offended with this Interruption, and that Renovation.

10. Forgetfulness of Old Distinguishing Mercies from the Lord. Thus, with
Respect unto the Latter Days, professing Jews are Taxed for their saying unto
God, Wherein? when he had told them of his former Love, Mal. 1. 2. which he
re-minds them of, in Competition with their Brother Esau, whom he had Hated,
and laid his Mountains waste, Mal. 1. 2, 3. Thus Edom, in the Mystery (or
Israel's Elder Brother, according to the Flesh) has been quite laid aside, of
later Years: yet have not the Men of Judah walked worthy of their being
suffered to continue still. And whereas Edom will (at such a time) hope for the
Return of his Captivity, God will throw down his Buildings, Mal. 1. 4 and will
be Magnified from the Border of Israel, v. 5. or from some out-skirts of these
Jews, as that word [Border] intimates, Ezekiel. 11. 11. although the Generality
of This People also (Now) would soon be laid aside, v. 11. and partly, because
they (virtually) had forgot this great Discriminative Favor.

11. Wishing for the Day of Christ, without Considering the Nature of it. Some
will Desire it is being hastened, in a way of scoffing, Isa. 5. 19. but others,
simply, though to no End, save their own sorrow, Amos 5. 18. And yet, who is
there at this day (among Professors) but seeks it, and is Delighted in its
Expectation? Like those of Old, Mal 3. 1. who yet could not Abide it, nor stand
therein, v. 2. The Reason is, because All Hope to wear some of that
Bridegroom's Favors, as did the Jews, Mat. 20. 21. and the Samaritans also,
John 4. ^^. but Dream not of his fiery Baptism, Mat. 20. 22. In which regard,
that Prophet did not desire the woeful Day, Jer. 17. 16. when others said, v.
15. Let it Come Now: No more should we, if seriously considering, How many
Virgins then will be Defloured, Zech. 14. 2. and how much Loss the saved ones
will then Meet with, besides Affrightment, Zech. 13. 9.

12. A mighty proneness to Impose upon, Observe, and Censure others more than
our selves; and to deal thus with some more than with others, in a sinful way.
Old Age is more for Talk, than Actions; as were the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 3. who
never thought another's Burden Heavy enough, v. 4. And they who mind their own
Work least, are apt to be most busy in Observing others, so as to spy their
very Motes, Mat. 7. 3. which is the Labor of Idle Persons. Yea, Christ and his
Disciples (who least Deserved it) had sharpest Censures, and most Observing
Eyes; (as Harmless Jeremy had from his Jerusalem, Jer. 15. 10. Yea, Evil for
Good, Jer. 18. 20.) while Herod's Incest, and their own gross Enormities were
over-looked. But as this did evince their being Hypocrites in Christ's Opinion;
so is it but a Folly Now, to think of Hiding inward sleightiness by Liveless
Testimonies, and being Dis-satisfied with another's Low Seize, more than
our own. It is a slye Temptation this, since Conscience is pleased with
Reproving sin or Pressing Duty; and Pride is for that Magisterial Act, with
reference unto another: Yea, under this Painted Tomb (of Verbal Declamations)
the Old Man's Rottenness lies undiscovered, Mat. 23. 27, 28. Next unto
Heartless self-condemning, this Formal witnessing unto the Height of Sin and
Duty in another, is one of the saddest Dying Groans (or Symptoms of a Near
approaching Change) among Professors at this Day.

13. Mis-apprehending the Voice of Providence; as to its Principal and Proper
Meaning. Thus, as the Enemies of Sion will not understand God's Thoughts and
Counsel, in bringing them against her, to their own Destruction, Mic. 4. 11,
12, 13. So neither will some in Sion know, wherefore he does Those things unto
them; as is Apparent from their putting that Question to the Prophet, Jer. 6.
10. wherein they are more Ignorant than some of other Nations, Jer. 22. 8, 9.
Such will impute the Assyrian's Coming, unto the Grosser Wickedness of those
among them: Whereas God chiefly sends him against the Hypocrites, Isa. 10. 5,
6. Such will Arraign ('it is like) that Persecuting Persian or Assyrian Spirit,
as by whose means their following Judgments came: But God tells them, it has
been by Their Means, Mal. 1. 9. because of their Complying with the Persian
Prohibition, Hag. 1. 9. And when Deliverance comes, such will be apt to share
its Meritorious Cause among Themselves: Which yet, next to the Lord's own Name,
Ezekiel. 36. 22. is Attributed to a Little Remnant, Isa. 1. 9. a Tenth or Holy
Seed, Isa. 6. 13. and single Cluster upon a Withered Vine, Isa. 65. 8. The Man
of Wisdom will see God's Name, Mic. 6. 9. and Prudent ones shall Understand,
Hos. 14. 9. but none of the Wicked, Dan. 12, 20. which is a sore Temptation.

14. Mistaking the Predominant Duty of such a Time, as did Five of those Spies
to One, when in the Wilderness, Numb. 14. 30. and but Three Hundred in David's
Time did seem to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. And with
Respect unto the Day of Jacob's Trouble, some Ask (as being Ignorant) what God
would have them do, Mic. 6. 6? Ghessing at several things, (as Thousands of
Rams, Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil; yea, their Firstborn, v. 7.) which in their
Eye were of the Greatest Value; and yet All wrong, v. 8. though such had Meant
according to their Proffer, which yet is Questionable. Thus at this Day, some
count a Witness against the Papists; others against the Prelates, others
against the Hearing of Conformists, etc. to be the Principal Duty of this
present Time, with reference unto which, they Nobly proffer the Sacrificing of
Ten Thousand Lives. But if our Going out of Old Jerusalem be a present Duty,
Mic. 4. 30. that seems (Now) to be Predominant, as being of a Later Date,
most Rarely Practiced, and most Opposed by Professors, by which Time-Truths are
to be known, when Grosser Worldly Persecutions are suspended, as they Now are.
The not Understanding of which things (belonging to our Peace) was that which
made Christ Weep over Old Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41, 42.

15. Aptness in some, (who still Continue in Dying Old Jerusalem) to Bless
themselves in such a worthless Portion, and Deeply to Censure others, (although
the Son of Man's own Brethren) as being far from God, (Compared with
themselves) because of their having Gone out of that Wicked City, Ezekiel. 11. 15.
before those other; although God's Glory was then Removed out of the Temple,
Ezekiel. 10. 19. All which befell a little before Jerusalem's Sacking, Ezekiel. 12.
11. Something like unto which, does Usher in Christ's Coming in these Latter
Days, Zech. 14. 2, 3. One of the Chief among which Vapourers, Ezekiel. 11. 1. was
struck with sudden Death, v. 13. to signify the Doom of all his Fellows, v.
10. who did Encourage the rest to Build, presuming that Day was not yet Near,
v. 2, 3. and who did therefore thus Bless themselves and Censure others, v. 15.
Thus will some Boast of their Abiding in that state, from whence God's Glory is
Departed; and Curse their Choiser Brethren, for being in Babylon, or Consusion:
wherein yet God will be (unto these Censured ones) a little Sanctuary, Ezekiel.
11. 16. and will give Them (in his due time) the Land of Israel, v. 17. when
their Deriders will be sadly Recompensed, whose present Worship is called
Detestable and Abominable, v. 21.

16. Lingering too long in Spiritual Sodom, as sometimes Lot did, Genesis 19. 16.
whose Day was Typical of that wherein the Son of Man will be Revealed, Luke 17.
28, 29, 30. The Reason of whose Lingering then (perhaps) might be his casting
about to save some of his better stuff; like unto which will be the Temptation
of some others in this day of Christ, Luke 17. 31, 32. Thus will some (Then) Go
forth at Last, as Lot and his Family did, but not at the first bidding, Genesis
19. 15. till some Good Angels lay hold upon them, and Bring them out, v. 16. Or
it is very probable, Lot's Daughters Lingered for their New Betrothed Husbands,
Genesis 19. 14. their Mother for them, and so Lot for them All: Thus Prejudicial
(unto a Spiritual Quickness) are Bad Examples; and Natural or Carnal Friends.
But as he is an unwise Son, who stays long in the place of Breaking forth,
Hos. 13. 13. So let such Lingerers bear in mind, how hardly Lot was saved, Genesis
19. 23, 2^. more for the sake of Abraham, than for his own, v 29. upon strict
Terms, v. 17. not having Faith sufficient for his Duty, v. 18. nor yet security
in his own choice, v. 30. and now his Lingering Wife perished in the way, v. 26.
whilst he and his Daughters Lived in a Cave, v. 30. unto their own perpetual
shame, v. 36. and Israel's being vexed afterward with their Incestuous
Offspring, v. 37, 38. with Zeph. 2. 8, 9, 10.

17. Enquiring the Mind of God with Idols in Heart, and stumbling blocks of
Iniquity before ones Face. Thus did some of the Jewish Elders, Ezekiel. 14. 1. 3.
who were then carried into Babylon; as is apparent, from their Coming to this
Prophet, v. 1. and sitting probably in Ezekiel's House, as Ezekiel. 8. 1. who then
was in Chaldea, Ezekiel. 1. 3. though sometimes (Visionally) in Jerusalem, Ezekiel.
11. 1. but Now was brought (in Vision) back again into Chaldea, v. 24. So that
these Hypocritical Enquirers were Persons carried out of Old Jerusalem, before
the rest, as some may be whose Hearts are not sincere. Which Idols in their
Heart (when they did thus Enquire of God) might be, partly, their being
Resolved (Before hand) what to Believe; viz. what Hananiah and such false
Prophets said, out of their own Hearts, Ezekiel. 13. 2. and boldly Fathered it
upon God, v. 7. which therefore was fitly called an Idol, Ezekiel. 14. 3.

18. Aptness to Question God's Design of Laying Old Jerusalem quite aside:
which seems to be hinted by the probable matter of their Enquiry
beforementioned, Ezekiel. 14. 1. and as may be collected from God's following
Answer, viz. Whether Jerusalem was wholly Now to be laid Waste, (as Jeremy and
this Prophet had declared;) or whether themselves should not be suddenly
brought out of Babylon back again to Old Jerusalem, as Hananiah had foretold,
Jer. 28, 1, 2, 3, 4: so loath are some to leave their ancient Temple altogether,
till they shall see it quite Demolished. With reference unto which, God tells
the Residue of those in Babylon, Ezekiel. 14. 22. that Old Jerusalem's Ruins must
go on, though Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, Ezekiel. 14. 14. 18. 20; and her
Inhabitants must be cut off, v. 21; excepting a Remnant, who shall come unto
these in Babylon, and Comfort them (with the sight of their Ways and Doings)
concerning Old Jerusalem's Just Destruction, v. 22, 23. Which staggering at
the Present state of things, was that which John and his Disciples labored
under, when the Preparatory or Destructive part of Christ's Administration
(answering to that of Babylon) was Begun: as is Apparent from their asking, Art
thou He? Mat. 11. 3. The Reason of which Doubting was, John's being Now cast
into Prison, Mat. 11. 2; who Formerly had Witnessed unto that Truth, Joh. 1.
29. but was Now at some Kind of Loss; whom therefore Christ then called a Reed,
that was shaken with the VVind, Mat. 11. 7; and by which Character John and his
Followers (at such a time) are to be Known. And from Christ's Answer may be
gathered, how scrupling Baptists may be satisfied, that Christ is He, in case
that Gospel is Now preached (only) to the Poorer sort; and if the Blind and
Lame, and Leapers, and Deaf and Dead (among them) be strangely wrought upon,
Mat. 11. 4. 5; which argues his Over-turning Dispensation to be Now on foot,
according to the Scriptures, Isa. 61. 1. and 35. 6.

19. Unsteadiness in that (upon a fresh Temptation) which has been Manfully
Returned unto, or Begun. This was their Case of Old; who did Begin to build the
Temple, or Open Worship, Ezra 4. 1. till the Assyrian spirit in that Day, v.
2. prevailed so far as to prohibit them, and whereupon that Work did cease, v.
24. Yea, when they did Return thereunto, Ezra 5. 2. upon Zachary's and Haggai's
prophesying, v. 1. before the Prohibition was Reversed, v. 3. yet they did fall
off again, (upon that fresh Discouragement, v. 3, 4.) as may be gathered from
those Prophets writings, although it be not Expressly mentioned. Since they
did First Return unto that Work, upon the Twenty fourth Day of the Sixth
month, Hag. 1. 15; and yet upon the same day three Months after, Hag. 2. 10.
that Prophet was sent again, to Pronounce that people unclean, v. 14. and to
declare the Reason of their continuing Judgment to That Day, v. 15, 16.
because until That very Day there was not a Stone laid in the Temple, v. 15.
Which necessarily inferres their having Again Desisted (upon some fresh
Temptation) from that work, which had been at the first Begun, and which more
Lately was Returned to; unto the making of them all unclean, and the Reviving
of their former Judgments, Hag. 1. 9. and Loss of all their former Labor, or
making the Temple's Foundation to Commence from their last Twenty fourth Day,
Hag. 2. 18. in which they Lastingly did first Return unto this Work; and from
which time, their Adversaries could not make them cease, Ezra 5. 5. And though
my self am satisfied, that This has been Already in Our days, sufficiently to
make unclean; yet Now a little time may show, Whether that fresh Desisting be
not (by some) to be Repeated: and if it be, then let those Three forenamed
Motives be remembered by us, to Prevent our falling under that Temptation, in
case fresh Persecution shall arise.

20. Shortness of Spirit; or being unable to Hold pace with Christ, unto the
End of his designed Journey. It is with some Men, as with Posthorses, who have
their Stages, beyond which they will not be made to go, with switch or spur,
and so their Rider is necessitated to take other. This is foretold at large,
(with reference unto the Latter days,) by that remarkable Vision concerning
several Horses, of diverse Colors, by which their spirit or mettle is commonly
judged of, Zech. 6. 2, 3. and as they were Types of diverse Spirits, v. 5. The
first of which Horses are of a Red color, v. 2. which is a Natural symptom of
their being VVashy in the Letter: and suitably whereunto, we read of Nothing
Done by that first Spirit or sort of Horses. The second are Black, Zech. 6. 2;
which is a far Better Color in the Letter: The third are White, v. 3. which
also Excells the Red; and suitably whereunto, these Black and White are said to
Go forth into the North (one After the other) v. 6. and to Accomplish what they
went about, in that Particular Northern Quarter, v. 8. The Fourth and last sort
of Horses, are the Grisled and the Bay, Zech. 6. 3. whose Colors do evince
their being of the Finest Mettle that is, compared with the Former Three:
though of these Two, the Bay is Best. Which Grisled and Bay, do seem to have
been sometimes Joined together, in One Chariot at the First, Zech. 6. 3. but at
the Last they part, as is apparent, v. 6, 7. which shows them to be of
Differing Spirits between Themselves, as well as with respect to all the
former. Only the Grisled (or Dapple-gray) being Better than the Black or
White, go forth unto the South, Zech. 6. 6. or Nearer to the Sun; though These
are also satisfied with their respective single quarter. Whereas the Bay (whose
Color is the Best of All,) are said to go forth, and seek to go, that they
might walk To and Fro, through the Earth; who are Bid so to do, and they Do
so, Zech. 6. 7. Thus will some spirits Quickly Tire, and Do Nothing: Others
may Gradually Excel and be of use; but yet are Limited to some one Quarter:
whereas the Largest spirited ones (Alone) will carry Christ (in his Triumphing
Chariot,) and Accompany him Throughout his Progress. But scarcely One of Five,
(as in that Vision,) or only Two of Twelve, (as other-where,) will evidence
their being of that Other Spirit, by following him thus Fully, Number. 14. 24.
though None but such will enter Canaan, v. 30. which is a fair Warning unto
All, Heb. 4. 1. Mat. 24. 13.

21. Aptness to be Offended with Christ, as at his first Appearing; and upon
such Accounts. Thus will some be Offended with him, as were the Jews, when
Herod was so, Mat. 2. 2, 3. fearing lest the Offended Romans would therefore
Take away their Place and Nation, Joh. 11. 48. Others, because of his being
Counted Joseph's son, Mat. 13. 55, 57; as some are at this Day, who only see
the Hand of Man (but not of God,) in what has come to pass in Later years,
answering unto Christ's Birth or first Production. Others, because Humane
Traditions are not Observed, but sharply Taxed; as were the Pharisees, Mat. 15.
2, 3. 12; and some in these our days, who cannot bear a being Contradicted by
a Differing Practice, much less to be dealt Plainly with. Others, because of
some more High or spiritual Doctrine, as were the Capennaites, Joh. 6. 58. 61.
and Many at this Day, who are Offended with the Hearing of any Other Manna than
what their Fathers have been wont to eat. Others, because of Persecution; which
makes Many to be Offended, Mat. 24. 9, 10: and in particular, unrooted Flashy
Hearers, Mat. 13. 20, 21; Yea John himself, when he is once become a Prisoner,
Mat. 11. 2, 3. 6; nay and Christ's own Disciples too, Mat. 26. 31. however
Confident they Never would be so, v. 33, 35; Thus will Christ be for an Offense
to both the Houses of Israel, Isa. 8. 14: but as, Woe be to him by whom Offenses
come, so Woe be to the World because thereof, Mat. 18. 7; and Blessed is the
Non-offended one, Mat. 11. 6.

22. Contentment with Lesser Duties, in the Neglect of Greater. Thus did the
Pharisees tithe their Mint and Annise and Cummin, Mat. 23. 23. and Rue and all
manner of Herbs, or Trivial things, Luke 11. 42; accounting This to be the
Tithe of All they did possess, Luke 18. 12. who therefore said, Wherein? when
God impeached them of Robbing him, viz. in his more Principal Tithes and
Offerings, Mal. 3. 8. at least they did Omit the Exercise of Judgment and
Mercy, and Faith, Mat. 23. 23; or Judgment and the Love of God, Luke 11. 42;
which in Obedience unto God, they should have done Each toward Other, in more
Weighty cases. Thus did those Daily offer upon their Altar, Hag. 2. 14. to
salve the Neglect of Temple-work, which yet was Greater: and thus is Active
Duty Multiplied, to gain thereby a being Dispensed with from that which is of a
Passive Nature: Yea thus some boast of being Charitable unto Other Sufferers,
as did the Pharisees of Building the Martyrs Tombs, Mat. 24. 29; who yet
Themselves did Persecute the Present Truth, and thereby evidenced their being
those Former Persecutors Children, v. 31, 32. because they Owned them as
Fathers, (whom they should have Disowned,) and Did Accordingly. But if the
Least omission (Justified) does make men Least in Christ's account, Mat. 5. 19;
much more with reference unto VVeightier matters, such as Time-truths and
Duties are; and by which Rule, men have been Always (Chiefly) to be Known, as to
the Visibility of their spiritual State, in point of being Reprobated, Rev. 17.
8. or Elected, v. 14.

23. Imperfect Reformation, or self-Purifying, from contracted Guilt. Thus Old
Jerusalem is likened to a Pot, whose s^um was in it still, though boiled up by
fiery Dispensations, but yet not Gone out of it; which causes her being
Brought out, without the saving of any One piece by casting Lots, Ezekiel. 24. 6:
that being the Land that was Not Cleansed, nor Rained upon (or Washed) in the
Day of Indignation, Ezekiel. 22. 24. which made the Lord to gather them in his
Anger into his Fire, and there to leave them, v. 20. What Carefulness,
self-clearing, Indignation, Fear, Desire, Zeal, Revenge, does Godly sorrow
work, 2 Cor. 7. 11? but self-Abasing Exercises are soon thought to be
sufficient, especially by those who have most need to Multiply them. Thence are
such most Impatient, if not Immediately Restored to Communion-acts: whereas
that True returning Prodigal thought himse^f No More worthy to be called a Son,
Luke 15. 21. But if a Fathers spitting calls for seven Days Shame, much more
does self-contracted Leprosy; and it is a Mercy to be Then Received in again,
Numb. 12. 14. so long must self-polluters Purge Themselves before their
Offerings will be Accepted, Ezekiel. 43. 26, 27: therefore God calls for Mourning
Apart at such a time, Zech. 12. 12: nor may (perhaps) that work be thoroughly
Ever done, if not at First, Ezekiel. 24. 13.

24. Aptness in some to beg a Liberty of Resting in the Plains, or somewhat
short of where the Lord would have them be. Christ bids (in the Day of Old
Jerusalem) to flee into the Mountains, Mat. 24. 16: such also was his Order
unto Lot, Genesis 19. 17. in Sedom's Day, which answers unto Christ's. But Lot
then said, Not so my Lord, Genesis 19. 18; I cannot escape unto the Mountain, v.
19; let me continue (at some Distance) in the Plain, at Zoar; v. 20. and which
was sadly granted, v. 21. Thus some would be content to leave a wicked Sodem,
(especially when Forced thence;) but fain would have some other City or
Capacity to go into, fearing some Evil in the Mountain; as if Christ had
forgotten to consult for their Accommodation. These may have their Desire
granted, as Lot had his; but mind what followed, for our Admonition. Lot had no
lasting satisfaction in his saucy Choice, but went at last into the Mountain,
Genesis 19. 30. through slavish fear. Nor had he Wit or Will to go thence to his
Uncle Abraham, who lived not far off, Genesis 19. 27; but dwelt there in a Cave,
half Buried whilst Alive, with his two Daughters, v. 30. unto the Rotting of
his Name to all Posterity, v. 36, 37, 38. Let those mind this who will Dispute
the Case with Christ, as to their being in the Open Field, which they Must come
into at length, and upon doleful Disadvantages, viz. Unquietness, and being
left Alone, if not an After-falling into Sodom's Sin; yea possibly to be there
Judged, in the Borders of their Land, Zech. 11. 11.

25. Trusting to one's Own strength (or Resolution) in a Trying Hour. In which
regard, the Mighty man (at such a Time) is warned, Not to Glory in his Might,
Jer. 9. 23. And as a fuller Evidence hereof, let us Observe, the sad self
confidence of Peter and the Rest, Mat. 26. 25. upon Christ's telling them, v.
31. they All should be (That Night) Offended because of Him. Thus does the
Assyrians coming (into Immanuel's Land,) occasion Judah's looking to their
Armor, Isa. 22. 8. and making up their own Breaches, v. 9, 10. and being
supplied with store of Waters, v. 9, 10: who then are Jocund, v. 13. as being
Confident, although such look not unto God, v. 11. But Christ had those to
Watch and Pray, Mat. 26. 41; whose heels were soon struck up, by standing thus
upon their Tip-toes, v. 26. for Our Admonition, lest We be also Tempted.

26. Distrusting God; and his Provision, because of its being Contemptible in
an Eye of Sense and Carnal Reason. This was their Case of Old, who did Refuse
the Waters of Shiloah, that went softly, Isa. 8. 6; and as there was therefore
Joy (as it is in the Hebrew) in their Adversaries, (supposing it an Easy
thing, to Take Jerusalem which was so weakly Fortified,) so did the Men of
Judah slight that Mean Provision, and rather chose Associating with Assyrians,
unto their Ruin, v. 7, 8, 9. The Main of which Confederacy (in these our Days)
may have been made already; but to prevent its further possible degree, at
least continuance; its being Now Mentioned, may be of Use. Which Shiloah, or
Siloah, Neh. 3. 15. (the same with Siloam, John 9. 7.) was a small Rivulet,
arising from the foot of Sion, David's City, Neh. 3. 15. and therefore had a
special Instituted Virtue in it, (on Occasions,) as to Restore that Blind Man's
sight, John 9. 7. so to secure These at such a time, in Competition with
unsanctified or unlawful Means. And so the Lord has sent, (as Siloam does
signify, John 9. 7.) sufficient means for our Security, in time of Danger,
(such as are sitting still, Isa. 30. 7. and making him our Dread, Isa. 8. 13,
14.) which yet are apt to be Refused (at such a time) by unbelieving Jews,
though to their Ruin, who do Persist therein.

27. A making Light of Time-Temptations, and counting Duties of that Nature to
be merely Circumstantial. Christ's dearest ones are little ones, Mat. 18. 6.
and his Meat Offering was Green Ears of Corn, Lev. 2. 14. such are Time-Truths
and Duties; which therefore Man makes least Account of. This made the Pharisees
to slight Believing, that Christ was He; because they counted Faith on the
Messiah (in the General) to be the Substance; and that other but a
Circumstance. If Israel (in the Wilderness) had known, that not going up to
Canaan (at such a time) had been so Great a sin, Deuteronomy. 1. 32, 35. they would
not (certainly) have made so Light thereof; nor of their Tarrying in Old
Jerusalem afterward, Jer. 21. 8, 9. The Reason of whose sleightiness in that
Regard, might be, (as at this day it is,) because they had the Law Completely
given before; which though it spoke of these Time-truths to come, John 5. 46.
yet did they place the Main of Faith and Duty, in that which Commonly was Known
and Practiced of Old: through which Mistake, they Died in their sins, Numb. 14.
32. Jer. 21 9. John 8. 24. and wherein no true Saints (in their Respective
Ages) finally Miscarried, but thereby were Distinguished from Others.

28. Hard thoughts of God, because of his Severity at such a time: As in those
Jews of Old, who did evince it, by calling that Word [a Burden] which Jeremy
uttered against Jerusalem, Jer. 23. 33. the using of which Phrase is sadly
Threatened, v. 38, 39. and by their calling of his ways Unequal, Ezekiel. 33. 17.
for his being so Exact, v. 10. and not regarding their former Duty, v. 12, 13.
and by their Mourning one toward another (in a Pining way) for what the Lord
had done to Old Jerusalem, though stoutness of Spirit would not let them (at
the first) to do so Openly, Ezekiel. 24. 22, 23. and by their solemn Fasting
afterward for many Years together, Zech. 8. 19. viz. in the Fourth Month,
because the City was Then Taken, Jer. 52. 6. and in the Fifth Month, because
the Temple was Then Burnt, Jer. 52. 12, 13. and in the Seventh Month, because
of Gedaliah's being Then slain, Jer. 41. 1, 2. and in the Tenth Month, because
the City Then was first Besieged, Jer. 52. 4. Thus do some count it very hard,
that such a particular failing is so taken Notice of; and not their Manifold
Service other ways: Who therefore Fret and Pine away through Inward Grief and
Vexing; yea, therefore have such their Fasts, as had the Pharisees and John's
Disciples, because Old things went then to wrack, and wherein Christ's
Disciples could not join, Mat. 9. 14, 15. But let such know, it is Their way
that is unequal, Ezekiel. 33. 17. according unto which the Lord will Judge Them,
for thus Charging Him, v. 20. since he had given them Timely warning, v. 11.
and was yet willing to forgive, v. 18. in case they Timely did Return, before
his Door was shut.

29. Despondency at least, or want of Due Composure; because of the
Bridegroom's Tarrying, and Trials still continuing, if not Increasing. Joshua
himself, when in that Typical Valley of Achor, did sadly Wish, that he had been
Content to Dwell on Jordan's other side, Josh. 7. 7. At such a Time poor David
also did Conclude, that he should perish by the Hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. And
Hezekiah thought (in the Assyrian's Day,) that Sion would go nigh to Die in
Travail, Isa. 37. 3. Derided Jeremy was self-suspended, if not silenced, Jer.
20. 7, 8, 9. and those in Babylon gave up themselves for Hopeless, Ezekiel. 37.
11. searing their Heightened swelling Expectations would prove at last a false
Conception, Isa. 26. 17, 18. or Groundless Trusting, Luke 24. 21. Thus will not
Faith (at such a Time) be found on Earth, Luke 18. 8. which shows what All (the
very Best) have need to Watch against. And as a Motive thereunto, it else will
sadly signify, since all these fainting Holy ones were in the Issue
Over-comers, and whose Reviving Cordials (prescribed by the Lord himself,) are
therefore Registered to be Our Helps.

30. Excessive Fear, when that Day comes. Then will the Nations be Distressed,
and their Hearts failing them for Fear, Luke 21. 25, 26. Then will the
Babylonians Faces be as Flames, Isa. 13. 8. the sinners in Sion also will be
then afraid, Isa. 33. 14. Yea, Moses then had much ado to make God's Israel
stand, they were so Fearful, Exodus ^4. 10. 13. Then will be the Completing of
that Earthquake, Rev. 11. 13. at which the People Generally will flee, Zech.
14. 5. Yea, God will then Roar out of Sion, and shake the Heavens as well as
Earth, Joel 3. 16. which needs must Terrify. But yet the Saints Amazing Fear
(at such a Time) will be their sin, because They are Then bid to Look up, and
Lift up their Heads, Luke 21. 28. Yea, want of Confidence (in such a Day) will
Evidence their not Abiding in him, 1 John 2. 28. who will Then be his People's
Hope and strength, Joel 3. 16. And he that would Rest in that Day of Trouble,
must Tremble Now, Hab. 3. 16. and Pray, that God would not be Then a Terror to
him, Jer. 17. 17. and put Iniquity far away, so shall he not Fear, Job 11. 14,
15.

31. Unwillingness in some to own that Hand of God upon them, which they will
then Feel, but not Acknowledge. Thus when his Hand is Listed up, some will not
see: Isa. 26. 11. nor lay to Heart their Sin or Punishment, Jer. 12. 11. Yea,
when the Lord shall take from Old Jerusalem's Adherents, their Strength, the
Joy of their Glory, the Desire of their Eyes, and that whereupon they set their
minds, their Sons and Daughters, Ezekiel. 24. 25. yet will they not Mourn nor
Weep, save in a more secret way, v. 23. nor go Bare headed, as Lev. 10. 6. or
barefooted, as 2 Samuel 15. 30. nor with a covered Lip, as Mic. 3. 7. nor eat
the Bread of Men, as Jer. 16. 7. all which were Signs of Mourning. But let such
know, they shall be made to see, unto their shame (at last) and sorrow, Isa.
26. 11. Yea, therefore the whole Land shall be made Desolate, Jer. 12. 11. from
one End of it to the other, v. 12. and they shall therefore Pine away (through
inward Mourning and Vexation) for their Iniquities, Ezekiel. 24. 25.

32. The Painting of an Harlots Face, and calling her (then) a Spouse of
Christ. Thus were the Pharisees (in Christ's Day) like unto Whited Sepulchers;
as full of Inward Rottenness as ever, only New Whited with an Outside Beauty,
Mat. 23. 27, 28. Thus were the Generality of Professors (then) like to an House
Swept and Garnished, but Empty still, Mat. 12. 44. and sadlier Re-possessed
afterward than ever, v. 45. Thus also was their Temple (lately) Beautified
with Goodly Buildings, wherewith Christ's own Disciples were Enamoured, Mark
13. 1. q. d. Must we now leave this stately Temple? Which yet was (then) a Den
of Thieves more than before, Mat. 21. 13. and near its utter Dissolution, Mark
13. 2. Yea, thus we Read of Jezebel, Rev. 2. 20. (with reference unto these
Latter days) Resembling that self-painting Harlot, 2 Kings 9. 30. who did (Now)
call her self a Prophetess, Rev. 2. 20. and is Described by her Teaching and
Seducing Christ's Servants, to Eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, Rev. 2. 20. or
to make light of that for which God does pronounce Professors to be unclean, as
Hag. 2. 14. They who are Now of such a Spirit, are justly to be called the
Jezebels of this Present Day; whatever Paint they have upon their Faces, or by
what Name soever they are called. And as a warning unto such (in these our
days) let them consider (before it be too late) how sadly Jezebel is Threatened
there, Rev. 2. 22. together with her Friends, v. 20 and Children, v. 23.

33. Aptness in some (in the Assyrian's day) to go down into Egypt, to get
Relieved from Threatening Ashur; as is foretold at large in Isaiah's 30th. and
31th. Chapters. Which Egypt was the Old House of Bondage to God's Israel; and
fitly Answers (in these Latter Days) unto some former Persecuting Interest,
which some may seek to curry Favor with, to save them from a Later and more
Cruel Adversary. Thus did some Trust on Egypt, in the days of Hezekiah, or else
the Assyrian lied, 2 Kings 18. 24. and in the days of Zedekiah, to be sure; by
means of which Egyptians (then) the Babylonians Siege was raised for a while,
Jer. 37. 5. but came again, and sacked Jerusalem, v. 8. Thus in the Assyrian's
day, Isa. 30. 31. some will go down to Egypt, v. 2. and will not be withheld
by any means, v. 9, 10, 11. though sitting still (in that regard) would be
their strength, v. 7. and safety, v. 13, 14. But those Egyptians Help will
prove in vain, Isa. 30. 3. 7. because they are but Flesh, Isa. 31. 3. and were
sought unto in God's stead, v. 1. Yea, contrary to an Old express Command,
Deuteronomy. 17. 16. therefore both he that Helps, and is Helped, shall fall down
together, Isa. 31. 3. and Flee, one Thousand of them, at the Rebuke of one,
Isa. 30. 17. Whereas, they who then Trust in God, shall be Defended by him,
Isa. 31. 4, 5. and they shall see the Assyrian beaten down by God's own voice,
Isa. 30. 31. and his Young Men shall be Discomfited, Isa. 31. 8. his Princes
also shall be afraid because of the Ensign, v. 9. Yea, some (who have escaped
Old Jerusalem's Plagues) will choose going into Egypt still (through causeless
Fear) rather than to continue in Judea. This was their Case of Old, Jer. 41.
17, 18. because the Ammonites had Hired Ishmael to Murder Gedaliah, Jer. 40.
14. through his own Folly, v. 16. wherein the Chaldeans had no Hand. Thus when
Jerusalem is Sacked in these Latter days, some may Impute the Plotting of
Malignant Ammonites (against them still) to their Abiding in that state of
Desolation: Yea, notwithstanding God's Command, and Promise to Deliver them, as
Jer. 42. 11. whom they Dissemblingly Enquired of, v. 20. and solemnly protested
a Compor^^g with, v. 5, 6. So prone are Carnal Israelites to be in Love with
Egypt still, (their Ancient state, and where their Heart has Always been, in
times of Trial;) as having never yet been truly Humbled for their Old
Abominations, Jer. 44. 10. But as a Warning unto others in our Days, let us
consider, their Growing sin, Jer. 44. 16, 17. and Threatened Judgments, Jer. 42.
18.

34. Despising the Day of small Beginnings. Thus did the Jews, when they first
Built the Second Temple, Ezra 4. 12. something like unto which our Eyes have
seen, of Later Years, or with Respect unto John Baptist's Dispensation in our
days. Yea, when that Temple-work Revived afterward, those did still Labor of
that Old Distemper, as seems to be hinted, Hag. 2. 3. and Zech. 4. 10.
because this Second Temple had not that Gold and Silver, Hag. 2. 8. which was
in Solomon's; nor was this made (like That) of Hewn stones, but only Rolling
ones, Ezra 5. 8. as in the Margin and Original; nor had This any Priest with
Vrim and with Thummim, Ezra 2. 63. (or such who did pretend to Absolute
Infallibility) as had the first. But let them who thus Labor (being Tempted)
know, that Christ was (at the first) a Child; so will his Kingdom be: And those
were Unbelievers, who for that Reason did Despise him, Isa. 53. 1, 2, 3. and
that This work is in his Hand, who will Complete it, unto their Joy, Zech. 4.
10. and will not fail or be Discouraged, Isa. 42. 4. till he had made the
Second Temple Greatest, Hag. 2. 9.

35. Not Knowing Christ, at his Appearing in these Latter days, no more than
did the World, at his first Birth, John 1. 10. nor his Disciples, at his
Resurrection, Luke 24. 37. Among the Many Thousands of the Seventh Trumpet's
Hearers, how Blessed will that People be, (and therefore but a few) who know
that Joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. when Christ shall Come as King, v. 18. and
Rev. 11. 15! Some took John Baptist to be Christ, John 1. 20. Others took
Christ to have been John, Mat. 16. 14. So may some (in our days) Confound the
Bridegroom and his Harbinger; and so not know the Proper Name of such a
Dispensation, through self-contracted (if not wilful) Ignorance. And which
Mistake will not be Trivial; since they (and they alone) who know the Joyful
sound, shall walk, O Lord, in the Light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 89. 15. in
thy Name shall they Joy, and be Exalted in thy Righteousness, v. 16. Whereas
Mistakers (in that regard) can neither look to share in those peculiar
Privileges, nor yet to Understand their special Duty, which is Depending upon
Knowledge of the Times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.

36. Deserring that Day, through Unbelief; or being too much in Love with
Present things. Thus some will not Believe for Joy, as Luke 24. 41. Others (for
Anguish) will not Hearken, as Exodus 6. 9. and others because of visible
Improbabilities, as being too Mavelous in such a day, Zech. 8. 6. This will
betray some into Sensuality, Mat. 24. 48. others will therefore say, Come, Let
us Build, Ezekiel. 11. 3. and others, that Visions (or Discourses) of that Nature,
are to no Effect, Ezekiel. 12, 22, 23. But this Delaying it, (though only in
one's Heart) is said to be the Character of an Evil Servant, Mat. 24. 48. and
one of those, Ezekiel. 11. 1. who said, It is not Near, v. 3. was therefore struck
with sudden Death, v. 13. Yea, this Deferring of it, is quite contrary to
Christ's Design, in this whole Parable and other Scriptures; which therefore
had need be watched against, as that which is the Bane of watching in the
General.

37. Groundless Presuming upon Mercy, to the last. Thus Old Jerusalem's
Inhabitants were apt to Fancy, that the Chaldeans should depart, Jer. 37. 9.
because they had withdrawn a while, through fear of Pharaoh's Army, v. 5. and
would have had the Prophet to Comply with them, v. 3. Thus in all probability,
those Ante-deluvian Sons of God, Genesis 6. 2. did Hope, they should not All be
Washed away, according to the Rigor of that Sentence, v. 7, else would they
not have so Neglected Hastening into that Ark; the like Figure whereunto (in
point of saving us in such a Day) is Now Christ's Baptism or Dispensation, and
our being gathered up into it, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. Distinct from John's, as at
Christ's first Appearing, Mat. 3. 11. and as is hinted in that 1 Pet. 3. 21,
Yea, when Jerusalem was laid waste, yet the Inhabiters of those wastes presumed
they should Inherit them, because of their being Many, and Abraham's Children,
Ezekiel. 33. 24. though of the same Spirit with those Before, v. 25, 26. who
therefore were alike Destroyed, v. 27. And thus will Foolish Virgins Hope, that
so many Persons and Professors of their Parts and Gifts, and seeming Graces,
will not be wholly laid aside, until the Door shut upon them will Decide the
Controversy. This is that Great Temptation, with reference unto which, Christ
bids All to VVatch at such a time.

38. Aptness to call in Question the Exercise of God's Disposing Providence, in
such an Absolute Confused state of things. Foundations being out of Course,
Psalm. 82. 5. what can the Righteous do, Psalm. 11. 3? Yea, therefore some will
say, Where is the God of Judgment, Mal. 2. 17? The Earth will then be without
Form, and void, the Heavens also will have no Light, Jer. 4. 23. as in the
Chaos, at the first, Genesis 1. 2. which needs must have Astonished Adam, if he
had Then been Made; much more his Fallen Posterity, who will be Now in Being.
But though God is no Author of Confusion in a Moral sense, 1 Cor. 14. 33. yet
does he own his being the Creator of Afflicting Darkness, Isa. 45. 7. who also
can improve all manner of Darkness and Confusion, to Aggravate the Luster of
his following Light and Order, as in the first Creation. Yea, those are
Weariers of him (and therefore will be soon cast off,) who do thence Argue, his
being Absent, as well as They, who therefore say, He is Delighted in Evil
Doers, Mal. 2. 17.

39. Eminent Professors (or such as Joshua the High Priest was) will then be
apt to be Resisted (yea, to be Overcome, without Christ's Help) by Satan, Zech.
3. 1, 2. or under Satan's Dispensation, in a Revelation sense, Rev. 2. 10.
which Answers to that time in Zechary. The Matter of which Contest, Relates
to the Body of Moses, as is more plainly signified, Jude 9. where this very
Form of words [The Lord Rebuke thee] is quoted hence. Nor need we stick at his
being called [Michael] in Jude, who is here [Called the Lord] Zech. 3. 2. since
Christ is granted to be meant, by that word Michael, Rev. 12. 7. as Mr.
Brightman there confesses, although he does Distinguish them, Dan. 12. 1.
However, Christ might speak this in Zech. 3. 2. and Michael (or a Created
Angel, Employed by Christ in this Contest) might speak the same words
afterward, as Jude Relates. And so, by [Moses his Body] is meant his
Ministration; which Joshua (then) was Tempted to keep up in Rigor, or else to
lay it quite aside: As he was a Tie of others in these Latter Days, Comparing
Times with Times.

First, Joshua might be Tempted to keep that Ministration up in Rigor, as to
the Tabernacle-state (in Moses his Time) in Competition with the Present
Temple; because the Building of this Latter (viz. the Temple) was Now
Prohibited, and therefore Perilous. Thus have some Argued of Later times, (or
since the Prohibition issued forth) that a Less Solemn, and more Private
Worship (such as that in the Tabernacle in the Days of Moses) was more
Agreeable unto their Present Wilderness condition, than what is of an Open
Temple-Nature. Yea, some are Tempted to Observe Moses his Seventh-day-Sabbaths,
and other Ordinances, upon this Account.

Or, Secondly, Joshua might then be Tempted to lay that Instituted Ministration
quite aside, because of Troubles in the Keeping of it up: Pretending its having
been Abolished in Babylon. And thus some may be Now Tempted to conceive, that
Gospel-Institutions are no more to be Regarded, as having been carried into
Babylon, and not to be Restored again.

But Joshua Overcame, in that Contest; and Christ will give an Effectual Rebuke
to Satan, on the behalf of such, as he then did: which is good News to Them,
but sad to Others, who are in bondage unto that Temptation; since the Neglect
of typical Temple-worship (then) was so severely witnessed against; and since
the Reviving of Moses his Authority (Now) is so directly cross unto a Gospel
rule, Rom 7. 4. 7; and since the Restoration of Gospel-Institutions (after the
full Return of Babylon's Captivity in the Mystery) is so Expressly signified,
Rev. 11. 19. and in a Way of full Agreement with that in the Letter of Old. And
Presently upon the Rebuking of which Temptation, Zech. 3. 2. Joshua was
clothed with Change of Raiment, v. 4. and had a Promise of Presiding in
Christ's House, and Walking with those who then stood by, v. 7. viz. the
Angels, v. 5.

40. A Stealing of the Word of God (by some) each from his Neighbor; as in the
Day of Old Jerusalem, Jer. 23. 30. which Word of God (in all probability) was,
that Word which Jeremy had there declared (a little before) concerning the
VVhirlwind of God, that was gone forth in Fury, to fall upon the Head of that
wicked Generation, Jer. 23. 19. and not to Return, until the thoughts of his
Heart were Executed and Performed, v. 20. This Word the Devil (in his
Instruments) endeavors to Steal (or Catch away) from others, as Mat. 13. 19:
Partly, by making a Derision of his Message, Jer. 20. 8. and loading his Person
with false Reports, v. 10. that People might not Hear him, as Joh. 10. 20: and
Partly by substituting their False Word instead of his, Jer. 23. 25. with
utmost Confidence, v. 31. on purpose to make the People Forget the Other, v.
27; yea (possibly) offering to Prove their Own false Prophecy, (concerning
Babylon's being then to be Broken, as Hananiah did Assert, Jer. 28. 2.) from
Jeremy's own words against Elam, Jer. 49. 35. in the Beginning of Zedekiah's
Reign, v. 34. since Elam then was under Babylon, as some do (very Probably)
conceive. But as this sort of Stealers are Sacrilegious, Romans 2. 22. so does
the Lord declare himself to be Against them, Jer. 23. 30: and as, if he be For
us, Who then can be Against us, Romans 8. 31? so if he be Against a man, who
Can, who Will, who Dare be For him? Yea, it is Expressly said, with reference
to such a Time, that as there will be Stealers then, so will a flying Curse
pursue them, and Cut them off, with their whole House, Zech. 5. 3, 4.

41. The having of some men's Persons too much in Admiration. Thus were the
Pharisees (at such a time) in High Esteem, Luk 16. 15. among those men by whom
Christ was Despised, Isa. 53. 3. And as unworthy Shebna (in the Assyrian's Day)
was Steward in David's House, Isa. 22. 15. 21, 22; so Christ himself did suffer
Judas to be his Steward, Joh. 13. 20. a little before the setting up of his Own
Ministration, who therefore Doubtlessely was most Esteemed by his Fellows.
Thus some make bold to Linger (at this day) in spiritual Sodom, because of
Righteous Lot's Example, Genesis 19. 16. and will Dispute Escaping to the
Mountains, because Lot did so, v. 17. 18; especially considering his Gracious
words then uttered, v. 19. and God's Acceptance of him, v. 21. but not his
Portion afterward, v. 30. 36. Yea thus some argue from the General Faith and
Practice of Professors, unto the Warrant of Believing as they do; and Daring
others to Condemn so many Holy ones. But though God knows who are His, 2 Timothy
2. 19. and how to Deliver the Godly in such Cases, 2 Pet. 2. 9; yet is it
Desperately Presumptuous, to set Our good Opinion of any Person, in competition
with Christ's Command, and so to honor Them more than Him, 1 Samuel 2. 29; which
is the ready way to Perish, v. 30, 31. 35.

42. Aptness to fancy its being a Duty to be merely Passive, and not Active,
in a way of self-delivery out of Babylon. Thus have some pleaded, the Time was
not yet come for Temple-work, Hag. 1. 2; because the Law of Man was still in
Force, Ezra 4. 21. although directly Cross to God's Command, Ezra 6. 14: till
they had almost quite undone themselves, both as to Temporals, Hag. 1. 9. and
Spirituals, Hag. 2. 14. And thus, some Dare not stir out of a Present (though
Corrupted) state, till Providence does Force them out; as those of Old, whom
therefore God bad to Deliver Themselves, Zech. 2. 7; which leaves Others (at
this day) without Excuse. It is a Scruple (this) against the very Law of
Nature; since every living Infant (in the Womb) is some way Active to its own
Production; and therefore Ephraim had not the Wit of an unborn Child, for
staying so long, till setched out, Hos. 13. 13. which is a sad sign the Child
is Dead. But Jeremy went sorth of Jerusalem, to separate himself from thence,
and in the Midst of all the People, Jer. 37. 12; till he was Forcibly brought
back again, and put in Prison, v. 13, 14, 15. which others cannot truly say,
they are, as to their tarrying in their ancient Temples, and Active Compliance
with unrighteous Laws.

43. Aptness in some to Murmr, because of Others Equal Pay (for One Hours
labor) with Themselves, on whom the Heat and Burden of the Day had fallen; as
Christ Expressly signifies, with reference unto his Day, Mat. 20. 11, 12:
much more in case these Later laborers shall have All, as seems to be
intimated, v. 16. and as the Gentiles were to have, in competition with the
Jews, Mat. 6, 11, 12. Thus might Abiathar take it ill, that he, who First came
unto David in his Low Condition, 1 Samuel 22. 20. was afterward made to give
place to Zadok, 1 Chronicles. 24. 3. who came not in till David was come to Hebron,
1 Chronicles. 12. 23. 28. especially when Zadock (in the Issue) was High Priest
Alone, 1 Kings 2. 27. 35; and wherein Zadock was a Type, with reference unto
these Latter days, Ezekiel 44. 13, 15. Thus also John's Disciples did Repine, to
see their Master's Successor Preferred before him, Joh. 3. 25, 26. and so will
some of Christ's Disciples do, (upon a like occasion, to be looked for) in
case they be not well laid in with Self denial against that sore Temptation;
since First and Last must Counter march in such a Day, and wherein (partly)
will appear his Glory, Mat. 20. 15, 16.

44. Withstanding Christ, at least by Praying (Peremptorily) Against that which
the Lord has signified to be his Purpose. Indeed, there was a Time, when God
sought for a man to stand in Old Jerusalem's Gap, Jer. 5. 1. and Then might
Jeremy have safely Prayed for that People, whom afterward the Lord Prohibited,
Jer. 7. 16. We know not what to pray for, as we Ought, save as the Spirit
helps us therein, Romans 8. 26. according to the Will of God, 1 John 5. 14.
There is a Time for Silence, Eccl. 3. 7; and much of Prudence does appear in
being silent at some time, Am. 5. 13. with reference unto our Deprecating an
Afflicting Providence, Am. 6. 10. Thus Abraham Prayed for Sodom, but within
Compass, Genesis 18. 32; because he knew what God would do, v. 17. and therefore
Jeremy (in such a Case) did only Threaten those, Jer. 37. 6, 7, 8. who did
Request his Praying for them, v. 3. And though Isaiah (in the Assyrian's Day)
Prayed for Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. as it did shadow out Christ's Kingly
Interest; yea though some are Commanded (then) to Pray for sparing Mercy, Joel
2. 17. yet did the Lord Reveal (at such a time) that sin which then was unto
Death, Isa. 22. 14. and which should not be Prayed for, 1 John 5. 16. the
Knowledge whereof is a Peculiar Gift, by which those of that Other Spirit have
been Distinguished from the Generality.

45. Reproaching those of the Separation, as savouring of Carnality and Worldly
Ease, compared with those who still Continue in their former State. Thus did
the Pharisees and John's Disciples censure Christ and his, because These Fasted
not, as did the Other, Mat. 9. 14. And thus some may upbraid withdrawers from
them, as having Eased themselves of many Burdens, which They still bear. Thus,
if John be Austere, he has a Devil, Mat. 11. 18. if Christ be otherwise, he is
Licentious, v. 19. but Wisdom is Justified of her Children. And yet as Christ's
Disciples Could not Fast (at such a time,) as did the Other, because of their
Different Apprehensions about the Present Dispensation, Mat. 9. 15: so neither
could the Other (Truly) count themselves more Heavy Laden; considering what
Christ and his Disciples met with for their separating from the Pharisees; far
worse than what the Other groaned under. And as it argues Little Zeal for
Duty, to count it Burdensome, Mal. 1. 13. so God Accepted not their
self-imposed, Soulafflicting Exercises, in a Babylonish State, Zech. 7. 3 5:
much more will Christ soon reckon with those, who thus Reproach his Peoples
Duty with that Disgraceful name of Carnal Liberty.

THus have I now finished the Explication of these words. It only Remains,
to conclude the whole (both of this Verse and Parable) with a few words of
Exhortation, to be Watchful in the General, or with respect to Every of those
forementioned Particulars. In order whereunto, these following Motives may be
of use.

Motive 1. This work of Watching, is incumbent upon All, Mark 13. 37. which
Virgins therefore have no cause to think much at. All are not Bound (as some
may be) to Watch for Others, Heb. 13. 17: but Every man is bid to prove
Himself, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and his Own work, Gal. 6. 4. or to work out his Own
Salvation, Phil. 2. 12. Those are Soul damningly Presumptuous, who Trust unto
Another's watching for their Souls, and therefore sleep themselves; as in a
Bodily case: since Every self neglective Soul shall Die in his Iniquity,
together with his Careless Watchman, Ezekiel. 33. 8. Now if Professors should do
more than Others, Mat. 5. 47; will such fail in a Common Duty? No Servant will
refuse the doing of what his Master may expect from Others; and Virgins do
Profess themselves to be Christ's most Obedient and Proper Servants; whose
being such, is to be Evidenced by their Watching, Luke 12. 37. and Waiting for
him, verse. 36.

2 Saints have their Name from hence; who therefore (Eminently) are called
VVatchers, as well as makers of Decrees, Dan. 4. 17. Which Holy ones may be so
termed there, Partly with reference unto Others; but Chiefly with respect unto
Themselves. Thus was Ezekiel made a Watchman to his fellow Captives, Ezekiel. 33.
7: but to keep Others Vineyards, and not one's Own, is that which Spouses may
confess with shame, Cant. 1. 6. And if a spiritual sleeper (in the General) is
called Dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. much more a slumbring Virgin or Professor, who has
his Name from Watching. Therefore Christ said to Peter; Simon, Sleep Thou,
Mark 14. 37? as being worse in Him (because of his Profession) than in some
other. And as None can be Waking, in case the Watchers be Asleep: So He must
look to Suffer more than all the rest, for his Names-sake, Mark 13. 34.

3. How vigilant are sinners in their Evil way; who cannot sleep till they have
done some Mischief, Prove. 4. 16. Yea, who are most awake (or Active) in the
Night, and who are therefore waiting for the Twilight, Job 24. 15! Now, if it
be a shame for Men (in what is useful) to be Inferior unto Brutes, Isa. 1. 3.
or Birds, Jer. 8. 7. or Creeping things, Prove. 6. 6. much more for Saints to be
out-stript by Sinners in their Respective Watching; Especially since Saints
themselves have sometimes been (as sinners are) exceeding Vigilant, in a sinful
way; whose Change (by Grace) does not Diminish (but rather add unto) their
Circumspection, although with reference unto a Changed Object. In which regard,
Believing Paul did Persecute still (as in the Greek) or follow after that Truth
in Love unto it, Phil. 3. 12. which he had formerly Persecuted Others for, in
way of Hatred, v. 6.

4. Others are watching for our Halting, and therefore we have need to take
heed to our ways. How was Christ watched by the Pharisees, Mark 3. 2. and
Jeremy by his Familiars, Jer. 20. 10. and David by his Observers, which made
him Pray for being Led in a plain Path, Psalm. 27. 11! Which being so Narrowly
Observed by others, may prove our great Advantage; it being so Natural to be
Remiss, if winked at by Fellow Creatures. Yea, some must look to be Enticed, as
Jeremy was, Jer. 20. 10. on purpose to make a Breach upon our Principles,
whereby to be Revenged of us, for a Differing Practice or Profession. In which
regard, Christ bids his Disciples to be wise as Serpents, and to Beware of
Men, who watch for something by which to Color over their Designed Mischief,
Mat. 10. 16, 17. Those of the Separation have been always Censured for their
over-strictness; but if the least Mo^e be to be seen upon them, it will be put
into their Eye; who therefore have need to Watch and Keep their Garments.

5. Be therefore Vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a Roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may Devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And as this was his
Practice always, so more especially, must Josbua look to be Resisted by him at
This Day, which Answers unto that of Old, Zech. 3. 1. He can apply
Temptations suitable to our Tempers; yea, he can shrewdly Ghess at our
Inclining thereunto, and so Pursue them in their fittest Season. And what would
not he give, to have his Will (next unto Christ, Mat. 4. 9.) upon some
Christians, 2 Cor. 12. 7? He knows who is likeliest to be his Greatest
Adversary; whom he would therefore win, or weaken by some Fall: Yea, were it
only to prevent their Near approaching Crown, whom he does therefore
strongliest Tempt at such a Time, as in that Case of Joshua, Zech. 3. 1, 5. He
also has Devices on both hands, or under a most sair Pretense, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
by which he will get an Advantage, in case we be not very Vigilant, wherein it
is a shame to be out-stripped by him.

6. Christ also is called a Watcher, Dan. 4. 13. which is there plainly meant
of Him; as by his being singularly (there) spoken of; so by that Work it self,
v. 14. which Primarily belongs unto Him, although his People share with him,
both in that Work and Name, v. 17. who is so called, partly, because he
Watches (or Keeps) his Vineyard Day and Night, Isa. 27. 3. for he that
Keeps Israel does not slumber, Psalm. 121. 3. and if he watches them, shall
not They watch Themselves? Yea, he (as Man) did sometimes watch, in such an
Hour of Temptation, to set us an Example, Mat. 26. 38. And could ye not Watch
with Me? said he to his Disciples, v. 40. He also (as Mediator) watches still,
and Prays for his Peter's, Luke 22. 32. which should provoke Their joining
with him in that Work, v. 46. as Joshua was to Fight whilst Moses was at
Prayer, Exodus 17. 9. though Israel Prevailed upon Moses his Account, v. 11. as
if Christ does not Keep, the Watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127. 1. yet
should we therefore work, because God works in us, Phil. 2. 12, 13.

7. As watching is incumbent upon All, Mark 13. 37. and in All Things, 2 Timothy
4. 5. so at All Times, Luke 21. 36. which therefore ought not to be wondered at,
if Now required; but should be more attended to, on that Account. In which
regard, it may be said of watchfulness, as it is said of Holiness, 1 John 2. 6.
and Brotherly Love, v. 9, 10. which is not any New Command, v. 7. save with
Respect unto a Circumstantial Variation, v. 8. as Legal Duty is Now turned into
Evangelical; and as our watching (in the General,) is Now Commanded in Relation
to the Duties and Temptations of such a Particular Time. Now, when Christ
puts (upon his) none other Burden, save what they have already; he
signifies it as a Motive to Hold fast that which they have, until his Coming,
Rev. 2. 24, 25. And if Obedience be our Center, as we draw Nearer to its End,
so will our Motion be the quicker, as is to be Observed in a falling Arrow. And
if Men very Aged, (or drawing nigh unto their Dissolution) are also most Awake,
or apt to Rise up at the voice of an Early Bird, Eccl. 12. 4. it will be to
Their shame, who are most Heavy Headed, in a Spiritual sense, a little before
their dropping into the Grave.

8. Sleep is so Natural, (as in the Letter) and pleasing to the Flesh,
especially unto some, which is another Motive to be Watchful. In Meral cases
(to be sure) we may conclude that to be Excellent which Nature (at least
Corrupted Nature) is averse unto: And such is Spiritual Vigilance. The Old Man
is so called, partly, because of Drousiness; and if the first Adam's sinless
Nature was apt to sleep, Genesis 2. 21. as being of an Earthly Make, v. 7. much
more does sin dispose thereunto, and more especially in this Moral sense. And
though some cannot sleep (as others do) or sin to such an Height, yet do All
Love to slumber, or Dally with Temptations of a sinful Nature. And as Men of a
more Feeble Spirit, and Cold Complexion, and Grosser Bodies, are most
Heavy-headed, in the Letter; so let those look about them, in the Mystery,
whose strength is gone, whose Love is Cold, and who are most encompassed with
this World's Fatness. Nor ever had the Tempter such Advantages (as Now) in
point of Watchlessness; it being Now so Universal; which yet should stir up
others to be Singular.

9. Some (at this Day) have need to watch, because they are so much Alone; as
did the Psalmist, upon that Account, Psalm. 102. 7. He that will be (as Sparrows
are) upon the Housetop, must look (in Times of Danger) to be Alone: And woe be
unto him, whose solitariness (at such a Time) and sleepiness are in
Conjunction. These are Dividing Times, wherein we therefore should be gathered
up (so much the more) into our selves, and into self-defending Circumspection.
Those are poor Creatures, and have Naught to Lose, who can sleep in a solitary
Cottage; which is the case of several Now, who have been wont to Live in
Families. Let scattered ones improve this Consideration in a self-rouzing way;
whom Providence has Now constrained to be Watchful, and which may prove a
great Advantage. Now is the Watchmens Day of Visitation, Mic. 7. 4. wherein Old
Shepherds shall be made to cease from Feeding the Flock of God, Ezekiel. 34. 10.
only Lambs Feeding alone are in great Danger, Hos. 4. 16. who therefore had
need to watch themselves, as they would not become the roaring Lions Prey, 1
Pet. 5. 8.

10. The Spiritual Nature of Chiefest Duties and Temptations, does call for
Watching, at the Highest Rate. The very first Principle of Gospel-Duty is
self-denial, Mat. 16. 24. a Failure wherein, is so far from being Censured by
the Generality, that Men will Praise thee, when thou do Well unto thy self,
Psalm. 49. 18. Yea, Conscience also is un-acquainted with Holy Guriosities, or
Time-concernments; which therefore may be over-looked without any inward Check,
save as we are under Conscience, unto Christ. Grosser Temptations are like
Swords or Spears, which being more Obvious, may therefore be more Easily
avoided: but Time temptations are like Arrows; more out of sight, which are
more Dangerous, and by which Saul (for all his Shield, 2 Samuel 1. 21.) was
Deadly wounded, 1 Samuel 31. 3. Now as we are to Watch in Prayer, Col. 4. 2.
because that Duty is most spiritual; so have Saints need to be Completely
armed, Ephesians. 6. 11. because they Wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, but spiritual
Wickedness in High Places, v. 12.

11. It else will evidence our being Poor; since the Rich man's Abundance will
not suffer him to sleep, Eccl. 5. 12. Worldly Poor men sleep most securely; and
spiritual Sleepers may be concluded Poor, as are unarmed Travelers in Thievish
ways. Sinners are either Really poor, (as to what Souls are subject to be
Robbed of;) or else such know not the Worth of what they have, else would they
be more Watchful. Their Portion is in this Life only, Psalm. 17. 14; who
cannot Rest, if That be hazarded, Isa. 30. 15: but matters of a spiritual
nature are Another's (viz. the Saints Own, Luke 16. 12.) which therefore
Sinners care not to secure. As where the Treasure is, there will the Heart be
also, Luke 12. 34; so when the Heart is in a slumbring Frame, it is from the
Want of spiritual Treasure. Whereas, they who have Most of Grace and Joy, are
always fearful lest they should Lose it; who therefore keep a constant VVatch,
because they Know the VVorth of such Commodities, and their continual Danger.

12. In case I sin, (says Job to God) Thou Markest me, Job 10. 14. Thou
look Narrowly to All my paths, Job 13. 27; Do thou not Watch over my Sin,
Job 14. 16? And if it be so, then Job and we had need to VVatch Against it.
It Is true, God Marketh Iniquity (in his People) with a Forgiving Eye; but that
Forgiveness works Fear, Psalm. 130. 3, 4: yea his very Marking it, does make
them VVatch against it, Psalm. 44. 20, 21. And with respect unto these Latter
days, God represents himself as one that Hearkeneth, Jer. 8. 6. Mal. 3. 16;
which should Oblige us to be very Circumspect, since he does know the things
that come into our Mind, Ezekiel. 11. 5. and which is signified (there) with
reference to such a Time. Thus Christ came down (from Heaven) in Sodom's Day,
to know the Certainty of what he heard, Genesis 18. 20, 21; because he Then was
come to Judge upon the Case; as he Now will, Rev. 11. 18. Now when poor
Creatures stand before the Judge, how VVatchfull are they, (as All at This day
had need be) for fear of Aggravating their final sentence!

13. Let us not be less watchful in a Spiritual Case, than in a Bodily; or
with respect unto an Earthly Interest. Men (of a sober Spirit) will not Play
with Edged tools: and Sin is Wounding, Jer. 30. 14: the Thought of Foolishness
is (also) Sin, Prove. 24. 9. therefore take heed of Dallying with such
Temptations. How do men also watch for worldly Gain; though many to little
purpose, Psalm. 127. 2: now Duty is Enriching, Prove. 8. 18: nor will that labor
be in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 58: therefore take heed of letting slip such
Opportunities. Shall we be Circumspect, whilst in the sight of Men, (for fear
of losing our Esteem with them,) and not much more before the Lord? What is the
Body, to the Soul? or Time, compared with Eternity? or Reputation, to our being
saved? spiritual unwatchfulness proceeds from Atheism in its Spring, and
runs at the last into its Ocean.

14. It Is but an Hour of Temptation, this, which Now is come upon us. Rev. 3.
10: and can ye not Watch One Hour, Mat. 26. 40? Yea, This may Possibly be the
Last Hour of our Present day; and if the shortness of Time should make us weep
as though we wept not, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30; let it then make us watch, (in
competition with complaining) as though we watched not. The time may Now be
very near, when either we shall watch no more (if Dying in the Lord;) or not be
so Extremely Tempted, as we Now are. Though watchfulness will be a Duty to the
End, yet may the Labor of that Duty be Abated together with the Overcomers
being made (within a while) a Pillar in Gods Temple, Rev. 3. 12. Nor do I
doubt, but that conflicting Joshua may be (e're long) Relieved with greater
Strength, as 2 Cor. 12. 9. or Less Temptations, as Zech. 3. 1, 2. I dare not
set the time; nor is it our Duty to Depend thereon: yet should it Encourage us
to keep Waking, since our Salvation Now is Nearer every day than other, as is
argued, Romans 13. 11.

15. Let us consider, of how great Consequence it is, to Watch; and as
Continually, so Now especially.

1. Such will be most Dignified by Christ, at his Appearing; for he will then
make them sit down to meat, and Gird himself, and will come forth and serve
them, Luke 12. 37. Watching and Standing go together, Isa. 21. 8. which
Standing is a weary posture, and therefore such shall Then sit down; yea Christ
will then set them, or make them sit. Watching and Fasting go together, 2 Cor.
6. 5. yea want of Sleep requires Meat, instead of Nourishing Rest: therefore
these VVatchers shall sit down to Meat. Such also have approved themselves to
be his Servants, by their Watching, or Waiting for him, Luke 12. 36.
therefore he Now will be Their Servant, which Masters are not wont to be. They
have been waiting with their Loins Girt, Luke 12. 35. 36. to keep themselves
from being Weary: and therefore he will Gird himself. And though their
watching has been most within, yet he will then come forth and serve them. Yea
such shall be made Rulers over All, Luke 12. 44.

2. Such do Enjoy themselves (at Present) with the Best Advantage, (as in the
Letter) both in Relation to Themselves and Others. Persons Awake, can Hear, and
See, and have their other Senses better exercised, than if Asleep: so in the
Mystery. Such are not Deluded with idle Dreams themselves; and Pity others who
Laugh more Heartily, but in their Sleep. Beauty is chiefly seated in the Eye,
Cant. 4. 9. which none but Watchers can keep Open: nor can any other prevent
their being shamed several ways, Rev. 16. 15. Such can perceive the Tempter at
a Distance; and quickly clear themselves of that Pollution which rests upon
Others till they wake. And though Sleep in the Letter is Refreshing, yet in a
Spiritual sense, those are most Cheary who are most Awake. Yea such are also in
the best Capacity of being helpful unto Others.

3. Such will be Forwardest to See and Know and Open unto Christ when he shall
be revealed. Those had the first Tidings of Christ's Birth, who were then
keeping Watch over their Flock by Night, Luke 2. 8, 9. as if Christ had been
only born for them, v. 11. The Watchmen upon Mount Ephraim are First heard to
cry, Arise and let us go up to Sion, Jer. 31. 6: and Sion's Watchmen shall
lift up the Voice with Singing, for they shall see Eye to Eye, Isa. 52. 8. If
Mary had not been up before Daybreak, Luke 24. 1. she had not seen her Lord so
soon, Joh. 20. 1. 8: and Early Sights of such a Nature, will countervail the
want of Sleep sufficiently. Such also will Immediately Open to him, Luke 12.
36. since Readiness consists in Watching: and if it be a Privilege to be In
Christ First, Romans 16. 7. by way of Trusting, Ephesians. 1. 13. then to be First with
him; which is reserved for the watchful Ones.

4. Such will be less Affrighted (as in the Letter) with that Noise, wherewith
the Old Heavens must pass away, when Christ does come, 2 Pet. 3. 10. How did
that Jaylour Tremble, when he was Frighted out of his Sleep with that
tremendous Earthquake, and its Consequents, Act. 16. 26, 27, 29; who else would
not have been so much Amazed; nor Others Now, (at such a like Earthquake in the
Mystery,) but for their having been Asleep. Sleep makes secure; Security
preventeth Expectation; and unexpected Troubles are Transporting: thence are
the Sinners in Sion so Afraid (at such a time) because surprised, Isa. 33. 14;
and that surprizal is the Fruit of slumbring. Whereas Awakened ones are in the
constant Exercise both of their Sense and Reason; or like on Army Training in
the Field, who therefore are not so Affrightingly alarmed, as when Asleep in
their respective Quarters. The Holiest ones in former times, have been least
Terrified with those Revolutions which have betrayed Others into Ensnaring
Fears, by reason of their unwatchfulness.

5. Such are most likely to Escape; since Watchers are counted worthy, in that
regard, Luke 21. 36. The Cen^in^l (with Men) is in the Front of Danger from an
Enemy; but Christ bids, save the Watchman, as having delivered his own soul at
least, Ezekiel. 33. 9. Yea Christ will not Come (as an Adversary) upon Watchers;
who only threatens his Coming as a Thief, in case men do not watch, Rev. 3. 3:
nor could the Devil much infest us, if we did Fire at him when he first
appears, Jam. 4. 7. However, watchers are best able to defend themselves;
whilst sleeping Crocodiles are apt to be destroyed by an Egyptian Rat. Next
unto Death Sleep is the greatest Leteller; or that which makes All to be
Alike: Yea waking Infants are more self relieving than a slumbring Giant. If
some had not been fast Asleep, the Enemy had not sown his Tares, Mat. 13. 25;
nor had she lost her Living Child, 1 King. 3. 20. nor Sisera his Life, Judge. 4.
21; nor Sampson both his Hair and Eyes, Judge. 16. 19. 21; nor would the good
man's House be Broken through, if he had watched, Luke 12. 39.

6. Such will be in the best Capacity to entertain whatever may befall, in way
of Trial. Sleep makes Tender; but Watchers are more Hardy; and Holiest ones
have always been the bravest sufferers. A waiting servant (well Employed) cares
not how soon his Master comes, but Ecchoeth presently unto his Knock. Such are
Aware of what is coming; and being Provided for Tribulations, that sort of
Guests are not so troublesome as if they had been unexpected. Christ dreaded
not the Devils coming, because he could find Nothing in him, for he had been
Obedient, Joh. 14. 30, 31: and he whose Course is finished in such a way, need
not be frighted with the News of his Depaiture, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. None know's how
soon that Day may come, Zech. 14. 2. and Then, woe be to spiritual sleepers, who
possibly may be Awakened with a Sword or Pistol, and be run through before
they can Repent. However, we daily hear of some or other struck with sudden
Death; whose Case may be our Own; and Blessed then is he that watches and is
Ready.

I shall conclude this Exhortation to be Watchful, with some few Helps; which
are, as follows.

Helps: 1. Let us be thoroughly Wakened out of a Present Sleep: it is but a folly
(else) to talk of future Watching. Sleep in a Moral sense, is called Death,
Ephesians. 5. 14. and Watching is an Act of one Alive; till Men be therefore Quickened
by Awaking, they cannot mind this work of Watching. Such also must be thoroughly
wakened; else will they quickly sleep again, when once the startling Rouzer is
withdrawn, Mat. 26. 13. Now, all will readily confess their having been Asleep,
of Later Times; But if they be more sleightily Awakened, they will soon Nod
again. Overly Convictions, and Gentle self-reproving^ are wont to end in sad
Relapses; nor is he to be Trusted for the Future, who is not deeply sensible of
former Failings. Men un-convinced cannot watch, because they are Asleep: And
Men not duly Humbled (for their sin) will sleep again, because They are not
Thoroughly wakened. Make your awakening sure, one way or other, as you would not
be over-taken with a Second Sleep.

2. Take heed of being Alone, in way of sinful Choice, which is a wosul
Disadvantage, Eccl. 4. 10. but get into some kind of Body; and which is
Competible unto scattered ones: Dispersed ones cannot be in an Instituted Body
strictly taken; but such may be Together, as those Disciples were, before the
Spirits pouring out, Luke 24. 33. and which is an Awakening Help. Such may Pray
each with other, as They did, Acts 1. 14. if Prayer be not some way hindered, 1
Pet. 3. 7. and Prayer is an Awakening Exercise, which therefore is often joined
with Watching, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Luke 21. 36. Col. 4. 2. Ephesians. 6. 18. Such also may
speak often one to another, as Mal. 3. 16. and by that means may keep each other
waking: Yea, where that Body is, there will the Eagles be, in way of Feeding,
Luke 17. 37. and seldom do Men sleep whilst they are Eating. Nay,
Fellow-Captives may watch over one another, as Ezekiel did, though in a Larger
sense, Ezekiel. 33. 7. and Exercise some kind of Common Censures, which needs must
be Awakening.

3. Make Choice of your Companions though; else had one better be Alone: since
sleep is as Infectious as the Plague, and in a Spiritual sense more Dangerous.
In case Two lie Together, they have Heat, Eccl. 4. 11. supposing them both to
be Alive; but else a dead Log (in Bed) is not so Cold as a Dead Body is. I am
persuaded, some find it an Advantage to them, (at least no Loss) to be
Discharged of their Old Companions; and not without sufficient cause, which is
the Present Case. If you would know the Newest Fashion, then go to the
Professors of this Generation: But whither shall one go to find a Savoury
Spirit, a Spirit savouring what is of God? Let one begin to tell a story, (or
start some Idle Curiosity; and then he may have Talk enough: but serious
Communications shut Men's Mouths, if not their Eyes. Joseph in Pharaoh's Court,
Genesis 42. 15. and Peter in the High-Priest's Hall, Mat. 26. 72. had quickly
Learned their Late Companions Language: Yea, Barnabas was thereby much in
Danger, Gal. 2. 13.

4. As Men would not be over come with sleep, so let them take heed of
slumbring, the Latter of which is but an Inlet to the Former; as all the
Virgins have Experienced, Mat. 25. 5. Eve was Beguiled, by her Parleying with
the Serpent, Genesis 3. 1, 2. and fell in Love with the Forbidden Fruit, by
Looking on it, v. 6. therefore Job made a Covenant with his Eyes, Job 31. 1.
One stick will drop out after another, in case the Binder be Relaxed; and
therefore we should rather wedge more in, 2 Pet. 1. 5. since our best Duty
(like Green Wood) is apt to shrink, and so to slacken. A Tender Conscience is a
precious Mercy, and a great preservative; whilst others of a Bolder Spirit, are
oft-times caught before they are aware. The Nearer that Duty is, the better is
its Beauty seen: But sin's Deformity is best discerned at a Distance, or when
it is quite out of sight, as to a Carnal Eye. When once a Virgin has lost her
shame, the Tempter grows thereby more Impudent; and sinful Dallyings will
enfeeble Holy Bashfulness, which being Lost, the Soul lies open to more Gross
Temptations.

5. Take heed of shutting out the Light, since Darkness does Invite to slumber.
When Persons have a mind to sleep, they shut their Eyes, and draw the Curtains
close; since Light (though but Reflected by a Glass) would keep them waking.
Thence sinners are so fast asleep, because they are the Children of the Night;
which Children of the Day are not so wont to be, 1 These. 5. 5, 6, 7. Yea,
thence it is, that Daytime is often turned into Night; and Children of the Day
will sleep, in such a Case; who therefore should take heed of that Temptation.
They who Rebel against the Light, are such who also will commit the works of
Darkness, Job 24. 13, 14. There are Two greater Moral Lights (as well as
Natural) viz. that of the First and Second Adam; both which are Lovingly to be
received, and with Respect unto their fresh Appearances. Though Nature's Light
is but like that of the Moon, the letting in whereof does not so much disturb
the Sleeper, as does that of the Sun; thence may one sleep, and yet be Morally
Obedient: And Midday Light is most Awakening; therefore take heed of shutting
out more High Discoveries.

6. Take heed of being in some kind of Posture which does betray into a
slumbring Disposition; as in the Letter, so in the Mystery. As sitting (in a
Bodily Respect) exposes unto sleeping, in the Letter: So does the want of
being well Employed, in a Mystical sense. Sleepers are therefore bidden to
Arise, and to be Going, Mat. 26. 46. that being likeliest to keep them waking.
And the more Spiritual that any Duty is, the more are sleep-inviting postures
to be shunned: Therefore we do not Read of Sitting in that Duty of Prayer (save
in that private Soliloquy, 2 Samuel 7. 18.) but either Standing or Kneeling;
which is upon Record for our Instruction, save where good Reason warranteth
some other Posture. However Sitting; in the Mystery (or any kind of Idleness
whatever,) does very much prejudice one's being watchful. Persons (in Bed
together) quickly Talk themselves asleep; but if another's being up at work,
does keep us waking, much more if we our selves are so in Action.

7. As Drunkenness and sleep are joined together, 1 These. 5. 7. so is Sobriety
and Watching, 1 Pet. 4. 7. with reference to their Respective Influence. Full
fed Vriah slept at David's Door, 2 Samuel 11. 8. And he that Tarryeth at the
Wine, Prove. 23. 30. will fall asleep upon a Mast, v. 34. So will Professors do,
when growing sensual, as to their Bodily or Spiritual Diet. It Is not Men's
Using of this World, but their Abusing it, which is forbidden, 1 Cor. 7. 31. as
Men are not Distempered by their having great store of Wine and Meat before
them, but by their taking in too much thereof into themselves. I never yet saw
too Liberal Feeders upon Creature Comforts to be the choicest Christians: Nor
can it be Expected; since Love (in an intense degree) cannot be fixed upon the
Father and the World at once, 1 John 2. 15. Yea, they who are too Dainty
toothed, in a Spiritual sense, (or who take more than is their share of
Spiritual Comforts) have been Observed to be less Watchful than some others,
who take what is convenient for them, and no more.

8. The want of Due Rest Occasions Drouziness, when one should Watch and be at
Work. The Cares of this Life are over-charging, as well as Surfeiting; both
which Occasion sleeping, and so Christ's Day does come upon Men unawares, Luke
21. 34. God teaches his the Vanity of Distracting Care, and so he gives his
Beloved Rest, Psalm. 127. 2. Yea, he so keeps them Awake in Spiritual
Exercises, Whereas self-over-setting Workers all the week, are usually the
greatest Lord's Day sleepers; and they who will be Rich, cannot avoid
Temptations of a sinful Nature, 1 Timothy 6. 9. As VVorldliness has overcome
Professors, so have they let their Duty Fall, which (whilst they were Awake,
and not so Earthly minded) was held fast, 2 Timothy 4. 10. So let your Hands be
Exercised with the World, as that your Hearts may (through Believing) be at
Rest; else will you Nod in better Exercises. Yea, they who cannot mind their
Duty, without sollicitousness about Events, or being too busy in what concerns
another, are thereby often betrayed into slumbring, for want of Rest in its due
Time and Place.

9. They who are Heavy-headed (and would keep Awake) must not be apt to be
Offended with a Friendly Nip, or being Jostled, and sometimes Pricked or Trod
upon; at leastwise Touched, and more shrilly spoken to. Some are too Proud to
be Reproved; and others too self-loving to Offend them: Thence is the
Generality so fast asleep, till Christ himself does come, or send to waken
them. Some must be vexed, before they will unfold their sluggish Arms; and let
them Fight with their Awakeners for a while, rather than sleep the sleep of
Death. Christ trod upon the People's Toes, till some cried out, He had a Devil,
John 10. 20. and Peter pricked his Hearers to the Heart, who then Awakened, and
called him Brother, Acts 2. 37. whom formerly they had Abused, v. 13. When apt
to be Offended with some Rougher handling, let every one consider there may be
much of God in such a Portion, and in a way of Mercy to mine heavy-headed Soul.
I could sing Requiem's (as well as others) or smoother things, and thereby gain
poor Children's Love: But let me rather Rouse them with a Faithful Testimony,
than Rock and Flatter them into a Sleep.

10. Offer some kind of Holy Violence unto your selves; as in such cases (in
the Letter) Men are wont to do; not only by standing up, but shaking off an
Heavy Disposition. True Godly Sorrow works Indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and
when a Man is vexed with his sin unto a self-abhorring, Job 42. 6. his Eye is
Opened, v. 5. and will not readily shut again. Chafe in upon your Hearts some
Rouzing Terrors, as well as Comforts; so will you keep your selves Awake, and
Others too, 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. I have Observed, where some lie Napping
Now, in whom the Old Man has prevailed to a self-indulging; or who have been
afraid of giving him one Angry word. Did we first (always) speak unto our
selves, and Labor to make Convictions Powerful upon our Consciences, it would
Awaken them, which else will sleep the more securely, because of sleightiness
in serious Matters. This some can Recommend, as Eliphas did his Counsel unto
Job; Lo, we have searched it, and so it is; hear it, and know Thou it, for thy
Good, Job 5. 27.

11. Busy your selves with something of a Curious and stirring Nature: Else
Ordinary work may not prevent a Spiritual Nodding. Persons Engaged in some Deep
Discourse, (which calls for study, and stirs up Affections,) are not so apt
to Talk themselves asleep, as others are. Coldness in Arguing for the Truth,
(proceeding from Indifferency) is very prejudicial unto Zeal in Practice:
whereas a Lively Advocate does Heat himself, and thereby is the more Inflamed
with Love unto his Cause, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. There are deep things of God, 1
Cor. 2. 10. and Mysteries of the Kingdom, Mat. 13. 11. which he who rightly
studieth, is not so likely to come short in Lesser Matters. Paul Labored to
attain the Resurrection of the Dead, Phil. 3. 11. that kept him waking; whilst
he that Fancieth his being laid in sufficiently, will say, Soul, take thine
Ease, Luke 12. 18, 19. They who care not for Going on, Heb. 6. 1. may fall
Asleep; yea, quite away, v. 6. because of Resting in Old Received things, v. 1,
2. or that which is short of Perfection: which Therefore Paul Resolved to take
heed of, if God permitted, v. 3, 4.

12. Take heed of Worldly sorrow, which made the Disciples sleep, Luke 22. 45.
Now, let the Cause be what it will, immoderate sorrow becomes Worldly, and
that works Death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. which sinful sleep is oft-times called. Job's
Grief was very Great, Job 2. 13. and that betrayed him into a sinful Passion,
Job 3. 1. and Baruch Fainted in his sighing, Jer. 45. 3. that made him seek
great things at such a Time, v. 4, 5. And they who (in the Creatures presence)
can Rejoice, as if they had Rejoiced not, will also (in its Absence) Weep
accordingly; and by that means be kept awake. Jonah was therefore Angry, Jonah
4. 9. (with reference unto his withering Gourd,) because he had been so
Exceeding Glad whilst it continued, v. 6. who thereupon did sinfully wish for
Death, v. 8. and Justified it before the Lord himself, v. 9. Yea, they who do
inordinately Delight in Choiser Privileges, (such as Christ's Bodily Presence
was with his Disciples,) may soon Ditt up their Eyes with such a kind of dirty
Tears, as some do Now, because he Tarrieth: which also holds True, with
reference to any Privileges whatsoever.

13. Labor to be more Spiritual; since in Relation to this work of Watching,
the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41. Angels are Spirits,
Heb. 1. 7. who therefore do not sleep, but always Behold the Face of God, Mat.
18. 10. so will it be with Saints, (both in a Natural and Moral sense) as they
grow more like unto Heavenly Angels. The first Adam's utmost is called Flesh,
Mat. 16. 17. and Legal things are termed Carnal, Heb. 9. 10. Yea, so are also
Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1. and these are weak, or likeliest to fall in
Spiritual Watching. Nature skills not of Instituted Duty, nor yet a Legal
Spirit, of what is Evangelical; both which are therefore apt to fall, in those
Respective cases: And Babes (in Christ) are very prone to sleep and fall, as
Children, in the Letter are. The Cry is Now, All Flesh is withering Grass, and
all the Goodliness thereof is as a fading Flower; but the Word of our God shall
stand for ever, Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. and by which Word is meant what is of a
Proper Gospel-Nature, 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25. and therefore, as Men would stand in
such a day (or as they would not fall asleep,) so let them Labor to be
Spiritual and Evangelical.

14. Get well Acquainted with the Time, which being known, is much awakening,
Romans 13. 11. and inability to Discern its signs, is that by which an Hypocrite
is to be known, Mat. 16. 3. And though we should be sober, (in point of
Peremptory setting such a time,) yet let us take heed of saying, the Lord
Delays his Coming, Mat. 24. 48. considering what sinful Temptations that will
Expose unto, v. 49. Most talk of some great Revolution near at hand; which if
they seriously did believe, it would awaken them into a suitable watching.
Would some Men Beautify their Old defiled Temples with such goodly stones,
did they foresee their being soon to be demolished, Mark 13. 1, 2? Or did they
look (e're long) for New Created Heavens, Isa. 65. 17? Would others fill their
Houses with such dear-bought gain, did they believe their being Rifled, now
within a while, Zech. 14. 2? Would others dally with their gross Temptations,
were they aware, how soon all sinners now may perish by the Sword, Amos 9. 10?
I am not positive, as to the very Time; but such a study might keep men waking:
and though Grace turns upon Golden hinges, or Nobler Motives than Mercenary
Hope, or slavish Fear, yet may these help to prick us out of sleeping. And this
indeed is Christ's own Motive here, to make us watch, because we know not how
soon he may Thus come, in these our Days.

15. Let us be much in Prayer, which Duty we are bid to watch unto, 1 Pet. 4.
7. and to be Conversant about, together with our watching, as we would not be
led into Temptation, Mark 14. 28. Prayer carries a Soul into Christ's
Presence; and whilst he was with his Disciples, he would not suffer them to
sleep, at least not long. And if He does not keep, the Watchman waketh but in
vain, Psalm. 127. 1. therefore let us engage him (by our Prayer) to watch over
us, as he Obliges us (by his Command) to watch our selves. But let us also
watch unto Prayer in this regard, not Tempting him (by our neglect) who will
take no Man's work out of his hand, and who will not Relieve an Idle Beggar.
Thus let us VVatch and Pray, and Pray and VVatch; this is to be at work with
Both our Hands, which is the likeliest way to Overcome.

Thus have I now done with this whole Parable, which has Occasioned my walking
in untrodden paths, and wherein some may possibly have stumbled; whom I would
only wish to Weigh the Premises, before they do reject them. And having now
born my Testimony, I shall endeavor to stand upon my Watch, and see what I
shall Answer, when I am Reproved: Submitting all my Sober Apprehensions unto
Clearer Light, and Providential Determinations in God's Valley of Decision.

THE END.

