SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Late TRIALS OF Sir GEORGE WAKEMAN, CORKER and
MARSHAL, etc.

By Tom. Tickle-foot the Taborer, late Clerk to Justice Clodpate.

-- In tempore dicere verum Quis vetat? LONDON, Printed for A. Brewster. 1679.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the Late TRIALS OF Sir George Wakeman, Corker, and
Marshal, etc.
THe Reader may perhaps wonder why I should wave the Employment of Clerking to
a Westminster Justice, who seldom are of the wisest; and turn Minstrel; but
upon serious thoughts he will respect me for my Integrity, and give greater
faith to what I shall offer now; for to say the truth, the methods of my former
life were so villainous, in order to my Calling, as I could no longer dispense
with them; for I was forced to inform my master's Worship of all the
Bawdy-Houses within his District, which by that means were all set under
Contribution, and out of their Compositions for Enormities I had Poundage,
which was all my subsistence; for his Worship-engrossed all the Warrant-Revenue
to himself, so I grew of late melancholy, through the failing of Trade, the
private Misses driving all before them, that public Sinners are now of all
people the most miserable; so I retired some time before my Master's death, in
which Retirement, as Barbers having nothing to do, learn to play on the
Cittern, I got a stroke upon the Pipe and Tabor, by which means I now live very
comfortably, yet willing to give the world a Taste of my old Office of
Clerkship, I have made these following Observations.

The first part of the Trial was spent in the examination of Dugdale, Prance
and Jennison, to prove the Plot, so to obviate the common objection, that it
was unreasonable to believe two men against so many, upon bare testimony
without other Circumstantial Evidence, that was done with such notoriety, as
satisfied all unprejudiced persons: amongst other things it was proved by an
undeniable Witness, Mr. Jennison, corroborated with notable Circumstances, that
Ireland died with a Lie in his Mouth, as by consequence Sir John Southcot and
his Lady lives with the same veracity, which my old Master would have made
another kind of use on than was made; then was some fine Harangues about it to
answer some Objections, yet nothing was reduced to practice in the Case, during
that part of the Trial in which the Prisoners were but remotely concerned; it
may be observed, that Corker fell into great undecencies of passion, against
the Witness Dugdale, an argument of Guilt my old Master would have said; yet no
Inferences nor Reproofs upon it. Now I have given a short, yet true account of
what was but preliminary to Wakeman's, and their Trials, I shall go on, Doctor
Oats proved, that Wakeman refused ten thousand pounds, as too little for
poisoning the King, which he termed so great a Work, and afterward did
undertake it for five thousand more, as it was written down in the Entry Book,
kept sometimes at Wild House, sometimes at Langhorne's Chamber; and further, as
appeared by the said Entry Book, there was five thousand pounds paid in part,
and a Receipt subscribed, George Wakeman, which by a comparison of Hands was
sworn to be Sir George's Hand, which Sir George shifted off by the help of an
Apothecary, as he thought well enough; yet granting the Apothecary to say true,
which is questionable too, for they are often slippery Chapmen, especially
considering former Relations: and future hopes, and Oats to swear true, which
no wife man will dispute, there might be two Letters, which Sir George would
stur off, from the improbability of writing two Letters to one thing, and
gravely bids the Jury take notice, that he writ but one Letter, he might with
the same modesty have advised them not to believe a word against him, yet
little notice taken.

The improbability of writing two Letters to one thing seemed to weigh
something with the Lord Chief Justice: Though not so with Justice Pemberton,
who said it might be so, To serve a turn very well.

It was proved likewise by Doctor Oats, that Wakeman had a Commission to be
Physician General to the new Army, which my Lord Chief Justice had like to have
forgotten.

Amongst other matters, Bedlow deposed, that Sir George Wakeman, came into
Harcourt's Chamber in a Chafe, and told him, he knew not whether he should go
on or no, Harcourt went to his Cabinet, and took out a Bill, and asked Sir
George if he was ready, Sir George said he was, and had been long since, but
they were not punctual with him. But what have you there a Bill for two
thousand pounds at your service, replies Harcourt; which Bill Sir George
accepted, and afterward told Bedlow, that the Goldsmith had allowed of it, and
would pay him in the Afternoon, when Wakeman objected, it was not likely he
should discover so great a secret upon so small an acquaintance: Bedlow
replied, he would have a hundred times more, if Harcourt had but told him he
was his Confident, as he had done then. Wakeman rambled out into a passion, and
swore, that he never saw him in all his life, yet Bedlow made it out by
circumstances, that he had taken Physic of him at the Bath; and that
acquaintance he did not deny, but called him Rogue, etc. Before the Prisoner
called his Witness, it may be observed, that the Lord Chief Justice said, that
Bedlow, the second Witness, said no material thing against Wakeman, but only
some Circumstantials about a two thousand Bill, but not said for what, some
things about the Queen his Lady and Mistress.

Sir Robert Sawyer replied under favor, and began to sum up Bedlow's Evidence,
so the Lord Chief Justice seemed not pleased, and answered what is all this?
call Mr. Bedlow again, to whom he made a godly speech about innocent Blood, and
bade him give his evidence anew, who gave what is abovesaid. Sir George
replied, what if the Queen had given me two thousand pounds for my service done
her, is that any harm? I have deserved I am sure for nine years Service; yet a
little before a protestation before God he never saw Bedlow, a likely matter,
as if an absolute Stranger should come to the knowledge of such a
Money-Circumstance; and agree in the Sum too: Bedlow went on, and swore, that
Harcourt said to Sir George, This must be well followed, and closely observed,
because much depends upon it: For if we should miss to kill him at. Windsor, or
you miss in your way, then we will do it at New Market. The Lord Chief Justice
made Bedlow report the words again, which he did, only interposing (Which we
hope you will not:) The Lord Chief Justice replied very modestly, he says now
quite another thing; but was contradicted by the Lord Chief Justice North, the
Recorder, and Sir Robert Sawyer, and submitted to it most Christianly. Then
Bedlow went on, and swore, that Sir George Wakeman, in his hearing, declared
his consent; and that it was one entire discourse, upon which the Knight, as
well he might, said to the Prisoners, Then is my business done, and he had been
a true Prophet, if either Wit or Honesty had exercised a due dominion over the
Jury: Now if my old Master Clodpate had been on the Bench, he would have hung
hard upon that expression, as also upon Sir George's allowing of two thousand
pounds to be paid for Wages, he would have swaggered it, and have said, this is
not to be said to us that know the Methods of the Court, never to pay so much
Wages at a time, they always instal such Sums; you might however have brought
some other authority besides your self, which can deserve no credit here, when
it is clear by all Circumstances, you invoked God to witness to a Lie, about
your never seeing Bedlow within these ten Minutes.

Against Corker, Oats deposes, that he saw his Patent from Rome to be Bishop
of London; that he was privy, and did consent to Langhorne's Proposal to the
Benedictine Monks, to advance six thousand pounds toward carrying on his
Design, his consent being necessary, because he was President; and that Corker
should say further, that he carried on the Design under the disguise of
bestowing the Queen's Charity; and that he did except against Pickering being
chosen to kill the King, being that a mere Layman was more proper. Mr. Marshal
was charged with the same thing, and that Marshal went half with Conyers, who
laid a Wager that the King would eat no more Christmas Pyes.

Bedlow deposed further against Corker, that he had heard him discourse about
raising an Army, but nothing positively to the Murder of the King. Bedlow
accused Marshal much about that rate; but Marshal not being shye of his
lip-labor, fell to impertinent questioning him, about his knowing him, but was
confuted, but not at all ashamed in his Lies by Sir William Waller, who was
sworn in the Case; but Marshal with a company of soft words, would have
persuaded Sir William that he forswore himself; the Priest surely loved to hear
himself prattle, to spend so much time to the wasting of his credit, about a
thing which was not of a Farthing Concern, true or false: then he asked Bedlow
whether he had ever seen him before he was taken. Who said, at the Savoy. Then
with an unheard of impudence he replied, he would be content to be hanged, if
Bedlow could prove, that he was ever at the Savoy. Bedlow, though he had none
by to prove that, as perhaps he would have been in the same case, if he had
been to have proved himself ever to have been in Westminster Hall, as the L. C.
J. intimated; yet he did it by a sufficient Circumstance, when he gave Sir
William Waller directions where to search for the Gun that was to have killed
the King, which was found accordingly. This is now the substance of what the
Prisoners, Wakeman, Corker, Marshal were charged with: the other, Rumley had
but one Witness against him, so went off on course, Sir George now called his
Witness, the Chief was Chapman the Apothecary, of which I have given a former
account. Then was his man Hunt, and Elizabeth Henningham called, who talked at
the Apothecary's rate; so that Oats was not at all contradicted by them, but
they might both say true, and that the C. J. told them. Then Sir Philip Loyd
was called upon by Sir George Wakeman, to adjust what Doctor Oats should say
at the Council Table, who said, but not upon Oath, that when Sir George was
called in before the Council, and told of his Accusation, he utterly denied
all, and did indeed carry himself as if he were not concerned at the
accusation. Then Oats was called in to tell what he knew further; for as yet
he had given but a hearsay evidence (as my old Master used to term it) he
replied with lift up hands, God forbid (for I must tell truth, says Sir Phil.
Lloyd, let it be what it will) that I should say any thing against Sir George
Wakeman; for I know nothing more against him. Oats replied, he knew nothing at
all of this. Sir George triumphed, and cried, this is a Protestant Witness. Now
had old Justice Clodpate, my old Master, been upon the Bench, he would have
taken up the Knight, and told him, he had given a very officious Testimony; for
he was to tell only what Oats said at that time, and not to pretend to skill
in Physiognomy; for he was not mealy mouthed, but would upon occasion have
talked his mind to Knights, or any Body, and would have said further, it
appears to me, and may appear to any body else, that this Knight has as great a
kindness for Sir George, as for truth, and bidden the Jury have observed
accordingly; he would not have left there neither, for he would have said,
admit Sir Philip says true, and that is as kind to him as can be, what would
Sir George infer? that Mr. Oats is now tied up in his Evidence, by no means,
for the Case is no more than if a man be brought before a Justice of Peace for
stealing a Cow, and that Witness makes a solemn protestation, that he knows no
more against him, yet afterward upon his Arraignment swears to a Horse too, in
another Bill of Indictment, the former asseveration is attested by his
Worship's Clerk, quaere, whether that will quit him for the Horse, or ought to
be so much as heard in a Court? Besides here has been a late judged Case,
Whitebread and Fenwick's, the Jury was withdrawn for want of full evividence
afterward one of the short came to swear home, and was admitted, the Prisoners
found, and executed accordingly, if that was right, as no question it was,
because practiced, as I have been informed, it must be much more in the right
now, to admit of Oats his further Testimony; for the Council Table is no Court
of Record as this is.

Sir Thomas Doleman was called in for Oats, who said, that Oats at that time
was in great disorder and confusion, and as feeble as ever he saw any body in
his life, so as he believed he could not give any body a good answer; and
further said, that Wakeman was called in, and gave his Answer, at which the
Council was amazed, for he did not in his opinion deny it so positively as one
that was innocent could, but shuffled matters off with expressions of the great
Loyalty and Services to the Crown of himself, and Family, and required
reparation for injury done. It seems Sir Philip and Sir Thomas had different
sentiments about Sir George his meene. When Sir Thomas Doleman had done, Sir
George unbidden fell into a repetition of what he had said at the Council Table
in his defense, which resolved only into a telling what a Gowen he had been for
the King, what work his Brother made at Worcester; how his Father lost eighteen
thousand pounds Estate for the King, how he was in a Plot for the King, was
taken at his Apothecaries, some Arms found in the Cellar, carried to Prison,
and in much danger of being hanged, and how his Family was mighty instrumental
in the saving of the King, as Colonel Gifford, his Cozen Carlos, and that the
Pendrels were menial Servants to the Family.

Then Corker was called, who began with a florid discourse reflecting upon the
Witnesses, that they had been men of scandalous lives, and that there was no
Plot, which he flourished off as well as he could, but not to any reasonable
satisfaction; then he came to trifling about going to Lamspring in Westphalia,
and such other small matters; but at last he said, he was not President of the
Benedictines; which was material, had it been well proved, for it obviated Mr.
Oats his Accusation of consenting to the six thousand pounds as President.
Then Marshal was called to say for himself, who made a great pother about a
white spot under his Perriwig, and Sir William Waller's ordering him to put it
off, and many inferences he would have made, and then made a great stir about
Witnesses he could have come within three days, and many good morrows to no
purpose. Then Corker called his Witness Nell Rigby, to prove that he was in the
Savoy when Pickering was taken; and that Oats and Bedlow did know so much: she
likewise averred, that Stapleton was President of the Benedictines, and Corker
never officiated as such, and that she saw Mr. Oats once in the House, who
came a begging to Mr. Pickering for charity, and that was in the midst of the
Plot, as was made out by circumstance, from whence Marshal inferred, it was not
likely they should trust him with any thing of that nature, and suffer him to
want. This now must be a new contrivance, for it would have been set up before
in Pickering's Trial, had there been any thing of truth in it. I now wonder,
that none from the Bench set upon that Bitch Fox, to run down her testimony,
for allow that to be true, the Plot is Nonsuit, Semel insanivimus omnes; my
old Master would have clawed the three penny Baggage, and told her her own, and
likewise have broke her credit with the Jury, by the circumstances, that it was
never before offered, a thing that they could not be so careless in, had the
thing been true. Now Mistress Sheldon was called to prove Stapleton President
of the Benedictines, who accordingly did so. Then Alice Broadhead did the same.

Then Dr. Oats was called again, but never examined, he is wise that can tell
why; without somebody was afraid he should have cleared the Point, as it was
formerly in another case about Mr. Howard's Son.

Then the Court asked them if they had done all three? Sir G. Wakeman fell to a
detesting, forswearing, and abominating the Plot, and that he had never a
farthing for any such thing. Corker much at that rate: And Marshall made an
Harangue, that had it not been for my Lord Chief Justice North, I believe would
have lasted till now; it was all full of protestations of the Innocence of the
Executed persons; which were fully answered by the Chapter J. Sc. Who after some
little trifling velitations with the Priests, summed up the Evidence. In the
first part he proved by Mr. Jenison, as has been hinted before, that Ireland
dyed with a lie in his mouth.

Now a man would wonder what he should urge that for, unless to infer, That if
dying men in their last breath would lie, why should living persons be believed
under their circumstances; especially, when a Jury is free by the Law to do
what they will without blemish in the case.

Then the C. J. goes on and sums up Oats his Evidence against Wakeman, which
his Lordship leaving or forgetting all the material Points, makes only
circumstantial: Till Sir Robert Sawyer put him in mind of his Commission, seen
by Oats, to be Physician to the new Army; and then his Lordship goes on, and
allows that, as likewise that he refused 10000 l. and would have 15000 to do
the Work; but with an unusual sweetness, leaves the Truth with the Jury, and
then falls most Religiously into a declarement a against shedding innocent
blood: which he did so pathetically, as no man would judge him to be the Son of
a Father, who, as Moderns say, was not very scrupulous in that point.

Then he goes on to Mr. Bedlow's Evidence, and though he summed it up a little
short, yet he makes him a second Witness against Wakeman, if the Jury will
believe him. Now considering these [Ifs] were never put before, why the Devil
should they now, would Old Clodpate have said; and so say I Tom Ticklefoot.

And then the Chief Just. prays the Bench in aid, if he had forgotten any
thing material.

Then his Lordship was pleased to say the Evidence against Corker was not full,
so as to prove any Fact, but only some Words; and that he was not President of
the Benedictines, his Lordship affirmed from the Testimony of three
Fling-stinks, without any manner of hint to the Jury, that they were not upon
their Oaths; The Charge against Marshal, his Lordship said was rather less then
against Corker, and so accordingly lightened it, as became him.

Then he comes to Sir Phillip Lloyd's Testimony, which he laid as great a
stress upon, as it would naturally bear; and so as to invalidate any further
testimony against Sir George Wakeman, his Lordship was pleased to name Sir
Thomas Doleman's Evidence, but with so little respect, as he might have, as
decently, let it alone: And to invalidate Oats his Testimony further, he takes
notice that he was begging, without intimation to the Jury, of any probability
of the matter, which must utterly destroy Mr. Oats for the future; for no body
that believes that, can believe any thing he says of the Plott. And then after
a Pious Exhortation to the Jury to take care of Innocent blood, he concludes,
telling them, That if they believe Oats and Bedlow, they may do well to find;
otherwise not.

Bedlow charged the Chief Justice for not summoning up his Evidence right; Who
only replied, He knew not by what authority this Man speaks. I shall only make
this Observation upon his Lordship, In all former Trials he went on without the
least hesitation or running the same over again, as he did not in this,
especially about the concern of innocent blood: But by all that is good, it was
my Old Master Clodpate's disease, peace be with him, always to Sham up an
Evidence when any body had bin with him the Morning before.

About an hour after the Jury returned and brought them in not guilty; but
according to their abundance of want of understanding, enquired whether they
might not bring them in guilty of Misprision or no? Now could such a thing come
into their politic pates, had they understood what the word meant? for that
implies a knowing of, but not consenting to a Treason. Now there was no manner
of color for such a thing; for the Evidence was full, if they believed them,
as to absolute Treason: If not, why would they think of any thing but
Acquittal? But it may be they knew not the force of the word, which led them
into that Error; I Am sure that is their best Plea; otherwise they must yield
themselves to be great betrayers of their Nation, and ly under a damned
suspicion of being foully practiced upon; Especially if that be true that runs
about in Coffee-Houses, That a Gentleman, that went out amongst them, had a
sealed Paper of 50 Guineys thrust into his hand.

They say in the North, That a Jury consists of Eleven Fools and a Knave. Now
those of the South, as being more refined Wits, are of a nobler consistence, as
having more of the Knave in them. For had they had a mind to have examined
matters, and not barely to have acquiest in outward appearance, they might have
considered, That Oats and Bedlow did not swear by practice like the Boys of
St. Omers, from this circumstance, That Rumley had but one Witness against him.
Now had Hanging, and not Truth been the designed matter, how easy a thing had
it been for Captain Bedlow to have agreed with Dr. Oats, and made up two
witnesses against Rumley, is obvious to every considering Capacity, and might
have played such a prank formerly to have served a turn, when they were listed
amongst the Pope's Mamalukes.

It is no small wonder, I confess, to Tom Ticklefoot, that no body from the
Bench nor Bar hinted that Circumstance; my Old Master Clodpate would have been
hanged before he would have missed such a Barn-dore.

I am more particular in this, to the end that circumstance of their not
Combining, may induce Juries for the future, to look upon them, as Men that
swears only according to the dictates of Truth, notwithstanding the Sham Tale
of the Doctor's begging at Pickering's.

FINIS.

