Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker R. in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Gilberto, Arch. Episc. Cantuar. a
sac. Dom.
April 15. 1673.
A SECOND DISCOURSE IN VINDICATION OF THE Protestant Grounds of Faith, Against
the Pretense of INFALLIBILITY In the ROMAN CHURCH, In Answer to The Guide in
Controversies by R. H Protestancy without Principles, AND Reason and Religion,
or the Certain Rule of Faith by E. W. With a particular Enquiry into the
Miracles of the Roman Church.

By Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for H. Martlock, at the Sign of the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1673.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY Earl of SHAFTSBURY, Lord High Chancellor OF
ENGLAND, etc.
My Lord,
I HOPE it will not be thought unseasonable to make an Address of this nature
to Your Lordship in the Beginning of Term, since the great Cause at present in
Your Court (as one of late pleasantly said) is thaet between the King and the
Pope, between our Church and the Church of Rome. And while so many Witnesses
are daily sworn of the Kings and the Churches side; it may not be improper to
lay open to Your Lordship the Nature and Merits of the Cause.

A Cause, My Lord, which was at first set on Foot by Ambition, carried on by
Faction, and must therefore be maintained by the like means; but can never hope
to prevail among us again, till subjection to a Foreign Power can be thought
our Interest, and to part at once with Reason and Religion be esteemed our
Honor. It is a Cause much of the nature of some others depending before Your
Lordship, more vexatious than difficult; and managed by such Advocates who
being retained in the Cause, though they have nothing material to say for it,
yet are ashamed to be silent. Who are always disputing about an end of
Controversies, but at the same time do their utmost to increase and perpetuate
them; and are ready to foment our differences that they may make use of them to
their own advantage.

While we have such restless Adversaries to deal with, part of our danger lies
in being too secure of the Goodness of our Cause: and methinks there can be
little satisfaction in lying still or quarrelling with each other, when we know
our common enemies to be at work undermining of us. But whatever repose others
enjoy, my Adversaries seem to deal with me, as some do with those whom they
suspect of Witchcraft; they think by pinching me so often, and keeping me from
taking rest, to make me say at last as they would have me. But the comfort is,
as long as I am secure of my senses, I am of my Religion against theirs: if I
once lose them or my understanding, I know not whether it may be my fortune to
be carried to Rome, or some more convenient place. And in my opinion they deal
with those under their care, as if they believed them not to be in their right
senses, for they keep them always in the dark, and think nothing more
dangerous than to let in light upon them. Wherein I cannot deny, but
considering the nature of their Cause, they take the most effectual course to
maintain it; for it not being capable of enduring a severe trial, nothing can
preserve its reputation, but Ignorance and Credulity: which are therefore in so
great esteem among them, that if it were a Custom to Canonize Things as well
as Persons, we might find those sacred names in their Litanies; and addresses
as solemn made to them, as ever were to Faith and Virtue among the elder and
wiser Romans.

I need not go far, for an Instance of their design to advance, even in this
Inquisitive Age, the Honor of these two great Pillars of their Church: For if
your Lordship shall be pleased to cast Your eye on the following Discourse,
especially that part which concerns the Miracles of the Roman Church, You will
find fufficient evidence of it almost in every Page. When I first engaged in
this Controversy I could hardly believe what I now see, that they would ever
have brought it to this issue with me, viz. That they would renounce all claim
to Infallibility, if they did not produce as great Miracles wrought in their
Church to attest it, as ever were wrought by Christ or his Apostles. The
boldness of which assertion, and the pernicious influence of it upon
Christianity it self, has made me take the more pains in the examination of
it. Which I have done with so much care in consulting their own approved
Authors, that I hope at last they will grow ashamed of that groundless calumny,
that I do not deal fairly in the citing of them. A calumny so void of proof,
that I could desire no better argument of a baffled Cause, than such
impertinent Clamours. But if impudent sayings will serve their turn, they need
never fear what can be written against them. Do they indeed think me a man so
void of common sense, as to expose my self so easily to the contempt of every
one that will but take pains to compare my citations? Have I the Books only in
my own keeping? or are they so rare that they cannot get a sight of them? How
then come they to know them to be false quoted? But alas! they are men of
business, and have not leisure to search out and compare Books, and therefore
the shortest way is to say, that without doubt they are all false. Their
numbers certainly are not so small, nor their business so great, but they might
have spared some to have undertaken this task particularly, if I had been
faulty: and in my mind it had been of some consequence to have freed their
Church from those heavy imputations of Fanaticism, and destroying the necessity
of a good life, from the Testimony of their own Authors. But if these could not
move them, I desire them not to spare me in this present subject of Miracles,
wherein I profess to rely on the Testimony of their own Writers; if they show
me any wilful mistakes therein, I will endeavor to give them public
satisfaction.

Were I not well assured, My Lord, of the Strength of my Evidence, as well as
of the Goodness of my Cause, I should never have appeared in it before a Person
of so sharp and piercing a Judgment as Your Lordship. But I have the rather
presumed to offer this Discourse into Your Lordships hands, and to send it
abroad under the Protection of Your Name, not only thereby to acknowledge the
particular Favors I have received from Your Lordship; but to thank You on a
more public Account, I mean for Your late generous owning the Cause of our
Religion and Church in so Critical a time; which not only gives a present
Luster to Your Name, but will preserve it with Honor to Posterity. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged and faithful Servant Edward Stillingfleet.

The Contents.
CHAP. 1. An answer to the Guide in Controversies about Infallibility and the
Resolution of Faith.
THE State of the Controversy. p. 295. The Principles of the Guide in
Controversies. p. 300. Those Principles Considered. p. 304. Of Particular
Divine Revelation as the Ground of Faith. p. 308. The Resolution of Divine
faith must agree to all. p. 314. Of immediate assent. p. 316. Of the assistance
of the Holy Ghost. p. 318. The absurdities of the Guides Principles. 322.
CHAP. II. The Principles of E. W. about Divine Faith laid down and considered.
E. W's. Principles laid done. p. 329. Some things premised to the State of the
Question. p. 340. Of the necessity of Grace and the sense of Moral certainty in
this Controversy. p. 346. 347. Gods veracity as the foundation of faith not
received on divine Revelation. p. 349. Of the notion of Divine faith. p. 353.
The true State of the Question. p. 358. My first argument laid down and
defended. p. 361. Of the Motives of Credibility and their influence upon faith.
p. 369. Of the Grounds of Faith. p. 376. Of the School-notion of the obscurity
of faith. p. 383. Of the Scripture notion of it. p. 386. Of the power of the
will in the assent of faith. p. 395. The second argument defended against E. W.
p. 400. Of the Circle in the resolution of faith not avoided by E. W. p. 423.
CHAP. III. An enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church.
E. W's. assertions about the miracles of the Roman Church. p. 434. The ways
proposed for examination of them. p. 439. Of the miraculous translation of the
Chapel of Loreto. p. 441. Of the miracles wrought at the Chapel of Loreto. p.
452. Of the miracles wrought by St. James at Compostella. p. 465. Of St. Mary
Magdalens vial and other Relics. p. 476. Of the miracles of St. Dominick. p.
488. Of the miracles of the Rosary of the B. Virgin. p. 493. Of the miracles of
St. Francis. p. 496. Of the miracles related of the British and Irish Saints.
p. 505. Of the Testimonies of St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine against the
continuance of the power of miracles. p. 567. Of the miracles of St. Vincentius
Ferrerius. p. 574. Of the Testimonies of their own Writers against the miracles
of the Roman Church. p. 585. Of the miracles reported by Bid and St. Gregory.
p. 589. Of the miracles wrought in the Indies. p. 615. Of the Impostures and
forgeries of miracles in the Roman Church in several examples. p. 624. Of the
insufficiency of this argument from their miracles to prove the Infullibility
of their Church. p. 663. Several conclusions about the proof of miracles. p.
664. The miracles of Heathens and Heretics compared with those of the Roman
Church. p. 670.
ERRATA.
PAge 302. line 28. read ultimate. p. 343. l. 15. ^. asse^t p. 421. l. 13 r.
signatures. p. 437. l. 13. r. convince. l. 18. r. disp^ssessed. p. 493. l. 15.
r. consi^^ing p. 502. l. 24. r. several p. 508. l. 22. r. any better p. 549.
after Saints insert* than p. 590. l. 14. r. ^o^l, p. 641. l. 11. r. Anglerius.

CHAP. I. An Answer to the Guide in Controversies about Infallibility, and the
Resolution of Faith.
. 1. THere are two great Pleas for The state of the Controversy about
Infallibility, and the Resolution of Faith.
the necessity of Infallibility in the Roman Church, one to make an end of
Controversies, the other to lay a sufficient Foundation for divine Faith.
Having therefore fully examined the former Plea in the foregoing discourse, I
shall now proceed to the latter; with a particular respect to those
Adversaries, who have undertaken the Defense of the Cause of the Church of Rome
against me in this Controversy. And because all this dispute refers to the
Principles of Faith, I shall undertake to show,

1. That the Principles laid down by them are false and fallacious.

2. That the Protestant Principles defended by me are sound and true.

1. For the better examination of their Principles, I shall give a brief
account of the Rise and State of this Controversy about the Grounds of Faith.
The Archbishops Adversary in Conference with him, asked how he knew the
Scripture to be the Word of God, hoping thereby to drive him to the necessity
of owning the Infallible Testimony of the present Roman Church: but he failed
so much of his end, that the Archbishop fully proved, that such a Testimony
could not be the Foundation of that Faith, whereby we believe the Scriptures,
to be the Word of God; and that there are sufficient Grounds for Faith without
it. One of the great arguments whereby he disproved that way of Resolving Faith
was, that it was impossible to avoid a vicious circle in proving the Churches
infallibility by Scripture, and the Scripture by the Infallible Testimony of
the Church. This difficulty, which has puzzled the greatest Wits of the Roman
Church, his Answerer thought to avoid by saying, that the Churches
Infallibility was not primarily proved by the Scripture, but by the Motives of
Credibility which belong to the Church in the same manner that Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles were proved to be Infallible. Which bold
assertion obliged me in a large discourse to show these three things. 1. That
this way of resolving Faith was manifestly unreasonable. 2. That supposing it
true he could not avoid the circle by it. 3. That it was false and built on no
other ground but a daring confidence.

1. The first I proved. 1. Because an Assent is hereby required beyond all
proportion or degree of evidence; the Assent required being Infallible and the
evidence only probable and prudential Motives. 2. Because hereby they must run
into all the Absurdities they would seek to avoid, it being impossible to give
a better account of Faith by the Infallibility of the Roman Church, than we can
do without it; both sides acknowledging that those Motives of Credibility do
hold for the Scriptures, which are by us denied to belong to their Church; and
if faith as to the Scriptures be uncertain if it rely on them, much more must
it be so as to the Churches Infallibility: If divine Faith as to the Scriptures
can rest upon motives of Credibility, there can be no necessity of the Churches
Infallibility to a divine faith; if it cannot, how come those motives to be a
sufficient ground for such a Faith as to the Church? For the Churches
Infallibility being the reason as to them of believing the things contained in
the Scripture, it ought to be believed with a faith equally divine with that
whereby we are to believe the Scriptures which are the instrument of conveyin^
the matters of Faith to us. Besides, the leaves every man's reason to be judge
in the choice of his Religion; because every man must satisfy himself as to
the credibility o^ those motives. And after all, this way o^ Resolving Faith by
the Churches Infallibility, does unsettle the very Foundations o^ Faith laid by
Christ and his Apostles, wh^ all supposed a rational certainty of the motives
of Faith to be a sufficient Foundation for it; but the pretense of
Infallibility do^^ overthrow the evidence of sense and reason and put the whole
trial of the Truth of Christianity upon the pitiful proofs which the^ bring for
the Church of Romes Infallibility. And when they have brought men to it they
cannot assure them what that Church is which they attribute this Infallibility
to who in that Church are the proper subjects of it; what kind of Infallibility
it is; no^ when the Church does define Infallibly: so many things are to be
believed without reason, both as the persons who are to define, and the manner
of their definitions.

2. Supposing this way true, the Circle still remains: which I proved by three
things. ^. From the nature of the faith they enquire for a resolution of, which
is not humane but Divine Faith. For the Question was not, whether by another
kind of Assent they could not escape the circle; but whether they could ^o it
in the resolution of Divine Faith or not? Either then the Churches
Infallibility is not to be believed with a Divine Faith, or there may be a
Divine Faith without an Infallible Testimony, or this Divine Faith of the
Churches Infallibility, must be built on the Scripture, and so the Circle
returns. 2. From the persons whose faith is to be resolved; the way of
resolving faith being a different thing from proving a matter of Faith to an
Adversary; granting then that to those who deny the Churches Infallibility, but
allow the Scriptures, they may prove the one by the other yet this signifies
nothing to the Resolution of their own Faith, which is the thing enquired
after: and yet even in proving to ^d^ersaries the Churches Infallibility from
Scipture^ they cannot avoid the Circle, when the Question returns about the
sense of those places; for then they must run to the Church; because the Church
which is Infallible has delivered this to be the sense of them. 3. From the
nature of that Infallibility which they attribute to the Church, which being
not by immediate divine Revelation, but by a Supernatural Assistance promised
in Scripture it is impossible to prove this Infallibility, but by first proving
the truth of tha^ Scripture wherein these promises are contained, and so the
Circle still returns; for the believe the Scriptures Infallible because o^ the
Churches Testimony, and they belie^^ the Church Infallible because of the
Promises of her Assistance recorded in Scripture.

3. It is false that there are the same motive of credibility as to the
Churches Infallibility which there were for the Infallibility of Mos^^ and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles which T. C. therefore very wisely declined t^
prove, and only said it was sufficient to she^ how he had escaped the Circle.

. 2. This is a brief account of that pan The Principles of the Guide in
Controversies. Guide in Contro. disc. 3. Ch 10. Sect. 123.
of the Resolution of Faith which has bee^ since assaulted by two several
Adversarie^ but in different ways. The first of them i^ the Guide in
Controversies; who ingenuousl^ confesses the Question about the Resolution of
Faith upon their Principles to be intricat^; so any one might easily guess by
the intricacy and obscurity of his answer to it. I shall endeav^ur to bring it
to as much clearness a^ possibly I can; that I may the better represent the
force and consequences of it. The substance of what he says, may be reduced to
these propositions.

1. That the Church may be considered two ways. 1. As a Society already
manifested Sect. 126.
by Divine Revelation (whether written or unwritten) to be infallibly assisted
by the Holy Ghost. 2. As a Society of men whose Testimony is to be received
upon prudential motives.

2. That the Church being considered in the former of the two acceptions; the
infallible Sect. 127.
authority and testimony thereof is not only an introductive into, but one of
the articles of divine faith; and that so many as believe the Churches
Infallibility in this sense, may safely resolve their divine faith of other
articles of their belief into its delivering them as such.

3. That whatever this Infallible Authority of the Church be, it is not
necessary that Ibid.
every one for attaining a divine and saving faith, be infallibly certain of
this Infallible Authority; or as he elsewhere expresses it; that it is not
necessary for divine faith, that Sect. 135.
it should always have an external rationallyinfallible ground, or motive
thereto (whether Church Authority or any other) on his part that so believes:
or that he have some extrinsecal motive or proponent of which he is infallibly
certain that it is infallible.

4. There are two sorts of faith to be resolved divine and humane, or infused
and acquisite; the one is always built upon divine Sect. 143. 153. 148.
Revelation, the other needs no more than prudential motives, or such as are
sufficiently credible or morally infallible; on which an acquired or humane
faith securely rests.

5. That there must be particular ultimate divine Revelation, (which may not be
to all Sect. 144, 145.
the same but to some one, to some another, viz. either Scripture, or Churches
Testimony, or Apostolical Tradition or Miracles) beyond which he can resolve
his divine faith no further, for proving or consirming which revelation, he can
produce no other divine revelution, but there must end; unless a process be
made in infinitum, or a running round.

6. Divine Faith as to such altimate particular divine Revelation, cannot be
grounded merely on Gods veracity, but that God has Sect. 145.
said this particular thing which we believe (namely that the testimony of the
Church, or Apostles, or Scriptures is true) which must either be grounded (that
it may be the Foundation of a divine faith) on some other divine Revelation and
so in infinitum, or else I must rest there with an immediate assent to it.

7. The internal efficient of all Divine faith is the power or Grace of the
Holy Ghost illuminating the understanding, that Sect.
the prime verity cannot lie in whatever thing it reveals; and also that the
particular articles of our faith are its Revelations; and persuading and
operating in the Will such a firm adherence unto these articles, as many times
far exceeds that of any humane science or demonstrations.

8. The ultimate resolution of a Christians divine faith, as to the extrinsecal
prime motive, ground, reason or principle thereof, S^c^
that equals in certainty the faith built upon it, can be no other than that
particular divine Revelation which is first made known to him, or from which in
building his faith ^e proceeds to the rest; as to the internal efficient, it is
into the Grace of the Holy Spirit.

9. The motives of credibility, or the rational evidence of the truth of
Christianity do serve indeed antecedently for an introductive to, or (after it
introduced) for a S^ct. 148.
confirmative of this divine faith, i. e. to make it credible or acceptable to
humane reason (my own or others) that this faith is true and no way liable to
error; that I am assured in it by the holy and no seducing Spirit; but not to
constitute it in the notion of faith divine; because the faith so styled is
supposed to rest always on an higher ground. viz. Revelation Divine.

10. That the infallibility of the Church grounded on Divine Revelation and
believed by a divine faith is a main ground and pillar of a Catholics faith
for any other articles Sect. 153.
thereof, that are established by the sam^ Churches Definitions, where the
Scriptures, or Tradition Apostolic are to him doubtful. Of which ground and
assurance of such points (believed by Catholics from the Churches infallible
Authority) the Protestant^ faith is destitute.

. 3. These are the Principles upon which Those Principles considered.
this Guide in Controversies undertakes to clear this intricate Question, and
to free their resolution of faith from the danger of a circle; I have but two
small things to object against this way. 1. That it gives up the cause in
dispute. 2. That notwithstanding it does not avoid the main difficulties.

1. That it gives up the cause in Dispute^ which was whether the Infallible
Testimony of the Church be the necessary Foundation of Divine Faith? for upon
occasion of the supposed necessity of this Infallibility, the Question was
first started; this Infallibility being asserted to be necessary by T. C. and
was the thing I chiefly opposed in the discourse of the Resolution of Faith.
Now this the Guide in Controversies freely yields to me, and consequently the
main Foundation of Faith asserted by my Adversary is destroyed: as plainly
appears by the third Proposition, wherein he affirms that an external
infallible proponent is not necessary to divine Faith. But this he does not
barely affirm, but, he says, it is copiously proved by many learned
Catholics: and to this purpose he cites Cardinal Lugo speaking of Divine Lugo
de ^irtute Fidei disp. 1. Sect. 12. P. 247.
Faith, who says, that the infallibility of the Church cannot be the first
Ground of Divine Faith; because this Infallible Authority of the church by
Assistance of the Holy Ghost is it self an article of Divine Faith. And
experience tells us that all Children or adult persons first coming to the
Faith, do not apprebend much less infallibly believe, this Infallible Authority
in the Church before any other article of Faith. And in the Law of Nature and
under the Law of Moses, the Churches proposition was not necessary in order to
faith; but the instruction of Parents was sufficient in one, and the doctrine
of Moses and the Prophets in the other, before their Prophecies were received
by the Church. He cites Estius likewise speaking of this Divine Es^i. in 3.
sent. 23. d. Sect. 13.
and Salvifical faith, that it is not material to faith what medium God makes
use of to bestow this gift of Faith upon men: many having believed that knew
nothing of the Churches infallibility. He cites Layman Paul. Layman. Th^olog.
moral. 2. l. lr. 1. c. 5.
asserting that it often comes to pass, that other articles of our faith are
explicitly believed before that of the Churches Infallibility; and withal this
Infallibility of the Church, depends upon the promise of the spirit; therefore
men must first believe that there is a spirit of God and consequently the holy
Trinity. Farther says he, it is plain that the primitive Christians did
believe with divine Faith, not for the Authority of the Church, which either
was not founded yet (when St. Peter believed Christ to be the Son of the living
God) or had not defined any doctrines of Faith. Again he denies the Churches
Authority to be the formal principle or motive of Faith; and that for this very
good reason, because this infallible Authority of the Church is one of the
things to be believed. Nay he cites Fa. Knot himself in his reply to
Chillingworth affirming Christians may have a true Knots answer to
Chillingworth p. 358.
Infallible Divine Faith, of which faith they have only a fallible proponent,
nor are infallibly certain thereof, i. e. as to the proponent. I now appeal to
the indifferent reader whether the main thing contended for by me, viz. that
the infallible Testimony of the Church is not necessary in order to Faith, be
not here fully granted to me?

2. But yet the account of Faith here given is very far from clearing the chief
difficulties of it, as will appear by these two things. 1. That this resolution
of Divine Faith is very unsatisfactory in it self. ^ 2. That it is liable to
the absurdities which he seeks to avoid by it.

1. That the resolution of Divine Faith laid down by him is very unsatisfactory
in it self: the principles of which are these. 1. That Divine Faith must rest
upon Divine Revelation. 2. This Divine Revelation upon which faith is built is
that which is first made known to the person, and from which he proceeds to
other matters of faith. 3. This Divine Revelation is not one and the same to
all, but to some the Authority of the Scriptures, to some the Authority of the
Church, to some Apostolical Tradition. 4. Divine Faith must rest upon this
Revelation with an immediate assent to it, without enquiring further, for if
there be any further process there must be so in infinitum or a circle. 5. That
the Holy Ghost does illuminate the understanding of him that believes, both as
to the veracity of God and the truth of his Revelation, and causes such a firm
adherence of faith, as many times far exceeds that of any humane Science or
demonstrations. But in this way I can neither be satisfied, 1. What that
particular divine Revelation is, which this divine Faith does rest upon? Not 2.
How this Faith can equally rest in several persons upon several ways? Nor 3.
How it can rest with an immediate assent upon any way? Nor 4. Wherein this way
differs from resolving Faith into the Testimony of the Spirit?

. 4. I cannot understand what that particular Of particular divine Revelation
as the ground of Faith.
divine Revelation is into which as into it^ prime extrinsecal motive, Faith is
here resolved? The thing enquired after is the reason of believing the truth of
what God has publicly revealed to mankind, as we say he has done the
Doctrines of Christianity the ultimate resolution of divine Faith as to this I
am told is that particular divine Revelation, which is first made known to a
man: i^ this particular divine Revelation the sam^ with Gods public and
general Revelation o^ distinct from it? If it be the same it can offer no
reason for my Faith, unless the same thing may be proved by it self; if it be
different, then God makes use of particular divine Revelations to men different
from his public, into which they are to resolve their Faith. Suppose then the
Question be thus put, why do you believe that Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead? The general Answer is, because God that cannot lie has
revealed it; but then the Question returns on what ground do you believe this
Revelation to have been from God with such a divine Faith as must rest upon
divine Revelation? For such you assert to be necessary. To this the Guide in
Controversies Answers, that the ultimate resolution of a Christians divine
Faith is into that particular divine Revelation first made known to him. What
particular divine Revelation I beseech him is that, on which I ground the
divine Faith of this Proposition, that the Doctrine of Scripture is Gods
Revelation? For of that we enquire. It cannot be understood of the rational
evidence of the truth of the divine Revelation; for that is asserted by him not
to be a sufficient foundation for divine Faith, which must rest upon nothing
short of divine Revelation: I would gladly be informed and directed by this
Guide in Controversies, since I must believe Gods Revelation with a divine
Faith, and this divine Faith must rest upon a divine Revelation; what that
particular divine Revelation is on which I am to believe with divine Faith, the
truth of Gods public and general Revelation? I have endeavored to find out
what his meaning herein is, but I confess I cannot: sometimes he seems to den^
any resolution at all of this divine faith into an^ further principles, and
quotes Layman with approbation, who says, that the formal reason of believing
what God says is his veracity; but that God has revealed such thing it. 133.
to us, cannot be any further resolved or pr^ved by divine Faith. In the next
Section he says, That divine Faith does not resolve into an extrinsecal, even
morally infallibl^ Sect. 134
motive thereof either as the formal cause, o^ always as the applicative
introductive o^ condition of this divine Faith. From whence it follows, that
this divine Faith may be where there is neither infallible nor prudential
motive; i. e. it may be, where no account at all can be given of it; for all
motives must be of one sort or other; and yet this divine Faith does rest upon
a particular divine Revelation, of which since no account can be given, it is
unreasonable to expect it. But I will try yet further by an Instance of his
own. The Question put by him is, why he believes the things contained in the
Gospel of St. Matthew, to be divinely revealed; he Answers, That he resolves
his Faith of the truth of those contents not into the Churches saying they are
true, although he believe all that true the Church says, but into divine
Revelation; because God by his Evangelist delivers them for truth: Again he
says, When he believes that all contained in St. Matthew's Gospel is true,
because the Church tells him i^ i^ so, and then believes that the Church
^elleth him true, because God has revealed ^n some part of his Word, that the
Church in this shall not err; here his Faith he says, is ultimately resolved
again, not into the Churches Authority, but the divine Revela^ion concerning
the Church. This looks like something at first hearing, if one do not press ^oo
far in the examination of it; but being ^hroughly searched into, how profound
soever it may seem, it is scarce tolerable sense upon his own principles. For
it is agreed now on all hands that in the Question of the resolution of Faith,
the enquiry is not why we believe what God reveals; but why we believe this to
be a divine Revelation; and the Question is now put particularly concerning the
doctrine contained in St. Matthews Gospel: his principles are, That this must
be believed by divine Faith, and that this Faith must rest upon divine
Revelation; I now enquire upon what particular divine Revelation he does build
this act of divine Faith, that St. Matthew's Gospel contains the Word of God?
He Answers, first, Though he believes it to be true because the Church says it
is so, yet his Faith is not resolved into the Churches Testimony, but into
divine Revelation (...) What divine Revelation does he mean? that which is in
Question? viz. That St. Matthew's Gospel is divine Revelation: if so the^ he
does not believe it because the Church says it; but if he does believe it
because of the Churches Testimony, then it cannot be o^ the account of Gods
delivering it for truth by the Evangelist. For does he believe it because the
Evangelist says so or not? If h^ does, then he does not believe it, because
the Church says it, if he does not believe it because the Evangelist says it,
then he must believe it because the Church says it, and so his Faith must be
resolved into the Churches Testimony, which if it be a divine Faith* must
according to his own principles suppose that the Churches Testimony is a divine
Revelation, and the formal object of divine Faith. The same absurdity lies in
the other Answer, He believe^, he says, that all contained in St. Matthew's
Gospel is true because the Church tells him so; and then believes that the
Church tells him true, because God has revealed in some part of his Word, that
the Church in this shall not err. And yet his Faith is not resolved into the
Churches Authority but the divine Revelation concerning the Church. This Answer
must be understood either of St. Matthew's Gospel being proved by some other
part of Scripture, and then I grant the circle is avoided; but that does not
answer the present difficulty, which is concerning the ground of believing not
some one part of divine Revelation, but the whole: Or else it must be
understood of St. Matthew's Gospel being proved by some part of it self. And
then he resolves his Faith thus. He believes what St. Matthew's Gospel says
concerning the Church, because he believes St. Matthew's Gospel to be true; and
believes St. Matthew's Gospel to be true with a divine Faith, because the
Church tells him so. Can any thing now be more plain than that, he must resolve
his Faith into that Authority upon which he believed St. Matthew's Gospel to be
true, which himself confesses to be that of the Church? Only if a man can be
so foolish to believe first the truth of St. Matthew's Gospel, because the
Church says it, and at the same time believe the Church to say true, because
St. Matthew's Gospel says so, that man's Faith is to be resolved into nothing
but the dancing of Fairies, which have put him into such a circle that he can
never find the way out of. But if he mean any thing else I know not what to
impute such an absurd way of proceeding to; unless it be to a through
intoxication of School Divinity, which confounds all true notions and distinct
conceptions of things, and makes men have such swimming brains, that all things
turn round with them.

. 5. 2. But supposing I could understand The resolution ofdivine Faith must
agree to all?
what this particular divine Revelation meant, into which this divine Faith
must be resolved, why may not one particular way serve all mankind for it? Must
there be several and all equal foundations of divine Faith? I can easily
satisfy my self of the reason of asserting it^ but not of the reason of the
thing in this way of resolving Faith. The true reason of asse^ting it was the
plain evidence that many persons had a true divine Faith, without knowing any
thing of the Churches Infallibility: this made some men in the Church of Rome
confess that it was not always necessary; but least on the other side they
should seem hereby to forego the Palladium of that Church, they do withal say,
that sometimes Faith may begin there: and so run into the very same absurdities
that the others do. For if one man can resolve his Faith well so, why not a
hundred, why not a thousand, why not all Christians? If all cannot do it
without running into a circle, neither can one; for the process of Faith is
alike in all. Not that the same means are used to all persons; for it is
evident that men believe upon different grounds; but what is absurd if a
thousand do it, is equally absurd if but one do it. Although the Guide ^n
Controversies does not suppose it necessary ^or men to resolve their Faith into
the Churches Infallibility; yet he does suppose that some men may do it. Well
then, we will put the case that any one person does re^olve his Faith
concerning Gods Revelation unto the Churches Infallibility as the ground of his
divine Faith; I desire to be informed by this worthy Guide, whether he does not
run into the same absurdities, which all would do if they proceeded that way?
i. e. whether it be any more possible for one to free himself from a circle
than for all? Is not the reason assigned by Canus and Layman, and Lugo this
viz. because the Churches Infallibility i^ one of the things to be believed as
revealed by God, and therefore cannot be the ground of Faith to any? And will
not this reason exclude any one person from doing it, that resolves his Faith
as he ought to do? So that if this hold in any one, being drawn from the reason
of the thing and not from the circumstances of persons, it must equally hold
against all persons, and consequently no one person can reasonably establish
his Faith as to Gods Revelation upon the Churches Infallibility.

. 6. 3. I am far from understanding this way Of immediate Asnt.
of immediate asse^^t to the divine Revelation* I grant the reason against
proceeding furthe^ to be very good, for the Guide could see n^ passage that
way, but over rocks and precipices: and therefore finds out a shorter cut by
asserting an immediate assent to the Divine Revelation. But to what divine
Revelation does he mean? The Authority of Soripture Churches Infallibility,
Apostolical Tradition, or any of these? It is all one to me, which it is, for
it is equally unreasonable, to allo^ any of them. For I look upon Faith a^ an
act of the mind, which must always have a reason moving it to assent. Even in
self evident Propositions where the assent is most immediate, yet there is the
greatest and clearest reason for it, viz. the evidence of the thing, which
makes the understanding never hesitate or doubt, but yield a firm assent upon
the first apprehension, and proportionable to the reason and evidence of the
thing, or of the motive enclining to assent, so is the readiness and firmness
of it. But to assert an assent in Faith so immediate, of which no motive or
reason can be assigned proportionable to it, is a thing repugnant to the nature
of our reasonable faculties, and it is to make one of the noblest acts of our
understandings a mere blind and brutish assent. All that we enquire for, is a
sufficient reason to move our minds to believe in the act of divine Faith;
which is seen in all the acts of humane Faith. For no man can reasonably
believe what another says, or that he has said so, but he is able to give an
account of both of them. And it would be very strange that in the most weighty
matters of Faith, on which men's eternal happiness and misery depend, they
should be obliged to assent in such an immediate manner that they can have no
good account to give of their divine Faith. Yes, ^aith the Guide, an account
may be given ^o make this assent appear prudent by the mo^ives of credibility:
But that is not the thing we enquire for; but a sufficient foundation for
divine Faith: and as to this he asserts, that our Faith does immediately rest
upon divine Revelation without proceeding to another Revelation for the ground
of it. But now then can this divine Faith have a divine Revelation for its
ground? It may have it for its material object, which comes not under our
consideration; but only the formal object on motive of that Faith as to this
Revelation. We will suppose the Churches Infallibility to be the matter
believed, I demand a reason why this is to be believed? The Answer is, because
God has revealed it in his Word; there the Q^estion returns what reason have
you to believe that to be the Word of God? Here the Guide cries out, stand
there; if you proceed a step further you are lost. For if you say upon another
Revelation, then that upon another, and so without end. But say I, you tell me
I must believe this to be Gods Word with a divine Faith; and this divine Faith
must rest upon a divine Revelation as its formal cause; assign me that, or you
overthrow the nature of divine Faith; what divine Revelation is there for this
Faith to rest upon? None say you, but here it must stop; if so, then it is
certain by your own principles this either can be no divine Faith, or else
divine Faith does not always need a divine Revelation. So that this way of the
resolution of Faith overthrows it self; and needs no other opposition but of
one part to another.

. 7. 4. It may be all this may be cleared by Of the assistance of the Holy
Ghost.
the Assistance of the Holy Ghost supplying the want of another Revelation, by
its illuminating and confirming the mind. So the Tragoedians of old called down
the Gods upon the Stage, when they could extricate themselves by no other
means. Not that I do in the least doubt the efficiency of the divine Spirit in
the act and exercise of Faith; or that God by secret and unexpressible ways may
strengthen and increase Grace in the hearts of men, which thereby become better
assured of the things they believe. But the Question now ^s whether our Faith,
as to the motive and ^eason of it can, or ought to be resolved into ^he
illumination of the Holy Ghost? And in truth after all his turnings and
windings the Guide sits down at last in the grossest way of resolving divine
faith into the Testimony of the Holy Ghost. For he says that does ^lluminate
the understanding that the prime verity cannot lie in whatever thing it
reveals, and also that the particular articles of our faith are its
revelations. Was ever any thing more fully said to this purpose by the highest
Calvinists or Enthusiasts? Have the ^isputants of the Church of Rome hither^o
charged them with a circle in this ^esolution of faith, equal with theirs
between the Church and Scripture; and has the very Guide in Controversies
found no way to escape one whirlpool, but by falling into another? But since I
see no reason to believe this Guide in Controversies to be infallible, any more
than the Pope himself, I hope I may have leave to ask him some few Questions.
Does he in earnest believe that our assurance of Gods veracity and the truth of
his revelations do flow from the immediate illumination of the Spirit of God? I
would fain know then, 1. Why he trouble^ himself about any other resolution of
faith* For by this way he resolves faith in all the parts of it. If you ask the
first Question^ why you believe that to be true which God reveals? The Answer
is ready, the Holy Ghost illuminates my mind in the belief of this* If you
again ask, why you believe these particular articles to be Gods revelations;
the answer is already given, the same Holy Ghost illuminates my mind in that
too. What need Church-Infallibility, Apostolical Tradition, motives of
credibility, or any other way; the work is completely and effectually done
without the assistance of any of them* 2. Is not this to tell unbelievers that
we can give them no satisfaction as to the grounds of our divine faith? It is
true, he grants something may be said for a dull kind of humane and acquisite
faith, which others are capable of understanding; but for divine faith that
depends upon such secret and private illuminations, which no person can at all
judge of, but he that has them; nor he very well, unless another revelation
assures him, that these are the illuminations of Gods Spirit and not the
deceptions of his own. Especially since it is a principle in the Roman Church
that no man can attain any absolute certainty of Grace without a particular
Revelation from God. See then what a wilderness this Guide has led us into! We
^re to believe that what God has revealed ^s true, and that he has revealed
these things, from the illumination of the Holy Ghost: ^ut we cannot certainly
know that we have ^uch an illumination without another reve^ation to discover
that; and so we must run ^n without end or turn back again the same way we
went, to believe illumination by ^evelation and revelation by illumination. 3.
How he can possibly give himself any good account of his faith in this manner?
For since the fundamental principle of faith ^s the veracity of God, and the
belief of Gods veracity is here attributed to the illumination of the Holy
Ghost; we may see how excellent a Guide this is, that thus stumbles in a plain
way, or must of necessity go forward and backward. For I desire him to satisfy
me according to this resolution of faith, in this Question; why he does believe
whatsoever God says is true? his Answer is, because the Holy Ghost by his
inward illumination assured me so; But then I ask again, why he is assured of
the truth of what the Holy Ghost enlightens him? his Answer must be if he
speaks at all to the purpose, because the Holy Ghost is God and cannot speak
any thing but truth. So that the veracity of God is proved by the Spirits
Illumination, and the Spirits Illumination by Go^ veracity. But there is yet
another principl^ which faith stands upon, which is, that Go^ has revealed the
things we believe; he^ again I ask why he believes these articles a^ Gods
revelations, his answer is, the Hol^ Ghost by enlightening my mind has assured
me of it. But then I ask how he is su^ with a divine faith, which in this case
is necessary that there is a Holy Ghost and tha^ this is the illumination of
the Holy Ghost^ Here he must return again to divine Revelation, wherein the
promise of the Holy Ghos^ is made. Judge now, Reader, whether thi^ be not an
admirable Guide in Controversies and whether he has not given a very
satisfactory account of the Resolution of Faith?

. 8. Besides that this way is thus unsatisfactory The absurdities of these
principles.
in it self, I have this further charge against it, that other ways are liable
only to the single absurdities of their own particula^ opinions; but this blind
Guide hoping to clea^ himself of one great absurdity, has not only run into it
the very way he seeks to escape it, but into many more besides. If there be any
thing absurd in the Calvinists Resolution of Faith he has taken in that; if
there be any thing absurd in resolving faith by the Infallibility of the Church
he is liable to that too; because though he does not think ^t necessary he
allows it to be good; and last of all that which he looks upon as the advantage
of their faith above ours plungeth him unavoidably in as bad a circle as may
^e. And that is, That the Infallibility of the Church being once believed by a
divine Faith from the Revelation of it in Scripture it is a ground of faith to
him in all controversies that arise concerning the sense of Scripture; I am not
now to examine the falseness of the pretense, (which has been done already and
may be more afterward) that which at present I am to show, is, that it is
impossible for him in his resolution of Faith concerning the sense of Scripture
to avoid the circle. Let us see how he attempts it, Suppose I be asked, says
he, concerning some article of Sect. 151.
faith defined by the Church, though the same article does not appear to me
clearly delivered in the Scriptures, why with a divine faith I believe it to be
divine Revelation? I answer, because the Church which is revealed by the
Scriptures to be perpetually assisted by the Holy Ghost, and to be infallible
for ever in matters delivered by her, has delivered it to me as such. If again
why with a divine faith I believe these Scriptures in general or such a sense
of those texts in particular, which are pretended to reveal the Churches
infallibility to be divine Revelation? I answer as before, because Apostolical
Tradition has delivered them to be so: which Apostolical Tradition related or
conveyed to me by the Church I believe with a divine faith by the interna^
operation of the Holy Spirit, without havi^^ at all any further Divine
Revelation, from which I should believe this Revelation to b^ divine. This is
the utmost progress of divine faith with him. I know not how much faith there
may be in this way, I am su^ there is not the least shadow of reason. For if a
stop be made at last by the internal op^ration of the Holy Spirit, what need so
much ado to come thither? Might not the sam^ answer have served as well to the
first an^ second Question as to the third? When yo^ were asked why with a
divine faith you b^lieve such a sense of Scripture to be divine Revelation?
Might not you have hindered a^ further proceeding by saying, I believe i^ with a
divine faith by the internal operation of the Holy Spirit, without having at
all an^ further divine Revelation. But if you though it necessary to assign
another divine Revelation for the foundation of that faith, by the Churches
Infallibility, why will not the sam^ reason hold for the last act? which must
have as good a Foundation as the other, or els^ how comes it to be a divine
faith as well as ^he other? But the subtilty of all this is, ^ou have it seems
by your office of Guide ^he opening of the Gate, and you hold it ^pen so long
as to let through all your Friends, ^or Infallibility and Tradition must by any
means be let through, and when these are ^assed, down falls the Gate in so rude
a man^er as is enough to cripple any other that endeavors to get passage. Can
any man pos^ibly assign a reason, why the operation of the Spirit should not
have as great force, before the Churches Infallibility be let in? But this it
is to be a Guide in Controversies, ^o direct Infallibility, Tradition and the
Ho^y Ghost to know their distance and to keep their due places; and it is a
great favor that the Holy Spirit is allowed to bring up the rear and to make
all sure, but by no means to offer to go before Infallibility or Tradition. For
these are capable of doing better service afterward than the Holy Ghost is
ever like to do them; the greatest use of it being to make good a Pass, that
nothing follow to disturb the march of Infallibility and Tradition. But if I
may be so bold once more to presume to ask this wonderful Guide; when the
dispute is about the sense of Scripture, why he does believe such a particular
sense which does not appear clearly to him in Scriptures to be the infallibl^
sense of it, or to be divine Revelation? Hi^ answer is, because the Church
which is revealed in Scriptures to be infallible has delive^ed this to him as
the sense of it. Very well this is an Answer I understand, though I se^ no
reason for it. But I proceed, why d^ you believe this Infallibility to be the
sens^ of those places which speak of the Church since to me they are far from
appearing t^ be clearly delivered in those Scriptures Remember you believe this
with divine faith, and this divine faith must have divine Revelation; the
Question then is u^ on what divine Revelation do you believ^ the Infallibility
of the Church to be pr^mised in Scripture? He Answers, upon Ap^stolical
Tradition. Is this Apostolical Tradition the same with the Scriptures or
different from it? If the same what great clearness can there be in this than
in the Scriptures? If different, what divine Revelation is your faith of the
Infallibility o^ that built upon? He ingenuously consesse^ none at all, for
then there must be a process in infinitum or a circle. And yet hi^ principle is
that divine revelation is nece^sary to divine faith; but there can be non^ here
by his own consession, without process in insinitum or a circle; which i^ to
acknowledge the absurdity of his own way as far as a man can desire. Well, but
how comes this Apostolical Tradition to be known to him? By the Church he
says; but may the Church be deceived in delivering Apostolical Traditions? No,
he says, she is infallible: but do you believe her infallible with divine
faith? Yes, he says that must be done: then at last there must be a divine
Revelation again for this Infallibility, and so the circle returns. No, he
says, at last, he believes the Churches Testimony infallible only with a
humane and acquisite faith upon prudential motives; but he believes the
Apostolical Tradition related by the Church with a divine faith. Was there ever
such a perplexed Guide in Controversies? The Infallibility of the Church is
sometimes to be believed with a divine faith and sometimes not; and yet when it
is not to be believed with a divine faith it is the Foundation of the divine
faith of Apostolical Tradition; for he assigns no other ground or reason for it
besides the Infallible Testimony of the Church. But this infallibility he says
may be known two ways by promises of Scripture, or prudential motives; not to
dispute now the possibility of proving the Churches Infallibility by prudential
motives; (which I shall do at large afterward) the thing I now enquire after
is, since the Apostolical Tradition must be believed by divine faith, and the
belief of it comes by the Churches Infallibility; whether any other
Infallibility can secure such a faith besides the Infallibility by Promise; for
the Infallibility asserted being a security from error by divine Assistance,
and that assistance only supposed to be promised in Scripture, there can be no
other Infallibility here understood but that; which Infallibility by his own
assertion must be believed by divine faith, which divine Faith must rest upon
divine Revelation; and so he believes the sense of Scripture because of the
Churches Infallibility, and the Churches Infallibility by Apostolical
Tradition, and Apostolical Tradition by the Churches Infallibility, and the
Churches Infallibility by the sense of Scripture. See now what an admirable
Guide in Controversies we have met with! and with what skill and dexterity he
has escaped the circle. And so I take my leave of this GUIDE, finding nothing
in him further material about Infallibility, which I have not answered in the
foregoing Discourse. The Considerato^ urging so much the very same things, and
frequently in the same words, that I now think he either was the same person,
or made very bold with him.

CHAP. II. The Principles of E. W. about the certainty of Divine Faith laid
down and considered.
. 1. HAving met with so little satisfaction from the Guide The Principles of E.
W. laid down.
in Controversies, I now betake my self to the Rule; no Fancies, Toys, Trifles,
or Fallible Glosses, I assure you, for those E. W. cries out upon almost in
every page of his worthy work; but Reason and Religion, or The Certain Rule of
Faith. What can any man desire more? unless it be to see Mr. Stillingfleet
joined in the Title Page with Atheists, Heathens, Jews, Turks and all
Sectaries. And that he might own a greater obligation to him, than all that
Rabble; he dispatches them all, after a fashion, in 30. pages, and spends above
600, upon him. O what a pestilent Heretic is this Stillingfleet! that deserves
so many lashes beyond Atheists, Heathens; Jews or Turks! If he had been any one
of those, he might have been gently used, for never were they fairlier dealt
with by any man that undertook them. But he is not so much their Friend to
thank him for this kind usage: and E. W. thinks he will have enough to do to
defend himself. I confess I think so too, if either of his Books against me,
were to be thrown at my head; for they are very thick and as heavy as is
possible. And to my great comfort, I never yet saw two such bulky books, whose
substance might be brought into a less compass; for setting aside Tautologies
and tedious repetitions, frequent excursions and impertinent digressions the
pith and marrow of both his Books lies in this one word Infallibility. But it
is time to fall to my business, for fear of more Advertisements; and
Infallibility being the main design of his Books, that shall be the subject of
my present debate with him. And because this E. W. is a great pretender to
Principles; the method I shall proceed in shall be first to consider his
Principles, and then to defend my own. For which I shall chiefly make use of
his last Book, it being in effect but another edition of his former, the other
as I suppose being disposed of to better purposes than to be read; for I never
heard of one person in England that read it over. However, what there is
material in it, different from the last, as to the present controversy, I
shall upon occasion take notice of.

The two main Principles he builds upon are these.

1. That without an Infallible Church, there can be no certainty of Faith.

2. That the Roman Catholic Church is this Infallible Church.

If he can prove these two, he shall not need any more to establish their
Religion, or to overthrow ours. And I will say that for his praise that he has
brought the controversy into a narrow compass; for he confesses it is endless
to dispute out of Scripture and Fathers, since witty men by their fall^ble,
Glosses can turn and wind them which way they please, but there is nothing so
stiff and inflexible as a standing infallible Oracle in the Church, which being
once believed all Controversy is at an end. But we may as soon hope to see all
other controversies ended by dry blows, as this Principle proved to the
satisfaction of any reasonable man.

The main proofs for the necessity of the Churches Infallibility, which he
insists upon are these. 1. That there can be no Divine Faith without it. 2.
There can be no certainty as to the Canon, or edition, or sense of Scripture.
3. There can be as little certainty as to the sense of the Fathers or the
Primitive Church.

1. That there can be no divine Faith without it. This he frequently insists
upon in both his Books; and with so much vehemence, as to make the deniers of
Infallibility to overthrow all Faith and Religion. Which being a charge of the
highest nature, ought to be made good by the clearest evidence. Whether that
which E. W. produces, be so I shall leave any one to judge, when I have given
an Account of his Principles as to this matter. In his first Book called
Protestancy without Principles, he begins with this subject; and lays down
these assertions, upon which all his Discourse is built.

1. That Gods infallible Revelation requires an infallible Assent of Faith; or
an infallible verity revealed to us forcibly requires an answerable and
correspondent infallible assent of Faith in us: the contrary he calls wild
Doctrine; this subjective infallibility, as he calls it, he offers very wisely
to prove from those places of Scripture, which speak of the assurance which
Christians had of the truth of their Religion.

2. This infallible assent of Faith does require infallible Teachers; for
infallible believers and infallible Teachers are correlatives. And in the
second Chapter, he goes about to prove it, because, if Christ's infallible
Doctrine be only fallibly taught, no man has certainty what it is; and seeing
what is fallible may be false, Christ's Doctrine may not be taught at all; which
is infallible and cannot be false; and he that should abjure this fallible
Doctrine, does not deny therein Christ's Doctrine, and cannot be upon that
account an Heretic. But to Disc. 1. c. 2. p. 24, 27.
make Faith Infallible, he asserts, That every Preacher sent by the infallible
Church, as a member conjoined with it, is infallible in his Teaching: and on
the contrary, whosoever renounces an Infallible society cannot teach with
certainty Christ's infallible Doctrine. From whence he says, follows an utter
ruin of Christian Religion. In his third Chapter he further proves, That if
the Church were fallible in her Teaching, God would oblige us to believe a
falsity; because God commands men to hear the Church, and if the Church may
err, then men are obliged to believe a false Doctrine taught by her. And all
other means short of this Infallibility would be insufficient for preserving
Christian Religion in the world. In the fourth Chapter he comes to a particular
consideration of divine Faith, and from thence proves the necessity of
infallibility. Faith, says he, requires two things essentially, an object
which is Gods Revelation, and a Proposition of this object; by Virtue of which
the elicit act of Faith follows in a believer, and intellectually lays as it
were hold, both o^ Gods Revelation and the thing revealed. Now to prove the
necessity of such an infallible Proposition in order to divine Faith, ho^ lays
down some abstruse Propositions.

1. That Gods infallible Revelation avail^ nothing in order to Faith, unless
Christian^ by their Faith lay hold on the certainly thereof, or own it as
infallible and the assured ground of their Assent.

2. That the measure and degrees of certitude in the assent are according to
those which the Proponent gives to the Revelation. If he teaches doubtfully,
the assent is doubtful, if probably, the assent is probable, is infallibly, the
assent is infallible: the reason which he gives of this, is, because an object
revealed receives its light from the proposal, as an object of sight does from
the light of the air. As long therefore, says he, as the infallibility of a
Revelation stands remote from me, for want of an undoubted application made by
an infallible proponent, it can no more transfuse certainty into Faith, than
Fire at a great distance warm; that is, no more than if it were not certain in
it self, or not at all in Being.

3. From hence he says, it follows that Protestants can only doubtfully guess
at what they are to believe, and consequently never yet had nor can have
Divine, certain and infallible Faith. Because they cannot ^ropose Faith
infallibly. Hence he proceeds Chapter fifth and sixth, to disprove Moral
Cer^ainty, as insufficient in order to Faith; and destroying, as he says, The
very being and ^ssence of Divine and supernatural Faith; because the sole and
adequate object of divine and supernatural Faith is Gods infinite veracity
actually speaking to us; but this infinite veracity, (when it is duly
proposed), transsuseth more certainty into the elicit act of Faith, than any
Moral Certainty derived from inferior motives can have. For all Moral
Certainty is at least capable of falsity and may deceive us: Gods infallible
veracity cannot be false nor deceive if Faith rest upon that Motive, and if it
rest not there, it is no Faith at all. Nay he asserts, that supernatural Faith
is more certain and infallible, than all the Metaphysical Sciences which nature
can give us; For which he gives this plain reason, Because the infinite
veracity of God which only supporteth Faith with greater force, energy, and
necessity transfuseth into it, a supereminent insallibility, supereminent, he
says, and above all the Certainty, which the principles of nature can afford.
This is the substance of E. W^ principles of Faith in his first Book: which is
somewhat more enlarged in the second In one Chapter he designs to prove if the
Roman Church be not infallible, there is no tru^ Disc. 2. c. 5.
Faith in the world, the reason of which in his own easy terms is this, For
the mere possibility of deceiving Christians in one Article Disc 2. c. 14.
impossibilitates the Belief of all she proposes. In another Chapter, That she
is not only infallible, c. 15.
but that the Adversaries of her infallibility destroy the very essence of
Christian Religion. And in the next, That divine Faith in this present state of
things necessarily requires a Church infallible, because the infallibility of
faith necessarily requires not only an Infallible Revelation, but a^ infallible
Proponent. Ruin one or the other Infallibility, faith can be no more but an
uncertain Assent and consequently can be no faith at all; This reason he
diversifies into many shapes, and represents it in different words, but it
comes in at every turn. So in the next Chapter he proves the Catholic c. 16.
Church Gods infallible Oracle, because infallibility once taken away, no man
can have assurance so much as of one Christian verity; the reason is, no man
can be assured of what is fallibly taught: because what is so taught, may by
virtue of the Proposition be ^alse, but a doctrine so far removed from
in^allible certainly, for want of a due application of its infallibility, comes
not near to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, which was applied, taught
and proposed infallibly: And in the same Chapter he says, It is utterly
impossible, that an infallible verity C. 16 n. 14.
as revealed, though fallibly proposed should have influence upon faith, or
work in believers a most firm assent. Not long after, he asserts, That
infallibility being taken C. 18 n. 4.
away, no man can tell, but that Christian Religion is a fiction; for these are
his words. A feigned and fallible Religion are near Co^sin Germans. The one is
a Fiction, the other at least may be so, and for ought any man can know is no
better: And in the same Chapter he says, That without infallibility Religion
N. 12.
is mere Skepticism: because all other means, infallibility being set aside,
may be equally pleaded by Heretics, (as Arians and such like,) as by any
other. To the same purpose in the following Chapter, where he proposes that
which he calls the last proof of the Churches Infallibility, which is still the
C. 19. n. 3.
very same over and over; (for he out-does the Cook of Brundusium in serving up
the the same meat in several dresses) viz. That the denial of it overthrows
Christian Religion; be pleased to observe his concise way o^ reasoning. If the
infallibility of reveale^ doctrine be lost as it were in the way between God
and us, If the Revelation appear not as it is in it self infallible, when we
assent to it by faith, that is, if it be no^ infallibly conveyed and applied to
all by a^ ^nerring proponent, as it subsists in its first cause, infinitely
infallible, faith perishes, w^ are cast upon pure uncertainties, and man justly
doubt whether such a doctrine, separated from that other Perfection of
Infallibility be really true or no? In his third Di^course we meet with a
convincing Argumen^, as he calls it, for Infallibility. If all Authority
imaginable, whereupon faith can depend, Dis. 3 c. 4. N. 2.
conveyed or delivered these verities both as infallible Truths and infallibly,
and I assent to the doctrine with a belief not infallible, but only morally
certain, I leave by my fallible moral assent the true infallible teaching and
conveying Oracles of Christian doctrine, and believe upon a mere phansied
Authority, which was never empowered to convey Gods verities to any. Before I
come to examine these things it will be necessary to lay down his notion of
faith in his own terms, viz. That it essentially trends obsecurely to its own
object; (no matter for understanding it, but the words found c. 8. ^. 1c.
well together) and by this says we l^y hold upon the most supreme and all
comprehending infallibility proper to God alone. But withal we are to take
notice of a twofold certitude N. 14.
in faith; the one a certitude of Infallibility arising from the supernatural
principles which concur to the very act of belief, and these being not liable
to error can never operate, but when the divine Revelation really is, and
implies not only the mere truth of the act, but moreover an infallible
determination to Truth: the other a certitude of adhesion not grounded on
evidence, but upon most prudent motives proposed to Reason, (which clearly
discovered) the Will by her ^pious affection commands and determines the
intellectual faculties to assent indubitably. After all which he concludes,
that the plain c. 10, 11.
and easy Resolution of Faith, is into Gods veracity as speaking to men by an
infallible Church. Thus I have laid together so many parcels of E. W's.
rambling discourse, as were necessary in order to the examination of it. And
indeed I cannot compare his reasoning to any thing better than his own pretty
notion of faith, for just as he says, Faith essentially tends obscurely to its
object, so his principles do to his conclusion.

But that I may proceed with the greater clearness, I must premise these two
things;

1.. 2. That the Question is not concerning Some things premised to the S^a^e
of the Question.
the necessity of any internal Assistance o^ divine Grace, but of an external
insallibl^ Proponent in order to divine Faith. So tha^ whatever certainty of
says is derived from the Spirit of God, is no ways pertinent to ou^ present
debate. I do not deny that a trul^ divine faith, does suppose a divine and
super natural assistance; I do not deny, that the Holy Ghost may confirm men's
minds to suc^ a degree of certainty, which may exceed the rational grounds they
are able to give t^ others of their faith. But I say all this i^ very far from
the purpose. For I had expressly laid down this caution before, that o^ Question
in the Resolution of Faith, did no^ relate to the workings of the divine Spirit
o^ our minds of which no satisfactory accoun^ can be given to others; but to
the externa^ Rational Account, part 1. c. 7. Sect. 1.
motives and grounds of faith, whether the^ must be infallible or not? To what
purpos^ is it then, for E. W. to talk of a certitud^ of Infallibility, as he
calls it, arising from the supernatural principles which concur t^ the very act
of belief, and these not liable t^ error, can never operate, but when the
divine Revelation really is? Granting all thi^ to be true; yet what does this
prove, concerning the necessity of an external infallible Proponent such as the
Church is? All that ca^ hence follow is that those whom the Spirit of God
enables to believe, cannot believe a falsehood; but what then? Has he proved
that the supernatural principles of faith do never operate, but where the
Church first infal^ibly proposes? No, this he never attempts, either not
understanding what was fit to be proved, or knowing it impossible to be done.
But if the infallible certainty of Faith does depend upon inward illumination
and divine concurrence; the Infallibility of Faith may be had without an
external Infallible Proponent. And so all his first principles signify nothing
to his purpose, for supposing an Infallible assent of Faith necessary to an
Infallible Revelation; yet that does not prove the necessity of Infallible
teachers, unless it can be had no other way. But here he tells us, That
Infallible certainty is derived from supernatural principles concurring to the
act of Faith; which he elsewhere calls, The interior illustration of Grace
imparted to a Reason and Religion, Disc. 3 c 9. N. 4. p. 562.
Soul, which he says, is wholly necessary to make faith certain; and after
says, we come to an absolute certainty of Faith, upon tbis interior sacred
Language of God, N. 6, 7.
or his internal illumination; the necessity of which he proves from Scripture
and Fathers. But when he has done all, he has most effectually confuted
himself; For if this inward illumination, can, as he says, supply N. 9.
the inefficacy of external motives; How comes the Infallibility of an external
proponent to be necessary in order to that certainty of Faith which may be
obtained, by divine Grace making up what is wanting in the outward motives? Did
ever any man show more kindness to his Adversary in helping him with weapons to
destroy himself than this E. W. does? When after a most tedious endeavor to
prove the necessity of an externa^ Infallible Proponent in order to the
certainty of Faith; he sets down these words, Now what we assert in this
particular, is, that the N. 11.
Infallible certainty of faith comes from the interior illumination, as it more
lively set^ forth the formal object assented to, or help^ to a clearer proposal
of the divine mysteries. Does the Infallible certainty of Faith indeed come
from this interior illumination? What then becomes of the necessity of an
Infallible Church? We often hear of the great Assistance the Jesuits have in
writing their Books; I should rather have thought some enemy of E. W's. had put
in these things to overthrow all he had spent so many impertinent words about
before. But lest such expressions should be thought to have dropped from him
unawares, observe with what care he sums up the whole progress of Faith in this
State.

First, A natural Proposition of the mysteries N. 12.
precedes; this begets a natural apprehension of their credibility; after some
consideration there may arise an imperfect judgment of credibility: but should
the will offer as yet to incline the mind to assent only upon what appears
hitherto, it could not move to a Faith which is an assent super omnia or most
certain. Therefore the illustration, or powerful invitation of Grace (by which
as I said the object appears another way and more clearly) is infused, whereof
the soul is recipient. The Will now after other Preparatives thus strengthened a
new commands boldly the understanding to Assert upon the safest Principles
imaginable, viz. upon Gods infallible Revelation accompanied with his own
Divine Light, which makes faith to grow higher in certainty, than all the
reason or knowledge in this life can arise to. For as S. Thomas observes,
humane knowledge derives its certitude from man's natural Reason which may err,
but faith has its infallibility, ex lumine divinae scientiae, from the light
of divine wisdom which cannot deceive, and therefore is most certain.

Who, upon reading these words, would not have thought this E. W. more
conversant in Calvin's Institutions, than Aquinas his Sums? For in all this
Resolution of Faith, how can a man edge in the necessity of an infallible
Church in order to the certainty of Faith? I will not say E. W. was wholly
inapprehensive of this snare he had brought himself into, but he takes the
worst way imaginable to get out of it. For to show the difference between this
way and that of Heretics, he makes the exterior humane proposition N. 13, 14,
15.
of Divine Revelation necessarily preceding the true light of Faith; which
cannon be made but by one that makes the Proposition good by a Miracle, or some
supernatural wonder; but no Protestant is able to do thus much. And is any
Papist think we? I would withal my heart see some of the miracles wrought by
their Preachers to convince me; I profess the greatest readiness of mind to be
persuaded by them, in case they do but work such miracles as Christ and his
Apostles did. But of this subject at large afterward. At present it may
suffice to take notice. 1. That no proposition of Faith is supposed sufficient
by E. W. but where the Proponent does work Miracles: and therefore we may
safely question the Churches Proposition till we see such Miracles wrought by
her, as were by Christ and his Apostles. For thus, says he, Christ our Lord
Sent by N. 15.
his Eternal Father, thus the Apostles sent by Christ and the Church ever since
(all showing wonders above the force of Nature) proved their mission; and
withal evinced that God only empowered them to teach as they did. And because
the poor Protestant does not pretend to miracles, therefore the light he
pretends to is a mere ignis fatuus vain and void of all reality. I must say
that of my Adversary, that he puts the controversy upon the fairest issue that
can be desired. For if their Church work such miracles as Christ and his
Apostles did to attest their divine commission, the evidence from thence to
believe her infallibility ought to over rule the opinions of such who say she
has erred; in case the doctrine attested by Christ and his Apostles and that
of the Roman Church do not directly contradict each other. 2. Although this
exterior Proponent prove himself so commissioned yet by the Progress of Faith
laid down by E. W. this is not enough to beget an infallible certainty of
Faith. For, he says, after the exterior proposition only a natural
apprehension of their credibility succeeds; then a judgment of credibility,
then the inclination of the Will; but yet no infallible certainty till the
illustration of Divine Grace comes. So that it evidently follows according to
E. W. that an infallible Proponent cannot beget an infallible Assent of Faith;
but that does arise from the inward illumination of the mind by the Holy Ghost.
Which I have already showed does lay men open to all the absurditie^ the
highest Calvinists were charged with in resolving Faith; and is withal
impertinent to our dispute; which relates to the necessity of an external
infallible Proponent in order to the Certainty of Faith. But surely the Jesui^
are not so berest of all their subtilty to comply with their greatest
Adversaries without some advantage to be gained by it. Yes, E. W. will shake
hands with some old enemies, the better to assault some later Protestants, who
seem to attribute, he says, no other certainty to the very act of Faith, than
what is Moral; which doctrine, he says, N. 16.
if it be defensible it is impossible to declare, how Faith it self or the
illustration previous, can proceed from the Holy Ghost. For did the Spirit of
God work with a soul, when it believes, the certainty of Faith, would without
all doubt, go beyond that assurance, which is only humane, moral and fallible.
I think that I escape well, that E. W. has not transcribed a great part of
Bradwardin de Causa Dei against me; for I plainly see, he takes me for an
Absolute Free Willer, and a denier of the Grace of God. It is true indeed, I
set aside the consideration of Divine Grace in this matter, but I assure him,
not that I questioned the Truth or necessity of it; but because it was not
pertinent to ^his business. For to what purpose should we argue about that
which can only serve for ^he satisfaction of those which have it? and ^eaves
men entangled in the same difficulties they object to others? But the Question
was plainly put by me concerning the outward inducements to faith; viz. whether
an infallible Testimony of the Church were necessary in order to it? or whether
a certainty short of that, which I called Moral, were sufficient for Divine
Faith? Not opposing this Moral Certainty to the concurrence of Divine Grace,
but to an external infallible Proponent. I took it then for granted on both
sides, that the Grace of Faith does not come merely from our selves, but that
it is the Gift of God, that wherever God does immediately concur he does
direct the mind to the belief of what is certainly True, that there might be
unaccountable ways, whereby an inward certainty might be produced, and so firm
an adherence to the Truth believed, which all the arguments and torments in the
world could never shake, of which the Primitive Martyrs were undeniable
Instances; But this internal persuasion could be made no matter of debate, nor
any argument to convince another, any further than the effects of it did
manifest that it came from God: yet withal I did not Question, but faith being
an act of the mind of man which is rational and discursive, had sufficient
grounds to proceed upon, and such which without any absurdity might justify
men's belief to any prudent or considerative men, and to the severest enquiries
of a man's own mind. Now concerning these Grounds the Question was put by me;
taking in then the efficiency o^ Divine Grace, this is the true state of the
Controversy, whether the spirit of God may not by moral arguments work in men's
minds such a certain assent of Faith, as the Scripture requires for Salvation?
or whether in order thereto, an Infallible Testimony of the Church be
necessary? But because the inserting the operation of the Holy Ghost does
rather perplex the controversy, than explain it; since this was granted on
both sides, I thought it better to leave it out and to manage the dispute as it
ought to be only concerning the necessity of an infallible Testimony of the
Church, which is asserted by my Adversaries, and denied by me.

2. The Question is not, concerning that Foundation of Faith whereby we believe
what God says to be true; but that, whereby we believe this to be revealed by
God. For those two Propositions must be supposed to any particular act of
Faith, viz. that whatever God says is true: and that God has said this
^articular thing which I am bound to believe. Concerning the first of these
there is no dispute between us, for Gods veracity founded upon ^his Infinite
Wisdom and Goodness is agreed to be the ultimate reason of our assent ^o
whatsoever God reveals. Only E. W. to Protest. without Principles, Disc. 1. C.
5. n. 10.
^phold the supernatural certainty of Faith will not have the veracity of God
to be the Foundation of Faith, as it is known by natural Reason; for if it
were, says he, Faith would at last be resolved into one natural ^rinciple,
thus, I believe God to be the high^st verity imaginable, not because he says
so, ^ut because I know this great Truth scienti^ically. Now, says he, no
science gives the ^ast or least degree of intrinsic certitude to ^aith. This
is profound reasoning: but which ^ dare say, no faith can be built upon. For
^ither I must be convinced of Gods veracity ^y natural reason, from the
consideration of ^he divine nature and attributes, or by Re^elation from God;
but if by Gods revela^ion, then see what an excellent way this Scholastic
Divine has found for resolving Faith as to this Principle (for as it is a
mat^er revealed it is an immediate object of ^aith) If you then ask him why he
believes any thing to be true which is revealed by God, his answer is, because
he believes Gods supreme verity, or that he neither can nor wi^ deceive: but if
you ask him again why h^ believes this veracity of God, he answers because God
has revealed it. And is n^ this a likely man to escape circles, the makes them
where any common understanding would avoid them? But besides, supposing God had
never discovered his own veracity in Scripture, I would fain know of E. ^.
whether there could have been any suc^ thing as Divine Faith or no? if there
could then this principle of Gods veracity mu^ have been the Foundation of
divine faith ^ known by natural Reason. And supposin^ Gods veracity not to be
embraced antecedently to a divine Revelation, it is impossible to suppose there
should be any argumen^ sufficient to persuade me to believe any Divine
Revelation. For the greatest Miracle cannot convince me of Gods Truth though
they may of his Power; and the^ may persuade me to believe that God se^ such
men who work Miracles, but they cannon persuade me to believe that all they say
is true. For if God can deceive men, he may employ men as his messengers and
deceive the world by them: and if this opinion be rooted in a man's mind it is
impossible he should yield a firm assent to any thing because it is revealed by
God. But E. W. says Divines say so as he does. I suppose he means School
Divines and then I grant they do and a great ^any silly things besides, wrapped
up under the ^ame of subtilties. If any one has a mind ^o try the truth of
what I say, he need do no more than read their unintelligible subtilties about
the nature and resolution of Faith: Which Cardinal Lugo himself complains of;
and says they make the doctrine of the Schools Lugo de virtute Fidei Divinae
Disp. 1. Sect. 7. n. 114. Sect. 6. n. 82.

Suarez de Fide Disp. 3. Sect. 6. n. 8.


^ard and unintelligible; and in this particu^ar of believing Gods veracity on
the account of Divine Revelation, he says, it carries men into an inexplicable
circle. Suarez finding no better way to clear this difficulty ^uns to a mystery
in it; and makes it a great part of the mysteriousness of faith, that although
it does not clearly see its object nor the things revealed, yet it receives it
by its own light; and this act of faith, he says is wholly supernatural, he
might have said, unintelligible. But he gives an admirable reason for it, which
is; that this intrinsecally follows from the nature of a divine testimony, as
it is altogether infallible, and can oblige to believe those things which God
speaks, as infallible, for in speaking any thing he thereby declares his own
veracity in what he affirms; for by this means h^ induces men to believe the
truth of what he says and consequently his own veracity; a man being obliged
to believe the testimony infallible, and therefore from the intrinsecal nature
of such an act o^ faith and such an object, it follows that the same testimony
which suffices for the beli^^ of the thing revealed, will likewise suffice t^
believe Gods infallible veracity in revealing. This reason I grant is very well
accommodated to the mysteriousness of Faith; but I do not know how it would
satisfy any man that should doubt of Gods veracity in all his Revelations:
which ought to be the more considered since in the foregoing section, he names
some of their own Writers, who assert that there is no intrinsecal evil in a
falsity, and therefore God may is he pleases, reveal one so as to oblige
manking to believe it. I would willingly know then how the obligation on our
parts to believe what God says, can satisfy any man of the infallible
veracity of the revealer? For all that there is in this reason, is, that God
cannot oblige men to believe a falsity, which it seems, some of their own
Schoolmen would not yield to. But it is not enough, that God has declared he
never will do it? no: Suarez himself Sect. 5 n 9.
plainly refutes that by saying, that no man can be certain that God does not
make use of his absolute power in those declarations: and if he can tell a lie,
he may not perform his own promise, and therefore Gods ordinary power cannot
serve the turn, since by his absolute power he can act against it. Cardinal
Lugo, although he saw all the reason in the world to reject the former opinion
of Suarez, yet he asserts, That the assent to Gods veracity must be
supernatural and elicited Lugo, ib.
from the habit of infused faith: which is not easy to understand, since they
all make this supernatural infused Faith, to be an obscure inevident assent,
and himself grants this to be an evident assent from natural reason: but how
the same assent should be evident and inevident, is a Question fit to be
debated among the Schoolmen.

. 3. But all this perplexity and confusion among men of wit and subtilty arises
from Of the notion of Divine Faith.
their false notion of divine and supernatural faith, which as E. W. most
Scholastically speaks, essentially tending obscurely to its object, (like a
blind man running at Tilt) it makes them so much afraid of the least crevise of
light or evidence, lest the meritoriousness of it be utterly destroyed. For it
infinitely obliges God in their opinion to believe without evidence. Therefore
though a humane and acquisite faith, such as Heretics may have, may be
grounded on substantial reason; yet this supernatural and meritorious faith,
much like a Mole, works without light, and expects the more wages for working
in the dark. I confess this essentia^ obscurity of faith suits very well with
their Discourses about it; which as E. W. speaks seems to have transfused its
obscurity into their writings concerning it. But for us, t^ whom they will only
allow a humane faith I wish they would afford a little more evidence for what
they say; and not overthrow the fundamental ground of all certainty o^ Faith,
by deriving the persuasion of it from divine Revelation, and not from the
natural conceptions we have of God. But I cannon but commend the Ingenuity of
one of their late Schoolmen, who yields That the ver^city of God as it is the
foundation of fait^ Francise. bo^ae Spei To. 3 Tr. 1. de side. disp. 1. dub. 2.
must be known by natural light; and to the objection, that divine Faith must
then be resolved into a natural assent; he answers 1. That natural notices may
be an inadaequate formal object of faith. 2. That fait^ properly goes not
beyond a Testimony; the other being rather an act of knowledge tha^ faith. It
is all one to me, so the thing be granted, by what name men call it; That which
I aim at is, that the veracity of God which is the foundation of our assent to
what God reveals, must be received antecedently to divine Revelation. And so
the principles of natural Religion must be supposed true, before it is possible
for us to judge of revealed Religion; and among those principles we ^ust allow
of the veracity of God, without which we cannot imagine any firm assent to ^e
given to divine Revelation: which is that I understand by the name of Faith.
Wherein a divine Testimony being employed, that assent which I give to any thing
as true upon the account thereof may be called Di^ine Faith; as that which I
give to the Truth of a thing not upon knowledge, or experience, but the credit
of another Person, is ^ustly called humane faith, i. e. when it goes ^o farther
than mere humane Testimony, but ^f that humane Testimony at last leads me to
that which is divine, then the Faith must receive its denomination from that
which it ^ests upon. As suppose some persons in Persia at the time of our
Saviors being in Judaea, had been made acquainted with the Doctrine which he
Preached and the holiness of his Life, while these persons received all only
upon the credit of their Friends, we may call this a humane faith; but if they
were fully satisfied afterward of the mighty works which were done by him to
attest his divine Commission on which account they believe him to be the true
Messiah, their faith might now more properly be called a divine faith, because
it fixes it self upon an immediate Testimony of God. But then we are to
consider,

1. That there is no sixed and determinat^ sense of a divine faith; it being no
term^ used in Scripture, but taken up by men to express thereby the difference
between the assent we give to the Word of God, and to the Testimony of men. But
then this Faith may be called divine either as it relates to the material
object, or the formal object, or the divine effects of Faith; that Faith may be
said to be divine in one sense, which may not b^ in another. For a man may
believe tha^ which God reveals and upon the account u^ his Testimony, and yet
that Faith may never operate effectually; and so be no effect o^ divine Grace
upon the mind of man. Therefore one of the great mistakes of the Schoolmen in
this matter, has been the making the belief upon a divine Testimony, to be the
act of divine and supernatural Faith, which the Devils and Judas might have;
and ex^luding Faith built upon fallible grounds from being divine, which yet
might effectually lead men to the obedience of Faith, and consequently was
truly more divine than the other.

2. The same Faith in several respects may be called both humane and divine.
Human^ as it is first grounded upon the Testimony of men, and Divine, as it
finally rests upon the Testimony of God. And in the present condition of
mankind, it is not reasonable to suppose, that any Faith should now immediately
rest upon the Divine Revelation, without some rational evidence antecedent to
it. For the thing to be believed being the Testimony which God gave at the
distance of above one thousand six hundred years, we must either suppose an
immediate Revelation of it, or it must be conveyed to them by the credit of
others. Which according to this notion can beget only a humane faith, for to
resolve the belief of one Divine Testimony into another is to proceed without
end; but this humane faith, if it be so called, satisfying a man's mind,
concerning the Testimony which God gave, and thereupon assenting to what was
delivered upon that Testimony, this Faith proceeding in the same way of
rational evidence, becomes a divine Faith by resting upon the Testimony which
God gave to those who declared his Will.

3. The Faith whereby we must first embrace a Divine Revelation cannot in this
sense be called a Divine Faith, i. e. as divine Faith does rely upon a divine
Testimony. For that Faith is built upon those two Foundations, viz. That
whatever God says is true, and that this is his Revelation: Now neither of
these two can be entertained at first o^ the account of a Divine Testimony, the
first I have showed already cannot be without a circle, neithe^ can the second,
for still the Question will return on what account you believe that Testimony.
So that although thi^ be commonly cal^ed an act of divine Faith yet if Faith be
taken in this strict sense for believing upon a divine Testimony, we must find
out some other name for this Assent; no^ thereby to take off from the certainty
or excellency of it; but to prevent that confusion which the not observing
these things hat^ caused in these Controversies. And if the Terms of Divine,
Supernatural, Infallible* Obscure, and Inevident were banished the Schools, the
Schoolmen themselves would be forced to speak sense in these matters. And it
would be a pleasant sight to see how pitifully E. W's. Discourses would look
without them. For the main force of all he says, lies in the misapplying those
terms, and the rattling noise they make, is apt to keep in awe a vulgar
understanding, especially that has been bred up with some more than ordinary
Reverence to these astonishing terms.

. 4. These things were necessary to be The true State of the Question.
premised before we could come to the true State of the Question; which we now
plainly see does not relate to that Assent whereby we believe whatever God
says to be true; but to that, whereby we believe this particular Revelation
contained in the Scriptures to be from God? And so the Controversy is brought
to this issue, Whether in order to the certainty of our faith concerning Gods
Revelation an Infallible Testimony of the Church be necessary? which he
affirms, and I deny. For in order to the certainty of Faith, we have already
seen, he frequently asserts the necessity of an Infallible Oracle; and makes
all degrees of certainty short of Infallibility insufficient for Divine Faith.

But that we may the better understand his opinion, we must take notice of his
own explications of it, and the distinctions he thinks necessary for that end.

1. He distinguishes between the judgment Reason and Religion. Discourse. 3.
c. 1. n. 8.
of credibility necessary to faith, and the act of faith it self; and the
Resolution of these two though they have a due subordination to each other, yet
depend upon quite different principles: the judgment of credibility, whereby
the Will moves and commands the intellectual faculty to elicit faith, relies
not upon that object which finally terminates faith it self, but upon
extrinsecal motives which persuade and powerfully induce to believe super omnia.

2. He distinguishes between the nature o^ Science and faith; Science is worth
nothing unless it prove, and faith purely considered as faith, (these words he
desires may be well marked) is worthless if it prove. For faith reasons not,
nor asks how these mysteries can be, but simply believes: O^ as he expresses
it in his former Book; Fait^ solely relies on Gods revealed Testimony, Protest.
without Principles Disc. 1. c. 11. n. 2.
without the mixture of reason for its motive. And here he asserts, That there
is a more firm adhesion to the infallibility of that Divine Testimony for which
we believe, than the extrinsecal motives inducing to believ^ either do or can
draw from us.

3. He distinguishes between the Humane and Divine Authority of the Church;
the Humane Authority, being as such fallible is not sufficient to ground divine
faith. But the first act of faith whereby every one believes the Church to be
Gods Oracle, is built upon her infallible divine Authority manifested by
miracles and other signal marks of Truth. By the help of these distinctions we
may better understand his Resolution of Faith, which he delivers in this
manner. Demanded why we believe the mystery of the (...). (...).
Incarnation, it is answered, Scripture asserts it. Ask again why we believe
the Divinity of that Book called Scripture? It is answered, the Church
ascertains us of that. But how do we know that the Church herein delivers
truth? It is answered if we speak of knowledge previous to faith: then he
brings the motives of credibility, which make the Churches Infallibility so
evidently credible, that we cannot if prudent and manifest reason guide us, but
as firmly believe whatever this Oracle teaches, as the Israelites believed
Moses and the Prophets. This one would think were enough of all conscience; but
he thinks otherwise, for there is says he, but one only difference and that
advantageous to them, that in lieu of Moses they have an ample Church;
innumerable multitudes in place of one servant of God, the incomparable greater
Light, the pillar and Ground of Truth, the Catholic Church diffused the whole
world over: and a little after asserts, That they have the very same way of
Resolving faith which the Primitive N. 6, 7.
Christians had in the time of Christ and his Apostles. Here is enough
asserted, if it could be proved.

. 5. Against this way, laid down by my My first Argument laid down and defended.
first Adversary T. C. I objected these three things, 1. That it was
unreasonable. 2. That it did not avoid the main difficulties. 3. That it was
notoriously false; these three ways of attacking it, (of which a short account
is given in the entrance of this Discourse,) I must now more largely defend.

I showed this way to be unreasonable: and that upon these grounds,

1. Because an assent is hereby required beyond all proportion or degree of
evidence for the act of Faith being according to E. W. an insallible assent;
and no other grounds assigued for it besides the motives of credibility; he
must make an Infallible assent only upon fallible grounds. And it is not
sufficient to say, that the Infallibility of the Churches Testimony makes the
Assent Infallible; for Assent is not according to the objective certitude of
things, but the evidence of them to our understanding. For is it possible to
assent to the truth of a Demonstration in a demonstrative manner, because any
Mathematician tells one the thing is demonstrable? For in that case the assent
is not according to the evidence of the thing, but according to the opinion
such a person has of him, who tells him it is demonstrable. Nay supposing that
Person Infallible in saying so, yet if the other has no means to be Infallibly
assured that he is so, his Assent is as doubtful as if he were not Infallible:
Therefore supposing the Testimony of the Roman Church to be really Infallible,
yet since the means of believing it are but probable and prudential' ^he Assent
cannot be according to the nature of the Testimony considered in it self, but
according to the reasons which induce me to believe such a Testimony
Infallible. And in all such cases, where I believe one thing for the sake of
another, my Assent to the object believed is according to my Assent to the
Medium on which I believe it. As our light is not according to the light in the
body of the Sun, but that which presses on our Organs of Sense. So that
supposing their Churches Testimony to be Infallible in it self, if one may be
deceived in judging whether it be Infallible or no, one may be deceived in such
things which he believes on that supposed Infallibility. It being impossible,
that the assent to the matters of faith, should rise higher, or stand firmer
than the assent to the Testimony upon which those things are believed. But now
to prove the Churches infallibility, they make use only of the motives of
credibility, which themselves grant can be the foundation only of a fallible
assent. This was the reason I then urged, I must now consider what E. W. says
in answer to it. And the force of his answer lies in these things.

1. That all this proceeds from ignorance Disc. 3. c. 2. n. 3, 4.
of the nature of faith, which Discourses not like to science. For he grants
that the article of faith which concerns Gods Rev^lation cannot be proved by
another believe^ article of faith wholly as obscure to us ^ that is, for that
would proceed in infinitum; therefore all rational proofs avail t^ ^get faith
in any must of necessity be extrinsecal to belief, and lie as it were i^
another Region more clear yet less certain than the revealed mystery is, we
assent to by faith. And so in that article of faith, the Church is Gods
infallible Oracle, he says, that antecedently to faith it cannot be proved by
arguments as obscure and of the same Infallible certainty with faith, for then
faith would be superfluous, or rather we should believe by a firm and
infallible assent, before we do believe on the motive of Gods insallible
Revelation, which is impossible. So that the extrinsecal motives of faith
whereby the Churches Infallibility is proved independently on Scripture are not
of the same certainty with supernatural faith it self, and only prove the
evident credibility either of the Scripture or the Church.

2. That the force of this Argument will hold against our selves, and those who
believed in the Apostles times, whose infallible assent of faitb does as much
exceed all proportion or degree of evidence as theirs does in believing the
Churches Infallibility on the motives of credibility.

In order to the giving a clear and distinct Answer, it will be necessary to
enquire ^. What those acts of Faith are, we now Discourse of? 2. What influence
the mo^ives of credibility have upon them?

1. For the acts of Faith, there are two assigned by E. W. 1. That whereby men
be^elieve the Scripture to be the Word of God. 2. That whereby men believe the
Church to be Infallible; both these he acknowledges ^re Articles of faith, and
to be believed with ^an Infallible assent. But here mark the shuffling: the
first of these cannot be believed, but by an Infallible Testimony, viz. Of the
Church; for that end the Churches Infallibi^ity is made necessary, that the
Faith may be divine and infallible, because divine faith can rest only upon
Infallible Testimony; but ^hen in the other act of faith, whereby the Churches
Infallibility is believed, we hear no more of this infallible Testimony;
because then it is impossible to avoid the circle. I propose therefore this
Dilemma to E. W. Either it is necessary to every act of divine Faith to have an
Infallible Testimony, or it is not: if it be not necessary, then there is no
necessity of asserting the Churches Infallibility in order to believing the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, and so the cause is gained; if it be
necessary, then the faith whereby the Churches Infallibility is believed, must
have such a divine Testimony, and so either a process in infinitum, or a circle
are unavoidable by him. If he considered this, and yet wri^ two such Books to
prove the necessity of Infallibility in order to faith, he betrays too much
insincerity for a man to deal with him; if he did not, he need not complain so
much of others Ignorance, he may easily find enough nearer home. And therefore
all the fault of these men does not lie barely in making the assent to be more
certain than the motives of Faith; but in requiring so strictly in one act of
Faith a proportionable certainty to the assent and not in another. For what is
there I beseech E. W. in believing the Churches Infallibility, which should not
make it as necessary for that to be supported by an infallible Testimony as
that whereby we believe the Divine Revelation? If faith has n^ grounds and
does not Discourse as Science does, then I hope the case is alike in both^ and
so the necessity of an Infallible Testimony must be affirmed of the one, or
equally denied in the other.

But he seems to assert, That faith whatever object it respects does not
Discourse as Science does; but solely relies on Gods revealed Testimony without
the mixture of reason. Grant this at present, but then I hope both these acts
of faith equally do so; and still ^he Churches infallibility cannot be made
^ecessary to faith; for if faith immediately ^elies on Gods Testimony, what
need any other to ascertain it? or any other proposition, than such as is
sufficient to make known ^he object of faith, to which end no infalli^ility in
the proponent is necessary. Any more than it is necessary for the act of love
^oward a desirable object, that he that shows a Beauty should be infallible in
the description of her. If all the necessity of the Churches proposition be no
more, than to convey the Divine Testimony to us, as E. W. sometimes ^mplies,
let him take pains to a little better Disc. 3 c. 4. ^. 18.
purpose, in proving that such a conditio applicans as he calls it must have
infallibility belonging to it. For Infallibility is then only necessary, when
it is relied upon and is the ground of believing, and not where it is a mere
condition of understanding. If a Prince sends an Ambassador about a match to a
foraign Princess, declaring that he will wholly rely upon his Testimony of her,
in this case there needs the greatest judgment and veracity in the Person
trusted; because the Prince resolves his judgment into his Ambassadors
Testimony; but if he only imploys a Person to bring her into the Room where he
may see her and judge of her himself, in this case there is no necessity of any
other quality th^^ only obedience and fidelity. So we say as the Church, if the
Churches Testimony to be relied upon as the Foundation of o^ belief of the
Scriptures, then it is necessa^ the Church should be infallible if there c^^ be
no faith without such a Testimony; b^ if all the office of the Church be only
to pr^ pose the object of faith to be viewed and co^ sidered by us, then a
common veracity m^ be sufficient for it. And in this case I gran^ faith is not
to be resolved into the condition of applying the object of faith; any mo^ than
love is into the light whereby a m^ sees Beauty, or the burning of Fire into
the laying near of the fuel: but if it be assert^ that there can be no divine
faith without ^ infallible Testimony, that, this Testimony i^ that of the
Church, and therefore upon thi^ infallible Testimony we must build our says he
is blind that does not see in this case tha^ it must be resolved into this
infallible testimony. And therefore E. W. very impertinently charges me with
this constant error, viz. making the motives of faith the Foundation ^^. n. 19.
of it, and that hereby I confound the judgment of credibility with the assent
of faith; by making the infallible testimony of the Church to those who believe
it, the formal object of faith. For although the common motives of faith should
do no more than ^ake the object of faith appear evidently ^edible, and so the
faith of such persons be ^e^olved into a further reason than those mo^ves; yet
they who do believe upon the ac^ount of the infallibility of the Churches
^estimony, must resolve their faith into that, which to them is the only
infallible and adaequate Ground of Faith.

. 6. 2. To lay open the Foundation of all these mistakes, about the nature of
Faith. Of the motives of credibi^ity; and their instaence on faith.
I shall inquire into the influence which the motives of credibility have upon
believing. And therein give an account of these three things. 1. What the
motives of credibility are? 2. How far they are necessary to faith? 3. What
influence they have upon the assent of Faith?

1. What these motives of credibility are? Suarez brings them under four heads.

1. From the qualities of the Christian Suarez de side disp. 4. sect. 3.
doctrine and those are, 1. Its truth without any mixture of falsehood; but
faith he, if there be many things true and some false, it is a sufficient sign
that doctrine is not from God, as it was among the Philosophers of old. The way
to judge of this quality he thus lays down, those things which the Christian
Religion speaks of, which may be know^ by natural light are very agreeable to
the common reason of mankind, those other things which are above it are not
repugnan^ to any principle of it, but are agreeable t^ the infinite and
incomprehensible Majesty o^ God. 2. The sanctity and purity of this doctrine,
as appears by the excellency of the precepts of it; the moral precepts not only
agreeable to the Law of nature, but tend much to the improvement of it; the
spiritual precepts have nothing contrary to the rules of morality, and are
suitable to the perfections of the Divine Nature. 3. The efficacy of it, which
is seen by the strange and miraculous ways of its propagation, by such
instruments as were never like to effect their design without a Divine Power.

2. The second Motive is, from the number of witnesses, of the whole Trinity at
the Baptism of Christ, of Christ himself in his holy and innocent life, of
Moses and the Prophets before him, of the Apostles after him, of the Devils
themselves, of the multitude of Martyrs of all kinds suffering with so much
patience and courage, and Christian Religion increasing by it.

3. From the Testimony God gave to the truth of it; by the Miracles which were
wrought in confirmation of the Doctrine preached, in which ought to be
considered the nature, the effects, the frequency, the manner of working them,
and the end for which they were wrought, which must be not merely for the
benefit of the person on whom they are wrought, but for a testimony to the
truth of the Doctrine delivered; otherwise he grants a Deceiver may work
Miracles.

4. From the continuance of this Doctrine in the world, being so hard to
believe the Doctrine and practice the precepts of it; meeting with such
multitudes of enemies of all kinds; out of all which the credibility of the
Christian Religion may be demonstrated, a Divine Providence being supposed to
take care of the affairs of mankind. Greg. de Valentia Greg de Va^ nt. Tom. 3.
disp. 1. q. 1. p^act. 4.

Med n^ de rect a in Deum^side l. 2.


reckons up these motives to 19. Michael Medina follows ^cotus and makes 10. or
11. of them: on which he largely insists, viz. the fulfilling of Prophesies,
the consent of Scriptures, their Authority and truth, the care and diligence of
the first Christians in examining the Doctrine of Christianity, the excellency
of it in all its parts, the propagation of it in the world, the Miracles
wrought for the confirmation of it, the testimony of enemies, the justice of
providence, and the destruction of its Adversaries. To the same Lugo de side.
disp. 5. s^^l. 4.
purpose Cardinal Lugo and others of the Schoolmen make an enumeration of the^
Fincisc. Valent. Co^^^^dia juris Po^isicii cum Caesareo part. 1 q. 1. sect. 6.
motives of credibility; but a late Jesuit ha^ reduced them all to the four
chief Attribute of God. His Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Providence, but
inlarges upon the^ much in the same way that Suarez had done Thus much may
suffice for understandin^ what these motives of credibility are: wh^^ are
acknowledged to make up a demonstr^tion for the credibility of the Christian
Religion

2. How far these are necessary to faith for that we are to consider that faith
being an assent of the rational faculty in man, mu^ proceed upon such grounds
as may justify the assent to be a rational act: which cannot b^ unless
sufficient reason appear to induce the mind to assent, which reason appearing ^
all one with the cre^^bility of the object which does not imply here what may
be believed either with or without reason, but wha^ all circumstances
considered ought to be believed by every prudent person. And in thi^ sense
Suarez asserts the necessity of the evidence of credibility to the act of
faith: for Suarez. de Fide disp. 4. sect. 2. n. 3.
says he, it is not enough, that the object o^ faith be proposed as revealed
by God, but i^ is necessary that it be proposed with such circumstances, as
make it appear prudently cr^dible in that way it is proposed. For levil^ of
judgment and rashness of assent he makes ^nconsistent with divine faith; and
every man ought so to believe as to exclude all fear of the contrary, and so as
that he can never ^rudently disbelieve what he now believes; but if a man
believes upon bad grounds, he may afterward prudently reject those grounds.
But this is not all, for he makes such a proposition of the object of faith
necessary, whereby it appears evidently credible as revealed by God, and
consequently as certain N. 4.
and infallible. For which he gives this reason; because an inclination of the
will to assent must precede the assent of faith before which there must be a
judgment determining that act of the will; this judgment must either be
certain, or uncertain; if uncertain it is not sufficient for divine faith; if
it be certain then there must be such an evidence of credibility in the objects
of faith. And although a practical certainty as to matters of humane faith may
be sufficiently founded upon a judgment of probability, i. e. a man may judge
it fit for him to believe where he sees only a greater probability on one side
than of the other; yet in matters of divine faith a higher judgment than of
mere probability is necessary, viz. that which is founded upon the evidence of
credibility; for with a mere probability a prudent doubting is consistent,
which is not with divine says, and withal the certainty of faith is not merely
practical but speculative, i. e. of the truth of the thing in it self, and
therefore requires a speculative evidence of the credibility of the object.
From whence he concludes, that a bare credibility is not sufficient, but a
greater N 6.
credibility of the doctrine believed than of any other contrary to it; for if
two doctrines appear equally credible there can be only a doubtful assent given
to one of them: and a man might choose which he would believe: but in the
assent of faith it is not only necessary that there be a greater credibility of
one doctrine than of the other; but that this be evident to natural reason:
which dictates N. 7.
that in matters of Salvation that doctrine is to be believed which appears
more evidently credible than any other. To the same purpose Cardinal Lugo
determines that the will cannot command a prudent assent of faith, Lugo de
vi^t. sidei divinae disp. 5. sect. 1. n. 21.
where there precedes only a probable judgment of the credibility of the
object, because there must be the apprehension of a certain obligation to
believe, which must arise from the evidence of credibility in the object of
faith. And Aquinas himself had determined, that no man would believe, unless he
saw that the Aquin. 2. 2. qa 1. art. 4.
things were to be believed, either sor the evidence os miracles or something
of a like nature: which Cajetan interprets of believing Cajet. in loc.
truly and virtuously: truly, i. e. without fear of the contrary, and
virtuously, i. e. prudently. So that although men may rashly and indiscreetly
believe things without sufficient evidence of their credibility, yet no man can
by the acknowledgement of the most learned of the Schoolmen, yield a rational
and prudent assent of faith without it.

3. The main thing is to consider what influence the evidence of credibility
has upon the act of faith? For E. W. asserts that all that results from thence
is only a judgment of credibility, but that the act of faith it self relies
wholly upon other principles; and by the help of the distinction of these two
he labors to avoid the force of my arguments. Thus then the matter stands, it
is agreed that faith must have rational proofs antecedent to it, but these
proofs he must say do not persuade men to believe, or which is all one, have no
influence upon the act of Faith. If all that were meant by this talk were only
this, that we are then said properly to believe when we fix our assent upon
Gods testimony, but that all acts of the mind short of this may not properly be
called believing, but by some other name, this would presently appear to be a
controversy about words, which I perfectly hate. But more must be understood
by such men as E. W. or else they do not speak at all to the purpose; for the
Question is, whether in requiring an infallible assent of faith to the Churches
Infallibility upon motives confessedly fallible, an assent be not required
beyond all proportion or degree of evidence? to this he answers, that this
argument proceeds upon ignorance of the nature of faith which does not
discourse as Science does: and he grants that the motives of credibility have
not the same certainty that faith has. What then can hence follow, but that
faith is an unreasonable assent, and has no grounds; or that it may be
stronger than the grounds it proceeds upon? But if it appear, that faith must
have grounds, and that the assent of faith can be no stronger than the grounds
are, then it follows that they are very unreasonable in requiring an infallible
assent of faith to the Churches Infallibility barely upon the motives of
credibility.

. 7. 1. That faith must have grounds, Of the grounds of faith.
If a man had not to deal with persons who have confounded their own
understandings with an appearance of subtilty, one would think this as needless
a task as to prove that man is a reasonable creature; for if faith be an assent
of the mind, taking it as strictly and properly as they please, it must have
the nature of a rational act, which it cannot have unless it proceeds upon
reasonable grounds. The grounds I grant are different in several assents, but
it must always have some. Those which are accounted the most immediate assents
have the clearest and most evident reason, such as the assents to first
principles are, as that the whole is greater than the part. etc. and for
conclusions drawn from them, the readiness and firmness of the assent is
proportionable to the evidence of their connection with those principles from
whence they are drawn. In other things that depend upon the evidence of sense,
the reason of our assent to the truth of them, is from the supposition of the
truth of our faculties and that we are so framed as not to be imposed upon, in
matters that are plainly and with due circumstances conveyed to our minds by
our Organs of sense. But if there appear an evidence of reason overthrowing the
certainty of sense, Skepticism immediately follows and the suspension of all
assent to the truth of things conveyed by our senses; for no man can then be
certain of any thing by the evidence of sense, but only of the appearance of
things. I may be certain, that things do appear with such difference of
colors, and tastes, and smells; but I cannot be certain that there are really
such differences in the things themselves. If therefore the Scepticks arguments
should prevail upon any man's mind so far, as to make him question whether sense
be a certain medium to convey the truth of the things to his mind, it is
impossible that man should yield a firm assent to the truth of any thing on the
account of the evidence of sense. So that still, assent proceeds upon the
grounds of reason which satisfy the mind, that all circumstances considered it
ought not to suspend any longer. Let us now consider such things which are not
so evident of themselves, nor conveyed by our senses; and unless we distrust
all mankind we have reason to believe some things to be which we never saw our
selves, and this is the fundamental ground of that we call believing; which is
nothing else, but taking truth upon trust; or receiving a thing as true upon
such testimony which I see no reason to question. If I see any reason to doubt
either the skill or fidelity of those persons upon whose credit I am to rely;
it is impossible for me firmly to believe upon their Authority; if I see none,
then on that account I believe what they say; wherein it is as evident that my
assent is according to the grounds I proceed upon, as that two and two make
four. What is it then that has thus confounded these men's minds, to make them
to contend that the act of divine faith is of such a nature that nothing like
it is to be found in any other act of the mind? Must we cease to be men by
being Christians? or where the strongest reason is most necessary, must there
be none at all? to what end then were there arguments ever used to persuade men
to believe Christianity? were those arguments able to persuade men or not? if
they were, then men did believe upon the strength of those arguments; and is it
possible for men to believe upon the strength of arguments and yet those
arguments have no influence upon the act of faith? This is horrible nonsense
and fit only for those to write who believe contradictions; for such an act of
faith indeed can have no reason for it. But to come closer yet to our matter:
The Churches infallibility is to be believed, says E. W. with divine faith; is
there any ground for that act of faith, or not? If there be none, show what
obligation to believe there can be, where there is no ground for it: if there
be, I desire to know, whether they are able to persuade me or not; if not, show
then why I ought to believe on insufficient grounds; if they be, may not I then
believe upon those grounds? and if I do, does not that act of faith rely upon
those grounds* Besides, of those who plead for the necessity of the Churches
infallibility, I desire to know on what account they do it? Is it not, that
faith may have a sufficient Foundation to be built upon, which in their opinion
cannot be without such infallibility? and yet after all this, must not faith
stand upon this ground? Why then are, Scotus, Durand, Canus l. 2. c. 8. Lugo de
virt. fidei disp. 1. sect. 5.
Gabriel, Medina and others charged by some of the Roman Church with resolving
faith into the Churches testimony? What is this else but only to make the
Churches Testimony the ground of faith? Nay, why are there any disputes at all
about the formal object of faith? For the formal object is nothing but the
reason of believing, and what account can be given of the reason of believing
if there be none at all? But it may be all this while I mistake my profound
Adversary, it being hardly possible that a man of common sense should write
such stuff. To prevent any suspicion of this nature I shall lay down his
assertions in his own words; from several places of his worthy works. Faith
solely relies on Gods revealed Testimony Protest. without Principles disc. 1.
c. 11. n. 2.

Reason and Religion disc. 3. c 1. n. 10.


without the mixture of Reason for ill Motive; the previous Motives well
pondered, bring with them an obligation to believe and not faith it self. For,
Faith reasons not, but simply believes: Faith contrary to science goes beyond
the certainty of all extrinsecal inducements. And afterward, where he attempts
to answer the main difficulty, as he C. 8. N. 4.
calls it, in the resolution of faith, (which in short is, since the motives of
credibility seem to leave the matter doubtful, what that is, which determines
the assent to the objects of faith as infallibly true?) waving at present that
answer, that it is from the command of the will, he seems to attribute so great
an evidence to the Motives of credibility, that they do infallibly prove the
truth of divine Revelation, there being an insiparable connection between the
Motives and divine Revelation; but then he starts an untoward objection, viz.
that then the Revelation must appear evident and so faith would be evident; to
which he answers by denying the consequence, because this assent is science and
not faith; now this evidence arising from the motives of credibility, faith,
says he, as faith leaves, or lays aside, and firmly adheres to the Divine
Revelation only for it self, as contradistinct both from the Moral evidence of
the Motives, and their apparent connection with the Revelation. The reason is
taken, says he, from the notion of faith, which essentially N. 10.
tends obscurely upon its own object, as the most ancient Fathers assert. From
whence it is clear, if you believe him, that no evidence of the testimony
assented to can move to faith, not only because we should in the case of
evidence be necessitated to believe, but upon this account also, that the
certitude of faith, taken from the supreamest verity, i^ of a higher strain and
far surpasses all the certitude we find in nature, or in the Motives inducing
to believe. But which is more pleasant he yet adds, It is true, the more
evident N. 11.
these motives appear the better they induce to believe, yet for that reason
have less to do with the very act of faith, which as he said, rests upon and
lays claim to no lower a verity, than the most pure and supreme only, and if it
rests not here, it is no faith. And yet after all this he asserts, that the
evidence of credibility apparent in Disc. 3. c. 10. n. 7.
those manifest signs and marks which illustrate true Christianity is
abundantly sufficient to induce the most obdurate heart in the world to believe
with such an Assent as suits Gods great Majesty, i. e. with a faith most firm
and infallible. Here we have Motives, such Motives as give evidence of divine
Revelation, such motives as are sufficient to induce the most obdurate person
to an infallible assent of faith; and yet after all this evidence by these
motives in order to believing; this believing has nothing to do with them, and
the more they induce to believe, the less influence they have upon faith, for
that fixes on the divine Revelation solely for it self, and has a certainty
beyond that of the greatest arguments that are used for believing. He that has
the faculty of understanding these things ought to oblige mankind with a
clearer discovery of them, than E. W. has made; who does not seem to
understand what he writes himself and therefore it cannot be expected that
others should. But the Foundation of all this Nonsense, is a strange
apprehension of the nature of faith, which the School-doctrine has so rivited
into him, that it seems to be of the nature of a first principle with him,
which must be supposed as the Basis of all his discourse; which is, that faith
is an obscure and inevident assent, or that it essentially tends obscurely to
its object, and therefore no motives, or arguments how clear or strong soever
can have any influence upon faith. For he imagines as great an opposition
between arguments and faith as between light and darkness; he first conceives
faith to be a kind of deep Dungeon of the soul full of darkness and obscurity,
and then bids men have a care of bringing any light into it, for if they do, it
cease to be what he described it. A light may serve a man very well to show
him the way to this Dungeon, nay it may direct him to the very door; but then
farewell to all light, no^ the least crevise must be left to let in any to the
mind that is once entered it; but the excellency of it is, that the soul fixes
more certainly on its object in this state of darkness, than it could do being
environed with the clearest light. Just as if a man should say there is a
particular way of seeing with ones eyes shut, which is far more admirable and
excellent, than all the common ways of beholding things; being far more certain
and piercing than seeing by the help of eyes and light is; for the light and
sight may both fail in the representation of an object; but this seeing without
eyes is an infallible way to prevent all the fallacies of sense. Much in this
way does E. W. talk; for all arguments are fallible, and therefore by no means
must faith proceed upon them; O but this believing without, or above, or it may
be against arguments, is the most infallible thing in the world; for that man
need never fear being deceived with reason that disowns the use of it. Upon
these grounds a skilful Painter may make a shift to bungle and to draw some
rude uneven strokes by the help of his Pencil and a good light; but if he would
be sure not to miss making an excellent Piece he ought to shut his eyes or
darken his Room, for then to be sure that fallible thing called light can never
deceive him. An indifferent person that only consulted the nature and reason of
things could never have fallen into these dotages; but it has been the
interest of some men to cry down light that have had false wares to put off.
But of all things I wonder if this be the whole nature of Christian faith to
believe no man knows why nor wherefore, (for if he does, his faith ceases to be
faith being built upon reason) why all this ado is kept about an infallible
Church and motives of credibility? cannot a man believe without reason at first
as well at last? cannot faith fix upon Gods Revelation for it self, without
troubling those motives of credibility to no purpose? If a man has a mind to
leap blindfold from a Precipice, why cannot he do it without so much ceremony?
must he have all his attendance about him, and his Gentleman Usher to conduct
him to the very brink of the Rock, and there bid him Goodnight? If all these
motives of credibility contribute nothing to the act of believing, what use are
they of in such a Religion, where Faith is looked on as the great Principle of
practice and the means of salvation? If the judgment of credibility would save
men, they might still be useful; but this will be by no means allowed, for
nothing in their opinion, but this blind Guide (which they call faith) can
conduct men to Heaven.

. 8. But what is it that has made me^ Of the Scripturen^^ion of the obscurity
of Faith.
so in love with nonsense and contradictions? Has the Scripture given any
countenance to this notion of faith? Yes doubtless; they are such lovers of
Scripture, that they da^e not take up any opinion in these matters without
plain Scripture. Then I hope Scripture may be plain in clear things, if it be
so in the description of so obscure a thing as they make faith to be. But does
not the Scripture say, that Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen? Heb. 11. 1.
and is not this all one as if it had been said that faith essentially tends
obscurely to its object, and that it is an inevident assent and therefore
cannot make use of arguments? This I know is all the pretense they have for
this notion of faith; but is it not very pretty, because faith is called an
evidence therefore i^ must be inevident, or to follow the vulga^ Latin because
it is called an argument therefore it can use none? No man is so senseless to
deny, that we believe things we do not see, and things which cannot be seen; we
believe some things which might have been seen, and were seen by some whose
credit we rely upon; as the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ: we believe
other things which are incapable of being seen by our senses, as the Joys of
Heaven and the Torments of Hell; and as to such things faith supplies the want
of the Evidence of sense to us; and by it our minds are assured of the truth of
them though we do not or cannot see them. Which is all that is intended by this
description of faith; but how does it hence follow that our faith must be an
immediate, inevident, obscure assent, on which all the arguments that persuade
men to believe, can have no influence? May not I believe that Christ died and
rose again, and will come to judge the quick and the dead, because I see all
the reason in the world to persuade me to believe it, from the testimony of
those who saw him and have delivered his doctrine to us, and have given the
greatest evidence of their fidelity? Does the strength of the argument hinder
me at all from believing what I did not see? I had rather thought the more
obscure the object had been, (for it is little better than nonsense to call an
act of faith obscure), the greater necessity there had been of strong evidence
to persuade a man to believe; not such evidence as does arise from the nature
of the thing, for that is contrary to the obscurity of the object, but such as
gives the greatest reason to believe from the Authority of those on whose
Testimony I rely. So that the greatest clearness and evidence as to the
Testimony is not repugnant to the nature of Faith; this only shows that in
Christian Religion we do no^ proceed by mere evidence of sense or rigorous
demonstrations in the things we assent to; but that the great things we believe
are remote from sense and received upon the Authority of the Revealer; yet so,
as that we assert we have as great evidence that these things were revealed by
God, as the matter was capable of; and such evidence we say ought to persuade
any prudent person. This is all which the description of faith so much alleged
does imply; which was never intended for an accurate definition of it; for as
Hugo de sancto Victore says of it, non indicat quid est fides, sed signat quid
facit; it does not show what faith is, but what it does; by making things
future and invisible to have as great power and influence on men's minds as if
they were present and visible. And when the Fathers speak of the obscurity of
Faith, they do not mean an assent without grounds, but the belief of things out
of our view; and that obscurity is understood by them in comparison with the
clearness of a future state: or in opposition to the way of proving things by
mere reason without Revelation. So Cardinal Lugo truly answers the Testimonies
of Fathers to that purpose, by saying that when they exclude reason and
arguments Lugo de virtut. fid. Divin. disp. 7. sect. 2. n. 16.
from faith they take them as they are opposed to Authority; but in as much as
they suppose the mysteries of Christian faith to be believed for the sake of
Divine Revelation, a discourse is thereby implied from the Authority of God
revealing to the mysteries believed. Neither is such discourse only requisite,
but that in the first place which does assure men of the truth of this
Revelation; for upon that, the other must proceed. All mediums used for the
proof of this, must be extrinsecal to the nature of the thing, and therefore
cannot be repugnant to faith; and in this I have the consent of some of the
most learned of the Schoolmen, who make evidentiam in attestante as they call
it, consistent with faith.

But says E. W. No thanks to thee poor creature, Dis. 3. c. 8. n. 16.
to assent had thou Evidence. This it is now to hope to merit at Gods hands
by a blind faith! for so elsewhere, he says, evidence C. 10. n. 5.
is incompatible with that merit and obsequiousness of faith; which God
requires of his rational creatures who are to walk to Heaven by an humble and
dutiful faith. A very humble says certainly that hopes to merit by believing!
And very dutiful in expecting so large a reward for doing it knows not what! We
think it our duty to believe firmly whatever God says; but withal we think it
our duty to enquire carefully whether God has said it or no before we believe:
and according to the evidence we have of this we assent to the former. But this
is not to proceed Nobly with God, says E. W. Brave man! It has been reported
of a Hector in this Town that a little before his death he said he hoped God
would deal with him like a Gentleman: It seems E. W. would deal so with God. We
have often heard of works of super-erogation; but our noble E. W. is not
content with them, he will have a faith of super-erogation too. We poor
creatures, are contented to do our duties, and take it as a great Favor, for
God to accept of the best we can do: We dare not so much as think of such terms
of kindness and favor from us to God, as to proceed Nobly with him. Neither do
we believe, that God is so hugely pleased with the blind and the lame, when
they are offered in sacrifice to him. Whatever E. W. imagines, it is no such
Noble proceeding to believe infallibly upon confessedly fallible grounds. For
that is the present case, he grants that the motives of credibility are not
infallible, and that there are no other motives in order to faith above these,
and yet he supposes we ought to oblige God by giving an infallible assent upon
these Motives. But the bottom of all is That our Faith ought to be suitable to
Gods infallible veracity, which Faith immediately rests upon and from whence
and not from the motives, infallible certainty as E W. speaks, is transfused
into it. This deep speculation by no means satisfies me; for though I know it
to be impossible for God to lie or to deceive; yet our question is not about
believing the truth of what God says, but about believing this or that to be
revealed by him. And while the Question is whether Gods veracity be concerned
in the thing, how is it possible for his Veracity to transfuse an Infallible
Certainty into my Belief of it? Suppose E. W. be acquainted with as honest a
man as ever lived, and one comes and tells him from him that such a Friend of
his was dead, and gave him five hundred pound; I would fain know whether the
unquestionable veracity of the Friend, from whom the Messenger says he
received it, can transfuse an unquestionable certainty in his mind of the truth
of the thing, while he is yet in doubt whether his faithful Friend said it or
no? If his assent here be not according to the veracity of his Friend, unless
he be first assured of the fidelity of the reporter; No more can it be in the
present case of believing. For no one questions what God says, but our only
doubt is whether God has said it; and whilst one gives no infallible assent to
the one, he cannot infallibly rest upon the other. But may not credible
arguments as to the Messenger be sufficient for infallible belief of the thing
upon the Authority of the other? For that, I appeal to E. W. whether his belief
of the thing would not in that case be according to the grounds he had to
believe the Messenger? and the Authority of his Friend would make him so much
the more Question whether his name might not be abused by a Person that had a
design to put a trick upon him; especially if that Messenger challenged to
himself so much credit that he ought to be believed without any dispute at a^l.
For in this case, the over eager affirming would give a man cause to question
the more the truth of the person, if his evidence bear no proportion with his
confidence. So it is in our present case: it is granted on all sides, if God
reveals any thing it must be true: our enquiry is how far we are to believe
that God has said such a thing upon the credit of those who convey it to us;
if they desire no more credit with us than they give sufficient evidence for,
then we are bound to believe them; but if they exact an infallible assen^ and
offer only fallible grounds we have reason to mistrust their design; and so
long as we do so, we must question the thing which we are to believe upon their
credit. If they require only an assent suitable to their evidence it would be
unreasonable to deny it, but still the degree of our assent to the Revelation
is proportionable to the degree of evidence that it is a divine Revelation.
Which Dr. Holden thinks to be so evident, that he accounts it lost labor for a
man Holden Analys. fidei l. 1. c. 3.
to go about to prove it to any one that has common sense: viz. That no assent
of divine Faith can have any greater true and rational certainty, than the
assent of the medium has, by which the object of Faith is applied to the
understanding. For whatever certainty we can attribute to an intellectual
assent upon the Authority of God revealing it is necessary it should come from
and depend upon the certainty of the medium, by which this Authority of God
revealing is conveyed to the understanding. For as it is impossible that a man
should believe or yield assent to any thing because it is revealed by God,
unless he thinks and knows that God has revealed it; so it is impossible that
he should believe the things revealed by God with greater true and rational
certainty, than that by which he knows that God revealed them. For whatever
degree of uncertainty or doubt there is in the mind of a believer of the
certainty and truth of the medium, there must be the same in that assent
whereby he believes the things which are proposed by that medium. Because with
what degree a man doubts whether God has revealed this or that, he cannot but
doubt in the same degree of that which is said to be revealed by God. For what
man in his wits does not presently perceive that no man can be more certain of
that thing which God is said to reveal, than he is certain that God has
revealed it; as no man can be more certain of the things done by Caesar, than
they are that Caesar was; or of the mysteries revealed by Christ, than that
Christ was. This he says he had never mentioned, unless some later Divines,
(such as E. W.) discoursing vainly and Sceptically, and not considering the
true reason of believing, had feigned to themselves he knew not what kind of
divine and supernatural certainty in Christian Faith (passing by the true and
rational) which it is clearer than noon day, is but an idle and imaginary
thing. Good Reader, observe the power of reason over an ingenuous mind; I know
not what entertainment Dr. H. might have given E. W. on other accounts; but it
is plain by this Discourse he thought a dark Room the fittest for him, since he
pronounces that no man in his senses can assert the things which he confidently
does. Although therefore he thought this needless to be proved, yet I must
proceed to show,

. 9. 2. That the Assent of Faith can be Of the power of the Will in the assent
of Faith.
no stronger than the Grounds are. For if it does proceed upon Grounds, those
are of the nature of Premises and the assent of faith as the conclusion drawn
from them, and therefore must be stronger or weaker according to them. In every
act of Faith which has a particular Revelation for its object; there must be
two distinct premises conceived from whence that which is the proper act of
believing follows. As suppose the Question be concerning the Resurrection of
the dead, why I believe that article of Faith to be true, the present Answer is
because God has revealed it; but therein lies the force of a Syllogism, by
which it will appear that the act of Faith follows as the conclusion from the
premises. Whatsoever God reveals is true, but God has revealed the
Resurrection of the dead, therefore it is true. Now since the force of a
conclusion depends upon the premises, the assent of Faith cannot be supposed
stronger and firmer than the Premises are from which it results. For however it
may hold in other causes; in those which are moral and final, it is an
undoubted Maxim of reason, That which makes an other thing to be so, must be
much more so it self: As that end which makes any thing desirable for its sake,
is much more desirable it self, because it is that which moves the Soul to
desire the means; and so it is likewise in whatever moves the understanding to
assent as well as the will to desire: but the Premises do move the
understanding to assent to the conclusion, therefore the consent to the
conclusion must be agreeable to that of the Premises. This difficulty has so
racked and tormented the minds of the Schoolmen, that Arriaga relates he has
heard the most Learned and Arriaga Curs Philo. disp. 16. Sect 4.
Ingenious among them profess they could find no way through it. While they did
require an infallible assent in the conclusion, when there could be no
infallible assent to one of the Premises, viz. that God has revealed this.
Which some have thought they got over when they asserted the necessity of the
Churches Infallibility, as the foundation of that assent. But granting them the
truth of that, yet they have given the difficulty but one remove by it, for it
speedily returns again, concerning the belief of the Churches Infa^libility,
which they agree must be believed infallibly, and yet here again they offer at
no more than motives confessed to be fallible to prove it. And so at last they
are fain to take up with other Answers, which make the Churches Infallible
Proposition of no use at all in this matter: for if the assent be said to be
immediate to the Revelation, if the strength of it arises either from the
Spirit of God, or the pious inclination of the Will, and not from the motives
of Faith, if any of these ways can solve the difficulty; then however from
hence it follows that all these will equally do it without ever so much as
supposing the necessity of the Churches infallible Testimony. I shall not now
trouble my self with others, but consider my Adversary who after making several
attempts this way and that, at last bethinks of a good Friend in a corner,
called the Power of the Will, and to this he is willing to attribute the
strength of the assent, when it exceeds the motives of Disc. 3. c. 8. n. 14,
15, 16.
Faith: which he thinks the more plain and easy way; and therefore asserts
that after the previous judgment of credibility, the Will C. 9. n. 5.
works by her pious affection, and that moves the understanding to elicit the
infallible assent of Faith. For says he, if it be demanded how the
understanding dares rest C. 10. n. 10.
most firmly on an object not evidently seen, we pass from that Power to the
Will and say, she can by her pious affection command the intellectual faculty
to captivate it self in Obsequium fidei and believe most undoubtedly. This is
the last Reserve in this matter, which is as weak as any of the former. For if
the Will can determine the understanding to assent beyond the strength of the
motives, it may determine it to assent without any motives at all; because that
degree of assent which does exceed the evidence of the motives has nothing to
incline or move it besides the mere power of the Will: and if it can command
the highest and most Infallible assent without Infallible grounds it may
equally command a fallible assent without fallible grounds, and by this means
there will be no need of any motives of credibility at all. Besides, this takes
away any such thing as the formal object of divine Faith; for if the Infallible
assent of Faith do come from the power of the Will; then to what purpose is any
formal object of that assent enquired after? For the formal object does assign
a reason of believing from the object it self, of which there can be none if
the Will by her own Power elicit that which is the proper assent of Faith. And
all other material objects of Faith may be believed in as infallible a manner
by the same power of the Will. But if the Will can command the understanding to
assent beyond the degree of evidence; why may not the understanding dictate to
the Will to desire a thing beyond the degree of goodness appearing to it; and
by this means both those faculties would tend to their objects in a way
disagreeing to their nature.

All these ways being found in sufficient, Cardinal Lugo says some had
recourse at last Lugo de fide disp. 1. Sect. 4. il. 38.
to a mysterious elevation of the understanding, beyond all connatural ways of
its operation, whereby it lays hold on the matters of Faith in a way wholly
inexplicable; and however the Cardinal slights this way, and expresses a great
detestation of it, as that which renders the matters of Faith incredible and
imperceptible; yet I think it absolutely the best for those of the Roman Church
that has yet been thought of; and I would particularly commend it to E. W. who
loves to talk so unintelligibly and confusedly, as if he had this habit of
believing infused already.

And thus much in vindication of the first argument, I proposed against making
the Infallible Testimony of the Church the foundation of Faith, and yet that
Infallibility to be only proved by the motives of credibility, viz. that hereby
an infallible assent must be built upon fallible grounds. As to what E. W.
says by way of recrimination it shall be answered, when I come to defend our
own grounds of Faith.

. 10. The next Argument, which afford^ Rational Account part 1. c. 5. S^ct. 6.

The second Argument defended against E. W.


any new matter to my Adversary, whereb^ I showed this way of resolving Faith
to b^ unreasonable was, because by making the Insallible Testimony of the
Church necessary to Faith, they make that necessary to Faith, which was not
made so by Christ or his Apostles. What then, say I, will become of the Faith
of all those who received Divine Revelations, without the Infallible Testimony
of any Church at all? With what Faith did the Disciples of Christ at the time
of his suffering, believe the Divine Authority of the Old Testament? was it a
true Divine Faith or not? If it was whereon was it built? Not certainly on the
Infallible Testimony of the Jewish Church, which at that time consented to the
death of the Messiah, condemning him as a Malefactor and Deceiver: Or did they
believe it because of the great rational evidence they had to convince them,
that those Prophesies came from God? If so, why may not we believe the Divinity
of all the Scriptures on the same grounds and with a Divine Faith too? With
what Faith did those believe in the Messiah who were not personally present at
the Miracles which our Savior wrought, but had them conveyed to them by such
reports as the woman's of Samaria was to the Samaritans? Or were all such
persons excused from believing, merely because they were not spectators? But by
the same reason all those would be excused, who never saw our Saviors
Miracles, or heard his Doctrine or his Apostles: but if such persons then were
bound to believe, I ask on what Testimony was their Faith founded? Was the
woman of Samaria Infallible in reporting the Discourse between Christ and her?
Were all the persons Infallible who gave an account to others of what Christ
did? Yet I suppose, had it been your own case, you would have thought your self
bound to have believed Christ to have been the Messiah, if you had lived at
that time, and a certain account had been given you of our Saviors Doctrine
and Miracles by men faithful and honest, though you had no reason to have
believed them infallible: I pray, Sir, answer me, would you have thought your
self bound to have believed or no? If you affirm it (as I will suppose you so
much a Christian as to say so) I pray then tell me whether persons in those
circumstances might not have a true and divine Faith where there was no
infallible Testimony, but only Rational Evidence to build it self upon? And if
those Persons might have a divine Faith upon such evidence as that was, may not
we much more who have evidence of the same nature indeed, but much more
extensive, universal, and convincing than that was? And how then can you stil^
assert an Infallible Testimony of the conveyers of divine Revelation to be
necessary in order to a divine Faith? Nay further yet, how few were there in
comparison, in the first Ages of the Christian Church, who received the
Doctrine of the Gospel from the mouths of persons Infallible? and of those who
did so, what certain evidence have men, that all those persons did receive the
Doctrine upon the account of the Infallibility of the Propounders, and not
rather upon the Rational evidence of the Truth of the Doctrine delivered; and
whether the belief of their Infallibility was absolutely necessary to Faith,
when the report of the evidences of the Truth of the Doctrine might raise in
them an obligation to believe, supposing them not Infallible in that delivery
of it, but that they looked on them as honest men, who faithfully related what
they had seen and heard? and to which evidence of sense the Apostles and
Evangelists appealed; so that when there 1 John 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 16. Luke 1. 1, 2
was certainly an infallible Testimony, yet that is not urged as the only
Foundation for Faith, but Rational Evidence produced even by those Persons who
were thus infallible, If we descend lower in the Christian Church, or walk
abroad to view the several Plantations of the Churches at that time, where do
we read or meet with the least intimation of an Infallible Testimony of the
Catholic Church, so called from its Communion with that of Rome? What
Infallible Testimony of that Church had the poor Britains to believe on? Or
those Barbarians mentioned in Irenaeus, who yet believed without a written
Word? What mention do we meet with in all the ancient Apologeticks of
Christians wherein they give so large an account of the grounds of Christian
Faith, of the modern method for resolving Faith? Nay, what one ancient Father
or Council give the least countenance to this pretended Infallibility, much
less make it the only sure Foundation of Faith as you do? Nay how very few are
there among your selves who believe it, and yet think themselves never the
worse Christians for it? If then your Doctrine be true what becomes of the
Faith of all these persons mentioned? Upon your principles their Faith could
not be true and Divine Faith; that is, let them all think they believed the
Doctrine of Christ never so heartily, and obey it never so conscientiously; yet
because they did not believe on the Infallibility of your Church, their Faith
was but a kind of gilded and splendid infidelity, and none of them Christians,
because not Jesuits. And does not this principle then fairly advance
Christianity in the world, when the belief of it comes to be settled on
Foundations, never heard of in the best and purest times of it; nay such
Foundations, as for want of their believing them, their Faith must be all in
vain, and Christ dyed in vain for them.

And what now says E. W. to all this? First, he says, I do not bring
Instances enough. Secondly, That I bring too many.

1. That I do not bring enough; for he much wonders I omit to touch upon an
instance Disc. 3. c. 3. n. 6.
far more difficult than any of these concerning rude and illiterate persons,
which I and all others are bound to solve. Me^ thinks he might have been
contented with those I had brought, unless he had answered them better; and
should not have blamed me for omitting that which I purposely take notice of
and give a sufficient answer to in these words. Although the Ignorance and
carelessness of men in a matter of so great consequence Rational Account part 1.
c. 6. Sect. 15.
be so great in all Ages, as is not to be justified, because all men ought to
endeavor aster the highest ways of satisfaction in a matter so nearly
concerning them (and it is none of the least things to be blamed in your
Church, that she does so much countenance this ignorance and neglect of the
Scripture) yet for such persons who either morally or invincibly are hindered
from this capacity of examining Scripture, there may be sufficient means for
their Faith to be built upon. For although such illiterate persons cannot
themselves see and read the Scripture, yet as many as do believe do receive the
Doctrine of it by that sense, by which Faith is conveyed; and by that means
they have so great certainty as excludes all doubting, that such Doctrines and
such matters of Fact are contained in these Books, by which they come to the
understanding of the nature of this Doctrine and are capable of judging
concerning the Divinity of it. For the Light spoken of in Scripture is not a
light to the eye but to the mind; now the mind is capable of this light, as
well by the ear, as by the eyes. The case then of such honest illiterate
persons, as are not capable of reading Scripture, but diligently and devoutly
hear it read to them, is much of the same nature with those who heard the
Apostles Preach this Doctrine before it was writ. For whatever was an Argument
to such to believe the Apostles in what they spoke, becomes an Argument to such
who hear the same things, which are certainly conveyed to us, by an
unquestionable Tradition: So that nothing hinders but such illiterate persons
may resolve their Faith into the same Doctrine and Motives which others do,
only those are conveyed to them by the ear, which are conveyed to others by the
eyes. But if you suppose persons so rude and illiterate, as not to understand
any thing, but that they are to believe as the Church believes; do you if you
can, resolve their Faith for them; for my part I cannot, and am so far from it
that I have no reason to believe they can have any. Judge now, Reader, what
measure I am like to meet with from such men, who can so impudently charge me
with omitting a difficulty, which I give so punctual an answer to.

2. But those instances I have brought are too many for him; as will easily
appear by the shuffling answers he makes to them. My design was from them to
prove that the Churches Infallibity was not necessary in order to Faith; he
puts it thus: If the Infallibility C. 3. n. 5.
of the Church be a sure Foundation of Faith, etc. Is not this a good beginning
to put Sure in stead of Necessary, or only sure? For that may be sure which is
not necessary, and it was the necessity I disproved by these Instances. To them
however he attempts to give an Answer.

1. In general. That none make the Roman Catholic Church in all circumstances
the only ^. 7.
sure Foundation of Divine Faith. For the first man that believed in Christ our
Lord before the complete establishment of his Church had perfect faith resting
on that great Master of Truth, without dependence on the Christian Church, for
Christ alone was not the Church, but the Head of it. Faith therefore in general
requires no more, but only to rely upon God the first verity speaking by this
or that Oracle, by one or more men lawfully sent to teach, who prove their
mission and make the doctrine proposed by them evidently credible. In like
manner the Apostles preached no doctrine in the name of the new Christian
Church, whilst our Savior lived here on earth, but testified that he was the
true Messiah by virtue of those signs and miracles which had been already
wrought above the force of Nature. A very fair concession! which plainly
destroys the necessity of the Churches infallibility in order to Faith. For if
no more be necessary in order to faith, but to rely upon God the first verity
speaking by this or that Oracle, etc. how comes the infallible testimony of the
Church to be in any Age necessary to faith? For God spoke by Christ and his
Apostles as his Oracles by whom his word is declared to us, therefore nothing
can be necessary to faith but to rely upon God the first Truth speaking by
them. And this we assert as well as they. But he must prove that we cannot rely
on God as speaking by them, unless he has an insallible Church in every Age,
if he will make this infallible testimony of the Church necessary to faith;
which I despair of ever seeing done while the world stands.

2. In particular, 1. To the instance of the disciples of Christ believing the
divine Authority of the old Testament without any infallible testimony of the
Jewish Church; only upon the rational evidence they had to convince them that
those Prophesies came from God: he answers; that it is hard to say where the
force of it lies, seeing there were N. 8.
innumerable Jews then dispersed all Jury over and the other parts of the world
who most firmly believed the Divine Authority of those Books, upon whose
Testimony the Apostles might believe those Books to be divine. A most excellent
answer if we well consider it! Have not they of the Church of Rome proved the
necessity of infallibility in the Church from Deuteronomy. 17. 10, 11, 12. (of which
abundant instances might be produced, and particularly the Considerator of my
Principles) which words if they imply any Infallibility at all do necessarily
prove that it is lodged in the supreme Ecclesiastical Judges and no where else;
so that if there were no infallibility in them it could not be supposed to be
any where else; therefore I proposed the case at that time when these
Ecclesiastical Judges consented to the death of Christ, and my Question will
not only hold of the Apostles but of any common Jews among them, who might not
believe Christ infallible, any more than the Sanhedrin, I ask whether such
might not have seen sufficient ground to believe that the Prophesies came not
in old time by the will of man, but by the Will of God? if such persons had
reason sufficient for their faith without any infallible Testimony; the same I
say may all Christians have of the Divine Authority of the New Testament. For
if the concurrent Testimony of the dispersed Jews firmly believing the divine
Authority of the Old Testament were a sufficient ground for a person then to
believe the Divinity of those Books; why may not the concurrent Testimony of
all Christians afford as sufficient a ground to believe the Authority of the
Books of the New, though no Ecclesiastical Senate among Christians be supposed
any more infallible, than the Jewish Sanhedrin was at the death of Christ? and
by this I hope E. W. may a little better perceive what this objection aims at.
But, says he, hence it follows not, that then there was no Jewish Church which
believed the divine verities of the old Scripture: O the monstrous subtilty of
Jesuits! who is able to stand before their terrible wits? What have we to do
with a Churches believing the divine verities of the Old Scripture? we only
enquire for the Testimony of a Church as necessary in order to others believing
it. If they firmly believed and yet had no infallible Testimony of a Church at
that time what can be more to our advantage than this? seeing it hence follows,
that there may be a firm faith without any Churches infallible Testimony. Well,
N. 9.
but he verily thinks, I mistook one objection for another; perhaps I would
have said that the Apostles lost faith of our Saviors Resurrection at the time
of his Passion, but this difficulty is solved over and over. And then falls
unmercifully to work with this man of clouts; he throws him first down and
tramples upon him, then sets him up again to make him capable of more valor
being shown upon him, then he kicks him afresh, beats him of one side and then
of the other, and so terribly triumphs over him, that the poor man of clouts
blesses himself that he is not made of flesh and bones, for if he had, it
might have cost him some aches and wounds. But I assure him I meant no such
thing; yet if I had, I do not see, but after all his batteries, the argument,
such as it is, would have stood firm enough; for supposing the Infallible
Testimony of the Church to rest in the Apostles after our Saviors death, it
must have prejudiced the faith of others who were to believe that article upon
their Authority, if they lost the faith of Christ's Resurrection.

2. I instanced in those who believed in Christ and yet were not personally
present at the miracles which our Savior wrought, but had them conveyed to
them by such reports as the woman's of Samaria was to the Samaritans. Of these I
ask what infallible Testimony their faith was built upon? And if those persons
might have a Divine Faith merely upon rational evidence, may not we much more
who have evidence of the same nature, but much more extensive, universal and
convincing than that was? To this he answers, by distinguishing between the
Motive or the natural Proposition of faith, which comes by N. 10.
hearing and the infallible Oracle whereupon it relies; and he thinks it
strange I did not see the distinction. It is far easier to see the distinction
than the pertinency of it to his purpose; for our Question is not about the
necessity of an Infallible Oracle in order to Faith, but of an infallible
Proposition; we still yield that which our faith relies upon to be an
infallible Oracle of God, but if a natural Proposition of that be sufficient
for faith, we have all we contend for. But to what purpose the Legend of S.
Photina, and the dispute whether she were the Samaritan woman, is here
inserted, is very hard to understand, unless he thought it the best way by any
means to escape from the business in hand. Next, he tells us, what he might
answer i^ N. 11.
these instances, by saying with good Divine that all immediate Propounders or
Conveyer^ of Divine Revelation in such particular case^ need not to be
infallible. I am glad to hear of such good Divines among them: only I would
know why in these particular cases an infallible proposition was unnecessary to
faith, if in the general case of all Christians it be now become necessary? But
he says although N. 12.
infallibility be not necessary for young beginners seldom molested with
difficulties against says, yet it is not only convenient but absolutely
necessary for others more learned, who often struggle to captivate their
understanding, when the high mysteries of Christianity are proposed. Never was
there certainly a more senseless answer: for who are molested with difficulties
against faith, if those who are to be converted to Christianity are not? who
have none of the advantages of education to recommend the doctrines of
Christianity to their minds; and are filled and prepossessed with contrary
prejudices. Never were there such happy Converters of Infidels as the Jesuits
are, if they meet with such Converts who are never molested with difficulties
against faith; only as they grow up, they begin to grow Infidels again, and
then it is necessary to choke them with an Infallible Church. I do not at all
wonder, that the more learned in the Church of Rome seeing the weakness of the
grounds of Faith among them do struggle with themselves about believing the
mysteries of their faith; but I very much wonder if so unreasonable a pretense
as that of Infallibility can ever satisfy them. I desire to know of these more
learned believers, whether they believed the Churches Infallibility before
those strugglings or not? if they did not, how came they to be believers, since
there can be no divine faith, without an infallible testimony? if they did, how
came they to question whether they were to believe the particular mysteries of
faith, if they did believe the Church Infallible which proposed them? But I
suppose these learned believers, were such as questioned the Infallibility of
the Church, and Christ and his Apostles too; of which sort I doubt not there
are many in Rome it self.

But yet he has two other ways to solve these difficulties. 1. By Gods special
illumination; N. 13.
and that I hope, may serve all as well as these; and then let him show the
necessity of an infallible Proponent. 2. That every particular proponent as a
member conjoined with Christ's infallible Oracle may be said to teach
infallibly. A most admirable speculation! and so may every one we meet with in
the streets, be infallible not as considered in himself, but as a member
conjoined with truth: or every Sectary; as a member conjoined with Gods word,
which I hope is an Oracle, altogether as infallible as the Church, But the
question is, whether such a one may be divided from Gods infallible Truth or
not? if not, he is absolutely infallible: if he may; then what security has
any one to rely upon him upon such a conditional Infallibility which he can
have no assurance of?

But still he hopes to retort the Instances N. 14.
upon me: I never saw such a way of retorting in my whole life. My design was
to prove by these Instances that an infallible Testimony of a Church was not
necessary in order to Faith; he says I must solve my own difficulties. I
confess I see none at all in my way that need to be answered; for I assert that
men may have sufficient Grounds of Faith without an infallible Proponent. Well,
but he supposes, all these Barbarians converted to Christ to have had true
Faith and consequently prudent Motives to believe, before they firmly assented
to the Divine Revelation. And so do I too. But what were these motives? To this
Question, he says, I return the strangest answer he ever heard; for I seem to
make the motives inducing to faith nothing but the Rational evidence of the
Truth of the Doctrine delivered and therefore I grievously complain that they
destroy the obligation which arises from the Rational evidence of the
Christian Religion; upon which he discourses, as though by rational evidence
the self-evidencing light of the doctrine, and consequently all the miracles
wrought by Christ and his Apostles were to no purpose. Have not I reason to
applaud my good fortune that I have met with so ingenuous an Adversary? But I
see those who write Controversies must be true Nethinims, not only hewers of
difficulties, and drawers of the waters of contention, but bearers of burdens
too; even such, as their Adversaries please to lay upon them. Could any thing
be further from my meaning than by the rational evidence of Christianity, to
understand the self-evidencing light of the Scriptures? But it is not what I
say, but what E. W. finds in his Commonplace-Books? a little before, when I had
proposed an argument he had not met with in those terms, he presently fancied I
meant another argu^ent which he found under the title of Defectilility of the
Church, and then in comes that with the answers he found ready to it. Now for
the rational evidence o^ Christian Religion, he finds not that Head in his
Note-Books; and cannot therefore tell what to make of it. But an argument he
had ready against the self-eviden^ing ligh^ of the Scriptures; and therefore
the Seraphims seather must serve instead of St. Larence's Gridiron. He might
have been easily satisfied in that very Paragraph, what I mean by the rational
evidence of Christian Religion; viz. the unquestionable assurance which we have
of the matters of fact, and the miracles wrought by Christ for confirmation of
his Doctrine: and this within four lines after the words by him produced. And
in the foregoing paragraph, I insist very much on the evidence of sense as to
the miracles wrought by Christ as a great part of the rational ^vidence of
Christianity, which is destroyed by the doctrine of the Roman Church, while
transubstantiation is believed in it. For what assurance can there be of any
object of sense such as the miracles of Christ were and his Body after his
Resurrection; if we are so framed not only that our senses may be, but we are
bound to believe that they are actually deceived in as proper an object of
sense as any in the world? And if such a thing may be false what evidence can
we have, when any thing is true? For if a thing so plain and evident to our
senses may be false, viz. that what I and all other men see is bread; what
ground of certainty can we have, but that which my senses and all other men's
judge to be false may be true? For by this means the criterium both of sense
and reason is destroyed and consequently all things are equally true and false
to us; and then farewell sense and reason and Religion together. These things I
there largely insist upon; which is all very silently passed over, the Schools
having found no answers to such arguments; and therefore they must be content
to be let alone. But however, though arguments cannot be answered I desire they
may not be misrepresented; and that when I fully declare what I meanby
rational evidence, such a sense may not be put upon my words as I never dreamt
off.

There is nothing after which looks with the face of an answer to the^e
Instances, unless it be that he says, that none can have infallible assurance
either of our Sav^ours Miracles, N. 19^
or of any other verity recorded in Scripture, independent of some actual
living, actual infallible, and most clear evidenced Oracle by signs above the
force of nature, which in this present state is the Church. These are good
sayings and they want only proving; and by the Instances already produced, I
have showed that Persons did believe upon such evidence, as implied no
infallible Testimony; and if he goes about to prove the Church infallible by
such Miracles wrought by her as were wrought by the Apostles, I desire only not
to believe the Church infallible till I be satisfied about these Miracles; but
of that afterward.

But I demanded if we can have no assurance of the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles without an Infallible Church, what obligation can lie upon men to
believe them, who see no reason to believe any such Infallibility? And since
the Articles of our Faith are built upon matters of fact such as ^he death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, whether these matters of fact may not be conveyed
down in as unquestionable a manner as any others are? Cannot we have an
unquestionable assurance that there were such persons as Caesar and Pompey, and
that they did such and such things, without some Infallible Testimony? If we
may in such things why not in other matters of fact which infinitely more
concern the world to know, than whatever Caesar or Pompey did? This his Margin
calls an unlearned objection, and in the body of his Book says, I might have
proposed a N. 20.
wiser Question; an ^asier I grant I might, as appears by the answer he gives
it. For two things, he says, may be considered. 1. That the man called Christ
dyed upon the Cr^ss, and this, he says, both Jews and Gentiles yet assent to
upon Moral Cer^ainty, but therefore do not believe in Christ. 2. That the man
called Christ dying for us was the only Messiah, truly God, the Redeemer of
mankind. Here we have, he says, the hidden verities of Christian Religion, the
certain objects of faith, conveyed unto us by no moral assurance but only upon
Gods Infallible Revelation. A very wise answer I must needs say: if intolerable
shuffling be any part of wisdom. Read over my words again, and be ashamed. If
so, then men cannot have any unquestionable assurance that there was such a
Person as Christ in the world, that he wrought such great miracles for
confirmation of his doctrine, that he died and rose again. Is all this no more
than the common consent of Jews, Gentiles and Cbristians that Christ died on a
Cross? Was ever any man so senseless as to make only the belief of the death of
Christ on the Cross, the reason of believing his Divinity? But I say his
Miracles before and Resurrection after gave abundant testimony that he was sent
from God, and therefore his doctrine must needs be true; and when we believe
the truth of his doctrine, w^ are bound to believe every part of it, such are
his being the only Messiah, the true God, the Redeemer of mankind, and all
other divine verities contained therein. Let the Reader now judge whether the
Objection or the Answer savours of more ignorance and folly. But it is the
mischief of this School Divinity, that it adds confidence to Ignorance, and it
makes men then most apt to despise others, when they most expose themselves.

I proceeded to show, that instead of settling Rational Account Part 1. c 5.
sect. 9.
faith on a sure foundation by the Churches Infallibility, they bring it to
greater uncertainties than it was in before; because they can neither satisfy
men what that Church is, which they suppose Infallible, what in that Church is
the proper subject of this Infallibility, what kind of Infallibility it is, nor
how we should know when the Church does define Infallibly: and yet, I say,
every one of these Questions is absolutely necessary to be resolved in order to
the satisfaction of men's minds as to the Foundation of their Faith. His Answer
to these Questions refers us to his proofs of the Roman Churches Infallibility,
as Disc. 3. C. 3. ^. 22.
the only society of Christians which has power to define Infallibly by her
representative moral Body; which when I see proved I shall confess an Answer is
given to those Questions. Only one thing he thinks fit to give a more
particular Answer to; which is, that this Infallibility should be the only
Foundation of C. 5. a. 1.
believing all things in Religion, and yet so many things and some of them very
strange ones must be certainly believed before it. Here his common-place-Book
again fails him, and therefore wanting his Compass he roves and wanders from
the point in hand. He tells me it is hard to guess at my meaning, for I name
not one article thus assented to. Perhaps I would say, that the verities
revealed in some Books of Scripture called Protocanonical known by their own
proper signitures or motives, as the Harmony, Sanctity, and Majesty of the
Style, may be believed without this Testimony of an Infallible Church. Well, he
does not know what I meant, but he knew an Argument, he had an Answer ready to;
and therefore that must be my meaning. But are not my words plain enough to any
one that reads them? And what a vast measure of faith, say I, is necessary to
believe the Papal Infallibility; for unless a man believes the particular Roman
Church to be the Catholic Church, unless he believes that Christ has promised
an infallible assistance to the Pastors of the Church, and that not as
separate, but as assembled in Council; and not in every Council, but such as
the Pope calls and presides in and confirms, he cannot believe this Doctrine of
Infallibility. Nay further, he must Infallibly believe the Church to be
Infallible, though no Infallible Argument be brought for it; that this Church
does judicially and authoritatively pronounce her sentence in matters of Faith
though we know not what that Church is which must so pronounce; that he
Infallibly know that this particular sentence was so pronounced, though he can
have no other than moral means of knowing it; and lastly, that the
Infallibility must be the first thing believed, although all these things must
be believed before it. Could any man well in his senses after reading these
words imagine that I meant the self evidencing light of the Scriptures again?
But they write for those that believe them, and that never dare look into the
Books they pretend to consute.

Yet he has a mind to prove the name of Roman Catholic Church to be no Bull:
which I said in a Parenthesis, was like German universal Emperor: This gives a
new start, another commonplace Head is searched, Title, Catholic Church,
there he finds ready the old weather beaten Testimonies, Romans 1. 8. Your Faith
is renowned the whole world over: ergo Roman and Catholic are all one. A plain
demonstration! What need they talk of the obscurity of Faith, where there is
such convincing evidence? But what if it should have happened that S. Paul had
said the same thing of the Faith of the Corinthians, or Thessalonians, would it
not have been a most evident demonstration that the Church of Corinth was the
Catholic Church at that time, and was to continue so in following Ages? But
Scripture though never so plain cannot serve their turn, they must have Fathers
too. So E. W. brings in St. Hierom, St. Cyprian, St. Athanasius, St. Ambrose,
all evidently proving that the Church of Rome was once Catholic: and what then
I beseech him? Were not other Churches so too? But these very Testimonies, as
it unhappily falls out, had been particularly and largely examined by me in a
whole Chapter to that purpose. Rational Account part 2. c. 1.
But it is no matter for that, I had not blotted them out of his Note-Books,
and there he found no answers, and therefore out they come again.

. 11. 2. The second thing I objected Of the Circle in the Resolution of Faith,
not avoided by E. W.
against this way of resolving Faith, was that it did not effect that which it
was brought for, for supposing that Chuch Infallible, and that Infallibility
proved by the motives of credibility, they do not escape the circle objected
against them: Which I showed, 1. from the nature of divine Faith as explained
by them. 2. From the consideration of the persons whose Faith was to be
resolved. 3. From the nature of that Infallibility which is attributed to the
Church. I must now consider how E. W. attempts the clearing of these
difficulties.

1. As to the nature of divine Faith. I ask whether a divine Faith as to the
Churches Infallibility, may be built upon the motives of credibility? If it
may, then a divine Faith may rest upon prudential motives, if not, then this
way cannot clear them from a circle in the resolution of divine Faith. For I
demanded why with a divine Faith they believe the Scriptures to be the Word of
God? Their answer is, because the Church which is Infallible delivers them as
such to us. If I then ask, why with a divine Faith they believe the Churches
Infallibility? I desired them to answer me if they can any other way than
because the Scriptures which are Infallible say so. It is a very pleasant thing
to see how E. W. is miserably put to his shifts about this difficulty, for
although in his former Discourses he had pressed the necessity of divine Faith
so much, that from thence he might introduce the necessity of Infallibility;
yet he now seems wholly to have forgotten any such distinction, of Faith humane
and divine; although he could not but see that the force of my Argument did
depend upon it. The substance of his answer is, That the first act of Diss. 3.
c. 5. n. 5.
Faith whereby we believe the Churches Infallibility relies not on Scripture,
but upon the Church it self, as the most known manisested Oracle. Be it so: but
the Question is, whether this first act be divine Faith or not; if not, it is
nothing to the purpose, if it be, then divine Faith may want an Infallible
Testimony: for this first act of Faith concerning the Churches Infallibility
has nothing to rely upon, but the fallible motives of credibility, and
consequently divine Faith may want an Infallible Testimony. And I say still let
them answer this if they can; without apparent shuffling and running away from
the Question in hand.

2. From the consideration of the persons whose Faith is to be resolved: for I
say, 1. The Question is not which way they will prove the Insallibility of
their Church against those who deny it, but which way they resolve their own
Faith of the Churches Infallibility. 2. In disputing against their Adversaries
they cannot avoid the circle; for while they prove Infallibility from
Scripture, the Question arises how they come to know Infallibly, that this is
the sense of those places? for which they must again appeal to the Churches
Infallibility in delivering the sense of Scripture: which if it be not a
circle, I say, there is hardly such a figure in Mathematics. To this he
answers. 1. That they both resolve and prove; but then if they do resolve N. 7.
their Faith into this Infallibility, it is no sufsicient answer to say they
only prove it to Adversaries: which was all I intended by that first
particular. But what answer does he give to the second concerning tbe sense of
Scripture? Here again he makes use of his distinction of the first and second
act of Faith; the first he says, is not at all founded N. S, 9.
upon the sense of Scripture, but upon the Churches own Infallible Testimony
made by it self and for it self immediately credible. Now if we speak, says
he, of another distinct, consequent, and more explicit act of Faith, when we
believe the Churches Infallibility upon this ground, that she declares the
Scriptures genuine sense which proves her an Infallible Oracle, there is no
difficulty at all, because this very Exposition or Interpretation of Scripture
is ultimately resolved into (and therefore again believed upon) the same
Infallible Authority of the Church, or rather upon Scripture and the Churches
Interpretation together. For thus jointly taken they ground Faith, and not like
two disparate principles, as if we first believed the Scriptures sense
independently of the Churches Interpretation, and then again believed the
Churches interpretation to be Infallible, because the sense of Scripture known
aliunde, or without depending on Church Authority, says she is Infallible;
This cannot b^ if Scripture and the Churches interpretation indivisibly concur
to this latter act of Faith, whereof we now speak. Here then is a Dilemma that
clears all and frees us from the least shadow of a circle: we either know (or
believe) the Scriptures N. 10.
sense independently of the Churches interpretation, or receive it upon her
Infallible Authority; grant the first there is no danger of a circle; grant the
latter, there are (...) two imaginable propositions to make a circle of, whilst
that sense internal to the letter cannot be Infallibly propounded otherwise,
than by the Church. I have set down these words more at large to let the Reader
try his faculty upon them; what tolerable sense he can make of them. My
objection was plain and easy, they offer to prove the Churches Infallibility
by Scripture, at least as to the second act of Faith, which is alone pertinent
to our purpose; I asked what way they come to believe Infallibly themselves and
assure others this is the sense of those places; and in this case they are
forced to return to the Churches Infalli^ility; judge now, Reader, whether here
be not a plain circle because they believe the Church Infallible because the
true sense of Scripture says she is so; and again they believe this to be the
Infallible sense of Scripture, because the Infallible Church says so. No says
E. W. Here is not the least shadow of a circle. I would he had told us first
what a circle was, and then applied what he had said to the description given
of it. But for all that I can see by his answer he had a mind to amuse his
Reader by seeming to say something; but no great matter what. Is not that a
circle when the Argument made use of to prove another thing by, must it self
(...). Sexius Empir. Pyrr^o. hypo^p. l. 1. c. 15.
be proved by that very thing, which it is made use of to prove? For in this
case the mind has nothing to fix it self upon, and therefore must suspend all
assent: which must have some certain foundation to proceed upon, on which it
may rest it self. As the will could not love Physic for the sake of health, if
it loved health for the sake of Physic, so neither can the understanding
assent to one truth for another, if it assent to that other only for the sake
of the former. For then the same Proposition would be more certain than the
other, as it is the antecedent by which the other is proved; and less certain
as it is the consequent proved by the other as it is antecedent: and so in
different respects would be more and less certain than it self. Let us now
apply this to our present case. The thing to be proved is the Churches
Infallibility, the Argument to prove it by, is the Infallible sense of
Scripture; but if the Infallible sense of Scripture can be proved by nothing
but the Churches Infallible interpretation; then it is plain that is assumed as
an Argument to prove Infallibility by, which cannot be otherwise known than by
this Infallibility. Now let any man attend to the answer he gives: he says,
there is no difficulty at all in believing the Churches Infallibility upon this
ground, that she declares the Scriptures genuine sense which proves her an
Infallible Oracle. No difficulty at all! Nay, that is a little strange, that
there should be no difficulty at all in believing the Churches Infallibility
upon the sense of those Scriptures, whose sense could not be insallibly known
without the supposal of that Infallibility, which is to be proved by them. But
how comes there to be no difficulty at all in this matter? Because this very
Exposition or Interpretation of Scripture brought to its last principle is
ultimately resolved into (and therefore again believed upon) the same
Infallible Authority of the Church, or rather upon Scripture and the Churches
interpretation together. What a strange thing the difference of men's
understandings is! That which he thinks makes it no diffic^lty at all, makes it
to me the greatest in the world. For by the Exposition or Interpretation I
suppose he means, the Infallible sense of Scripture: and if this be resolved
into and believed upon the same Infallible Authority of the Church, then I
still enquire how this Infallible Authority of the Church comes to be proved by
this Exposition of Scripture the Infallibility of which does suppose the thing
to be proved, viz. the Churches Infallibility. And if the sense internal to the
letter cannot be infallibly propounded otherwise than by the Church; I would
fain know what assurance any man can have of this sense but from the belief of
this Infallible Interpreter? But, says he, Scripture and the Churches
Interpretation indivisibly concur to this latter act of Faith. This indivisible
concurrence, is to me an odd piece of mystical Divinity: the meaning must be
(if there be any) that I believe the Church Infallibility by those Scriptures,
from the Churches Infallibility appearing in the Infallible sense of those
Scriptures. But whence, say I, does this appear to be the Infallible sense of
them? For if the sense of any places of Scripture be doubtful, theirs is; since
their meaning is so doubtful, how come men firmly to believe this to be the
true and Infallible sense of those places and none else? Can men come to an
Infallible sense of Scripture, without an Infallible Church? if so, what need
of any such Infallibility? if not, then the Infallible sense of these places
cannot be known but from the Churches Infallibility: and therefore the Circle
unavoidably follows, viz. that they must prove the Churches Infallibility by
the Infallible sense of Scripture, and the Infallible sense of Scripture by the
Churches Infallibility. And any man might easily guess that E. W. was in a
Circle by his Conjuring, and speaking things which neither he, nor any one else
can understand.

3. I showed, that they avoided not the circle by this way, from the nature of
the Infallibility, which they attribute to the Church. Which is not by an
immediate Revelation, but but by Divine assistance promised in Scripture; and
therefore the utmost the motives of credibility can do in this case, is only to
notify or distinguish the Church; but still the formal reason of believing
this Infallibility, cannot be from those Motives, but from those promises which
are supposed in Scripture to imply it. So that still the circle returns, for
they believe the Scriptures. Infallible because of the Churches Testimony, and
the Church Infallible because of the promis^ of Scripture. This he gravely
calls, a^ N. 11.
unlearned objection. That is even as i^ pleases him; but I have no reason to
take him for an Infallible judge of Learning: how ever it is no great matter,
learned o^ unlearned, it is more than he gives any tolerable answer to. But I
see no reason why he calls it so unless it be, because he says it is in effect
the same objection repeated again. And he thinks a man may be allowed to call
his Creditor Rogu^ or Rascal, that comes a second time, because he could get no
good answer at first. However such is the civility of E. W. that he will not
send it away without a sufficient answer; and yet after all we have nothing for
payment but the first general act of Faith; one would have thought it had been
the Act of Public Faith, by the badness of the payment. And this first general
act of Faith, he says, w^olly relies upon the Churches own Infallible
Testimony, without depending on Scripture. But what is this to that divine
Faith we enquire after, and which, he says, must rest upon an Infallible
Authority? For since Faith must rest upon its motives, and those motives are
confessed to be fallible; this cannot be that assent of Faith, which himself
makes to be necessary and we have made appear, notwithstanding all his
shusfling, unavoidably brings them into a Circle.

CHAP. III. An Enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church.
. 1. THE next thing which I objected E. W's Assertions about the Miracles of
the Roman Church.
against this way of resolving faith was that it was notoriously false, viz.
that there are the same motives of credibility for the Infallibility of the
Roman Church, that there were for the Infallibility of Moses and the Prophets,
or of Christ and his Apostles. The natural consequence I said, of affirming
Rational Account Part 1 C. 5. S^ct. 12.
this was, that there is as great danger in not believing the Church of Rome
insallible, as in not believing Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles
to have been sent from God. For where there is an equal obligation to believe,
there is an equal sin in not believing; and where the sin is equal, it stands
to reason that the punishment should be so too. So that the denial of the Roman
Churches Infallibility, must be accounted by them as high a piece of
Infidelity, as calling in Q^estion the Infallibility of Christ himself; or
denying the Scriptures. This does not in the least startle E. W. for he boldly
asserts, that there are equal motives of credibility as to their Church and
Christ and his Apostles, he frequently challenges me to show the disparity, nay
he puts the whole issue of his cause upon it. As may be seen by these words of
his: The main argument of T. C. Reason and Religion disc. 3. c. 5. n. 1, 2.
he says was this. As Christ and his Apostles proved themselves Oracles sent
from God by their Works, signs, and Miracles; again as the Primitive Christians
induced by such signs believed Christ and the Apostles upon their own Testimony
to be Infallible Teachers; so we having ever had the very like Works, Signs,
and Miracles manifest in the Church are prudently induced to believe her as an
Infallible Oracle, upon her own Infallible Testimony. To solve this plain and
pressing argument says E. W. one of these two things must be done: either a
disparity is to be given between those first Signs and Miracles of the
Apostles, and the later of the Church, or it must be shown wherein the
Inference made is defective or unconcluding, viz. that the Church evidenced by
her signs is not proved Gods Infallible Oracle, as the Apostles were proved by
their signs, to be Infallible Teachers. Afterward he says, he has proved that
the N. 4.
Church has wrought Miracles every way equal with those, which the Apostles
wrought. In those Chapters to which he refers us for the proof of this, I find
this assertion in the beginning. I say first, clear and unquestionable Miracles
of the like quality with those Disc. 2. c. 8, 9.

C. 8. n. 1.


which Christ and his Apostles wrought, have been ever since most gloriously
manifest in the Roman Catholic Church, and in no other Society of Christians.
Afterward, he calls their Miracles, glorious Miracles standing upon
inslubitable record; and for the proof of these Miracles he appeals to the
lives of the Saints and certain Church History. Besides N. 4.
the Testimonies of some Fathers of Miracles done in their time, not at all to
his purpose, (as shall afterward appear) he appeals, to the known Miracles of
those two admirable Saints, Blessed St. Dominick and the Seraphical St.
Francis, and St. Vincentius Ferrerius N. 6.
reported by the pious and learned St. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence. From
whence he infers that the Miracles wrought N. 7.
in the Roman Catholic Church, are not inferior to those done by the
Apostles; and a little after, I^ the Miracles of Christ and the N. 13.
Apostles rationally proved against Jews and Gentiles the credibility of
Apostolical Doctrine, the very like signs and supernatural effects most evident
in the Roman Catholic Church, as rationally prove against Sectaries the
credibility of our now professed Catholick-Doctrine; for which he gives this
reason. The same signs and marks of Truth when equal in Majesty, worth, quality
and number, ever discover to reason the same Truth: wherefore if the
Roman Catholic Church most clearly gives in evidence of her Miracles equal in
worth, quality and number with those wrought by Christ and his Apostles, it
follows that as those first Apostolical wonders were sufficient to convice Jews
and Gentiles of the Truth of Christianity, so these later also wrought in the
Church are of like force, and no less efficacious to convince Sectaries of
whatever Doctrine she teaches. Now ponder well what the Apostoles did; they
cured the sick, dispossed Devils, raised the dead, converted nations, etc. but
these very Miracles have been done in the Roman Catholic Church, yea and
greater too. Ergo, we have the like evidence of Truth in both the Primitive Age
and this, consequently with it the same Truth. The sequel is undeniable. After
this, for particular instances, he appeals to the undeniably authentic
monuments and testimonies of that one sacred house of Loreto; to the continual
Miracles done at the Relics of N. 16.
St. James at Compostella in Spain, to the Sacred Vial of St. Mary Magdalen in
France, wherein, says he very gravely, the precious blood gathered by that
penitent Saint at our Saviors passion is yet preserved, and visibly boyls up
on the very day he suffered after the reading of the Passion; to the undoubted
Miracles wrought by the intercession of our N. 17.
Blessed Lady at Montaigu, for which he calls in the testimonies of Lipsius and
Putean, and at large relates a Miracle wrought by St. Xaverius upon F.
Marcellus a Jesuit at N 18.
Naples; and then answers some few Objections C. 9.
and concludes with the vindication of the Miracle at Zaragosa in Spain. This
is the substance of E. W's discourse upon this subject; which in the proper
consequence of it does more really enervate the proofs of Christianity, than
establish the infallibility of the Roman Church. For I do not think an Atheist
would desire more advantage against the Christian Religion, than to have it
granted that the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles were no other than such as
are wrought in the Roman Church; and that the proofs of them are no more
authentic and undeniable than those of the Miracles done at Loreto,
Compostella, or Montaigu: and that Christ and his Apostles gave no more
illustrious evidences of their being sent from God than St. Dominick, or St.
Francis; and that there was no greater evidence of Christ's Resurrection from
the dead than there is of the boiling up of the blood of Christ in the Vial of
St. Mary Magdalen in the Church of St. Maximin in France.

Therefore not only to invalidate the Testimony drawn from hence for the Roman
Churches Infallibility, but to preserve the honor of Christianity, I am
obliged to enquire into these two things.

1. Whether the Testimony upon which the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles,
and those of the Roman Church are delivered be equally credible?

2. Whether the Miracles of the Roman Church be so equal (to abate him what he
says of greater) in worth, quality and number with those of Christ and his
Apostles, that the Roman Churches Infallibility is as much attested by them, as
Christ and his Apostles was by theirs?

1. I shall enquire into the credibility of the Testimony on both sides. Two
things are agreed to make up sufficient credibility in a Testimony; viz. the
knowledge and fidelity of the persons who deliver it. If they speak nothing but
what they were certain witnesses of, and never gave suspicion of fraud and
deceit, and offered the highest ways of proof concerning their own fidelity,
then it is an unreasonable thing to disbelieve them. This is the case of those
who recorded our Saviors and his Apostles Miracles, they were persons who
either saw them wrought themselves, or had them delivered to them immediately
by them who saw them; they published them to the world in that Age wherein they
werecapable of being disproved by persons then living in the same places where
they were wrought, and were notorious enemies to the persons who did them, who
were concerned to discover for their own justification the least fraud or
imposture in those matters. But besides this to take away all suspicion of
design, the ^nesses of these things freely quitted all ex^ectations of worldly
advantages, they ran themselves upon the greatest hazards to attest the truth
of what they said, and at last sacrificed their lives to confirm the truth of
their own Testimony. But on the other side if I can prove,

1. That the greatest number of the Miracles in the Roman Church have been
believed upon the credit of Fables and uncertain reports.

2. That the Testimony of those who deliver them has been contradicted by men
of greater Authority than themselves.

3. If upon strict and careful examination notorious forgeries and impostures
have been discovered; and never any persons laid down their lives to attest the
truth of any of their Miracles; then it can be nothing but the greatest
impudence in any to parallel the Testimony of the Primitive Church concerning
the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, with that of the Miracles wrought in
the Church of Rome.

1. That the greatest number of Miracles in the Roman Church have been believed
upon the credit of Fables and uncertain reports. For the proof of this I shall
make choice of his own instances of Loreto in Italy, Compostella in Spain, St.
Maximins Church in France, and the lives of his two admirable Saints to which I
shall add some nearer home that we may have a proof of the credibility of these
miracles in the most considerable places of Europe.

. 2. Let us first go on pilgrimage to our Lady of Loreto, to view the
undeniably Of the Miraculous translation of the Chapel of Loreto.
Authentic public monuments and Testimonies of Miracles there wrought. The
first to be seen there, in a Table hanging up for that purpose, is, the
wonderful Miracle in the translation of that Chapel first from Nazareth to
Dalmatia, and from Dalmatia into those parts of Italy where it now stands. The
story cannot be better told, than it is in the Authentic Table it self: which
may be thus Translated.

The Church of our B. Lady of Loreto was a Chamber of the House of the B.
Virgin Mary Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ which House stood in the country of
Judea, in a City of Galilee whose name was Nazareth; in which Chamber the B.
Virgin Mary was born, and bred up, and afterward there received the salutation
of the Angel Gabriel, and in the same Chamber she educated her Son Jesus Christ
to the Age of twelve years. After the Ascension of Christ to Heaven the Virgin
Mary remained upon earth with the Apostles and other Disciples of Christ who
seeing many divine Mysteries performed in the said Chamber, did by the common
consent of them all decree, to make a Church of that Chamber to the honor and
memory of the B. Virgin Mary, which they did, and the Apostles and Disciples
consecrated that Chamber to be a Church, and there celebrated divine offices,
and St. Luke the Evangelist with his own hands made an Image to the likeness of
the B. Virgin, which is there to this day. Afterward that Church was inhabited
and honored with much devotion by the Christian people in those parts in which
it stood as long as the people remained Christian. But after they renounced the
Christian faith and embraced Mahometism the Angels of God took away the said
Church and carried it into the parts of Sclavonia and there placed it by a
certain Castle called Fiume; where it met not with that honor which the B.
Virgin desired. Therefore the Angels came and took it from thence and carried
it clear over the Sea into the parts of the territory of Recanati, and there
placed it in a Wood which belonged to a Noble Lady who had the command of the
City of Recanati, and was Owner of the Wood whose name was Loreta, and from her
the Church took its name of St. Maria de Loreto. In that time by reason of the
great concourse of all people to that Wood in which the Church remained
abundance of robberies and mischiefs were committed there; and therefore the
Angels again took up the Chapel and carried it to a Hill belonging to two
Brothers where the Angels set it down; these Brothers getting a vast revenew by
the resort of Pilgrims thither and the oblations by them made, fell to a great
discord. Upon which the Angels came again and took away the Chapel from that
place, and carried it into the Highway; and there placed it where it is now,
with many signs and innumerable gifts and miracles. Then all the people of
Recanati went to see the Church which stood upon the Earth without any
Foundation: and being astonished at such a Miracle, and fearing left it should
come to ruin, they compassed it about with a good thick Wall and a strong
Foundation as it i^ seen at this day, and yet no one knew, from whence that
Church came into those parts, until in A. D. 1290. the blessed Virgin appeared
in a Dream to a certain man much devoted to her, to whom she revealed the
foregoing things, and he presently divulged them to certain honest men of that
Country: who immediately resolved to know the truth of these matters; and
therefore determined to send sixteen notable good men to Nazareth, to find out
the truth of them. Who carried with them the measure of the said Church, and
there they found exactly the Foundations of it and the just measure; and to
make all sure, they found it written upon a Wall that such a Church had been
there and was gone from thence, and these persons upon their return certified
the truth of all these things; and from that time it was known that that
Chapel was the Chamber of the blessed Virgin Mary, and the Christian people
showed great devotion toward it: for the blessed Virgin there every day, does
infinite Miracles as experience shows.

There was a certain Eremite that was called Brother Paul of the Wood, who
dwelt in a small Cottage in that Wood, and every morning went to divine offices
in that Chapel, and was a man of a great abstinence and a holy Lif^, who said,
that ten years before or thereabouts on the day of the Nativity of the blessed
Virgin b^ing the 8th. of September, two hours before day in a clear Air going
out of his Cottage toward the Church he saw a light descend from Heaven upon
the Church twelve ^oot long, and six broad, and when it was upon the Church it
vanished; upon which he said it was the blessed Virgin, which there appeared on
the day of her Nativity, and came to see her Feast observed; but no man saw her
besides this Holy man.

To confirm the Truth and certainty of all these things, two honest men of this
Village reported them several times to me Teremanus the Over-seer and Governor
of the said Church: one of them was called Paulus Renaldatii, the other Francis
Prior. The said Paul told me that his Grandfathers Grandfather saw when the
Angels carried the said Chapel over the Sea and placed it in the Wood, and
that he and other persons oftimes went to the said Chapel. And the said
Francis oftimes said to me that his Grandfather being one hundred and twenty
years old, said that he went often to the said Church in the Wood. Moreover the
said Francis averred that his Grandfathers Grandfather had a House and dwelt
there: and that in his time the Chapel was removed by Angels from the hill of
the two Brothers to the Highway.

Deo gratias.
Imprinted at Venice by Benedictus de Bindonis A. D. 1499.
In the Italian Copy it is only added, that this Narration was taken out o^ an
Original Authentic M. S. belonging to the said Chapel March 20. A. D. 1492.

And is not this a very pleasant story to be matched in point of credibility
with the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles? What do these men think in their
hearts of Christian Religion; that dare avouch such ridiculous fictions as
these are, and impose them on the credulity of mankind? But we are not to
imagine this to be only a Legend hung up at Loreto, for the comfort of devout
Pilgrims; but it is delivered in the same manner, by men who should have had
more wit, or more honesty. Cardinal Baronius in his Baron. Annal. ^ Tom. 1. A.
9. ^. 1.
Annals, cannot let it escape, but relates the miraculous translation of this
Chapel from Nazareth to Dalmatia, from thence to Loreto much after the same
way. All the Argument ^e brings for the truth of it, is taken from Gods
omnipotency, as though, as Is. Casau^on Casaub. Exercit. 7. sect. 1.
truly answers him, all the Rabbinical and Mahumetan Fables might not be
believed on the same ground. And he observes from some of the Fathers, that
Gods omnipotency is the Sanctuary of Heretics, whither they betake themselves
when they are basfled with reason. But Baronius refers us to Canisius Ca^is.
His^. Deiparae l. 5. c. 25.
for a fuller account of this admirable story; who very wisely brings the
stories of the Prophet Elias, Habakkuk, and: Philip in the Acts to confirm the
truth of this; as though the dispute were whether God could do it, and not
whether the thing were really done? But if we offer to Question whether the
holy Angels are ever employed in the carrying Houses (not on their shoulders I
suppose, but their wings) he chokes us presently, with the Angels, being said
to be ministering Heb. 1. 14*
spirits for the heirs of Salvation; as though it were no^ possible for them to
discharge that office faithfully; unless at some time or other, they took away
an old House from its Foundations, and mounted it into the Air, and conveyed it
above two thousand miles. Is not this notable service to the heirs of
Salvation? The latter writers, such as Raynaldus, Bzovius, Spondanus, and
Benedic^ ^^ Rav^ald. A. D. 1291. n. 68, 69.

Bzov. Anal. ad A. D. 1296. n. 14.

Spo^dan. A. D. 1291. n. 22.

Govo^. Chronic deip. A. D. 1298.

T^rsellin. Hist. La^ret. 1. 1. c. 6.


Gononus refer us to Horatius Tursellinus as the most Authentic Historian of
this stupendous Miracle: and his Book was not only approved by the General of
his order, but has a Bull of Clement 8. prefixed before it. The substance of
his story is the very same with the Table of Teremanus, only enlarged with some
more improbable circumstances, as that the Trees made lowly reverences and
bowed themselves to the Chapel in its passage; (but it seems they bowed so low
that they could never recover themselves after; being I suppose of great Age
when they made this obeisance) that, when the new Wall was built for the
support of the Chapel; the Walls of it would not endure the others being too
near, but made the new Wall by degrees know its due distance, so that at last a
Boy might be put in between them: that C. 16.
the Image of our Savior being taken out to be set in a more conspicuous
place, it went of its own accord into the Chapel again, so that after several
attempts they were fain to give over their design. I confess these
circumstances do not tend much to the making the story it self more credible;
but what Authority has Tursellinus found out for so strange a Miracle? He
often quotes Hieronynius Angelita, but he writ in Clement the sevenths time,
and dedicated his History of that Chapel to him; but the main prop of all this
story is the Tradition of Loreto, and the Table of Teremanus, whom he highly C.
28.
commends for his integrity and prudence, who was Governor of the Chapel in
the time of Pius 2. about the year 1460. and to his Testimonies Tursellinus
appeals for proof of the matter of fact. And was ever so great a Miracle better
attested than this? We will out of mere kindness, set aside the Testimony from
Visions and Dreams; but then could we imagine any thing less than that some
persons of credit who had seen the Chapel in its march over the Sea, were
resolved to observe, where such a Chapel in the Air would at last fix it self;
or that some that saw it pitched upon the ground without any Foundations,
should presently fill the Country with the noise of it, as such strange things
are very apt to do; and that such witnesses being strictly examined should have
left a deposition written by them for the satisfaction of future Ages. In stead
of which we have two plain Countrymen brought in to give testimony to a thing
done in the time of their Grandfathers Grandfathers: neither do they both give
testimony to the same thing; but one of them says, his Grandfathers
Grandfather (not his Grandfather as Tursellinus has it) saw the Chapel, while
it was in the Air carried by Angels over the Sea. Is not this a substantial
witness, that attests what his Grandfathers Grandfather saw, without any other
evidence of it, than that he heard so? Tursellinus says, that it was not only
to Teremanus that they attested this by word, but they did swear to it: which
adds very much to their credit considering the nature of their Testimony; but
methinks Teremanus himself should not have forgotten that. All the force of
this Testimony lies upon one man, who is reported by his great Grandchild to
have seen the Chapel carried by Angels over the Sea. But suppose he did see
something moving upon the Sea, while he was cutting Wood, or feeding his Cattle
in the fields of la Marca di Ancona; was he sure it was the Chapel of Loreto:
did he see the Angels carrying it? might not a plain Countryman mistake a
little about the color and shape of Angels? might not a Ship under sail in the
Adriatic Gulf be taken by such a man for a House carried by Angels with white
Wings? are such Miracles so little regarded by the people of Italy, that no
proof could be produced for it, but what two Affidavit-men said, that they had
heard what their Ancestors almost two hundred years before had seen or heard?
Is it possible the memory of such a Miracle should be so near being quite lost?
were there no Writers in that Age to record it and take notice of it? Is it
credible so great a Miracle should happen in those days and neither Dantes nor
Petrarch, nor Boccace take the least notice of it, although they were all
Italians, and inquisitive men, and had sufficient occasion in their Writings to
mention it? But suppose, these men were not apt to believe such things; what
shall we say to St. Antonin of Florence, whom E. W. calls a pious and Learned
man, who has written such a Rapsody of all sorts of Miracles, and lived a good
while after this miraculous translation and yet takes not the least notice of
it? What shall we say to that admirable Saint, St. Vincentius Ferrerius, as E.
W. calls him, who lived after A. D. 1440. who says, that the Vi^cent. sorm. de
assamp. B. V.
Chamber of our Lady was still in Nazareth? And although the former are
negative Testimonies, yet they cannot be rejected by such who make use of the
same kind of Testimonies to cast off a matter of fact attested by much better
Authors than Paulus Renaldatii, Franciscus Prior, or Petrus Georgius Teremanus.
And that is in the story of Pope Joan, wherein Baronius says, That thesilence
^a^on. A^^al. A. D. 853. ^. 65.
of so long time after it, wherein there was a just occasion to mention it was
more than a thousand witnesses to prove the faisity of it. And if silence be a
thousand witnesses on their side, I hope it may be at least five hundred on
ours. But Tursellinus offers to bring Tursel. Hist. La^ret. l. 1 c. 23.
all the Testimonies which were to be had; the first, is Blondus who was
Secretary to Eugenius the 4th. about the year 1450. a good competent time after
the Miracle was said to be wrought. Yet a^l that Blondus says is only, that
there was a famous Chapel of Blondi Italia illustr. in Piceno p. 339.
our Lady at Loreto, as appeared by the many oblations there made, but not one
word of the miraculous translation. The Poet Mantuan says, he read the Table
hanging up in the Chapel; and no wonder if he found the story fit for a Poets
brain to work upon. Leander Albertus speaks home, but he comes much too late to
give any Testimony, having published his description of Italy A. D. 1550. But
Leander seems to rely most upon the Miracles there wrought as an evidence of
the Leand. Albert. in Picen. p. 428.
Chapels miraculous translation; and the proof of those Miracles depends upon
the Tables hung up in the Chapel; which I suppose are E. W's. undeniable and
Authentic Testimonies

. 3. Therefore instead of pursuing farther Of the M^racles wrought at the
Chapel of Loreto.
this incredible fiction of the Translation of this Chapel from Nazareth to
Dalmatia and so to Loreto, by any scrupulous enquiries, how such a Chamber or
part of a House should be able to hold for above one thousand six hundred years
without decay: how at Nazareth it should escape being destroyed when Josephus
and Dion say all the Country Jo^ph de bello Jud. l. 7. Dio^ in vit. Trajani
thereabout was burnt and destroyed by the Romans, fifty Castles and nine
hundred eighty five Towns being consumed by Trajan after the strange
devastation made by Vespasian? How the Church of the Anuncia^ion at Nazareth
should be removed to Italy and yet remain still at Nazareth by the constant
Tradition of the Eastern parts? How the measure should be found exactly
agreeing by those sent to examine it, when Thomas de Novaria says, that he
lately found out the only true Quares^n. Elucid. terrae S. l. 7. c. 5. per^gr.
3.
Foundations larger than the Angels Chapel there built? These and several
other scruples I shall now let alone; and consider the other undeniably
authentic monuments and testimonies of this sacred House of Loreto.
Turs^llinus mentions one which he says, is so well T^s^ll. Hist. Lauret. l. 2.
c. 18.
attested that it is a sin to doubt of it: and is very well worth our reading
that we may see what rare stories are paralled'd with the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles.

A certain Priest of Dalmatia being hugely devoted to the blessed Virgin of
Loreto, was taken Prisoner by the Turks; who would have forced him to renounce
his Religion, which he would by no means hear of; but still called upon Christ
and Mary; they being enraged at him asked of him what he meant to use those
names so much; he told them they stuck to his very entrails; upon which they
threatened that they would pull out his entrails if he did not immediately
curse them both. Which they resolving to do, the poor Priest made a vow to the
blessed Virgin of Loreto, that if he lived he would go in Pilgrimage thither.
At which they being more enraged cut open his breast and pulled out all his
entrails, and gave them into his hand being now ready to sink, and bid him go
and carry them to the Lady of Loreto. The Priest presently goes on his way, and
after many days journey, comes safe to Loreto, having his entrails in his hand.
Wherever he came great flocking of people there was about him, (as we may
easily imagine) and to our Ladies servants here he shows his naked breast, and
his entrails taken out; and after having offered up his devotions to the
blessed Virgin, in the sight and embraces of her he breathed his last. Is not
this a swinging Miracle; and deserving credit beyond those of Christ and his
Apostles? To ask how a man could breath without his Lungs, or live without a
Heart, or by what vessels the circulation of blood was then performed? or any
such untoward questions, were but to gratify carnal reason too much, where
nothing is required but mere Faith. And such men have certainly great store of
that or rather of folly and impudence, that can dare to call these Legends by
the name of Authentic monuments or undeniable Testimonies. This is a very
hopeful beginning in the search into these Monuments; but I have several things
further to object, against this way of proving Miracles by Tables that are hung
up in such places as the Chapel of Loreto is.

1. That any extraordinary accident that befalls a person, if he either chanced
to think upon the blessed Virgin of Loreto, or pray to her, or at least tell
those so, who are concerned to have it believed, this immediately passes for a
Miracle. There are very few persons in the world but at sometime or other of
their lives do meet with extraordinary deliverances, either from diseases, or
other dangers. If any of these, had lived in those parts and had been possessed
with the same superstitious follies, immediately any such passage of their
lives, if they had gone to Loreto after it and there acquainted the
Poenitentiary or Confessor with it, it had been entered into the Tables, and had
been preserved (as a Tooth-drawer does Teeth) for the reputation of the place.
The far greatest part of the Miracles mentioned by Tursellinus are of this
kind. The first Miracle, by his own consession which brought the Church of
Loreto into reputation was the cure of Pius the second who being troubled with
the Gout, Turs^ll. Hist. Laur^t l. 1. c. 26.
and a Fever, and a Cough, prayed to the Lady of Loreto for his recovery, (not
merely to go to Ancona, but as the inscription expresses it on the Cup he sent
to Loreto, that he might be freed from his diseases and recover sound health)
and Tursellinus tells us, That he did not fail of his hope in any part; for
immediately, says he, his Fever went off, his Cough left him and his Limbs
recovered strength; and away he goes for Ancona and there dies of his Fever
and Consumption. Call you this a Miracle? I know not what kind of Miracles the
Lady of Loreto works; I am sure Christ and his Apostles never wrought such. We
use to say that a Miracle is a perfect work; and is dying of a disease a
miraculous cure? Platina and Ciacconius in his life take no notice of a cure,
much less of a Miracle, but say that upon some intermission he undertook his
journey where he dyed of his disease. Yet Tursellinus says, The fame of this
cure brought great reputation to the Lady of Loreto: which till that time (viz.
for one hundred and sixty years after the miraculous Translation) was known
only among the inhabitants of the Country about Ancona; and scarce the least
knowledge of it was passed into the neighbor Countries, which is the reason he
gives why Vincentius, Antoninus, and the Italian writers take no notice of it:
and those who did, as Blondus, yet do not mention the Translation, lest they
should seem to utter vain and incredible things. A very substantial reason I
confess. But after this time Miracles grew more frequent, as the superstition
and credulity of people did increase. If a man recovered of a dangerous
sickness, if Julius l. 2. c. 2. c. 12, c. 24, c. 27. l. 3. c. 15 16, 17, 18,
24. 26, 27. l. 4, 5, 6, 7, 17, 18, 19, etc.
the second escape being shot by a Cannon bullet, if Clement the seventh escape
with his life in the sacking of Rome, if others are delivered from great
dangers either by Sea or Land, in what way or kind so ever it be, if they do
but send or go to Loreto afterward, all these are there recorded for Miracles.

2. That this way of Testimony is liable to the greatest exceptions. For, the
Priests who make these Tables are easily abused by the confident affirmation of
persons who come and tell them great stories of Miracles wrought at the
invocation of the Lady of Loreto; as in all likelihood Riera the Poenitentiary
of Loreto was, by many who came to him, who were persons of no reputation at
all. As the Jew that told the formal story, of his being delivered at Nazareth
out of prison, by calling upon his Countrywoman, Tursill. l. 4. c. 12.
the Lady of Loreto; who thereupon appeared to him with her woman called Lucia
waiting upon her, (whom she bid to knock off his chains,) and opened the prison
doors and led him to the Sea side, and showed him a ship ready for his passage,
and bid him make have to Loreto and be there baptized. And we may think he
obeyed her will, for he told Riera, that he came to Ancona in two days. Yet
this man was received with great joy and the Miracle highly magnified; and
which was more, for all that we can find, verily believed. And no doubt the
Venetian Courtesan ^. 3. c. 28.
was a person of great credit, who having spent many years in that Trade, came
to Loreto full of a very strange Miracle, viz. That she was set upon in her way
thither by her companion, who desperately wounded her in many places and cut
her throat; and she just in the very nick of expiring called upon the Lady of
Loreto for help; who presently appeared to her and took her in her lap and
stroked her wounds and immediately cured her body, and filled her soul with
heavenly Joy. Was not the blessed Virgin very kind to a Courtesan? But all this
was presently believed at Loreto; and as an impregnable evidence of the Truth
of it, she showed a shining list about her neck upon the skin; which was a
demonstration she was healed by a divine hand. For St. Winifred and others had
just such a one when their heads were joined to their bodies again. And are not
these Authentic Testimonies and undeniable Monuments? Is the Testimony of the
whole Christian Church to be compared to that of a Jew and a Courtesan? But
supposing the persons who delivered these things to them were such as had a
great credit; (and so they had need to be when the reputation of a Miracle
depends upon their single Testimony,) yet is it not possible to suppose that
the Priests for the reputation of their House, may help out a lame Miracle with
an advantageous circumstance or two? it being for so good a Cause as the honor
of their Church. Especially when such infinite riches come by it, as may be
seen by Tursellinus his History of the Lady of Loreto; whose Book is made up of
Miracles and Riches: and in truth the greatest Miracle there is the riches of
that Chapel since it gained reputation in the World. They had need of a very
untainted credit, to have their Testimony taken on their bare words, when there
is such a reward for Lying. Men need not ask Cassius his Question cui bono? For
any one may easily discern that, that compares the Tables of Miracles and the
vast riches accruing by them together. The honest Heathens thought a persons
Testimony was then to be relied upon; when there was no reward for falsehood.

Cum sunt praemia fals^
Nullae, ratam debet testis habere fidem.
Tacitus thought, it was a good argument of men's fidelity, if they affirmed a
thing postquam nullum mendacio pretium; when there was no advantage to be got
by it. But I am sure this can never hold in these Authentic Testimonies of the
Miracles of the Roman Church; Rich Jewels, Silver shrines, presents of all
sorts, and vast endowments may tempt men to strain a little in such trifles, as
a few circumstances, which can easily change an ordinary accident into a
Miracle, Nay persons of great honor and reputation, (beyond ten thousand such
Priests whose interest is so deeply concerned in the belief of these things,)
have affirmed that they have seen Tables hanging up in one of the Churches
mentioned by E. W. of a miraculous cure wrought upon a lame person, whom
themselves have seen immediately aster, so lame as to use crutches. Therefore I
hope such Testimonies as these, for mere shame, will never more be compared
with the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles: who had no Diana's to attend
upon, nor expected any silver shrines. Not that I compare the blesfed Virgin to
a Heathen Goddefs, but I may safely enough, the nature and reward of the
attendance on both, and the means to draw riches to their Temples. Can any one
imagine if all the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles had been done in this
manner, and the Testimony of them only taken from Tables hanging upon Walls,
that ever Christianity would have prevailed upon the ingenuous part of mankind?
No, it was because these Miracles were wrought publicly by Christ and his
Apostles in the view of enemies; and they who attested them did not fit to
receive presents and tell tales, but ventured their lives as well as fortunes,
to give testimony to the truth of these things; and offered as much
satisfaction as sense and reason could require in these matters. But if they
had nothing to show but Tables hanging upon the Walls of their Temples; the
Heathens would have told them, they had as good evidence for Miracles among
them. For

3. Such Authentic Testimonies as these have been among the greatest enemies
to Christianity. And I hope E. W. will not say that Christianity has no better
proofs than Paganism. If we search but a little into the practices of this
nature among the Heathens, we shall find that Polydore Virgil had Polyd. Virgil
de I^vent. rer. l. 5. c 1.
reason of his side, when he said this custom of hanging up Tables, was taken
from them: among whom nothing was more usual than upon any extraordinary
deliverance to set up their votivae tabulae in the Temples of those Gods they
were most addicted to: some to Isis, some to Neptune, some to Aesculapius,
especially in the case of escape from Shipwreck to Isis and Neptune; and in
case of recovery from dangerous diseases to Isis or Aesculapius. Lambin says,
the very same custom continues still, only instead of the Heathen Lambin ia
Horat. l. 1. Od. 5.
Gods they do it to the Virgin Mary or some Saint. This custom is mentioned not
only by Horace, but by Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus, Juvenal, Persius, and others.
And all know the saying of Dionysius upon seeing these Tables of those who had
made vows and escaped; but what is become says he, of those who made vows and
were drowned? Cicer. de Not. D. or. 1. 3.
And the very same Question may be asked of these modern vows as well as
theirs. I shall only mention the Tables of those who had, as they thought,
miraculous deliverances from sicknesses; of which kind there are so many in the
Tables of Loreto and elsewhere. It is a remarkable testimony to this purpose
which Diodorus Siculus gives of Isis in Egypt: Diodor. Si^ul. ^ist. l. 1. p. 22.
where he says of her, That being now advanced to immortality, she takes great
delight in the cure of men; and that to any who desire her help she manifests
her presence to them in sleep (as it is in very many of those of Loreto) and
her great readiness to help them. For the proof of which they do not bring
Fables as the Greeks do; but the evidence of matters of fact; or undeniable
authentic Testimonies. For the whole World bears witness to it by the honors
they give her, and the presents they s^nd for the cures they have received. For
many have been strangely cured by her help, who have been given over by
Physicians, and and many blind and lame have been healed by her. Let E. W.
produce more Authentic Testimonies than these are: if he thinks so much credit
to be given to these Tables, or any Argument can be drawn from a Catholic
reputation, or great presents. Neither was this only in Egypt, but Tibullus
mentions the same at Rome too speaking of Isis.

Nunc Dea nunc succurre mihi, namposse mederi Tibull. l. 1. Eleg. 3.

Picta docet templis multa tabella tuis.
The same may be seen in the Temples of Aesculapius, especially that of
Epidauru^, of which Strabo speaks, and says, It was full Strab^. Geogr. l. 8.
of the Tables of such as had recovered from diseases by his help, as likewise
were his Temples at Co and Tricca. The like may be observed of the Temple of
Aesculapius near Rome in the Isle of Tyber, of which some of the Tables have
been preserved in Rome by the Maphaei and are published by Mercurialis. Mercur.
de art Gymnast. l. c. 1.
And Cicero speaking of an Image of Ceres at Enna in Sicily; says, That many
prodigies were done by her, which showed her power Ciccr. act. 6. ia ^er^.
and Divinity; that in many most difficult cases persons have found her help;
and not only the Sicilians but other Nations flock th there: And that the Statue
of Hercules was in so great esteem there that his very Chin was worn, with the
salutations which were given him; To the same purpose as Tursellinus somewhere
speaks of the Image at Loreto. So that the Arguments drawn from the Tables,
from general reputation, and the concourse of people will equally hold for a
Religion directly opposite to Christianity. But we have not followed any
cunningly devised Fables, the proofs of our Religion do not depend upon the
fraud of Priests, or the superstition and credulity of the people, nor upon any
extraordinary accidents and rare occurrences; but the Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles were public and frequent, wrought by their own words while they
were conversant among men; not at Shrines or Altars, or in dark andobscure
places, and only among persons prepossessed before hand with sufficient
readiness to believe what ever shall be related as a Miracle. These are the
circumstances of the Miracles wrought in the Roman Church, but as vastly
different from those of Christ and his Apostles, as light is from darkness, or
Truth from uncertain reports, or a well grounded Faith from superstitious
credulity. And thus much for the Authentic Testimonies of Miracles in the
sacred House of Loreto.

. 4. Having performed one Pilgrimage, Of the Miracles wrought by S. James at
Co^postella,
we must begin another to St. James of Compostella: and there take notice of
the Miracles done at his Relics there. But what if St. James have no Relics
at all there? What if he never were in Spain, how can his Relics there ever
then perform any Miracles? But what ever we believe, it is infidelity in Spain
to question it; it is fit therefore we should have the story as they relate it,
who think they should know it best: and it is this, That James the Son of
Zebedee having passed through Judea and Samaria came into Spain to Preach the
Gospel, and having converted some there, he returned to Jerusalem carrying his
Disciples with him; where he was slain by Agrippa, and his Body afterward was
carried to Compostella where it is solemnly worshipped by Pilgrims flocking
thither from all parts of the World. This is the substance of what the present
Roman Breviary allows; and is truly more kind to the story than it has been
formerly; for I am much mistaken, if Clement the 8th. did not insert into his
Breviary, That he came into Spain according to the Tradition of that ^rovince.
For we must know the Court of Rome has been very jealous of such pretenses as
those are of receiving the Faith at first from any of the Apostles, besides St.
Peter or those sent by him, lest under such a pretense they might one time or
other plead for their exemption from the Popes Authority. This made Cardinal
Baronius so much to set himself against this tradition of St. James his Baron.
A^. A D. 816. n. 49, 50, 51.
Preaching in Spain; and disproves it from the Testimony of Rodericus Ximenius
Archbishop of Toledo, who in the Lateran Council under Innocent the third,
denied that ever St. James came into Spain, and that not unadvisedly; but in a
solemn debate between him and the Bishop of Compostella. He consesses indeed
that when he was a Boy he heard the story of it, but it was only from some
Religious Council. Genesis Tom. 11. part 1. p. 236.
women says Baronius, some Nuns and Religious Widows, says Rodericus himself;
but as Baronius observes, he did not think it worth inserting into his History;
and the Bishop of Compostella could not produce one ancient Author for that
tradition, though he came provided to the Council for the managing this debate.
Besides, he says, that the Church of Compostella could then boast but of the
antiquity of one hundred and nine years, (one hundred wanting nine says
Baronius) for then Pope Calistus translated the Bishopric of Merida to
Compostella, before which there was only a small Oratory there. To this
testimony he adds two Popes Innocent the first, and Gregory the seventh
affirming that Spain first received the Faith from Rome. But the present
Breviary has excellently accommodated this difference; by making seven of St.
James his Disciples to be ordained by St. Peter at Rome and thence sent into
Spain. This it is to serve a turn, though it be without the least pretense from
Antiquity! But now is not this tradition of St. James his being in Spain
confirmed by undeniable and Authentic Testimonies?

What shall we say then to the Miracles wrought by him? For we are to consider
although the story be so lean and bare in the present Brevia^y, yet the learned
and worthy Archbishop St. Antonin (besides others) have it much improved. For
he tells us, how Antoai^. Chro^. part 1. c. 7. Tit. 6.
St. James after his return to Judea, was much opposed by Hermogenes a Magician
who sent his Disciple Philetus to confound him: (we must never ask from whence
they had this story it is fully enough that the name of Hermogenes and Philetus
are in the New Testament.) Well, Philetus becomes a Disciple of St. James, at
which Hermogenes was so enraged that he enchanted him so that he could not
move. N^w we will see, says he, if St. James can release you. Philetus send^
word to St. James, who sent him his hand. kerchief and by that was released.
Hermogenes commands the Devils to bring St. James and Philetus both bound to
him; when they came near him the Devils cried out they were bound by Angels of
Heaven and begged St. James to release them; be did so, and commanded them to
bring Hermogenes bound, which they immediately did with his hands tied behind
him; and then St. James bid Philetus unbind him; at which Hermogenes was
desirous to turn Christian; but being asraid of the Devils he craved S. James
his assistance, who lent him his walking staff; and so he became his Disciple.
Is not this now like one of the Apostles Miracles to give men instruments for
the cudgelling of Devils? But this Miracle for all that, hastened St. James his
end; for Abiathar the High Priest (where are we now? For I remember no Abiathar
High Priest since the days of King Solomon; but it is no matter for such a
slender mistake as that:) raised a commotion among the people, and brought him
to Herod who beheaded him, upon the day in which Christ was incarnated and
suffered, one whole year being passed. That Is well again; it seems St. James in
a years time, preached through Judea and Samaria, and went into Spain and
returned to Judea and was there beheaded by Herod. But St. James suffered the
same year, that St. Peter was delivered out of Prison, which by the consent of
their own Writers, was not till the second year of Claudius. A pretty long year
from the eighteenth of Tiberius according to Baronius, to the second of
Claudius! To pass by Josias the Scribes suffering together with St. James;
(which the Acts of the Apostles, by reason of the insufficiency of Scripture,
take no notice of) we are to understand, that the Disciples of St. James,
(being then so much at leisure to attend the Corpse of their Master so long a
journey) took away his body and carried it to the Seaside where they found a
small Vessel lying ready (no matter to whom it belonged) into this they entered
and committing themselves to Gods providence and the mercy of the Sea; they
came safe to the Coast of Spain, and entering the City of Compostella they there
buried his body in a Church erected to his honor (no matter by whom for all
St. James his Disciples went away with him.) yet this was not easily performed,
for there was one Queen Lupa in the Country at that time; (how a Queen in a
Roman Province! but doubtless she was some Roman Lady, for I think Romulus his
Nurse was of that name.) And there were miracles to be wrought to convince her
to give way to his burial. Here St. Antonin gives over; but others are so kind
as to tell us what the miracle was which convinced Queen Lupa: I shall not so
much as once mention the author of the Golden Legend (though a person that
highly merited of the Church of Rome in his time:) having so much better
Authorities. No less a man than John Beleth (a grave Doctor of the Sorbon, a
man of great learning says Trithemius, and excellent at confounding Heretics
says Laurimanus) Bel^th de divinis o^ ficiis c. 140.
who gives this account of it, that Queen Lupa cast these men into prison, but
being miraculously delivered thence she proposed this condition to them; that
if they would take such Oxen as she should give them, they should carry the
body whether they pleased. But she designed only to put atrick upon them, the
Oxen being very wild and unruly; but she was overreached in all her cunning,
for they only made the sign of the Cross over the Oxen and they were as quiet
as Lambs: and they carried the body to the place appointed, and without any
driver went back to the Queens Palace and staid not till they came to the very
middle of it; at which miracle Queen Lupa was turned into a Lamb and turned her
Palace into a Church. Is not this now a miracle as great and as well attested,
as any wrought by Christ or his Apostles? The first part of this story about
Hermogenes and Abiather the High Priest, was solemnly read here Portiforiuu^
s^cundum usum sacrum Julii 25.
in England on the twenty fifth of July as part of the lessons of the day: and
the later confirmed by Vincentius in his history. Bivarius Vincent. spec.
histor. l. 8. c. 7.
cites about twenty Spanish Breviaries that mention St. James his coming into
Spain; but whether with the relation of these miracles Biva^ii Comme^t. in
Dextri Chronic. A. D. 36.
I know not. Mariana in his history, finds no argument for his coming into
Spain but the tradition of the people, which he was unwilling to contradict.
It Is true, in a Mariana de rebus Hisp. l 4. c. 6.
discourse on purpose he goes about to defend this tradition, as well as he
could; but yet confesses there is a wonderful silence in all ancient Writers
about St. James his coming into Mar^ans de Adve^tu Ja^^bi c. 5.
Spain, and his body being at Compostella; both in the Chronicon Alveldense
above 600, years old, in the Chronicon of Alphonsus the great above 700. years
old; in Isidorus Pacensis, Sampirus Asturicensis, nay in the ancient history of
Compostella it self, there is not a word of St. James his coming into Spain: in
his answer to this argument he confesses they have no histories come near that
time, and therefore it is no wonder they should not mention it; but upon what
grounds came it afterward to be believed then, if they have no testimony of
ancient time to confirm it? For Baronius lays down an excellent rule as to
these matters; whatever is delivered by later Authors concerning matters of
Antiquity, Baron A^nal. n. 12.
and is not confirmed by the Authority of some ancient Writer is contemned. And
by this rule in all these matters, let us stand or fall. But supposing St.
James never were in Spain, yet his Relics might be carried thither, and work
miracles there? No one questions the possibility of the thing, but the reason
of believing it, and we have hitherto seen very little for one or the other.
Baronius, Baron. Annal. A. D. 816. n. 52, 53.
whose zeal carried him no farther than the Popes interest, is willing enough
to allow them the Body of St. James at Compostella: and that it was carried
from Jerusalem thither, but yet, he says, the memory of it was quite lost, as
he proves by Venantius Fortunatus: till at last it was discovered by a
miraculous light in the time of Alphonsus Castus. But what was discovered by
that light? a Body buried among bushes and thorns? and what then? must this
needs be St. James his Body and none else? What characters were there upon it,
which might discover it more plainly than the light did? No inscription on it
is alleged; but after all Baronius thinks, there is no need to prove that
which is so abundantly attested by the miracles there wrought. Proceed we then
to the examination of these miracles, of which Pope Callistus the second wrote
a whole Mariana de A^vsn^u Jacobi c. 12.
Book, which Mariana says he saw entire, but by what is preserved of it, we
may judge it was a very worthy one, and that the miracles there wrought deserve
to be compared with those of Christ and his Apostles. He tells us, that from a
Child he loved St. James Vincent. sp^c. Hist. l. 26. c. 30.
of Compostella, and spent fourteen years in going from place to place to learn
his miracles, and that he put them together in loose papers which were
miraculously preserved among thieves, in prison, in water, in fire, and at last
by a vision was confirmed that his work was pleasing to God: therefore he
desires that no body would despise his Work, for whatever is written in it is
Authentic and confirmed by great Authority; and decrees that the miracles
should be read in the Refectories on Festival days. He could not have decreed
better, for in truth they are an excellent entertainment.

In A. D. 1090. says Calixtus, certain Germans were going to St. James, and in
the C. 33.
City of Toulouse, they were made drunk by their Host, who put two silver Cups
into the Portmantues of two of them: next morning he ran after them and cried
Thieves; they knowing their own innocence desired to be examined; the Cups were
found in the Porlmantues of Father and Son: the Judge determined that but one
of them should be hanged, and after much complementing between them the Son was
executed; the Father goes on his Pilgrimage, and after thirty six days
returning by the place he goes to the body of his Son, and there wept bitterly
over him. On a sudden his Son b^gan to comfort him, and said, O my Father weep
not, but rejoice, for I never was so well in my whole ^
life. For to this time St. James h^th supported me, and comforted me with
Heavenly pleasure; at which his Father being overjoyed ran to the City, and the
people flocking thither took him down safe and sound, and hanged up the Host in
his Room. Was our Saviors raising Lazarus after only four days, to be compared
to this?

In the year 1100. a certain French man, av^iding the mor^ality then in France,
resolved Ibid. 3
to go in Pilgrimage with his Wife and Children to St. James of Compostella; at
Pampelona his Wife dyed and the Host seized upon his Beast and his Money. The
man went on however with his Children; and at the Towns end one meets ^im with
an Ass which he lends him to carry his Children. When he was come to
Compostella one night as he was praying St. James appeared to him and asked him
if he knew him; he told him no; then he said I am James the Apostle who met
thee at Pampelona and lent thee my Ass; and now I lend him thee home again, and
I tell thee thou shall find thy Host dead, which happened accordingly, and as
soon as ever he took his Children off from the Ass he disappeared. This is an
instance of his kindness by Land, but Calixtus tells us he was as kind by Sea
too.

Witness the Sea Captain that tumbled to C. 34.
the bottom of the Sea with his armor on, to whom St. James there appeared and
taking him by the hand, brought him safe to his ship again.

Witness the Pilgrim that fell into the Sea, C. 35.
whom St. James held by the hair of his head, and kept him above water for
three days till he came to his Port,

These were pretty odd things at Sea, but Ibid.
if we come to Land again, what shall we think of his making a man leap from a
Tower forty cubits high without any hurt?

Nay, which is a much greater and a more courteous miracle, what shall we say
to a high Tower stooping to the ground that a man C. 36.
might go off without any danger from a leap? yet this is related by the same
Pope to have happened A. D. 1106.

These are pleasant tastes of the kind of St. James his miracles related by no
meaner a person than the Head of the Roman Church: but these are too luscious
to be insisted on.

Only for a warning that men should observe his Feast, he says, that a Country
man in Spain presuming to thresh on that day, C. 41.
and at night going into a Bath, the skin of his back parts from his shoulders
to his thighs, went off from him and stuck to the Wall; and so the poor man
died for an example.

If these things do not prove that the miracles wrought by St. James at
Compostella, are equal to those wrought by Christ and his Apostles in Judea,
truly I do not know what will.

. 5. We must now proceed to the Vial of Of St. Mary Magdalens Vial and other
Relics.
St. Mary Magdalen and the Church of St. Maximin in France: into which she put
the Blood of our Savior which visibly boyls up every year on the day of our
Saviors Passion. It would astonish a man to see^ such fopperies as these are,
compared with the miracles of Christ and his Apostles. If they had done no more
than showed such tricks to convince the world, it might have remained under
Paganism to this day. The miracles wrought by Christ or his Apostles tended to
the great benefit and advantage of mankind, and were not cunningly managed in a
corner; for a solemn show at a certain season of the year; but the gift of
healing the sick and the gift of tongues, in which consisted chiefly the
Testimony God gave to his Apostles, were things of real advantage to the world
and lay open to the observation of every one. But the world is apt to suspect
and not without reason, these useless and secret miracles; if they be true they
signify no good to the world, if they be false they do unspeakable mischief to
Religion. Our Saviors Blood was never shed to show tricks with, and Mary
Magdalen was hardly at leisure at our Saviors passion to gather up his Blood
as it dropped from him. But what will not these men say and profess to believe
too! Certainly there were never more shameful impostures than about Relics
and Miracles in the Roman Church; and when some of the wiser men of their own
communion abroad shake their heads and are ashamed of them; our S. C's and E.
W' s magnify them still, as though the people of England were as capable of
being made Fools as ever. I pity the weakness and credulity of some, but I
abhor the hypocrisy and fraud of those, who do not believe these things
themselves, and yet would make others believe them. Gentlemen, Religion is a
grave and serious thing, and a severe account must be given to God of any thing
we say about it; God will never think himself honored by the falsehood and
hypocrisy of men; and that Church of all others in the world shall never draw
me to its communion which cannot be upheld without abusing mankind, and the
most excellent Religion in the world. If you have any miracles to show, do them
as Christ and his Apostles did in the midst of their enemies and upon them too;
can you do them for a better end than our conversion? was not this the end God
designed miracles for? and how comes he to change his patent among you, with
whom they are only done among Friends and in corners: Where they may be showed
with advantage among ignorant people who have no skill in Optics nor judgment
to know the difference between the boiling of a thing from a natural cause and
by a miracle. For truths sake, if your Church, has such a power of miracles as
Christ and his Apostles had, never send us to Loreto or Compostella, or St.
Maximins Church in France; nor refer us to your Tables and Legends, those are
things in no request among us, whatever they be with you; but we have many sick
and wounded persons and many dead; come and cure all manner of diseases with a
word, in an instant, perfectly, and openly; raise those who have died of a
known incurable disease, and are carried out to be buried or have lain in their
Graves as Christ did: or else out of honor to Christ and Truth, and for mere
shame avoid such rude and impudent comparisons of the miracles of your Church,
with those of Christ and his Apostles. If we must believe St. Mary Magdalens
Vial; why not as well all the rest of the Glorious Relics of your Church, for
there are few of them, but have as good Authority as that of Spondanus, which
E. W. produces for this Miraculous Vial? Why not the Foreskin of Christ about
which no meaner a man than Cardinal Tolet says great Toiet i^ c. 2. l^. c.
An^o. ^1.
miracles were wrought at Calcata in Italy A. D. 1559. after it had been stolen
from the Lat^ran Church in Rome by a certain Soldier Joh. Ferrandi disquis.
Reliqui. l 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
A. D. 1527. and lay undiscovered till after his death; and yet Ferrandus tells
us, that Germany, Flanders, Lorain and France, all boast that they have it.
^ollandus, or Bolland Acta Sector^m Jan 1. p. 3, 4, etc.
rather Roswayd tells us, that these of Antwerp pleaded a possession of it for
almost 500. Innocent. de Missae myster. l. 4. c. 30.
years; and the testimonies of Pope Eugenius A. D. 1446. and Clement the eighth
A. D. 1599. Pope Innocent the third notwithstanding his pretense to
Infallibility thought it fit that so weighty a cause should be left to God
himself to determine. Symphorian^^ Campegius in Bollandus, says, that it is at
Anicium (le Puy) in France together with Aarons Miter; others say, that it was
carried by an Angel to Charles the great, and he placed it at Aken. Now the
same worship is given at all these places where it is supposed to be, and I
suppose miracles equally wrought at them. I desire to know when false and
counterfeit Relics do work miracles, what we are to think of the Testimony
given by such miracles and of the nature of them? It is a pleasant thing to see
the accounts given by these men of the same Relics being in several places at
once. Ferrandus has found out very subtle ways to ^e^and. disq. Reliq. l. 1.
c. 1. sect. 2.
solve this difficulty and particularly concerning this Foreskin of Christ. 1.
By a multiplication of it; which being in Gods power to do, no question is to
be made but he does it. 2. By a wonderful replication of it; the terms I
consess are not very easy, but I suppose he means, that the same body may be
in several places at once. He tells us, that Suarez and Collius see no cause
for so great a miracle; but he thinks there is as much reason for it, as for
the multiplication of the Wood of the Cross; and I think so too. But yet he
has another reserve, which is, that these several Prepuces are really nothing
but so many parts of the Umbilical Vessels, which are sent up and down for the
consolation of the faithful. And no doubt they tend very much to it; especially
when they mistake one thing for another. And why may not then that which goes
for the Blood of Christ be the blood of some other person; especially since the
blood of Christ is shown in so many other places besides? But that we may not
however doubt of the truth of both these, St. Brigit says in her Revelations,
that the Brigit Revel. l. 6.
Virgin Mary told her that a little before her assumption she committed the
Sacred Prepuce to the care of St. John, with some of the Blood which remained
in the wounds of Christ. Et jam lice at dubitare? Says Ferrandus: by Ferrand.
l. 2. c. 1. sect. 1.
no means. But it is good to understand where it is. Yet he tells us, some are
of opinion, that there is no other blood of Christ upon earth, besides that in
the Eucharist: and others that all the blood of Christ which was shed in his
passion, was resumed at his resurrection, and therefore he rather inclines to
think, it is some of the blood he shed in his Agony, which is preserved in so
many places. But was St. Mary Magdalen there with her Vial to gather it up? No,
it is said, it was at the time of his Passion and therefore this answer cannot
serve. How then come such great quantities of this Blood to be seen? not only
in St. Maximins Church but at Paris, at Rome, at Mantua, and several other
places mentioned by Ferrandus. To this, he answers with Biel that Christ had a
whole legion of wounds 6666. and Alanus de Rup^ has undertaken to cast up just
how many drops he shed viz. 547500. And can there be any reason in the world to
question the credibility of the Testimonies of such persons who are so exact
and punctual in their calculations? Far be it from us in the least to derogate
from that inestimable love which the Son of God expressed in shedding his Blood
as a Sacrifice of Propitiation for us. We adore, and celebrate that sacred
mystery of our Redemption by the Blood of that immaculate Lamb. It is the
Blood of Christ we glory in and hope for Salvation by; but not as kept for
Relics, or preserved in Vials to make a show of; much less to abuse mankind
with a pretense of that Sacred Blood, when there is not the least shadow of
reason to believe it.

But thus it has been in the Church of Rome, they have turned the most wise
and holy and reasonable Religion in the world into a matter of show and
ceremony. And for this end they have made use of all manner of devices to get
any thing into their hands, that seemed to have any relation to the bodies, or
garments of Christ, or his Disciples. And thus while they slight their words,
and corrupt their Doctrine, and pervert their institutions; no persons can
contend more than they for the hair, or nails that belonged to any of their
bodies, although they destroy each others Testimonies, by so many pretending to
the same things. The very Tears of Christ are pretended to be kept in two
several places in France: and those put into a Vial too by the blessed Virgin,
if we believe the Jesuit Ferrandus. It is a pretty competent Dis^. Reliq. l. 1.
c. 2. sect. 2.
Miracle to preserve Tears so long: but what cannot they show, who have some of
the hair of Christ, when an Infant, at St. Denis in France as Spondanus assures
us, and some Spo^d. A. ^. 1205. n. 1.
of the swaddling clouts he was wrapped in, in the Manger? And as good an Author
every whit as Spondanus, relates that at Courchiverni a place near Bloys the
breath of Joseph is kept in a Vial too, which the Angel took Moliaai.
hyperaspi^t. c. 18.
while he was cleaving Wood. What a shame would it be now for us to question
the truth of any other Relics among them? Why should we dispute the vast
quantity of the blessed Virgins Milk, so learnedly defended by Ferrandus? to be
seen in Judea, in F^r^a^d. l. 1. c. 2.
Italy, in Spain, and in many places in France. What doubt can be made of the
several Locks of her Hair? For although they believe her Body assumed up into
Heaven; yet no doubt, says Ferrandus, by frequent combing enough Ibid.
would fall off to furnish the several Churches in Rome, in Spain, in France,
and other places, with it. What if so many places pretend to have the true
Seamless Coat of Christ? is it possible, they should be any of them mistaken,
although there could be but one true one? For it is a very weak defense of
Ferrandus to say, that there were many made after the likeness of the true one;
for l. 1. c. 1. sect 4.
all places contend that they have the true. It were endless to give an account
of multitudes of other Relics, which Ferrandus confesses to be equally
challenged by many places; and which he pitifully defends by such shifts, as
these are.

But it is not enough to show in general that there can be no sufficient
credibility in the Testimony given to the Relics of the Roman Church; but I
shall now show it more particularly concerning this Vial of St. Mary Magdalen.
This Vial is supposed to be of her own bringing into France, and it is worth
the while to know how she came thither.

Thus the story is related in the Roman Breviary. After Christ's Ascension to
Heaven, Martha with her Sister Mary, (whom they suppose to be Mary Magdalen)
and with her Brother Lazarus and their servant Marcella, and Maximinus one of
the seventy Disciples of our Lord with many other Christians were put into a
Ship by the Jews without any Sail or Oars, that they might perish by Shipwreck:
but by the Providence of God the Ship came safe to Marseilles: by which Miracle
and Preaching the inhabitants of Marseilles and of Aix, and the neighbor
people were converted: and Lazarus was made Bishop of Marseilles, and Maximinus
of Aix. But Mary Magdalen having accustomed her self to prayer and a
contemplative life, retired into a hollow Cave of a very high Mountain; where
she continued thirty years, separated from all conversation with men, and every
day was carried up by Angels, to hear the Choire of Angels Sing. This is
contained in the fourth and fifth Lessons on July 29. in the present Roman
Breviary: but we are to consider that this story was not always in the Roman
Breviary; for those who reformed it under Pius the fifth had left it out; but
since it has been thought fit to be restored again; it being much for the
edification of the people, to hear such Legends. For there is not the least
pretense in Antiquity for any part of it, as a Learned Doctor of the Sorbon
has at large proved, showing in a set Discourse Job La^^oii de Co^me^titio
Lazari and Maximini, Marthae and Magdalen^ in Pro^in^iam app^l^u opuscula.
Paris. 1660.
that for a thousand years after Christ it was the constant tradition of the
Greek and Latin Church, that Lazarus, Martha, and Magdalen, all dyed in the
Eastern parts, and not a word said of Maximinus; that the whole story is taken
out of a very fabulous Book, pretended to be Written by Marcella the servant to
Martha in the Hebrew Tongue, and Translated by one Synthex into Latin; and
preserved by Vincentius in his History. It may not be amiss to set down some of
the Miracles contained in this story; one is of the Persons who accompanied
them and the places assigned to them, as Trophimus was sent to Viacen^. Spec.
^i^. l. ^. c. 94.
Arles, Paulus to Narbon, Eutropius to Aurange,, Austregesilus to Eourges,
Irenaeus to Lions, Ferrutius to Bezan^on, and Dionysius is placed over all
France. Was there eve^ better company put together? when Irenaeus dyed A. D.
205. Eutropius A. D. 464. Austr^gistlus A. D. 629. and Trophimus, Paulus,
Martialis, Saturninus, and Dionysius are by the most Learned Writers of France,
cast back as far as the time of Decius: and Ferrutius was a Disciple of
Irenaeus. It would be too tedious to relate Mary Magdalens Preaching at
Marseilles, (notwithstanding St. Paul's prohibition, which the Author says, she
had not heard of, but as soon as she did, she retired into her Cave) the manner
of the conversion of the Governor of Marseilles and his Lady, their going
toward Jerusalem; her death C. 95.
upon the birth of her Child in the passage; St. Peter's conducting him to
Jerusalem, seeing C. 96.
the badge of the Cross on his shoulders; the miraculous education of the Child
by sucking the breasts of his dead Mother, who was C. 97.
found by his Father on the shore after two years playing with stones, and
running upon all four: the Resurrection of the Mother, C. 98.
their return to Marseilles, where they found Mary Magdalen Preaching to a
multitude of people; the monstrous Dragon tamed by Martha C. 99.
with a little holy water and the sign of the Cross; which was thicker than an
Ox, longer than a Horse, had the head of a Lion, and the strength of twelve
Lions, and was supposed to be of the race of the Leviathan mentioned in Job,
and came by Sea from Galatia; being b^gotten of the Leviathan, on a strange
beast of that Country, which kills by its scent the length of an acre, and what
ever it touches, it burns like fire; these and several other such pleasant
Miracles I purposely omit; La^noy p. 298. p. 321.
which Launoy calls more than old wives Tales, by which Christian Religion is
dishonored, and men are abused; which make the enemies of Christianity despise
it, and fill its friends with indignation; to hear so holy a Religion so
horribly corrupted by the impudent lies of idle men. But after all these
things, thus laid together, can we do otherwise than believe that the Blood of
Christ is kept in the Vial of St. Mary Magdalen in the Church of St. Maximin
and that it boyls up every year on the day of our Saviors Passion?

. 6. The next thing we are to consider, is, the Miracles recorded in the lives
of those Of the Miracles of S. Dominick.
two admirable Saints, B. St. Dominick, and Seraphical St. Francis. The first
Miracle we read of concerning St. Dominick, was the miraculous prediction
concerning him in the two pictures in St. Marks Church in Venice, reported by
no meaner a person than St. Antonin (E. W's. pious and learned Archbishop
A^tonin Chron. part 3. Tit. 23. c. 1. sect. 1.
of Florence.) One in the likeness of St. Paul with those words over it (...),
and under, these, Per istum itur ad Christum, over the other (...), and under
Facilius itur per istum; it seems St. Paul Nicol Jansenii vit. Domini. l. 1. c.
7.
was but a very ordinary Preacher, if compared wtth the Founder of the order of
Preaching Friars. But this prediction did not so plainly set him forth, as the
Vision his Mother had near her time of travel with him, viz. that she bore a
Whelp which carried a Nicol. Jansenii vit. S * Do ninic. l. 1. c. 1.

Th^od. de A^poldid vit. S. D. l. 1 a^ud Suri^m Aug. 5.

Brev. Romans Aug. 4. lect. 4.

Jansen. Commentar. ad vit. S. Dom. p 252.

Auco^in. Chro^. p. 3. Tit. 23. c. 1.

Jarsen. vit. Dom l. 2. c. 14.


firebrand in his mouth, which set the whole World on Fire; which had its full
accomplishment by his being the first Author of the blessed Inquisition; for he
was a true fire brand, having not near so much light as heat in him. Jansenius
tells us; that he had no kind of mercy upon Heretics, that he was rather a
Lion than a man in his carriage toward them. And was not this a fit person to
be compared with our blessed Savior? as he is most blasphemously, by E. W's.
most modest Prelate Antonin, wherein he is followed by Jansenius. They might as
well have compared Light and Darkness, tenderness and cruelty, a Wolf and a
Lamb together. But the most blasphemous comparison of all others in that which
St. Katharine of Siena said she had by Revelation from God, and is repeated
after her, by Lewis of Granada Lud: Granat. con^. 1. de Festo S. Dominici Jans.
vit. Dom. l. 2. c. 14.
and Jansenius, viz. That she saw the Eternal Father producing his Son out of
his mouth, and St. Dominick out of his breast. Whereupon he said to her, my
dear Child, thou see how I have produced these two Sons, where of the one is
my Son by Nature, and the other by Adoption; and so proceeds in an admirable
comparison between them as Jansenius thinks it; but we may well use his own
words though with a far different meaning. Quis vero hic non miretur ac
stupeat? For who can choose but wonder and be astonished at such horrible
blasphemy? to see a firebrand compared in such a manner with the Eternal Son
of God. But what was it, this B. Dominick did to be thought to come so near to
Christ? why forsooth, Christ was laid in a Manger, and St. Dominick when an
Infant would not lie in his Cradle, but would throw himself out of it, and lie
upon the bare ground; when Christ was born, a star appeared to the wise men,
and when St. Dominick was baptized, his Godmother fancied she saw a star in his
forehead. Christ went at twelve years old to the Temple, and St. Dominick was
carried to Church by his Parents and there left to be instructed. O admirable
comparisons! But yet further. St. Dominicks Fathers name was Felix, and his
Mothers Joanna; now Joanna, says Antonin is as much as full of Grace, and the
Angel in his salutation said to the blessed Virgin. Ave Maria, gratia plena,
Can any thing be now plainer than this comparison between our Savior and St.
Dominick? But it may be, he wrought some special Miracles in which he came near
to Christ. I shall mention some of them by which we may make a judgment of the
credibility of the rest. One particular thing which St. Antonin instances in,
was St. Dominicks power over Devils; and in truth he was very extraordinary in
this. Jansenius has already put together several instances to my hands. It
seems the Devil Jans ib. l. 2. c. 10.
used to trouble him in several shapes; but he was never more vexed with him,
than when he flew up and down while he was Preaching to the Sisters (so my
Author calls them) in the shape of a Sparrow. He perceiving the Devils cunning,
called to Sister Maximilla to catch him and deliver him to him. She did so, who
had no sooner got him into his hands but he falls to the pulling him crying out
still Theodorie. vit. Dom. l. 3. c. 7.
Enemy, Enemy. Till at last he left not a Feather upon him, and then insulted
over him and bid him fly now if he could. The poor Sparrow hoped up and down
till at last he got under a Brass Lamp before the Altar of the blessed Virgin,
and down he tumbles that: when behold a mighty Miracle, the Lamp hanging by a
Chain fell not to the ground, and which was more, not a drop of oil spilt; but
at St. Dominicks command the Lamp was put in its right place; and the Sparrow
disappeared. But the Devil was never so abused as when he appeared in the shape
of a Monky, when St. Dominick was writing late at night; and the Devil was
showing Monky-tricks round about him: Saint Dominick nodded to him to stand
still and hold his Candle for him. The Devil could not yet leave his old
tricks, but at last the Candle was almost burnt out; and the Monkys Tees began
to burn, then he made a lamentable noise; still St. Dominick commanded him by
his nod, (for he would not vouchsafe to speak to the Devil) to stand still,
which he was fain to do, till his Toe was burnt, and then St. Dominick soundly
lashed him and sent him going. I would not be thought to pick these things out
of old Legends, that are disowned by themselves; but I assure the Reader, these
things are not only contained in the ancient and approved Writers of St.
Dominicks life, but in Nicol. Jansenius the latest and most elegant of them;
whose Book was Printed at Antwerp A. D. 1622. And he further tells us, that the
Devil finding no good was to be done this way, was resolved to set upon him by
main force; and finding him once so intent at Prayers that no noise would
disturb him, he takes a huge stone from the top of the Church and throws it at
his head, but hit only his Cowle. But when he saw he could not stir him with
all this, he went sneakingly away. This happened, he says, in the Church of
St. Sabina, where the stone is still to be seen, and is of the bigness of a
great Holland Cheese, says Jansenius, and as black as pi^oh. One time, the
Devil came to him to confession, but St. Dominick presently smelt him out, and
so rated him that he sent him away speedily to Hell. If he met with possessed
persons he had a trick that he could make them confess what he had a mind to.
For we are to understand, that the blessed Virgin among many singular favors
she had showed to St. Dominick had taught him such a way of praying, as was
never known before, the most effectual against Devils and all sorts of enemies
that could be: which is sometimes called the Psalter of the blessed Virgin,
sometimes only the Rosary consisted of one hundred and fifty Ave Marys, and
fifteen Pater Nosters. This excellent device was revealed to him, after his
Body had had three days conversation with Briars and Thorns in the Woods near
Toulouse when the blessed Virgin, says Alanus de Alanus de rupe de d^gnit.
Psalm. c. 3.

Go^on. Chronicon. D iparae A. D. 1213. Bzov. A. 1213. n. 9.


Rupe, commended it to him as the most effectual means to reform the World; and
therefore commanded him to Preach and inculcate this in all places. As Soon as
ever he began to Preach it up, it is not to be thought how the Devils were
alarmed at it, strange Thunders and Lightenings, and Earthquakes immediately
happened upon it. St. Dominick goes on, and at last the Devils were heard to
cry out through the Air, Woe, woe to us, we are bound by this Psalter with Chains
of Fire. St. Dominick having thus found out what would hamper the Devils, he
made use of it upon occasion, for finding a person possessed with several
Devils, he ties the Rosary of Beads about his neck, and then made the Devils
confess what he pleased; and at last they acknowledged that no man that
continued Janse^. l. 1. c. 5.
in the use of the Rosary could go to Hell. Upon this he bids the people fall
to their Rosary, and at every Ave Maria, a Devil went out from the person as
black as a Coal. Was ever any thing like this done by Christ or his Apostles?
No, I confess they understood nothing of the miraculous virtue of the Rosary,
that was reserved for a new discovery to help these latter Ages of the World.
We read only of their casting out Devils by Fasting and such Prayer as Christ
instructed them in, but they were to seek in the way of tying Beads about their
necks, or exorcising with one hundred and fifty Ave Marys. But all the virtue
of this admirable Rosary does not lie only in tormenting Devils,; for very
extraordinary things are reported of it in another way. Bzovius says, That a
Lady in Spain being carried prisoner Bzov. A^nals A. D. 1213. n. ^0.
into Africa, and there put to lie in among the Cattle, falls to the Rosary of
the blessed Virgin, and presently the blessed Virgin appeared and performed the
office of a Midwife to her; and Christ in the habit of a Priest came and
baptized the Child; not long after an Angel came and invited her to the
Churching, and led her to an unknown Church with St. Anne and St. Magdalen, the
blessed Virgin being present, and Christ again in person performed the office.
Are not these fit things to be inserted in Ecclesiastical Annals? But something
must be allowed to Bzovius for the honor of St. Dominick and the Rosary
invented by him.

He that can believe all these Miracles already reported of St. Dominick need
not stick at any of the rest, as his Books being preserved dry in the midst of
the water, his walking dry in the midst of storms, his raising forty Englishmen
out of the water at Toulouse, his blessing a Cup of Wine so that it served one
hundred and four persons and not a drop of it missing, his turning the Worm
that came out of the Woman's breast at Rome into a rich Jewel, his raising the
Cardinals Nephew from the dead, his being lifted up from the ground at his
devotion; he that sees sufficient reason to believe the reporters of these
things upon their bare words, must rest satisfied that St. Dominick wrought
Miracles.

. 7. But the Seraphical St. Francis did Of the Miracles of St. Francis.
not come much behind him in this pretended gift of working Miracles. I do not
find that he had such a power over Devils as St. Dominick had; but however he
did wonderful things in his way. It seems St. Francis himself was not so
terrible to Devils as Br. Juniper was; for St. Francis used to threaten the
Devils, that if they would not go out of persons, he would bring Br. Juniper to
them; at whose name they presently flew away, says Wadding. Wadding Annals
Min. A. 1210. n. 36.
For they had so great a consternation upon them at the approach of Juniper,
that a possessed person perceiving at a quarter of a miles distance his coming
toward him, ran away for seven miles together crying and howling; as the same
grave and late Author relates. Yet one time the Devil, who owed him a spite,
was like to have been too hard for him; when he was condemned to be hanged for
a Spy; and was upon the Rack, and there confessed himself a Traitor, but by
good fortune the F. Guardian, espying him and knowing his simplicity, (for
Wadding Wadd. ib. n 35 Id A. 1213. n. 43
confesses he was commonly accounted a Fool) procured his release. But the
Devil (if the Franciscans Annalist may be credited) was not so much asraid of
coming near St. Francis, for finding him once in the Cave of Monte d' Alverno,
he was like to have tumbled him down headlong from thence, had not the Rock
miraculously yielded to his hands, so that he left the impression of his
fingers in the place he laid hold on; which says Wadding were to be seen many
years after, but were at last cut away; for fear any person should go thither
to confute him. But although St. Francis had not that power over him that goes
about like a roaring Lion; yet he had an extraordinary power over a devouring
Wolf, as appears by the story of his miraculous conversion by him: Wadding
relates the story very briefly, having a mind to be at the end of it; but he
agrees in substance Id. A. 1222. n. 18, 19.
with the rest, and refers us particularly to the Speculum vitae Sti Francisci,
wherein Speculum vitae S. Fra. l. 1. c. 76.
it is related at large; in short, it is this, there was a terrible Wolf not
far from Eugubium, that spared neither man nor beast, which kept the people in
so much fear, that they durst not stir out of the gates of the City. St.
Francis moved with a pious zeal not to kill but to convert this Wolf, out he
goes at the gates of the City, with no other Armor than what he could
presently make with his fingers, viz. the sign of the Cross; the people were
got upon the tops of their Houses to see the issue of this encounter: the Wolf
comes with open mouth toward him, St. Francis presently shuts his mouth with
the Spoelberch. not in specul^m Francise.
sign of the Cross (see here says Spoelberch the wonderful virtue of the sign
of the Cross) After this St. Francis comes to parley with the Wolf in a familiar
manner, and says to him Brother Wolf, I command thee in the name of Christ that
thou hurt neither me nor any one else; Upon which he immediately falls on the
ground in the posture of a penitent. St. Francis takes him to confession,
laying open before him the horrid cruelties he had committed; but at last
offers terms of agreement between him and the City; the Wolf by the moving of
his tail and ears plainly showed that he understood and accepted his offer. St.
Francis then tells him he knew he did all this to satisfy his hunger,
therefore he would take care he should be provided for, if he would promise he
would never hurt any body again. The Wolf bows his head in token of consent;
and when St. Francis held out his hand to make the bargain sure, the Wolf put
his right foot into his hand; (very well understanding the way of contracts).
Upon this the Wolf quietly walks along with him toward the City; the people
seeing that, flocked in great abundance about him, St. Francis makes an
excellent Sermon on the occasion, and at last assures them of the conversion of
Brother Wolf, and acquaints them with the promise he had made for his
maintenance; the Wolf renews his promise before them all, as formerly. The
People were filled with great joy and the Wolf lived very innocently and
neighbourly among them all the rest of his days, and the people much lamented
his death. This story I confess I did not expect to have met with any where
else than in the Golden Legend, or the ingenious Book of Conformities; but not
only finding it, in other more creditable Authors among them, but inserted into
their Books of Annals by Wadding, and defended by Hen. Sedulius who writ an
Apology Hen. Sedulii Apolog^tic. adversus Alcoran. Francis. pro libro
conformit. l 3. c. 29.
for the Book of Conformities, I thought I had reason to produce it: not
knowing but that E. W. might reckon this among the miracles of St. Francis,
which might be paralleled with those of Christ and his Apostles. Cardinal
Bonaventure does not particularly relate the story, but he mentions his taming
Bonov. vit. S. Franc. l. 1 c. ^8. n. 12.
of Wolves among his extraordinary acts; and tells us of St. Francis his great
kindness to all sorts of creatures calling them Brothers and Sisters.

And although Christ and his Apostles thought it enough to preach only to men
and women, St. Francis his charity was so much beyond theirs, that he preached
to Birds and Beasts as St. Anthony of Padua his Disciple did to Fishes: and I
assure you with no small success. For Wadding tells us that St. Fancis was in
dispute with himself, whether it Wadding An. 1212. ^. 29, 30, 31,
were fitter for him to spend his time in praying or preaching: being in a
great perplexity about it, he sends to Brother Sylves^er (the same who saw the
Golden Gross come out of St. Francis his mouth) and Sister Clara, that they
should seek God for resolution; they both agree that he was to Preach; being
thus satisfied in his Call; the next morning early he goes toward Bevagna, and
seeing a place where multitudes of several kinds of Birds were gathered
together, he makes have thither and salutes the Birds as if they had been
reasonable creatures. The Birds being big with expectation turned themselves
and bowed their heads toward him; then he admonished them all to hear the word
of God, and then said to them. My Brethren, ye ought to praise your Creator
that has given you Feathers and Wings, and good air, and that provides for you
without your care. At which excellent instructions, the devout Birds stretched
out their Necks, and clapped their Wings, opened their Bills, and looked
earnestly upon him. Then he walked in the midst of them, and not one of them
stirred, till he gave them the blessing and made the sign of the Cross over
them, and then they all flew away together. Thus Cardinal Bonaventure and
Wadding both gravely relate the story of his first Preaching, after it was
revealed that he ought to preach: but that was not all, but they tell us that
being returned to his Disciples, he blamed himself for so long neglecting the
duty of Preaching to the Birds. From hence he went forward in his work, and the
Swallows (not being I suppose at his former Sermon) were very troublesome in
making a noise to the disturbance of the Auditory; to whom he thus spoke,
Sisters Bonavent. l. 1. c. 12. ^. 4.
Swallows, it is now time that I speak; for you have tatled enough already.
Hear the word of God, and hold your peace till that Wadding A. 1212. ^. 3^.
be done, which they presently did; and all the people were astonished at the
miracle; as well they might. A Scholar of Paris, having heard the fame of this
miracle, say the same Authors, and being very much troubled at the chattering
of a Swallow, commanded him in the name of St. Franci^ to come to him and hold
his peace, which the Swallow immediately did. Another time, as St. Francis was
passing through the Marshes of Venice, he Bonav. l. 1. c. 8. n. 8.
heard a great number of Birds singing pleasantly together, he told his
companion, he would go and sing prayers among them; which he did, but because
the noise was so great they could not hear prayers, he bid them leave off
singing till he had done. Which they did as readily as if they had made the vow
of obedience. But this spirit of devotion did not fall Id. ib. n 6.
upon the Birds alone; for he instructed a Sheep to attend prayers, which she
constantly did kneeling, and bleating before the Altar of the Blessed Virgin,
which was her way of saluting her. O, but at the elevation of the Host, she
fell down upon her knees, in token of her profound reverence. We need not now
wonder at the devout Dog of Lisbon, whose story is told with so much
circumstance by Eusebius Nierembergius, that Fuseb. Nie^emb. hist. nat^r. l. 9.
c. 94.
belonged to a Cook of Lisbon, and constantly followed the Sacrament wherever
it went; and could by no means be drawn off from his attendance; and not only
so, but would let no persons be quiet, if they did not pay their devotion to
the Sacrament. I think it would be a hard case to determine whether St. Francis
his Sheep, or the Lisbon Dog, or St. Anthony's Mule had the greatest devotion
to the Host: it is certain they were all very extraordinary in their severy
kinds. But it was not only such mild creatures as Sheep that were thus obedient
to St. Francis, but being once to preach at Trevi in the market place, the
young Fool of an Ass ran up and down and very much disturbed him; at last St.
Francis with a pleasing Countenance said to him, Brother Ass, I desire thee
Wadding At. 1213. n. 6.
to stand still and not interrupt the word of God which I am now Preaching to
this thirsty people: Upon which the Ass (moved belike to see the humility of
this good man in owning his poor kindred) fell upon his knees and heard the
Sermon quite out. Was any miracle like these ever done by Christ or his
Apostles? But did St. Francis work no other kind of miracles? Yes we are told
of many more, and of another nature, but they are all delivered by the same
persons, and upon the same credit; so that if we believe some upon their words,
we ought to take all; if we reject some and take others, we believe not upon
their testimony; but our own judgment. One thing more is so remarkable that we
ought not to omit it, viz. that St. Antonin St. Anton. Chron. Tom. 3. tit 24. c
1.
applying that place of the Psalms to him, he sus upon the Cherubim and rides
upon the wings of the wind; makes it plain from thence, that St. Francis being
above the Cherubim, was of the order of ^eraphim (for which reason, or for none
E. W. calls him the Seraphical St. Francis) and to make this out, they tell us,
that he appeared in a Chariot of Fire among his Disciples; but what was mo^e
miraculous, Wadding AA 1210. n. 25.
he and his Brother Massaeus going to Preach, he was so set on fire with zeal
and devotion that he seemed to cast flames out of his mouth; and called his Br.
Massaeus to Specuium Francis. l. 2. c. 36.
him crying A. a. a. with the force of which breath Friar Massaeus was carried
up into the air many cubits, says Wadding. Nay it was no extraordinary thing
with St. Francis himself Wadding A. 1215. ^. 12.
to be so raised up, for Friar Leo who was permitted to be with him in his
retirement to Monte d' Alverno, found him sometimes Speculum Francis. l. 1. ^.
89.
so high in the air in a rapture, that he could just kiss his feet; sometimes
up to the middle of the trees, and sometimes so high that he could hardly
discern him; (especially in a dark night.) But the most glorious miracle of St.
Francis was that of the bleeding Speculum Francis l. 2. ^. 34.
wounds of Christ in his side, and hands, and feet: as to which it is
observable, that they were so wonderfully concealed, that no man could ever
fully discern them in his life time; only Friar Ruffin once thought he spied
the wound in his side. And although many ways were used to convince men of the
truth of these wounds after his death; yet to me there was none like that of
the Image of St. Francis, for to convince a certain Friar, from Wadding A.
1237. ^. 5.
the mark of the wound in his side fresh blood was seen to run, from which time
he most firmly believed them. And can we think that St. ^homas his putting his
hands into the wounds of our Saviors side, was half so strong an evidence of
the truth of Christ's resurrection, as the bleeding of an Image was of the
wounds of St. Francis? No, no, although a Body may deceive, a Picture cannot.
Are not these now doughty miracles and attested with such uncontrolable
evidence, that they ought to be compared with those of Christ and his Apostles?

. 8. Before I dispatch this first head in Of the miracles related of the
British and Irish Sain's.
showing upon what uncertain reports miracles are received and believed in the
Roman Church; I shall give an account of some of them nearer home, by which we
may judge how far the Miracles boasted of by E. W. ought in point of
credibility to be compared with those of Christ and his Apostles. I hope none
will deny that there are some bounds to be set to our belief of reports
concerning miracles: for although Gods omnipotency has no bounds, yet we are
not to think that God does equally employ his power in all things, nor at all
times, nor as often as men shall please to say he does it. In many cases it is
very hard to determine the farthest extent of the power of nature; and
punctually to show what is a miracle and what not; for the power of mere
natural causes may lie secret and hidden from us; yet from a continual
observation of the course of nature a certain sphere may be fixed, within which
the effects of nature are contained. As that a body being once truly dead,
cannot of it self come to life again; that there are some diseases at such a
height as to be incurable by natural means; in these cases the raising of such
a body to life, the curing of such diseases being done frequently, publicly,
and in an instant are great arguments of a miraculous and divine power. And
this we say was the case of the miracles of Christ and his Apostles: but from
hence men ought not to abuse mankind; and because the power of God is
unlimited, therefore to say that the most extravagant, foolish and idle
imaginations of men, because they have passed without proof for miracles among
credulous people, must still be received for such. For is it reasonable that
because we believe that nothing is impossible with God, therefore we must not
question that so many Saints walked with their heads off, or did such
extravagant things as the makers of the lives of the Saints tell us? For it was
not only St. Denis of France of whom that is reported; but our own
Ecclesiastical stories will acquaint us with many other Instances of a like
nature. So Mr. Cressy tells us of St. Justinian the martyr, that when his head
was cut Cr^ss^'s Church History, B ok 11. c. 8. n. 15.
off, his body presently rose, and taking the head between the two arms went
down to the Sea shore, and walking thence on the Sea passed over to the port
called by his name; and being arrived in the place where a Church is now built
to his memory, he fell down, and was there buried by St. David with admirable
hymns and canticles. So the same grave historian relates of St. Ositha, that as
soon as Book 17. c. 15. n. 5.
her head was cut off, her body presently rose and taking up the head in the
hands by the conduct of Angels walked firmly the straight way to the Churches
of St. Peter and St. Paul about a quarter of a mile distant from the place of
her suffering, and when it was come there, it knocked at the door with the
bloody hands, as desiring that it might be opened, and thereon left marks of
blood. Having done this, it fell there down to the ground. To the same purpose
he tells of St. Clarus, Book 17. c. 3. n. 7.
whose head being cut off presently after arose, and with his hands taking up
his head, by the assistance of Angels, carried it to a fountain not far
distans, into which he cast it: and then carried the same back to the Oratory
of his Cell, and going on a little further toward a Village seated near the
River Epta, he there consummated his course, and transmited his blessed soul to
Heaven. And of St. Decumanus he writes, that when his head was Book 21. c. 3.
n. 6.
cut off from his Body, the trunk raising it self up took the head which it
carried from the place where he was slain to a spring not far of, which flowed
with a most Christalline water, in which with the hands it washed the blood
away. So St. Juthwara with her own Book 23. c. 9. n. 8.
hands took up her head being cut off, and to the astonishment of all, (as we
may easily imagine,) carried it back steadily into the Church. These are pretty
good instances for one that takes it so ill that his History should be called
the great Legend What can be imagined more absurd, and be supposed to be done
to less purpose than such foppish miracles as these? But I extremely wonder at
his niceness in omitting some others of a like nature delivered by a late
infallible Author called Oral Tradition: As St. Maxentia's being beheaded and
carrying her head in her hands, for which Capgrave quotes nothing less than
Capgrav. F. 228. 1.
infallible Oral Tradition; for, says he, faithful people have received this
from their Fathers by certain tradition. And have their late men better any
argument than this for transubstantiation, invocation of Saints, etc. Why
forsooth, can it be imagined that Fathers should go about to deceive their
Children? did not they who saw it know the truth of what they saw? would not
they speak truth to their Children? how, could then any error or mistake come
into the belief of the faithful. None certainly. Why then it is a
demonstration, that St. Maxentia did after her ^ead was cut off from her body
carry it in her b^nds. Can any thing be more demonstrative than this? And by
the same arguments we are assured, that the Head of St. Melorus being cut off,
out of great pity to Cerialtanus his murderer, being in a great thirst, bad
^im thrust his staff into the ground, and he should immediately see a spring to
arise thence, with which he might plentifully quench his thirst. Was not the
head of this Saint very charitable and kind to his murderer? Now this, which
was a principal part of the story Mr. Cressy seems in a very sullen humor to
leave out; although he takes the rest from Capgrave; of which I can only give
this account, (for I have no reason to question Mr. Cressy's faith or good
will;) that Alford Alford A^nales Eccl^s. A. D. 411. n. 5.
from whom he translates his history, only refers to Capgrave, and does not
relate enough for Mr. Cressy to make up the Legend. The like omission he is
guilty of about another miracle concerning him, viz. that when by Cressy's
Church History Book 8. c. 26. n. 3.
the command of his Uncle his right hand and left foot were cut off; and he had
a silver hand and brass foot sramed for him, (as Mr. Cressy confesses)
Capgrave adds, that he could move the fingers and open and shut his hand as if
it had been made of nerves, and flesh, and bones; but this likewise is left out
in Alford, from which it appears how faithfully Mr. Cressy kept to his Author.
Upon the same reason, I suppose, he omits, St. Paternus his calling to his man
when he was dead, and he saw his head cut off before his eyes; but behold a
miracle, the head answered to him, Here I am Sir, at which the Saint Capgrav.
F. 259. 2.
finding out the head and joining it to the body, it presently arose safe and
sound. It is not to be thought that Mr. Cressy did question the latter part of
it, who at large relates the miracle of St. Winifred's head being joined to her
body again, and her rising up presently Cressy's Church History l. 16. c. 8. n.
8.
upon it, cleansing her face from the dust and sweat; to the wonderful joy of
the whole Congregation. But as I observed before; a white circle remained ever
after about her neck, showing the place where the section had been made. And
can the heart of man doubt of this? when Mr. Cressy says, that immediately
Breviar. sccu^dum ^s^m Sar^m 3. Nov. ^ect. 8.
after her death, her story was written by the holy Abbot Elerius, her last
spiritual Father, and this story was constantly read upon her day in the
Breviary secundum usum Sarum. But St. Edmund had a red list about Capgrav. F.
108. 1.
his neck when after his head had been cut off by his enemies, it was found
joined fast to the Body in his Grave; and which was very remarkable, when his
friends, seeking after his body in the wood, had like to have lost themselves
and one of them cried to the other, where art thou? the head answered
distinctly Here, Here, Here; and never ceased crying so till it had brought
them all to it. This miracle Mr. Cressy very honestly gives an account of, and
says, he finds it attested Cressy's Church History l. 27. c. 2^. n. 2.
and received by all ancient Authors without exception, particularly by William
of Malmsbury. But so much he dares not say of St. Winnisred; for he confesses
that Bid and the Saxon Historians do not mention her; and among these his own
Malmsbury is one; but both he and Alford think that the Saxons hated the
Britains ^o that degree, that they would not so much as remember their Saints.
Which is a very likely thing. But of all the miracles of this kind commend me
to those of St. Cadoc: one time, when he was building an Oratory, an Irish
artificer came to his assistance, who being envied by his fellow Capgrav. F.
53. 1.
workmen, they very maliciously cut off his head and tied a great stone to his
body and so threw it into a pond, next morning the beheaded artificer brings
his head in his lap and the great stone at his back; and all bloody shows
himself to St. Cadoc, then the Head (to whom it belonged to speak) thus
addressed it self to the Saint. O servant of God set my head on my shoulders
again, and I will tell thee all the things which thou know not about this
matter. Which he had no sooner done, but the head told the whole story, and
having done so expired. But as remarkable was his raising the Giant Can at St.
Andrews in Scotland, who told him that he brought his Soul out of Id. f. 54. 1.
Hell; and being so useful a man, upon the prayers of St. Cadoc he lived a
notable digger and labourer there a good while after. Have we not now very
great reason to believe these Miracles? and is not the Authority of the
Legendaries, from whom these things are reported, equal to the Testimony of all
Christians? and are not the Miracles themselves as credible and likely to be
true as those of Christ and his Apostles? But if these do not satisfy, what
can we be able to say, to Count Wallen Earl of Northumberland, who being
beheaded for rebellion against William the Conqueror, his head sixteen years
after his death, says Capgrave, was found fastened Id. f. 278.
to his body and only a bloody list about his neck where it was cut off. It
seems Rebels are as capable of these Miracles as Saints. We need not at all
wonder now that when he was beheaded while he was saying the Pater Noster, his
head went through with it, after its being cut off. This would hardly go down
for a Miracle, when we have such choice of so much better and plainer Miracles,
related by those Anthentick Historians; from whom Mr. Cressy and others have
furnished themselves with such trash.

Can any one deny it to be a great Miracle for a man to make a whole Basket
full of broken Eggs whole again? Yet this Capgrave tells us St. Swisbun did to
the poor woman's Eggs that were broken by his workmen, while he was building the
Bridge on the Eastside I^. f 278. 2.
of Winchester; and this notable Miracle was performed only with making the
sign of the Cross over them. Now I appeal to the conscience of any man, whether
we ever read that Christ or his Apostles did any such thing? Or did ever Christ
or his Apostles hang their garments upon the Sun beams; yet this was done,
says Capgrave by St. Aldelm in the Lateran Church, and the beam of the Sun Id.
f. 10. 1.
held his garment a long time: which was kept for a Sacred Relick in the
Monastry of Malmsbury. It had been a stranger thing if they had preserved the
Sunbeam too. But he was not alone in so strange a Miracle; for St. Cathro's
Staff was supported by a Sunbeam, Colgan. Acta Sanctorum Hib^r. 6.

Martii. vit. S. Cadroe n. 27.


as Colganu^ tells us in his life. And that we may not be surprised at the
strangeness of this Miracle, in his Notes he refers us to the Life of St.
Deicola and St. Brigid. In the life of St. Deicola I find, that being weary
with traveling; he had a mind to put off his upper garment, which the servants
seeing, ran as fast as they could to take it from him; he told them, by no
means; for he had Colganus 18. J^^. ^it. D^^ o^ae n. 4.
a Servant that would be sure to keep it; and behold a wonderful thing! he
espied a beam of the Sun coming in at a window, and came toward it, and laid
his garment upon it, where it continued for two or three hours till he took it
away. Bollandus relates the same story, and that it may not appear incredible,
he says the same thing was done by St. Goar, St. Florentius, and St. Amabilis,
St. Brigid Bol^and. Acta Sa^cto^um. J^^. 18. vit. D^^col^e c 4.
hung her garment upon the shadow which it seems was stronger than a Sunbeam,
for her clothes were heavy being dropping wet, and she mistook the shadow for a
great Tree; (I am much afraid this was not the only mistake in this matter.)
But however they hung there a drying, says Cogitosus in the life of St.
Brigid; whom Bollandus calls an excellent Messingham Floril^^. Sa^cto^^^
Hibera. vit. B^i^idae c. 3.

Bo^land. Acta Sanctorum Feb. 1. vit 2. St. Brigidae c. 2. n. 9.

Bolland. Comm^^t. prav. ad Acta Brigl. sect. 2. n. 9.


Writer, and a man that Wri^ not only what he heard but what he saw. (I would
he had told us whether he had seen this Miracle or no.) And yet Bollandus
thinks he did not live in the same time, with St. Brigid. But it may be this
must pass for another Miracle that he should see things that were done before
he was born.

We think the preservation of Moses when a Child was extraordinary; but what
was that, to the miraculous preservation and education of St. Kyned? The Son^
says Capgrave of a Prince of little Britain Capgrave f. 205.
by his own Daughter, who being delivered she exposed him to the River in a
Wicker-Cradle, in which he was carried to the Sea and at last was cast upon an
Istand called in the British tongue Henisweryn; and on a sudden the Sea fowl
gathered about him, and by their Bills and Claws took him out of the water and
carried him into the Air, and at last placed him upon a Rock, making a bed of
Feathers for him and driving away Serpents and hurtful creatures, and sheltered
him from Wind and Hail and Snow, by joining their wings together over him.
While the Child lay thus, before nine days were passed, an Angel came to him,
and brought him a Brass Bell, and put the Child's mouth to it: and when the
Child was hungry it turned it self and sucked of the Bell; which afforded
nourishment sweeter than any milk: and of so subtle a nature that he voided no
excrements. Thus he continued till he could walk, and the swaddling clothes in
which he was wrapped, grew to him as bark to a Tree just as he grew. Afterward a
wild Do came twice a day and filled the Bell with Milk, thus he continued
eighteen years, being taught to read by an Angel. But although he changed his
place yet still he continued an Eremitical life: once St. David desired him to
go to a Council with him, he excused himself because of his deformity; St.
David prayed for the cure of it, and he was healed, St. Kyned prayed for the
return of it, and he was as bad as ever. This Miracle Alford relates, although
he Alford A^^al^s Eccl^s. A. D. 529. n. 3.
thinks, the Writers of his Life have exceeded a little too much in his
Miracles. But to my mind St. Kyneds sucking of a Bell, was not so strange as
St. Berachs sucking St. Froegius his ear; which Colganus very gravely relates.
No sooner was St. Berach born but St. Froegius his Uncle took care of him and
told his Mother, Colganus ad 15 Jad. i^ vit. St. Berac^. n. 4.
God was able to bring him up without the help of Milk; and he gave him his
right ear to suck, by which he was as plentifully nourished as if he had sucked
all the while at his Mothers breast. If Caepgrave had had the trimming of this
story, he would have added that this was sweeter than any milk. Colganus (as he
had reason) is very angry with those that say St. Froegius his ear gave milk,
for although, says he, it were possible for God to make his ear give milk, yet
it is not probable, because other way^ might serve as well for his nourishment.

We read not of any Miracles wrought by Christ himself, till he entered upon his
Preaching; but these Saints began very early and some of them held out to a
mighty Age; for St. David lived to 147. St. Fintan to 125. St. Mochaius to 150.
and St. Cathubius as long, St. Finnian to 180. St. Kentigern 185. but St.
Kieran for 300. years, says the Author of his life, near 300. says the
Colganus 5. Martii p. 466. 16. Martii. p. 627.
Lesson upon his day, St. Abban 300. St. Mochteus 300. In all which time he
neither spoke an idle word nor eat fat meat, so the Author of his Life says;
but the old Verses cited by Colganus say, That in all that time he neither
spoke nor eat; and others that speak more moderately, say, That in one hundred
years 24. M^^^. p. 734.
he eat nothing: A pretty reasonable fast for any man! But to be sure much
exceeding that of Christ himself: but that is not our present business; which
is, to show how very early they began to work Miracles. It is hardly
conceivable they should begin sooner than in their Mothers Wombs; and while St.
Fursey was in his Mothers Womb, he very V. Fursaei 16. Jan. apud Colg. n. 5.
severely rebuked his Grandfather for thinking to condemn his Mother, without
any reasonable cause. Colganus confesses that this was a very great Miracle,
but justifies it as the Author of his Life does from Gods omnipotency. Yet
Bollandus would fain in his Notes, have it softened and made more probable,
viz. That a voice was heard to that purpose, Bollandus not. in vit. S. Fars.
16. Jan. c. 2. n. 7.
and that some thought the Child spoke in his Mothers Womb; but he confesses
the ancient Mss. are express that it was the Child; and the hymns of the Church
are plain to that purpose.

Matris intra viscera
Loquens, avi nequioris arguebat scelera.
Which were Sung upon his day, says, Arnoldus Wion, from whom Bollandus had
Wion. Lig^. vitae l. 3. p. 26.
them: and we hope they were more honest than to praise God for that which they
did not believe. Was St. John Baptist's leaping in his Mothers belly to be
compared to this? But they have a better instance to parallel this, viz. St.
Nicholas his fasting Wednesdays Vit S. Fursaei c. 2. n. 8.
and Fridays while he sucked his Mothers breasts; or which is all one sucking
but once on those days, which I suppose being after Vespers made it a good
fast: but methinks in honor to the Church of Rome, Saturday should have been
one of his Fasting-days. But commend me for devotion to St. Mocht^us that leapt
in his Mothers Womb at Canonical hours; Colginus 24. Martii v. S. Mocht^i n. 1.

Colganus 8 Martii p. 544. v. St. Cathaldi ^. 1.


a good presage certainly of his future devotion. For a Child new born,
scarcely any went beyond St. Cathaldus, for as soon as he was born he struck his
head against a piece of Marble, and the Marble yielded like wax to him, and
when his Mother expired at her delivery, the Child raised up himself without
any help, and embracing his Mother in his Arms he raised her to life again. Was
not this a towardly beginning for a Child? Had not St. Alred a very clear
complexion, whose face Arch deacon William Capgrave f. 11.
in Capgrave saw shining like the Sun, with such bright beams, that his hand
gave a shadow being held toward him; from whence he had reason to think he
would prove an extraordinary man in his time. It seems to be now no great
matter that S. Aldelm should Id. f. 10. Vit. S. Aldelm apud S^rium 25. Maii.

Cressy's Ch^^ch Hi^t. l. 19. c. 12. n. 4.

Portisor. Sarish. 25. Maii. ^ect 3. Capgrave f. 242.


make a Child to speak at nine days old, to vindicate the Innocence of the
Pope; and although Mr. Cressy speaks doubtfully of this matter; yet surely
there is no more reason to question it than many other Miracles related by him
and his Authors, for it was read in the Lessons upon his day. Capgrave says
that St. Ninian commanded a Child who was but few days old to declare who was
his own Father, the Child presently obeyed and pointed with his finger, and
openly said such a man was his Father. Was not this an early sign of a wise
Child! But never was there certainly a more early Confessor than St. Romwold of
whom Capgrave relates, that being newly born he cried out he was a Christian,
Id. f. 275.
and presently made a most elaborate confession of his Faith hardly short of
that of Athanasius in its exactness in the point of the Trinity; but he was too
ripe to hold long, for after three days he dyed. St. Kieran in his Childhood
raised by his Prayers a Bird half killed by a Kite; but St. Kentigern (being
Colganus vit. S. Kierani ^. Mart. n. 3.
perhaps a year or two older) exceeded him, for when his School-fellows had
pulled off a Robin-red-breasts head, he took the head and put it to the body
and by his Prayers and the sign of the Cross raised the Bird to life again, so
not only Capgrave, but Bollandus Capgrave f. 208.

Bolland. Acta sector^^n Jan. 13. p. 816.

Bolland. praef. genesis c. 1. sect. 7.


relate the story; and Bollandus in his preface particularly vindicates
Capgrave's Authority with relation to the life of St. Kentigern.

Are not these now pregnant instances how much these Saints exceeded Christ and
his Apostles in their beginning to work Miracles so much before them?

But withal we never find that Christ and his Apostles wrought such trifling
Miracles. To pass over the Resurrection of Robin-red. breast, methinks it was
an occasion somewhat with the meanest to save Schoolboys from whipping, as
Capgrave tells us some of his Saints have done, witness the Boy at Canterbury
that ran for Sanctuary to St. Adrians Tomb at St. Augustins, whither his Master
Capgrave f 1.
pursued him; and resolved to whip him, till a white Dove appeared on the top
of the Tomb, and by stretching out his neck and wings begged pardon for him?
then the Master fell upon his knees to the Saint and confessed his fault; and
so the Dove flew away. But he escaped better now than at another time, (if he
were the same Master) when whipping the boy however that had fled thither, his
arm was held stretched out all that day till he fell upon his knees to the boy,
and asked him pardon and by his intercession he recovered the use of his Arm.
The truantly boys that ran to St. Bregwins Tomb Id. F. 43.
for sanctuary from their Masters, became invisible to them there, if Capgrave
may be believed. A boy that ran to St. Erkenwalds Tomb from St. Paul's school
got his lesson by Inspiration Id. F. 134.
there; and when his Master pursued him thither, he repeated it exactly to him.
But never was poor Master so punished for whipping boys, as he was that
p^esumed to Id. F. 135.
chastise those that had fled to S. Ermenilds Tomb; for the next night the
Saint appeared to him, and bound him hand and foot stronger than with Irons, so
that he could not move himself; next morning he sends for the boys, begs them
pardon and desires them to intercede for him; and being carried to the Tomb of
the Saint, he was restored to his former condition. Were not these very
important occasions for God to employ the power of miracles upon?

The nature of this last punishment inflicted on the Schoolmaster, puts me in
mind of St. Ivo's boots which he put the poor Abbot of Ramsey into for not
believing the Carpenter Ezi's revelation concerning his body; the whole story
is worth reading as Mr. Cressy Cr^ssy's Church History l 13. c. 9. n. 3.
relates it in his Church History. This St. Ivo was born in a City of Persia
called Frianeos (no matter whether Ptolemy or others mention it, for who can
tell but such a City might have been in the world and they not know it?) that
his Father was a Prince there named Yomos, and his Mother Isitalia, and his
only Brother Athanatos (a Persian word doubtless) lived an Eremitical life in a
certain wood and was illustrious for miracles. (But how came these particulars
to be so well known to our Monks in England? I suppose Ezi informed them all by
the vision of St. Ivo) Well, but St. Ivo was elected Bishop in the Town where
he was born and not long after translated to the Archiepiscopal See of the City
Asitanea, (A huge City in Persia I suppose) Which See be governed with great
sanctity and prudence, till a terrible famine so desolated the Country that
Parents were compelled to devour their Children. By reason whereof St. Ivo with
eleven more devont companions, for sook that region and passing through many
Countries at last came to Rome: (Now what a cross thing is this? that William
of Malmsbury says, that he left his Country Malmsbury F. 292.
to avoid the pleasures which his rich Bishopric afforded him; that he only
had Alford A^nal. A D. 600. n. 7.
three companions and never mentions his coming to Rome; but Mr. Cressy had the
wit to take no notice of this, although Alford had not.) At Rome, by the Popes
advice they severed themselves, and St. Ivo by divine disposition together with
his Nephew Sithius and his Kins man Inthius (two pretty Persian names) and some
others came into Britany. (Observe it good Reader, the Pope sent St. Ivo into
Britain; for fear, we should derive our Christianity from the Asian Bishops;
and I assure thee Alford not a little glories in this.) And at last died in a
Town called Id. ib. n. 1, 2.
Sleep, at three miles distance from Huntington, serving God all his days in
watching, fasting and prayers. But all this while, not one word is said of any
acquaintance this good Bishop had all his life time in England; not one person
is pretended to have known who he was, or whence he came till the Carpenter
Ezi's vision; therefore we come to that. Mr. Cressy confesses his sacred body
remained several Ages in the place of his burial, in so much as his memory was
lost in that place. But at last A. D. 1001. a certain husbandman as he was
plowing the ground light upon his Tomb, which being taken up and opened, the
Body of a Bishop in his Pontifical ornaments was seen in it. The night
following the same Bishop St. Ivo appeared in a very reverend form and with
great brightness to a Carpenter called Ezi and told him who he was; commanding
him to signify to Ednoth Abbot of Ramsey that he should translate his and his
companions bodies from thence to his Monastery. But the poor man not having the
boldness to relate this vision, he appeared to him the second time repeating
the same commands; which he still neglecting to perform, at the third
apparition the Bishop smote him on the side with his crosier, telling him that
the pain of that stroke should remain, till he had performed what had been
enjoined him. The man awaking presently after, found as grievous pain in his
side as if a sword had pierced it. Thus was he compelled to declare his vision
to the Abbot, which as soon as he had done he was freed from his pain. But the
Abbot would give no credit to what the man told him, but calling him clown and
fool, said, must we translate and venerate the ashes of I know not what Cobbler?
the night following the holy Bishop appeared to the Abbot, and said, rise
quickly, for I whom thou scornfully calledst Cobbler have brought thee here a
pair of Boots that will last a good while. These thou must put on and wear for
my sake. Having said thus, he seemed to draw on his Legs a pair of Boots with
care to make them sit smooth and handsome. Presently the Abbot waking felt such
horrible pain in his Legs, that he was not able to walk or stand, and fifteen
years did ^eremain under this infirmity (of Boots.) By this miracle, faith Mr.
Cressy, the Sanctity of the Holy Bishop was approved. A wonderful discovery of
Sanctity! to revenge himself so severely upon the Abbot for his reasonable
suspicion of an imposture; methinks however a pair of strait shoos might have
been fair punishment at first for calling him Cobbler; and if those had not
convinced him, he might then have proceeded to the Scotch severity of the Boot.
But we are to consider that a great deal depended upon the honor of the Body
that was to be translated; for the resort would be made accordingly; and
therefore a long gout upon an old Abbot might by an easy metaphor pass for St.
Ivo's boots. I wonder Mr. Cressy omitted another miracle wrought, no doubt, in
approbation of the Sanctity of the Holy Bishop too; for in my opinion the story
of St. Ivo's girdle is as good as of his boots; for which we must understand
that these Saints were very severe toward all persons who neglected their
Festival days; now it so happened, that a Monk commanded his servants to work
upon his day, and spoke not very kindly of the Saint. Capgrav. F. 2co.
(It may be questioning whether ever there was any such Saint or no; or calling
him Girdler, as we may think by his punishment.) to him St. Ivo appeared and
asked him if he knew him, he trembling, answered no. The Saint replied I am Ivo
whom thou lately said thou did not know and hinderedst men from keeping my
Feast; Here, take this girdle and by this token remember me; and girding it
about him he left him. The Monk waking found himself as it were girt with an
Iron girdle, and was under horrible pains and diseases till by visiting St.
Ivo's monument he recovered his health. Thus, these miracles end in some honor
to a shrine or monument, which may reward the Monks well for the use of their
inventions to delude the people. But did ever Christ or his Apostles testify
their sanctity by giving men such Boots and Girdles as St. Ivo did? Did they
ever vindicate the honor of their Festivals in such a manner? It Is true, when
persons openly lied and cheated, they were once struck dead upon the place; and
when others profaned the holy institution of the Lords supper they were
severely punished; but what is this, to the questioning the body of such an
unknown Saint as St. Ivo? What is this, to the hindering men from keeping his
Festival? Were the other such fit ends for God to employ his power in working
miracles as these? Could any think, the asserting the Apostolical power, or the
holiness of Christ's own institutions were fit to be compared with the owning of
the body of St. Ivo, or making servants work upon his holy day? If they do,
they must have different apprehensions of the Christian Religion, from what
some would seem to have in the Church of Rome. But to proceed,

Was ever any thing done by Christ or his Apostles like the turning a pound of
butter into a bell? yet this is related, from the same storehouse from which
they had St. Ivo's Boots and Girdle, viz. Capgrave, who says that St. Oudoceus
Bishop of Landaff traveling, Capgrav. vi^^ St. Oudocei F. 258.
desired of some women that were washing butter, a dish of water; they told him
they had no dish but their butter; the Bishop took their butter, and made it in
the fashion of a bell and drank out of it, and it remained in that fashion as a
Golden Bell, and was perserved as a sacred Relic in the Church of Landaff for
a Testimony of the miracle. Did ever any of Christ's Apostles merely with
breathing, and the sign of the Cross change a person from looking young and
fresh to be grayhaired and wrinkled; yet this Mr. Cressy C^^ss^'^
C^ur^h-History l. 28. c. ^. n. 4, 7.
delivers (as he says) from our more ancient and credible Historians
concerning St. Modwenna: who intending to retire appointed Abbess over her
Monastery a certain virgin named Orbila; who by reason of her youth and beauty
being in great apprehension to undertake that charge; she binding her with her
own girdle, and making the sign of the Cross upon her, presently all her hair
became white, and her Countenance wrinkled as if she had been very aged, yet
without any diminution of her health or strength. Mr. Cress^ C^pgrav. F. 235.
omits a necessary circumstance of this miracle, viz. that she breathed upon
her; for who can tell but there might be as great virtue in that, as in the
sign of the Cross or her girdle? When was there ever such a miracle seen in the
Apostolical times, as in the letting down the bolt of a door to St. Neotus? For
as Mr. Cressy observes he was of a stature so very Cr^ss^'s Church-H^^tory l.
29. c. 2. n. 3.
low and dwarfish, that in celebrating Mass, he was obliged to make use of an
iron footstool; Now, says Capgrave, some great man knocking hastily at the
door, St. Ne^t endeavored to open it and the bolt was much too Capgrav. F. 23^.
high for him, and behold a miracle! the bolt was let down to his girdle that
he might with ease open it. Had it not been as well, for the door to have
opened it self by a miracle? but then St. Neot would have had no hand in it.
Did ever any of them revenge perjury as St. Quintin did? who pulled a man by
the nose in the night for it, and as Capgrave says, the next morning touching
his nose, it dropped off into the basin where ^e was washing; or as St. Egwin?
when an old man swear by his beard, that the land was ld. F. 12^.
^is own, which belonged to St. Egwin, immediately his beard fell to the
ground, and so he lost his land and his beard too. Did ever any of them curse a
whole Trade in a Town ^s St. Egwin did: for St. Egwin, we must know, went often
from his Monastery of Evesham to Aln-cester to preach to the people; Id. (...)
which place was very full of Smiths, who beat their Anvils so loud while he
was preaching, that he could not be heard; upon that he solemnly cursed the
Trade of Smiths in that place, so that says Capgrave, never did any one thrive
by it since. Did ever any of them bind themselves in Iron Chains for their sins
and go in Pilgrimage in them as the same St. Egwin did from England to Rome?
(as Mr. Cressy relates the story from Ancient Authors.) Cress^'s Church History
l. 21. c. ^. n. 4, 5.
And were any of them assured of the pardon of their sins by such a miracle as
he was; viz. As soon as he had fastened his chains he cast the key which locked
them together into the river Avon publicly protesting that he would never
esteem himself secure of the pardon of his sins, till either the key were
restored to him, or the chains unloosed by a power supernatural. And now behold
the miracle. While he was at his devotion^ in the Church of St. Peter in Rome,
his servants going to the rivers si^e to buy provi^^on for their master, they
found in a sifh^^ belly the key which locked his chains, and then in the
presence of a great multitude h^ unlocked the said chains, perceiving says Mr.
Cressy, that such was the divine will and mercy: or rather the cunning of one
of his servants who might very easily convey the key from England to Rome to
gain reputation to his Master by so glorious a miracle; as it seems this made
him esteemed a Sai^^ at Rome. If it were in his return between France and
England, as Malmsbury says, the miracle is just as great as it was, only I
observe that they sometimes differ in the circumstances of their Relations.

We read indeed that one of the Apostles was taken up into the third Heaven and
hear^ unutterable things there; but I dare say, none of them ever dreamt of
seeing the Angels ring Bells in Heaven to the praise of the Blessed C^^grav. F.
296.
Trinity as St. Walstan did. Pythagoras his Music of the Spheres was nothing
to the Peal of Angels which he heard: which so ravished him that he gave over
his work, and called to his Companion to come to him and devoutly to set his
own foot upon his and believe stoutly and he should see the Heavens ^pened, and
the Angels ringing Bells to the praise of the ever Blessed Trinity. Methinks
the Monastery of Barking had been a good place to have Ca^g^av F. 1^0. it.
Hilde^^^hae.
^een this ringing of the Angels; for over that Capgrave says, the Heavens are
seen open after a peculiar manner. It was a thing which frequently happened, to
hear Angels singing at the death of their Saints: so St. Munis heard them
singing all night about a tree where St. Patricks Leper lay dead, says Jocelin
in Joce^. in v^t. St. Pa^^icii c. 113.
the life of St. Patrick; St. Aengussius saw as many about another body as
reached up to Heaven who were all singing over the body; ^ut they accompanied
the body of St. Abba^^s to his burial, with rays of light instead Colg^n. Acta
S^cto^^m H^bern. ^. 579. 10. Martii.
of Torches as bright as the beams of the Sun. But this was not all, for the
Angels were extraordinarily serviceable to them upon all occasions, above any
thing we read concerning Christ or his Apostles. I shall not mention their bare
appearances, for it was as common for Eremites and such Saints to see Angels,
as for us to converse one with another: but the Angels brought wood for St.
Moedoc for Colgan. 3^. Jan. vit. S. Mai^ocin. 53.
the bui^ding of a Church, till one of his Disciples against his command was
resolved to see them, and he espied a multitude of beautiful young men with
golden locks to their shoulders, but from that time a voice was heard
forbidding them to bring any more; otherwise the whole Church would have been
built by Angels. Then was St. Mo^doc hard put to it, not being able to procure
an exquisite workman; he takes an unskilful fellow and blesses his hands upon
which he was enabled to finish the work which the Angels began. They helped St.
Finnian to Id. 23. Feb. vit. S. Finnian. n. 6.
to bring Timber from the Wood, both more and quicker than others of his
Brethren; and Cathmoelus heard the noise of Angels about him. An Angel helped
St. Senan^ to grind in a Mill for a whole night together* Several of them
ground at the Mill for Eugenius and Tigernachus while they were reading. An
Angel carried a letter from St. Fi^nian to St. Columba, who upon receiving it
Id. 8. Martii v. 13 v. Senani.
went ten days journey in one day: Another brought a Candle to St. Abban in a
dark night to conduct him in his way, and when Id. 1. Ma^t. p. 438.
he had done, took it of him again. Many other such offices we read they
performed to Id. 23. Feb. p. 404.
these Saints, of which we read nothing in the lives of Christ or his Apostles.
I Suppose it was an Angel that tolled St. Goodric's Id. 16. Mart^i n. 31.
Bell for him, to prayers, for they tell us it was miraculous; and when others
took notice of this miracle, he prayed that he alone Ca^grav. F. 160.
might hear it, which happened accordingly. But it is no wonder the Angels
should toll the Bell, when the Blessed Virgin taught him to sing. For she
appearing one night to him at her own altar, came and laid her hands upon him;
and afterward begun a Tune before him as Masters use to do to Scholars. The
very Song is extant in Capgrave, which contained only an invocation of her
self; which no doubt she extremely desires. In my judgment it was a great
kindness the Angels did to St. Finan when thy gave him three round Capgrav. F.
168.
stones, which served him instead of Candles in the night, to read, and write,
and pray by all his days. But the Author of his life Acta Sancto um 16. Martii
n. 7.
in the late Jesuits Collection tells us that the fingers of St. Finians left
hand served him instead of candles; which a poor country fellow espying lost
one eye for his curiosity. But St. Patricks fingers did mightily outshine his,
for in a very dark night his Coachman not being able to find his Horses, St.
Patrick out of great compassion toward him, lifts up the fingers of his right
hand; and behold, says Jocelin a very wonderful Jocelin vit. St. Patricii c.
157.
thing! his five fingers did shine like the beams of the Sun, and turned
darkness into light and night into day. This I confess was very extraordinary;
but in another kind St. Elsleda's fingers did well, when, we are told, she
arose one night to prayers and her Candle going out, the fingers of her right
Capgrav. F. 126.
hand did give such a light, as not only served her self, but all about her to
read by. And can any of these be paralleld by any miracles done by Christ or
his Apostles? These are a sort of New Lights bey^nd what any of our Fanatics
have pretended to.

Now if we consider the miracles done either by Christ or his Apostles we shall
find that these Legendary Saints did very much exceed them in the same kind of
miracles. Our Savior we read only fasted forty days and forty nights; we have
met with one a^ready that fasted a hundred years: but if that seem too
Romantic, we shall find some of them fasting the same time of forty days but
with the addition of a very pretty circumstance that they grew fatter and
taller by it. So we read in Colganus of St. Moedoc; but Colgan. 31. ^an. n. 36.
St. Aidanus in Capgrave out pitched him, for he fasted fifty days and fifty
nights and grew fatter also. St. Bartholmew of Durham for seven years and a
half before his death drank Capgrav. v^t St. Aida^. p. 3.
nothing; if he had not eaten in that time neither, it had been a perfect
miracle.

When our Blessed Savlour Preached he did not make a mountain on purpose but
went up into the next at hand; but when St. Rentegern was to Preach in Wales
(though there was no want of mountains there,) a mountain Acta S^cto^^m on Jan.
13. c. 6. n. 33.
rose up under his feet, which abides to this day, says Capgrave; Bollandus
in the Capgrav. F. 210.
notes on his life, tells us, the same is said of St. David, but with more
particular circumstances, thus related by Mr. Cressy; when Cresse's
Church History l. 11. c. 11. n. 2.
all the Fathers assembled assigned St. David to Preach, he commanded a Child
which attended him, and had lately been restored to life by him to spread a
napkin under his feet: and standing upon it he began to expound the Gospel and
the Law to the Auditory. All the time that his Oration continued a snowwhite
Dove descending from Heaven sat upon his shoulders; and moreover the earth on
which he stood raised it self under him, till it became a Hill, from whence his
voice like a trumpet was clearly heard and understood by all, both near and far
off. On the top of which Hill a Church was afterward built, which remains to
this day. It seems St. David wanted St. Columba's voice, which says Capgrave
when he was singing service might be heard distinctly above a mile without the
help of a Hill.

It is true that Christ did cure the lame and the blind and cleansed the
Lepers: but was ever any withered arm cured by him as the woman's was at the
Tomb of St. Erardus Colgan. Acta Sctor^m Hibern. p. 27.
which made such a noise at its first stretching, as was heard in every cerner,
of the Church? Were ever Lepers cleansed by Christ or his Apostles in such a
manner as is related of some Irish Saints, by Bollandus, and Colganus? Acta
Se^torum 1 Jan. c. 3. ^. 6, 7.
St. Munnu in the life of St. Mochua in Bollandus, wanting the daily
conversation of an Angel, which he had before, fell into discontent about it;
the Angel told him he must be humbled, St. Munnu desired that he might have a
leprosy for his humiliation; his prayer was heard, and he had it for seven
years; at the end whereof the Angel came to him, and told him he should go to
St. Mochua to be cured. St. Mochua was not presently to be found, in the mean
time St. Munnu employed himself in sweeping together the lice that dropped from
him and putting them in their places again; (according to the rule of Friar
Bartholmew of Durham that men must Capgrav. F. 32.
have nasty bodies if they would have pure souls) at last S. Mochua comes to
him and embraces him and by licking him all over perfectly cured him; but the
hardest part of his task was the sucking his nostrils which he did three times
and drew out three tough pieces of phlegm, and (behold a miracle indeed!) these
thre^ pieces were turned into three talents of Gold, which were preserved in
his cabinet like three Golden Apples. I confess Bollandus seems a little
startled at these miracles, but he faith they were usual in that ^imple and
holy nation as may appear by the Bo^land. 1 Jan. ^. 45.
lives of other Saints. I wonder the Jesuit durst make a reflection on the
whole nation for the sake of the folly of the Monks. Colganus Colgan. 20 Jan.
vit. Fech. ^ 13. and p. 151.
in the life of St. Fechinus relates, that he put Dermitius his Queen upon this
nasty way of curing a leprosy; and the same miracle followed; for the phlegm
was turned into pure gold, with part of which he purchased land for his Church,
and the other he put into his staff to be preserved to posterity. This story is
three times related in Colganus, that he might be sure to preserve the memory
of it. But we must not suppose our own Country Monk^ to come behind the Irish
either in simplicity, or this faculty of working miracles: for Capgrave tells
us that St. Egbin the Monk used the same way of cure to a Capgrav. F. 122.
leprous person; but instead of Gold (O horrible blasphemy!) that which he
sucked out proved to be the very flesh of the Son of God. For he found this
leprous person to be Christ himself, and while he held him by the sides he
looked up and saw the Heavens opened, and he saw a Cross upon his head and
Angels coming to meet him; and as he raised himself up into the air, he spoke
very kind words at parting. But what will not these men say to make the nasty
Monks workers of miracles!

It was prophesied that in the days of the Messiah the Wolf and the Lamb should
lie down together and the Leopard and the Kid, i. e. that the Christian
Doctrine should be the most effectual means to remove animosities out of the
World and to bring in universal Peace and Charity. But the Monks who wrote the
Lives of these Saints fearing they should in any thing come behind what is said
of Christ himself; have filled their Legends with prodigious stories about the
taming of Wolves, and the power they had over all sorts of living creatures. It
was very common with these Saints when the Wolfes had devoured the Calves to
make them come and suck the Cows in their places for fear they should lose
their milk. So the Author of the life of St. Gerald affirms that at his command
the Wolf came and did his duty; But after a while by the instinct of nature or
rather by Colgin. 13. Martiin. ^7. p. 600.
the motion of the Spirit of God (says the same Author) the Wolf went to a
hill and there called a Fawn to supply his room; by which means they got both
the Do and the Fawn to the Monastery; and from hence the name of the Monastery
was called Elitheria, Elith in Irish, says he, signifying a Do. St. Fechinus
his mother set him to keep seven Cows and a Calf; but he being busy at his
contemplation, a Wolf came and killed his Colgan. ^0. Jan vit. Fech. n. 7.
Calf, and eat him up to the bones; his Mother chid him for his neglect; he
presently runs after the Wolf and calls to him as his acquaintance and friend,
the Wolf presently submits, he takes him and ties him to a hollow stone,
whither the Cows came at their time to the Wolf as if he had been the Calf and
gave down their milk as freely; which stone has since done great wonders.
Another time he was shrewdly mistaken, for instead of milking a Cow he went to
a Bull, and sadly complained he could get no milk, N. 9.
but behold, says the Author of his Life, a wonderful Miracle! The Bull gave
more milk than any Cow of them all. And for this, he appeals to Gods
omnipotency as Baronius does for the Chapel of Loreto. Another life of St.
Fechinus relates this Miracle concerning Pastolus, his Cook; but withal Vit S.
Fechini n. 36. p. 137.
adds, that the Bull afforded as much milk as all the seven Cows. St. Kentigern
wanting Oxen to plow with, commanded two Stags to come out of the Wood and do
their work; the Stags presently obeyed, and when they had done their days work,
returned to their pasture again. At last a Wolf seizes on one of them and
devours him. Then St. Kentigern stretched forth his hand toward the Wood and
said, In the name of the blessed Trinity, I command the Wolf to come out and
make Acta Sanctorum 13. Ja. vit. Kentig. c. 4. n. 20.
me satisfaction: and behold the Wolf came howling and fell at his feet. To
whom the Saint thus spoke, Arise, and in the name of Jesus Christ I command
t^ee to go to plow in the place of the Stag, which command the Wolf obeyed, and
though he was unequally yoked made a shift to plow nine Acres and then went his
way. But his sowing was as miraculous as his plowing, for one time wanting
grain he sowed sand instead of it, and at harvest he reaped excellent Wheat. N.
21.
These Miracles of St. Kentigern I the rather instance in, because one being
offended at the Miracles contained in the lives of these Saints as published by
Capgrave; Bolland^^ offered Bolland. praf. gener. c. 1. sect ^4.
him the Life of St. Kentigern for a trial, and asked him what he disliked in
it, as he had published it, When he had read it, says Bollandus, he confessed
if the lives of the Sain^^ were so published they could not but please Learned
men. I desire such persons to give their opinions by these instances; and let
them then judge whether the New Legends be not altogether as bad as the Old.

When a Wolf had devoured a Calf belonging to St. Modwenna she sent her Boy
with her staff to him to command him to come Capgrave vit. S. Modwennae f. 234.
to her; the Boy found the Wolf yet eating the Calf, and told the Wolf his
errand: the Wolf followed him like a Dog, and fell down before her and begged
pardon. She first chid him, and then bad him keep that Cow out of danger all
his days: which the Wolf punctually observed, and was ever after beloved by the
Cow as if he had been a Calf. Yea all the Wolfs that were of his race kept the
Cows there abouts for three miles compass; and Capgrave says, They are less
than others and have white spots in their fore heads, and hurt no body. When
St. Neots Oxen were stolen, the Stags came and offered their Service to Plow
for him; at which Capgrave vit. S. Neoti f. 240.
the Thieves were so astonished that they brought his Oxen again; and some say
that all the Stags that are descended from them have white marks where their
harness was put on: but of this Capgrave says, he neither affirms it, nor
because of Gods omnipotency dares to deny it.

St. Bernac made use of Stags to draw his carriage when he pleased, and then
sent them back to their Forage: he committed his Cow Id. svit. S. Bernaci f.
37.
daily to the keeping of a Wolf, which led her out and brought her home every
day. The King of Wales sends to St. Bernac to provide him a supper; he returns
a rude answer, (as any man but one of their Saints would have thought) that he
owed him not so much service, the King being angry sends his servants, who
chopped his Cow to pieces; but they could never make the water hot wherein the
meat was to be b^yled; the King then submits and very humbly sues for pardon;
then St. Bernac raises his Cow although cut to pieces, and commits her to the
Wolf again; and the Monk being in a good humor (as it was dangerous to Princes
for them to be otherwise) invites the King to supper, and having nothing
provided, he goes to the next Oak, and instead of leaves upon it he found as
many Manchets as he had occasion for, (the first Manchets I am confident that
ever grew within a mile of an Oak;) then to the River he goes, which ran with
Wine instead of Water, and all the stones in the River were turned into Fishes:
the King requited him well for this cheap entertainment, by exempting his Lands
from all Taxes. By these few instances, out of very many which might be
produced, we see what subjection Wolfes and other creatures were in to them in
those days, for, so far as I can learn, this sort of Miracles is now wholly
ceased.

But we must not think that since they were so much civilized, they took no
farther care of their education. For St. Kieran intending to make himself a
Cell; the first Disciple (says the Author of his Life in Colganus) which came
to him was a wild Boar, which brought him Colgan. Acta Sanctorum Hibe. n. 5.
Mart. n. 7.
rods and hay with his Teeth toward his Cell, then came a Fox, a Brock, a
Wolf, and a Do: and lived very strictly under his Government, and obeyed him
in all things like so many Monks; which are the expressions of the Author; and
are justified by Colganus Colgan. p. 464.
in his Notes, who appeals to the State of Innocence; the power and goodness of
God, and other ancient instances of a like nature, and the obedience which the
Birds and Beasts showed to St. Francis. But the Fox never thought I dare say,
of any state of Innocence, for he stole the good Abbots shoes, and wickedly
forgetting his vow of obedience, carried them to his old Kennel; the Abbot
knowing this sends another Monk, viz. the Brock after him who finds the Fox
ready to eat up the shoes; and with much ado brings him to penance; the devout
Abbot lays open the greatness of his fault before the the Fox, (as certainly it
was a great fault in ^ Fox to steal shoes with a design to eat them) who
submits to penance and fasted till St. Kieran bid him eat: he fasted three
days, says Capgrave; who tells the same story only calling the Abbot Piranus.
St. Abban took such pity toward the lean Wolves that came C^^gr. (...), S
Pirani. f. 267.
out of the Wood that he commanded them to take one of the Calves; upon which
they made a present dispatch of him; the Wolves came and gave him thanks for
their good Colgan. vit. S. Ab^a^i 16. Marti^ n. 5.
Dinner; the men that were set to keep the Cattle, finding a Calf destroyed by
Wolves, made very lamentable moan to St. Abban; at which he fell to his Prayers
and signed the small remainders of the carcass with the sign of the Cross, and
immediately skin and flesh covered the bones, and the Calf rose up just of the
same color and bigness he was of before: and the Author of his Life conjures
us to believe him because all things are possible N. 8.
with God. Another time as he was sitting in his Cell, the Wolves ran in among
the Cattle, he cried out, let them alone; and from that time the Wolves not
only forbore to devour them, but lived very neighbourly with them. Thus we see
what command they had N. 28.
over these creatures; but in my mind St. Colmans Flea was as great a Miracle
as any of Colga^. vit. S Colmanni p. 244.
these; for he had brought a Flea to stand just upon the line where he left,
when he was called away from his Book, as he had done a Mouse and a Cock to
wake him to Mattins; but as all these things are mortal, it happened that these
three dyed, at which the good man was so disconsolate, that he sent to St.
Columba to comfort him. Colganus uses such expressions about these miraculous
attendances of the Flea and the Mouse, that I am ashamed to repeat them;
calling them The familiar condescensions and sportings of Christ with his
people, which can only seem incredible to those, who do not consider how
wonderful God is in his Saints. Are such as these indeed the Favors and
condescensions of Christ? Pitiful souls! that can think such sopperies as
these, the expressions of Gods wonderful goodness to his Saints. I confess some
of their Miracles upon dead Cattle were extraordinary; as when St. Mochteus
raised up a Calf after it was eaten; when Colgan* 24. Ma^t n. 14. Id. 31. Jan.
n. 55.

Jocelin. vit. S. Patric. c. 27.


St. Moedoc discovered a man that had stolen one of his Cattle, and afterward
denied it, by making the ear of it hang out of his mouth. And when St. Pa^rick
made the Goat that was eaten cry out in the belly of the man who had stolen
and eaten him. These were very wonderful things, and were they not delivered by
such substantial and grave witnesses as these Legendary Writers, could hardly
be believed.

We read that Christ and his Apostles did frequently cast out Devils, and that,
presently, publicly, without any Ceremony; but we never read they played such
ridiculous pranks with one another, as the Devils and these Legendary Saints
did. St. Fintan pulled the Devil out of a man by putting three fingers in his
mouth; and when he had done Co^gan r. Ja^ vit. S. Fintani ^. 10.
he confined him to a certain Rock, where for all that we know he continues to
this day; for the Author of his Life says, he did so till his time, and hurt
no body. To d^fend this, Colganus flies to Gods omnipotency, which indeed makes
every thing possible, but barely of it self proves nothing. Friar Bartholomew
of Durham was hugely molested with the Devil in several shapes, as of a Mouse,
a Lion, and an Ape, sometimes leaping upon his Legs, sometimes being ready to
choke him, sometimes pulling him by the Capgr. f. 33.
Cowle and casting him on the floor; at last after many tricks, the stout Friar
takes a whole pot of holy water and throws it in his face, and then he sneaked
away horribly ashamed and confounded. St. Benignus was going one night to the
Church of St. Mary Id. f. 36.
in Glastonbury; upon the Bridge he espys a Devil making toward him; after some
sharp words that passed between them the Saint caught hold of him with his left
hand, and and with the staff in his right hand, beat him as long as he could
stand over him; and at last threw him into a Well, out of which he never arose
again: But no persons ever durst come near that Well since that time says
Capgrave. The Devil, watching his opportunity, stole from St. Caradoc the
Eremite, his girdle and purse; and when the good man was looking for them, he
saw the Devil standing Capgr. f. 55.
not far off with them fleering and laughing at him; but he soon made him
restore them again. We must not forget St. Dunstans holding the Devil by the
Nose with a red hot pair of Tongs, which although Mr. Cressy sliely passes
over, yet his friend Alford honestly remembers it; and speaks of it as an
heroical Capgr. f. 90. Alford. Annals A. D. 935. n. 4. 5.
act in him (as no doubt it was) in the beginning of his conversion; a thing
without parallel from the time of the Devils fall from Heaven to this day. No
wonder it made him cry out, What has this bald pate done? But for all that,
the Devil would not give him over so; however he thought fit to change his
shape into a Bear, St. Dunstan finding who he was, falls upon him unmercifully
Capgr. f. 92.
with his pastoral staff, and never gave him over till he had broken his staff
upon him into three pieces. The Devil played forty tricks with St. Goodric which
Capgrave relates; once he persuaded him to dig for a Id. f. 163.
treasure, and when he had dug a little way, up rose several little black
boys with shorn heads, which mocked him and threw stinking pellets in his face:
but from that time he would never mind money more: and therein he was too hard
for the Devil. Another time, the Devil and he wrestled so long together, that
the combat endured nine hours; and the noise of it was heard by others abroad;
for it seems they were at it both with words and blows. But at last St. Goodric
said, with F. 194.
the help of the sign of the Cross, he feared the Devils no more than he did
the motion of the Air. Never was poor man so used by them as St. Guthlac in his
retirement at Crowland; for they made nothing of binding him and Id. f. 170.
tossing him in the air, and throwing him into Lakes and Ponds, and whipping
him till at last kind St. Bartholomew came to his assistance, and made them
carry him safe again to the place where they took him up. Afterward he had
sufficient revenge upon some of them, for some he made to serve him in his
buildings, and one he shut up in a boiling F. 1^2.
pot. Thus we see how far in their ways of combating with the Devils, these
Legendary Saints out did Christ and his Apostles.

It was a small matrer with them to raise the dead as Christ did Lazarus; but
when the head of Beoanus was cut off by his enemies, and not to be found, at
St. Ita's prayers the Colgan. 15. Jan. ^. 15.
head came posting through the Air, and stood by the body, and she joined them
as fast together, as if they had never been separated, and in the space of an
hour he arose as sound and vigorous as ever he was in his Life: and these
things are written if we believe Colganus by a faithful and ancient Author. P.
71.


But what shall we say to St. Patrick, of whom Jocelin speaks that he raised up
a man Jo^elin vit. S. Patric^i c. 82.
that had been dead one hundred years, being Grandfather to him for whose
satisfaction he was raised. Jocelin does not express the number of years, but
St. Ewin in Colganus does. Jocelin elsewhere mentions his raising one that had
been ten years dead; but we are to remember by what instrument St. Patrick is
said to do C. 78.
these things, viz. by the staff of Jesus, which is supposed to have been
delivered to him by one who said he had it from Christ himself and was the very
same he used upon Earth.

Nothing more usual with the Irish Saints C. 24.
to raise dead Cattle as well as Men, viz. Oxen and Horses, Calves and Hogs, as
may be seen abundantly in Colganus. One thing I have yet omitted which was very
extraordinary; viz. that the Kings only Daughter being dead; they sent to St.
Gerald to raise Colgan. 13. Ma^ii vit. S Gerald 1. 6.
her from the dead, who not only did it, but with this pleasant circumstance,
to the great joy of the King, turned his Daughter into a Son at her
Resurrection. Colganus confesses That nothing like this occurs in story, and
yet though it seem never so incredible, we ought not to question Gods
omnipotency; especially when the matter of fact is so stoutly attested. That
which comes nearest to this, is St. Abbans changing the sex of a Daughter by
Baptizing her; as the same Colganus Id. 16. Ma^tii vit. S. Abban. ^. 23.
reports it; methinks he need not have troubled himself to have heaped together
so many stories of natural transformations to make these credible. For they who
can believe the other Miracles contained in the lives of the Saints published
by him, need not stick at any thing in the World. They who could turn Acorns
into Pork, and which is more a swerd of Bacon into a Coulter to Plow with, both
which he reports of one of their Saints; Id. 20. Jan. n. 31. 42. vit. St.
Fechini p. 136, 138.
why should not they be able to transsorm one Sex into another? No men can tell
what bounds to set to the power of such, who could bring a man from Rome to
Cassells with the sound of a Bell, as St. Fe^hinus did Tyrechanus; Id. ib. ^ 14.
or that could feed a whole Army with one small measure of Grain for three days
together; and which adds much to it he divided that measure into two parts,
whereof the one N. 34.
served for drink, as the other sor meat: as is related of the same wonderful
Saint. Next to him is St. Kierans feeding a whole Army Co^gan. 5. Martii p.
468. lect. 9.
with a Cow and a Hog; as is contained in the Lessons to be read upon his day;
but the Author of the English Martyrology, makes the Miracle more considerable,
for he says, Martyrolog. A^gli^. ad ^. Maii.
That with three Cows he fed ten Armies for eight days. I^ ommend a man that
will make something of a story when he has it in his hands.

I shall mention but one thing more, viz. Miraculous going upon the water as
our Savior did; and then we shall see that these Legendary Writers will leave
the honor of no one Miracle entire to our Savior excepting that of his own
Resurrection from the dead, which was the greatest of all others; and to which
I do not find that any of them ever so much as pretended. But for passing upon
the Waters in a miraculous manner, nothing was more common among them; and
scarce any of them did it but exceeded our Savior in some circumstance or
other. The Sea of Quaresm. elu^id. terrae sectae l. 7. c. 3.
Galilee on which our Savior walked was but one League over, and three in
length; and upon this he walked only till he came to his Ship; but these
Legendary Saints made nothing of passing from Ireland to Britain and so back
again. St. Fanchea had a great mind to see her Brother Endeus at Rome and took
Colgan. 1. Jan. vit. S. Fancheae n. 8, 9.
three other Virgins with her, but commanded them to carry no manner of
Utensils with them; but one of them transgressed her command and carried a
brass Basin with her; when they came to the Seashore to pass for England, they
missing a Ship to transport them, St. Fanchea spreads her Mantle upon the Sea,
and walked boldly upon it dry foot, and she and her companions seated
themselves upon it; and the wind blew to their minds but on a sudden one part
of the Mantle sinks under water. Then St. Fanchea bid them confess their sins,
which when she had done who conveyed away the Basin, the Saint takes the Basin
and throws it into the Sea, and they came safe to their port in Britai^, But
for all this, the Basin comes again miraculously to her, for St. Darercha
finding it o^ the shore of Ireland, and knowing how useful it would be to St.
Fanchea for the washing her hands, beseeched Almighty God (in so important a
business) to employ his power that it might be conveyed to her: she tied
another to it and so dispatched them by Sea, and both came safe to St. Fanchea;
who sends back her own to St. Darercha again the same way, and she receiving it
gave great thanks to God and his holy Angels. Was not Gods Almighty Power in
the mean time very much a^ the beck of these female Saints? Whereas, if I be
not deceived, the Scripture never mentions any Miracle wrought by a Woman, no
not even by the blessed Virgin her self. St. Fanchea having found this easy
passage returned to Ireland again after the same manner. St. Schotinus was
passing over from Ireland to Wal^^ Colgan. 2. Jan. vit. S. Schotini n. 5, 6.
walking upon the Sea, and he meets a Ship wherein St. Barra was, who asked him
w^^ he walked upon the Sea? Schotinus told him he walked in a flowery Meadow,
and putting down his hand took up a handful of reddis^ Flowers which he cast
into his bosom to convince him. St. Barra on the other side took a Fish out of
the Sea which he threw toward Sch^tinus to prove it was the Sea; and on both
sides, thus playing with Miracles, and glorifying God in his wonders they
departed from each other, faith Colganus. Another time he passed over to St.
David from Ireland N. 7.
on the back of a monstrous great Beast in the Sea, when he was sent in haste
by the Angel to prevent St. David's being poisoned. But it is no great wonder
he should have so quick a passage by Sea, since Colganus says of him, that
having great business at Rome he was carried from Ireland thither in a day: and
having N. 8.
dispatched his affairs, returned to Ireland in another day. St. Moedoc was one
day troubled that he had not asked St. David, who was to be his Confessor in
Ireland; upon this Colgan. 31. Jan. vit. Maidoci n. 20.
weighty business away he walks over the Sea toward Wales; an Angel met him
upon the Sea and chid him for his boldness; he told the Angel he trusted to
Gods omnipotency and goodness. But the Angel (who it seems by the story was a
Heretic) further told him he went upon a needless errand, for he needed no
Confessor besides God himself, but if he would have a witness of his
Conscience, he should choose Molua. Upon this he returns. But he bethinks
himself that his Bell was in Britain; (for we must know that the Saints in
those times made great account of little tinkling Cymbals; so we read of St.
Gildas his Bell consecrated by the Pope, and sent to St. Cadoc for men to swear
by, of St. Iltutus his Bell, and the Miracles done by it, of Capgr. f. 54 Id.
f. 188.

Colgan. 20. Jan vit. S Molaggae n. 17.

Id. 4. F^^. vit. C^annae n. 12.


St. David's Bell, and the curing the King of Dublin by applying it to his
Cheek; but most wonderful was the Bell of St. Furseus, that when St. Cuanna and
his Disciples were together in the Fields, came hovering over them like a Bird,
and in token of Fraternity was sent by him from Peron in France; which
comforted them very much: these Bells the Irish have a strange reverence for to
this day, as Colganus tells us, and their most solemn oaths are by them.) And
as soon as he had occasion Id. p. 149.
for his Cymbal, he saw it swimming over the Sea to him; which he receiving so
miraculously gave God thanks for it. St. Abban put his staff under his feet and
marched Id. 16. Martii vit. S. Abbani n. 15.
into the midst of the Sea; where he was met with a Troop of Devils, who
threatened to drown him, but while he was singing Psalms in the midst of them,
he heard the Angels singing who came to his relief; then an Angel told him he
should be the Patron of those who pass the Seas, and whosoever entering into a
Ship should call upon him, and say such an Irish saying there mentioned should
not be drowned: at which he more rejoiced than his own preservation. Another
time St. Ibarus had a mind to go to Rome, and St. Abban de^ired to go with him,
but the other denied N. 10.
him, while he was sleeping on the shore, the Ship puts to Sea, when he wakes
he sees it sailing at a great distance, he prays and runs into the Sea after
the Ship as fast as he could, and the Ship stood still, till he came into it,
and then they came speedily and safely to Britain. St. Moedoes Chariot and
Horses went Colgan. 51. Jan. n. 41.
over a great Lake as if it had been dry ground. This was pretty well (if it
were in hot weather) but I am mistaken if St. Walstans Hearse did not however
very much exceed his Chariot, for Capgrave tells us, That it not only Capgrave
f. 296.
went upon the surface of a very deep water, as if it had been firm ground; but
the very prints of the wheels are said to appear to this day. I confess I was
somewhat fearful Colganus would have quite put down Capgrave or John of
Tinmouth, or any other of our brave Writers of the lives of the Saints, but
this one passage, puts me in good hopes of the English side. To have made the
print of wheels remaining upon a firm ground for so many years would have
sounded well; but to have them seen upon water and in the same place too (for
else the impression would soon have been carried into the Sea) especially if it
were a running stream, is a Miracle I think can hardly be paralleled by
Colganus himself. When St. Modwenna and her three Virgin companions wanted a
convenient passage from Capgr. vit. S. Modwennae. f. 237.
Ireland to England, an Angel did them an extraordinary kindness, says
Capgrave, for he cut off that snip of Land which they stood upon from the rest,
and removing it from its own place, conveyed them to England upon it, and when
he had done he settled that Island near the Castle Daganno, in which St.
Modwenna built a Church. St. Decuman^^ passed over from Southwales to
Somersetshire Capgr. vit. S. Decum. f. 86.
near Dunstar on a bundle of rods; but St. Bernac went much beyond him, for he
passed over the Sea from little Britainy to Southwales upon a piece of a Rock,
which Id. f. 37.
carried him on the surface of the water. This I think is somewhat beyond bare
walking on the Sea; but Colganus has something to outmatch this, (as if they
writ the Lives of the Saints for the whetstone) for St. Cuanna, and eight of
his Disciples standing upon a Colgan. 4. Feb. vit. S Cuannae n. 7.
Rock, were carried over the Sea to their own Country: which Rock was
afterward carried to his Cell and he kept seven Lents upon it. St. Hya went
somewhat easier upon a small leaf she saw in the Sea, and passed upon that from
Ireland to Cornwall, sooner than St. Fingar and all his companions could reach
Colgan. 23. Feb. vit. Guigneri n. 12.
it. This not only is delivered by Colganus, but by St. Anselm, and is
published among his works by Picardus. St. Patricks Altar ought not to be
forgotten, for its excellent faculty not only of swimming it self but
transporting others over the Sea: for when St. Patrick was to go over from
Britain to Ireland, a certain Leper standing on the shore begged earnestly to
be admitted into the Jocelin. in vit. S. Patricii c. 27.
Ship with him; the Seamen absolutely denied him. St. Patrick out of great pity
threw over a stone Altar the Pope had given him, and bad the Leper sit upon
that: upon which he went safely to Ireland and landed the same moment with them
in the Ship. David Roth in his Elucidations upon Jocelin consesses this David
Roth El^cid. in Jocel. c. 1.
to be somewhat an odd Miracle, because, as he very Philosophically speaks, it
is the nature of a heavy body to tend downwards; but still this, and all other
fabulous Miracles must be defended by Gods omnipotency. From which Argument we
must believe every thing that is told us; because all things are possible with
God. How can we then question St. Barr's Colgan. vit. S. David 1. Martii n. 18.
r^ding in the Sea on St. David's Horse, as if it had been a Meadow? and his
meeting St. Brendan upon the back of a Whale, and after they had saulted each
other, and St. Brendan's saying, Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis suis, they parted,
St. Bar Landed a Horseback in Ireland, and told this wonderful voyage to his
Disciples, and in memoof this Miracle they set up a brazen horse over the Image
of St. Bar. The same Argument I suppose will defend the seven years voyage of
St. Brendan in quest of Paradise, which in all respects was the most
extraordinary, that Colgan. 22. Martii p. 721.

Capgr. vit. S. Brendani f. 45.

Joh^a Bosco Bibliotheca Floriac. viis S. Machut c. 6, 7.


ever was made on the Sea. Which I shall briefly relate out of Colganus,
Capgrave, and John a Bosco. St. Barinthus coming to visit St. Brendan, was
desired by him to tell what wonders he had lately seen in the Sea; then St.
Barinthus related how his Disciple Mernoc had found an Island near a great
Rock, called The delightful Island, whither he had drawn many Monks, and many
wonders were done among them: which he understanding had a great mind to visit
them; after three days Voyage they came out to meet him like swarms of Bees,
his coming being revealed to them before; they had no food but Apples and Nuts,
and Fruits, and Herbs; after he had observed their orders and discipline, and
viewed the Island, his Disciple Mernoc led him to the shore, where a Boat lay
ready into which they went and made Westward toward an Island which is called
the Land of Promise which the Saints are to inhabit in the last times; after a
sudden darkness and a glorious light succeeding it, they came to the Island,
where all Herbs were in flower, and all Trees bore Fruit, and no stones in it
but Jewels; after fifteen days travel they came to a great River running
Eastward; while they were debating how to pass it, one comes to them in great
glory, and calling them by their names commanded them to fly back for it was
not lawful for them to pass over. While they were ready to ask him impertinent
questions, he describes to them the glory of the Island, that there was no need
of meat, drink, or clothing there; that there was perpetual day, for Jesus
Christ was the light of it. As Soon as this person had conducted them to their
Boat, he vanished out of their sight: and they returned to the delightful
Island; and by the smell of their Garments their Brethren found they had been
in Paradise; for that smell lasted above forty days (as it seems it used to do
with those who had been in Paradise.) Here Barinthius says, he continued with
his Disciple two whole weeks longer, and although they neither eat nor drank
all that time, yet they seemed as full as if they had been drunk with new Wine.
After which time he took his leave of the delightful Island, and returned to
his own Cell. St. Brendan was so struck with admiration at this pleasant story,
that he fell upon his face and praised God for the great discoveries he had
made to his People. Forthwith St. Brendan resolves upon a Voyage thither, and
out of 3000. Monks makes choice of 14. to go with him, he proposes the keeping
a fast of 40. days, by three days at a time, to prepare themselves for it.
After this they prepare a small vessel for themselves (for it seems they durst
not venture to walk on the Sea so far) very light the Vessel was, and covered
over with tanned hides, greasing all the seams with butter (which the ancient
M. S. in Colganus and Capgrave expressly mention) thus taking in provision for
40. days, they set sail, and had a good gale for 15. days, then they tugged at
their Oars till they were all weary, which St. Brendan observing, bad them
hoyse their sails and let God drive them whither he pleased; after 40. days,
their provision was quite spent, and then they espied a high rocky Island in
which after three days, they went on shore, and found a spacious hall furnished
with beds, and seats, and water to wash with, and all sorts of utensils of
several metals, horses bits, and horns done with Silver. Here one of the
Brethren could not hold his hands, but although expressly against St. Brenda^s
command, he had secretly put up a silver bitt, but upon strict examination he
confessed his fault and threw it before them; then a little black Devil went
out of him and railed'at St. Brendan for dispossessing him; but he commanded
him to hurt no one till ^^e day of judgment. Being refreshed here, ^hey put to
sea again and came to another ^sland, and after that to one called the Para^ise
of Birds, and for three months after saw nothing but sea; at last they came to
the ^sland of Silence where the Monks never ^pake but at prayers; only the
Abbot gave an ^ccount to the strangers of their miraculous ^way of living; for
every day they had twelve ^oaves sent them from Heaven, and upon ^estivals and
Sundays twenty four, every one ^hen having a whole loaf: which custom had
continued for eighty years with them ever since the days of St. Patrick, and
they never felt cold or heat, and the lamps in their Church were kindled from
Heaven and never diminished with burning; the Altars and all the Vessels were
made of Crystal. When any of the Monks wanted any thing, they went and kneeled
before the Abbot, but spoke nothing. The Abbot by Revelation knew what they
desired, and writ down his answer in a Table Book, and in all that eighty years
the Abbot protested to St. Brendan, he had not heard the voice of a man but
only at prayers: and they had none of them felt any infirmity of body or mind
since their coming thither. While they were thus discoursing a fiery Arrow came
from Heaven and kindled all the Lamps. Many other Islands they came at with
great variety of accidents too many to be transcribed. As their meeting with a
great Whale that ca^^ out fire and water out of his mouth which St. Brendan
killed by his prayers and gave them a third part of him to eat; (which I
suppose by the fire and water that came out of him, they believed to be well
sodden already) the strange Bird that brought them a bunch of grapes as big as
apples; the Griffin that was destroyed by that Bird; the Glass Sea, in which
they could see to the bottom, the Christalline Pillar that reached up to the
Sky, covered with so thin a Canopy that their Ship passed through one of the
holes of it, every side of which Pillar contained 1400. cubits; the Island of
Black-Smiths, where they heard the Anvils as loud as thunder, which proved at
last to be the suburbs of Hell, as they guessed by the howlings they heard and
the stench they smelt: the Island of Paul the Eremit, where he lived for forty
years without food, and was all hairy and as white as snow. In the seventh
year, says the life of S. Machutes, Vit. St. Machut. c. 6.
they came to a certain Island where they found a Tomb of a wonderful length;
then because of the infidelity of some, who would hardly believe that there
ever was a man of that prodigious height, St. Brendan and the ^est desired St.
Machutis to raise him out of ^is Grave, which when he to satisfy their
^uriosity had courteously done, they asked ^im who he was, he told them he was
a Gi^nt (which I suppose they were convinced of ^y their eyes) and that his
name was Mil^^^ that he had lain in Hell so long, but now ^e was a Christian
and desired to be bapti^ed; which was performed by St. Machutis; ^f it were by
dipping, it must be done in the ^ea doubtless.

This Giant gave them the first discovery ^f the Island of Paradise, for once
walking C. 7.
^n the Sea, he said he had seen it, that it was compassed about with a Golden
Wall and ^et as clear as Crystal, but he being a Hea^hen could see no entrance
into it. They de^ired him to conduct them thither, he takes the Cable of the
Ship and walks into the Sea and drew the Ship after him (which as the Author of
St. Machutis his life well observes ^s a thing one would hardly believe; but
Joh. a Bosco thinks he has fully cleared all in ^is Notes to which I refer the
Reader for his ^urther satisfaction) presently a mighty storm arose so that
they were forced back to ^he same Island, where the Giant died. While ^hey were
now debating about their return home, they beheld a small Island in the Sea;
when they were landed upon it, they desire^ St. Machutis to say Mass and when
they cam^ to Pater noster they found the Island give a terrible shrug, which
put them all into a fright, a^ last they discovered their Island to be a gre^^
Whale, or as the most judicious among them thought, the Leviathan; we may well
thin^ they made have with their Mass, and wishe^ themselves well off of this
new Island; upon St. Machutis his prayers Leviathan di^ not sport himself in
the waters but stood still, till the Monks were got clear of him, the^ they
sung jubilate in their Ship, and as that Author says, returned home. But he
wa^ certainly mistaken, for Capgrave says, the^ did at last find the Island of
Paradise and a^^ things answerable to St. Barinthus's description: and staid
there forty days, and then (...) young man bid St. Brendan load his Shi^ with
Jewels and return home; for that Isla^^ was reserved for their successors when
tim^^ of persecution should happen. Now to pro^^ the truth of this story, (for
it seems the^ were some Infidels that presumed to question it,) Colganus
reckons up abundance of the Acts of the Saints wherein it is mentioned, and not
only so but a Book of Litanies, above 800. years old wherein the companions o^
St. Brend^n in seeking the Land of promis^ are solem^ly invocated; and the very
day is se^ down in their ancient Martyrologie: and when St. Brendan was
returned, he gave an account of his voyage to St. Abban, which he did by the
command of an Angel, says the Author of his life; which Colganus calls an
illustrious Colgan. 16. Marti^ vit. St. Abbani n. 43.
testimony of the truth of it. Thus having given an account of this miraculous
voyage, and despairing to meet with any thing like it, I here give over my
enquiry into the Miracles which have been received and believed in the Roman
Church, in the most considerable parts of Europe.

And now, without farther reflections upon them, I leave the Reader to judge,
whether the Testimony on which they have been received, ought to be compared in
point of credibility, with that Testimony on which the Christian Church has
believed the miracles of Christ and his Apostles. Only one thing I desire may
be observed, viz. that I have not raked their Kennels, nor made use of the
Authorities of Jacobus de Voragine, Petrus de Natalibus, Claudius Rota,
Cantiprata^us, and such like; no nor yet of Caesarius ab Heisterbach,
Dauroultius, Marulus, Gononus, or such as have made Collections to my hands,
but have taken their most approved and late writers, and such whose Authorities
themselves make use of in other things. Capgrave, is supposed to have taken
most of his lives out of John of Tinmouths Sanctilogi^^, Pitseus
de-Scr^ptoribus Angliae A. D. 1366.
whom Pits commends for his excellent learning, and that work particularly, for
his diligence, exactness, wit and judgment which he showed in it; that he cut
off many superfluous things with discretion; and if Capgrave took out of him,
we may suppose that aft^^ so many strainings we have only the best left;
considering the Character that is given of Capgrave; an excellent Divine says
Possevin; the chief of his time for piety and learning Possevin in Apparatu v.
Capgrave. Harpsfield. sect. 15. c. 17.

Pits descrip. Ang. A. D. 1484.


says Harpsfield; the most learned man that ever was of his order in England,
say Josephus Pamphilus and others in Pits; a man of such excellent parts and
wit says Pits himself, that he had scarce any equal, none superior in England
in his time: and among other things he commends him for his judgment and
therefore his Authority will not be rejected as mean and contemptible among
themselves. Colganus his first Tome of the Acts of the Saints of Ireland, which
I have only made use of, was published at Lovain A. D. 1645. with great
approbations from the General of his order at Rome, from the Professors of
Lovain, from the Ordinary Censor Librorum, from four Jesuits, and by
commendatory Epistles from Vernulaeus and Erycius Puteanus who highly applauds
him for his industry, piety and faithfulness; therefore my Adversaries cannot
pretend that I have picked up some old worm^aten stories with which to disgrace
their miracles: No, they are such as are thought fit to be published with as
great approbation, as ever any Books come forth among them. And for the Jesuits
Collection at Antwerp, which I have sometimes made use of, begun by Bollandus
and continued by Henschenius and Papebrochius, it was published since A. D.
1642. and with as much ostentation of care and judgment as ever any thing was
set forth in that kind; the last volume I have yet seen, came forth A. D. 1668.
with sufficient approbations. So that whatever judgment be passed upon the
miracles, they cannot deny the Books I have made use of to be of greatest
Authority of any extant in this kind; and yet after all, I am apt to think they
will meet with a great deal of infidelity from all that have not captivated
their understandings to the obedience of the Roman Faith.

. 9. Having thus far showed how much Of the Testimonies of St. Chysost. and St.
August. against the continuance of the power of Miracles.
the miracles boasted of in the Roman Church fall short in point of credibility
of those of Christ and his Apostles, from the different nature of the
testimonies, and of the miracles themselves; I now proceed to the second thing,
viz to show that the credibility of the Wilnesses in the Roman Church is taken
away by the Testimony of persons much more credible than themselves. For if the
most impartial Witnesses utterly deny, that there is any comparison to be made
between the miracles wrought in the Church in latter-ages with those wrought by
Christ and hls Apostles, If persons living in the communion of that Church,
have asserted such things concerning their miracles, as sufficiently discover,
that their Testimony is not to be relied upon; then I appeal to the judgment
of any man whether it be not intolerable impudence in any to parallel the
mlracles of that Church with those of Christ and his Apostles?

1. The most impartial Witnesses have asserted the direct contrary to E. W.
viz. by affirming that no comparison is to be made between the miracles of
after-ages of the Church and those of Christ and his Apostles. The most
impartial Witnesses in this case must be men of approved sanctity on both
sides, persons of great judgment and experience, and that lived at such a time
when no interest could bias them to favor one side more than the other. And
such in all respects were St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine; to them therefore we
appeal in this matter.

St. Chrysostom not once or twice, but several times and upon very different
occasions delivers his opinion upon this subject. In his Commentaries upon the
first Epistle of St. Paul Chrysostom. in 1. Ep. ad Corinth. Hon. 6. Tom. 3. ed
Savil. p 275, etc.
to the Corinthians and the five first verses, puts this Question (...); for
whose sake is the power of miracles now forbidden? which he at large discusses
in that place. The substance of his answer is this; either the persons who put
that Question do believe the miracles wrought by Christ or his Apostles, or
they do not; if not, let them give an account how the Christian Religian which
is so contrary to the present interests of men should prevail so much in the
world as it has done: for if they believed without miracles that would appear
to be a far greater miracle. But, says he, because (...).
no miracles are wrought now, make not that an evidence that none were wrought
then; for then it was useful there should be miracles, and now it is useful
there should not. Can any Testimony be plainer and more express than this? Is
it possible he should believe as great miracles were done in the Church
afterward as by Christ and his Apostles, that not only asserts that there were
none, but says it would not be useful to the Church there should be any?
Because as he adds immediately after, those who preach now do not preachly
Inspiration as the Apostle did, but only that doctrine which they receiv^d from
them: and therefore make use of their miracles to confirm the truth of what
they spoke. But why, says he, were miracles useful then and not now? because
the continual working of miracles would lessen faith, and our Savior says,
Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed. But if thou will not
be convinced without signs, thou may see signs, although not such as Christ
and his Apostles wrought, viz. the accomplishment of prophesies; several of
which he there mentions. Why then, says he, do not all believe now? to which
he gives this answer, that the first Christians did not believe only on the
account of the miracles they saw, but by seeing the holy and exemplary lives of
those who wrought them; It is, says he, therefore the want of the primitive
sanctity rather than miracles which makes men yet continue in their insidelity:
let those that have a mind to be saved search the Scriptures, wherein they will
find both the miracles they wrought and the holy conversations which they led.
But if a man be found that has any footsteps left of the ancient wisdom he
presently leaves the City and conversation, and betakes himself to the
mountains, a fair pretense is made for this to prevent the deadning of
devotion; as though it were not better to be duller and to gain others, than
remaining in a mountain to see round about thee thy Brethren destroyed. As he
excellently speaks, though I doubt with little satisfaction to the Monastic
pretenders to perfection in the Roman Church. Elsewhere complaining of the
degenerate lives of Christians, from whence now, says he, shall Christians
Chrysostom. in 1. ad Tim (...). 1. p. 288.
be persuaded to believe? from miracles? (...) but those are not now wrought.
Who is there now a days says he, in another place to be compared with St.
Paul, who had such a divine power going along with De Sacerdot. l. 4. p. 37.
his preaching; who was terrible to Devils if he only appeared and said
nothing; but if all we were met together with a thousand prayers and tears, we
could not do so much as St. Paul's handkerchief did. And is it possible to
believe that St. Chrysostom ever thought the miracles of after ages could be
compared with those of Christ and his Apostles? No, he utterly blasts the
Testimony of such who afterward have pretended to miracles, unless they can
show a plain reason why miracles should cease in St. Chrysostoms time, and be
so common again afterward. It is evident that the world was not so fully
converted to Christianity then, but there was as great occasion for miracles,
as could be pretended in succeeding Ages; all the difference that I can find
was, that men were honester and wiser then; but as the Christian world
degenerated from the piety and goodness of the primitive times it pretended to
come nearer to the Age of Christ and his Apostles in doing wonders. To the same
purpose with St. Chrysostom speaks the Author of the imperfect work upon St.
Matthew, who has sometimes Auctor. impersect o^. in Matthew. hom. 49.
gone under St. Chrysostom's name: and herein differs not at all from him, for
he says, that formerly true Christians were differenced from the false by the
miracles which they wrought; the false Christians either not being able to work
any, or not such as the true Christians wrought; but empty signs such as caused
admiration, but brought no benefit Nunc aut^m sig^o^^m operatio om nino levata
^st: magis a^^em and apud eos inve^itur, qui sal^^ s^nt Christia^i fi^ri ficta.
with them. But now, says he, this working of miracles is wholly taken away
and only pretended to by false Christians. Let E. W. and such as he, consider
these words, and see who they are that pretend to miracles since the primitive
days, Carolus Seribanus who undertook to write a defense of Lipsius his Virgo
Hallensis, thinks to escape this Testimony by saying, that this Author only
denis Carol. Scribanii Orthodox. Fid^i Cont^o^. l. 4. c. 2.
such kind of miracles to continue still as were in the Apostles times, viz.
the speaking and understanding tongues. But E. W. makes no limitation at all,
nay he not only says the same, but greater miracles have been done in the
Roman Church; and it is apparent that ^hese very miracles have been pretended
to ^n the Roman Church, as not only concerning St. Vincentius Ferrerius but
many others before him. We are told by some that Ephroem David R^^h. ^lucid in
Joc^lin. p. 120.
Syrus understood the Greek tongue by the ^rayers of St. Basil; but Baronius
himself ex^lodes it for a Fable, however it be still be^ieved by others. If
Capgrave and such wri^ers may be credited, St. David, St. Paternus, Baron. A.
D. 370. n. 56.
St. Theliaus all preached at Jerusalem in their own language, and the people
understood them as if they had spoken in theirs. Some Ca^grave vit St. Thel* f
281.
such exposition they had heard of the Apostles speaking in strange tongues on
the day of Pentecost, and because these were at Jerusalem, the same miracle
must be related of Colgan. vit. St. David n. 20.
them. But methinks, they should not have lost the gift they had of speaking in
the languages of the several countries they passed through, which is likewise
attributed to them; for if God gave them such a miraclous gift only for the
convenience of traveling, it seems hard they should want it when they were to
preach at Jerusalem. St. Goodric spoke Capgrave. vit. St. Goodric f. 144.
French to a Monk on the day of Pentecost says Capgrave, although he never
understood that Language before; which is not very probable, in so great a
Traveller as he represents him to be. But the greatest instance of this kind is
E. W's admirable Saint St. Vincent^us Ferrerius, of whom two strange miracles
are related, one that speaking in one Tongue, he was understood by his Auditors
of several countries in their own languages, another Lud, Bail. Bibliothec a
Co^cionatorum p. 3. c. 65.

Raynald. A. D. 1414 n. 20.

Mariana d^ r. bus Hisp. l. 19. c. 12.

Ribadin^ira Flos Sectorum 13.

Junii. Vita St. Anto^ii c. 15. 17. ed. d^ la Hay 1641.

Sc^^id^. 6. at. mundi^t. Seduli. tract. de Sa^ctis Or. Ribaden. 16. Junii. 114.

St. Antonin. Chro^. Ton. 3. tit. 24. S^ct. 2. Spondan. A. D. 1403. n. 7.

Nicol de Clemangis ^p. 113.


that although people were at never so great distance from him (for they say he
had sometimes 80000. Auditors) yet he was easily heard by them all. Had not
this man an admirable voice, or the people admirable ears! Mariana says this
happened to none but him from the Apostles days. And yet Ribadineira relates
the very same thing of St. Anthony of Padua; and that he was heard at two miles
distance: which is likewise affirmed by the Writer of his Life printed before
his Works, and by Hermannus Sch^idel, Sed^lius and others. Nay Ribadineira
tells tha^ St. Ludgard speaking Dutch, was perfectly understood by some French
Women that understood only their own language. It seems then this was not St.
Vincentius his pecu^iar gift, if it were his at all. I find that Raynaldus and
Spondanus appeal to the Testimony of Nicol. de Clemangis concerning this
miraculous gift: who was Secretary to Pope Benedict the thirteenth to whom St.
Vincentius had been Master of the Palace at Avignon. Of him Clemangis says,
that it is not improbably beli^ved that he had the gift of tongues: he dares
not we see absolutely affirm it, al^hough he heard him preach at Genoa. But
that arguments does he produce for it? one ^s, that although he were a
Spaniard, he ^pake Italian so readily and distinctly that even (...) Women
understood him. And is it such ^ miracle for a Spaniard to speak Italian well
that it ought to be compared with the Apo^tles gift of tongues? But the great
wonderment is yet behind, viz. that though he spoke ^talian words yet all
people of other nations ^nderstood him: and for this he only tells us, ^e heard
a German say some such thing, and ^or his own part, although he did searce half
^nderstand Italian, yet he perfectly under^tood what he said. Which is no such
great ^onder considering the matter of his preach^ng chiefly on one subject of
the day of Judge^ent, which requiring the use of such words as are taken from
the Latin, may easily be ^nderstood by a person who thoroughly under^^ands
Latin, though he be not perfect in Italian. The whole credit therefore of this
^iracle depends upon the testimony of this German; and who can tell how much he
understood either of his Sermon or of the Ita^ian Tongue? For he says no more,
than that he understood him as well as if his words had been spoken in his own
tongue: which surely he might do without a miracle, unless it were a miracle
for a German to understan^ Italian. But concerning this, and all the other
supposed miracles of this admirabl^ Saint, we have a remarkable Testimony (...)
one of the ablest men of that Age, (the knew Vincentius, and a letter of his is
exta^^ which he writ to him; wherein he expresse^ no such admiration of him)
and that is the famous Chancellor of Paris, John Gerso^* He wrote a discourse
against the Sect of Whi^pers, (which by the preaching and enco^ragement of
Vincentius was again revived, and 10000. says Rauzanus in his life followed
him up and down, many of which did so Rauzan. vit. St. Vincentii apud Bzov. A.
D. 1419. Sect 20. apud Surirum 5. Aprilis.
soundly lash themselves according to Vincentius his instructions, that he
says some account it a miracle that none fell into any sickness by it). In
which discourse he lays op^^ the folly of this Sect, and says, men mig^^ as
well brand themselves with hot Irons (...) castrate themselves, as hope to
expiate their si^^ by such bloody whippings of their bodies. But besides this,
Vincentius preached of the very ne^^ approach of Antichrist and the day of
Judgment, both which Gerson dislikes in him; b^^ Joh. Gerson c. Sectam se
s^ag^lla^^^^ Tom. 1. p. 641.
says he, if any man offers to bring new miracles to confirm the near approach
of Antichrist let him know that the world is in i^^ dotage and therefore is
easily imposed upon by the apparitions of false miracles. As an old man is
troubled with dreams in his sleep; therefore, says he, miracles are now to be
ve^emently suspected, unless a very diligent ex^mination be first made of them.
See now what judgment this truly great man in that Age, passes upon these
pretended miracles of this admirable Saint! However, it hence appears that in
the Church of Rome they have not pretended to any one sort of miracles alone;
but let them be of what kind soever, some among them (setting only aside their
own resurrection from the dead) have challenged to themselves the glory of
them. But after all, this is a miserable shift to avoid this Testimony; for
this Author makes no other difference of signs; than that the miracles of false
Christians were only in appearance, and brought no advantage to the world;
whereas the miracles of the true Christians were real and beneficial to the
world; but now, says he, this working of miracles is wholly taken away: and
only false Christians pretend to it. Which testimony is so strong that I expect
no other answer to it, than calling the Author of it Heretic and Arrian.

But against St. Chrysostom, he objects more plausibly, viz. from the daily
wonders which he confesses are wrought by the Martyrs: Chrysostom. in Pa^y^.
(...).
and particularly by Babylas when the D^vil told Julian his Mouth was stopped at
the Oracle (...) Daphne, since Babylas his bones were lai^^ there. It is not to
be denied, that St. Chr^sostom did look upon this as a wonderfu^^ thing; and
says afterward that the Devil still expressed such consternation at the
shrin^^ of the Martyrs as might convince the im^^dence of such who disbelieved
the miracles (...) the Apostles. But St. Chrysostom speaking o^ these
extraordinary things which were do^^ by the Martyrs calls them (...) and no^
(...) as he does the other; for he says exprefly, that the (...) were ceased,
i. e. a^^ such miracles as gave any Testimony to the infallible commission
which persons had from God to deliver his doctrine; but yet the^^ were may
(...) still done by the Martyrs, i. e. such extraordinary things which we
cannot suppose God would permit to happen, if these Martyrs had not been highly
in favor with God.; and therefore these were only attestations of their
Sanctity in a time when they were so much despised as they were by J^lian and
his followers, and when Paganism began to recover again; and it was very
agreeable, with the wisdom and methods (...) Divine Providence in an
extraordinary manner to vindicate the innocence of the Martyrs; as he did in
the case of Babylas to J^lian himself, by stopping the Oracle by the nearness
of his Bones to the Temple of Daphne, and when they were removed, by setting
the ^emple on fire in so wonderful a manner as ^ is at large related by St.
Chrysostom and ^e Ecclesiastical Historians of that time.

The same account we are to give of St. Au^stins opinion in this matter. In his
August. de vera Relig. c. 25.
Book (...) True Religion, having showed how neces^ary miracles were to confirm
the Authority ^f those who were sent by God to declare his ^ill, he adds that
by their working mira^les they are become unnecessary to us now: ^or says he,
since the Catholic Church is now ^stablished and diffused through the World,
Miracles are not suffered to continue to our ^imes; that we may not always seek
after vi^^ble things, and left custom should abate the ^steem of them. Much to
the same purpose De ^tilit. cred. c. 15. 16.
^e discourses in his Book of the usefulness of Believing against the
Manichees; where he ^hews the necessity that there was of miracles ^o confirm
the Christian faith at first, and the nature of the miracles wrought by Christ
and his Apostles, and then puts the Question as St. Chrysostom did, Cur,
inquis, ista modo non fiunt? Why are not such miracles w^^^ ght now? to which
he answers, because miracles would not move men if there were not something
wonderful in them; and there would be nothing wonderful if they were common. It
is true that St. Augustine did consider both these places in his Book of
Retractations (not as though he Recanted every thing which he handles there,
for Retractati^^ Retract. l. 1. c. 13.
in St. Augustins sense was no more than to review) for mentioning the former
saying; he adds, that it is true, for, says he, the miraculous gifts of
tongues are not now poured out when hands are laid on the baptized, nor are
sick persons healed at the shadow of the preachers of Christ and many other
such things, which it is certain are now ceased, But he would not have it so
understood as though no miracles at all were then wrough^ in the name of
Christ; for then, he says, he knew that a blind man was healed at the Shrines
of the Martyrs of Milan; and s^ many other such things were done that they
could neither know them all nor enumeralt those he did know. And to the other
place, he says, that he gave that Answer, because Ib. c. 14.
neither so many nor so great miracles a^^ wrought now as were by Christ or his
Apostoles. And can any sayings be more contradictory than this of St. Augustins
and E. W's asserting, that as many and as gre^^ (nay greater) miracles are
wrought sinc^^^^ ever were in their days. It is true that St. Augustine does
there say, that there were so^^ miracles still left in the Church, and he
produces several instances elsewhere; but in the ^^me place he denies the
necessity of these De Civit. D^i l. 22. c. 8.
^iracles since the large propagation of Chri^^ianity in the world, and
accounts him a ^odigie that yet seeks after prodigies to con^^m his faith. Only
he shows Gods extra^^dinary kindness to his Church in that time while there
were so many Pagans yet left among them) that he did not leave them without
some Testimonies of his miraculous Power in the cure of diseases at the
memories of the Mariyrs or upon the prayers of the faithful, of which he there
gives several examples: but elsewhere he shows, that the mi^acles In Psalm. 130.
v 1.
wrought by Christ and his Apostles were ^rought for the benefit and
satisfaction of future Ages as well as their own, that so none might complain
for want of a power of miracles. And when the Donatists aftewards appealed to
the miracles wrought by Donatus De unit. Eccles. c. 10.
and Pontius, and to visions and revelations; St. Augustine very smartly bids
them lay aside those feigned miracles or Diabolical impostures: for either they
were not true, or if they were, we have so much the more reason to beware of
them; because our Savior has foretold that false Prophets should arise
working signs and wonders, that if it were possible they should deceive the
very Elect. But it may be said, that in all this St. Augustine does only upbraid
the Schismatical Donatists wit^ lying miracles and not take away the evidence
of miracles from the true Church; (...) that St. Augustine himself answers, that
the Catholics do not bring the evidence of miracles to prove the true Church
by, nor yet o^ Visions and Revelations; for, says he, (...) such things are to
be approved, because they are done in the Catholic Church; and n^^ that the
Church is proved to be Catholic^ because such things are done in it: and
therefore says, that controversy of the Church must be ended by the
Scriptures. From whence it necessarily follows that St. Augustine could never
think the miracles done in his time, were to be compared with those wrought by
Christ or his Apostles, or could give equal evidence of credibility either
concerning the Doctrine or the Church which delivered it. Never did two men
more plainly contradict each other in this point than St. Augustine and E. W.
who appeals to miracles for proof of the Catholic and infallible Church, and
such as are equal to those of Christ and his Apostles; but whether St. Augustine
or E. W. deserve the greater credit that is another controversy which I am not
now at leisure to engage in. To the same purpose St. Augustine speaks in another
place, viz that miracles are no proof of the true Church; for Tract 14 in Joh,
c. 3.
though Pontius and Do^atus might do wonders and see visions, yet Christ has
now forewarned us, quia and miraculis decipi non debemus, we ought not now to
be deceived by miracles. The force of which argument from our Saviors caution
depends upon this, viz. that the Christian Religion being once established by
plain and evident miracles, there would be no necessity in after ages to have
recourse to miracles again: For if no new Doctrine be delivered, what need can
there be of new miracles? Let no man therefore now complain says the same St.
Augustine, because De verbis Dom. Scrm. 18.
Christ does not work the same miracles now that he did in former times; for he
has said Blessed are they which have not seen and yet have believed; whom does
he mean, says he, but us, and those who are to come after us: But those
miracles were wrought by Christ to draw men to faith; and this faith is now
spread over the world. And now although he does not work the same cures, he
does greater; now the blind eyes do not receive sight by a miracle of Christ,
but the blind hearts do see by the doctrine of Christ; now dead bodies are not
raised, but souls that are dead, in living bodies do rise again. Now deaf ears
are not opened, but deaf minds are by the power of Gods word, so that they
believe and live well, who were unbelievers and wicked and disobedient. Could
any man of common sense have used these expressions; if he had thought there
was either any necessity of miracles being wrought in his time, or that there
were such miracles then wrought which might be compared with those of Christ
and his Apostles? and as he elsewhere fully speaks to this purpose; Sign^ and
Miracles were wrought by the Apostles to Quaest. ex Novo Tes^an. c. 63.
bring men from infidelity to faith; that men seeing those things done which
are impossible with men, may acknowledge that the preaching is from God, by
which power they were to prove that there was reason to believe. Among
believers then signs and miracles are not not necessary; but only a firm hope.

From these Testimonies of St. Augustine thus laid together we observe these
things. 1. That the main intention of miracles was to convince unbelievers. 2.
That the Christian faith being established, there was no longer any necessity
of the power of miracles. 3. That though there were not any such necessity; yet
God out of his abundant kindness, was pleased to do some extraordinary things
among them in their time. 4. That in disputes about the true Church they never
appealed to the Power of miracles; but to the Scriptures whose Doctrine was
already confirmed by Miracles. 5. That those out of the true Church might make
as great a pretense to miracles, visions and revelations as those who were in
it, as appears by the Donatists. 6. That some kind of miracles were wholly
ceased then in the Church, as the gift of tongues and the common miraculous
cures of diseases by those that preached. 7. That those which did then remain,
were not in any respect for number or quality to be compared with those of
Christ and his Apostles; as the cure of one blind man at Mi^^n, or those other
cures of a Cancer, a Fistula, or the two shaking persons in Africa: for when
himself speaks most favorably of the miracles then wrought, he says they were
not so great, nor so many, as those done by Christ or his Apostles.

. 10. But what shall we now say to the succeeding Ages of the Church? For after
Of the Testim^nies of their own Writers against the miracles of the Roman
Church.
the first 600 years were passed, and there were no more St. Chrysostoms, or
St. Augustins, and one of the greatest Prodigies, (as Tully said of old) was a
wise man, the pretense of the common working of miracles was again started, by
those who undertook to give an account of the lives of the Saints; for they
thought they said nothing in effect of them if they did not attribute the power
of miracles upon any occasion to them. Then St. Gregory and Saint Bede showed the
way to the rest, and by their own credulity and want of judgment gave a
pattern and encouragement to all the Monkish Tales and impostures afterward.
But we must acknowledge our obligation to some more ingenuous and judicious men
in the Roman Church, who in several Ages have blasted the credit, and
discovered the Impostures of these Legendary Writers: which is the next thing I
am to prove; viz.

2. That the credibility of their miracles in the Church of Rome, is destroyed
by the Testimony of their own more judicious Writers. Ludovicus Vives, after he
has discoursed of all Lud Vi^es detrad. Discipl l. 5.
other Histories, comes to that of the Church, and particularly the Lives of
the Saints, of which he says, that they are generally corrupted with abundance
of lies, while the Writer indulges his own passion, and sets down not what the
Saints did, but what he would have had him done: so that in their lives we see
the mind of the Writer, and not the truth. For there have been those who
thought it a piec^ of pie^y to tell lies for Religion: which is a very
dangerous thing lest by that means the true be rejected for the sake of the
false. This saying of Vives Melchior Canus, a man highly M^l^^ Ca^. lo. Th ol
l. 11. c. 6.
esteemed in the Church of Rome, recites and approves, with a great deal more
to the same purpose, wherein he says, that the lives of the Philosophers are
more severely written by Laertius than the Lives of the Saints by Christians,
and that Suetonius has with more honesty and integrity delivered the acts of
the Caesar's than the Catholics have done the Acts of Martyrs, Virgins and
Confessors. And afterward he charges them with wilful falsefying either only
to deceive or to gain by it, of which the one is sordid and the other
pernicious: and he produces some instances of such miracles, which he says,
are without number. Neither does he only understand this of such men as the
Author of the Golden Legend, or of the speculum exemplorum; but he plainly
confesses, that their most grave Writers in reporting the miracles of Saints
have followed uncertain reports and conveyed them to Posterity. In which they
either gave great liberty to themselves or yielded too much to the desires of
the People, whom they found not only ready to believe these miracles, but to be
fond and greedy of them. Therefore, says he, they have reported some signs and
miracles; not that they did willingly believe them themselves, but because they
would not be wanting to the pious desire of the people; which was it seems,
that they should tell lies to please them. And if they had not their desires
fully answered in this, they were very insatiable. After this, he particularly
instances in Bid and Gregory, the one of which in his History, the other in
his Dialogues he charges with relating miracles upon common reports, which the
Critics of th^^ Age will judge to be uncertain. And we may be sure Canus, who
tells us, what an excellent Loc. Th^o. log l. 12. p^ooe^.
wit his Master Victoria said he had, was one of them. But is now the
credibility of the miracles in the Roman Church to be compared with that of
Christ and his Apostles? Did they who writ the miracles recorded of them
indulge their own affections, and make Tales to please the people; as we see
Canus says their gravest Writers of Miracles did? Or did they take up things
upon common rumors, and from thence divulge them to posterity? as we see Canus
charges even St. Gregory, and Saint Bede with doing. What would become of our
Christianity, if we had no better grounds to believe the miracles of Christ and
his Apostles? If any should say so of the reporters of their miracles they
would be justly charged with betraying the Doctrine of Christianity, and making
it suspectd to be a fourb, an Imposture a fabulous story, as E. W. speaks in
the case of the miracles related by St. Antonin: And yet M^lchior Canus
expressly says of him, that he did not make it his business to wri^^ what w^^
true and certain, but to let nothing pass that he could meet with: And that he
and Vincentius Belovacensis were so far from weighing what they writ in an
exact balance, that they did not so much as make use of a common judgment.
Whereas our Critical E. W. says. And who dares say that so great Reason and
Religion Disc. 2. c. 8. n. 6.
a Doctor and most modest Prelate as St. Antonin was so frontless as to write
that we read without assurance and certainty? We see Melchior Canus dares say
it; and that not only of St. Antonin whom he looks on as far inferior to the
other, but of his venerable Bede too, whom E. W. calls a great Scholar, and a
man highly esteemed the whole Christian world over; I shall not go about to
diminish his reputation in other things; but he had need of a good easy faith
that can swallow the miracles related by him, whether those of St. Cuthbert,
which E. W. mentions or others. What must we think of the Angels appearing to
S. Cuthbert a horseback when he was a boy, S. Cuthberti vita Auctore Bed^ tom.
3. and ap^^ Colg. 20 Martii. and Bolla^d. 3. tom. Martii. C. 2. C. 4. C. 7. C.
20.
and prescribing him a Poultess to cure his sore knee? and of his seeing the
Gates of Heaven opened and the soul of St. Aidan conveyed through them by a
troop of Angels? Of his receiving three hot loaves from an Angel, that were
whiter than lillies and smelt beyond roses, and tasted sweeter than honey? Of
his frighting the crows from stealing the thatch off from the Covent, and the
penance they submitted to for the injury they had done, and the satisfaction
they made by bringing him a good piece of Lard with which he used afterward to
grease his Boots? Of the virtue of his shoo's in curing a man of a Palsy after
St. Cu^^bert's C. 45.
death, being put on upon his feet? Of these I shall only ask E. W's. Question,
An any such s^en now a days wrought among Protestant Bishops? No, God knows
their faith is a stranger to such kind of miracles.

But what shall we say to Canus who takes away the Authority of St. Gregory too
as well as Bede in this matter of miracles? I know Baronius falls very soul
upon Canus for speaking (...). not. in Martyr. December. 23.
so freely of St. Gregory in this particular, especially because he does not
mention those miracles which he looks on as undeserving credit; but I think he
ought to have thanked him for his modesty and silence herein, in not exposing
Gregory's credulity to contempt by insisting upon them. But in truth St.
Gregory in those Books of Dialogues (for I see no reason to deny them to be his
own) was the Father of Legends, and most of the others afterward were made in
imitation of his; as might be particularly made appear by many Instances. And
Bid followed the Copy which Gregory had set him, and from hence such a swarm
of Legends arose, that in the succeeding Ages it is hard to say whether there
were more Ignorance or Wonders. To give only a taste of some of the miracles
reported by Gregory; the first is of Honoratus the Abbot that stopped a great
stone in the middle of its Greg. Dialog. l. 1. c. 1.
falling from a great mountain by making the sign of the cross toward it, and
there it is seen hanging as it were in the air. But in my opinion St. Dunstan
out-did him, who not only, says Capgrave stopped a piece of Timber so falling,
but with the sign of the cross made it Capgr. f. 92. 1.
return back to the place from whence it sell. This was the greater miracle
although the other had more to show for it; if the stone had hung quite in the
air; which I confess I do a little question. Libertinus raised one from the
dead by Honoratus his shoe being laid upon his breast, says Gregory as St.
Cuthberts shoo's in Bid cured a man of the Palsy. Greg. l. 1. c. 2.
The Gardener of the Monastery being troubled with a Thief that came over the
hedge, and stole his herbs commanded a Serpent to follow C. 3.
him and to lie just cross in the way he was wont to come over; the Serpent
presently obeyed, the Thief was taken and the Serpent released. From hence
afterward, he scarce deserved the name of a Saint of whom they could not tell
some extravagant stories of the power he had over Serpents: of which multitudes
of Instances may be seen in Colganus and Capgrave besides many other more
ancient than they. The story of St. Equitius in Gregory and St. Elias in
Capgrave, as to t^^ C. 4.
way of their being delivered from all lust^^ thoughts by an Angel appearing in
the nig^^ and seeming to castrate them, is the very same by which we see out of
what Magazineth later Legendaries took their materials, whi^^ they altered and
adorned with such varieti^^ of circumstances as would best go down wi^^ the
people. Methinks then Baronius migh^^ have let alone Canus in this matter, and
no^ provoked others to give an account of the soppish miracles contained in
that Primitiv^ Legend, such as, the Devils entering into Ib.
Nun because she eat a Lettice in the gard^^ without crossing it; and when St.
Equiti^ demanded of him what he did there, the D^^ answered, he was sitting
upon the Lettice a^^ she came and eat him up; but it was well f^ her that St.
Equitius sent him going without prescribing her a vomit: as, Nonnosus (...) C.
7.
removing a stone by his prayers, which fif^^ Yoke of Oxen could not stir, and
all this f^ no other end but only to make way for a litt^ Kitchen garden for
the Monks: as, the sa^ Ib.
man's praying the pieces of a glass Lamp wh^^ again, only for fear of the
displeasure of (...) superior: which was a substantial reason for so pretty a
miracle. And his multiplying o^ by a miracle rather than the lazy Monks should
Ib.
(...) out to gather Olives: as, Boniface's re^iving C. 9.
12. Crowns by a miracle, because his ^ephew complained be had opened his Chest
and had taken a way so many from him to give (...) the poor; and his adjuring
all the Erue's (...) his garden in the name of Christ to be gone and ^ot eat up
his herbs, which they imme^iately did, and not one remained: and ^aking the Fox
by his prayers bring back the ^^llet he had stolen, because he complained
(...) God Almighty in the Church, (whither he ^un upon this sad disaster) that
he could eat ^one of his Mothers Poultry: as, Martirius (...) signing the cake
in the embers with the sign C. 11.
^f the cross without touching it; only making (...) toward the fire, at which
it gave a great ^^ack and was perfectly signed with the cross ^hen they took it
out. These may serve only for a ^ast of the kind of these miracles out of his
first Book, that men may judge with what reason Canus made such exceptions to
Gregory's Au^hority in this point of miracles. It would be too ^edious to give
an account of the miracles in his ^hree other Books, but they are so much
alike, that by seeing these we may judge of the rest.

Thus we see the opinion of Vives and Canus about the Testimony on which
miracles are believed in the Roman Church; but we must not think these persons
were singular in this opinion; for in several ages men of any honesty and
judgment have complained of t^ pious frauds which have been used in the
matters: and that some thought them la^^ to be used as long as they were for
the hono^ of the Church or the Saints. So Petrus D^ miani Pet. Damiani vit. St.
Romua^di prolog.
says there were some who thought the honored God by making lies to extol
the ^^tues of his Saints; which words he uses up^ this occasion of miracles;
and goes abo^ seriously to confute them, by telling them the God does not stand
in need of our lies; (...) to the same purpose he speaks in the pres^ to the
lives of St. Maurus and of Domini^ Ferratus written by him. What secu^^ can
there be then, of the miracles repon^ by them who think it lawful to invent
lies (...) the Honor of the Church or of the suppos^ Saints who live and dye
in it? If the Primiti^ Church had made lying for the sake of Ch^^stianity
lawful, it would have been the mo^^ reasonable pretense for infidelity, that
co^^ be supposed. For how can any man thi^ himself obliged to believe another,
that do^^ not think himself obliged to speak truth? (...) the Primitive
Christians had made lying (...) indifferent thing all their sufferings could
have given no security of the truth of their Test^mony, for notwithstanding the
falsehood (...) their Testimony, they might then hope however, to be rewarded in
another world, an^ consequently might suffer any thing here; ^t when they
declared at the same time, that ^ing was utterly unlawful, and yet ventured
suffer the utmost extremity to attest the ^uth of their Testimony; this gives
the high^^ credibility to the things asserted by them. ^t we have no
satisfaction as to either of ^^ese things in the witnesses of the miracles in
^e Roman Church; no man has ever lost much as a finger to give Testimony to
one ^iracle among them, and supposing they should suffer, we have no assurance
but they ^ight think it lawful to lie for their Religion; ^^d therefore all
their sufferings could not love the truth of their Testimony. We have (...)
sentence or declaration of their Church ^^ainst pious frauds; but we have large
con^ssions from their own Writers of the practice them, and the good end they
are designed (...), viz. to keep up the devotion of the people. ^^n Gerson
honestly confesses this to be the ^d of the Legends and miracles of the Saints
Joha Gerson declar. ^
and their visions and revelations so much ^lked of in the Roman Church viz. to
stir up ^piety and good affections of the people: for ^ese things, says he,
are not proposed by (...) Church to be believed as true; but they are ^ther to
consider them as things that might done, than as things that were done. And i^
no matter, says he, if some things that are really false are piously believed;
so that th^^ be not believed as false or known to be false the same time. And I
wish he had added o^ condition more, viz. that the infallibilit^ of the Church
be not to be proved by them for in that case I hope it is of some litt^^
concernment whether they be true or false. B^ are we not like to meet with
credible Test^ moneys in such things where the most hone^ and learned among
them think it is no gre^ matter whether they be true or false? N^ Lyra in c.
14. Dan.
wonder then, that Lyra complains of t^^ frauds used by the Priests in the
Churches (...) make the people believe that miracles wo^ Cajetan. op^^c. trac.
10. de concept. B. V. ad Lcon. 10. c. 5.
wrought; no wonder, that Cajetan so mu^^ slights the argument drawn from
modern miracles and revelations and says it is only (...) for old women; could
any man have do^ this, that had believed them to be any oth^^ than cheats and
impostures? Especially in (...) solemn a matter as the immaculate conceptio^
and in a discourse addressed to Leo 10. an^ prepared for the Lateran Council.
By which we see, that the learned and wise men amon^ themselves when they are
put to declare the^^ minds, speak as freely of these matters, as w^ can do; but
still they think it fit the common people should be cheated and deceived by
them; so a learned and ingenuous writer o^ the French Church and Doctor of the
Sorbo^ tells us, that he was so far from receiving Joh. Launoy de curd E^^l^.
pro. (...). ss. a^t. 30. Co^oll. 1. Po yb. H^stor. l. 16. p. 732. Ed. Casaub.
^anks from many for laying open the fables ^^d impostures of the Monks, that
they re^^rred him to Polybius his judgment about ^^ese matters; who
determines, that allowance ^^ght to be given to those Writers who invent
^iracles and stories to keep up the devotion of ^he People. The occasion of
Polybius delivering ^is judgment of his was this, It seems the ^eathen Priests
made almost as many and as ^oolish stories of miracles about their Images, ^s
they are wont to do in the Church of Rome; among the rest, it was verily
believed among ^he Bargelietae that the Image of Diana being ^xposed to the air
could receive no injury either by snow or rain; and the same was be^ieved of
the Image of Vesta among the Jassi^ns: and these miracles were written by their
Historians. But Polybius declares his great oppo^ition to these follies; such
says he, as the mi^acle Theopompus relates of Jupiter's Temple in Arcadia,
that the bodies of those who are in ^t never cast any shadows. Yet he yields,
that something of this nature must be done to keep up the devotion of the
people; but he would have it within bounds, although, he says, it be very hard
to determine those bounds. Now says Launoy, this saying of Polybius I have
been often told of by all sorts of men who pretended hereby to secure Christian
piety, but I found them worse than Polybius; for he would have bounds set, but
these will allow none. For they judge of all things by the absoluteness of Gods
power; and regard not whether the things were done or no, as long as they might
be done. But as he excellently adds, a false Religion indeed, according to
Polybius, stands in need of such cheats and trick^ to support it; but true
Religion wants no such helps; the more simple, pure and innocent it is, it is
so much the greater and more glorious; it is corrupted when it has any thing
unlike it self mixed with it. They who think otherwise of Christian Religion do
not know it; but design to make a Religion out of truth and falsehood. Thus far
that ingenuous man. By whom we see what the opinion is, which the more
sagacious Persons in the Roman Church have of these Monkish tales and
impstoures; yet they generally are for keeping them up in as much credit with
the people, as they can, and discountenance those who go about to undeceive
them. But is not the Testimony of these things by their own confession very
credible the mean while, and fit to be compared with the Testimony upon which
the miracles of Christ and his Apostles is received in the Christian Church? It
is hard to think that such men do believe Christianity in their hearts that
dare publish such impudent comparisons. When the impostures of this nature in
the Church of Rome, have been, like Astrology in old Rome, always complained
of and always practiced: as will easily appear to any one that will peruse the
Testimonies brought by Launoy in that discourse concerning counterfeit Saints,
Relics and miracles, which I shall not transcribe. The whole Christian World
is obliged to the Ingenuity of such men who have taken pains in the discovery
and confutation of such Impostures; as the Monks have abused the people with.

But we are not only beholding to such learned men who have purposely done
this, but to those who have lately published such writings of the middle Ages
whereby we understand their History far better than we could do before. As for
instance to our present purpose: among other very useful things published by
Lucas D'achrey we have the works of Guibert Abbot of Nogent in France, who
lived in the beginning of the 12. Century Guibert Abbas de Pignoribus
Sanctorum. l. 1. c. 1.
a time brim full of miracles and superstition: in his works we have a
discourse of the Relics of the Saints, which was occasioned by a pretense the
Monks of St. Medard made to a tooth of our Savior, wherein he begins with a
complaint of the dishonor which is put upon the Saints by the false stories
which are made of them, and then proceeds to the false Saints which were
worshipped by them, as Saint Piron, whom upon enquiry he found to have fallen
drunk into a Well and so dyed, yet this man was worshipped, he says, both in
Britain and in France: and after telling some ridiculous miracles which he was
willing however to believe to be true, he falls upon the false and counterfeit
ones; of which, he says, that they who ascribe to God that which he never
thought to do, as much as lies in them make God a Liar: and he produces this
instance of C. 2. s^ct. 5
his own knowledge; a certain boy that belonged to a Soldier happened to dye
upon good Friday; the people were ready to attribute great Sanctity to him for
dying upon that day; and of a sudden great resort was made to his tomb, and
many oblations were made and wax Candles offered, and his tomb compassed about
with great devotion, the people coming out of Britain to it. The Abbot and
Monks seeing the people make such resort thither, were willing to have it
believed that miracles were wrought there. And presently some of the people
feigned themselves deaf, others mad, and others lame to bring greater credit by
their cures to the young Saint; that was but newly set up, and the good Abbot
gave encouragement to them. But Guibert detests his Nebulonity for it, as he
calls it, a word though hardly to be met with elsewhere, yet very fitly
expresses such horrible cheating and deluding the people. Another instance, he
gives immediately after done in his presence, viz. a Preacher in a famous
Church had a mind to draw Sect. 6.
custom to it, and finding it necessary to tell them what excellent Relics
they had, he produces a box and shows it to the people, and tells them they
were to understand that within that box was kept a piece of the bread which
Christ himself did eat; and if you do not believe this, behold a very learned
Person among you, pointing to Guibert, will bear witness, if it were needful,
to the Truth of what I say. Guibert says, he blushed at the man's impudence,
and had a good mind to have contradicted him, but he stood too much in awe of
the Persons about him who were his abettors in so advantageous a lie to them.
But he says, neither Monks, nor Clergy men did abstain from this base way of
bringing gain to their Churches, viz. by abominably cheating and abusing the
People. I hardly think any of the frauds of the Heathen Priests in their
Temples and Oracles at Delphi, Dodona and other places could exceed these.

Afterward, he says, that the Acts of several Cap. 3. Sect. 1.
of their Saints were taken out of old Women's Tales and Songs; and some things
were written of them which were not fit for Plowmen to hear. And when they make
their Saints to be of great Antiquity, yet they desire new Lives to be written
of them. Which he confesses was a request often made to himself; but, says he,
I am apt to be deceived in the things I see, what truth then could I write of
the things which no man ever saw? If I should yield to such a request both I
that write or preach such things, and they who desire them ought to be branded
with public infamy. But supposing the Saints to be true, yet they make lies
about their Relics, so John Baptist 's head is said to be in two several Sect.
2.
places, and what can be more ridiculous than to make the Baptist have two
Heads? one or other must cheat and deceive the people. His own predecessor St.
Godfridus had a mind to make a translation of the body of St. Firmin as the
people were to believe; after all the search they could make, they found not
one syllable of any intimation of such a Body (...) St. Firmins lying there.
But the Bishop of the City caused an inscription to be made upon the leaden
coffin. Firminus Martyr Ambianorum Episcopus. This, he said, he had from the
mouth of the said Bishop and another. Were not these men fit to be made Saints
of, who could so cunningly turn the body of any, though it may be the most
wicked person, into the Relics of a Saint or a Martyr, and so into an object
of sacred veneration among the People? But to make the story of this
Translation yet more pleasant, Guibert tells us, that about the same time the
Monks of St. Denis made a solemn Translation of the same Body of St. Firmin;
and D'achery takes Lucas D'achery not. in Guibert p. 567.
great pains to prove that the Monks had the true Body; and yet the Author of
the Life of St. Godefrid, says, that the people were invited by that Saint to
prepare themselves Nicol. vit. St. Godefridi l. 2. c. 26.
for the translation at Amiens and to bring their gifts, and such a concourse
of People came to it, that one would have thought all Europe had been there.
Then the Bishop with the Priests went to the place where the Sacred Treasure
lay, and exposed the holy Relics with great trembling to the Veneration of the
People. Are not these rare doings for Saints and holy Bishops, thus horribly
against their own Consciences to abuse the people? After these Guibert relates
how Odo Bishop of Bayeux brother to William the first, bought Sect. 3.
the body of a Countryman called Exuperius of a Sexton for 100. pound and made
a solemn Translation of it for St. Exuperius: But, he says, the instances of
this kind are so numerous, that he had neither strength nor time to relate the
things which were done in this manner by those who made gain their godliness.
It was a common thing in those days to steal and sell Relics (of which
Capgrave gives several examples) and to fight for them, as we find in Colganus;
and there was a sort of wandering Monks called Circelliones who made a trade of
this; Greg. Turonensis Hugo Menard not. in Co^c^^d. Regul. c. 3. p. 125.
tells us of one Desiderius in the City of Tours, that pretended to work
strange miracles, and that there were messengers passed between St. Peter and
St. Paul and him; Greg. Turon hist. l. 9. c. 6.
to whom abundance of people flocked, carrying the Blind and Lame to him to be
healed, and that he deceived the people by his art. Another, (who was
afterward found to have been a Bishops servant) went about clothed in white,
carrying a Cross, at which hung two vessels in which he said holy oil was
contained; this man p^etended to have come out of Spain and to have brought
some Relics of Vincentius and Felix; he went to Paris and drew the people
after him; but the Ecclesiastical Officers causing him to be searched, instead
of his Relics found the teeth of Moles, the bones of mice, the claws of bears,
and the roots of herbs, with which they supposed he made enchantments for the
people; and of such persons Gregory says our Saviors words are to be
understood, that many false Prophets shall arise doing signs and wonders. But
of these Impostors more afterward.

Afterward Guibert vehemently disputes against those who pretended to the
Tooth of our Savior and the milk of the Blessed Virgin, Lib 3. c. 1.
and makes them guilty of lying and forgery: C. 3. s. 4.
and derides the miracles that were wrought by the Monks as vain, foolish, and
uncertain, C. 5. s. 1, 3, 4.
and concludes his Discourse with saying, that to make gain with carrying about
or showing Sect. 5.
the pretended Relics of Saints is a profane thing.

Thus we see from the Authentic Testimony of so considerable an Author in his
time how little credit was to be given to the lives of the Saints, or their
pretended Relics and Miracles. Yet still this way of abusing the people has
been upheld and practiced, and their most solemn offices of Religion corrupted
with shameful lies; for the story of the seven sleepers, and the 11000.
Virgins, of St. Christopher and others the most ridiculous Fables, were
preserved in their Breviaries and Lessons of them read upon their days; as may
be yet seen in the Salisbury Breviary, which was most in request in England.
And, which deserves to be taken notice of, while they would by no means suffer
the sacred Bible to be in the hands of the People, they were well enough
contented that senseless Book of the Golden Legend should be published in
English to be devoutly read by them. So much more did they think it their
interest to feed the people with lies and fables, than with the holy word of
God; so much more advantageous was it for them to deceive than to save their
souls. But, it may be, now they will pretend, that things a^^ otherwise with
them, that the Golden Legen^ is out of request, that the Breviaries are
Reformed, the Martyrologies corrected, the A^^^ of the Saints set forth pure
and free from F^bles. This last I have already showed to be very far from being
true, and we need no more to show how little credit they dese^^^ than what the
collections of Surius, Ribadineira, Bollandus, Colganus and such like, will
afford us. Their Breviaries and M^tyrologies I grant are in some things
reformed, but there are many Fables still remaining (...) them, and some of the
late Correctors o^ them instead of amending them have inser^^d Tales that were
never in before: as Lau^^^ has at large proved in several discourses. One
pleasant passage, often mentioned by him, Joh. Launoy d^sq. disquis. de Magdal.
Massil. p. 157.
it may not be amiss here to insert, to she^ the skill of the Roman Correctors.
In the Roman Martyrologie on the twenty fourth of January in the Edition
corrected by Galesinius, and approved by Gregory 13. with his Bu^^ before it;
these words were inserted, Atque A^tiochiae Sanctae Synoridis Martyris: And
B^ronius in his learned Anotations upon this Place, says, that St. Chrysostom
speaks of her Homil. 4. de Lazaro, and St. Hierom of another of that name a
woman famous for Nobility and Piety. How can they ever want Martyrs in the
Roman Church, that can turn Words into Martyrs! For this M^rtyr Synoris in
those Authors is no more than the Greek word (...) which signifies a Pair
joined together, or a Chariot drawn by a Pair; and so St. Chrysostom there uses
it of Juventius and Maximus calling them (...), and St. Hi^rom of Juliana and
Proba calling them Sanctam Christi Synoridem: This was Baronius his Noble
Martyr Synoris; it was ill for her, that she happened to be first known in so
unlucky a time, when some learned men (of France as I take it) sent Baronius
notice of this new Martyr, who being ashamed of her, expunged her out of all
Editions of the Martyrologie since A. D. 1586. notwithstanding the Popes Bull
in approbation of that Edition: But if it had been her good fortune to have
been heard off a little sooner, by this time we might have had an excellent
Legend of her, distributed into several Lessons in the Breviary, and the Office
of a Martyr to be performed for her; we might have heard many pretty stories of
her Childhood, and of her very early devotion to the Blessed Virgin for the
sake of her Sex; how many strange Miracles she had wrought; and without doubt
she had been at least the daughter of a Prince, and it may be the youngest
daughter of King Costus. But so unhappy a thing it is to come into the worl^
out of due time! for she appeared but for ^ little time, and then vanished
quite out of sight. Whereas if she had come abroad some Ages before, who knows
what a world of Good she might have done by this time, being solemnly
invocated, and might have bee^ thought as proper for all that go in Coache^,
especially with two Horses, as St. Antony (...) for stolen Goods, or St.
Apollonia for the Toothache; or St. Viarius for the Loym. This St. Viarius was
another very pretty Saint, solemnly worshipped near Ebora for (...) Bishop and
a Martyr, especially for the Cu^^ of the Loins, when, God knows, it was only
the name of an ancient Roman Curator of the Highways, which they had m^^ with
in some inscription, as Andreas R^sendius Andreas Resend. de Martyr. Eborens.
Ep. ad Barth. Kebed. p. 1007. To. 2. R^rum Hispanic.
tells us. Who having the curiosity to search the Antiquities of the Church
where this Highway Saint was worshipped; a grave Priest told him all the
Legend of his Martyrdom, Resendius desired to see what Monuments of it they
had, he presently produces a Roman Inscription, wherein were these words VIARUM
CURANDARUM. Now said the cunning old Priest VIARUM that is plain his name was
Viarius, and CURANDARUM is as much as if he should have said, Cura curarum, and
that belonging only to a Bishop, it was evident, this Martyr Viarius was a
Bishop. Resendius kept his countenance, and complained he says to the Bishop
of this worshipping the Roman Curator for a Saint; but the people cursed him
sufficiently for it, they having received much help from him. But, methinks
they should have set out his life with all the circumstances of it, as well as
have known for what disease he was proper to be invocated. And Beatus Rhenanus
tells us, how such a thing might have been ingeniously done: for Bea^. Rh^^. r.
r. G^rma^. l. 3. p. 161.
a certain Monk published the life of St. Beatus and called him Suetonius, and
described many passages of his life; and said he had a companion called
Achates. Beatus Rhe^anus being more than ordinarily inquisitive after his
namesake, goes to the man, and asks him whence he had this information,
supposing he had some good Authority for it; but upon enquiry he told him, that
he called him Suetonius, because he heard he came out of Sweden, and he called
his companion Achates, because that was the name of Aeneas his Fellow
Traveller: and yet this admirable story Rhenanus says, was not only printed,
but painted in Churches too. And which adds something more of Grace to it,
Dempster in Dempster Eccles. Hist. l 2. n. 159.
his Ecclesiastical History derives the ancient and Noble Family of the Setons
in Scotland from this St. Suetonius.

But what if after all these pretenses to Miracles in the Roman Church, some of
their own members that must know them, and were no way inconsiderable either
for Authority, judgment or learning, should declare that they believe no such
thing as the continuance of the Power of Miracles in the Church? Can any thing
more invalidate the Testimony of those who assert these Miracles than this?
There was hardly a greater man for learning and judgment in his time than
Tostatus Bishop of Avila in Spain, and he purposely discusses this Question
about the continuance of the Power of Miracles in several places. In his
Commentaries upon Tostatus in Levit. c. 9. q. 14.
Leviticus, he shows that God made use of the Power of Miracles in the
beginning of an Institution, as of the Aaronical Priesthood by fire coming from
Heaven to consume the Sacrifices; but when the Priesthood was already
confirmed, there was no need of any more Miracles in the consecration of the
following Priests: So, says he, was it in the New Law, for in the beginning of
it many Miracles were wrought, by and upon the New Converts: but now there are
no such things ^^n. The reason whereof, is, because at first be faith of the
Gospel was not confirmed in be minds of believers as it is now: and few
^elieved in Christ; therefore to bring men to ^^ith, this power of Miracles was
necessary, be matters of faith being incapable of de^onstration; but now the
Christian faith is ^fficiently confirmed, there is no need at all (...)
Miracles. The same he asserts more large^y in his Commentaries on St. Matthew,
and Com^^ent. in Matthew. c. 3. q 12, in Matthew. 10. q. 21.
^one place puts this Question, Why the Bi^^ops and Preachers of the Church who
suc^eed the Apostles do not work Miracles, as ^e Apostles did, since Miracles
are for the ^onfirmation of the Christian faith? To which he answers, That
Christ does not be^ow the gift of Miracles, but when it is ne^^ssary, or at
least very useful; but now the ^ift of Miracles in these persons is neither
^rofitable nor useful; because we have argu^ents enough to persuade us to
believe without that; and therefore he determines that Miracles now would not
be for the profit of ^e Church, but only for curiosity; and says ^at it is not
meet that God should give this ^ower of Miracles, nor does he. Nay, he ^^ls the
case of Heathens to be converted to ^^e faith; and to that he answers, That it
^ight ^e either through their demerits, or of those who go to them, that God
d^nies thi^ power of Miracles to convert them: b^^ withal, says that the
conversion of Infidels (...) not so necessary now as in the Apostles times and
therefore God does not in this ordinarily bestow this gift on men, although he
m^^ do it in some extraordinary cases. Wh^^ shall we say now to the Testimony
of thi^ learned Bishop? had he never heard (...) St. James of Compostella and
the Miracl^^ pretended to be wrought there? and could (...) believe them, and
write these things? Ha^ he never heard of St. Vincentius Ferreri^^ who lived in
some part of the same time wit^ him, and if he had believed the Miracles
reported of him, he would neither have p^^ the Question, nor answered it so as
he di^ After him I shall produce the Testimony (...) Fisher Bishop of Rochester
in his Answer t^ Luther, who to prove the necessity of interpreting Ros^^^^s.
c. Luth^r de ca^ivit. Babyl^. 10. Sect. 4.
Scripture by the continued sense (...) the Church, and not by the bare Letter,
offe^ to produce such words of Christ in which besides the matter of fact and
the comman^ there is a promise annexed; and yet, says he, in our days no
effect of this promise i^ seen: and then brings the words of Scriptu^^ wherein
it is said, that Christ cured t^^ blind and the lame, and cast out Devils and
he commanded his Disciples to do (...) same, and makes a promise to them that
should believe in Christ. Mark 16. that many ^^gns should follow them: and yet
this promise, says he, has no effect now; for no man ^ow casts out Devils,
nor heals diseases, and yet no one questions but there are many that believe.
But what then, was the promise of Christ of no effect? no, says he, Christ
intended it only for the first Ages of the Church; but when the Christian faith
was dispersed over the world, there was no longer need of miracles. Can any
Testimony be more plain or weighty in our case than this, it being from one who
undoubtedly knew all the pretenses to miracles that were then made? Erasmus
expressly says, that the gift of miracles Erasm. in 1. Ep. ad Cor^^th. 13. 13.
(which was necessary to the first Ages of the Church for the conversion of
Infidels, as speaking with strange Tongues, miraculous Cures, Prophesying, and
such like miracles) is is now ceased. Stella, not only says, that Stella in
Luc. 11. 29.
the power of miracles is ceased; but he says that the receiving it would do
more hurt than good; for men would say, that the Christian faith was not
sufficiently confirmed before. Of all cases we might most reasonably suppose
that God should, if ever, renew this gift in the conversion of Infidels; and
yet Franciscus a Victoria says, that he heard of no Victoria Relect. 5. p. 200.
miracles or signs that were wrought for the conversion of the Indians.
Josephus Acost^ Acosta de procurand^ Indorum Salute l. 2. c. 9, 10.
at large debates this case, why God does n^^ now give the power of miracles
among those who preach to Infidels as he did of old? an^ he offers at several
reasons for it, of which this is the chief, That miracles were necessary in the
beginning of Christian Religion, but not now. And if the Church be defective in
the power of miracles where it is the most necessary, what reasonable ground
can there be to think that God should employ his power not for the satisfaction
of Infidels, but of the credulous and superstitious? As God never works
miracles to convince obstinate Atheists, so neither does he to gratify the
curiosity of old Women and Pilgrims; but if ever he do^^ it, it is to lay a
sufficient foundation for those to believe, who are otherwise destitute of the
means of faith. But if such persons who are employed upon the work of
converting Infidels do want the Testimony of miracles, I know no reason to
believe that he imploy^^ it for other ends. And if these persons had believed
that the power of miracles had been any where else in the Church, they would
have made that considerable objection to themselves, why God should give it
where there was less need, and deny it where there was greatest?

But what then shall we say to the miracles pretended to be wrought by Xaverius
and others in the East Indies? I say, that if they were sufficiently attested,
we might be much more inclined to believe the Truth of those miracles, than of
the Lady of Loretto or St. James of Compostella, or any of the rest which E. W.
refers us to. For if it were at any time reasonable to expect a power of
miracles, it would be for the conversion of Infidels, and Xaverius and his
companions, going upon so generous a design, might be favored in it by some
extraordinary effects of Divine Power. But then in all reason the miracles
would be such as were most accommodated to that design, as the speaking with
the Tongues in which they were to preach the Christian Religion: but by the
letters of Xaverius himself we find, that he was extremely put to it for want
of this gift of Tongues, both on the Coast of Commorin and especially in Japan:
for in one of his Letters he laments his condition very much, because Epistol.
Japan. 3. p. 30.
the people being willing to learn, and he as willing to instruct them, for
want of the language they conversed with each other like Statues; and when they
asked him questions he could give them no answer; but by degrees he said, he
learnt to prattle like a Child among them. Can any one now imagine that God had
bestowed the gift of miracles upon Xaverius for propagating Christianity, and
yet should deny him that, without which all other miracles would be to no
purpose, if he could not deliver the doctrine those miracles were to confirm,
so as to be understood by the people? But in truth, I do not find that Xaverius
himself in any of his Epistles, did make any pretense to the power of miracles;
after his death indeed, the Jesuits in those parts to increase the glory of
their Society, and their Brethren in these parts as readily concurring to such
a design, published some miracles, which they said were wrought by him. So
Melchior Nunezius in his Epistle to Ignatius Loyola, where he gives an account
of E^ist. Japan. 8. p. 91.
the death of Francis Xaverius, says, that many things were discovered since
his death, that were not known while he was alive: and is not this a very
probable circumstance that he had a power of miracles? Would the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles have converted Infidels if they had not been known
while they were living? And yet these miracles he reports are very few, and
delivered on the single testimonies of no very considerable men: the rest, he
faith, for brevity's sake he omits; which is not very probable, considering how
long he insists upon the story of the miraculous incorruption of his Body after
his decease. Which Bellarmin likewise magnifies, viz. That his Body being
Bellarm. de not is Eccl. l. 4. c. 14.
cast into Lime was preserved fifteen months entire and free from corruption.
What will not these men make miracles of, when they have a mind to it? When
Maffeius says, Maffei Hist. Indic. l. 8.
that the Relics of St. Thomas at Meliapor, were mixed with Lime and Sand,
which no doubt were designed to preserve them from corruption. And Paulus
Zacchias a learned Pa^l. Zacchiae Quaest. Medico. l^gales l. 4. tit. 1. q. 10.
n. 24.
Roman Physician has declared, that the incorruption of bodies by Salt, Nitre,
or Lime, is so far from being a miracle, that it has nothing of wonder in it.
And yet this must be cried up as a strange miracle in Xaverius Kirchman. de
funeribus Romans l. 1. c. 8.
his Body, which would have passed for a common accident in any one else, it
being so well known to be an ordinary effect of nature; to preserve bodies a
long time from corruption by the use of things which are of Korman. de mira
ulis Mort^orum p. 3. c. 6.
so drying a nature as those are. But as to all these miracles, whose relation
we have from the Jesuits in the East Indies, we are to consider what credit
their testimony deserves with us; for if they are men who think it lawful to
lie for a good cause (as no doubt the honor of their Society is such with
them) how can we with any tolerable discretion rely upon their words? And what
will those men stick at, who have had the impudence to insert fabulous miracles
and stories into the very history of the Gospel? For which we are to understand
that Acabar Emperor of the Mogols, having given liberty to the Jesuits to live
in the City of Agra, desired of Hierome Xavier the chief of them, (a kinsman of
the former Francis Xavier, and a man of such an Apostolical Spirit, faith
Alegambe) an account of the life and Al^gambe Biblioth. So^iet. J^s^ p 188.
miracles of Christ. The subtle Jesuit very well understanding their own
doctrine about the obscurity and insufficiency of Scripture, durst not put into
his hands the four Evangelists, but framed an excellent Gospel of his own A. D.
1602. which he declares at the H^storia Christi Persic. a Xaverio, ^^atine
Edita a Lud. de Di^u p. 536
end of it, to have taken out of the Holy Gospel, and the Books of the
Prophets: and we may judge of his sincerity by these passages. In the beginning
of it, he relates the story of the Virgin Mary, not as it is in the
Evangelists, but as he had taken it out of a a silly Book de Nativitate S.
Mariae attributed to St. Hierom, but rejected not only by Erasm. Schol. in ^p.
Hi^r. Baron. Apparat. n. 39, 44.

Cani Loc. Th olog. l. 11. c. 6.

Sixtus Senenj. B^blioth. l. 2. in Matthew.


Erasmus, but by Baronius, Canus, Sixtus Senensis, and others; and the true
Author is supposed by some to be Seleucus the Manichee; whether it were he or
no, Baronius says, he was so ignorant as not to avoid manifest lies: however
this new Evangelist thought him a fit Author for him to make a new Gospe^ out
of, the better to please the Great Mogol. He tells him out of that Book that
Joachim and Anna the Parents of the Blessed Virgin, being very Rich and
Childless ^ad made a vow to God, if they had a Son to devote him to his
service; one time Joachim went up to the Temple to offer up his Sacrifice
there, and Issachar the High Priest rejected him (a notorious lie, says
Baronius, for no Historia Christi p. 17
such man as Issachar could be High Priest then) upon which he and his Wife
went ^way discontented; at last God sent an Angel to comfort Joachim, and told
him he should have a daughter, and should call her name Mary, who should be
filled with the Holy Ghost from her conception; and charged them to perform
their vow about her education in the Temple; he is so punctual as to set down
the very day of her conception and birth, and relates the occasion of keeping
the Feast of her Nativity among Christians, viz. a revelation made to an
Eremite that she was born the eighth of September, when the Eremite heard
strange Melody in the Heavens upon that day; upon which Innocent the fourth
appointed the Feast to be kept. What Gospel and Prophets had this Jesuit met
with to take these excellent stories from? But it must be from one of the
Prophets indeed, since Innocent the fourth lived 1250. years since the birth of
Christ. The Blessed Virgin, as Xavier's Gospel goes on, at three years old,
upon Friday the twenty first of November was carried Xaver. p. 22
up to the Temple, and there shut up in a Holy place to be educated (most of
the mode^^ Commentators on this new Gospel, tell us it was the Holy of Holies,
which it seems was then turned into a Nunnery, and for elev^^ Rayeaud. Diptych.
Maria^, n. 10.
years together, they say, she never went o^^ of that place; if any one should
boldly ask what conveniences she could have there? they readily answer, that
she needed non^, being fed by Angels all that time with spiritual food. So
Canisius, Poza, and others in Theophilus Raynaudus; and Benedictus Gon^nus
Bened. Gonon Chronicon. D^i^. p. 6.
adds, that Zachary Father to St. John Baptist saw the Angel that carried her
meat to her; for which he quotes Pantaleon in Metaphrastes; (no doubt an
excellent Author) but Xavier says, that for the most part she had her food
from Heaven. I omit her vow of Xaver. p 25 p. 26, etc.
Virginity, the manner of her Espousals with Joseph, and the reason of them,
viz. to chea^ the Devil; the blossoming of Joseph's Rod; p. 30.
the particular description of the Virgin Mary's countenance with great bluish
eyes, and golden locks, etc. all which he sets off with as many circumstances,
as if they had made a considerable part in our Gospels: but one of the greatest
miracles of her beauty was, that a wicked man by looking upon her was ibid.
converted. It was great pity then she went no oftener abroad, that she might
have reformed the world by her Countenance. Afterward he describes the manner
of the Angels Salutation of the Blessed Virgin so exactly, p. 34.
that it plainly appears, he despised the rudeness of the Evangelists in their
manner of expressing it. The Blessed Virgin, says he, was then sitting in her
Parlour musing upon that saying of Esaias, A Virgin shall conceive, etc. and
she mightily desired to see that Virgin, and wished she might be her handmaid,
while she was in these thoughts, an Angel comes in like a beautiful young man
with great splendor, and falls upon his knees and fixed his eyes on the
ground, and with great devotion said Ave Maria, etc. She was not surprised,
says he, at the sight of the Angel, for she had often conversed with Angels
before, but at his humble posture, and the honor he gave to her. Who can now
doubt the lawfulness of praying to the Blessed Virgin, when the Angel Gabriel
said the Ave Maria upon his bended knees to her? After the Angel had delivered
his message, ^he made him wait, says Xavier, till Midnight, before she gave
any answer; then, says he, in the very point of Midnight, she fell upon her
knees, and with her head downward, p. 37.
and eyes full of tears, and her arms a cross, she said, Ecce ancilla Domini,
etc. p. 41.
Much in the same way he describes the manner of her delivery, only that her
eyes were then lifted up toward Heaven. I pass b^ p. 62.
the fabulous miracles he relates concerning the birth of our Savior, of which
there i^ p. 74.
not one word in Scripture, or any good Historian: The story of the wise men
with their names Melchior, Caspar and Balthazar, of the^^ p. 89.
Kingdoms, and how their Bodies came to be carried to Cologn, which was much
for the Great Mogols edification to know; the m^racle of the letter Vau blotted
out by old Simeon; which he found in the word afterward; the check the Angel
gave him, and p. 94.
how thereby he came to own the Messiah, the care Anna had over the young
Virgins in the Temple, and the manner of observing her Feast with Wax Candles;
the miracles p. 98.
wrought in Egypt at Christ's being there; the miracle of the Pool of Bethesda
being caused p. 101.
by the wood of the Cross, being hid there by King Solomon, which floated in
our Saviou^^ p. 198.
time, and when they took it out for the crucifying Christ, then the Pool lost
its virtue: and abundance of other interpolations and corruptions of the story
of the Gospel; but by these few, we may guess what sincerity we are to expect
from such men in the relating the miracles of their own order, who cannot keep
their hands off from forgery and imposture, in relating the story of the
Gospel. And after the same manner Xavier has published the History of St.
Peter. But lest any should imagine that these Books were framed and set forth
by some enemies to the Jesuits, to the disgrace of their Order, Alegambe
confesses they were both written in the Persian Language by Hierome Xavier, and
faithfully translated into Latin by Lud. de Dieu; some very few faults he takes
notice of, but they are so slight, that they confirm his Authority in all the
rest: Let now any impattial man judge whether such Persons deserve any faith in
relating other miracles, that dare so horribly to adulterate and corrupt the
very story of the Bible? but they little thought these abominable frauds, would
ever have come to light in these parts, to make us truly understand what kind
of Gospel it is which they propagated in the Indies; and how unlikely it is
that God should give the attestation of miracles to such lewd forgeries. And
thus much may suffice for comparing the credibility of the Testimony on which
miracles are received in the Roman Church, with that upon which we believe the
miracles of Christ and his Apostles. Enough one would think, not only to stop
the mouth of E. W. for the future, but even of Impudence it self.

. 11. 3. I now come to show the notorious Of the Impostures and Forgeries of
Miracles in the Roman Church.
frauds and impostures which have bee^ discovered in the Roman Church in this
point of miracles. It was an easy matter in an Age o^ Credulity and Ignorance
to set up for a power of miracles; for few men were inquisitive into the nature
and circumstances of things, and those who understood, generally the best i^
those times, were either Contrivers or Friends* yet it so fell out, that some
notorious impostures have been discovered, which have differed in nothing from
those which have passed for true miracles among them, but only in the fortune
of being discovered. Glab^^ Rodulphus in his History, tells a story of his
Gla^^^ ^od^lpi Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
own knowledge of a certain Person that went up and down pretending to do great
wonders; after the great feats he had done in France, he goes into the Alps;
and there pretends to have found the Relics of St. Justus the Martyr, the
Country people flocked in to him, and they who came whole and sound were sorry
they had no Disease or Lameness to be cured. But certain it is, says the
Historian, strange Cures were wrought there; the Bishops in whose Diocesses
these things were done, instead of making strict enquiries, demanded money to
give license to deceive the People. At last, one Ma^sred a Great man in those
parts caused the Body which wrought these miracles to be taken away and placed
in a Monastery of his own erecting, and this Relick-Finder grew into great
request with him, promising to discover more precious Relics than these, and
he told him the names of the Martyrs, and manners of suffering very exactly.
Some persons, among whom the Historian himself was one, asked him how he knew
these things; he told them, that an Angel appeared to him in the night, and
told him all the things he desired to know; and lifted him out of his bed, and
after many discourses, they parted very lovingly. Although some of them
suspected the imposture, yet the Bishops who consecrated the Church with great
Pomp, and applause of the People, who were innumerable, solemnised the
translation of these Relics. And although afterward the wiser sort found out
the cheat, and that the Body was taken at a venture in the night out of a
Grave, yet the work of miracles went on as well as if the Martyr had been
there, and the People still continued in the belief of it. This the Historian
says, he purposely inserted to discover the imposture of those pretended
miracles. Gulielmus Neubrigens^s gives an account of a seditious person in
London Guil. Neubrigens. de r^bus A^glicis l. 5. o. 20, 21.
in the time of Richard the first called William Longbeard, who styled himself
the Savior of the Poor, and had gotten so great an interest among the People,
that he had two and fifty thousand men at his command, at last he was seized on
and executed; b^^ after his death the people cried him up for ^ Martyr, and a
Priest got one of his Chains, and gave out that he cured one sick of ^ Fever by
it; the people being encourage^ by this, took away the very Gallows where he
hung in the night, and all the earth about it where any of his blood was
supposed to be spilt, and they dug so far as to make ^ Pit with carrying
away the earth for the Cure of Diseases. By these instances we see what a
disposition the people were in, to be deluded under a pretense of Relics and
Miracles.

But it may be said, that such impostors may be in any Religion, and this
reflects no mo^^ dishonor on the Roman Church, than Simon Magus did upon the
Apostles: I proceed therefore to show, that Persons who have been countenanced
and encouraged in that Church have been found guilty of imposture. At the
latter end of the twelfth Century appeared one Fulco, a man very famous for the
great miracles wrought by him, and his extraordinary way of preaching. He was,
says Jacob. de Vitriaco Histor. Occidental. c. ^.
Jacobus de Vitriaco, a plain Country Priest, very simple and illiterate, who
had been a ^oose and dissolute man, but being now re^ormed, to the University
of Paris he goes ^o get some Authorities and Moral Docu^ents in his Note-books,
which says he, he ^^^nished himself with, as so many smooth ^^ones to destroy
Goliath. Being thus far armed ^e pretends a Commission from Heaven to go ^broad
to preach in all places, and gave out that the Blessed Virgin appeared to him,
and ^ad fitted him for that work, and bad him go ^^each repentance in all
places, and that she ^ad bestowed the Gift of Healing upon him, ^s Otto de
Sancto Blasio tells us. Upon this, Otto de Sancto ^lasio a^pend. ad Otton.
Frising. c. 47. Ja^. de Vitr. c. 8.
^e preaches at Paris to the great admiration ^f his hearers, who looked on him
as a person inspired, says Jacob. de Vitriaco, and as another St. Paul; which
preaching was so ^^fectual with many of the people, as to make them take off
their Garments and Shoo's, and ^arrying Whips in their hands, to cast
themselves at his feet to receive penance. After this way he went over all
France, and a great ^art of the Empire, and came over into Eng^^nd, Matthew.
W^stmonast. A. D. 1197. Knighton l. 2. p 2412. apud 10. Scriptores. Hoveden.
Annal. p. post. p. 448.
as our Historians tell us, and preached before Richard the first, by the same
token he ^alled him Hypocrite, to the great regret of some of our Historians;
but it seems he staid ^ot long here, but away he went for France ^gain^ Hoveden
tells us that the Clergy of Lisieux in Normandy cast him into Prison but he
made a shift to get from thence quickly, and went to Caen where he was again
imprisoned by the Governor of the Castle; an^ escaping thence, he cast off the
the dust o^ his feet against them: But although the Kin^ of England had so mean
an opinion of him the people in France thought they could no^ sufficiently
adore him. For Jac. de Vitria^^ Jac. de Vitriaco c. 8.
says, that they thought themselves happ^ who could get any piece of his
Garments, (...) so much that he was fain almost every day t^ put on a new
habit: which one day the people tore so unreasonably, that he desired the^ that
they would not tear his Garments which were not blessed, but he would bless the
h^bit of one that stood by him, which he (...) no sooner done, but the people
did tear it i^ a thousand pieces, and preserved them f^ Relics: They pressed
so much upon hi^ says the same Grave Author, that he w^ forced to beat them
off with a Staff in h^ hand; and although he wounded some wi^^ his blows, yet
they were so far from bei^^ displeased at it, that they kissed the bloo^ which
came from them, as being sanctifi^^ by his strokes: (for his Hair Shirt and P^
nance made him very Choleric). Never an^ man had greater reputation for
miracles tha^ this; for where ever he came, it was give out that he cured all
Diseases; as all the Hi^orians that mention him agree; but Otto ^ives the most
particular account of them, which he said he had from one Bertoldus de
^sinberc, who saw him; when any dumb ^ere brought unto him he opened their
^ouths, and breathed into them, and com^anded them to speak; which if they did
not presently, he gave them a good blow on ^he cheeks, and then they spoke. He
made a very infirm Boy leap off his Horse and run before him with holding up
his Staff, as one ready to strike him. But never was poor man so served as the
rich Usurer was by him, (for we must know his great zeal was against Usury) he
seeing in the Spirit, says Bertoldus, that this man was praedestinated to
life, took an occasion to dine with him; and as soon as he was gone into his
house, he asked what he had to Dinner; the man told him he need not trouble
himself about that, he would provide as well for him as the City would afford;
he was not satisfied with this, but would needs go into the Kitchen and have
all set before him, which was no sooner done, but he (very spightfully, so near
Dinner time) turns all into Frogs and Serpents; upon which the poor Usurer fell
upon his knees and begged pardon for all his faults. But Fulco told him, both
he and all his provisions were unclean; and there was no way for him to escape,
but to give away all that he had; which the Usurer in a little time after told
him he had done; but it seems he had forgotten a quantity of Wheat which was
yet left. Fulco hearing of it, takes the Usurer with him, and goes to the place
where it lay, and found it full of Toads and Serpents; then he tells him, if he
would be perfect, and certain of Gods mercy, he should go naked into that
Granary, then he promised him eternal life; which command he presently obeyed,
and then Fulco shut up and sealed down the cover of it, and commanded all not
to come near it till next morning; then great multitudes flocked to see what
was become of the man, and they found nothing but a man's bones whiter than
Snow; which he took out, and declared them to be holy Relics, and caused them
to be laid up accordingly. By this one miracle attested by one, who says, he
saw his miracles, we may judge of the man and his miracles. However, this man
was thought a fit instrument to be employed by the Pope to preach up a Croisado
(for their Holinesses have thought fit to make use of such false pretenders to
Inspiration and Miracles, as the fittest men to manage their designs, as Peter
the Eremit by Urban the second, and this man by Innocent the third) For Otto
says expressly that he preached by the Popes Authority: and the Chronicon
Andrense lately published by D'achery, affirms the same: Raynaldus mentions
D'a^herii Spicil^g. Tom. 9. p. 520.

Raynald. ad A D 1198. ^. 38.


the Letters which were sent him from Innocent the third; and Jacobus de
Vitriaco says, that at last, he carried the Cross upon his shoulders, and
persuaded Princes and others to an Expedition to the Holy Land; and by this
means he heaped up abundance of wealth togeth^; and from that time, says the
same Author, his Authority and Reputation began to decline, and not long after
he dyed of a Fever at Neulli in his own Parish Church, where he began his work.
Otto has no mind at all to speak of his end, but only says, that men cannot
tell what became of him, after the stories of his miracles, nor what end he
made; at which, he says, the wiser men were exceedingly scandalized; but he
thinks he might be honestly defended. But Rigordus who lived in the Rigord. de
G^s^ is Philippi A D. 1198.
same time with him, intimates his mind sufficiently about him, when after
mentioning his miracles and preaching, he says, but if a man desires to know
with what intention a man preaches, he must look to his end, because the end
does most clearly discover the intention of the heart. By which it is easy to
understand what kind of person he thought this Fulco to be. One of the greatest
companions of this Fulco, was one Petrus de Rusciaco or de Rusciaco, who had
likewise gained a great reputation for preaching poverty till he made himself
excessively rich, and by that means, says Jacobus de Vitriaco, he not only
Jac. de Vitriaco. c. 8. Hist. Occid.
made his own doctrine contemptible, but brought a great scandal upon all the
Disciples of Fulco. And Robertus Antissiodorensis an Rob. A^tissiod. Chron. ad
A. D. 1198.
Author of that time, acknowledges that the devotion of the people occasioned
by these Preachers speedily declined, and many that seemed to be reformed of
their vices, returned to the practice of them. But Jacobus de Vitriaco adds
afterward, that many false Jac. de Vltriaco ^. 10.
Prophets and deceivers went abroad under the same pretense of extraordinary
preaching; and which is more, that they were sent by the Bishops of several
Churches to get money from the people for the repair of their Churches; and
Antissiodorensis expressly says, that Fulco went abroad to preach in his
itinerant manner by the Inspiration of God, and the License of his Bishop.

Within less than forty years after this Fulco, appeared another famous
Imposter pretending to work great miracles called Johannes d^ Vincentia, or
Vicen^a in Italy, of the Dominican Order, say the most Historians, although
Vignier makes him a Cordelier. This man was employed by Pope Gregory the 9th in
the time of his Troubles with Frederick the second to the City of Bononia, and
prevailed Si^on. de Regno I^ali^ l. 17.
so much upon them, says Sigonius, by the reputation of his Learning and
Sanctity, that in a little time he had gotten the whole power of the City in
his hands. But that which chiefly gained him so great authority, was the
opinion of his great miracles; for Guido Bonatus, who lived in that time, and
says Fulgos. l. 1. ti^. de Relig. cul^^ C. 1.
he saw him, affirms that he had made the People believe he had Revelations
from God, and that by his command the dead were raised: Spondanus out of Thomas
Cantipratensis Spondan. Annal. Eccl. A. D. 1233. n. 10.

Vi^nie^ Histor. de l'Eg^^se A. D. 1264.


mentions seven, Vignier eighteen that had been raised by him from the dead,
and adds, that his companions gave out, that he cured all Diseases, cast out
Devils, and did many other miracles: but after a while, he says, his imposture
was discovered, but not before he had gotten twenty thousand Marks of Silver to
his Convent: and Guido Bonatus says of himself, that he was thought an
Heretic for suspecting his imposture from the beginning. Matthew Paris says
of him, that he lost all his esteem through his pride and bad company.
Spondanus knows not what to say to this judgment of Matthew Paris, finding him
on one side so highly commended Mat. Paris in Hen. 3. A. D. 1238.
by Pope Gregory the ninth in his Letters to him, and on the other such evident
Testimonies, that in a little time he lost all the Authority he had in Bononia.
But it is plain by the Letters of Pope Gregory extant in Raynaldus, Odoric.
Raynald. A. D. 1233. n. 35; 37, 38.
that he looked on him as one inspired, and that had a gift of miracles; for he
solemnly gives thanks to Jesus Christ for the great miracles wrought by him,
which he parallels with those wrought by Moses in the presence of Pharaoh for
the redemption of the People of Israel; and it is as evident, that some of the
learned men in the Roman Church look on him as a mere impostor. For the
famous Jesuit who writ the Diatribae against the Dominicans under the name of
Petrus de Valle clausa, reckons up this man Pelri de Valle-clausa diatrib.
advers. Cyriacos Sect. 11.

Joh. Casalas Candor Lilii Vindicatus p. 431.


among the notorious cheats of that Order: and he who writ in vindication of
the Order has very little to say for him, but only that the Pope had a better
opinion of him: which it seems the Jesuit who knew the Popes correspondence
with him well enough, did not think sufficient to excuse him from imposture.
And yet after all this, Bzovius for the honor of his Order, attributes to him
wonderful Bzov. Annals A. D. 1232. n. 2.
sanctity and miracles; and makes him to have cured abundance of Diseases with
the sign of the Cross, to have raised up ten men from the dead: adding, that
once when he was praying, there appeared a Cross in his forehead, another time
over his head; and that a bright Star was seen over him, and an Angel
whispering in his ear. Judge now Reader, what credit these Reporters of
miracles in the Roman Church do deserve from ^s: when such Persons who are by
their own order cried up for the workers of miracles, are by others of their
own Church condemned for mere impostors.

But one of the most notorious impostures which ever came to light, was that of
the Dominicans at Bern; the substance of which, I shall give from the
Authentic relation it self as it was published A. D. 1509. very soon De 4.
Haeresiarchis Ordinis Praedicatorum, etc. apud Suitc^ses in Civitate Berne^si
combustis A D. 1509.
after the thing was done. It seems the Controversy about the immaculate
conception of the Blessed Virgin had caused great heats in Germany, and all
sorts did favor the Desenders of it; which extremely discontented the
Dominicans, who found that the Franciscans gained ground of them chiefly upon
the Authority of some Revelations and miracles. The Dominicans therefore
considered how they might vye with their Adversaries in these things, and
resolved to have Revelations from the Blessed Virgin against the immaculate
conception, and to have as good Marks of Christ's wounds in their Order as St.
Francis had; but such a design required a good Theater to act it on, where it
might not be discovered, and yet be sufficiently known; at first they thought
of Francfort, then of Norimberg, but at last they pitched upon Bern, as most
convenient, by reason of the simplicity and ignorance of the People. Four
Persons were employed as the chief Actors in it, although with the consent and
knowledge of the Provincial; the first was Johannes Vetter the Prior of the
Convent, the second Stephanus Bolshort their Preacher, the third Franciscus
Ulschi the Sub-prior, the fourth Henricus Steinscer the Procurator of the
Convent. Not long after, an occasion happened for them to begin their design, a
plain simple Tailor called Johannes Jets^^ happened to desire to be admitted a
L^^brother, at first they scorned him, but finding he had money, they consented
to his Admission; after they had tried him they found him a fit Person to
practice upon. Accordingly the Sub-prior in the night threw stones into his
room, and made dreadful noises to affright him with the apprehension of Spirits
disturbing him; the next day they gave him Wax Lights and holy Water and some
sacred Relics to arm him, so that he might have the courage to talk with the
Spirit, and they informed him what he was to say to it. The next night the
Spirit, viz. the Sub-prior comes again, and puts the poor Tailor into a
miserable fright, so that he durst not answer as he was instructed; then the
Spirit comes and seizes upon his Throat, as though he were going to choke him,
at which he cried out and desired to know how he might help him; for he was
told it was the Soul of one in Purgatory that came for relief; then the Spirit
told him he must discipline himself for eight days till the blood came, and
cause eight Masses to be said for him: and to say himself fifty Pater Nosters,
and as many Ave Maria's for him, and at every one to kiss the ground in
remembrance of Judas his kiss to Christ, and then he should be delivered: all
this he promised to discover to his Superiors; the Spirit bid him not be
affrighted, for he was to come again six days after, and to bring others with
him: Immediately these things were publicly performed, and mighty flocking of
the people there was upon the noise of it, and the Dominicans were cried up to
the great disgrace of the Franciscans. Against the next time, (when Stephen
whom they appointed his Confessor, had found him, not mistrusting in the least
any trick in it) they told him they would certainly try whether he was a good
or evil Spirit, by two pieces of the Blessed Sacrament which they would have
ready against the time the Spirit was to appear again. The Spirit comes at the
time appointed with two more: but the honest Tailor having now gotten heart by
the presence of the Host, adjures the Spirit to answer him, and to tell him his
business* Then the Spirit revealed to him, that the other two were his
Tormentors which immediately vanished away; that he had been i^ Purgatory one
hundred and sixty years, the the Dominican Order was the best in the world,
that some were in Purgatory for contradicting St. Thomas his opinion about the
maculate conception; that the City of Be^ should be destroyed, unless the
Francisca^ were expelled out of it, that Scotus was in Purgatory for asserting
the immaculate conception, with many other particulars concerning himself which
they had learnt from him in confession. After this the Spirit appeared in the
Form of St. Barbara, and told him the other Spirit would now return no more;
but that the Blessed Virgin would appear suddenly to him; which accordingly
happened, and then revealed to him that the Pope would shortly determine
against the immaculate conception, and in favor to him told him, that she gave
him some of the Swaddling Clouts Jesus was wrapped in, and a Vial full of her Sons
Blood (such another I suppose as that at St. Maximins in France) with several
other particulars too large to be mentioned. The most remarkable thing after
this was, the next appearance of the Blessed Virgin, who expressed a great
kindness to him, and ^ favor she would confer upon him in token of her
maculate conception: then she desired ^im to put out his hand, at first he was
unwil^ing, but durst not refuse, then the Spirit drove a great Nail into his
hand, and made ^ wound in it, and bad him keep it open with ^qua fortis and
other corrosives, the next ^ight she brings him Clouts to lay to it, such ^s
St. Francis had, but fearing he should not hold out with the other four wounds,
a Wa^er was given him which deprived him of all sense, and then were the rest
made, which when he came to himself he wondered at, and was ready to believe
indeed that they came from Heaven; and wondered at himself how like St. Francis
he was: Then they taught him to imitate Christ's sufferings in his carriages, by
stretching out his arms and hanging down his head in public: which drew a
strange concourse of people to see him, and when they gave him the Water, then
the Prior told them, that the expired with devotion: after this, they persuaded
him to great mortification and abstinence; that it might be thought he had
deserved these revelations and wounds by his great merits. At last the poor man
discovered his Confessors voice in the habit of the Blessed Virgin, and cried
out he was cheated; then another came with the Host all bloody in his hands, as
they had colored it, and assured him he was the Blessed Virgin whom he doubted
of before: but his suspicions still increased by their endeavors to take them
away. Then he resolves to leave the Convent, which they perceiving, at last
drew him to consent to the carrying on the design: which when he had done, they
began to show new tricks to the people, making the Image of the Blessed Virgin
to weep, by the help of one Lazarus a Painter, and Jetzer to embrace it so fast
in a posture of devotion, that he could not be stirred from it, till the bloody
Eucharist was brought. But Jetzer was at length tired out, with the severities
they used toward him, and afraid of being poisoned to prevent the discovery,
and so escaped out of the Convent, and then declared all this Imposture to the
Magistrates, upon which they were all seized upon, and after many delays used
in the prosecution of them at the Court of Rome, they were at last burned, and
their ashes cast into the River, lest they should be preserved for Relics; as
the Author of the Relation confesses they were accounted Martyrs by some and
thought to be very unjustly condemned and executed. And no doubt, the violent
prosecution of them was due to their inveterate enemies the Franciscans;
otherwise, they might have escaped as other impostors had done before them. But
the pretending to the wounds of St. Francis was an unpardonable fault with
them; and to be expiated with nothing less than death.

This story, is not only thus related in this Book published on purpose (which
I have by me) but the truth of it is confessed by Trithemius, by Peter Martyr
Anglericus, by Trithem. Chro^ico^ Sponheim. A. D. 1509. Petr. Mart. ^p. 341,
402.

Basel addit. ad Naucler. S^ri. Comment. (...) gest.

Del Rio disquisit. Magic. l. 4. c. 1. q. 3. sect. 4. Spondan. A^n. A. D. 1508.
n. 5.

Petrus (...) Valle-claus^ sect. 99. Candor Li^il Vindicat. p. 421.


Baselius, by Surius, by Del Rio, by Sponda^, and by Petrus a Valle-claus^, all
of them far enough from being suspected of any enmity to the Roman Church.
Bzovius thought it the best way to take no notice at all of it, and so did
Genebrard, Gaultier, considering what a dishonor it reflects on them, by the
occasion it gives to suspect other frauds and impostures which have been
managed by better hands. But the late Dominican Apologist Joh. Casalas would
needs have it all to be a mere contrivance of Reuchlin out of his hatred to the
Monks; which is so ridiculous and absurd an evasion, that it appears by it he
had never seen the Authentic Relation of it. But he tells us, that Antonius
Senens^s in his Bibliotheca Ordinis Praedicatorum justifies the men that
suffered, saying that they suffered innocently, being oppressed by their
enemies. So impossible is it for the greatest frauds and impostures as to
Revelations and Miracles, to want Friends in the Roman Church.

But we must not think this sort of impostures was confined only to the
Dominican Order, for the Franciscans at Orleans were found out in the
counterseiting a Mute Spirit, representing the soul of a woman deceased that
made signs she was damned for being a Lutheran, which was found to be nothing
else but a Novice of their Order appointed by them to act that part: but after
full discovery of the matter of fact they were preserved from punishment for
the reputation of their Order, in a time when the design was to persecute the
Lutherans. This story I confess is Sleida^. Comment. l. 9. A. 1534.
related by Sleidan, but I do not find it contradicted by any of their own
Authors.

Of the same Seraphical Order, and not long after that time, appeared in Spain
a notorious Ribadincira de vit. Ignatii l. 5. c. 10.

Del-Rio disquis. Mag. l 2. q. 18, 25.

Benzo Hist. Novi orbis l 3. c. 16.


Impostor called Magdalena de la Cruz, and confessed to be such by Ribadineira,
Del-Rio, Benzo and others: She was Abbess of the Franciscan Nuns in Corduba,
and these miracles are reported of her, that being invocated in a storm at Sea,
she appeared to the Mariners, and the storm ceased, that she was frequently
lifted up in Trances into the Air, that once being so lifted up, she received
the Host, which came out of the hands of the Priest through the Air and en^red
into her mouth, that when she was in the Garden, and the Sacrament by chance
passed by in the Street, the Wall of the Garden opened that she might worship
the Host, that for many days she lived only upon the Blessed Sacrament. Her
reputation by means of these Miracles was so great, that the great Ladies of
Spain being at the point of Child-^irth sent to her their Child-bed-linnen to
be blessed by her. Nay, the Empress her self, ^ent hers from Valladolid to
Corduba; and the Emperor undertook no great expedition without consulting her;
and desiring her prayers; and yet after all these things the Dominican
Inquisitors being jealous of the growing reputation, by her means, of the
^ranciscan Order, found a pretense to seize upon her, and upon examination
condemned her for a notorious impostor.

Such another was Maria de la Visitacion, Prioress de la Annuntiada in Lisbon
(of whom I have spoken elsewhere on another occasion) but she was of the
Dominican Order, (for these two Orders of Mendicants still did strive to
out-match each other in these pretended Saints and Miracles, and by their
mutual jealousies and animosities these impostures came to be discovered,
without which they had passed among the people as current as those of the
Founders of the two Orders). About her a Book was published in French by
Stephen de Lustgnan a Dominican Friar, printed at Paris by John Bessan^ A. D.
1586. with this Title, The great miracles and most holy wounds which this
present year 1586. have happened to the right reverend Mother, now Prioress of
the Mon^stery de la Annuntiada in Lisbon, of the Order of Preaching Friars,
approved by the reverend Father Friar Lewis of Granada, and other persons
worthy of credit; in his dedication to the Queen of France he says, that he
had published the greatest miracles that ever Almighty God in our times has
wrought in the person of a most noble, most virtuous, and most religious
Virgin, most devoted to the Holy Sacrament, and St. Thomas of Aquine: by whose
merits and intercessions she has deserved to have visibly for her Husband
Jesus Christ crucified, his five most holy Wounds, by means whereof the Divine
Majesty does continually diverse miracles. In the Letter of the Provincial F.
Antonio de l^ Cerda sent to Rome to be showed to the Pope, and afterward
printed by order, are these passages concerning her. Mother Mary de la
Visitacion at eleven years of Age entered into the Monastery de la Annuntiada,
and at sixteen years made prosession. In which time our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared to this Religious, to recompense her merits, and took her to his
Spouse, saying to her the words of the Prophet Jeremy, I have loved thee with
an ev^rlasting love, etc. And from that time forward, he still appeared to her;
granting her many particular favors, speaking and conversing familiarly with
her, as one Friend does with another, as God talked and discoursed with Moses;
and often times he appeared to her accompanied with Saints of both Sexes, as with
Mary Magdalene, St. Domin^ck, St. Thomas of Aquine, St. Katharine of Siena, and
sometimes alone, and was very familiar with her, helping her to say the
Canonical Hours, and at the end of every Psalm she would say, Gloria Patri, and
tibi, and Spiritui Sancto: he tells strange stories, of her Raptures and
Ecstasies, of her miraculous Cures of Diseases; and how the Host came of its own
accord to her mouth out of the place where it was kept: of her miraculous
wounds in imitation of St. Francis, made by Christ himself with beams of fire
issuing from him in her side, hands and feet, which opened on Frydayes; and how
she was often seen, with a glory about her, lifted up into the Air. To these
Lewis of Granada adds, that for seven years every Thursday, at the Ave Mary
hour she felt in he^ head all the pains of the Crown of Thorns, and she had
some marks of those thorns in (...) head, and the pains endured till Friday ^he
same hour. Many more particular miracles the Provincial relates of her, as the
curing of a Cancer, by applying one of the Clouts to it which was taken from
the wound in her side; and that instruments were made of the truth of this by a
public Notary: and of other Diseases, by pieces of the C^oss given by her;
from which Lusignan among other conclusions draws this, that miracles have ever
continued in the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church. Such kind of miracles
I grant have, but I think not much to the credit of it. Sixtus 5. was
over-joyed at the News of these glorious miracles, as he expressed in his
Letter to that purpose to Cardinal Alb^rtus of Austria, dated at Rome, Sep^emb.
10. 1584. subscribed Antonio Prucha Badulini. And so great was her reputation
in Spain, that she was chosen to bless the Standard Royal in the Spanish Armada
1588. which was performed with a mighty solemnity. After all which, in the
beginning of 1589. she was condemned for an Impostor, and a Book published
showing the man^er how she deceived the people in this pretense of miracles.

Ribadineira mentions such another impostor, Ribadin^ir. vit. Ign. Lo^lae l. 5.
c. 10.
viz. a Nunn at Bononia, which imitated the pains of our Savior on the Cross,
and says, that she had the wounds in her hands and side, and the pains of the
Crown of Thorns on her head, which dropped blood from them; but she had at last a
very bad end; the observation of which impostures made, says he, Ignatius
Loyola in his old Age vehemently to suspect, those frequent Ecstasies, Visions
and Revelations, which himself had pretended to as much as any in his younger
days. And afterward he excuses Ignatius Loyola for not having his sanctity
so attested with miracles as some expected; and says, that miracles are not
necessary in our times. This he writ A. D. 1572. but although he knew Ignatius
as well then as ever he did afterward, yet when the design of Canonizing
Ignatius began to be managed by the Society, then Rib^dineira changed his
story, ^d in the lesser account of his life published afterward, pretends to
abundance of miracles that were wrought by him. By which we may easily guess of
what credit those miracles are, which so intimate a Friend of Ignatius knew
nothing of, till it was thought to be much for the honor of their Society,
that he should be Canonized. And it is observable, that the miracles mentioned
by Ribadineira were such, only which are most liable to fraud and imposture,
viz. casting out of Devils in their way, of which there are so many notorious
instances in the Roman Church.

Hasenmullerus who had been himself a Jesuit, relates that his Brethren at Rome
told Hasen Muller. Histor. J^suitici Ordinis c. 8.
him, that a Woman possessed with a Devil followed Ignatius, and cried, Thou
only art able to deliver me, then Ignatius turning about repeated this Verse of
Virgil,

Speluncam Dido, Dux and Trojanus eandem. At which (for there is an unknown
quality in these words for casting out Devils) the Devil threw the Woman down,
and going out of her cried, O thou Son of Loyola, like a Lion thou sendest me
to Hell, but I beseech thee send me any where else; then Ignatius taking pity
on the poor Devil, bid him go whither he would, so he possessed no body after:
at which the Woman was delivered: and as the Jesuit Turrian said, she was a
devout servant of Ignatius all her days. Another time, a servant of Cardinal
Farnese was possessed with a sullen Devil, that was resolved not to be cast
out, but only by Ignatius; he was then called by the People, and he told them,
he knew that Devil well enough, he thinks to laugh at me and you too, but he
shall be deceived. Therefore he gives a Brother of his Order one of the Beads
of his Rosary, which was consecrated by Pius the fifth, and bid him come behind
the possessed person (was that fair dealing to come behind the Devil?) and to
touch him, and say softly, I adjure thee in the name of the Virgin Mary, and by
command of my Father Loyola, and by the virtue of this blessed Bead to be gone.
Immediately the Devil cried out, that Loyola tormented him; but no persons saw
him there abouts: the Devil then explained himself saying, that his Bead was of
more force than all their Exorcisms; and so left him.

The same Author tells us of his own knowledge, that at Landsperg in Germany,
there was a Carter that went to his Parish Priest and told him, that the Devil
did often drive him to his doors, but would not go in himself, nor let him go
in; not long after, this sellow was taken and condemned for Thievery, but he
pretended he was possessed with a Devil; the Jesuits hearing of it, came to
him, and made use of all their Exorcisms, but to no purpose. At last the Rector
of the College remembering Ignatius his cunning way of coming behind the Devil,
follows his method, and with an Agnus Dei commands the Devil in the name of the
Virgin Mary to be gone, but the obstinate Devil told him plainly he would not
be gone, unless the man were saved from hanging. Forthwith, the Jesuits got his
Pardon, and the Devil was presently gone, and the man went away and laughed in
his slieve, and told others afterward, he counterfeited being possessed, only
to escape hanging. But however the Jesuits boasted of this as a great miracle,
and commended the use of Agnus Dei's very highly for this, and sold abundance
of them (as Mountebanks do their Medicines) to the People, that were willing to
be cheated. And one of the Fathers of the Society called Lutz made a Sermon to
the People on the occasion of this miracle, in commendation of Agnus Dei's.
Many other such stories he relates of the Jesuits miracles.

But we are not to imagine, that these subtle Jesuits only cast out Devils thus
in other Countries, for we have sufficient evidence of this Faculty of theirs
here at home: For which we are to understand, that in the years 1585. and 1586.
the Jesuits in England finding it necessary to animate their party toward a
design then in hand, thought nothing would tend so much to it, as pretending to
some great miracles. And nothing being more easy to be managed for the
deceiving the People, than the casting out of Devils, where they never were,
this they resolve upon. To this end they gave out, that the places where they
intended to act this Scene were mightily haunted with Spirits, then they made
choice of fit Persons to show their tricks upon, which were hypochondriacal and
distempered men, and some hysterical and fearful Women, who had all of them
their dependence on such as were fast friends to the design: twelve Exorcists
were employed to act their parts in this Scene under Weston or Edmonds the
Jesuit, who was the chief Contriver and Manager of it. It happened that three
of the Maid servants had been Protestants; these they told that the Protestants
are possessed with Devils, and that no good could be done to them till their
Baptism was set right. Then to work they go with them, as to their Baptism,
with their Latin Charms, their Salt, Spittle, Oil, etc. and gave them new
names. This being done, they took all occasions to tell them strange stories of
Exorcisins in foreign Countries, the manner of the fits of possessed persons,
and the words they spoke, and the sights they saw, how they roared at the
approach of any Sacred Relics, how they could not abide the sight of the
Sacrament, or the Priests, how they would greatly commend Heretics, and
complain that they were burnt if the Priests did but touch them. By this they
very well understood their parts, and they were soon put upon showing their
skill in acting them; for at the first Mass that ever one of the Maids saw, she
was put into the Holy Chair, and they bound her with Towels, then one of the
Priests read in his Book of Exorcising, but finding no alteration in her, but
only from her fear, they made her drink about a Pint of Sack and Sallet Oil
being hallowed and mingled with Rue and some kind of Spices, which they called
the Holy Potion. The Maid loathed the taste of it, which they told her came
from the Devil, who hated nothing more than that Holy Drink, but she was forced
by degrees to drink it up. Then she grew very sick and giddy, and fell into a
cold sweat, which made her begin to believe her self pofsessed. After this they
burned Brimstone with other things, and made her hold down her face over the
smoke of it: which they did, till they made her look black in the face. By this
horrible usage, the Wench fell first into a rage, and spoke she knew not what,
then it intoxicated and benumbed her senses, and at last she fell into a
swound: and when she came to her self, told them they had almost killed her;
and some of them after this usage (which was common to all whom they would have
believed to be possessed) were resolved rather to make away themselves, than
endure i^ again. They had invented pretty names for the Devils which possessed
them, Frateretto, Fliberdigibbet, Hoberdidance, Tocobatto, Kellico,
Porterichio, Motubizanto, Maho, Modu, etc. When ever they cried out with pain
and ill usage, they still said, it was the Devil in them, so that at last they
were forced to comply with them, and to say just as they would have them for
their own ease. Then the work went on well, and the Devil commended the Queen
and the Protestants, but declared a great hatred of Holy Water and Relics,
especially of Campians Thumb and Brians Bones, when they applied them to them.
All the dreams they had in the night passed for Visions; and as often as the
Exorcists pleased, what ever they said or did was not by themselves, but by the
Devils in them. But at last, when some of their own party disliked their
doings, and they were in great fears of having their horrible imposture
discovered, they soon dispossessed all the Devils out of them. Then their care
was to prevent discovery by these persons, whom they disposed of in several
places, and fed with money and promises, and kept from their Friends, and
sometimes threatening them, that if they confessed any thing, the Devil would
possess them worse than before: and withal told them, that without an Oath they
might say any thing to excuse themselves; but Harrington a Priest, that had
taken to himself one of the Wenches afterward, under pretense of marrying her;
told Friswood Williams which was her right name, that if she were examined upon
Oath, the Church did dispense with her, so as she might answer what she thought
good notwithstanding; because an Oath did not bind her to confess any thing
that might tend to the dishonor of their Priesthood, or of the Catholic
Church.

Before this imposture was discovered, it did the Priests very great service,
for Anthony Tyrrell one of the Priests in his examination confessed, that in
the compass of half a year, they had gained five hundred persons to their
Church; and some said three or four thousand. And the Priests had written
several Books concerning the miracles wrought by them, full of most notorious
forgeries, as appeared by the particular examination of the Persons pretended
to be dispossessed by them. Tyrell said that Weston the Provincial of the
Jesuits had written a Quire of Paper of the Visions of Mainey one of the
persons out of whom he said he had cast out Devils; and another Book to prove
the continuance of this power in their Church, and to show the virtue of holy
Relics especially of their late Tyburn Saints, Campian, Sher^in, Brian and
Coltam. This business making so much noise put the Persons in Authority upon
enquiring more strictly into it; and having at last seized upon some of the
Persons concerned in it, in their several examinations upon oath they confessed
the whole cheat, as I have delivered it from them. Their examinations were
entered upon Record in the Court of High Commission, and afterward published A.
D. 1604. with a particular declaration of the whole imposture. In which any
person may satisfy himself of the Truth of what I have reported, and abundance
of circumstances which I have omitted. Tyrell the Priest upon his oath June 15.
1602. declared in his consession written with his own hand, that having perused
the examinations of Sara Williams and Friswood her sister, of Anne Smith and of
Richard Mainey, he was fully persuaded that they have deposed the truth in such
points whereof they were examined belonging to their pretended possession or
dispossession. The effect whereof, says he, is, that they were drawn by our
cunning carriage of matters, to seem, as though they had been possessed, when
as in truth they were not, neither were any of the Priests ignorant in my
Conscience of their dissimulatino, nor the parties themselves, (as now it
appears) of our dissembled proceeding with them. And afterward adds a very
material thing, viz. For although both my self, (and so I think of the rest)
did know that all was but counterfeit, yet for as much as we perceived that
thereby great credit did grow to the Catholic cause, and great discredit to
the Protestants, we held it lawful to do as we did. For the general conceit,
says he, among all the Priests of that Order is, that they may deny any thing,
which being confessed does turn to the dishonor of the Catholic Church of
Rome: and concludes his confession with saying, that they do not account it
evil, (as I verily think) to c^lumniate the Protestants by any device
whatsoever, that may carry any probability with it, nor make any Conscience at
all to tell and publish any untruths, which they think, being believed, may
advance and promote such points and matters as they take upon them to defend
for the honor of the Church of Rome and dignity of their Priesthood. Judge
now, Reader, whether such persons do not deserve the highest credit in all
their stories of Miracles, who think it lawful both to cheat and lie for the
sake of their Church.

Not twenty years after the discovery of this imposture ^e find them at the
same work again, when they writ the faithful narration of the proceedings of
the Catholic Gentlemen with the Boy of Bilson; with this sentence at the
beginning and end of it. Non nobis Domine, non nobis; sed Nomini tuo da
Gloriam, Whereas the history of this imposture is so particularly laid open by
the confession of the Boy himself, that it would make any others (but such as
have the impudence to compare their frauds and impostures with the miracles of
Christ and his Apostles) be ashamed ever to mention or own it.

Such another imposture Thuanus at large T^uan. ^ist. l. 123.
relates concerning Martha Brossier, A. D. 1599. which gave great disturbance
in France, happening so soon after the edict of ^ants. One James Brossier being
weary of his poor employment at home, wanders from place to place with his
three Daughters, and this Martha pretended to be possessed with an evil Spirit,
and although the cheat was discovered in other places, yet at Paris they hoped
to meet with some who would be ready to make use of such a counterfeit
possession for their own ends; accordingly there the Capuchins presently lay
hold upon her, and persuade the people she was really possessed; the
Archbishop of Paris disliking the Capuchins proceedings appointed some of the
ablest Physicians in Paris to watch and examine her, who presently suspected
the imposture, but desired further time and advice. In the mean while Fr.
Seraphin very solemnly falls to his Exorcisms, and she acted her part so
artificially with writhing her body, rolling her eyes, and trembling of all her
joints as caused great astonishment in the Spectators; but at these words Homo
factus est, she moved her whole body in so strange a manner from the Altar to
the doors of the Chapel, that Fr. seraphin cried out; if there be any Infidel
yet among you let him come and try his strength with this Spirit. At which
Marescot the Physician said he would do it; then the cunning Gypsy cried that
the Spirit had left her; wherein she was seconded by the Exorcist. While the
Physicians were by, she lay very still, but she no sooner thought them gone,
but she was at her old tricks. Then these Physicians were shut out and others
brought in, who would be more favorable to the design; and by these a
certificate was drawn up attested by themselves that she was really possessed;
and an Abbot affirmed that when she was held by six men she got above their
heads four foot into the air and there stood. When this account of her was
published, Marescot confuted it answering all their arguments and giving an
account of all the strange Symptoms which were s^en in her. But so much were
the people moved by this, that there was great danger of a tumult, the King
therefore gave order to the Parliament to prevent riotous meetings and to
commit the pretended possessed person to the care of Physicians, who returned
this answer that they could find nothing praeternatural in her; then great
clamours were made by the people and ^editious Preachers that the privileges
of the Church were infringed, and that all this was done in favor of the
Hugonots; to take away from the Catholic Church the glory of her Miracles:
after severe animadversion on these factious Preachers and Friars; Martha was
sent home with her Father and Sisters, and confined thither. But the Bishop of
Clermont and his Brother carried her away to Avignon, and refused to obey the
summons sent them by the Parliament; and the King sent to Cardinal Ossat his
Ambassador at Rome to acquaint the Pope with the whole matter, before they came
thither: It happened that sirmondus was then with Cardinal Ossat, him he
imploys to the General of the Order of Jesuits (who were suspected to be
friends to the Brothers who had been bred up in their Society) that if they
meddled in this matter, it would be their greatest hindrance to their
restitution in France, which they had then good hopes of. Upon this, the
Jesuits for sook them, and they were forced to submit to the King; and so poor
Martha was quite dispossessed. Thus we see what intrigues and designs are
carried on by such impostures in the Roman Church; that when such things escape
examination they pass for Miracles, but when they are thoroughly searched into,
they appear to be mere cheats and impostures.

I shall conclude this discourse of impostures with these passages out of the
Lord Herber^ History of Henry 8.

The King having issue Male, proceede^ more confidently in his designs; and
because H^rberts Hist of H^^^y 8. A. D. 1538. p. 431.
he knew that the pretended and false miracles of Priests had seduced many
ignorant people to a superstitious obedience to the Romish See and reverence of
Monasteries, he resolved to detect them, at least as many as he could; for
diverse were so cunningly represented, as they had kept their credi^ for some
ages; the manner of these times being, if a man were restored to his health
upon a Pilgrimage, or obtained any thing he desired upon a vow to some Saint,
never to study other cause. And here out of ou^ Records I shall mention some of
the Image^ and Relics to which the Pilgrimages o^ those times brought devotion
and offerings, as our Ladies girdle, showed in eleven several places, and her
Milk in eight, the Bel^ of St. Guthlac, and the Felt of St. Thoma^ of
Laneaster, both remedies for the Head^ ach: the Penknife and Boots of St.
Thomas of Canterbury, and a piece of his Shirt much reverenced by great-bellied
women: the Coals that roasted St. Laurence; two or three heads of St. Ursula,
Malcus his Ear; and the pairing of St. Edmonds Nails; the Image of an Angel
with one Wing which brought hither the Spears head that pierced Christ's side;
an Image of our Lady with a Taper in her hand, which burned nine years together
without wasting, till one forswearing himself thereon, it went out; and was now
found to be but a piece of wood: our Lady of Worcester, from which certain
veils and dressings being taken, there appeared the statue of a Bishop ten foot
high; these and others were now brought forth and with great ostentation showed
to the people. Among which were two notable Trumperies I cannot omit: One was
the Rood of Grace at Boxley in Kent; which being made with diverse vices to turn
the eyes and move the lips was showed publicly at St. Paul's Cross by John
Bishop of Rochester and there broken and pulled in pieces. The other was at
Hales in Gloucestershire, where the Blood of Christ brought from Jerusalem
being kept (as was affirmed) for diverse Ages, had drawn many great offerings to
it from remote places: and it was said to have this property, that if a man
were in mortal sin, and not absolved he could not see it; otherwise very well:
Therefore every man that came to behold this Miracle confessed himself first to a
Priest there, and then offering something to the Altar, was directed to a
Chapel where the Relick was showed; the Priest who confessed him (in the mean
while) retiring himself to the back part of the said Chapel, and putting forth
a Cabinet or Tabernacle of Crystal, which being thick on the one side that
nothing could be seen through it, but on the other side thin and transparent
they used diversely: For if a rich and devout man ^entred, they would show the
thick side, till he had paid for as many Masses, and given as large Alms as
they thought fit: after which (to his great joy) they permitted him to see the
thin side and the blood. Which yet (as my Author a Clerk of the Council to
Edward the sixth and living in those times affirms) was proved to be the blood
of a Duck every week renewed by the Priests, who kept the secret betwixt them.
Besides which, the Images of our Lady of Walsingham, of Ipswich, of Fenrise, of
Islington, and St. John of Osulston (called otherwise Mr. John Shorn) who was
said to shut up the Devil in a Boot; and diverse others were publicly burnt.

And by this means the Monasteries grew infamous where most of these Images
were kept, and diverse were undeceived who before held a Reverend opinion of
these pretended Relics and Miracles.

After which, he relates, how the King P. 437, 438.
discovered the Forgery of the Miracles pretended to be wrought at Thomas
Beckets shrine, and that the Scull which the People did so much venerate, was
not his own, that being found together with his body in the Tomb.

I leave it now to the judgment of the Reader, what credit such Miracles
deserve, which are reported by Persons who think it lawful to lie in these
matters, and which, where strict examination has been made, have been
discovered so often to be notorious impostures? And this may abundantly suffice
for the first particular, which was the comparing the Miracles of the Roman
Church with those of Christ and his Apostles in point of credibility.

. 12. 2. I come to compare them as to Their Miracles being granted do not prove
their Churches Infallibility.
the Testimony given by them to Infallibility, i. e. whether the Miracles
supposed to be wrought in the Roman Church do equally prove that Church
Infallible as those wrought by Christ and his Apostles did prove them
Infallible.

For clearing of this I shall premise these particulars.

1. That it is agreed on both sides, that the miracles wrought by Christ and
his Apostles, did sufficiently prove that they were Teachers sent from God. For
we are assured by the universal Testimony of all Christians (not contradicted
by their greatest Adversaries) that the first Preachers of the Christian
Religion did work so many, so public, so great miracles, that all impartial
Persons could not but look upon them as persons immediately sent by God. And
Christ himself declared that this was the end for which he did those miraculous
works, that men might Matt. 11. 5. John 5. 36. 15. 24.
believe by them that God had sent him, that without these men might have had
an excuse for their Insidelity, that his works did bear witness of him; And his
Evangelist declares, that this was the end for which these miracles are
recorded, that men might believe that 20. 30, 31.
Jesus was the son of God. Afterward, when he was risen from the dead and he
sent abroad his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he told them that God would
bear them witness by Mark. 16. 17, 18. Heb. 2. 4.
diverse signs and miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, of which we have a full
account in the Books of the new Testament. As to all which miracles we have not
the least ground of suspicion of any fraud or imposture, being publicly done
in the presence of enemies, and written in a time when the Testimony of Writers
might be easily contradicted, and when all imaginable way's were used to make
the first Witnesses of these things to recant their Testimonies, by the
greatest severities and persecutions: in stead of which they persisted with
great resolution and laid down their lives rather than weaken the Testimony
which they had given. Thus we see such great and extraordinary effects of
Divine Power which we ought to call miracles, were wrought by Christ and his
Apostles on purpose to confirm their own Authority that they were Persons sent
from God, and therefore could not deceive the World in the doctrine delivered
by them.

2. The Authority and Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles being thus confirmed
by the miracles wrought by them, there cannot be any such necessity in
succeeding Ages to confirm the same doctrine by miracles. For if it were once
fully proved by those miracles then wrought, there can want nothing further to
establish the faith of succeeding Ages than a certain conveyance of those
miracles to them. Those miracles being wrought for the benefit of succeeding
Ages, as well as of that present Age: And if those miracles would not serve for
the Ages following as well as that present time, it might with as much reason
be said that then they did serve only for those who saw them. For on the same
ground that Persons then, in regard of distance of Place, were bound to believe
although they did not see them wrought; so likewise are others in regard of
distance of time, only supposing the certainty of conveyance to be equal. But
it is with much advantage to us, by the concurrent Testimony of so many Ages,
and the effects of the doctrine confirmed by those miracles upon so many
nations of the World, not with standing all the Power and subtility which were
used against it.

3. The less the necessity and the greater the pretense to miracles, so much
more reason there is to suspect them. Because God, we are certain, does not
employ his Power in going beyond the common effects of nature to little or no
purpose. When we see, that in all the writings of Scripture miracles were very
sparingly wrought, unless it were for the confirmation of a new Religion, as
that of Moses and Christ; if asterwards we find such abundance of miracles
pretended to, that no Age or Country of one sort of men, but give out that
multitudes of these are done among them, what, must we think that God has
changed the Method of his Providence? and not rather, that God is true, but
such men are liars, or through ignorance and credulity take those for miracles
which are not so.

4. Those cannot be true miracles which are pretended to be wrought to confirm
a doctrine contrary to what is already confirmed by miracles. For God will
never employ his power to contradict himself; he may in the establishing of one
Religion foretell the coming of another afterward in its room by his own
appointment as in the Gospel succeeding the Law; but the latter miracles in
this case do not contradict, but rather confirm the doctrine of the former; but
when he has declared that no other Religion shall come into the world after
that which is confirmed by miracles, as it is with the Christian Religion, then
to suppose miracles wrought to confirm any doctrine contrary to that, is to
suppose that God by miracles should contradict himself. Therefore although in
the beginning of a Religion, the doctrine is to be proved by miracles, yet that
being once supposed, miracles afterward are to be tried by the doctrine. And
then though an Angel from heaven should preach or offer to confirm any other
doctrine by miracles than that which was first confirmed by Christ and his
Apostles, we are bound to reject that doctrine and to suspect those miracles
not to be from God.

5. Where false and lying miracles are foretold by a doctrine confirmed by true
miracles; there can be no reason to believe upon such miracles till they are
evidently distinguished from such as are deceitful. Now this is plainly the
case in the Christian Religion, Christ himself has foretold that men shall
arise doing such great wonders in imitation Matthew. 24. 24.
of him as should deceive if it were possible the very elect; and his Apostles:
that his greatest enemies should appear with all power and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
signs and lying wonders. Can any thing be now more reasonable than after such
forewarnings for us to examine all pretenses of miracles, by trying whether
they can be evidently distinguished from all deceitful appearances of
miracles; which may be wrought by a power less than divine? For in this case
the evidence must be such, as the persons concerned are to judge by; to tell
them any distinctions which they cannot proceed by in the judgment of
miracles, is to speak impertinently, where rules of Judgment are required.

6. If the continuance of the power of miracles be asserted to prove the
Churches infallibility in every Age, there must not only evident proof be given
that such miracles are wrought, but that they are wrought for this very end.
For if God may work miracles for another end, either to show his Providence in
general, or particular Regard to some men, then the mere proving miracles
cannot be sufficient, but it must be showed that these miracles could be
wrought for no other end, but to prove the Church infallible.

These things being premised I now come to show.

1. That in the Roman Church, they cannot give any evident distinction between
the miracles they pretend to, and such which we are bid to beware of.

2. That they can never prove that the miracles wrought in their Church could
be wrought for no other end, than to prove the infallibility of their Church.

1. That in the Roman Church they cannot give any evident distinction between
their miracles and such as we are bid to beware of. For which we are to
consider, that scarce any Religion or superstition has obtained in the world,
but it has pretended to be confirmed by some kind of mirac^es; which in it
self is no more a prejudice to true miracles than sophistical arguments are to
true reasoning. But those who pretend to miracles in a Church which is founded
on a doctrine confirmed by undoubted miracles must give such evidence of the
truth of them, as may apparently distinguish them from all false pretenses. For
if they give no other answers to such pretenses of miracles as they condemn in
others, but what will destroy the Authority of the miracles asserted by
themselves, then they can prove no more the Churches infallibility by their
miracles, than either Philosophers; Heathens, or Heretics could do by theirs.
If the bare pretense of miracles would serve, for all that I know Pythagoras
might deserve at least as much esteem as St. Francis, or St. Dominick; for the
Scholars of the one delivered as unanimously the report of his miracles, as the
Disciples of the other could do. Pythagoras his taming the Daunian Bear,
(reported says Porphyrie in his life by ancient Writers of good credit) and
charging him Porphyr. vit. Pythag.
never after to hurt any living Creature, was to my understanding as great a
miracle as St. Francis his taming the Wolf. And his whispering the Tarentine
Bull in the ear and persuading him to eat no more bean's, (who for his great
abstinence afterward was called the sacred Bull) was altogether as good an
argument of the restoring the State of Innocence to him, as the command over
brute Creatures was to St. Francis, or any other Legendary Saints. The Rivers
saluting him (whether it were called Caucasus as Porphyrie has it, or Nessus
as Laertius, and Jamblichus, or Cosas as Aelian, or what ever were the true
name of it) was as great an argument of his Sanctity, as the Trees in
Tursellinus, howing to the Chapel of Loreto were of the miraculous sanctity of
it. Why should not his being seen at the same time at Metapont in Italy, and
Tauromenium in Sicily, be as great a wonder, as the being seen in several
places at once has being reported of several of the Romish Saints? Why should
not his golden thigh be as miraculous, as the restored Leg at Zaragosa? unless
the Priest Abaris be proved a falser witness, than Hieronimus Brizids; or the
people of Zarogosa less suspected of partiality, than the Greeks, at the
Olympic games: at which some Authors tell us Pythagoras showed his Golden
thigh. Why should St. Francis his Ass that stood still to hear him preach, be
more miraculous, than the Ass, which Suidas reports, heard Ammonianus his
Lectures? Why should the S^id v. An^mo^^^^.
speaking of Images in the Roman Church prove the infallibility of the Church
of Rome, more than it did in old Heathen Rome? for as the Roman Breviary says
that an Image spoke to Aquinas, and commended his writings, so the old Roman
Writers say, that the Image of Fortune spoke not once but twice to the Val.
Max. l. 1. c 8. ^. 3. 4.
Matrons and commended their dedication of her: and so did the Image of Juno
Moneta at Veij to the Soldier that asked her whether she would go to Rome? to
whom she answered, she would. Why may not Aesculapius his cure of the woman in
his Templeat Epidaurus mentioned by Aelian be thought as strange as Aelian. de
animal. l. 9. c. 33.
Xaverius his appearing to Fr. Marcellus Mastrilli at Naples and curing him
upon his promise to go to the Indies? which is another of the miracles so much
magnified by E. W. If there be any difference, that of Aesculapius seems the
greater miracle? Why should not the miracles attributed to the Emperors
Vespasian, Adrian, and Aurelian, related by Tacitus, suetonius, Spartianus, and
Tacit. Hist. 4. Sueton. V^sp. c. 7. Spartian. i^ Adrian. Vo^iscus in A^^l.
Vopiscus, have as much credit at least as those of the Legendary Saints? since
the Writers of them are looked on as men of more sincerity and integrity, by
those of their own Church, than the Authors of the Lives of the Saints are.

But to come yet nearer, how can their pretended miracles prove the Church they
are wrought in to be the true Church and infallible; since by their own
confession, miracles to all appearance as great have been wrought among
heretics and in a false Church? And by the Answers they give to these we shall
easily judge, how far they can give evidence of the truth of their own
miracles. The Ecclesiastical Historians report several miracles that have been
wrought by Heretics and Schismatics; Philostorgius attributes the power of
miracles to the Arian Bishops, to Philostorg. ap^d. Phot. Cod. 40. and apud
Nic^tam Choniat l. 5. c. 7.

Philostorg. l. 2. tom. 8. l. 3. tom. 4. l. 4. n. 7. l. 9. n. 1.

So^rat. l. 7. c. 17.

Sozo^. l. 1. c. 14.


Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, to Agapetus Bishop of Synada, of whom he says
that he raised the dead and healed all sorts of diseases, to Theophilus, to
Aetius, Eunomius, Leontius, Candidus, Evagrius, Arrianus, and Florentius.
Socrates attributes the same power to the Novatians; as to Paulus the Bishop of
that party when he was to baptize the Jewish Impostor, and the water
mi^^aculously disappeared; And Sozomen to Eutychianus of the same party; And
the Donatists, to Pontius and Donatus as we have already seen from St.
Augustine. Now if the trial of the Church in those day's had been by miracles, I
would fain know on which side the advantage had been? St. Chrysostom, disowns
any such thing as a continuance of the power of miracles in the Bishops of the
Catholic Church, as besides the places already produced to that purpose, may
be seen in several others: wherein he supposes, that (...) etc. Chrysostom. de
sacerd l. 4. p. 35. (...) in Ma^th. hom. 33. (...). Tom. 5. p. 277. Tom. 6 p.
148.
there is not so much as a foot step of that power of miracles left in the
Church which was in the Apostles; he asserts, that God has put a stop to
miracles, that he does not give it to the most worthy persons, that they were
intended only for unbelievers, and that there is no need of them where the
Christian faith is settled. What now should be said in this case? for it is
just the same as between us and the Church of Rome, the Catholic Bishops
pretended no more to a Power of miracles than the Protestant Bishops do now;
but the Arians, Eunomians, Novatians and Donatists all challenged this power of
miracles to themselves, therefore it is a plain case, if the Church of Rome be
now in the right, then so were these Heretical and Schismatical parties, if the
Protestants be mistaken, so were St. Chrysostom and the Bishops of the
Ca^holick Ch^r^h.

But what answer now do these men give to these instances? even such as very
easily returns upon themselves, and upon the very same grounds we may ove^throw
the Authority of their miracl^s.

1. They say, the testimony of the writers ought to ^e suspected of par^^ality
to their own side. So M^laerus answers the Testimony of Mald^r. i^ Tho^. 2. 2.
q. 1. art. 5. sect. 6.
Socrates; saying that he either f^igned, or related these miracles to the
honor of his own party; but this answer is both false and destr^ctive to
t^emselves. It is false, because notwithstanding what B^ronius, Labbe and
ot^ers have said, Socrates ^as no Novatian, as Henri Valesius, has well proved
in his preface to his History. But suppose he were, must the Authority of all
Persons be taken away that relate things to the honor of their own Church?
what then becomes of all the miracles of the Roman Church? are they attested by
any but such who are well wishers to the truth of them? and that may go a great
way in the belief of them. Were not Gabriel de Aldama the Vicar General and
Hieronymus Brizids and the rest of the subscribers as great Friends to the
Church of Rome and as much conce^ned for the honor of it, as So^rates could be
for the Novatians? why then should their testimony for the restored Legate
Z^ragosa be more creditable than Socrates his, for Paulus the Novatian Bishop?
So that, if interest takes away all authority in these matters, then we cannot
safely believe the Testimony of any in the Church of Rome, for the miracles
wrought in it; if notwithstanding that, the Authority of witnesses stands good,
then miracles may be wrought in heretical or schismatical Churches; and
consequently can prove nothing as to the truth, or infallibility of the Church.
But neither the Novatians, nor Arians, nor Donatists were convicted of so many
forgeries in this matter of miracles as those of the Church of Rome have been;
they never tho^ght it lawful, that we can find, to te^l lies for the honor of
their Church; both which we have already proved concerning the reporters of
miracles in the Roman Church; and therefore their Testimony ought more to be
suspected in this matter, than that of honest Heathens or Heretics.

2. They answer, that notwithstanding all the outward appearance of miracles,
the things done by them might be no true miracles. So Malderus goes on saying,
that the pretended miracle of Paulus the Novatian Bishop, was not such as did
exceed the power of the Devil. And Bellarmin grants that there can Bellarm. de
no^is Eccl. l. 4. c. 14.
be no infallible certainty of the truth of a miracle before the approbation of
the Church; the reason he gives is this, because though the Devil can do no
true miracles, yet he can do the greatest to appearance. Now I would sain
understand this, how miracles can prove the truth and infallibility of the
Church, if the truth of miracles depends upon the Churches approbation? i. e.
whether I must not first believe the Church to be true, before I can possibly
be certain whether a miracle be true or not? I know, Bellarmin says, that the
Church is proved by miracles not as to infallible certainty; but as to the
evidence of credibility. But what evidence of credibility can there be from
miracles, where no one can be certain whether they be miracl^s or not? For the
making faith credible by miracles does suppose those miracles to be first
certainly known to be such; but in this case, if the power of the Devil can
extend so far, as that no certain difference can be assigned between true and
apparent miracles, but from the Churches approbation, how is it possible the
Church should be certainly known by miracles, if the miracles cannot be
certainly known but by the Church? So that for us to distinguish the miracles
done by Heretics and those in the Catholic Church, we must appeal to the
judgment of the Catholic Church; and yet our way to know, which is the
Catholic Church says E. W. and his Brethren must be by miracles; i. e. we
must know a man by such marks which we cannot know to be the marks of such a
man till we first know the man. But it may be others speak more consistently
and reasonably in this matter: and therefore,

3. They answer, that although Heretics may do real miracles yet not for the
confirmation of their heresy; but of some common truth. So the same Malderus
says, that the Novatian miracle being granted to be true, does not confirm the
error of the Novatians, but the truth of the Sacrament, for the Jew was
baptized before by the Arians and Macedonians. So (...) Medina salves the
miracles wrought among the Pagans, that they did give testimony to Mich. Medina
de recta in Det^n fide l. 2. c. 7. p. 53.

Fevardent. not. in Iren. l. 2. c. 56.


divine providence and not to their particular superstitions. Fevardentius
confesses the Church has never determined that Heretics cannot work true
miracles, and that those who hold the affimative have plain Testimonies of
Fathers for them; which he there mentions. If this be true then miracles now
can prove nothing as to the Truth or infallibility of the Church, when the
communions of Christians are different from each other; for the miracles
wrought may only be for the attestation of some common truths received among
all Christians or to manifest the Providence of God to the world.

Among their late writers none has considered this difficulty with more care
and diligence than Father Lingendes has done, both with a respect to the
miracles of Heathens and Lia^endes ^o^cion in Quadrag. Tom. 2. (...). 2.
Heretics. To which he thus answers. 1. That for the most part, they were
false and counterseit, at least they were not true miracles, if the name of
miracle be taken strictly and properly: for, says he, either they were mere
illusions of the senses, or they did not exceed any created power, either in
the substance or the manner of them, and therefore the Devils might easily
effect them. 2. That some circumstances did discover the imposture, when true
miracles were wrought in opposition to them, as in Pharaohs Magicians and Simon
Magus: otherwise God would not permit evil men to work miracles. 3. That God
has given a most certain rule for the trial of miracles viz. God is faithful
and cannot deny himself: and therefore he cannot be the Author of miracles
whereby things contrary to each other are confirmed. Wherefore says he, if a
says once established by miracles be impugned by other miracles, we are to
believe the latter miracles to be mere imposture. For the Apostle tells us,
that Jesus Christ is not yea and Cor. 1. 19, 20. Gal. 1. 8.
nay, but a Yea and Amen; and although we or an Angel from heaven preach
another Gospel, let him be Anathema: See the wisdom of the Apostle: He brings
us back to the first preaching, which was not lightly established but with
innumerable miracles, which were most certain and most manifest: from whence he
concludes that all others that are brought to confirm any doctrine contrary to
this ought to be rejected. But of what sort? even though an Angel or an Apostle
should preach another doctrine; for, says he, among things impossible, that is
the most impossible that God should lie: which is far more impossible than that
an Angel should; and consequently what God has once attested by miracles, can
be less salse than when an Angel has attested; or the Apostle spoke this, that
by this means we may discover the Devil, when he transforms himself into an
Angel of light. 4. If any true miracles were wrought among Heathens and
Infidels, as it may be some were; yet none were ever wrought to confirm any
falsehood or error, but for some truth, or some benefit to mankind, among which
he reckons the miracles of Claudia the Roman Lady and of the vestal virgin to
give testimony to their innocence. After this he descends to a more particular
examination of the miracles of Heretics and false Christians; and as to these
he lays down these propositions. 1. That miracles are of two kinds, some
strictly and properly so called, which are effects exceeding all created
Powers, either as to the substance or the manner of them; as the curing a man
born blind, the raising the dead, etc. others, are such as exceed the common
power of nature, although there may be some secret and hidden causes of them
that may lie within the compass of nature. The first sort he says, are the
only undoubted testimonies of truth; but the other may be wrought by the Devils
power, either by local motion, or the application of the power of natural
Agents. Of this sort, says he, are the miracles done by false Christ's and
false Prophets and by Antichrist; and among these he reckons all manner of
cures, when the diseases are not wholly incurable. 2. He says that miracles of
this later sort are equivocal signs and may be referred to different causes,
and therefore nothing can be determined by them considered in themselves;
because they may be done by a different power and for a different end. When
they are done for ostentation, or delight, or curiosity, they cannot have God
for their Author; much less when they are wrought to confirm a false doctrine,
or for an evil end: therefore when such miracles are wrought for confirmation
of an error they have not God but the Devil for their cause. For although they
be aequivocal of themselves, yet the determining of them to an evil end such as
the confirmation of an error is, takes away all aequivocalness in them. 3. He
asserts, that true and proper miracles in the first sense, although most
commonly wrought by good men as Gods instruments, yet may sometimes be done, by
wicked men, and Heretics and Infidels. For which he instances in Balaam, and
those our Savior mentions, who should boast of the miracles they had wrought
in his name, which Christ does not deny, but only rejects them for being
workers of iniquity; and in Judas, who wrought miracles with the other
Apostles, although we do not read that the Blessed Virgin, or Joseph, or John
the Baptist ever wrought any. He observes from St. Austin that God gives this
power of miracles to evil men when he denies it to good. 1. Lest the power
should be attributed to the instrument: or seem to take its virtue from thence.
2. Because miracles are not wrought for the good of the efficient, but for the
good of others. 3. Lest men should set a higher value upon miracles than upon
true goodness and virtue. For, Says he, this is a false consequence, such a
man does miracles, therefore he is approved or his doctrine; such a place
miracles are wrought in, therefore such a place is approved; for by this
consequence, wicked men, Heretics and Infidels would be approved, of whom it
is certain that they have wrought miracles. 4. Such kind of miracles though
they may be done by Heretics can never be wrought sor the confirmation of
error; for that were to charge God himself with falsehood; but miracles of the
other sort he grants may be wrought for the confirmation os errors, because
they are such as do not exceed the Devils power: and in this case to know
whether they come from God or the Devil, must be taken from the end for which
they are wrought; as he shows from S. Austin. From which discourse of Lingendes
it follows, that since the confirmation of Christian Re^igion by miracles, the
only certain way of ^istinguishing true and deceitful miracles is from the end
for which they were wrought: For he grants that to all outward appearance,
Heretics and false Christians may do as great ^s any; nay God himself may use
them as his Instruments to confirm Truth by; but we are sure God cannot employ
his Power to confirm a falsehood. Since therefore we are forewarned that men
shall appear with such signs and lying wonders, as would if it were possible
deceive the very Elect; since no distinction can be made from the things
themselves between the effects of a created invisible power, and of a divine in
most things which pass for miracles; since Heretics may be Gods instruments in
the most divine miracles for a good end, it necessarily follows that the
pretense of miracles is far from proving the truth and infallibility of the
Church wherein they are wrought, till it be made appear, that they are truly
divine miracles, that they are wrought for this end to prove this Churches
infallibility, and that the Churches infallibility does not contradict any part
of that doctrine which has been already confirmed by the miracles of Christ
and his Apostles.

2. They can never prove that the miracles wrought in the Roman Church, were
wrought for no other end but to prove the Infallibility of their Church. When
Christ and his Apostles wrought miracles to prove their Infallibility, they
wrought the miracles themselves, and declared that this was the end for which
they were wrought that men might believe that they were Teachers sent from God;
but there is nothing like this in the miracles of the Roman Church: They are
generally pretended to be done at some Shrine or Monument, or by a vision of
some Saint, and among the most credulous people, but by no means for the
satisfaction of Infidels or Heretics, whose very presence is enough to spoil a
well contrived miracle; but supposing the things true which are reported, what
does a restored Leg to a poor Boy at Zaragosa in Spain signify to the proof of
the Roman Churches Infallibility? or Father Marcellus his cure at Naples by a
vision of Xaverius, to the proof of Pius the fourths Creed? If they will prove
any thing by this way of miracles, let their Missionaries here among us, whom
they account Infidels and Heretics, do the same things that Christ and his
Apostles did for the conversion of Jews and Gentiles. Let them heal all manner
of diseases as pub^^ckly, as commonly, as perfectly, as sudden^y as they did;
and with no more art or cere^ony; let us see them raise the dead, and not ^hink
we will be put off with painted Straws, (...) counterfeit Trances, which we
hope they ^re ashamed of themselves; such things, I as^^ure them, tend not to
the credit of their ^ower of miracles among us, and do not much ^elp our faith
in the belief of things done at ^ great distance and in such places where
credulity and superstition reign. If you do miracles in earnest do them before
enemies, as Christ and his Apostles did, give us leave to stand by, that we may
be satisfied from the circumstances of them that they are true miracles, and
wrought to testify that your Teachers are sent from God. But you do not
pretend to work miracles to confirm the Authority of your Teachers, for then of
all persons your Popes should work the greatest miracles, and the Bishops who
sit in General Councils, among whom this Infallibility is lodged, therefore
there is no parallel between the miracles done in the Church of Rome, and those
which were wrought by Christ or his Apostles. If all that had been pleaded in
the Apostles times for their divine commission had been only that a poor Boy
had his Leg cut off and strangely restored, or that some persons were suddenly
cured of a dangerous disease by the vision of an Apostle, would this have ever
satisfied the world, that the Apostles were Persons sent from God and assisted
by an infallible Spirit? Supposing the matters of Fact were true, it might be
reasonably demanded, why God might not do such extraordinary cures in some rare
cases, without making that Company of men infallible among whom they are done?
For we see their own Writers acknowledge, that God may do real miracles even
among Pagans and Infidels, to give testimony to his universal Providence. And
Suarez particularly distinguishes in this case of miracles, saying that a
miracle may be wrought two ways. 1. Without respect to (...) d^ Fi^ (...) Sect.
3. ^. 10
any truth at all to be confirmed by it, but only for the benefit of him that
receives it, as in case of a miraculous cure or such like. 2. When it is
wrought purposely to confirm the truth of a doctrine. Now I say, supposing I
should grant all that E. W. contends for, as to the truth of the two miracles
he insists so much upon, viz. the cure of F. Marcellus, and the restored Leg at
Zaragosa, what can this prove as to their Churches infallibility, if according
to Suarez such miracles may be wrought only for the benefit of those who
receive them? Del-Rio says this is no good consequence, such a one wrought
miracles therefore Del. Roll. disquis. Magic. l. 2. c. 7.
his faith is true, because God may work miracles by Insidels, but this
consequence, he says, is good, such a one wrought miracles to confirm the
faith which he professed, therefore his says is true, because God cannot work
miracles purposely to confirm a falsehood. But withal, he says, elsewhere,
that the faith being now established, there is little or no necessity L. 4. c.
4. quaest. 5. sect. 2.
of miracles to confirm it. Supposing then some true miracles to be wrought in
the Roman Church, what consequence can be thence drawn for that Churches
infallibility in doctrine, if those miracles are not wrought for that end? as
E. W. never undertook to prove that they were. And if the consequence will not
hold as to a particular person for the truth of his faith, from the bare
working of miracles, neither can it for the truth or infallibility of a Church,
for the same reason; for if God may work miracles by Infidels, he may likewise
in a false or corrupt Church. Maldonat, another Jesuit confesses Mal^at. in
M^. 16, 17.
that since the Christian Religion has been confirmed by miracles in the
Churches beginning, there is no necessity of miracles for that end, and quotes
Gregory and Bid for it; who compare the power of miracles to the watering of a
plant which is only need^ul at first and is given over when it has taken root.
So that whatever miracles they suppose to remain in the Church, they do not
look on them as wrought for the confirmation of any necessary part of Christian
faith, such as the Churches Infallibility is asserted to be by E. W. Andradius
says that miracles are oftimes Andrad. def^l. fi^. Trid. l. 2.
false, but always weak proofs of a true Church. Ferus, that the doctrine of a
Church is not to be proved by miracles, but miracles Fer. in Math. 24. v. 23,
24.
by the doctrine, viz. because Christ has forewarned us of false Prophets
doing so many signs and wonders. So that Acosta says, Acosta de te^p. noviss.
l. 2. 6. 9.
that in the time of Antichrist it will be a hard matter to discern true and
false signs, when these later shall be many and great, and very like the true;
and he quotes it from Hippolytus whom he calls an ancient Writer, that
Antichrist shall do far greater miracles than the cure of Marcellus, or the
restored Leg at Zaragosa, viz. that be shall raise the dead as well as cure the
diseased, and have command over C. 18.
all the elements. And I would understand from E. W. whether Antichrists Church
will not then be proved as insallible in this way as the Church of Rome?
Cajetan determines that Cai^t. de c^pt. virciaus c. 1.
the Church has no ground to determine any matter of doctrine now on the
account of miracles; because the D^vil may do such things which we cannot
distinguish from true miracles, as in great cures, etc. and because signs were
given for unbelievers, but the Church ^ow has the Revelation of Prophets and
Apostles to proceed by: and because miracles prove only a personal faith, i. e.
of one that says he is sent from God; and because the doctrine of the
Scripture is delivered to us with so much certainty, that if an Angel from
Heaven should deliver any thing contrary to it we are not to believe him; and
lastly, because the most authentic testimonies of miracles among them, viz. in
the Canonization of Saints, are not altogether certain, because it is written
every man is a liar: and he supposes that faith must stand on a more infallible
certainty than that of their miracles. And many of their most learned Writers
do assert, that there can be no certainty of the truth of any miracles among
them, but from the Churches approbation; which is in effect to say, they do not
believe the Church infallible because of their miracles, but they believe their
miracles to be true, because they believe their Church to be infallible. For
which Paulus Zacchias gives this reason, because Paul Za^chiae Quaest Medico.
Legal^s. l. 4. tit. 1. q. 1. n. 5, 6, 10.
wicked men and Devils may not only do miracles in appearance, but such as are
really so, as the instruments of divine Power; and because credulous people are
very apt to be deceived with false miracles instead of true. And after he has
laid down the conditions of a true miracle he has a chapter on purpose to
enquire, why since miracles very rarely q. 4. n. 3.
happen, yet so many are still pretended to in the Roman Church? One cause he
assigns of it is the monstrous credulity of their people in this matter of
miracles, who make so many, that he says, if they were to be believed,
miracles would be almost as common as the ordinary effects of nature; for no
odd or unusual accident happens, but among them passes for a miracle; no man
escapes out of a dangerous disease (especially if by the disturbance of his
Fancy, he imagines he had a vision of some Saint as Xaverius or the like) but
he gives out he obtained his recovery by a miracle; no man avoids any great
danger or trouble (if he chanced to think of the Blessed Virgin in it, or made
any addresses to some Saint, for I do not find that praying to God or Christ is
so effectual for miracles as praying to the Saints is) but this is cried up for
a miracle. Riolanus gives the relation of a man Riola. Arth opogra^^ l. 1. c.
15.
that was hanged and his body delivered to the Physicians to be dissected, who
found there was some lise in him, and by letting blood and other means they
recovered him, who afterward returning to his own Country Oetingen, where
there was a celebrated image of the Blessed Virgin, this very recovery was
there painted for a substantial miracle. But to return to Zacchias: miracles,
says he, are made so common among us, as though God had nothing else to do
with his Power but to pervert the course of nature by it at the beck of any
idle fellow; as it God did not manage his power, as he does all things else,
with infinite wisdom; as if God employed his extraordinary power without great
and most urgent causes. For when it was necessary to show his power for the
confirmation of the Christian Religion and the Satisfaction of unbelievers,
then all persons might see the wonderful works of God: but now, says he, when
the Truth of Christianity is known it would be to no purpose for God to show so
many miracles. But whence then comes it, that so many miracles are still talked
of? This arises, says he, from the devotion of some who attribute ordinary
effects of nature to a miraculous Power; and from the Superstitious folly and
fraud of others who will not endure any thing cried up for a miracle should be
ever questioned by any; but say, it is profane, Atheistical, and which is
somewhat worse, heretical to do it. Whereas poor wretches, they do not think
what injury they do the Catholic cause, while they go about to strengthen it
with lies and forgeries; when the Christian doctrine is already fully confirmed
by the most true and undoubted miracles of Christ and his Apostles. What need
they then to feign any new miracles? Does God need your lies, will ye talk
deceitfully N. 7.
for him? as I may justly use the words of Job, says he, of these men. Another
cause of so much talk of miracles in the Roman Church, he says, is Ignorance;
whereby any extraordinary accident, though such as might happen, where
Christianity was never known, is extolled for a miracle.

Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt, haec fieri divino numine rentur.
From hence he proceeds to particulars, and shows, that most of those who are
accounted N. 9.
possessed among them are Melancholy and Hypochondriacal men and Hysterical
women: and then examins the pretense to Inspiration Quaest. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11.
and Prophecy, to raptures and ecstasies, to miraculous cures, to prodigious
fastings, to incorruption of bodies, to raising from the dead and shows under
every one of these heads, how very often the mere effects of nature pass for
miracles in the Roman Church; to whose learned discourses I refer the Reader:
and we may easily understand the meaning of such a person, when he tells us
after all this, that the Church will not suffer men to be deceived about
miracles, but such as the Church approves are to be approved. Now let any one
judge whether such persons who receive no other miracles, but such which the
Church commands them to believe, could ever imagine that the Infallibility of
their Church was proved by such miracles, which they would not believe to be
true, unless they first believed the Church which approved them to be
infallible. Fortunatus Fortun. Scacch. de notis and signis sa^ctitatis s^ct. 8.
c. 1.
Scacchus, a man of great Authority in Rom^, grants that it is a very easy
matter to take false miracles for true; and that no certain argument can be
taken from Tables which are hung up at Images or shrines; that wicked men may
do real miracles, which he proves from Scripture and History, and the continued
practice in their Church, from whence he concludes, that no argument can be
drawn for the sanctity of any Person, but only from such miracles as are
approved by the Roman Church. For, says he, it belongs only to the Authority
of the Roman See, and the Bishop of Rome to determine which are true miracles?
because the promise of infallibility is only made to the Roman Church and the
Head of it. From whence he concludes, that no other Bishop has any Power to
approve miracles, especially if they be supposed to be wrought by an
uncanonized Saint.

For we are to understand, that the great use of miracles in the Roman Church,
has not been pretended to be for proving the faith or Infallibility of the
Church, but for an argument of Saintship of those who are to be Beatified or
Canonized. So Aquinas determines, that miracles are either wrought to Aq^in 2.
2. quaest. 178. art. 2.
confirm the truth of a doctrine preached; or for the demonstration of the
Sanctity of a Person; and therefore in the Process of Canonization, one main
enquiry is, about the miracles wrought by the Person who stands for the
preferment of Canonization. In the Process about the Canonization of Andreas
Corsinus presented to Paul 5. the Auditors of the Rota, say, that to the Being
Canonized, it is concluded by all to be necessary Proc^ssus Cano^iz. B. Andr^ae
Co^sini part. 2. sect. 3.
that the person have wrought miracles: and there they agree that it is not
necessary to a miracle to be wrought for the confirmation of faith, seeing
miracles may be done for another end viz. for the proof of the Sanctity of the
Person. And such miracles say they, are those which are done among Catholics,
for whose sake miracles would be necessary on no other account: because
miracles are a sign not to believers but to unbelievers; whence, as they well
observe from Isidore St. Paul cured the Father of Publius by a miracle, but
pres^ribed to Timothy a natural remedy. And (...) (...) many other processes of
Canonization to the same purpose viz. to prove Contelor. de Canoniz. Sanctorum.
Cap. 17. n. 7.
that it is not necessary to a miracle that it be done for the confirmation of
any part of Christian faith. Since therefore the far greatest number of the
miracles in the Roman Church, are such as are wrought for another end how can
they from them prove the infallibility of their Church? unless they can make it
appear that where ever there are true Saints, the Church is Infallible. From
which it appears, that the miracles of the Roman Church ought no more to be
compared with those of Christ and his Apostles as to the Testimony by them
given to Infallibility, than in point of credibility; and that in both respects
they are, so infinitely short of them, that nothing but the height of impudence
could make any man, pretending to be Christian, to assert, that as great (nay
greater) miracles have been done by the Roman Church, as ever were done by
Christ or his Apostles, in which subject I have taken the more pains, not
merely to detect the frauds and impostures of the Roman Church; but to preserve
and vindicate the Honor of Christianity, lest that should suffer by the
intolerable rudeness of these comparisons.

The END.
Books sold by Henry Mortlock, at his Shop, at the Phoenix, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall.
A Rational account of the grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies Relation of a conference from the
pretended answer of T. C. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. in Folio.

Cotgraves Dictionary French and English, in Folio.

Sermons Preached by Anthony Farindon. Folio.

House of Mourning, in Folio.

Sheppards Practical Counselor, in Folio.

Animadversions on the 4. part of Cooks Institutes, by William Prynne Esquire Folio.

Observations upon Millitary and Political afairs, by the Right Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle. Folio.

Origines Sacrae, or a Rational account of the grounds of Christian faith, by
Edward Stillingflee^, D. D. in Quarto.

Irenicum, a Weapon salve for the Churches wounds, by Edward Stillingfleet, D.
D. In Quarto.

The being and well being of a Christian, in 3. Treatises, by Edward Reyner,
late Minister at Lincoln. In Octavo.

A Fathers Testament. In Octavo.

The History of the Administration of Cardinal Ximenes Great Minister of State
in Spain. In Octavo.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of salvation in the Communion of it, in answer to some Papers of a
Revolted Protestant; wherein a particular account is given of the Fanaticisms
and divisions of that Church. By Edward Stillingfleet. D. D. Octavo.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics. In Octavo.

The Original of Romanees. In Octavo.

Hools Greek Testiment. In Twelves.

Hodders Arithmetic. In Twelves.

Drexelius on Eternity. In Twelves.

The Advice of Charles the 5. Emperor of Germany and King of Spain; to his son
Philip the second, upon his resignation of his Crown to his said Son, in
Twelves: now in the Press and will speedily be published.

Sermons Preached upon several occasions, (five of which were never before
Printed) with a discourse annexed concerning the true Reason of the sufferings
of Christ, wherein Crellius his answer to Grotius, is considered by Edw.
Stillingfleet, D. D. In Folio.

Knowledge and Practice; or a plain Discourse of the Chief things necessary to
be known, believed and practiced in order to salvation, by S. Cradock, in
Quarto: a Book very useful for private Families, both sold by Henry Mortlock,
at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White-Hart in West-minster
Hall.

FINIS.

