A LETTER FROM Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Thomas Scot, Io. Berners, and John
Weaver Esquiers, delivered to the Lord FLEETWOOD: OWNING Their late Actions in
endeavoring to secure the Tower of London, and Expostulating his Lordships
defection from his Engagement unto the Parliament.

Printed in the Year 1659.

A LETTER
From Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Thomas Scot, Io. Berners, and John Weaver
Esquiers, delivered to the Lord Fleetwood:
Owning their late Actions in endeavoring to secure the Tower of London, and
Expostulating his Lordships defection from his Engagement unto the Parliment.
SIR*
UNderstanding you have received* some disturbance of late in examining diverse
persons about a design to surprise the Tower, to save your further trouble we
do hereby freely own our utmost and hearty endeavors to have put that place
into more faithful and confiding hands, and that by Authority from the Council
of State, who at the passing of that Resolve, had the sole Legal Power from
the Parliament of ordering directing, and disposing of all the Garrisons and
Forces of this Common wealth, both by Sea and Land; An Action so Honest and
Honorable, as would not only have given check to your Exorbitances at
Wallingford-House, and White Hall, but was most necessary to the preserving
the Peace and Safety of this great City, by giving advantage to them, to put
themselves into a Regular Posture of Defense, and such an Encouragement to the
sober Party amongst them, as would (through Gods mercy) have utterly defeated
the Designs of the Common Enemy.

Sir, Let us tell you this Design was not so vain but that we had (by the
blessing of God) possessed that place some weeks since, had we not been
frustrated by our mistake in the Courage and Fidelity of a Person, whose
Opportunity, Interest and Duty, (if not Principles) gave us better hopes;
But in this Age we are to complain and wonder at nothing, yet we cannot but
highly resent the Confidence of sending for one of our number by a party of
Soldiers; As if Redcoats and Musketts were a Non Obstante to all Law and
public Privilege, not as if that person or any of us are afraid or ashamed
to own the Enterprise before any that have a lawful Authority to demand an
account of it, which we are sure no single Person, Juncto or Pack of Men at
White Hall, or VVallingford-House have a pretense to.

Sir, We have the witness with our own Spirits that we have and do Cordially
wish the preservation and good of you and your Family, but if the Lord has
said, you shall not hearken, but be hardened in your way, we must acquiesce in
his Providence, and with sorrow look upon that Ruin which is flowing in upon
you, as upon one in whom we thought we had seen some good.

Sr. consider that in the day of trouble which is certainly coming upon you,
what support you will have to your spirit when you shall be assaulted with the
shame you have brought upon God's people, with the breach of Faith to the
Parliament, from whom you received your Commission; with the ruin you have
brought upon your native Country (unless the Lord by his own almighty Arm
prevent it) and with the misery you have led the poor Soldiers into; who
instead of being the instruments of securing and settling the Peace and Liberty
of these Nations, enjoying the honor and quiet thereof, their arreares fully
paid, future pay and advancement settled and established, in order and with the
blessing of their Countrymen, are now become the instruments of nine men's
ambition, have made the whole Nation their enemies, and are exposed again to
the hardship and hazard of a new unnatural War, without prospect of ever
hoping that the issue of these affairs can leave their new Masters so rich
(though conquerors) as to satisfy their arreares, or so secure as to trust
preferment in any hands but such whose fanatic principles or personal
relations makes them irreconcilable to the public interest: But God (we
trust) has raised up a deliverer, having by admirable providence put an
opportunity and power into the hands of General Monck the ablest and most
experienced Commander of these Nations whom he has also spirited to stand firm
for the interest of this Commonwealth, as well against a Rebellious party of
our own forces as the designs of the common enemy (notwithstanding all
causlesse and false aspersions maliciously cast upon him) being warranted in
his present actings by especial Commission and Authourity from the Council of
State, whereas yours is that only of the Sword. Our prayers and earnest request
for you and all honest men amongst you are, that you may timely join with him,
and partake of the honor and blessing of his actions, and your true repentance
shall be a greater rejoicing* then your defection was a trouble. When
providence shall have separated the precious from the vile, and no have
suffered our scumme to boil in, but shall have placed the Sword and Civil
Authority in the hands of men ofthe best and soberest principles.

Sir be not so far deceived as to think sober men see not through the mask of
this strange new Parliament, whose Liberty* and safety, either of meeting or
debating must be at your pleasures, who having taken upon you, to be
Conservators of the cause, will only make use of them as your Assessours and
Tax-gatherers: The present interrupted Parliament being the sole lawful
Authority, and which can only be hoped to make the Sword subservient to the
Civil interest, and settle the Government in the hands of the people, by
successive and free Parliaments lawfully derived to them.

Sir, we have in sincerity given you our sense, and shall leave you to him that
disposes ofall men's hearts, and remain

December 16 1659. For the Lord Fleetwood late Lieuetenant General of the
Army. Your Servants so far as you shall be found to serve the public Anth.
Ashley Cooper. Thomas Scot* Io. Berners, John Weaver.



