THE HISTORY OF TAMERLAN The GREAT.

Taken out of ALHACENT, the Emperor's Historian, and some other Arabian
Manuscripts.

By the Lord de Sainctyon.

Now Englished by M. D'Assigny, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for S. Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holburn, 1679.

TO THE HIGHBORN PRINCE, HIS GRACE, JAMES. Duke of Monmouth, etc.
IF Tamerlan the Great were this day alive, he would doubtless approve of this
most worthy Choice that I have here made of your Graces Noble Person and Name,
to place at the Frontispiece of this exact Narrative of his Life and Conquests.

He was a Sovereign Prince, of an Heroic Spirit, of an undaunted Courage, and
of an admirable Conduct in War. He was called betimes to make use of these
great Virtues at the Head of an Army, where Providence always Crowned his
Actions with Success. At first he rose out of a small Province of Asia, but in
a few years, he spread the Glory of his Name and Victories, all over that part
of the World. He was a Prince so exact in the Execution of Justice, and of so
singular a Piety and Goodness, that the Christian Profession, as well as his
own Religion, flourished all over his Dominions under his Protection, And his
greatest Enemies thought themselves happy at last, to have been Conquered, and
to be Governed by a Tamerlan.

The whole Nation, Great Sir, if not the whole World, sees your Graces Noble
Soul enriched with the same extraordinary Virtues, and divine Qualities.
Providence has also led you out betimes, and caused you to march after
Tamerlan, in the same Paths of Honor. The safety of Europe has called your
Grace into the Field, to show your Valor and Conduct, to give Laws to unruly
Enemies, and set Bounds to the unjust Greatness of ambitious Neighbors.

Your Graces noble Mind, your Courage, your Fame, and Victories, appear to us
as glorious in this Northern World, under our Monarch of Great Britain, as
Tamerlan's ever did, either under the King of Parthia his Father, or the Grand
Cham of Tartary his Uncle. And your Graces sincere Devotion for our Protestant
Religion, your mild and courteous Behavior, your great Affection and daily
Services for the English Nation, have rendered your Name Sacred every where in
City and Country, and caused us all to look upon you as a second Tamerlan.

Did Providence put into your Hands the same Power, Opportunities, and
Authority, we should doubtless see, through your Graces Wisdom and Courage, the
English Name rendered as famous all over Europe, and as dreadful to our proud
and insulting Neighbors, as ever the Parthian was to the Moscovites, the
Turks, the Mammeluks, and other Barbarians, forced to submit to the Empire of
Tamerlan the Great.

This notable Resemblance, together with your Graces Affability, Mildness, and
most sweet Disposition, has encouraged me to this Presumption, for which the
greatness of my respects, the Excellency of the History, and the Nobility of
the Subject will, I hope, mediate for, and obtain a pardon from your Graces
goodness.

If I may be so happy in this Address to give your Grace some little
satisfaction, and delight you in the reading of the brave Exploits of this
Hero, as Alexander was in the perusal of the Warlike Actions of Achilles, and
cause your Grace to cast an Eye of Favor upon this small Treatise, and its
mean Author, I shall attain to the chief End aimed at by this Dedication. God
preserve your Grace for the good of this Nation, and give me leave to be in
word and deed, with all humility and submission,

Great Sir, Your Graces most humble, most faithful, and devoted Servant, M.
D'Assigny.

THE HISTORY OF TAMERLAN the Great.
THE Divine Providence seems to take a delight sometimes to surprise and
startle the minds of men, with the strange and unexpected Revolutions and great
Changes that happen in the World: Such as are the terrible Earthquakes that
bury Cities and Provinces in their Ruins, the irresistible Floods that carry
all before them, the sad Fires that turn into Ashes in the twinkling of an Eye
the beautiful Works and the proud Fabrics of many Ages. This Divine and wise
Providence seems also to take a delight, to produce in the World, in the
greatest times of need, those admirable souls and Great Men, who come as
Blessings to Mankind, to banish away all Confusion and Disorder, and settle
Peace and Happiness amongst men; like so many skilful Physicians they come to
purge Nature from all its ill humors.

Cyrus, Alexander, and Caesar were Agents of this Divine Providence, employed
for that charitable purpose. So likewise when Bajazet, that cruel Emperor of
the Turks, destroyed the Provinces of Asia and Europe, and made a havoc of his
Neighbors, Gods Providence chose Tamerlan the Great, to give a check to his
Pride and Cruelty, and stop him in his full career, wherein he intended to
Conquer the World.

The History of this great Hero I shall now represent, that it may encourage
and direct all Martial Spirits in the Employment of War, and inform the rest of
the World with a just and true Account of the brave and glorious Actions of
this Noble Conqueror.

CHAP. I. Of the Birth and first Years of Tamerlan.
TAmerlan signifies Celestial Grace. He was the Son of Og King of Zagatay, or
of the Parthians, Nephew of the Grand Cham of Tartary, and not the Son of a
vile Shepherd and Robber, as his Enemies have basely invented to discredit him,
out of malice or ignorance; that the geatest Revenues and Riches of the Eastern
Kings consist in the number of their Flocks and Herds, rather than in their
Golden Mines, which nevertheless are also there to be found in their Dominions.

The Province of Zagatay, or Sachetay, lies West from the Sogdians, and is
properly the ancient Parthia. The chief City is Samarcande, seated upon the
River Issarle. It grew so mighty in riches and number of men, as well as in
beauty, during the Reign of this Prince, that it may now be compared to any
other City of Asia.

When Tamerlan was happily born, in his person were discoverable from his
Infancy so many rare signs of a great Courage, and of a sweet Disposition, that
gladded the heart of his old Father, and obliged him to encourage those Gifts
of Nature, by the tuition and teaching of the rarest persons and Doctors of the
Country. After a good and speedy proficiency, this young Prince became the
delight, the love, and the wonder of his people. Before he was full fifteen he
had learned from his Masters all that they could teach him for the exercise of
his body, or to grace his mind. He had some insight in the Mysteries of
Astrology, and skill in Talismanical Figures, which is called the Astrology or
Divinity of Zoroaster and of the Bactrians, and which since has been much used
by the Arabians, as well as in riding of a Horse, handling of a Lance, drawing
of a Bow, and wrestling. The King his Father looked upon him then as worthy to
Govern the Kingdom, in which he employed him a little after; and the rather,
because he saw himself aged and weak, and desired nothing more but to sequester
himself from business, and to serve God the rest of his days in the
contemplation of his glorious Works.

But before he accomplished this great Design, though he had for his Son all
the esteem and good opinion that he deserved, he was not so unadvised as to
venture in such young hands the Government of his Realm, without a precaution
and sufficient provision for his advice and counsel; for if he had done
otherwise, he would have but exposed his Kingdom to those dangers and losses
which are not easily repaired.

To prevent all mischiefs of that nature, he placed near his Son, to ease and
direct him in the management of Affairs, Odmar and Haly, the two greatest and
wisest men of the Kingdom, noted for their Noble Birth and for their Experience
in Affairs, as well as for their other Virtues and fidelity to his Interest.

Tamerlan received these two great persons from his Father as the tokens of his
love, and since he never undertook any thing without their advice. He embraced
them always with so much respect and affection, that for fear of forgetting one
after his decease, he wore his Ring upon his Finger, as well to call to mind the
good services that he had received from him, as to hinder him from forgetting
two rare Precepts which he had given him, when he was to sit in Judgment, and
to do justice to his Subjects.

This noble way of acting soon won him the hearts of all his Subjects, so that
they looked upon him as their life and soul. From hence we may observe, That a
mild and loving disposition, together with an acknowledgment of good deeds, is
the strongest Charm that a Prince can use to win the souls of his people, and
get their prayers and affections.

In his young days, and at his first coming to the Crown, he enjoyed quiet and
peace at home, through his Fathers care to scatter and send at a distance all
troublesome spirits, who might have disturbed the State. But this peaceable
time he employed rather in Study than in his Divertisements; instead of
spending his hours in a Bath, the greatest delight of the Parthians, he spent
them in reading of Arabian Books, and in meditating the Precepts of Astrology,
at such moments only when he had finished his weightier Employments relating to
the Government of his Kingdom. In the discharge of which he often said, That
his good Genius did assist and help him, and that having so much favor from
Heaven he could not but succeed in all his Designs.

He had so great a care of and so much esteem for divine matters and things,
and for whatsoever concerned the Religion of his Forefathers, that he would not
be persuaded to suffer any alteration. Nevertheless he gave liberty to all
Religions that teach to worship one God Creator of all things, giving this as
his Reason, That his Divine Majesty did delight to be served and adored in
diverse manners. But he was a declared and an irreconcilable Enemy of Idols and
Idolaters, whom he always vexed.

He was of a middle stature, his shoulders were but narrow, his legs beautiful,
his body full and well set, a comely face with good features, and his eyes so
full of goodness, mildness, and majesty together, that it was no easy matter
to look steadfastly upon them. Therefore the Prince was wont to turn away out of
modesty his eyes from him that spoke to him, that he might finish his discourse
with more confidence. He had but little hair upon his Lips and Chin, it was
curled, very thick, and of a fine Ash Color; he wore it long, contrary to the
custom of the Tartars, who shave their Heads before, leaving but some few locks
behind, which they cover over with their Caps, but he had almost always his
head uncovered. Therefore when one of his Favorites asked him why he had not
his Head shaved as other persons of his Country; he answered, Understand my
Friend one thing which I will tell thee, because I will thereby acknowledge thy
affection to me, That my Mother was of the Race of Samson, therefore in
remembrance of my Forefather, she has commanded me to preserve my hair: This
is the cause of my long hair. This secret being afterward spread abroad,
gained to him the respect of all his Subjects, chiefly of his Army, who
imagined therefore some extraordinary virtue in his hair. This belief was
confirmed by his wonderful skill and strength in wrestling, because the
strongest Tartars were not to be compared to him, and that such as were foiled
thought it an honor, though overcome, to struggle with a Prince of so much
reputation.

This being the right description of Tamerlan, it is easy to be imagined, that
rest and a quiet life was not pleasing to him. But though his aim was at Glory
and Honor, he chose rather to check his Martial temper, than to invade his
Neighbors, and trouble their Peace without cause. Providence that had adopted
him suffered not long his courage to be without exercise: It led him upon this
great Theater of the World, there to appear in an eminent manner. We shall see
him next in his first goings out.

CHAP. II. Tamerlan's War with the Moscovites.
THE Moscovites broke the Peace: they were weary of that Rest which they had
long enjoyed; thinking themselves therefore so dreadful, that all their
Neighbors were to stand in awe of them: They made some In roads upon the
Territories that are on this side of Cazan and Astracam, and that border upon
both Empires. They had never received any damage from these Inhabitants: Their
intention was only to conquer them without any Right or Claim. They entered
therefore amongst them with their Army, and cau'sd every thing to pass through
Fire and Sword, sparing neither Towns nor Villages; besides, they plundered a
City bordering upon Zagatay, or Sachetay, and under Tamerlan's protection.

In this surprise, these poor Inhabitants, being not able to stop the fury of
those Northern Barbarians, sought a remedy from their Tears and Complaints, and
from the Power and Justice of their Protector. Tamerlan was sensible of their
wrongs, and the affront done to his Person and Government, by the Insolency of
the Moscovites, who had discovered so little regard of him. He promised
therefore to punish them, and check their cruelty and boldness: For that intent
he takes advice, what to do in this juncture, from his two faithful
Counselors, who encouraged him to declare an open War with the Moscovites, in
defense of his People and Confederates.

In the mean time Odmar and Haly, according to their Princes expectation and
Orders, were busy in gathering together all their Troops dispersed in
Garrisons, to raise new Soldiers, and form a considerable Body, with the
assistance of their Allies. At the first beginning of the Spring, Tamerlan, at
the Head of his Army, marches against his Enemies, who were encamped upon the
Borders, near the River Maspha.

The Moscovites were in all one hundred thousand Foot, and fourscore thousand
Horse; most of them old Soldiers, who had been in many Encounters with their
Neighbors.

Of this fourscore thousand Horse, ten thousand were Polanders, sent from the
King of Poland, newly reunited by a League with the Moscovites: Besides there
were eight thousand Hungarians, and many Noblemen of that Nation, under the
command of a great Lord, called Vladislaus. Tamerlan had in his Army threescore
thousand Horse, and one hundred and fifty thousand Footmen, brought up in
Arms, but they were not to be compared with the Moscovites, who had exercised
themselves in several Campagns; whereas the Parthians never saw an Enemy during
the Government of their King Og, who had always been at peace with all the
World.

At the sight of the Enemy, Tamerlan's warlike Courage and Martial fury was
kept in by the fear of a mistake: He thought it therefore wisdom to take a view
of their Camp, by which he understood that he could not go to them without
passing at the foot of a little Hill, which they were possessed of before his
coming. They had planted there six thousand of their Foot, who might have
strangely gawl'd Tamerlan's men, had they attempted to set upon the Moscovites,
on that side, and yet they were necessitated to begin the assault there; but
first Tamerlan judged contrary to the judgment of his Privy Council, that they
were first to beat the Enemy from that advantageous Post, and that without
engaging themselves in a Battle. The Moscovites were so well fortified in this
place, that it was no easy matter to force them. Tamerlan therefore draws them
down by a Stratagem: He gave Orders to twenty thousand Foot, commanded by Haly,
seemingly to assault the Hill, and when he saw the rest of the Army drawing
near to their assistance, he caused his whole Army to pass over the River of
Rosna; by that means he reduced the Enemy to a necessity of fighting.

This proceeding of Tamerlan was succeeded by two advantages: First it put his
Cavalry in security from the Guns and Darts of this little Hill, unto which
they had been otherwise exposed: Next it caused him to succeed in his design of
ending this War, which the Moscovite was resolved to protract. He was persuaded
that he could draw away his Men from this Post at his pleasure, in case of
necessity; and that in a Night, as he was wont, he could retreat back twenty
Leagues. But he found by experience this to be a real truth, That humane
wisdom, in that very moment when it is the most enlightened, is but dark and
blind.

These two Armies in the mean while were in sight of one another without
engaging; for they stood at a stand, looking at what passed upon the Hill,
where the Parthians, recruited from time to time, and in season, endeavored to
drive from thence the Moscovites, who, being assisted with continual succors,
made a stout resistance. The Fight lasted two hours with equal advantage on
both sides: for both Parties were encouraged by the many Witnesses that beheld
them. But Haly, at last, took this equality for an affront, or a kind of
defeat. This made him call upon his Men to do their uttermost, to force Victory
to declare for them. They obeyed his persuasion, and gave such a vigorous
onset, that their Enemies, weary and tired out with the former assaults, began
to give back by degrees; which when Tamerlan's Men perceived, his Parthians set
upon them so stoutly, that the others had no time to rally again together, but
shamefully fled, and forsook their Station.

This unexpected disgrace, instead of affrighting the Moscovites, and filling
them with fears, which are the usual sequels of such kind of defeats, filled
them with impatiency to be revenged, and make amends for their losses; chiefly
because they were reduced to a necessity of fighting by the nearness of the
Enemies approach, who had passed the River for that purpose, and from whom
there was no flying with safety. This made them passionately desire the signal.

The Moscovites Army was thus embatteled. The Van, led by the Prince of Russia
the Emperors Son, was composed of five and twenty thousand Horse, Poles,
Hungarians, and Moscovites, in a Body. They charged with their Lances in double
Files, leaving behind a sufficient distance to retreat, but this proved to
their disadvantage.

The main Battle, where their greatest strength was, consisted of forty
thousand Horse, followed by all their Infantry. The Emperor was there in
Person, with the greatest part of the Lords of his Court. The Rear was a great
Squadron of ten thousand Horse, in a square Body, of their best and compleatest
Troops.

Tamerlan's Army marched in another order: This Prince had divided all his
Cavalry into nineteen squadrons, every one consisting of six thousand Horse,
only his own squadron had ten thousand, and his Infantry stood in Battalions.

Odmar led the Van of nine squadrons of Horse, having forty thousand Foot upon
the Wings, twenty thousand on each hand.

The Body was commanded by Tamerlan, having ten squadrons of Horse, his own in
the middle, and fifty thousand Foot, all chosen Men, the ablest of his Army.

The Prince of Tanais, his Cousin, brought up the Rear, having forty thousand
Foot in six Divisions, and three thousand Horse, named Oliacks, or Dragoons, to
second them.

The Parthians, encouraged with a prosperous success upon the Hill, waited for
nothing but for the Signal, to fall on their Enemies. And Tamerlan himself,
when he saw them advance in so good order, to save them the trouble of marching
part of the way, met them in the middle, sending his orders to Odmar to go
forward: But this wise and experienced Captain, who alone was authorized by his
credit and long experience in War, to oppose the desires of his Prince, sent
him back word, that he would stop where he was; that he would wait upon the
Hill for the Enemy, and would not lose the advantage gained already of the
higher Ground, of the Wind and Sun. Three things that helped them to win the
day, and that incommoded so much the Moscovites Army, that during the Encounter
they had always Dust in their Eyes, so that by this means they were less able
to see to the wants of their Army.

Though at this time Tamerlan saw nothing in the Countenances, and on the Faces
of his Soldiers, but that which promised success and happiness, yet to
annimate them the more, he thought it fit to speak to them in this manner.

Tamerlan's Speech to his Army.
IT IS neither for Riches, my dear Companions, nor for larger Bounds to my
Empire, that we are to fight this Day: It Is for that which is far more
excellent and noble: It Is for the Glory and Honor of our Nation: It Is to show
these Enemies before us, that we are the same Parthians who put a stop to the
Roman Conquests; the same who were not to be daunted by those Lords of the
World. These that stand against you have neither their Courage nor Virtue. They
are but a rabble led on by Insolency and Brutality, who would never be so
audacious were it not for their numbers. I shall only recommend to you the
remembrance of your Ancestors Glory, and these considerations; that your Prince
is in the Encounter with you; that he never knew what it is to run away, or
fly from an Enemy; that he has made you pass over the River never to go back
without Victory in your Hands; and that he puts all his trust upon your
undaunted Courages and Faithfulness.

These words caused strange Transports in the minds of the Soldiers, which
made them break out into loud cries to be led on to the Battle. Their
furiousness was so great, that they were not to be kept in at the sight of the
Enemy. Odmar soon satisfied them, by sending to Tamerlan for the Sign, and word
of Command, when he saw the time convenient; but he was prevented by the
Moscovites, who charged first, and gave a furious onset. The Parthians received
them with an undaunted resolution, which had caused them to give back, if
Odmar, at that time, had not by his fall disordered his squadron. By this
accident his Cavalry began to shake, and was afterward broken, and himself
hurried away in the Crowd; so that he was forced, after a considerable loss of
Men, to shelter himself under the left Wing of his Infantry, on that side of
the Mountain whither the Prince had sent already six thousand Horse as a
recruit.

When he was mounted again, he rallied all his Men that he could pick up, and
fell upon the sides of the Moscovites Army, where the Hungarians were, who this
day behaved themselves so bravely, that only with three thousand Men they broke
through Tamerlan's Battle. At this he retreated, according to the Parthians
manner, which made the Enemies imagine them to run away. This fond conceit had
so puffed them up, that they thought the Victory to be already in their Hands:
But as soon as the Rear was come up, led by the Prince of Tanais, who had
rallied together about fourteen thousand Horse, and all the Foot; he obliged
the Moscovites to run away in their turn, after such extraordinary resistance,
that one may justly say, that their Virtue and Courage was forced to yield to
the greater number.

When the Parthians perceived that Victory smiled upon them, they pursued their
advantage so fiercely, that their Enemies had neither time to rally nor to
understand themselves.

Tamerlan was here wounded in the Forehead, and near the left Eye, having left
two Horses killed under him.

The Moscovites Army was totally routed, many Lords and chief Officers taken
Prisoners; the Emperor himself was once fallen into the Hands of a Parthian
Soldier incognito, but he happily saved himself, and met with ten thousand
Horse that had not been broken; with them he retreated ten Leagues, and for his
greater security he passed over a River in the Night, beyond which he rallied
together all that he could save of his Army.

His Cavalry behaved themselves in the Battle like Men of Courage, but when
they saw themselves forsaken of the Foot in the hottest Encounter, when they
were fiercely charged, and Fortune seemed to turn them her back, they were then
forced to yield to the Conqueror. They suffered therefore more than the
Infantry, that saved themselves along the Mountains in the dark of the night,
which favored them in all their flight.

Tamerlan, having pursued them three Leagues, returned to the Field, where he
solemnly gave God the praise for the Victory obtained.

The next day as soon as it was light he reviewed all his Army, and understood
that he had lost not above seven or eight thousand Horse, and between three and
four thousand Foot; whereas the Moscovites wanted seven and twenty thousand
Foot, and about fifteen or sixteen thousand Horse.

We must acknowledge that Odmar, this day, was the safety of his Prince and of
the whole Army; and that after his disgrace he behaved himself wonderfully well
and wisely, in that he assaulted the Enemy upon the Flanks, when they had
beaten both the Van and the Main Battle, and were going to fall upon the Rear,
led by the Prince of Tanais, under whose Wings Tamerlan was retreated. If Odmar
had not acted in this manner, the Moscovites would have doubtless, and with
ease, defeated the Rear, and won the honor of that glorious day. By this it is
easy to understand, how great is the advantage of that Commander, who having
pitched upon a Field, and chosen a favorable Ground and Place, waits
steadfastly for his Enemies coming, chiefly when he has both Wind and Sun to
fight with him. Tamerlan forgot not to mind his Soldiers and Captains of this
happiness. It is also certain, that when the Rear, is well commanded it is able
to restore the Battle when it is in a most desPerate condition, and to snatch
the Victory out of the hands of the stoutest Enemies.

As Soon as Tamerlan, as I have already said, had given thanks to God, and taken
a review of his Army, he commanded all the dead, both his own men and the
Enemies to be buried, and afterward he rewarded all those that had well
behaved themselves in the Fight. But his joy for the Victory was qualified with
the grief for the death of Haly; he was killed with an Arrow, as he was going
to the Fight, after that he had gained the Mountain, and performed Actions
worthy of an Immortal Glory. Tamerlan caused his Body to be embalmed, and to
remain with him in his own Tent, till he returned to Samarcande, where he
caused a stately Sepulcher to be made for him, which renders his name famous in
succeeding Ages, and gave a beginning to the glorious Structures, which he
caused afterward to be erected in his Capital City, and which have made it to
be one of the most famous Cities of the World.

Tamerlan, after this Victory, was not puffed up with Pride, as some of his Age
are in such great successes; many times they are so apt to forget themselves,
that they become unsufferable to their best Friends. But after the slaughter,
when he beheld so many thousands reeking in their Blood, he lamented at the
hard and unavoidable fate of such as command in great Armies; and addressing
himself to those that were about him. O how happy is my Father in his choice of
Peace, and in preferring a solitary and quiet life to this troublesome,
painful, and cruel employment of a Soldier, which he must sometimes embrace
that governs a Kingdom. Is it not grievous, that such an one cannot purchase to
himself Glory, but by the Death of so many millions of his own Species, and
oftentimes the destruction of his dearest Friends. In this manner Tamerlan
received, with displeasure, such bloody successes purchased at the price of so
many lives.

In the mean while he supplied the duties of his place, and gave Orders to
advance into the Moscovites Country; marching after their flying Army that were
rallied into a Body of thirty thousand Horse, which, together with the Foot,
seemed to be willing to venture another Battle, but their Emperor had no such
resolution, when he saw the Parthians so soon at his Heels, ready to enter into
his Country, where the People were frighted at the approach of so victorious an
Army. To secure himself and his Men, he passed over the River of Nifort: on the
other side he called together a General Council of Officers, who advised him,
for the preservation of his Subjects, to send a solemn Embassy to Tamerlan,
with Overtures of Peace, rather than to hazard another Battle against a Prince
who had justice on his side. They were the sooner invited to this, by the
generous behavior of Tamerlan with the Prisoners that he had taken; for
thereby he seemed to give an assurance, that he would not refuse reasonable
offers of Peace, and that after he had shown sufficient proofs of his Courage
and Power, he would likewise give some Tokens of his Moderation and Generosity.
In pursuance of this Design, the Moscovite sends him Ambassadors to treat of
Peace, and offer all possible amends for the wrongs sustained by his Subjects
In-roads into Tamerlan's Country.

When the Ambassadors were arrived at Tamerlan's Camp, they found a most
obliging reception. He was so far from insulting over their unhappiness, that
he seemed to pity them, and treated them with so much kindness, that though a
Conqueror, he seemed to have as much modesty as the Conquered. They declared
that they were come in their Masters name to desire a Peace, upon such
Conditions as he should propose, which they expected would be favorable, for
they were confident that he would use his Victory with moderation, which he was
to take rather as a kind gift of Fortune, upon which no person can settle his
assurance, than an evident proof of the greatness of his Forces. He answered
them, that he had taken up Arms only to protect his Subjects and Confederates
from the insults of the Moscovites; and if they had proved happy and
successful, he acknowledged himself to be therefore indebted to the great God
of Hosts, who had favored the justice of his Cause: That because he held and
had received this advantage from his pure goodness, he was not therewith puffed
up with pride; that they might have learned so much from the manner of
proceeding of the Parthians, who had it recommended to them from their
Predecessors, not to want courage in adversity, nor to be insolent in
prosperity; but to observe a moderation in both, and seek the execution of
Justice. He told them, that it was but just that they should give some
satisfaction to the Conqueror, and promise never to molest or trouble his
Allies; that they should pay down all the Expenses of the War, which amounted
to three hundred thousand Ducats, and that they should become Tributaries, and
give him yearly one hundred thousand Ducats; and that for the performance of
these conditions, they should deliver Hostages, which were to be renewed every
year; and that he for his part would grant them peace, and send home all their
Prisoners of War.

These Conditions were readily accepted, so that Tamerlan, full of glory and
satisfaction, returned to Samarcande to his Father, who was so much
disinteressed in the affairs of the world, that these prosperities of his Son
wrought no alteration upon his countenance, and in his discourse, no more than
in his mind.

But every where in the Princes march he was received in State with Arches of
Triumph, with Sports, and all the marks of a public joy and pomp, which
Tamerlan accepted as the signs of his Subjects affections with a grateful
acknowledgment of their love.

In these great causes of public joy he seemed to be very moderate and modest;
when a solemn Embassy came to him with rich Presents, to congratulate his
Victory, from the Grand Cham of Tartary his Uncle, with the offer of his only
Daughter in marriage, promising to cause all his Subjects to acknowledge him as
the Heir of his Empire, because he was his nearest Kin, and had no hopes in his
old age to be Father of any more Children.

This pleasing news was welcome to this young Prince, and the rather, because by
this great Succession, he was in hopes to be able to put in execution the
mighty things that he designed in his mind, which should immortalize his Name.
He prepared himself with all possible diligence for this journey toward
Quinsay, where the Emperor his Uncle lived. He was by his Orders received, as
in Triumph, by all the great Lords of the Court, as well as by all the
Inhabitants of this great City, who honored his arrival with the richest
shows, because he was one day to be their Sovereign, and the disposer of their
lives and fortunes.

The days immediately after his magnificent Entry were spent in sports and
gallantry, in Plays, Races, Encounters, and other Divertisements, in which the
vainglorious Tartars were glad to show their address and dexterity.

Yet Tamerlan met with none there that could beat him in all these Exercises.
He was so expert in them, in shooting with Bow and Arrows, and in fencing with
a sharp Sword, that he gained the admiration and love of all his Subjects.

At the end of six days spent in these delights, the Emperor caused him to be
solemnly crowned, with the applause and consent of all sorts of men, for the
Prince was desirous that this Solemnity should precede that of his Marriage,
that his Right to the Imperial Crown might be better secured, and that it might
not seem that the Empire fell to him by the marriage of his Wife, but by a
Lineal Descent, for Daughters in that Country cannot inherit the Crown.

Immediately after Tamerlan was married with all the splendor and glory
imaginable. In this occasion, all the magnificence and pomp of the old Rome
seemed to appear at Quinsay, to render this Solemnity more glorious.

After the Consummation of the Marriage, Tamerlan spent two Months at this
Court, with all the satisfaction and honor that he could desire; for he was
mightily beloved, and generally looked upon as the only hope of the Empire of
Tartary. But at last his natural inclination to return into his own City of
Samarcande, where he took more delight than in any other place of the World,
together with the desire to show himself to his own Subjects as the Successor
of the greatest Empire of the World, prevailed upon all other considerations,
and obliged him to take leave, with his beloved Spouse, of his Father-in-law,
and of all the Friends that he had got in that Court. He arrived in safety with
the Princess to this City, where he was expected with the longing of his
people. We must acknowledge that the abode is very pleasant, as well in regard
of its situation, as for a beautiful River that waters it, and renders it one
of the richest thereabouts for Trade, and the fertility of the Soil. At his
arrival he met there with the Ambassadors of several Princes, some were come
to congratulate him upon his new Promotion, others to make a League with him,
others to avoid his displeasure, that they might not have him for an Enemy. The
most pleasing Embassy was that of the Emperor of Moscovy; for besides the
stately gifts, several beautiful Horses, and the richest Furs of the Country,
as black Foxes, and Sables, which the Ambassadors brought, he saw himself
freed from the apprehension which he had conceived upon the news that this
Prince did gather together his Army. He understood that it was to march against
Poland, and some other Neighbors. The Poles solicited in vain the Prince by
their Envoys, and by some of the chief of the Court, whom they had gained to
send Succors. They alleged to persuade him, that the Moscovite was but a
reconciled Enemy, that he would quickly become more dreadful if he met with
success in this attempt; and if he could overcome so great a Kingdom as Poland
is, to add it to his former Dominions, that then it would be too late to seek a
remedy to prevent an evil, which was now to be hindered by sending some
succors and assistance to the Polanders, who would ever after become the
Parthians Scouts on that side of their Empire, and watch over the actions of
their common Enemy: Besides, it is a general rule amongst Princes, not to
suffer their Neighbors to grow too great, for fear of the usual consequence.
These reasons made no impression upon Tamerlan's mind: This was all the answer
he returned, That he had given to the Moscovite the dearest thing that he had
in the world, namely, his Faith, and that he would not be the first to break
it; but if on the other part he did offer to violate the Treaty, he knew how to
punish and bring him to reason, seeing that he had been able to overcome him
when he had nothing but the Kingdom of the Parthians, which is but a little
Province of Tartaria; and that now that he was become the Lord of so great an
Empire, he had less reason to stand in fear of him: that he was fully
persuaded, that in observing the rules of Equity and Justice with all the
world, he had reason to expect that his Sword would be able to make way into
new Empires, and other Kingdoms; and that whiles the Moscovites were employed
and busy in their designs, he would endeavor to proceed on in his purposes,
to get to himself honor and glory: that the Peace concluded and sworn to the
Moscovites, was known to all the Neighbors, and should never be broken by him;
besides, that it was honorable to himself, and advantageous to his people. He
told them, that he knew for certain that God punishes commonly Princes who
lightly engage themselves in unjust wars and quarrels; and that this Lesson
having been learned and carefully practiced by his Forefathers, had been a
means to raise and establish his Family, and caused it to continue for three
hundred years safe and secure, by this observation of the Rules of Justice; so
that in all that time none of his Predecessors have ever been crossed with
unsuccessful attempts, for the God of Hosts is a lover of Right and Justice. He
told them, that if he had, as some declared, so great a delight in War, and so
earnest a desire to appear in action, he had means enough, without committing
injustice, to satisfy his mind, by requiring from some of his Neighbors the
Lands which they had taken from the King his Father, who had never demanded any
restitution, out of a carelessness for the world, or an earnest inclination for
Peace: that in case of a refusal, it would be just and glorious for him to
recover his poor Subjects, and free them from the tyranny of an unlawful Power.

Odmar, who had been one of the most earnest persons to persuade him to assist
the Polanders, with an intention to weaken the Moscovites, yielded, or seemed
at least to yield to these reasons. He was mightily ravished with the justice
and equity of Tamerlan's discourse, and to consider how he moderated his
courage with the Rules of Reason: And though the judgment of many of the wisest
of the Privy Council, grounding their opinions upon the antipathy of both
Nations, and the difference of Religions, was contrary to that of Tamerlan,
they could not prevail to make him alter his resolution. Odmar alone knowing
the cause, strengthened it the more; so that it overcame the advice of those
who supported their opinion by undeniable Maxims of State, and the experience
of many Ages. Tamerlane nevertheless understood very well that they had good
reasons on their side, and that by resisting their judgments he acted against
the rules of humane wisdom; and it may be he had followed their advice, if it
had not been for another great design which he had found, the Great Cham was
the first Author of it in a Conference at Quinsay, he caused him to resolve
upon it: only Odmar had been privy to it; for there discoursing of the weighty
Affairs of the Empire, they took together a resolution to carry the War into
China, as well to drive those people into their ancient bounds over which they
had passed, as to secure on that side the Empire of Tartary. In the mean whiles
preparations were secretly made for this great Enterprise, for which the Prince
had a mighty fancy, without discovering his mind. He depended upon the succors
which the Emperor his Uncle had promised, and with which he was confident to
re-establish the Tartarians in their ancient possessions, and that he should
gain the Victory, because he had Justice on his side, which doubtless would
favor him in his undertaking. Whatever inclination he had naturally for War,
he had thought it a crime to engage himself in a quarrel only out of a motive
of ambition, or for pleasure, and he had looked upon himself as the Author of
all those desolations, disorders, and miseries which accompany and follow War:
Therefore he often desired of God the Spirit of Wisdom and Discretion, and the
power to overcome his own passions, which he would sometimes say was a more
glorious Victory for a Prince, than that which wins for him Kingdoms and
Empires. Therefore when he could find Justice on his side, and see that she did
encourage his strong inclination for War, then his Soul was fully satisfied in
it self, sending forth out of his eyes, and upon his countenance, certain
motions which signified his joy and inward contentment; chiefly when he was to
demand his own Territories, to free his Subjects from slavery, or deliver his
Allies from an apparent oppression.

There was never a Prince less guilty of presumption: he was never angry when
his judgment was opposed, but rather well pleased when he was overcome by
stronger reasons than his own; therefore he honored and respected so highly
wise and virtuous men, that without any regard to their Rank or Dignity, as
soon as he could hear of any, though in the deepest misery, he was wont to send
for him, receiving him in this obliging manner; My friend, I entreat thee let
me be a partaker of thy Wisdom, and I will make thee a partaker of my Riches.

Upon this subject he did often complain, that he had many gifts offered to him
of Gold, Silver, Jewels, and rich Movables, but very few did offer him those
Ornaments and Graces which are needful to govern well so many differing Nations
that he had in his Empire.

Amongst the chief Officers of his Court, and dearest Friends, there was a
Genoese, a Christian, named Axalla, who had been brought up with him from his
Cradle, and for whom the Parthians had a great respect. He was the chief
incourager to set the Prince on to great and noble Actions, and worthy
Enterprises. The difference in Religion never hindered Tamerlan from listening
to him, and believing him; for, as I said before, when God alone, the Creator
of Heaven and Earth was worshipped, he never troubled himself, nor inquired
into the differing Modes of worship. He was wont to say, that it did become the
greatness of the Divine Majesty, to be served and adored by all the Nations of
the Earth, in diverse manners, according to the diversity of people. But he
hated all Idolaters, and would not suffer them to abide in his Dominions: So
that the Christian Faith which Axalla professed openly, hindered him not from
enjoying and possessing the greatest honors and dignities of Tamerlan's Army
and Court.

CHAP. III. The War proclaimed by Tamerlan against the King of China, but stopped
by the Revolt of a Calix, a great Lord of Tartary; his defeat, and Execution.
WHen Tamerlan had privately made sufficient preparations for the Expedition
that he had promised his Uncle, not only for the reasons already mentioned, but
also because it tended to the Public Peace, to employ the Subjects of so great
an Empire in a Foreign War; for otherwise either their numbers, or their
stirring dispositions, might have proved prejudicial to the State, every one
was surprised to see that the Cloud that had been long a gathering, was going
to fall upon China. The King of this large Country, who is named the Offspring
of the Sun, expected no such matter: But to acquaint him with the reasons of
such great preparations, Ambassadors were sent to him, to require a
restitution of all the Lands, Estates, and Feedings, which he had taken from
the Tartars, contrary to the last Treaties. These Lands are lying beyond a
River called Tachii, and beyond that famous Wall which bound both Empires, and
which the King of China caused to be built to secure himself and people from
the frequent Inroads of the warlike and restless Tartarians. What answer this
proud Monarch would make to this Embassy was known before; therefore all the
Troops were commanded to advance and hasten to their general Rendezvous.

The Parthians were to meet at Hirdas of Baschir, where the whole Army was to
join them; but the Tartarians were ordered to gather together in the Wilderness
of Ergimul, where Tamerlan with all his Forces was to come to them at a certain
day.

The Grand Cham's Army had two hundred thousand fighting men, all well
disciplined and inured to labor and pains. In this Army besides were several
considerable Lords, and worthy Commanders, who had rendered themselves famous
in many Encounters and Wars, in which the Emperor, before the decline of his
Age, had been engaged, and by which he had enlarged the bounds of his great
Empire.

When Tamerlan's Ambassadors were returned out of China, they brought this
insolent answer, that this proud Prince, puffed up with a strange conceit of
his own power, wondered that the King of the Parthians was so bold to make War
upon him; that he judged it more reasonable for him to rest satisfied with that
which he could take away from him with his mighty Army; that he regarded not
the progress that Tamerlan had made with his Forces, nor their successes
already, they were too weak to be compared with the numerous Armies of the
Chinese.

This proud Answer caused all deliberation to cease. Tamerlan instantly sent a
Messenger to the Emperor, to let him understand the posture of Affairs, and
this vainglorious Answer of the King of China. In the mean while, he gave all
necessary orders for Provisions and Ammunitions to be sent to the Rendezvous of
the Army from all parts, and for the Tartars Army to advance forward, with an
intention to join both his Armies in few days. But before his departure, he was
willing to take his leave of the King his Father, and recommend his just Cause
and Expedition to his Prayers.

This good Parent being sensibly moved at the goodness and piety of his Son,
embraced him several times. After many hearty wishes for his prosperous
Expedition, he spoke to him in these terms, Farewell my Son, I shall see you no
more: I feel my self departing to my final rest; I am going to exchange this
perishing life, so full of misery, for another more happy. Then he took his
Royal Ring from off his Finger, and gave it to his Son, without enquiring into
the causes of his Wars. The old Father called Odmar, and spoke to him to
recommend his Sons concerns to his care and fidelity, in a manner so full of
gravity and goodness, that he seemed to have something in him more than humane.

After this the Prince returned to Samarcande, where the Empress his Spouse
was, whom he intended to carry with him in the wars, according to the Custom of
that Nation. And as he was naturally very thankful for the services that he had
received, he visited the Tomb of his faithful servant Haly, and according to
the manner of his Law, he caused prayers to be said, during three days entire,
for the peaceable rest of his Soul. Finally, he gave order to the Government of
his Kingdom, and for the preservation of the Frontier Towns, and committed all
to the inspection of Samay, a man of great worth and experience, who had
tutored him in his young days. Tamerlan could not easily forget such kind of
services, he had a particular respect for those that taught him Virtue; he kept
for them as much affection, as if he had been still under their tuition. This
generous inclination, so full of goodness, made him highly reverenced and
beloved of his People. He went from Samarcande to Hirdas of Baschir, where his
Army was quartered, consisting only of one hundred thousand Foot, and fifty
thousand Horse. There he gave orders to the rest of the Army, to march as soon
as he should send them word.

His greatest dependency was upon the Forces of the Grand Cham his Uncle, who
mightily encouraged this War. But when he was at the Rendezvous, he was forced
to make a stop, because of his indisposition, occasioned chiefly through the
change of the Air, as his Physicians imagined.

In the mean while the Army of the Grand Cham was upon the march, under the
Command of Calibes; and for fear the rumor of his Distemper should cause any
disturbance in the Empire, unto which he was newly promoted, he was careful to
inform by Messengers, very often, his Uncle, of the condition and temper of his
Body.

He had good cause to suspect, that a certain great Lord of the Country, named
Calix, was neither his Friend, nor content with his Promotion, because he had
not been with him, to acknowledge and render him homage, as the other Lords of
the Empire. Though at that time men discoursed of Calix, in a manner, that was
able to beget a jealousy in Tamerlan, his good disposition would not suffer
him to take any notice of it, neither did he think it convenient to attempt any
thing during his Uncles Life, or trouble the Peace of an Empire newly put into
his hands. Some thought that what he had done was out of policy, to oblige more
strongly to himself the hearts of his new Subjects, who had already a love for
him; and to render himself more dreadful to those that were angry at his
Promotion, he had craftily suffered this Cloud to gather together, and the
beginnings of a Civil War to ripen, that he might gain to himself more honor,
credit, and reputation, by dissipating and destroying it; that he was able to
stifle it in the Cradle, for Empires are gotten and kept by the affections of
the Soldiery, by treating them well and civilly, as his manner was; and that
it was easy to disappoint such as are of a stirring nature with a little
patience, for in time they may be destroyed in diverse Expeditions, or they may
be removed into several quarters, far from the places where they have credit,
or they may be employed in long and tedious services, where they may alter
their minds, and the power of doing mischief.

In the mean while, Tamerlan's delays and long abode in one place was subject
to diverse censures, some thought it was caused only by his distemper, others
better informed, imagined that it was the product of a faithful advice, and
good knowledge of that which was acting against him, which doubtless would
break out as soon as he should be on the other side of the Mountains of
Pasanfu. Calix expected this with great longing: as soon as he had understood
that the Forces of the Grand Cham were beyond the River of Meau that runs on
the other side of the Mountains, and that they were encamped at Bouprou, he
thought it high time to discover his design.

For this purpose he gathered together his chief and most intimate Friends,
declaring to them, that now the time was come to disappoint all the intentions
of the Parthian, who purposed to subdue them, and keep them under his Command;
that seeing their Emperor was so unadvised of his own head, without the
approbation of those who ought to have a share in such Elections, they for
their parts should not neglect so fair an opportunity of redeeming their
precious Liberties; that Tamerlan was diseased, the Grand Cham aged, the
greatest part of his Army at a distance, and that there could not be offered a
fitter opportunity to set on foot such a design; that their Enterprise was so
likely to succeed, that as soon as they should set footing in the Province of
Cattay, that the whole Country would declare for him, because his Father had
governed it many years, and because the Inhabitants, not knowing Tamerlan,
would believe all that he should tell them; that the Province of Zagatay was at
a great distance from them, that Tamerlan would have much ado with the powerful
Enemy who had mocked his Embassy sent to prevent the War* therefore their
Enterprise would doubtless succeed happily, when he should have sent to assure
the Great Cham, that their intentions were not against his Person or
Government, with promises not to forget the Allegiance and Fidelity which they
had sworn to keep for him, their armed posture being only to shake off the yoke
of the Parthians, their ancient and unreconcileable Enemies, whose Tyranny they
would never be persuaded to endure. Moreover, he assured them, that the
Emperors decrepitage, and weak body, loving ease and rest, would not
intermeddle in this quarrel, because he had no Heirs-male to succeed him: And
that it was easy to destroy Tamerlan's Army, by waiting for him at his return,
and besieging of the Streights of Tenduits, after his Forces should be weakened
by the Encounters with the Chinese, for then they would endeavor to retreat
into the Province of Zagatay, out of which it was no ^^ficult matter to keep
them, by besieging those ^^ow passages.

Calix's Speech had a good color, it was strengthened with many Reasons and
Insinuations. He had spent a whole year in winning the peoples favor, that he
might be able to use them in due time. He prepared all manner of Ammunitions,
and had spared no cost nor labor to compass his design. But though all things
were carried secretly, without any noise, Tamerlan had intelligence of all
these practices against his Person. At first he made light of it, or seemed so
to do, wisely concealing all the reports of the Rebellion of this ambitious
Fool, that it might break out to the eyes of the World, and render Calix more
guilty, and himself less blameable, by bearing Arms in his Uncles Dominions,
whose displeasure he was loath to draw upon himself. It is very likely that he
could have prevented this mischief in its beginning, but he had good cause to
deal otherwise. His long abode at Cachobach, near a Months time, because of his
indisposition, as was pretended, had a good reason.

In the mean while, the Tartarians Army, commanded by Calibes, hearing of the
mighty preparations and intentions of the Chinese to assault them, murmured
because they were idle, and let slip the opportunity of showing their courages
to their Enemy, and their new Prince. The Commanders endeavored to pacify and
quiet the Soldiers martial disposition, with news that came at every foot of
some unexpected obstacle that staid Tamerlan from joining with them. It was
easy to imagine, that his quick and speedy temper in executing his
resolutions, was stopped by the knowledge of Calix's Conspiracy^^ and that he
delayed the time only, that he might have a favorable occasion to punish him:
Nevertheless, he was willing that Calix should believe, that he was passed
beyond the Mountains, to assault the famous Wall defended by all the Armies of
the Chinese; for that purpose he gave an express Command, that care should be
taken that none might forsake the Rear, to give notice where he was with his
Camp.

This wise proceeding succeeded well; for Calix imagining that his Enemy was at
a vast distance encountering with the Chinese, though he was on this side of
the Mountains, cast off all dissimulation, and with as much indiscretion as he
had hitherto shown wisdom in his secrecy, commanded all his Forces to march
against the Prince, to surprise and entangle him. But all this while Tamerlan
seemed to be asleep, and expected nothing else, that he might give a Check to
the ambition of this Foo^^. He went forward with his Army a days journey
toward Calibes, unto whom he had dispatched a Messenger with the news of this
Rebellion. Tamerlan called together his Council, and Chief Officers of both
Armies, and spoke to them in this manner.

Tamerlan's Speech to his Council of Officers.
I Am persuaded, my Friends, that you will all advise me to set by the
Enterprise against China, and endeavor the quenching of these Flames that are
kindled in the Bowels of our Country, that I may preserve that Kingdom where
you desire that I should Reign, and where all the faithful servants of my Lord
and Uncle have received me with applause, and expressions of joy. I am in duty
bound to help him to punish Calix for his Rebellion and Insolency: He alone
has resisted the Emperors intentions, and refused to acknowledge me, and
yield to my Promotion to the Empire of Tartary: But we must also think at the
same time of resisting our Foreign Enemy, whose vast Armies are as likely to
assault us, as to oppose our attempts.

It is very likely that the Chinese are made the bolder by Calix's Rebellion,
with whom it is probable they hold Correspondency, and to whom they may have
promised assistance and protection, with a design to divert our Forces, which
they saw were all coming against their Country, to re-take what they had
usurped upon us. Therefore, my Friends, I think it best, that whiles I shall go
back to chastise the ambitious Rebel, Calibes should stay upon the Frontiers
with five and twenty thousand of the Parthians Cavalry, and forty thousand of
the Emperors, and with one hundred thousand Foot to hinder the Chinese from
breaking into our Country. I shall leave at his Command all the provisions of
Victuals and Arms which we have gathered for our Army, and put into some place
of security our Artillery and warlike Engines. In the mean while, I will march
back with the remainder of the Army against Calix, and order Samay to meet me
with fifty thousand Horse; and when I shall see convenient, I will stay to wait
for the Emperors Commands.

This Discourse of Tamerlan was well liked of by all the chief Officers of the
Council, though some that had not understood this Rebellion were of a contrary
judgment: They said, that it was a temerity to engage in a War with the King of
China, in such a time when a Civil Dissension breaks out like a Cancer that
consumes the Entrails of the Kingdom, and disappoints all foreign designs; that
it was wisdom to secure the Heart of a Country, before one attempts the
Conquest of another. But these persons were not well acquainted with the
Princes Secrets; for the long knowledge of the rebellious practices of Calix,
had made him keep up an Army always ready to march at his first motion. They
knew not that Tamerlan apparently displeased at this Rebellion, was not really
angry to go into his new Empire with weapons in his hands, for a Cause that his
Uncle judged to be just, because this would gain to him the affection of the
Soldiers, and give him a new possession of, and Title to the Empire that had
been given him, and because this tended to the security of his Dominions for
the future; for by the punishment of this Rebel, others would ever be
discouraged from making new attempts.

We must confess that Tamerlan's wisdom appeared as well by this separation of
the Tartarian Army, as by obliging Calibes to stay upon the Borders, though he
knew very well that this Lord was desirous to follow him, to be an Eyewitness
of the event of this Civil War, that he might govern himself according to the
good or bad success.

The Prince of Tanais, who had an eye upon Calix, and without whose advice he
never did any thing, commanded the Van of the Parthians Army that was left
behind. Thus both Armies were divided. The King of China was a long while
without understanding any thing of this inward Rebellion: He thought the whole
Army of the Parthians and Tartarians had been at hand; for Tamerlan had taken
great care to stop the passages, that no News could pass. This favored
Tamerlan's designs not a little.

The Army where his Person was, marched back with diligence, and great hopes of
success. The Van, led by Odmar, staid upon the borders of those Provinces where
Calix had his Agents, until the Prince had sent to acquaint the old Emperor
with all things that had passed. But when the Messenger was returned, he
understood that the Emperor was desperately sick, and that the whole Empire
was inclineable to Rebellion. This News made him leave his Infantry behind, and
to draw with more haste nearer to the Enemy with all his Cavalry. His coming
was to him unexpected.

Calix had been with his Army of one hundred thousand men before the great and
proud City of Cambalu, the Metropolis of the Province of Catay. The Inhabitants
had opened their Gates, and received him with as much joy, as if he had been
their lawful Sovereign. They were so blind and foolish, as to send some of
their own Citizens, with the Deputies which the Rebel had dispatched to the
Court held then at Quinsay. They had Orders, in his name, to assure the
Emperor of his obedience and fidelity, and with studied expressions to impose
upon him, by coloring his Revolt with the hatred against the Parthians, and
their solemn League which they had lately made never to own Tamerlan for their
Prince. They beseeched his Majesty to substitute in his place Calix, that their
glorious Empire might not be inslaved to a Stranger of Zagatay.

At this same time there was news secretly flying, that the Prince of Parthia
was already upon the borders of Catay, and that he was followed by the best
Troops of the Empire. Calix could never stifle this Rumor, to keep on his side
such as had too unadvisedly engaged themselves in this Quarrel, out of a
persuasion that Tamerlan would not be able to return in eight Months from his
Expedition into China, whatever success and happiness he met with. Calix, with
all his subtle fetches, could not work upon their minds already possessed with
the fear of the punishment which their Rebellion had deserved: They were as
much surprised and affrighted, as are a company of Scholars when their Master
finds them quarrelling, and in a disorder, contrary to their duty. At this time
the Tartarians were Courting of Calix at Cambalu, where he received the Homages
of the Provinces that yielded to him. But this unexpected coming of Tamerlan
was a dreadful news that dashed all their joys; some of them were ashamed of
their sudden and inconsiderate Rebellion, which so much the more deserved a
punishment, because it was acted against their lawful Lord, and against the
greatest Captain of the World, whose Virtue was worthy to command not only the
Empire of Tartary, but also of the whole World. The rumor of his march spread
every where amongst the people, and as the Moon, which never continues two days
the same, this report increased and decreased, according to the affections of
the Authors and Entertainers of it. But this caused the most passionate persons
for Calix's Interest to grow cold, and alter their intentions. The Inhabitants
also of this great City gathered together in Companies, some of five hundred,
others of a thousand, others of two thousand, to consult, but not able to come
to any settled resolution, for they were afraid of Tamerlan's just displeasure,
having incensed him by their baseness and infidelity; for they had been sworn
unto him, and by the Emperors Command had acknowledged him for their Lord.
They said amongst themselves, that he was lawfully descended from so many
Monarchs who had reigned over them very justly; therefore their troubled
Consciences fancied him at their Gates, ready to punish them for having rashly
opened them to a Rebel, who had plotted against his lawful Prince.

Whiles these people were thus justly troubled with several disquieting
apprehensions, Tamerlan expecting the Forces that he had sent for out of his
own Kingdom of Zagatay, drew nearer by degrees to the City of Cambalu. His Army
had passed Caindu, and marched strait to Calalia. The Inhabitants of Cambalu
had been deceived with the deceitful promises of Calix; and as many persons do,
they had flattered themselves with large expectations of prosperity, without
thinking how deceitful the affairs of the World are, and how subject to change.
When therefore they saw the Prince upon their borders, they were mightily
perplexed with fear and displeasure for their Rebellion. As soon as Calix
understood it, he went out of the City, with a firm resolution to fight
Tamerlan with all his Army. He gathered his men from all parts, intending to
try the fortune of a Battle. At the same time he received ill news from the
Court, that the Emperor was so far from being pleased with his undertaking,
that he had commanded his Soldiers, in considerable numbers, to gather
together out of all the Garrisons, and to march to help his Nephew, unto whom
in his most desperate sickness, when he thought to have left the world, he had
sent his Imperial Ring, giving out an express Command, that all his Subjects
should obey him as his own Person.

This news, together with that of Tamerlan's approach, caused him to hasten to
hazard all in a Battle: For that intent, he took out of Cambalu fifty thousand
men, partly Inhabitants, and partly Garrison Soldiers, placed there by the
Emperor. This Garrison was in number thirty thousand: Calix had won them by
the means of their Officers and Governors, who were of his Party, and had
consented to deliver up into his hands this great City.

When all his Soldiers were together in a Body, they amounted to fourscore
thousand Horse, and one hundred thousand Foot. His design was so well ordered,
that if the Moscovites, whom he had solicited underhand, had answered his
expectations, and entered into the Province of Zagatay* to stop the march of
the Parthians Army, in whom Tamerlan had the greatest confidence, it is certain
that Calix might have put this Prince to a nonplus* chiefly because he had the
City of Cambalu to assist and favor him. It is therefore very dangerous for
such as govern to anger great ones, or not to mind their behavior. If their
displeasure be encouraged by their Credit and Interest in the Provinces, they
are more inclineable to stir and cause disturbances.

We must here acknowledge, that the Emperor of Moscovy was a great Friend to
Tamerlan in this occasion, by refusing to assist a rebellious Subject against
his lawful Prince. He had in vain endeavored to dissuade him from his wicked
purpose, and reduce him to obedience. Odmar much taken with this just
proceeding, was wont to speak of it often to Tamerlan, so that he was an useful
Instrument to preserve friendship between these two Princes.

As soon as the Succors of the Parthians were come to Tamerlan, he marched
with diligence against Calix. He understood, by the means of two thousand Horse
whom he had sent before, that the Enemy came to meet him in good order. This
news caused him to detach two thousand more to seize upon the passage of a
River named Brior, as well to secure his Provisions, as to stop there, and
suffer the Rebels to think upon their fault, which either a little time would
infallibly call to mind, or the want of food, unto which he hoped to reduce
them, or at least to put them in disorder. In this particular, Rebellious
Armies differ much from Royal Armies, where Order and Discipline join hand in
hand, and preserve Union and Plenty.

In this march of the Prince against Calix, he forgot not the Command of the
Emperor his Uncle, to make a notable example of this Rebel, and of his
Confederates, to secure by that means the peace of his Empire, and of his days.

This consideration made him act with caution, that he might not miscarry in
any thing. He saw that his own Army did increase every day by the arrival of
new Levies from all parts, whereas the Enemies Army wanted already Provisions,
because they could scarce have any from Cambalu, a Wilderness lying between the
City and the Camp, and certain Mountains at the end of the Wilderness, where a
Subject of the Grand Cham commanded, named Cangi. This Lord had promised to let
the Provisions pass when Calix was in his Territories, but as soon as he was at
a distance, he refused it, and took all that came into his hands; he had a
greater power to perform this, because Tamerlan had sent him four thousand
Horse to guard him and his Country.

This grievous accident, which Calix never could foresee, caused him to resolve
upon a Battle: But Tamerlan understanding his wants, and the cause of his
speedy resolution, had seized all the Passes and Fords of the River of Brior
for his own Army; it had fourteen miles behind it a fat and a plentiful
Country, besides the Salt Lake, and the River of Ostan, which was beyond: so
that he could stay till the Enemy did assault him; for this wise and
experienced Prince judged it advantageous to him to suffer the Enemy to spend
himself, and his Provisions by degrees.

The two Armies stood two Months looking upon one another: All this time was
spent in light skirmishes. When Calix understood the intent of Tamerlan, he
resolved to return back to Cambalu, where he knew that he should have all
things in abundance; and the rather, because he understood that some practices
were acting against him there. As soon as the Prince perceived it, he passed
over the River with all his Army, which consisted of one hundred and fifty
thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot. After that he had consulted his
chief Officers, he resolved to try the fortune of a Battle.

This resolution was grounded chiefly upon two reasons; first, because he was
afraid that Calix would return, and spend the Winter at Cambalu, where he
should be forced to go and fight him. This would cause the total destruction of
that famous City, for he doubted not of the Victory: secondly, because if he
did win that City by assault, he was afraid that his Army should grow too rich
and wealthy with the plunder, and by that means would be less fit for the great
Actions, in the prosecution of which he intended further to employ them. This
resolution that he was forced to take grieved him; he was not willing to enter
into the possession of his Empire by Bloodshed and Cruelty. This consideration
caused him once more to summon Calix, and advise him to lay down his Arms, with
promises of pardon, and to receive him into his favor.

The unadvised Calix, whose courage was not contemptible, slighted all these
gracious offers; his ambition rendered him cruel to himself, and caused him to
look upon all other conditions of life, under that of a Sovereign, as unworthy
of him. He could not submit, but chose rather, though but for a day, as a
Prince to govern, than to live many years as a Subject. He could not trust nor
rely totally upon the promises of his Prince, with whose generosity and good
nature he was never acquainted: He thought the destiny of men in his condition,
condemns them either to a fatal Ruin, or raises them up to a Throne.

Tamerlan's Army went over to Chincy, marching seven Leagues: as soon as the
Enemy understood it, they altered their design, and returned back, with an
intention to venture a Battle. It is reported, that Calix turning himself then
to some of his followers, told them, with his eyes lifted up to Heaven, that in
all his lifetime he had never received a more pleasing news:. The Parthians,
says he, have passed over the River, and are coming toward us: If therefore
Tamerlan, who dallied with us before, will suffer us now to end our Quarrel by
a Fight, my happiness is great, whatever be the event, it must needs procure me
an immortal glory: If the advantage happen on my side, what Prince is there in
all Asia that may contend with, or be compared to me, for I shall be Lord of
all Tartary and Zagatay, for I fight against the Armies of these two Kingdoms
which I have divided: but if I be overcome, the greatness of my undertaking
will leave behind me a great deal of Reputation in the world, seeing that I
have stopped with my Army, during two Months, between the Rivers of Brior and
Ostan all the Armies of Zagatay: Therefore if we chance to lose the Victory, it
will prove for our honor. During this discourse, his Attendants took notice in
his looks of a Noble Air, which made him esteemed and admired of every one.

When the Armies drew near, the Scouts met, and those of Tamerlan's Army were
driven back into their Camp, which accident vexed Odmar that commanded then the
Van. The Prince told him, that at the approach of the Enemy he ought to have
increased the numbers; he excused himself, in that he imagined that Calix would
not be so bold as to advance three Leagues toward the Army at that instant.

The next day was spent in giving out Orders to every one: The Captains went
about in the Ranks, exhorting their Soldiers to behave themselves well; and
both Captains and Soldiers encouraged one another to fight valiantly, by
declaring the Encounters where they had been already.

Calix was forty years of age, much respected because of the Nobility of his
Blood, and the considerable Rank that he held in his Country. The Emperor
esteemed him so much for his experience in War, that before Tamerlan appeared
in Tartary, he was always looked upon as worthy of the Empire.

The Armies stood one against another, for eight hours in the morning,
skirmishing sometimes according to the Tartarian manner, before the Battle: A
great Plain, and even ground lay between them. Odmar commanded the Van, where
were sixty thousand Foot, and forty thousand Horse, which he separated into
four great Squadrons, causing one to go before the other to the Fight. Tamerlan
marched on in the same Order, but his Squadrons were stronger. The Infantry of
the Van, and of the Main Body, were on the right hand, and on the left. He had
taken out of his Army, to make up the Rear, six thousand Parthians, and two
thousand Tartarians, giving the Command to Axalla a Genoese; but, as I have
said, had been brought up with him from his Infancy: He had by his affection
for him, by his virtue, experience, and valor, deserved his Princes esteem and
confidence. Tamerlan ordered him not to fight but in the extremity, and to have
a care to gather together all that should be broken in the Army. Axalla
performed this so exactly, that he did this day notable service to his Prince.
He was no less esteemed by the Men of War, though he professed a Religion
contrary to theirs; for he was a Christian, and imitated by many whom he had
sent for out of Georgia, and beyond the Pontus Euxinus; these accompanied him
with their courages and persons in the Battle.

Calix on the other side was Eloquent, and naturally a great Speaker; he
encouraged therefore his Soldiers with the honor and liberty of their Nation,
to play their parts like men, and follow his example. He had divided his Army
into three Bodies, only he had placed his Infantry at the right hand, and his
Cavalry at the left; he himself was in the middle Body, surrounded with his
Foot, as with a Circle, according to our manner of fighting. Odmar, a crafty
and experienced Commander, stopped when he saw the Enemy coming, and observed
their motion; but when he perceived that their greatest Body was shaken at the
onset of his first Squadron, he caused his two others, the one to charge at the
right hand, and the other at the left: They were so furious and happy, as to
put the three Bodies of Calix's Army into a disorder, so that they were forced
to reunite in one.

At that time Tamerlan came in, and cut in pieces all that stood before him,
nothing was able to resist his fury: he made way through the thickest of his
Enemies, some he put to flight, others he laid in heaps; the cries and
lamentations of the dying were heard in every place; the disorder and
hurley-burley was generally all over the Field: here you might have seen weak
Squadrons disarming others more numerous; there you might have beheld Troops of
Horses taken by such as were more greedy of prey than honor; every where
Tamerlan's Army seemed to have gained the Victory, when fifteen thousand fresh
Troops, led by Calix himself, came into the Field, and gave a furious charge
upon the Princes Battalion, and broke it all to pieces. This Reserve proceeded
from some that at the first onset fled to the Carts and Carriages, where they
had rallied, whiles Tamerlan's men were pursuing the victory, and killing. When
therefore this Body of Horse appeared first, Tamerlan's Army being in disorder,
they had no great difficulty to overcome them: The Victory was almost lost.

This obliged him to retreat in fighting, according to the manner of the
Parthians: The Prince had been dismounted, but rescued at the same moment,
which caused him to look to his Rear, which could not yet come up to him. His
Infantry had opened it self when he gave the onset: It had not yet been
assaulted, but only upon the skirts in the several Encounters. At the same time
therefore that Calix pursued so vigorously the Princes Army, that by a stout
resistance had lessened the number of the Enemy, Axalla, who commanded the
Reserve, or the Rear, came up to the Infantry which had scarce been engaged in
the fight. The Clouds of dust hindered Calix from perceiving this Body that was
in the Rear, and that was falling upon him and his men, who advanced in very
good order, bearing all down before them. At that very instant these words were
often heard repeated, Give back, give back, give back. Axalla had commanded a
thousand, or twelve hundred of his Body, to advance, and free the Prince: They
charged home to the Enemy, so bravely, that Calix began to conjecture what
would become of his Empire, of his Glory, and ambitious designs, by what was
then acted: The displeasure made him pensive a little moment, but resolution
caused him to send a Party to stop the Enemies fury, while he rallied his
scattered Troops. He gathered together about eleven thousand, with them he
thought to have beaten Tamerlan's Rear: But he was not a little troubled,
because the dust hindered him from distinguishing the Foot from the Horse; he
imagined therefore that all Axalla's Party were Horse. In this occasion he
showed his courage and resolution with a settled countenance, by exhorting his
men to play their parts, and pursue their good fortune which they had already;
and assuring them, that the remainder of Tamerlan's men before them were
nothing, but such as had already fled, who endeavored to rally; and that with
a stout onset it was easy to hinder them. Whiles he was speaking, his Party
increased: But Axalla considering that his Master had put into his hands that
day the fortune of two great Empires, was resolved to answer his expectation,
by hazarding his life for his interest and glory, with a resolution of dying
upon the place, or of carrying away the Victory, he called to such as were
nearest to him to follow his example; therefore with an incredible fury he
broke through the Squadron led by Calix. This Prince was wounded with a Lance
in the mouth, when he had performed the duty of a Commander, and common
Soldier, and expressed sufficiently his undaunted courage. In the
hurley-burley he was taken Prisoner by Axalla himself. It was immediately
noised abroad all over the Field, together with the advantages that Tamerlan
had obtained, for he himself had defeated a Body of Horse, by charging them in
the Flank. Axalla before had broken them, but they were rallied together again,
and had not Tamerlan seasonably come in, they might have snatched the Victory
out of his hands. This bad news broke the hearts, as well as the Troops of the
Enemy that fled immediately upon it.

In this Fight there died above fifty thousand men on both sides; so that
Tamerlan purchased the Victory at a dear rate, and was forced to confess, that
in all his lifetime he never was more likely to be undone than at that time.
He embraced and extolled Axalla for his courageous behavior and wise Conduct
that day. This Noble Captain presented Calix before him, wounded with a Lance
in the Mouth, and with an Arrow in his Side. Tamerlan asked him some questions,
but Calix's pride and insolency would make no answer, pretending that he could
not well speak. He was kept till the next day, the last of his life, for he was
judged worthy to die by a Council of War. His Head was chopped off, and sent as a
Present to the Inhabitants of Cambalu. All the other Commanders were treated in
the same manner: There was a necessity for this severity, to hinder all Civil
Broils from rising again; it was therefore needful to cut off the Chieftains.

After the Fight, Tamerlan's Army meeting with no resistance, marched into the
Province of Catay, which is full of all kind of Fruits, Grass, Beasts, and
Fowl, more than in any other part of Tartaria. The Prince gave a severe Command
to all his Soldiers, not to offer to abuse the Inhabitants, whom he would deal
with as with his best Subjects.

The Cities of Cangi, Sochgi, Gonzae, Tagin, Togara, and Congu, that had
revolted, staid not for a Summons to yield, but wisely sent their Deputies to
Tamerlan, to implore his mercy.

This good Prince forgave them, requiring nothing from them, but that they
should furnish his Army with Provisions, telling them, that for the future they
should be better advised, than to be so easily persuaded with the empty
promises of ambitious persons, who would endeavor to draw them from that
obedience which they owe to their Lord and Master.

This kind and courteous dealing being divulged all over the Provinces, wrought
a great change in the minds of those, who expecting no favor from Tamerlan's
hands, were yet resolved to venture all, and ruin themselves and their
Country. The Citizens of Cambalu had taken this strange resolution, to sell
their lives at a dear rate, if they were to lose them; for this City was full
of those Mutineers, who knew themselves as guilty as their Commanders that had
been punished already; expecting therefore no mercy for themselves, they
thought it might mitigate their punishment, if they could but draw into it the
rest of their Citizens.

But this kind and gracious dealing of their Prince put other thoughts into
their Souls, and raised their hopes. Nevertheless, the Armies approach to the
City, increased daily the fears and apprehensions of the people. Tamerlan had
notice of all that was there acted from those that favored his Interest: They
sent him word, that at last every one was resolved to obey the Conqueror, and
perform his Commands; therefore he left his Army at Gonza, only thirty thousand
men he ordered to march thither to fill up the ordinary Garrison. When they
were entered, they put all things in a good posture, and caused every one to
submit to the Princes pleasure without murmuring. He himself was received into
the City two hours after his Garrison in a triumphing manner, for the
Inhabitants labored, in this occasion, to make him forget the wrong they had
done him. He had only pardoned the meaner sort of people, the rest he left to
the will of the Emperor his Uncle, unto whom he had dispatched a Messenger, to
inform him of the Victory, of Calix's death, and of the imprisonment of some of
the chief Commanders and Leaders of the Faction; and to desire to know what
punishment he would have inflicted upon those of Cambalu, who had been the
greatest Mutineers. By this kind and insinuating dealing, he purchased to
himself in this great City the reputation of a merciful and gracious Prince. He
gained also the love of every one by courting them, chiefly those who had been
faithful to his Party.

After eight days stay in this place, he went away with a thousand prayers and
praises, which were again reiterated a little after, when news came from the
Emperor, that he would have Justice done upon the Authors of the Rebellion.
This was performed in the Cham's Name, and by his Officers two hundred of the
Inhabitants were executed, and their Heads were lifted up in the public view,
for an example to all such as should afterward attempt to rebel. This cruelty
of the Great Cham, condemned by the common people, caused them to extol the
goodness of Tamerlan, who by this yielding to his Uncles will, laid a greater
Obligation upon him, and nevertheless purchased to himself the universal esteem
of the Country.

In the mean while, the Emperor began to rise from his sick Bed, which caused
him to have an earnest desire to see the Prince, who delayed this Interview
till he had been with his Army, where he intended to advise, whether it were
not best to stay first, and expect what news he should receive from his Army
upon the borders of China. Thus he went as far from Cambalu as he could, that
he might not be thought to have any hand in the execution of the Citizens.

In this manner this dangerous and Civil War was ended, to the advantage of
Tamerlan, whose diligence had been notable in the extinguishing of it: One may
justly say, that he conquered this great Empire, for there was a dangerous and
a general conspiracy and rising against him: His vigilance disappointed all his
Enemies. In such like cases, speedy and early appearances in the Field, are of
the highest importance for a Princes Affairs, to encourage his own Party, to
terrify such as are wavering, and to prevent all false reports, with which the
common people are usually cozened. His chief endeavor should be to persuade,
and make it appear, that the Rebels are not to be feared, and that he himself
dreads them not; but this he can never do, unless he commands his own Army: By
this means he will have a great advantage over the Rebels. It is not to be
imagined, that a Revolt is to be stifled by weak Remonstrances, for that
persuasion savours of as much indiscretion, as the Authors of the Rebellion
have had craft to cause their injustice to be entertained under the notion of
Equity: Therefore without delays, a Sovereign Prince must fall upon the Rebels,
scatter and destroy them with the fear of a speedy punishment. By no means let
him be prevailed upon to grant pardon to the Chieftains of the Rebellion.

Tamerlan dealt in this manner with Calix. He knew his designs a great while
before he was in a capacity to put them in execution; therefore he provided a
timely remedy, a powerful Army in the Province of Zagatay, to be ready to march
at his first Command. In the mean while, he pretended to be busy in his
Expedition against China, that he might by that means better discover the chief
of the Rebellion, and their wicked intentions; by this act of wisdom he
disappointed Calix, who doubtless might have prevailed upon a negligent and
weak Prince given to his pleasures: But Tamerlan had better qualities, he found
the benefit of his cares and vigilance; for before this he was not well settled
in the Empire; but by this Victory he became such an undoubted Successor and
Owner of it, that the death of the Great Cham could not cause any alteration or
opposition of his Right. From hence it is easy to conclude, that as his
kindness and moderation were strong Chains to bind the hearts and souls of his
good Subjects, his courage and severity knew how to punish the Rebels, and
seditious persons, and bring them to obedience. As soon therefore as Tamerlan
had overtaken his Army, Odmar who expected him, and caused them to march in
good order, and slowly, received him with the Captains and Soldiers, with
acclamations and expressions of joy, calling him in the Tartarian Language,
Most great and victorious Emperor.

In the way he discoursed with his Captains concerning the Greatness and Beauty
of the City of Cambali^^, till he was come into the Tent prepared for him,
where he remained alone with Odmar. He told him all that had been acted in that
rebellious City; afterward he desired his advice, whether he should visit the
Great Cham, his Uncle, at that time or no. Odmar understood by his words, that
he remembered what Honors he had received at Quinsay when he was there, and
that he had a secret inclination to spend the Winter with the young Empress,
and to go in the Spring into China.

But as he was an Enemy of Flattery, and loved his Prince entirely, as one of
his most faithful and chief Officers, he spoke to him boldly in this manner;
Brave and Invincible Emperor, let all the world understand, I beseech you,
that Tamerlan knows how to use his Victory, as well as to gain it. Do not you
mind, that the Army which you have left upon the borders of China is busily
employed in fighting with the Enemy above six months; that the Chief Commander
is a Tartarian, and one of the most considerable of his Nation. Know you not
that the Tartarians and Parthians never think a Prince worthy to reign, if he
cannot go with them to the War: And do you not consider, that you have
undertaken this War to increase the glory of him who has made you his
Successor, and enlarge the bounds of his Empire, by re-taking the Lands which
the Chinese have usurped: It concerns you therefore in gratitude to recover
them with speed. Consider likewise, that your Glory and Reputation will appear
to him greater at a distance, than near at hand, and more pleasing, because it
will at a distance tend to enlarge his Empire, and render his Affairs more
prosperous, whereas near at hand your Fame will but diminish his Reputation,
and it may be cause a jealousy in him. Princes sometimes are subject to
change, and by a sudden repentance to strive to ruin the person whom they have
exalted too high. What need have you to undertake a journey so much destructive
to your Honor and Glory? Is it not better to spend the Winter bravely in your
Tent with your Army, than in the stately Palaces of Q^^insay, in an Effeminate
Court? where such as are not afraid to slander, will not spare you, but will
ask, where you have left your Army? whether you threaten the King of China only
at a distance, who in your absence may perhaps cut all your Troops in pieces?
In such a case, what a trouble will it be, to gather together your dispersed
Army; b^^sides, your example will have an influence upon the Parthians, they
will desire also to return to their Country, and the Tartarians to theirs;
whereas if now you march immediately to the Frontiers, you may easily get a
Victory, which otherwise you may lose. No doubt but the King of China believes
that you are much engaged in your own Country with your hands full, that your
Army is daily weakened by the Rebels, who had almost snatched the Empire from
you. He believes your designs are disappointed, considering the weakness of the
Army commanded by Calibes; their behavior causes him to conceive, that they
are sent thither rather to secure Tartary, than to assault China. It may be he
has heard some persons tell him that which many of your own people suspect,
but I dare not affirm it as true, because it is not lawful for me to enquire
into the wise counsels of Princes; that the cause wherefore you have left
Calibes the Chief of the Tartars upon the Borders, was only to secure his
person, and to remove the cause of your fears, rather than out of any desire to
proceed on in the Conquests which you pretended to make. Lose not therefore,
mighty Prince, such a favorable opportunity to succeed, which God offers to
you; opportunity is bald, catch hold of her whiles you may: But if I have
offended your Majesty with the freedom of my discourse, use me according to
your pleasure, I am your Slave, and here is my Head.

This Speech of Odmar made Tamerlan sad; he changed countenance often, but
Odmar nevertheless continued on, being so much the more animated by his zeal
and affection for his Person and Glory. He repeated to him again the same
discourse, kissing the Hem of his Garment, as they use to do to the Emperors.
The Prince, with his eyes fixed upon him, told him, that this was the cause of
his pensiveness, he was overcome with his affection and faithfulness, and was
not in a power to reward him according to his deservings; that in this
particular he had found, more than in any other thing, a sign of his Fathers
wisdom, in that he had chosen Odmar to be near him, and assist him with his
wise Counsels: That necessity, that made him cast away all thoughts of rest,
taught him, that Sovereign Princes are like their Creator in this, that his
Glory has no limits, and consists in action; that though he had flattered
himself with the thoughts of resting a while from his former labors, he now
saw himself forced, unless he would renounce the new Laurels that waited for
him, to prefer all the inconveniences and troubles of the Deserts of Cipribit,
to the pleasures and delights of Quinsay; that he was nevertheless resolved to
quit his first intentions. Alhacent the Arabian Historian declares, that he
has often heard Tamerlan confess, that at this instant Odmar seemed not to
speak to him as a mortal Man, but as a Messenger of God, whom he had sent, to
divert from him a mischief that would have perhaps fallen upon him, and to give
him an opportunity to increase his Glory.

In the mean while, the news of the Princes going to visit the Emperor his
Uncle spread every where, to the great satisfaction of many, who imagined that
they should also go and visit their Parents and Country. But the next day he
commanded the General Musters of the whole Army, and spoke to his Soldiers in
this manner.

Tamerlan's Speech to his Army.
WE had sometimes since an intent, brave Soldiers, to go and assault the King
of China, to oblige him to restore what he has taken from the Tartarians, and
recover the Lands beyond the Mountains which he has usurped upon us, to the
great shame of our Nation, whose Glory we purposed to restore; but to our grief
we have been hindered by the sawciness of Calix, who forced us to return back
to punish his insolency. With the assistance of your Arms, and Invincible
Courages, we have quenched the flames of the Rebellion that he had kindled with
his blood, and with that of his Companions; I could have wished that this
Victory had been rather upon Strangers, and a Foreign Nation, than upon our own
unfaithful and rebellious subjects. In such a case I had been as joyful, as
when at my first appearance in Arms with you, we overcame the proud Muscovites:
I must confess I am more obliged to you for this, than for that, because your
courages and valor appeared more visibly in this Civil War; for you were to
encounter with some as brave as your selves, you were to encounter with
Tartarians, who had forgot what they were, their Allegiance to their Prince. I
cannot call to mind this mournful passage without tears, I could willingly bury
in Oblivion this unhappy Victory, though I have gained by it much honor; I
mind you of it at present, only to make you understand, that I can never forget
your faithfulness and services, expressed sufficiently in this occasion. But we
must not stop here, we must turn our Arms next against those that think that we
are lost for ever; whereas we are victorious, we must go to our Companions that
wait for us, who have delayed the execution of their designs till they hear of
our successes, and victory; we must go and spend the Winter with them. All our
Ammunitions are there, doubtless the sleeping Enemy expects us not in this
season of the year; they rest with confidence upon the weakness of our Troops,
whose intent they imagine is only to defend themselves, as not in a capacity to
assault them. You shall have double Pay to buy Clothes, and arm your selves
against the Cold; and I hope that with these new Garments we shall purchase to
our selves new honor and glory.

As soon as his Discourse was ended, the Soldiers cried out with a loud voice,
One God in Heaven, and one Emperor upon Earth. At the same time they bowed
their Heads to him, to express their reverence; and declared, that they would
perform whatsoever the Prince should command them. After this, every one went
strait to his Tent. The Army abode in the same place eight days without
stirring, only Zamay was sent with five and twenty thousand Horse, and fifty
thousand Foot to Zagatay, to secure that Kingdom. He sent also an Express to
the Emperor his Uncle, to inform him of all his Resolutions, and to entreat
him in the Spring to send him fifty thousand men, or thereabouts, to recruit
his Army, with Money to pay his Soldiers, and Ammunition of War, with
provisions for the Belly.

Thus when he had given all necessary Orders, and caused public Prayers to be
made, according to Custom, he commanded the Army to march toward the Mountains.

CHAP. IV. Tamerlan 's Expedition against the King of China.
THE Provinces of Leaotum and of Pekin, which the Chinese had taken from the
Tartarians, were the Causes of that anger and displeasure which they could not
dissemble. They found themselves by this means, and by a prodigious Wall of a
vast length, built in the passage of the Mountains, deprived of the benefit of
that Prey which they were wont to make in that Kingdom by their frequent
Inroads. They always brought back Herds of Cattle, with which China abounds
above all other places, because of its good temperature, being neither too cold
nor too hot. This Consideration, together with that of their honor, engaged in
the recovery of the Provinces which the Emperor of the Tartarians esteemed and
valued at a high rate, obliged Tamerlan to prosecute this Enterprise, to please
his Uncle and new Subjects, and satisfy his own Passion.

The Army marched softly to avoid wearisomness, and in thirty Days got as far
as Cipribit, where news came to them of Calibes, who was in his way to meet the
Prince that entertained him very kindly. He told him of all his happy
Successes, and then, taking him aside, he discovered to him his design, and
Calibes gave him an account of all that he had done against the Enemy.

The next day the Prince took Horse, and rid as far as Pazanfu, where Calibes
Army was quartered: They had often encountered with the Chinese in Skirmishes,
and small Parties, and by the experience they had got, they judged themselves
better Soldiers than their Enemies in Courage and Skill. He caused them all to
appear upon the Parade, going from one Rank to another he took notice of every
Soldiers Countenance and Behavior; he caused them to muster next and receive
their Pay; they returned him Thanks, Acclamations, and Wishes for his health.
When Calibes left his Army to go and meet Tamerlan, he had left the chief
Command with the Prince of Tanais, General of the Parthians, who thought
himself obliged by this opportunity to give some Testimony of his Zeal and
Courage. He went out with a small party, and met with four thousand Horse,
commanded by the Kings Brother of China. He drew them cunningly to the Fight,
and charged them so vigorously and successfully, that he broke their Order and
put them to flight. The Night favored their Retreat; they left behind five or
six hundred dead to pay for their Companions, and witness the Victory and
Courage of the Prince of Tanais, who returned from this Encounter with many
Horses and other Spoils taken from these Barbarians. Tamerlan received him
kindly, and caressed him in that obliging manner that his late generous Action
had deserved, and many others, for he scarce suffered them to breathe. He was
the Son of one of Tamerlan's Sisters. His noble Qualities, as well as his
Birth, gained him the Love and Respects of all men: He was yet but young, but
he had already done great Services to his Prince, chiefly in that famous Battle
against the Moscovites, where he commanded the Rear, for he was a good and
experienced Commander. The Prince of Tanais, as we have represented him, out of
an earnest desire of Glory, let slip no occasion to manifest his Courage and
Skill in Arms: As he was nearest to the Enemy, he had an opportunity to
discover in what places the Wall that stopped the Tartarians Inroads might be
assaulted. He had sent some Spies into China by secret and by-ways in the
Mountains that are at the passage: From them he understood all that happened
there; but his prudence had succeeded chiefly in winning, by his insinuations,
one of the greatest Lords of the Mountains, named, The Lord of Vauchefu. This
Lord was displeased with the passages of the Chinese and Tartarians over his
Ground, or rather he had been won with the picture that the Prince of Tanais
had given him of Tamerlan, and of his obliging disposition. This caused him to
change his Master, and make an agreement with the Tartars. He went and
discovered his mind to him who had first spoken to him of it, telling him, that
he was ready to serve the Emperor, and assist his Army against the Chinese.
The Prince of Tanais, having kept this secret from Calibes, discovered it first
to Tamerlan, who with great joy sent for this Lord to speak with him. He was
mightily pleased with this invitation, and appointed a day for this honorable
Enterview. Tamerlan, without moving his Army, went to visit the Quarters of the
Prince of Tanais, near the River of Lanquenne; at the place appointed. The Lord
of Vauchefeu came to him thither to pay him his respects* to offer him his
Services, with protestations of his faithfulness to his interest. The Prince,
by his Interpreters, told him, that he would protect him against all his
Enemies, and that he would give him such Testimonies of his Love, that he
should never have cause to repent his kind offer; after this Vauchefu
discovered to him a secret passage that he knew, and leads into China, by which
it was easy to go in and surprise the Soldiers that were to guard the Wall.
That which troubled the Prince most, was that Calibes, an old and tried
Captain, had represented this passage, after a diligent search, difficult to be
won, and that it was kept with fifty thousand of the best Soldiers of China;
the King was there in person, and always on horseback, to oblige every one to
be diligent and ready, and that the Forces he had there were sufficient to
guard the Wall against all the World, if it should offer to be assaulted. The
Prince gained this Lord by his kindness and gifts, which were the richest Furs
of Tartary, many beautiful Horses, and all the rarest things that he had; with
these he purchased his Affections, and obliged him to discover his mind in
these terms. Know for certain, mighty Prince, that you will but trifle away the
time, if you believe it possible by force of Arms alone to force and win the
Wall which the Chinese have built to hinder the Inroads of your Subjects; let
your Courages be never so great; let them be heightened by your example, and
the remembrance of your former Victories, and of the people that you have
overcome; let them be never so obedient to your orders, which have obliged them
to contemn the greatest dangers, and death it self: In a word, all the skill of
these worthy men, whom you alone are worthy to command; all these advantages
will not prevail against the Wall of the Chinese, which is guarded by fifty
thousand men of the best Soldiers, and which at the least notice shall be
assisted by fifty thousand more, commanded by Xianxi; and when you shall be
engaged in fight with them, weary and tired out, the King himself will come
with two hundred thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot to assault you.
Suppose you should beat him also, this cannot be without much Bloodshed on
your side, and then it will not advantage you much. But to show you, great
Prince, that I am wholly yours, and that the Civilities and Respects of your
People have won my heart, I will discover to you a way for fifty thousand men
whom I will lead into China my self. They shall fall upon those that guard the
Wall before they are aware. In the mean whiles you shall with your Army assault
a place that I will appoint, that your Soldiers may become Masters of a
Mountain over against the Enemy, which will gall them, for when the Chinese
shall see that they are assaulted behind and before, they will no longer guard
the Wall, but will suffer you to enter and assist those that I shall lead in;
and for your security, and my fidelity which I promise, I will give you my only
Son in hostage, together with two young Daughters, and my Wife; and for my
Brother, I am persuaded he will follow my directions, and serve you every where
as affectionately as my self.

When this Lord had ended his discourse, the Prince was wonderfully satisfied,
and began to hope that his design would take effect, but he desired that the
business should be managed so secretly, that he suffered not the Prince of
Tanais to know by what means the Lord of Vauchefeu would give an entry into
China to his men; none was admitted to his Conference but only an Interpreter.

This Lord went away very well contented with his gifts, and Tamerlan's
Kindness and respects to him. The Prince of Tanais had orders to conduct and
guard him with all possible honor and civility. Tamerlan likewise returned to
his head Quarters. The next day he discovered all the Plot to Odmar, but before
he would venture upon the Execution, he desired to understand from Calibes what
he had learned concerning the intentions and preparations of the Chinese; in
obedience to his Command he spoke to him in this manner. Worthy Prince, I am
ready to put in execution, without examining, all your Commands, as your most
obedient slave; if therefore you desire from me to know what I have understood
concerning the present State of China, having had sufficient time to learn,
during six Months that I commanded your Armies upon the Borders, to defend them
against the Inroads of the Enemies, I must tell you, that the King of China,
that reigns now, is a Prince of a great reputation, gained by his enlarging the
limits of his Empire, more than any of his Predecessors before him; He is proud
and insolent, for he names himself The Lord of the World, but all his strength
consists in the defense and guarding of this famous Wall which stops us here. I
confess it is great, and is as I judge guarded by fifty or threescore thousand
men in Garrison along these Mountains. They are the best Soldiers of the
Kingdom* so that I judge it not possible to force away through, without
endangering your whole Army; I have heard that about the Lake of Hogeen there
is an easy way to go into that Kingdom, but we must march seven or eight days
to it, and go through strait passages long and tedious for so numerous an Army
as yours is; so that the King of China would have time to provide for his
defense. He thinks at present that none opposes him but I alone; and that I am
here but only to defend the Country, by your orders; for my part I think that
it is the best for you to direct your course that way; it is doubtless the most
secure for the convenience of Provisions, the strength of War, and of an Army,
without which there is no marching to a Fight with Courage: This, noble Prince,
is my judgment of that you desire to know of me, I cannot discourse of the
Country till we enter into it.

The Prince, who knew more, listened with attention, and discovered nothing to
him, nor any body else about him, of that which he had discoursed with the Lord
of Vauchefu. When every one had spoken his mind, he answered, That the great
God whose Glory he maintained against such wicked Idolaters, would assist his
good intentions, strengthen the Courages of his Soldiers, and would facilitate
that which they looked upon to be difficult or impossible. In this manner the
Prince discovered his designs, and the strength of his Army, which consisted
more in cunning than in courage, more in the Foxes Tail than in the Lions Skin.

Thus the Emperor craftily concealed the assured means that he had to open a
passage to his Enemies, that being ignorant of the facility to overcome them,
they might ascribe the good success to his conduct alone; and by that means
that his Reputation might be more increased, and his Wisdom, Skill and Courage
more esteemed. But before he attempted this great design he gave rich presents
to the Kings, Princes, and Lords that were there with him, to win them; and
appointed next the Rendezvous of his Army.

As Soon as it was together in one Body, he drew out fifty thousand men of his
best Troops, making the Prince of Tanais their Captain, and gave him for
Assistant Axalla, the Genoese, an experienced Commander, faithful and
courageous for his interest, he desired the Prince to act nothing without his
advice, and to believe him in every thing.

At the Day of the departure, the Lord of Vauchefu came with his Brother to
meet the Emperor; they assured him that the success would answer his
expectation; for they had been to visit the way which was to be forced, and
that led into the Kingdom of China; they had found it as unprovided as they
expected. The Prince, after a short Conference upon the place, resolved to
march in person with all his Army and draw near to this famous Wall over
against Quaquifou, whiles the fifty thousand chosen men, commanded by the
Prince of Tanais and Axalla, should gain the passage into the Country in that
order that he had prescribed to them; which was, that Axalla should lead twenty
thousand men in the Van, and the Prince of Tanais should follow in the Rear
with thirty thousand, and that each Party should have with them one of the
Lords of China to guide them, that the Enterprise might be the easier. After
this, they left the Prince and marched ten Leagues to the passage, which they
took without resistance; a little while they stopped there to rest themselves,
and then went on ten Leagues farther, to the place where the Chinese were to
guard the Wall. They never dreamed of any such surprise, but minded only those
that were commanded by Tamerlan; they hoped well that the great advantages
which they had would enable them to repel all the assaults of Tamerlan's Army.
They found themselves deceived and at a loss, for no sooner did the Prince's
Army draw near to their Walls, but they saw at the same time Axalla coming to
them by another way, with twenty thousand men, seconded by the Prince of Tanais
with another Body. They went directly to assault them, but the Chinese in that
urgent occasion, divided their Army, and unfurnished the Wall, which gave an
opportunity to Odmar to win it with his Infantry which he commanded that day;
he made such speed, that the Chinese found themselves on a sudden encompassed
about with two Armies, when Axalla begun the onset. The Battle was Bloody, the
Chinese were totally routed by this noble Christian, before the Prince of
Tanais with his Troops could overtake them, so weak was the Enemies resistance.
This Victory enriched all the Soldiers of Tamerlan's Army, for they found much
Gold about them, upon their Clothes, Arms, and Horses; one of the King of
China's Kinsmen, who was styled King, was taken Prisoner, with the chief
Commanders that were saved from the furious slaughter which was made amongst
them.

The sadness of this overthrow spread every where, and soon came to the Ears of
the King of China, who was then at Quanton. It filled all his Court with
Sorrow, Displeasure and Fear* every one wept for his Friend, or his Relation;
but this Prince, who had always till then thought himself the happiest of all
men, was inwardly surprised, without discovering himself to any of his Court,
as a man that commanded himself and his passions; he gave orders to gather his
Soldiers from all Parts, and sent for his Priests that kept his holy things,
commanding them, as their Lord, in a passionate manner, to offer Sacrifices for
him to the Gods, and chiefly to the Sun, the greatest of the Gods, whom they
think to be immortal, impassible, the Cause and Author of their Beings, that
appears to men only for their benefit; he sent likewise his orders round about
the Neighboring Provinces of his Empire, to call together all that were able
to bear Arms, appointing them their Rendezvous at Pekin: He imagined that
Tamerlan would direct his course that way, for it was the next City to his
Camp; and the great Lord of China, called the Xianxi, failed not to be ready
with his fifty thousand Men to strengthen such as were to guard the Wall. He
hasted to oppose Tamerlan in his March into the Country, and as his Men were
all Horse, well acquainted with the By-ways and narrow Passages, they were a
continual plague to Tamerlan's Army. This wise Prince, to secure his retreat,
caused the Wall, and all the Forts that were there builded to be demolished,
that the passages might be open, for the Garrisons they had all submitted
themselves to the Conqueror after the Victory. He treated the people of the
Mountains so lovingly, that he caused them almost to forget that they were
under a new Lord.

He rewarded well the Lord Vauchefu, by giving a little County wherein were
seven good Towns, as Archii, Ymulii, Falisq^^iem, Fulii, Cohensin, Quialii,
Pulii and Quiamlu, all which were adjoining to this Lords former Territories;
so that the Inhabitants were so much the more willing to obey him. He made him
also Governor of the Province next to that of the Xianxi, and declared to him,
by his liberality, that he was a Prince of his word; his Brother he intended
afterward to gratify.

This kind dealing of Tamerlan was very advantageous to him, in making way for
his succeeding Conquests; for he that will subdue Kingdoms and Lands with ease,
must first conquer the hearts of the Inhabitants. The Chinese are great
admirers of those virtues that are not practiced by them, as of Love,
Affability, Kindness and Mercy, which Tamerlan's Soldiers were ordered to
express to them, and which is contrary to that cruel dealing with which they
use to treat their Enemies that fall into their hands; this Custom they borrow
from the Indians their Neighbors.

When therefore they saw that this Prince handled them in a manner contrary to
theirs, and that he expressed so much affection for them, they began to admire
and honor him.

After the destruction of the Forts, Tamerlan took advice which way he should
march with his Army: He had heard that the King of China had furnished his
strong places, and that with as many Men as he could gather together he was in
his way to meet and fight him. This news caused him to be not well resolved
what course to take; first whether he should assault a Town in sight of so
powerful an Army, or whether he should leave behind him places unconquered,
which might cut off all his Provisions, and march directly to fight the King of
China's numerous Army. In this irresolution he desired to know his Officers
minds; He called them together, and proposed to them the business, which could
not be quickly resolved, because of the diversity of opinions; but at last this
advice prevailed above the rest, that no Town was to be left behind; that they
were to make speed and take it before the Battle, that the Army might draw from
thence Comfort, Assistance and Provisions, and that in case the Enemy would be
so bold as to offer to relieve it, that then they would hazard a Battle; for
this is the ordinary practice of a Conqueror and Assailant, to venture a fight
with the Enemy, as it is the wisdom of the assaulted to decline it, and never
to yield to it but in necessity; for by delays and light skirmishes, and
without engaging in a whole Body, the Conqueror and Assailant is weakened and
tired out; and by this means Fortune is oftentimes forced to declare for him,
and side with the assaulted.

The King of China ought in reason to have taken this course, if he had been
well advised, but his ill fortune suffered him not, as we shall see by the
following Relation.

This design to march forward being resolved upon in a Council of War, the Army
went straight to Pekin to lay siege to it. This is a great, rich, and populous
Town, well walled, and adorned with many stately Structures. Tamerlan thought
that the King of China would rather venture a Battle than lose this City out of
his hands. He flattered himself with the hopes of winning it, and the victory
at once; for the wonderful riches that were in it encouraged the greedy
Soldiers to venture their lives boldly, chiefly the Tartarians, who are
unsatiable for Prey and Plunder.

Odmar was ordered to march forward with fourteen thousand Horse to surround
it, and hinder the importation of Provisions, that they might be useful to
their own Army.

Axalla was appointed to follow him with all the Infantry, amounting to one
hundred and fifty thousand Men, which he commanded as chief Colonel. This
Office, given to him as a reward of his former services, caused him to be
looked upon both in the Army and in the Court. Tamerlan followed next with all
his Horse, and with his Engines, his Artillery and Ammunitions.

Odmar went the first day twenty Leagues; so that when he came to the Walls of
Pekin, the Citizens expected their King before the Tartarians. He took into his
custody all the Beasts thereabouts, and seated himself in a convenient place,
to wait for the coming of the whole Army, leaving the City between himself and
them.

In the mean while, to affright the Enemy and learn news, he sent many Parties
abroad; and about three or four days after the Infantry, led by Axalla, came to
him: They sent then their Summons into the Town, to command them to yield;
threatening, That the Citizens should otherwise suffer all the Calamities that
usually happen in cases of resistance, when they are overcome. They returned
this answer, That they would live and dye faithful Subjects to their Prince.
This strong resolution proceeded from a new Colony that the Chinese had settled
there of their own people, after they had driven away the ancient Inhabitants,
who forty years before had been conquered by the Father of the Cham of Tartary,
and were his Subjects; so that in the City there was no remembrance of the
Tartarian Empire, but in the Country round about they had a love for their old
Masters; for the Deputies of the little Towns came to submit themselves to
Tamerlan. This caused his Army to be full of all manner of Provisions, and in
such plenty, that in the Province of Catay they could not have more; this gave
him great hopes and assurance of the success of his Enterprise; for without
doubt the want of Provisions and Forage is the ruin of the greatest Armies,
and that which disappoints their most likely designs.

Thus the large and proud City of Pekin was regularly besieged, and our
Infantry commanded to draw near the Walls round about within a Musket shot.
This dreadful sight of so many Enemies affrighted neither the Citizens nor the
Garrison: Tamerlan left nothing unattempted to reduce them, and they used their
utmost endeavor to defend themselves, as much as could be expected from brave
and resolute men.

In the mean while Axalla went to view a Suburb encompassed about with a Wall
about half a League round; when he had seen it, he wisely imagined that the
keeping of it would not be easy for the Inhabitants, who would hazard too much
in defending it; he resolved therefore to assault it in the Night, when he had
first told the Prince: All his men were ready at the first Watch, with their
Ladders and needful Weapons: When the time was come, the Assault was made in
several places, and the Tartars were beaten of; but at last Axalla entered the
Suburbs, and cut in pieces all that were found in Arms, about eight thousand
men; many of his Soldiers were killed, before the Walls, in the place where
they expected them most likely to enter, but in that which they won scarce any
body was killed on their side. The Plunder was rich, and given to the
Soldiers. This loss, together with the Courages of our men, terrified the
Inhabitants of the City, and surprised them strangely; so that then they began
to despair of their safety, of which they doubted not before. They found
themselves disappointed in their expectation of the coming of their Prince, who
had promised to be with them in fifteen days, which were expired. They saw this
dreadful Army gaining every day Ground upon them, and in a Post that commanded
their City, and from whence with the Artillery they intended and were preparing
to batter it. These considerations funk deep into many timorous Souls of the
chief of the Town, who desired more to gain the favor of the Conqueror, by
yielding in time, than to deserve his displeasure by a long, a fruitless, and
too obstinate a resistance. But the Governor, a great Lord of the Country,
well respected by his Prince, assured them that the King was at hand, that he
would not fail to relieve and succor them in due time; that they were not yet
in any great danger; that the City was yet theirs; that the loss of one of its
Suburbs was their advantage rather than a loss, bebecause the keeping of it was
difficult and dangerous; that now all their Forces were together to defend
themselves, and beat off the Enemy; that for his part he was fully resolved to
hazard his Estate and Life, and give his Prince all the signs that he could
desire of his Courage and faithfulness.

This discourse coming from such a noble and worthy person, who acted himself
what he required from them, made a great impression upon the minds of the
people, and obliged them all to return to defend their Walls, with a resolution
to bury themselves in the ruins of their City, rather than to yield basely.

Pekin is a large Town, of a difficult access, situate in a plain, surrounded
with Mountains at a considerable distance: There is only a Hill on the
North-side which is nigh the Walls; a River runs at the Foot of this Hill, and
near to it are the Suburbs that were stormed; so that on that side it was not
easy to relieve the City, or put into it any succors, because the Tartarian
Army commanded all the passages of the Mountains, which were of old the Borders
of China, when Pekin belonged to Tartary, and served as a Bridle to stop the
Inroads of the Chinese. They had no other way to succor the Town but along
the River, over which the Tartars had built many Bridges, for the convenience
of their Army, that kept the passages of the Mountains; so that it was
impossible for the Chinese to relieve the Town, without the hazard of a
Battle, which Tamerlan desired, and which should be the aim of all Conquerours
in his Power and Condition. In this posture, the Army being passed before the
City, Odmar, Calibes and the Prince of Tanais, were often sent out with Parties
into the Country, to learn and understand something of the Enemy, and to cause
the Cavalry to subsist the better, and keep the Provisions in the Camp for a
greater necessity: Besides, the Soldiers were commanded to provide themselves
beforehand with great stores of Victuals, that they might be better able to
subsist, and not be obliged to raise the siege for any want, in case the Enemy
did offer to beset them. This caused them to plunder several small Towns that
would not bring them in Provisions; so that though the Tartarian Army was
numerous they had plenty of all things.

In the mean while the Chinese were more in number and stronger, advancing
toward us by little and little. Tamerlan intended to meet them himself with
his Cavalry, and to leave the greatest part of his Infantry before the City, to
continue the siege, which he prosecuted vigorously; but the Inhabitants
resisted and fought with Courage. But to try once more to win the Walls, he
commanded to plant against it all his Engines of War, and to make a breach,
that his Soldiers might come to a handy-fight, and assault the City with more
ease. This proceeding wakened the resolutions of the besieged, and terrified
them wonderfully; chiefly a Mount which was raised upon some ruins about a
Bow-shot from the Walls, upon an high place: From thence the Tartars saw and
discovered the Guards within, and shot into the City, so that by day none dared
appear upon the Walls. This inconveniency obliged them to watch and work more
carefully in their own preservation. For that purpose they began to retrench
themselves, to secure their Bodies by a Wall that was to be two and twenty Foot
high, as many broad, and fifty Foot in length: As soon as the Besiegers
perceived it, they thought it not convenient to stay till this work should be
finished, but rather to try Fortune, and endeavor by an assault to win the
Walls.

In prosecution of this design and resolution, the Prince sent for Axalla into
his own Quarters, because it concerned him most, in regard of his Office, and
because during this siege he had been most active, he told him his intentions,
desiring him to prepare himself and his men for the next morning. As soon as
Axalla had drawn out his Soldiers, he assaulted the Wall, which was stoutly
defended by the besieged; but at last this Captains Valor, assisted by twenty
thousand of his Men, took it by force, and fortified himself there. He could
scarce keep back his Soldiers in their heat and fury from breaking in further;
according to the commands of Tamerlan, which he was persuaded to give, for two
reasons: First, because he did not desire that the City should be won by
assault, for it was rich and full of all good things; he was therefore afraid
that the Enemies Army should come at that Instant when his Soldiers were busy
in plundering the houses, which would have caused their utter overthrow; for
rich Soldiers, who have much to lose, can never fight well: Secondly he stopped
his men from taking the City by assault, because he intended to make of it a
Magazine to furnish his Army, and carry on his designs with greater security.

The loss of the Wall abated not the Courages of the besieged; they defended
themselves as obstinately and bravely as before, in hopes of receiving speedily
some succors from their King, who was near at hand as they were rightly
informed. But in their greatest expectations, the accident of a shot cast from
one of the Engines, which struck down a piece of Wood and wounded the Governor
dangerously, caused them to lose their Courages. This worthy person, so
affectionate to his Prince and Country, died of this Wound a few hours after,
leaving his Soldiers without heart or resolution; for this brave Commander, by
his example and persuasions, obliged them to hold out so long. This unexpected
accident forced them to consent to a Treaty with the Emperor, before he should
hear any news of their misfortune, and of the loss of the numbers of men who
had been killed in defending the Wall. They expected better and more honorable
Articles.

Tamerlan began to be weary with the long siege, eight days were spent since
the last assault, and he saw no change in the Citizens resolutions, and
understood not that the King of China made any haste to fight him; but when the
King heard the Governor of Pekin was killed, he was afraid of the consequence;
this made him draw toward the Besiegers with more speed with his Army in
Battle. Axalla, who lodged upon the Wall, perceived the Enemy first: he went
therefore to inform the Prince, he rejoiced to hear such good news, but his joy
was much more increased when he saw the Deputies of the City, who came to yield
themselves and their City into his hands. The Emperor received them with his
wonted kindness, promising the Inhabitants his protection, if they would
continue to him faithful, but he threatened them with severe punishments, if
they offered to revolt.

The Articles were agreed to, the Garrison, in number about eighteen thousand
men, went out, they were the remainder of thirty thousand in the beginning of
the siege, which lasted two full Months. The Citizens were confirmed in all
their privileges, and were mightily taken and enamoured with the sweet and
loving disposition of their new Lord.

At this same time the King of China, who was at hand with all his Army,
understood that the City was delivered up by the Garrison that he met in his
way. The Lieutenant Governor he commanded to be executed, with many Captains,
for their Cowardice, but he pardonned the Soldiers who were not so guilty. He
commanded all his Army to stop their march in the very place where he received
the news of this Cities surrender, thinking more convenient to wait for
Tamerlan there in a Ground that lay well for his Forces to draw up. The Tartars
spent eight days in repairing the breaches, and furnishing the Town with all
necessaries fit to abide a siege, whatever happened. The Emperor also mustered
his whole Army, paid off his Soldiers, increased their Wages, and rewarded
every man according to his deservings: he ascribed the honor of this Conquest,
so considerable, to the cares and wise conduct of Axalla, therefore he offered
him the Government over this City and the Country which he had already
conquered; but he very fairly refused it, desiring the Prince to bestow it upon
some other Body, because he desired no other reward but to bear a share in the
labors of his Master, whose Glory should be his chief aim and desire. This
answer pleased the Prince, for he had offered it to him, only because he had
well deserved it, but he was not willing that he should take it; for he was
desirous to have him always nigh his person, knowing that he was courageous,
faithful and ingenious, and well experienced in the Affairs of War: When he
refused it, the Prince of Tanais accepted it, with the Title of Viceroy.

Tamerlan, having set all things in good order, and dispatched some Messengers
to the Emperor his Uncle, and all his Friends to inform them of his happy
successes, and satisfied his Soldiers, who were ten thousand men less than
before, he caused Prayers solemnly to be offered up to the God of Hosts during
a whole day. After this he marched to find the Enemy, who was with all his Army
of his Subjects and Allies at Sinteh^. As soon as the King of China had
understood that our Army was passed over the River of Culifu, he caused it to
be proclaimed all over his Camp, that every one should be ready to fight, for
he did not desire to see the Tartarians farther in his Country, to eat it up
and destroy it. But there was no Wisdom in that resolution, for it caused him
to lose his own advantages, and run headlong into the mischief that was at
hand; for had he lengthened the War as he ought, the many and strong Towns,
which were to be besieged one after another, would have undermined Tamerlan's
Army, and rendered it unable to stand against his fresh Troops; and for the
Tartars, they could not in reason advance so far as to leave behind them any
one Town, which might have cut off their Provisions. Reason and Justice obliges
Commanders of an Army to deal in this manner, otherwise they may soon destroy
the most flourishing Army.

Therefore the Emperor could not but say, privately to some about him, not in
a boasting manner, for he never used to boast of the greatest advantages that
he has had over his Enemies, That the King of China was ill advised to desire
a Battle; that he would doubtless have cause to repent of this folly at his
leisure, because his Soldiers were not to be compared to his Men in Strength
and Courage.

When the King of China understood that the Tartars were marching toward him,
he advanced with his Army to meet them, in such a glorious manner, as if he had
intended only to show them his Grandeur and Riches. Nothing appeared to the Eye
but Gold and Silver in his Army, and the Chariot, upon which he was mounted,
was so beset with Diamonds, Rubies and Pearls, that it was not possible
steadfastly to fix the Eye upon it in the Sun.

This Prince, of about thirty three years old, had been brought up from his
infancy in the delights and pleasures of the Court, and not in the troubles of
the War, which requires a Body inured to pains, and hardened against the
inconveniences of the Seasons. He was in his discourses insolent, from his
Mouth dropped nothing but Threatenings, Words of Contempt and Defiance,
complaining that he had been surprised by the Tartars, and engaged in a War
without notice given, as it is the Custom of his people: Three or four of his
Neighboring Kings accompanied him in the same State and Splendor; so that the
hopes of such rich Spoils as were to be gotten with the Victory, strangely
encouraged the Tartarian Soldiers to behave themselves like men.

Whiles the two Armies were drawing nearer together, Tamerlan took the Town of
Thiauchevoi in his march, which happened to be very useful to his Army, in
regard of its good situation in the midst of Waters and Pasture Grounds for
Cattle, so that when Tamerlan saw it first, he resolved to pitch there his
Tents, and see whether the Enemy would have so much boldness to attempt upon
him in that place that would prove disadvantageous to him. To engage the
Chinese the sooner to a Battle he sent them a defiance, and at the same time
laid siege to Panihu, which was a little behind him. This Town was strong and
well furnished with a stout Garrison; Panihu was distant from Thiachevoi about
ten Leagues, so that it had not been convenient for the Emperor to return and
assault it himself, for then he had been forced to turn his Back to the Enemy;
he judged it therefore more fit for him to beset it with his Troops of Horse,
for these two Reasons; First, to hinder the Enemy from breaking in upon his
Army; and next, that he might with more ease approach nearer to the King of
China But this Precaution was not needful, nor the Consultation that happened
thereupon; for when Odmar was returned, he assured him, that the Chinese were
within a Days March, and that in all likelihood the Battle would be the Day
following.

At this news the Prince sends for Calibes, who was with ten thousand Horse
before Panihu, commanding him to come to him with speed. In the mean while he
was careful to provide all things needful, and to seek his advantages to win
the Victory.

The Army advanced softly within a League of Thiauchevoi; and the next day
understood for certain, that the Chinese were in their march toward him. The
Emperor, with a merry Countenance, as soon as he had acquainted Odmar with the
Order that he intended to observe, and drawn up his Men in the Field that he
had chosen, looked upon the Enemy in their march, at the head of six thousand
Horse, with which he advanced before his Army, having Calibes with him. He used
thus to view the Enemy himself, without trusting to other Men's Eyes. He
endeavored to draw them into the Field, where his Army was ready for the
Battle. When he had well considered this vast Army, he commanded Calibes, as
soon as he should be assaulted, to retreat back in good order, and draw the
Chinese nearer to the Tartarian Troops. He returned afterward to his Army to
prepare them for the fight, disposing of his Infantry upon the decline of the
Hill with their Artillery to defend them. They were in number sixscore thousand
men, armed according to the Christians fashion, under several Captains who
obeyed Axalla as their Lieutenant General.

The Cavalry was drawn up in a plain Ground, having their Enemy at their right
hand, and their Infantry at the left to withdraw toward it in case of
necessity. They were in number fourscore thousand Horse. Cali^^es, with the
Tartars, led the Van: He was to command thirty thousand divided into three
Bodies of ten thousand a-piece, who had orders to join to him as soon as he
should have drawn the Enemy into the Field, according to the Prince's Orders.
Odmar was commanded to second him with thirty thousand more, and Tamerlan led
the Rear, which he placed near one of the Wings of the Foot, which he looked
upon as the chief strength of his Army.

His intention was to let those threescore thousand Horse begin the Battle, led
on by those two great Commanders: He hoped, when they should have broken the
Enemy, or shaken them, he would quickly defeat them. He commanded them
therefore to advance forward, staying behind with his Infantry, and twenty
thousand chosen Horse, able to win another Battle, if his Men had been beaten.
When these things were thus ordered, Calibes, by retreating from the Enemy,
drew them on forward, but sometimes he charged them home. It was a beautiful
sight to behold that great Army stronger than ours, full of armed Chariots,
with which the Chinese expected to get a great advantage over Tamerlan's Army.
The Chinese were full of Gold and Silver, their Armor, Horses and Cloths,
were so laden, that the Tartars had just cause to wonder.

In the mean while the Emperor's Eye was every where; he was well pleased to
see Calibes execute his Orders so punctually, and to behold the Chinese draw
toward him in good order. He endeavored to understand in what place their
King was; for that purpose he had near him the Lord of Vauchefu, who was well
acquainted with their Rules and Manners. This Lord caused the Prince to take
notice that they had but one Body which was not divided into Van and Rear, and
that the King was in the middle of his Chariots and Infantry. Upon this
Tamerlan turned back to his Men, telling them, That they must scatter that
Golden Cloud, and that the King of China must give them a share of his Riches.
As soon as he had spoken these words, he gave not time to the Enemy to rest
after a march of a long League, but sent order to Calibes to begin to charge
with his Vanguard, and that he should send back his ten thousand wearied Horse
to him. Calibes could not prevail upon them to retreat, but they, as soon as
the signal was given, desired earnestly to go in the Front, and give the first
Onset, under the Command of a young Lord named Ziocoatanes. This Lord charged
the foremost of the Chinese Army so stoutly, that he made them give back. The
Battle was Bloody, for every one endeavored to show his Courage, and fight for
the honor of their Prince, and the safety of their Nation. In an hours time it
was not known which Party had got the advantage; but at last, when Calibes had
been wounded; and his Squadrons broken, the Enemy for a time seemed to have won
the Victory.

The Prince, who was an Eyewitness of this first charge, before he withdrew
back to his Rear, saw this dishonor without any alteration in his Countenance:
His mind was so settled and unmovable in prosperity and adversity, he only
said, That the vast numbers of his Enemy, though in a Confusion, had oppressed
the courages of his men.

These thirty thousand Horse already defeated were almost all Tartarians, that
fight not in the same manner as the Parthians, nor in that good order. Two
thousand of them retreated with their wounded Commander behind the Prince, who
caused his Wound to be searched before him, and ordered him to go back behind
his Infantry with the other wounded Men, where a great many other Tartars
rallied.

That which Calibes could not perform with the Tartars, Odmar did with the
Parthians; he charged and broke into the Enemies with that fury, that he made a
way through their whole Army, and afterward fell upon one of their Wings,
forcing them to retreat to their Chariots where the King was in person. It had
been wisdom to stop there, or turn another way, but his fury made him think
nothing impossible for his Courage to perform: this persuasion caused him to
assault that dreadful Barricade that kept in the King of China, who had marched
forward to help his Cavalry in their Retreat, and obliged them to rally after
they had been broken by Odmar. But in this Attempt he found a strong
resistance, and lost a great many Men to no purpose. This caused him to stop
his Men, and send to the Prince for Infantry and Artillery, with which he
assured him that he should gain the Victory. At this news the Prince commanded
his Party to stand, and sent him fifty thousand Foot, with some of his
Artillery, under the Command of Axalla, whom he had ordered to force the
Barricado of Chariots. This brave Captain with all speed marched up to Odmar,
and having put his Artillery in the Front, with which he caused such a disorder
amongst the Chariots that their Governors obliged the King to fight the
Tartars. He had an hundred and fifty thousand Men about his Person, but Axalla
was not terrified with this vast number of Enemies; he was thereby more
encouraged to fight, so that he was never observed to have behaved himself more
bravely, and with greater success.

In the mean while Odmar slept not, he knew that the Kings Cavalry that he had
broken were rallied behind their Body of Foot; he charged them again afresh,
scattered and put them to flight.

At the same time Tamerlan came in with a choice Body of Horse, and the rest of
his Infantry which he had commanded to advance to succor Axalla; without any
delay he charged and cut all in pieces that stood before him, getting as far as
the second Barricado of Chariots, where the King of China was with forty
thousand Men untouched. Here the Fight was cruel for two or three hours, every
one striving to overcome; but at last the Reserve of Horse with which the
Prince had charged so vigorously, assisting the Foot in good time, got the
Victory, and put the Chinese to flight.

The Day was won in this manner, after a bloody Fight of eight hours; the Night
put a stop to the Slaughter, and favored the Chinese in their Retreat. Their
Camp was taken and plundered by the Tartars, the King himself wounded with an
Arrow in the Arm became a Prisoner; two Kings that assisted him lost their
Lives in the Hurly-burly, and two others were taken with him.

This complete Victory enriched the Soldiers with Plunder. The Spoils were
infinite and inestimable, nothing but Precious Stones, and Vessels of Gold and
Silver appeared every where, with such rich and beautiful Chariots that they
could not be too much admired.

After this happy success the Prince rode round about the Field, as well to
hinder more Effusion of Blood, as to rally his Men and place his Guards; he
unburden'd himself of the rest of his cares upon Axalla, leaving the King of
China in his Custody in the middle of his Infantry. He intended to see him the
next day, in the mean whiles he gave order to have him cured of his Wound, and
well treated.

There was nothing more beautiful to the Eye than the rich Armor which the
Chinese had put on that day, and the many Ornaments with which they had
trimmed themselves; for the diversity of colors yielded at a distance, the
most satisfying prospect in the World. Their Army was more numerous than the
Tartars, but they had neither the dexterity nor the courage of Tamerlan's Men.
They say, that the King had in the Field three hundred and fifty thousand
Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot; but the most part of them were unskilful
Brutes, who suffered themselves to be butchered without resistance, and without
making use of their Numbers; for they had no knowledge in the Art of War, or so
little that they were not much the better for it. Threescore thousand Men died
in this Battle.

Tamerlan gave his orders for the burying of the dead, and for thanks to be
given to God for the Victory; afterward he caused all the wounded to be
carefully healed, of both Armies. He went to visit Calibes, who was ill with
the Infection of the Air, and of a Wound, which hindered him not from
performing his duty and commanding the Van, as carefully as if he had been in
perfect health. The Prince was well pleased with him, he looked upon him as the
chief Commander, next to himself, amongst the Tartarians; for he was so well
beloved by them, that he was very well obeyed.

Tamerlan received news, that one of the King of China's Brothers was fled with
fifteen thousand Horse; he sent thirty thousand to pursue him, and commanded
Panihu at the same time to yield. This City readily obeyed, sending their Keys,
which caused the Army to advance forward into the Country.

Tamerlan had been almost a day and a night on Horseback, from which he lighted
about two a Clock in the Morning; they brought to him a Loaf of Bread and
Water, for he never drank any Wine; afterward he laid himself down upon a
Carpet, discoursing with his Officers afterward till Sunrising. I was, says
Alhacent, always near him at that time, and could never hear the least word
from his Mouth which might discover any pride that he took in his good success;
he only pitied the King of China because of his unhapiness, caused by his
refusal of surrendering into his Hands what belonged to him by right. He told
Odmar that God had led him as it were by the Hand to obtain that day, without
the loss of any of his chief Officers, a great Victory; that he was sorry for
the death of his other Soldiers, but he thought them happy because they had
lost their Lives in the service of their Prince, fighting courageously against
the Heathens who worshipped false Gods.

The next day Tamerlan caused all his rich Tents to be spread, and placed his
Guards in such a manner as might make his Grandeur to appear the more: the
chief Officers of his Army being near his Person to wait upon him, he then sent
to Axalla that he should bring before hime the King of China. As soon as he
understood that he was coming, he went out of his Tent to meet him. This great
Prince was not cast down by his misfortune, he appeared at this instant with
the Countenance of a Man of courage. As soon as he had inquired of Axalla, by
his Interpreter, which was the Emperor, he spoke to him in this stately
manner; My Gods have been so displeased against my Country, and my happiness,
that they have made me thy Prisoner: And if it be true what Fame speaks of
thee, that Tamerlan fights for nothing but for the glory of his Nation, this
that thou have now purchased ought to satisfy thy mind, to have subdued with
thy Sword the Offspring of the Sun, and the Lord of the World, who is now in
thy power and at thy disposal. He spoke these words with a free and bold air,
and not as a Supplicant. The Emperor saluted him first very civilly, and
caused him to be led into his Tent, where he answered him by his Interpreter,
That an unjust cause is hateful to every Divinity, whether true or false; that
for his part, he gave thanks to the immortal and incomprehensible God, the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, whom he worshipped, for the late Victory which he
acknowledged to have received from his bounty alone; as the King of China
ascribed the cause of his misfortune to his mistaken Divinities: but he
promised that he would not abuse the advantage that he had got upon him, but
that he would endeavor by all civil and courteous dealing to cause him to
forget his present condition. The King of China, surprised with this unexpected
discourse, returned him his thanks. At the close of this discourse Tamerlan
drew back a little, to observe the motions and behavior of this great Prince,
whom he beheld steadfastly with delight. He asked him afterward, what he
thought of the Actions and courage of his Soldiers in the Fight? The King
answered, That when he saw so feeble an Army, in Comparison of his, came to
him, he was fully persuaded to get the Victory, but the Gods had otherwise
ordered it. He inquired from Tamerlan, whether his Brother had been killed or a
Prisoner. Before the reply was made, one of the Commanders there present
desired to know whether he did fight near his person. He told them that he
commanded in the Battle the Cavalry, and wore as himself a Princely Attire.
They answered him that he was taken; then he fetched a deep sigh, which caused
some to be so inquisitive why he was displeased, that his Brother should run
the same hazards as himself, and fall into the same condition. He replied, That
in his misfortune he had this comfortable persuasion, That his Brother ( the
second expectation of the Chinese) would not forsake him, but would attempt
every thing to re-establish his Affairs, and the reputation of his Countrymen.
He lamented pitifully at his mishap, but praised his Courage: But Tamerlan
knew very well that he was escaped and out of his reach, for he had rallied all
the broken Troops of Horse and was fled. Odmar had been sent after him to
hinder him from gathering together too numerous a Body.

The chief Prisoners were brought next, they were laden with so much Gold and
precious Jewels, that it is not to be conceived. The two Kings, Confederates
and Tributary to China, appeared first. As soon as this Prince saw them coming,
he arose to honor them, and they fell down and worshipped him almost in their
salutation; he wished them to rise from the Ground; Tamerlan asked who they
were; the King of China answered that they were his Friends; one the King of
Chiampa, the other the King of Cochinchine; and that he was sorrowful for their
misfortune as much as for his own, which made him willing to follow them in
death. He spoke in this manner, imagining that the Tartarian Custom was like
that of China, to kill and destroy all their Prisoners of War, and sometimes,
in a savage manner, to feed upon their Flesh. But the Emperor received them
with expressions of kindness, and assured them, that he would use them well and
gently.

The King of China felt a great satisfaction at this unexpected civility and
humanity. He was not above thirty years of Age, but had a long Face, great
black Eyes, a Nose of a middle size, a long Beard, which he handled often, a
grave and lofty Air, like that of a great Prince. His Kingdom contains two
hundred thousand Fortresses, fifteen great Provinces or Governments; in them
are to be found many Golden Mines, and some Silver, and a certain Herb which we
call Rhubarb, They reckon that he has seventy Kings wearing Crowns, his
Tributaries. This large and wide Country which we call China, is named by the
Inhabitants Tame; and the People, whom we call Chinese, are named by them
Tangis. This Country is full of Fowl and Fish, because of the many Rivers that
run through it. Silk is here so plentiful, that the Beggars are clothed
therewith. Wool is here scarce, but this want is remedied with much Cotton and
Linen. The Climate is temperate. The Men have liberty here to have as many
Wives as they can conveniently keep: They wear their Hair long, but the Women
have short Perrukes. There is always a General, or Governor over the whole
Kingdom, next to the King, called by them Tuton. The Brother of the King of
China had this Office, which is of so great importance, that the Laws command
him to be always within the Kingdom. But this man entreated the King his
Brother so earnestly, that he might be present at the Battle, which he was
persuaded to win, that he yielded to his importunities. He had placed in his
stead a Lord which the King did not trust. This grieved the King when he
considered that he had been guilty of so great a fault, as to suffer him to
hazard with him his person in the same fight, and to have left the Government
of so large an Empire in unfaithful hands.

Tamerlan called afterward together his Privy Council, to advise what was to
be done with the Prisoners, and how they should use their Victory. At that time
news was brought, that the King's Brother was safely arrived at Quanton, a City
which he had fortified, that he was endeavoring to furnish it with all manner
of Provisions, and that he was busily employed in gathering together an Army.
As soon as Tamerlan heard this, he sent the Prisoners, with two thousand
Parthian Horse to Pekin, for his Army had rested themselves several Days: he
commanded them to stop there a little, and carry them over the Mountains to
Burday, a City that had been always faithful to the Tartars, and that they
should there keep them till they had further order. Malaxan, Axalla's
Lieutenant General, was to command that Party; by him the Prince writ to the
Emperor his Uncle, and to his Viceroy of Sachetay, to acquaint them with his
happy success and Victory, where he had lost but few of his Men, but the
Chinese many. By this means he freed himself from a great many Chariots and
Baggage that encumbered his Army, sending them with the Prisoners. He ordered
also the Recruits to be hastened, and forty thousand Foot to be gathered in
Parthia, and thirty thousand Horse in Tartaria, that they might come to him
before the Forces of the King of China could be able to make head to stop him.
He advised what was best to be done upon this news, and it was resolved, That
Quanton should be spedily besieged, and, if it were possible, to shut up the
Kings Brother in the City.

This place is one of the chiefest of the Kingdom, very populous, and naturally
strong. It was about forty Leagues from the Field where the Battle was fought.
Odmar took in his way thither many small Towns, without opposition, and was
marched as far as the Walls, dispersing his Troops round about, with an
intention not to depart without the Prince's order, to whom he had dispatched a
Messenger, to understand his pleasure. An universal fright had seized upon the
hearts of all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, though the Kings Brother
endeavored to settle their minds, and oblige them to take Courage. The
Humanity of Tamerlan, and the Civilities that he had expressed to the King of
China, and to the rest of his Prisoners, being noised abroad in the Country,
satisfied their minds, and made them bear their misfortune with patience. Every
one knew already that the Prince was of a mild and obliging temper; that he
took a great delight in showing his mercy to such as deserved or desired it, by
their behavior and repentance; and that when he was angry, by an indiscreet
fierceness, he was loath to be cruel and rough to any: But in regard his design
was to bring down the proud, and to raise up the humble, he observed an
equality in his Rewards and Punishments, to prevent by that means all occasions
and inclinations of mischief. He had another good quality that caused him to be
admired and cherished by all the World: he was a religious observer of his
word, and no Person durst attempt to make him break it, without deserving his
displeasure. The fame of so many good qualities, and of so rare a Virtue in
Tamerlan, spreading about amongst the ignorant Chinese, produced this good
effect; that when once they had obtained his word, they depended upon it as if
he had put it immediately in execution. This is of an high importance to settle
the interest of a Conqueror amongst his new Subjects.

After all these orders given, Tamerlan commanded public Prayers to be said,
to implore the Divine assistance. He distributed Moneys afterward to the
Captains, that they might have a care to heal the wounded, and provide
necessaries for them; and with the rest of his Army, in good order, marched
toward Quanton. He had ordered Odmar to Post himself on the other side of the
Town, to hinder the Kings Brother from carrying into it his succors, in case
he should attempt to put any in; willing him to oppose himself with all his
power, and to fight him in case of necessity; for he informed him that he was
coming with the Army to besiege that City.

At this same time the Kings Brother sent Ambassadors to Tamerlan, to Know how
the King did, and to desire leave to visit him. Tamerlan was glad of this
request, because he feared that he would have Proclaimed himself King of China,
and by that means have created him much more trouble than his elder Brother. In
the mean while, the Prince of China having understood in what condition the
Citizens of Quanton were, he resolved to succor them, and adventure another
Battle; because, as he thought, he had the Troops of his Allies, and his own
Army, numerous enough to do this business: for that purpose he marched straight
to Porchio, situate upon a great River, where he intended to build a Bridge
with Boats, having Materials in abundance.

As soon as Tamerlan had understood his motion, he caused a Ditch to be made at
the end of the Bridge that was over the River, with a Fortification to prevent
all sudden attempts; placing there three or four thousand of his best Soldiers
to Guard it. In the mean while, as the Enemy drew near, he stood with his Army
drawn up on this side the River, and took notice of their countenance and
motion.

Both Armies continued in this manner ten or twelve days, without performing
any thing worthy of notice. At last Tamerlan had news brought him, that the
Kings Brother had gathered together a great many Boats, and was making of a
Bridge, at a narrow place called Cambin, about ten Leagues from his Camp. At
first he took no notice that he knew it, staying in the same place with his
Troops, without attempting any thing; but when he understood for certain, that
the Bridge was perfected, he gave order to fifteen thousand Horse to attack
such as were passed over the River, commanding his Body of Foot to follow
after. He had left behind him at Porchio as many as were needful to secure his
Camp; the rest of his Horse, Commanded by the Prince, brought up the Rear. He
stopped, or advanced his Army, according to the news that he received at every
foot in his March, of the number and posture of his Enemies that had passed
over the River. About Midnight they left their Camp, and came to their
Rendezvous about Noon. Odmar was there half an hour before the rest, but as
soon as he understood that there was no more of the Chinese on his side of the
River than he was able to beat, he stopped with his Party without meddling with
them; because he wished that more would adventure over, and he staid for
Tamerlan's coming. He thought fit to send some Scouts to understand how their
number increased: when he perceived that there were about fifty thousand passed
over the River, he sent news of it to Tamerlan; who was at hand, and marched
directly to attack them. His coming was not expected, for they knew nothing of
his March: He found them in disorder, so that at the first Onset he put them
to flight. Some of them resisted with courage, but not so stoutly as they might
have done in so advantageous a Post as they were in; for they had the River on
the one side, and a large Marsh on the other side. It is certain, that if they
had but known their strength, and the advantage of the place, a small
resistance had been able to stop the Tartarians. But as soon as Tamerlan's
Infantry had got as far as the Rivers side, and had pierced through to the
Bridge of Boats, they began to break and sink it. They had a great Ship in the
manner of a Fire-ship, coming down with the Stream; as soon as it was within a
convenient distance, the Tartars set it on fire. This flaming Engine, carried
with the strength of the Water, beat with fury against the Bridge, broke some
of the Boats, scattered others, and burned those that were nearest. This
strange sight astonished the Chinese that were passed over the River, because
they saw no hopes of saving themselves by a Retreat. Twenty thousand of them
were killed in the place, and amongst the rest the Prince of Cochinchine, at
the first Onset, where he behaved himself like a Man of courage. The Brother
of the King of China saw his Men destroyed and drowned, and himself unable to
assist them. Though he had lost in this Encounter but the third part of his
Army, and had yet one hundred thousand fresh Men, there was no likelihood that
he would hazard to fight with them against Tamerlan, who commanded the Head of
the Prince of Cochinchine to be cut off, and to be sent to the Inhabitants of
Quanton; for he was one of the noblest Subjects of the Empire: this sight
therefore would be able to make them believe the Victory, that they might not
expect any other succors.

Axalla besieged them so close, and gave them so little time, that though they
endeavored to defend themselves vigorously, and were continually at
handy-blows with his Men, they found themselves every day weaker, and their
Enemies draw by degrees nearer to their Walls. When they found themselves thus
wearied with watching and fighting, and no likelihood of safety by an obstinate
resistance, they resolved to fly to the Conquerours mercy. They sent word to
Axalla, that they desired to treat with him. He sent them word back again, that
they had more reason to rely upon the Emperors mercy, than their own strength;
and that for his part, he would so order the business, that they should have no
cause to repent of their resolutions. After a few Messages and Discourses of
yielding, they desired eight days to send to the Brother of the King of China,
to acquaint him with their estate and condition; and that if within fifteen
days they were not relieved, they promised to yield up the City; upon condition
that Tamerlan should maintain their Privileges, and treat them in the same
manner as the Kings of China had done before. Axalla returned them this Answer;
That he had power to treat with them, and receive them favorably whenever
they would fly to the mercy of his Prince: And that though the time they
required was long, he would nevertheless inform him of their desires, and write
for them. But that immediately, without delays, they ought to give him Hostages
for his security; and that upon that condition all Acts of Hostility should
cease, and that he would grant them a Truce, till he understood further of his
Princes mind. He sent therefore to Tamerlan, to acquaint him with this good
news, which he received with much more joy, than for the late Victory obtained
of the Enemy. He granted all that the Inhabitants of Quanton had desired, at
the Request of Axalla, sending him a Commission to end this business as he
should judge most convenient.

In the mean while the Prince was watching, to observe what motion and course
the Kings Brother would take after his late overthrow. He intended, if he did
not forsake the Banks of the River, to pass over and pursue him to the Sea
side. After three or four days staying, he was advised by his Captains, to get
over the Water only with his Cavalry. His intent was to march three or four
Leagues into the Country, to hinder the Chinese from seeking a Ford, which
they intended, that they might more speedily succor Quanton that was besieged.

This fear quickly ceased, as soon as the Prince of China had seen the Tartars
on his side of the River; for not thinking himself safe near so powerful an
Enemy, he retreated with speed toward the Sea, sheltering himself amongst the
Mountains; into which the Cavalry could not easily approach, and where his Army
could entrench and fortify themselves with ease. When he was come to that
place, and had rested his Men, he consulted with the Grandees of China that
were about him, what resolution was best to be taken. They advised him to seek
the fairest means; and for that purpose, that he should send to Tamerlan
Overtures of Peace, to ransom the King, and save the rest of the Provinces;
telling him, that he should endeavor to purchase Peace with Gold or Silver,
seeing that so much Blood had been spilt in vain: That they perceived that the
Gods were wroth with their Nation, seeing that they had favored their Enemies
so apparently; and therefore they had best yield to necessity, and to the
conditions that Tamerlan would impose upon them: for that purpose, the Kings
brother sent for a safe Conduct for such as he should send to treat with
Tamerlan, which was readily granted to as many as he should appoint.

In the mean while Quanton was surrendered into Axalla's Hands, who caused the
Garrison to depart, and received the Inhabitants in the protection of Tamerlan,
and all such as were willing to stay there without Armor. He marched into the
City amidst the general applause of the People, who were desirous to see their
new Prince. They received him very honorably; Axalla put thirty thousand Men
there in Garrison, giving them some Money to supply their necessities until the
Army could Muster and receive the three Months pay due to them, which amounted
to eight hundred thousand. Tentins, which are worth four hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns, or thereabouts. The Inhabitants of Quanton readily paid this
Money.

Whilst these things were acted, the Emperor sent Alhacent to Axalla. He found
him treating and feasting his Captains, in expectation of his Princes commands,
which he brought to him; to stay at Quanton, and send him all the Infantry. He
took this course, to fright and strike a terror into his Enemies the sooner,
who might perceive after the taking of that City, when the Army should be all
in a Body, that Tamerlan's intent was to march further into the Country, and
conquer more of the Kingdom. He thought this to be the best way to succeed in
his design, to oblige them the sooner to seek an honorable Peace, and settle
his own interest in those Parts. Alhacent returned back from Quanton to the
Prince, being much satisfied to have seen that beautiful and great City, so
well fortified and so populous, standing in a fruitful Soil, abounding in all
manner of good things. The Army was two Months and a half about it, without
suffering any want of Provisions; and might have continued there three or four
Weeks with ease and plenty; for there was no lack of any thing in the City,
unless it were of Men; for many had been killed during the Siege. To supply
this want, the Kings Brother advanced with his Army, to cast in some recruits.
Many also of the Tartars were dead, through the unwholsomness of the Air, and
the violent Heats unto which their Bodies were not accustomed. Therefore they
waited and watched the Recruits that were coming in haste to the Army, before
it could advance further into the Kingdom, or assault any other place. Axalla,
who staid in the Town, spent his time in making up the Breaches which the
Artillery had made, and win the affections of the Citizens. It was a very
strange thing, that not one of the Inhabitants went out with the former
Governor when he left the place; he led with him thirteen thousand Men only,
which were remaining of thirty thousand that he had in the beginning of the
Siege; some of them were dead and killed in the Assaults, some staid behind in
the Town with the Inhabitants without Armor, willing to obey the Conqueror.
This was a remarkable Passage, which caused Tamerlan to conclude from thence,
that they were but an unconstant People so soon to forget their former Lord,
who with his Predecessors had Commanded them and Governed them in peace, above
two hundred years. This is a good Lesson for those that Govern Republiques and
Empires, not to have too great a confidence in the common People, let their
profession of zeal and affection be never so great. This consideration obliged
Axalla to doubt of the future, and to confess to Alhacent, that he knew not how
so great a Multitude could be kept in order and commanded, in case any loss or
misfortune should happen to his Party. He commanded him therefore to tell the
Prince, that he should not proceed on further in the Conquest of the Country,
but endeavor to treat with the Enemy before his Army should decrease; and that
he should consider, before he left the Country, how he should be able to keep
under such a Multitude of People in his absence, which were so inclinable to
change, and so uncon^^ant.

A whole year had been spent already in this Expedition, and the Companies that
decreased daily through the Distempers of the Autumn, discovered the weakness
into which they should infallibly fall. The Prince considered all these things;
besides, he feared that a too long and tedious absence would cause some
disturbance in his Empire, as it happens very often: He thought therefore it
was as much honor for him to keep, by his wisdom, what he had gained, as to
win and conquer it by his Valor. Therefore it was his mode never to refuse
reasonable offers of Peace, and to value that more which he obtained by that
Method, than that which he purchased with his Sword. He considered also that if
he could preserve all that Country which he had overrun, which made the third
part of the Kingdom, and receive from the remainder a yearly Tribute, he should
be able to bridle in the King of China, and hinder him from revolting; and that
before he would attempt any such thing, he would think a while upon it: And
that he would take such a course to secure his interest against the natural
inconstancy of the Nation, that by the punishment that he would inflict upon
the Offenders, he would scare and terrify all others from a Rebellion.

He was therefore resolved to hearken to the first reasonable Proposals of
Agreement, and to bound in that place the Conquests of China; seeing that what
he had already taken was almost the third part of the Kingdom, and he had
enough to bridle the King of China, and to hinder him from revolting, if he
should at any time desire it.

The Ambassadors, who were some of the chief Lords of the Kingdom, came to
Tamerlan; who received them as courteously as could be expected, showing to
them all the Grandeur and State of his Court, and the strength of his Army,
that they might have a stronger inclination to be at peace with him. When they
had saluted Tamerlan, they told him that the Prince of China had sent them to
treat with him about the Liberty of their King, and the Peace of China. That
the Fame of his mildness and humanity had invited them to try it by experience,
before they would again complain of the ungratitude of their Gods. That they
were now highly displeased at their own neglect. That they had not prevented
his entrance into their Kingdom, by yielding to him all those things that he
requested of them with so much equity and Justice. That now they were come to
make him full amends, and receive from him such conditions as he should
require. That they were at present sensible, though too late, that nothing was
able to stop the progress of his Army, and that they were willing to be
Examples of this to future Ages.

The Prince listened with attention to their discourse, which he caused to be
interpreted to him, and made this reply: That they had good reason to rely upon
his humanity and mildness, but that they had done wiser, if they had made trial
of it before they had experienced the strength of his Army. In such a case
their condidion had been better, and they had been more kindly used. But as the
design of War is to make such persons hearken to Terms of Peace, as were not
willing without it; and, in regard they desired it, he assured them, That he
was willing to yield to Peace, and grant them that which was the first
Declaration of his mildness and humanity to them; but that on their side, they
ought to propose and make offer of such just and reasonable Conditions, as his
Council would yield to after a due examination. Tamerlan after these words
departed from them, wishing them to declare the Conditions in Writing, and that
they should have an answer. They appeared to be very joyful for the kind
expressions that the Prince had given them, being in their minds most confident
of concluding a Peace.

The Conditions that they offered were, That they would yield Pekin, with all
the Gountry between that and the Mountains, with their Fortresses: That they
would satisfy all the Charges of the War till the Peace was concluded: That
they would give two Millions of Gold to redeem their King. The Prince answered
them. That he was resolved to keep whatever he had conquered, which belonged to
him by the right of War: That he was willing that the River where his Army was
encamped should be the limits of both Kingdoms, as far as Porchis and the Sea:
That the King of China should pay to him and his Successors yearly, as a
Tribute, two hundred thousand Crowns, which he should send to Pekin, and five
hundred thousand Crowns ready Money for to defray the Expenses of the War; and
that in consideration of this sum, the King should be released and sent home;
that all the other Prisoners should pay to such as had taken them, Ransoms
according to their Qualities; only the Kings should pay down each of them one
hundred thousand Crowns for their releasement: That no Chinese, within his
Territories, should hereafter be kept Prisoner or sold as a Slave: That there
should be a free Trade between both Kingdoms: That the King of China should
leave as Hostages for the performance of the Treaty, his Brother and the two
Kings that were Prisoners; and besides them, twelve other Lords of China, who
should be exchanged every year by a like number that should take their rooms,
and bring with them the Tribute of two hundred thousand Crowns.

These conditions, though hard and grievous, were accepted, because they were
not in a condition to refuse them; for their Armies were destroyed, their
strength was weakened, the best Men and the flower of their Army killed or
wounded, and the remainder were affrighted; their King taken, two Battles lost,
the two chief Cities of the Kingdom snatched out of their hands, and all their
chief Passages at their Enemies command. In regard therefore that they were
threatened with a general desolation, and all the Country was full of fears and
apprehensions, they reckoned that favor was showed to them, to spare that
which was left of their Kingdom, which would infallibly and totally be ruined,
if the Peace was not concluded, and their King set at liberty. They were well
informed, that the Emperors Army was to be recruited with other fresh Troops,
that were in their march toward the Army. All these things considered, caused
them to resolve and yield to the conditions required, without any further
debate, taking a strong resolution to bear with patience the Yoke of their
Bondage, until such time as they should have a favorable opportunity to assert
again their own liberties, and free themselves from the Tartars.

In the mean while the Prince had dispatched two thousand Horse, with a
Commission to bring with them the King of China from Burda, that he might swear
to the Peace in Freedom. At Quanton he took the Oath: Tamerlan departed
immediately to Pekin, carrying with him all the Hostages; and amongst the rest,
the Kings eldest Son and Brother. The King went into his Kingdom, to appoint
all things for the performance of the Articles agreed upon: He was received by
his People with strange transports of joy, insomuch that they seemed to adore
him. Tamerlan's vigilance was mindful of every thing that might secure his
conquered Countries: He looked upon Odmar as the fittest Person to leave behind
him, and govern in his absence; he made him therefore his Viceroy, giving him
an absolute power over all the Country, with thirty thousand Horse, and fifty
thousand Foot, well furnished with all needful things: they were to be
dispersed into all the Garrisons and Strongholds. He wished him to make his
ordinary abode at Quanton, to cause good and strong Guards to be kept all along
the River; and to build a Fort at Dermio, to secure that place. He recommended
to him the Person of the Lord of Vauchefu, who had expressed so much zeal and
affection to him in this War, and so much experience in Public Affairs: for
his Brother he was willing to keep him near his own Person, and give him an
Estate in Sachetay; where he enriched and enobled him. He invited also several
of the Inhabitants of Quanton, and of other places, to serve him; with an
intention to settle them in his own Country, and send thither Parthians in
their stead; to arm himself by that means against their inconstancy.

All things having been thus ordered, the Army took the way to Cambalu; but
before they began to march, the Prince sent to the Emperor, his Uncle, to
inform him of his happy successes and return. In this Court were several
jealous Heads, that blamed Tamerlan for what he had done, because he had not
subdued and destroyed all China. But they understood not the difficulties that
were to be overcome, and that it is not always good to pursue things to the
uttermost; that turnings of Fortune are too ordinary: that such as would have
too much more than they ought, lose often what they might have kept with honor
and safety. In trurh, by keeping what he had conquered, Tamerlan could justly
name himself King of China. He had in his Possession two of the most beautiful,
and greatest Cities of the Kingdom, with an infinite number of lesser Towns,
with an hundred Leagues in the Country limited with a great River, which could
not hinder him from going over to the Enemies at his pleasure, and yet stopped
them from coming into his Dominions without danger and trouble, in regard of
the easiness of the guard and defense of it. The King of China could not fail
to pay his yearly Tribute, but he must at the same time draw upon himself the
inconveniences of his Army: So that by this Peace Tamerlan got more honor, and
deserved more praises, than if he had destroyed all China with Fire and Sword,
and ruined a People that had yielded themselves into his Hands so freely to pay
him Tribute.

One thing chiefly surprised the Chinese, and caused them to be strangely
grieved: It was the Command that the Prince gave Odmar before his departure, to
break down all the Idols that should be found within his conquered Country; for
he ordered them all to worship but one only God, according to the Custom of the
Parthians, unto whose Religion he wished that they would join and accustom
themselves. The People expected no such proceedings, but they hoped to enjoy
all their ancient liberty in all respects; but now they saw that they must of
necessity yield to this Order, seeing that the Prince had left Odmar to Command
them, one of the wisest and most experienced Captains of his Empire, who had
always a care to observe and put in execution his Lords Commands. When Odmar
took his farewell of the Prince, he humbled himself as low as his Feet,
according to the Custom of the Country; but the Prince raised him up with a
smiling Countenance, I perceive, says he, that thou art become a Chinese,
seeing that thou offerest to worship me as they do their King; but the greatest
worship that I require of thee, is, that thou should put my Commands in
execution. I entreat thee above all things, to establish amongst my new
Subjects the Honor and Service of God, and next my Authority; and remember
that all these Persons that I leave at thy command have been subdued by the
Sword, and not by Love, or their own Inclinations: so that they are to be kept
in and under by fear, and not to be trusted too far. I recommend my affairs to
thy care, Farewell. The Assistants took notice at this separation, that the
Prince never left any Body with so much regret and displeasure, as he did then
Odmar: But it was absolutely needful to leave such an one as he was in this
Country, a Man of that extraordinary wisdom, faithfulness, and experience.

The Army in their return homewards, carried with them all their sick People;
and after two days March, they met with the new Recruits that were coming to
assist them. The Prince ordered them to proceed on no further, but to return
home toward Cambalu; whither he intended to go and meet with the Emperor, who
intended to see him there, and give him a triumphing Reception, with all the
Pomp and Magnificence imaginable.

It is remarkable, that after Odmar was absent, the Prince loved Axalla above
all other Persons; he trusted him more than any other with the governing of his
Army. His reputation and credit was always very great, but it was mightily
increased by the taking of Quanton, which was his doing alone; for Tamerlan had
left to him the management and carrying on of this Siege; every one remembered
how well he had behaved himself, when with the Prince of Tanais he entered into
China. The Correspondency that he had to advance his Prince's Interest, and all
his other noble and discreet Actions flew abroad, and were known all over the
Empire.

Calibes led the Van; Axalla, unto whom the Prince had given two hundred
thousand Crowns per annum, Commanded the main Body. This Axalla, whose mind was
meditating upon great designs, could not see his Lord idle. He accompanied him
into his own Country, but it was to persuade him to undertake some noble
Enterprise, which might redound to the glory and quiet of the Christian
Commonwealth, for which he had always a great affection; so that his Education
amongst People of another Religion could not oblige him to alter his mind.

After many days Journeys, news came to the Army, that the Emperor was already
at Cambalu. This caused our Prince to send his Army to their Winter Quarters,
into a good and plentiful Country, and with all expedition to hasten to that
City. He made that speed, that in a few days he arrived within four Leagues of
Combalu; where all the Princes and Grandees of the Emperor's Court, with some
of the chief Inhabitants, met him, to congratulate his safe arrival and return
from such a glorious Conquest. The Prince embraced every one according to his
Degree and Quality, with a Countenance full of goodness and Majesty. The
Empress, his Wife, was then with him, she had always accompanied him, and was
likewise welcomed by all the People with extraordinary rejoycings. The next day
the Emperor himself went out of the City to meet him, with a glorious and
magnificent Train. The Prince paid him all the respect at the first interview
that could be expected, and presented him with the richest Chariots, and the
most beautiful Horses of China. It was observed, that when the Prince lighted
from his Horse to pay his respects to the Emperor, his Uncle, the old Man wept
for joy. He offered to go down from his Chariot, but Tamer^^an entreated him
not to do him that wrong; and with all the submissions and respects that he
could express to his Lord and Prince, he hindered him from his purpose. This
old and grave Emperor, being very desirous to see his Daughter that had been
absent from him so long, caused her Chariot to be uncovered, and desired her to
come up into his Chariot, that he might discourse with her at his pleasure. In
the mean while the Prince was on Horseback, drawing upon himself the Eyes of
all the World, that could not sufficiently admire him. He presented afterward
Calibes to the Emperor, praising him for his good services and faithfulness;
which caused him to increase his Pension, and give him one hundred thousand
Crowns. Axalla came next to him, and in few words he was told of his Valor and
noble Deeds; to him he appointed one hundred thousand Tartarins of Gold, to be
paid him out of his Exchequer, after a kind reception; and gave him a
Principality, to reward his Virtues, and express the esteem that he had of his
Person.

CHAP. V. The War of Tamerlan against Bajazet, the Turkish Emperor. His defeat
and imprisonment.
ALL the Winter was spent in Sports, Plays, and Divertisements; but before it
was over, the Prince heard that Bajazet the Turkish Emperor, a stirring and a
warlike Prince, had an intent to conquer the Empire of Greece; that he had won
a Battle and put the Christians to flight* intending to lay Siege to
Constantinople, the chief City of the Empire. This news, together with the
earnest entreaties of the Ambassadors sent to him from the Emperor
Paleologue, made him resolve to send some of his Court to Bajazet, to inform
him that the Prince whom he assaulted was his Confederate, and therefore he was
obliged by that Alliance to entreat him not to attempt any thing to his
prejudice, but to suffer him to live in peace in his Dominions. All this
proceeded from the solicitation of Axalla, who was related to the Family of
the Paleologues, and had found a means to oblige his Lord to defend and protect
him and the Empire of Greece, in the Profession of the Christian Faith, from
the Invasion of Mahometanism; for he had been born there of Genoese Parents.
Tamerlan's Ambassador was roughly treated; Bajazet proudly answered him, That
his Lord should meddle with his own business, and give Laws to his own
Subjects; without making any such application to him, who owed him no
subjection nor respect. Axalla aggravated this Answer with the most heinous
Circumstances, and endeavored to incense the Prince against the Ottoman
Family, thinking himself obliged to oppose its dangerous growth which might
prove as destructive to the Tartarian Empire as to their weaker Neighbors.
After a due consultation, the Ambassador of the Palcologue was dismissed with
this joyful news to his Master, That Tamerlan would not fail to assist him.
Bajazet was not then asleep, he advanced every day forward in his conuqests,
and his happy successes had so besotted him, that he would not hearken to nor
believe the reports of the Tartarian succors, but looked upon them as idle
contrivances invented to scare him from his designs.

Tamerlan seemed to be weary of rest before the Winter was past; the fresh
Laurels of new Victories called him into the Field in the opening of the
Spring, to dis-ingage his word and perform his promise. Axalla never left
urging him, until the Prince sent him into Sachetay to gather together his
Troops from all Parts, that in the beginning of the Spring he might appear with
them in the Field.

This Army made the more haste, because news was brought by an express
Messenger, that there had been a Battle fought between Bajazet and the Greeks,
who were overthrown in such a manner that their Affairs were utterly lost
without a speedy assistance; and that they would be forced to yield to the
mercy of the Ottoman Family. Tamerlan had procured from the Emperor, his
Uncle, one hundred thousand Foot, and fourscore thousand Horse, for this
glorious expedition. He expected the same number from Sachetay, and imagined
that the Princes and great Lords, that would accompany him in this War, would
be able to make up fifty thousand Men more. With these Forces he imagined that
there was some likelihood of obliging the Ottoman Family to hearken to reason,
and free the Grecians from their apparent danger and oppressions. Axalla soon
sent him word that all things were ready, and his Soldiers prepared for a
March in Sachetay. The Prince at this news took his leave of the Emperor, his
Uncle, leaving behind the Princess his Spouse to comfort his Father in his
decrepit old Age. These adieux of the Uncle and the Nephew, and of the Prince
and his Spouse, were grievous and troublesome; and the rather because she had
never forsaken him in all his Travels and Expeditions. But when the glory of
his Empire, the ease of his people, and the deliverance of his Friends were
concerned, nothing was able to keep him. He often declared, That he had been
born for War, and that he ought to take there his delights and pleasure, and
that all other things that he acted out of this Sphere he performed not with
any affection. And he declared, That he was appointed by God to bring down the
pride of imperious Tyrants.

The Night immediately before his departure from Cambalu, he had a Dream which
we may not pass over in silence. He thought he had seen a great Company of
grave and old Men stretching out their Hands to him, entreating him to lend his
assistance to free them from certain proud Tyrants that afflicted them with
diverse Torments. He often said, That to his imagination he never beheld a more
venerable Company that deserved a greater respect and consideration; some of
them seemed to him in his Sleep to be clothed in white, beautiful Garments;
others were attired in Cloth of Gold; some of them, as he thought, had Crowns
on their Heads. The respect and compassion he had for them, obliged him in his
Sleep to reach out his hand to them, and draw them all out of a very low place
where they were shut up. The Prince discovered this Dream the next day after
his departure to many of his Attendants; but as no person then could presume to
tell him the meaning, he never mentioned it afterward.

He went from Cambalu, conducted through the Town, followed with the Prayers
and Wishes of all the People, and receiving all the expressions they could give
him of their Love and Loyalty. Several persons of quality offered him many
Gifts, in return of his kindnesses that the City had received from him during
his abode there. Calibes, and the Prince of Tanais, attended upon him. The
Prince was made chief Colonel of all the Infantry instead of Axalla, who had
been before appointed to be Lieutenant General of the whole Army, and Chief
Commander of the Van. Calibes was to bring up the Rear. Tamerlan never had more
hopeful Troops, nor a more numerous Army. Every day fresh Companies were coming
in from all Parts to join the Army. The Lord of Vauchefu, of China, earnestly
desiring to express his thankfulness to his Benefactor by some noted Action,
had leave granted to him by Odmar to accompany him in this glorious expedition.
He brought with him twenty thousand of the Chinese, who were glad to serve
their new Lord, and understand the Tartarian Customs and Manners in War. Odmar
was afraid of some mishap during the Prince's absence, not so much from the
unconstancy of the Chinese, as from the unconstancy of Fortune. Tamerlan had
sent him word of his designs and expedition, unto which Odmar advised and
encouraged him, telling him also, That he was come on purpose to bring down the
Proud and raise up the Humble. Therefore there was nothing could more displease
and anger him than the sight of a proud and haughty mind. He made this
inclination of his sufficiently appear when he was in China, for casting his
Eyes, and considering that lofty Nation, he saw nothing but an empty vanity in
all their proceedings. I am sent, said he to his Officers, to bring down the
unsufferable pride of these people, and I hope I shall abase them.

After a few days March Tamerlan's Army got as far as Ozara, the General
Rendezvous of all his Troops: And, because they were not all arrived, he went
with his Guards to Samarcande, the place of his Nativity, from whence he had
been absent about three years. Zamay came out to meet him with an infinite
Multitude of people, who filled the Air with Acclamations, Applauses, and
Prayers, for his prosperity. All the Princes and Lords of the Country met him
also to pay him their respects; and the whole City did ring with joy for the
happy return of their noble Prince whom the people loved entirely. He staid
there about a Month; in the mean while Axalla came with his Troops to the
rendezvous at Ozara, where he made all things ready for a March, and waited for
his Princes orders. He had sent him the news of the progress of Bajazet, and of
all his proceedings.

Tamerlan had sent word to the Muscovites, and acquainted them with his
intentions to march against the Turks, requesting him to send him a few Troops.
This Prince had heard of the great preparations for War that the Tartars made;
he was jealous that they were intended against himself, but he was eased of his
fears, and rejoiced to hear that Tamerlan was marching with his numerous Army
against the Ottoman Family, whose prodigious growth had given him cause to be
afraid. He sent therefore his Ambassadors to Tamerlan, to offer him in his
expedition all the assistance that he desired. The Prince entreated him to send
him fifteen thousand Horse with some Moneys due to him, and a free passage over
his Country. All this was readily granted by the Czar, who continued faithful
in his Alliance and League with Tamerlan.

This dreadful Army of the Tartarians caused all Men to expect the abasement of
the Ottoman power, which in a few years was grown dreadful to all the World,
and insupportable to all their Neighbors: for this cause, as well as for the
Confederacy contracted with the Paleologues, Tamerlan was resolved to withstand
Bajazet with all his might. He chose rather to assault him in his new
Conquests, than to stay to be assaulted by him in his own Country amongst his
people to their unspeakable damage and loss. This wise resolution of Tamerlan
was intended for these two purposes; first, his Army would live upon the
Enemies^^Country, and spend of his Substance securely; if Fortune should frown
upon him there, his own Territories would be never the worse, and he should
lose none of them thereby, so that all the advantage would prove to be on his
side. Prince Axalla was the chief Agent of this Expedition; he governed at this
time both the Empire and the Emperor. His great Authority, being a Christian,
gave a jealousy and displeasure to several Grandees of the Court; but his
discreet Behavior and obliging Disposition, together with his rare Virtues
that appeared in all the course of his life, and the notable Services that he
had performed, stopped the mouths of all envious persons, and kept him up in his
eminent Station. He was as welcome to the old Emperor as to Tamerlan himself,
unto whom he cunningly gave the honor of all successes, though his Wisdom and
discreet Conduct had the greatest share and hand in bringing them to pass; so
that if his Power was great, his Worth and Virtues were answerable. There was
never any person more courteous, more affable, more merciful and kind. He
incited Tamerlan to nothing but to Glorious Actions, to Noble Designs full of
Honor; and when they were to be executed, he was always the first man that
would adventure his Life and Person, without sparing himself. And though
Tamerlan had always next to his Person many illustrious Princes and noble
Lords, their Glory was darkened by the Splendor and Magnificence of Axalla,
who exceeded them all in number of Servants, in beautiful Horses, and in a
stately and glorious Train. He had a great Soul, adorned with many Virtues, and
a Discretion able to maintain his own interest. He never gave any Counsel but
he offered himself to put it in execution; in which he always was so happy that
all things succeeded to him that he undertook. His Policy appeared chiefly in
listening to all persons that had any Errand to him. He would lend an Ear to
the meanest with that mildness and Humanity, that never any Person went from
him dissatisfied; but he had the art to captivate their affections, and win the
hearts of all Men that knew him. One day the Prince checked him because he was
so courteous and kind, and so easily to be spoken with; for which he blamed him
before Alhacent: But Axalla replied, It may become you, my Emperor, to be
stately; but I ought to be humble, as your Slave and Servant: Grandeur agrees
with your Place, but Humility is my greatest Ornament. I am near your Person,
my noble Lord, for no other purpose, but to cause you to be honored; if
therefore you be respected, it is sufficient. It matters not how I behave my
self, so I perform my Duty. If I were stately and proud, I should become odious
to all the Lords of your Court, and disoblige them so as to think ill of your
choice of my Person. I shall desire that they may honor me, not for my sake,
but for yours, that your service may be better advanced. This Answer gave a
great satisfaction to the Emperor; for he had a particular art to gain the
love of every one, and he was respected also more than he desired.

I have, says Alhacent, made this little Digression from the History, to give
a Description of Axalla; because without it many things cannot well be
understood in this Relation.

The Prince sent orders to Axalla to come to him to Samarcande, to advise about
the march of his Troops, and till his return, to leave the Command of the Army
with the Prince of Tanais. Axalla took Post, and in obedience to this Command,
went to the Prince: After a serious Debate, it was resolved in Council, that
the whole Army should march over the Borders of Muscovy, straight toward
Constantinople, the chief City of Greece, whither Bajazet with his Army were
going apace; for he was in Asia Minor. Tamerlan sent a Relation of Axalla, to
inform the Emperor Paleologue of the coming of his Army; for whose subsistence
great stores of Provisions had been laid up in all the considerable Cities of
the Empire.

Tamerlan therefore, in pursuance of his Expedition, went from Samarcande to
Ozura, where the Rendezvous was appointed of the whole Army. There it was
debated again which way to take; that of Capha, by the Borders of Muscovy; or
the other way, on the other side of the Caspian Sea, through the Confines of
Persia. At last it was resolved that the Army should march to Capha, and from
thence to Trapezuntium, or Trebisonde, through the Borders of the Georgians,
and enter that way into the Dominions of the Turks.

Thus, when Prayers had been solemnly offered up to God, to implore his aid and
gracious assistance, for the Prince did put in him his greatest confidence, the
whole Army went straight to Maranis; where it abode three days in expectation
of the Troops sent from Odmar, who were near at hand, as well as the other
Succors coming out of Muscovy.

In this place the Emperor caused a General Muster and Review of all his Army,
which was obliged to march twenty Leagues through a Desert Country, where they
found no comfort, not so much as a little fresh Water. Tamerlan had provided
beforehand for this inconveniency, for he had ordered all the Ships and Vessels
in the Harbors of the Caspian Sea, to attend upon him and the Army, near the
Shore. In these Ships were Provisions sufficient, a great deal of Ammunition,
and the most part of his Equipage. This foresight helped them in season, and
hindered the Army from meeting with want. In the march the Prince went along
the Seacoast, sporting himself in Hunting, or discoursing with his Attendants;
he was commonly about ten Leagues from the Army, and none came near him but
those that carried Provisions from the Ships. This Army was so numerous, that
they stretched along twenty Leagues into the Country.

When it was come to Mechet, there the Army went over the River Edel, by a
Bridge that was there, and two or three more made on purpose for a more speedy
passage. During this time the Prince abode at Sarasick, where he understood for
certain that Bajazet was going to besiege Constantinople, that he had conquered
all Bythinia and Bursa, the chief City of this Kingdom: that he had commanded
it to be well fortified, and many other Towns where he had exercised his
cruelty upon the Inhabitants: That all the Neighboring Provinces, for fear of
him, yielded without resistance, and became Tributaries to him. The news that
displeased Tamerlan most, was, that Capha a strong City, where Axalla was
brought up, and received under his protection at Axalla's request, had followed
the Example of the rest, and opened their Gates to the barbarous Enemy. This
unworthy contempt of his Authority Tamerlan was resolved to punish; he sent
therefore to summon them to appear before him, and give an account of their
revolt from him. The Citizens were troubled at this Message, they apprehended
his just indignation, and the punishment due for their Rebellion. They sent
therefore some of their Citizens to pacify his wrath, with many rich Gifts and
rare Furs: They promised in the name of the rest, that they would never be
guilty of any such Crime for the future, but would endeavor to make amends for
it by their future behavior and faithfulness. The Emperor understanding of
their true repentance, he pardoned them for Axalla's sake, unto whom he gave
the Sovereignty of the City. Axalla went to visit there his Friends and
Relations, and settle there a good Order and Government for the security of the
place; giving his Citizens to understand that he loved his own Country, and
would see to preserve his Countrymen. In his way he took Tana which belonged
to the Genoeses, he recovered Aches and Lopeso, three considerable Towns which
the Prince bestowed upon Axalla, willing him to fortify them and furnish them
with all necessaries.

Some may wonder what moved this Genoese Prince, who had refused the Government
of the Kingdom of China, and many considerable Towns, to accept now a small
Territory with more satisfaction, and to prefer such narrow Limits to greater
Dominions. This discovers that strong affection that we have naturally for the
Country where we came first into the World. Axalla accepted of this Gift the
rather, because he might hereafter retire himself in Capha in case of
necessity. Though he held the second place, and was next to the greatest
Monarch of the World, he seemed thereby to confine all his ambition to this
little Territory, and preferred a small Portion of the Caspian Sea, to a large
Compass of Ground limited by Scythia and China, and all the Countries conquered
by his Master, though he were well-beloved by the Soldiers, and highly
respected by all other Persons.

The Army continued sometimes about Mechet, to refresh themselves: The Prince
till that time had employed himself in Hunting, having left the whole Command
of the Army to Axalla; but now he took charge of it himself, and caused it to
march forward toward the holy Mountains; where the Circassians and Georgians
sent Ambassadors to him, to offer him their assistance. These People are
numerous, all professing the Christian Faith. They have been always Tributaries
to the Roman Emperor, since the time that they were conquered by Pompey;
before that, they were under the Jurisdiction of Mithridates, whom this Roman
General overcame. They were joyful to receive Tamerlan's Army, because his
design was to free the Grecian Empire from the Tyranny of the Ottoman Family.
Axalla persuaded a great many of that Country to join themselves with the Army,
for they are noted for their courage and strength. They are a sort of People,
tall, well-set Bodies, and very Warlike; they have often resisted the Power of
the Turks, partly by their stoutness, and partly by the situation of their
Country, which is Craggy and Mountainous. At the first noise of War they burn
their Houses, and waste the Country; so that they are able to withstand by that
means the Assaults of a powerful Enemy. The Emperor was well pleased to behold
these proper Men with their long Hair, and took a delight to understand their
Warlike Dispositions and Actions. Therefore he gave an express Command, That
his Army should not do any injury to that Country. They were at that time part
of the Empire of Trapezuntium, which belonged to Greece. The Prince was
received everywhere with Honor, and his Army supplied with Provisions, as
much as could be desired here. It was reported for certain, That Constantinople
was besieged by Bajazet, who, with a very powerful Army, was set down before
it, and kept in the Emperor Paleologue: and that all his Dominions were in a
great danger to be lost. The Turkish Prince could not believe that Tamerlan
dared oppose his Designs. Therefore when the fame of the Tartarian Armies
coming spread about amongst his Soldiers, he forbid, by his Proclamation, any
person so much as to mention the Tartarian Army; so highly did his proud mind
despise and contemn it. All the Inhabitants of the Country, where this Army
passed, praised the Soldiery, and wished them all happiness, because they were
orderly, quiet, peaceable, and just in their dealings: If a Soldier had stole
but an Apple, he was sure to dye for it without Mercy.

This severity was observed in all the March, because this expedition was
undertaken for no other purpose but to deliver these people from the fears and
slavery of the Turks, and force proud Bajazet to listen to some reason. In this
order the Army came to Bachichich, where it stopped to take some refreshment
eight days. There the Ambassadors of Guines, a Man highly esteemed for his
Holiness, met the Prince. They offered him, in their Masters name, all the help
and assistance that he could desire or want in this expedition; they brought
him some beautiful Horses, and assured him, in their Master's name, that he
should succeed in his designs, for Guines was a learned Astrologer and a
Prophet in those Parts. The Emperor declared to them, That he thought himself
honored by their coming in Embassy from such a Prince, therefore he sent a
rich Present of rare Furs, and some Golden Plate.

Here at Bachichich he mustered and viewed his Army, and gave them all their
Pay, both Horse and Foot, exhorting them to behave themselves valiantly. It was
his constant practice to do so at such times. He caused them also to exercise
themselves with feigned Fights, that they might be more expert and keep their
order; he was very careful of this, which he recommended always to his
Captains. In those days every private soldier had the liberty to behold their
Emperor with more confidence than at other times; for the Prince gave them
access, and seemed to cast off the Majesty and State which at other times
hindered their approach, that he might converse the more familiarly with them,
and encourage them to be brave and courageous.

At the departure of the Army from Bachichich, it consisted of three hundred
thousand Horse, and five hundred thousand Foot of several Nations. Tamerlan had
heard how the Turks had conquered all Greece; he imagined therefore, That as
soon as Bajazet should hear of their approach he would depart out of Asia into
Europe for his security, as Wisdom and Reason obliged him, had he been
well-advised: but his Pride and Presumption caused him to take a contrary
course to all the Rules of the Art of War; for as soon as Tamerlan's Army was
at Buisabuich, beyond the Country of the Georgians, Axalla left the Van, which
he commanded to ride back to the Prince, to acquaint him with Tidings that he
knew would please him, That Bajazet had left the siege of Constantinople, and
was marching with all diligence to protect the Countries of Asia; That he
intended to fight him, and that for that purpose he had sent for all the Troops
that were in Greece, and gathered all the Soldiers that he could possibly get
from all Parts. He did not trust so much to their Numbers, as to the Courages,
Boldness, Skill and Experience of his Janisaries, who had been trained up in
War, and knew not what it is to fly away. The Emperor was joyful at this
news, but not insolent; for he foresaw the Event of a Battle, and confessed,
That a small number well-governed and bravely led on, is able to carry away the
Victory from a more numerous Army.

Three days he stopped at Buisabuich whiles his Troops were drawing toward
Euphrates, that they might pass over that River and live in the Enemies
Country, and ease that of the Confederates. Here the Prince sent an Express to
the Emperor, his Uncle, to inform him of the raising of the siege of
Constantinople, and of the resolution of the Turks, to fight him in a pitched
Battle. He entreated him, not knowing certainly the hazard of War, to prevent
the worst, and give order that the Borders of the Empire might be well-guarded
and secured with Soldiers: That the Cavalry might be always ready with their
Horses, because the Neighboring people, who are wont to fawn upon the
Conqueror in his prosperity, change their minds, insult, and labor to spoil
them when Fortune begins to frown. Therefore wise Princes, when they are ready
to adventure their Army in a considerable Battle, always labor to secure the
entry of their Dominions, for fear that victorious Enemy, in pursuance of his
advantage, should deprive him of the power of recovering his loss by winning
from him his Country. This was Tamerlan's constant practice in such occasions:
He was more careful to call upon his people, and advise them to provide for
their defense, than to send them notice of his Victory.

The Army left Buisabuich, after that a Council of War had been held of the
chief Officers and noblest Persons, whom the Prince was wont to call together
to propose his designs, and desire their advice. By this means he won their
Affections, which he knew how to reward: such persons as were the farthest from
him did sometimes receive Testimonies and Marks of his goodness and of his
esteem, with which he honored them, in the places where the Army continued a
while, and when it was at a stand: But chiefly the Officers of Foreign Nations
and of his Allies did often receive expressions of his bounty. He did
frequently invite them to eat at his Table, where he did converse with them in
a very obliging manner, setting aside for a while all gravity and incommodious
reservedness. Amongst these strangers the Lord of Vauchefu, a Chinese was one
of the most esteemed and honored by him: He often said, That the Virtue and
Courage of Axalla, together with the Affection of this Lord, had made him
Master of one of the noblest Kingdoms of Asia. Therefore to show how thankful
he was, the Prince had him often near his person, and discoursed with him
concerning the Customs and Manners of the People, through whose Country they
marched. This Lord brought with him some Troops out of China, which kept
company with the rest of the Army, and observed the same Order and Discipline.

Thus the Army arrived at Garga, where it passed over the River Euphrates; the
Van having gone over before at Chinserig. The Rendezvous of the whole Army was
appointed at Gianich, which was surrendered at the first summons. There Tamerlan
understood, That Bajazet was within thirty Leagues of that place, which caused
the Tartars to march more warily and more compact together. The greatest part
of the Cities and Towns in the way were yielded up into the Prince's Hands, who
treated them very kindly; but those that offered to resist were severely
punished, if the Inhabitants were Turks; but the Christians were commonly
pardoned and set at liberty, for the sake of the Emperor Emanuel Paleologue,
whom the Prince was resolved to gratify in all things. Axalla, according to
his orders, caused them to take an Oath of Allegiance to this Prince, whom he
intended to re-establish in possession of his whole Empire, and punish his
dreadful Enemy, whose ambition carried him to attempt the ruin and destruction
of the once flourishing Empire of Greece, without minding how much the Tartars
were obliged to defend it.

This War undertaken by Tamerlan, against him who was commonly called the
Thunderbolt of Heaven, could not have a more just and reasonable ground; for
besides the horrid Cruelties that he committed upon both Sexes, he endeavored
to take away the Empire from a Confederate Prince, under a pretense of
pacifying the troubles, and rob one who had never offended him. He often
flattered him with fair promises which he never fulfilled, so that he had
reduced him to that extremity, that of a large Empire, he had only a few small
Towns remaining to him about Constantinople, unto which he had laid Siege. This
undertaking therefore of Tamerlan was very honorable, to free this Emperor
from an apparent Tyranny and Oppression; and to pluck out of the unmerciful
Hands of so barbarous an Enemy, a flourishing Empire, and the most Magnificent
City of the World. In the prosecution of so honorable a design, he expected
with good reason, the blessing and assistance of the great God of Hosts.

In this little digression, I have thought fit to show the greatness of his
courage that led, and inclined him naturally to help the feeble, oppressed with
unlawful Powers; and to oblige the proud to listen to reason, in imitation of
God, unto whom all Sovereigns should endeavor to be like.

The Army left Granich with joy, and assurance of success. Axalla, who
Commanded the Van, sent before Chianson, Prince of Ciarran, with four thousand
Parthian Horse, to learn some certain news of the Enemy. He commanded to
destroy all places thereabouts with Fire and Sword, and to bring him word where
Bajazet was, and what manner of Country was beyond Sannas. This Captain, who
was highly esteemed in the Army, and Commanded in Axalla's absence the
Vanguard, sent before his Party five hundred Horse, Commanded by a Parthian
Captain, who had not gone above ten Leagues but he had news of the Enemy; for
as soon as he had surprised Sannas, he was told that the Turkish Army was at
Taraya, in their march to meet Tamerlan. Axalla sent notice of this to the
Prince, who commanded him to keep the place till the Turks were come up, and to
let him understand every hour all the news that he could learn. Tamerlan had no
desire to march any further, because he was already in a large and spacious
Field, fit for a Battle. He was forced to precaution himself, and take care of
his great business; because he had to do with a Warlike People used to fight
against Christians, a cunning People that want nothing to manage the business
of War. He considered therefore, that though his Army was more numerous than
his Enemies, it was composed of many Nations, who were to be governed with
discretion; for they were then to fight, not with the Chinese, a delicate and
effeminate People; but with true Soldiers, who had no other hopes but in
Victory. Therefore the Prince forgot nothing that might be useful to him, and
help him in his business; for that purpose he sent Axalla to take a view of the
Ground unto which he intended to draw Bajazet, to have his advice whether it
were fit for a Battle. It is situated between the Sea, or the Pontus Euxinus
and Gianich, near Sannas: on the one hand it is bounded by a little River that
runs into Euphrates. He sent him word again, to have a care to keep Sannas as
long as he could; and that in case they could not keep it, they should set Fire
to the Houses and burn it, that the Enemy might not stop there, but advance
toward the Plain where he was resolved to expect him, because he was stronger
than Bajazet in Horse.

At last Bajazet's great Army, encouraged with the hopes of victory and a
desire to engage, began to assault the Tartars in Sannas; but the greatest part
of them were gone, only some hundreds of Horse having kindled the Fire, at the
Enemy's approach fled with all speed in some disorder.

The Prince of Ciarcan having divided his Party into two Bodies, and given
special order to the first, that as soon as they should see the hundred Horse
issue out of Sannas and fly away, that they should receive them and retreat
behind him; for he had Posted himself in a Valley with the other Body of Horse,
near a Wood, from whence he saw two thousand Turkish Horse, the Scouts of their
Army, pass by him. He charged them in the Rear, so speedily, and with that
courage; that when they saw themselves so briskly assaulted and had not the
time to look about, they yielded and fought but faintly; retreating, many of
them were killed, and taken Prisoners. This was the first Encounter between the
Turks and Tartars, wherein the Victory fell to the latter. All the Prisoners
were sent to Tamerlan, and amongst them the Bassa of Natolia, their Commander.
The Prince spoke to him, and asked him what had caused Bajazet to forget
himself so strangely, as not to regard him, and to despise his Army; that he
hoped that in a few days he should find one that would bring down his pride,
and make him more tractable. The Bassa answered, that his Lord was the Son of
the World, that he could not endure a Partner; and that for his part, he had
good cause to wonder at Tamerlan for undertaking so long and dangerous an
Expedition, to stop the Progress of his Prince's good successes, whom Heaven
favored, and to whom all the World yielded obedience; and that there was no
discretion in him to withstand him. Nay, said Tamerlan, I am sent and appointed
by God, to chastise this proud Man, and to teach him that Insolency deserves
the vengeance of Heaven; and that God delights as much to abase the proud, as
to raise the humble Souls: That the raising of the Siege of Constantinople was
a beginning of his success against his Master. And thou may, said he, though
I pity thy misfortune, understand what a difference there is between my
Parthian Horse, and that of Bajazet' s. But, think thou that thy Master will
fight with me? The Bassa replied, He desires nothing more passionately.
Afterward he fell down at Tamerlan's Feet, with these words; Noble Prince, I
entreat you, suffer me, out of your generosity, to assist my Prince that day.
Tamerlan soon yielding to his Request, answered in this manner; Go and tell thy
Master that thou have seen me, and that I shall be in Fight in that place where
there shall be a green Flag hung out. The Bassa surprised with such a noble
Grant, promised him, when he took his leave, that next to his Lord and Master,
there was no Person in the World that he would serve with more affection, and
sooner than him.

At his return to the Turkish Army, he told Bajazet all the discourse that he
had with Tamerlan, and chiefly he told what he had wished him to say to him. We
shall understand all these things very shortly, replied Bajazet, and before I
have done, I will make him repent of his folly. The Bassa acknowledged the
favor that he had received from Tamerlan, and published everywhere his
Grandeur and Goodness; extolling highly his Generosity in giving him a very
beautiful Horse, though he knew that he would use him in fighting against him.
The next day the Turkish Army marched two Leagues, to come in sight of the
Tartars, who were at Even about a League distant from it, expecting the day
following, in which the great Dispute was to be. The Night was not very
peaceable, the noise of Men, and the neighing of Horses filled the Air, and
caused every one to desire the return of the Sun, to give liberty to their
courages to act in this Field of Mars. The Scythians, that love Prey and
Plunder, were encouraged by their Leaders, to behave themselves valiantly, in
hopes of the rich Spoils which the Victory would deliver into their Hands. The
Parthians, who were ambitious of the glory and honor of their Nation, were
obliged to do their uttermost endeavor to overcome the Turks, who alone were
able to dispute with them for the Empire of Asia. The Christians, who were very
numerous in the Tartarian Army, for they were near the fourth part, were
animated with a hatred against their mortal Enemy, whose defeat would prove the
liberty of Greece. In this manner, in the night, the several Nations encouraged
one another according to their several dispositions. The Prince walked about
his Camp in the night, hearkening to their Discourses, which rejoiced his heart
because they had a certain assurance of obtaining the Victory.

Alhacent walked along with him: The Prince told him, That the night before his
Fight with the Muscovites, his Camp was full of Songs of Triumph and
Rejoycings, and that none of the Soldiers could sleep, which caused him to be
persuaded of the Victory he obtained: I see, said he, the same presage now of
the next days happiness and success. When he had gone round his Camp he
returned to his Tent, at the end of the second Watch, and laid himself down
upon a Carpet to take a little rest, but could not sleep, for he was impatient
to see the appearance of the next day. In the mean whiles he commanded Alhacent
to bring him the Book, which he commonly read, containing the Histories of the
Actions of his Forefathers, and the worthy deeds of the most famous men of his
Country. He lighted, in opening of the Book, upon the Relation of a great
Battle which his Grandfather lost, fighting against the Persians, which he
thought before to win, and had got it, had he not attacked them indiscreetly,
and neglected the advantages that were offered him, trusting too much to his
own and his peoples Courages. He commanded Alhacent to read over that passage
once more, with this saying, I read often this description of that Battle
before I engage in a fight, that I might not trust so much to my Lions Skin,
that I neglect the use of the Foxes Tail to cover my head; That this fault of
my Grand father, in leaving his advantageous ground, against the advice and
entreaties of his Servants, to assault an Enemy in his Trenches, might cause me
to be more wary and cautious. A little after he asked whether it were day, and
sent for his great Chamberlain to cause the Trumpet to sound, that his Horses
might be made ready: He rested himself a little longer, and asked for Axalla,
who came to him with several other Lords and chief Officers of his Army. He
advised with them what was best to observe, and took Horse, sending them all to
their several Commands. Immediately after news came to him, That the Turks were
drawing near, and entering into the Field. He was very desirous to see them in
their march, that he might be better able to order his Army according to that
manner. He moved them from the place where he stood, sending before three
thousand Horse to begin a light skirmish, whiles he appointed to every one his
Rank and Place.

In this view of the Enemy he had taken notice, That the Turkish Infantry,
named Janisaries, kept the middle, having upon each Wing two Bodies of Horse,
amounting to about thirty thousand, and that there was another Body that went
before and covered all the Foot. This order seemed to him very strong, and not
easy to be broken. I was once resolved, said he to Axalla, to fight on foot,
but now I see I must be on Horseback to encourage my men to break through that
great Body of Janisaries, which I shall suffer, advance as far as they please.
I will have fifty thousand Foot on each Wing, and forty thousand Horse of my
best Cavalry in the middle; behind them there shall be fifty thousand Horse in
three Bodies, which you shall command, and I will follow and second you with
fourscore thousand Horse more, where I intend to be in person; behind me I will
have one hundred thousand Foot, who shall march in two Battalions; the Rear
shall be composed of forty thousand Horse, and fifty thousand Foot, who shall
not strike a stroke till I shall want them. The reserve shall be ten thousand
of my stoutest Horse, whom I will send to the places that shall have most need.

The Prince of Ciarcan, a famous Commander of great worth, led the first forty
thousand Horse. The Lord Synopes, a Genoese, and Relation of Axalla, his
Lieutenant General of the Infantry, a Captain of a great Reputation, was at the
Head of the first Infantry; Prince Axalla followed him with fifty thousand
Horse.

Bajazet's Army seemed to be very beautiful and numerous, marching toward the
Tartars, who stood to their Ground without stirring; only some single Troops,
Scythians and Muscovites went sometimes between the two Armies to skirmish a
little; but these bold Fellows performed nothing of consequence for the winning
of the Victory.

At that moment a Spy was taken who informed Tamerlan, That Bajazet, who was
then on Horseback, encouraging his Men, intended to fight that day amongst his
Janisaries a-foot. These Janisaries are certain brave and faithful Soldiers,
brought up from their Infancy in Feats of Arms, and chosen out of all the
Christian Nations; beautiful and strong of Body, and of a good Constitution.
They are trained up from their Childhood together, and are esteemed
invincible. They fight for their Prince and Lord with a strange resolution, in
the form of a Half Moon about his Person: They were then about thirty thousand
in number. Bajazet confided most in them, not regarding the rest of his
Infantry, which was numerous; for they were People gathered together from
several places. He had a brave Company of Horse, about one hundred and forty
thousand, very well experienced in all manner of Fights. He had also above
thirty thousand Mameluks, very good Horsemen; and forty thousand Foot, sent to
him from the Souldan of Egypt to help him. So that his Army seemed to be as
great as Tamerlan's, which stood closer together and marched in several Lines;
whereas Bajazet's had but one, and appeared in one Front: It marched on with a
great noise, and grievous threatenings; whereas Tamerlan's Army observed a great
silence, in expectation of the Signal.

As soon as public Prayers were ended, the Emperor appeared in the Van, to be
witness of the first Onset, causing Axalla to advance forward; he himself
returned to his resolved Station, when he had called upon every one to behave
themselves well. It is not to be imagined how furiously the Turks assaulted the
Prince of Ciarcan, who had orders not to fight until the Enemy were in their
march, and had begun to attack him. The place was a large Plain of a vast
extent, where the advantage was equal for both Parties; only there was a River
on Tamerlan's left hand, which he looked upon as a benefit to his Army; so that
he gave an express and a strict Command, not to suffer the Turks to take it
from them, because of that side which he esteemed the best for his Men to
fight. It was always his Practice in War, to suffer his Enemy to begin the
Encounter; therefore he ordered the Commanders of his Vanguard to stay till
the Enemy did first assault them. In the mean while the Prince of Ciarcan, with
his forty thousand Horse, was almost overthrown. He did all that could have
been expected from a great courage, and a judicious Commander: He broke into
the middle of the Janisaries, where Bajazet was, and disordered them; but his
valor, that overturned all things in his way, was soon stopped with an Arrow
that struck him to the heart. At that time Axalla went on with his Men, and
charged one of the Enemies Wings, where he meeting with no great resistance cut
them all to pieces. His Infantry came then up to him, according to appointment,
and with it he assaulted the Janisaries. The Prince considering the difficult
Task that Axalla was to have, sent him ten thousand Horse out of his Body; as
well to favor the rallying of such as should be disordered, as to charge a
Body of Foot which were marching on to help the Janisaries, who behaved
themselves gallantly for the glory and safety of their Prince. The Fight lasted
a full hour before any Person did offer to retreat. The Turks and the
Parthians, with a wonderful obstinacy, killed one another in heaps: Men and
Horses covered the Ground, in their Gore-Blood, lying one upon another. Here
you might have seen some falling dead upon those that they had newly killed:
There you might have beheld some breathing out their last Gasp with threatening
looks. In every place were heard lamentations, groans, and the cries of the
wounded and dying Soldiers. The Prince beheld this fight patiently, looking
for the end; but when he perceived that his Men decreased, and seemed to be too
weak, he sent ten thousand Horse to second the ten thousand appointed for the
Reserve, and commanded them to fall on as soon as they should see that need
required. In the mean while the Emperor entered into the Battle with his
Party, and broke through all that stood in his way; and the Infantry, Commanded
by the Prince of Tanais, advanced and assaulted the Janisaries where Bajazet
was yet in Person. They found no easy work to overthrow them; but when the
Emperor had again charged them the second time, and followed by his Rear, he
overcame them rather by his number than by valor or courage; for they
performed all that could be expected from brave Men: but so many Onsets one
upon the Neck of another, by fresh Soldiers, oppressed them.

Bajazet forsook this Body of Janisaries, and took Horse, wounded, but he fell
into the Hands of Axalla; unto whom he yielded himself Prisoner, thinking he
had been Tamerlan. He was at first taken for some great Lord of the Turkish
Army. Twenty thousand of the Tartars never acted, but after the Fight in
pursuit of the flying Enemy, whom they killed by heaps. The Prince had his
Horse run through, and killed with a Lance; but he was quickly mounted again.
One may justly say, that his Conduct alone won the Victory; for had his Army
engaged all at once, they had been in that strange confusion that might have
overthrown them: but his cunning to weary the Turks in fighting, and recruit
his own Parties when they were in want, got him the Victory. Threescore
thousand Men were killed of the Turks, and about twenty thousand Tartars. The
Prince of Ciarcan, and the Captain of the Georgians both lost their Lives, to
the great sorrow of the whole Army. Calibes, that brave Commander, who brought
up the Rear, was vexed to meet with such small resistance, and to have had so
little hand in the Action. The Despot of Servia, a Christian, who fought for
Bajazet, was taken Prisoner; every one praised him for having well behaved
himself that day. The prince received him very kindly, after that he had blamed
him for serving Bajazet, against him that intended nothing but to assist and
set at liberty his Emperor. The Despot answered, That what he had done was not
out of Duty, or Inclination for the good of Bajazet; but only for fear of
losing his Dominions, which he saw were exposed to the ambition, and at the
mercy of him, to whom all the World before seemed to yield obedience. Tamerlan,
pretty well satisfied with this excuse, gave him his freedom to depart when he
thought convenient. The Emperor had a great care to secure Bajazet's Children,
and to cause their Father to be cured of his Wounds; afterward he commanded
him to be brought before him: Bajazet showed no sign of humility. The Prince
seemed to be displeased at his proud carriage; he told him therefore, That his
Life depended upon his will, and with a word-speaking he could take it from
him; Speak the word, I entreat thee, replied Bajazet; for it will be my
greatest happiness. How come thou, said Tamerlan to him, to be so bold, to
take away the Empire from the Prince of Greece? The desire of glory, answered
Bajazet, and of enlarging my Kingdom. But wherefore, said the Prince, do thou
commit so many Cruelties, and use thy conquered Subjects so barbarously, as to
spare neither Age nor Sex? I act thus, answered he, to terrify mine Enemies
the more. For the same Reason, replyd'd the Prince, thou shall be treated in
the same manner. With that he sent him away, and turned to his Commanders;
Behold, said he, a proud and haughty Man, that deserves to be punished and made
an Example, to all such cruel and barbarous People as he is. I confess God has
this day subdued, and put in my power, a great Enemy; I am bound to return him
thanks. Afterward he sent for Bajazet's Children to be brought to him, he
seemed to pity their misfortune, and commanded them to be civilly and
courteously treated, as the Children of a great Monarch. He commanded next
that, to bury the dead. The Body of the Prince of Ciarcan was found amongst the
Janisaries, where he was engaged; Tamerlan expressed a great deal of sorrow for
the loss of this young Prince, who was his Kinsman, and likely to do him great
service. A great number of Captains were killed this day, and almost all the
Officers of the Turks, for the Fight was fierce and bloody, for the Fight
continued from seven a Clock in the Morning, till four in the Afternoon; and
then it was not well known who should win the Victory.

On the third day after the Fight the Army marched away, for the first was
employed in burying the dead, every one rendered that Duty to their Friends and
Kindred. The Body of the Prince of Ciarcan was Embalmed, and conducted with a
Guard of two thousand Horse to Samarcande, to be there kept till the Emperor's
return. The other Corpses were buried in Sannas, with honor. Axalla was
grieved for the death of his Kinsman, a brave bold and courageous young Man,
well beloved of the Prince: His Command was given to his Brother, who showed
then great signs of a noble courage.

Alhacent says, That he could not but make that day a Reflection upon the
unconstancy and vanity of worldly things, sufficiently represented in this
Battle. At the beginning Bajazet, the dreadful Emperor of the Turks, thought
himself above all changes of Fortune, having met with nothing on Earth able to
withstand his Power; but a few hours after he is cast down, and with a blow his
flourishing Estate overthrown when he least expected it. This caused him to
confess since, that he had been deservedly punished for having despised great
Armies, and placed all his confidence in the valor of his Horsemen, and of his
Janisaries. He was three days as it were in a despairing condition, fretting
and tormenting himself; he sought to kill himself, and called for Death to
deliver him out of his Captivity. Tamerlan, who was the mildest, the most
courteous and compassionate Prince, yet could he not be persuaded to pity him;
for he dealt with him as with a furious Beast, so that when he mounted upon his
Horse, upon solemn Festivals, Bajazet was brought to him that his Shoulder
might serve him as a step to leap upon his Horse. This he did not out of any
Ostentation, but only to humble Bajazet, and discover to him the folly of Men;
who seek in themselves, and not in God, all their greatness and confidence.

The next day the Army marched the way that leads to Bursa, whither the sad
remains of Bajazet's Army were fled, under the Command of Bassa Mustapha. All
the Country through which Tamerlan passed, submitted. He commanded all the
Fortresses to be demolished, and punished severely those that offered to
withstand him and endure a Siege.

Tamerlan had caused several Prisoners to be led in Chains after the Body of
the Prince of Ciarcan to Samarcande: He intended to enlarge that City, and
increase the Inhabitants; that it might be a Testimony of his Glory, and a
Monument of his Grandeur to future Ages. For that purpose he had caused many
Chinese, taken in the former Battles, to be carried thither, and some he had
invited out of Pekin and Quanton. This famous Battle that overthrew Bajazet
filled all his Subjects with fears, and obliged them to submit to the
Conqueror. Nothing was able to resist Tamerlan, till he arrived with his Army
before Bursa, whither his defeated Troops were fled and shut up, with two of
his Male Children, very young. In the mean while Axalla advanced forward, with
forty thousand Horse, and an hundred thousand Foot without any encumbrance, or
Baggage: with them he hindered the Enemy from rallying, and made a terrible
destruction of the Turks; freeing the Grecians from the Tyranny of the Ottoman
Family. At last he came to the Walls of Bursa, from whence all that were able
^^ fly away were gone. The two Children of Bajazet were sent to the Greek
Emperor, to be Educated and brought up. The rest of the Turks were fled to
Gallipoli, and passed over to Adrianople; a City which they had taken from the
Greeks.

But to return to Tamerlan, he had dispatched to the Emperor his Uncle, and
the Empress his Wife, one of his most trusty Servants, named Lieban, who was as
the first Gentleman of his Chamber, to carry them the joyful news of the
Victory, which was far more glorious than any that he had ever gained before:
He sent them also the Bow and Cymitar of Bajazet, and the Trappings of his
Horse, which were valued at above two hundred thousand Ducats.

Lieban was mighty welcome to the old Emperor, and the young Empress; chiefly
when they understood that the whole World rendered Homage to Tamerlan, who
nevertheless received all these advantages from the hand of God, without
growing insolent or proud: When Providence favored him most, he seemed to be
mildest and most courteous. He was never rough but immediately before a Battle,
that he might thereby deliver his Orders with more State and Majesty. None
could describe his temper in an adverse Fortune, for he had always Prosperity
to favor him. But it is commonly seen, that those whom good successes cannot
puff up with pride, are not cast down in adversity.

When he had given these needful Orders, he marched to Bursa, laden with the
Spoils of his Enemies; which yet increased daily, by the surrend^^ of many
Towns that were yielded up to him. He treated them all as he had done the
Cities of China, where the Inhabitants, that brought him their Keys and
submitted, were kindly used; but those that refused to yield were cruelly
punished: for it is wisdom in a Conqueror to treat the People in that manner.

In the March of the Army, news were brought that Axalla had taken Bursa, and
capitulated with the Citizens in the Emperor's Name; but the Garrison had been
driven out by the Inhabitants, and cut in pieces. Axalla sent the Prince word
of the coming of a solemn Embassy, from Emanuel the Greek Emperor, of the
most illustrious Persons of his Court; but that he had hindered them from
advancing further until Tamerlan should send him order. He wished them to stay
where they were, commanding them to be well treated till Tamerlan's arrival;
which happened a few days after. All the Inhabitants went out to meet him with
their Heads uncovered, to signify their submission and subjection to him. He
was carried in great Pomp and Glory: Axalla met him also with the Ambassadors,
whom the Prince received very honorably and courteously, showing before them
his Glory and Magnificence. He led them about his Army, which in a Camp
appeared as a great City. All manner of Provisions were brought into it every
day from all Parts; for there was an admirable Order observed.

These Ambassadors had Orders from the Greek Emperor, Emanuel, to offer and
yield up his Empire and Person to the Prince's pleasure; to hold his Dominions,
he and his Posterity after him, as his Vassals and Subjects. The Ambassadors
were also Commissioned to tell him, That he offered him all his good, as due to
him, for the great benefit he had received by the deliverance from the
cruellest Tyrant of the World; whatsoever therefore that he would send for, he
should have. That he was so much obliged to Tamerlan for his pains and great
labors in so long and tedious an Expedition, and for the Blood of so many
thousands of his Subjects, that he could not possibly requite him, but by
yielding himself and all his People into his Hands. That he engaged himself,
and promised to serve him and obey him faithfully. That so many rare Virtues
and excellent Qualities, which had rendered his Name famous to all the World,
had won his heart and affections. That he desired earnestly to see him in his
chief City, to put it into his power, and yield him up the Empire of Greece;
where he entreated him that he might continue, only that he might oblige his
People to be more obedient to his Orders.

After this Audience, the Ambassadors expected nothing less, but that they
should fall under a new Master. What they had offered, so great and so delicate
a thing, to such a Conqueror as Tamerlan, that it was not to be refused. All
that they desired was, that their offers might be accepted kindly and civilly.
But the Prince's Answer to their Message, caused them quickly to change their
minds and their thoughts of him; for, with a mild and courteous speech, he told
them; That he was not come so far, and had not taken that pains, to subdue new
Kingdoms and Empires: That the advantage to be expected thereby could not make
him amends for the greatness of his labors and dangers: That the Motive which
had obliged him to act and undertake this Enterprise, was more noble and more
worthy of Tamerlan; for he purposed to himself no other benefit but glory and
honor, and to render his Name famous to the succeeding Ages all over the
World: That he desired them to understand, that he was there only to assist the
Emperor, Emanuel, as his Friend and Ally, and at his request; and that his
designs had succeeded well, because God had blessed his just intentions: that
he knew very well, that by the help and assistance of the Almighty, rather than
by the Multitude of his Souldlers, he had overthrown the Power of the cruellest
Enemy of Mankind: That it was his desire to re-establish the ancient Family of
the Paleologues in the full and free possession of the Greekish Empire, of all
their Rights and Privileges, and in a peaceable enjoyment of the City of
Constantinople; that he might render thereby his Name the more famous: That he
scorned that any Person should say of him hereafter, that he had falsified his
Faith, prejudiced his Honor; and that under Color of helping his Friend and
Ally, he had taken from him his Empire and Estate: That he desired the Services
that he had rendered to the Emperor Emanuel, might never be forgotten by his
Posterity, and that they might acknowledge them with thanks: And that for his
part, he was fully satisfied with the honor and glory of the success alone,
without any other benefit. He told them also, That it concerned the Emperor
Emanuel to take such a course at present, and give such Orders, that his Army's
presence might secure his Interest for the future, and settle his Empire in
peace, so as that he might have no cause to fear a relapse into the same danger
as before. That he would commit the two Sons of Bajazet into his Hands, to
treat them according as he should judge most convenient; and that he advised
him to be more circumspect and careful in the choice of his Ministers, that he
might not be misled; and that he entreated him to value and esteem his
friendship, which should never fail him in time of need.

It is not to be imagined how joyful the Ambassadors were, to hear this
courteous and generous Speech from the Prince's Mouth; to refuse a large and
rich Empire, and the most stately and magnificent City of the World; few
Princes would have had that extraordinary moderation. But it is not to be
expected that many Tamerlans should live in these corrupt Ages.

Axalla had Orders to treat and feast the Ambassadors, and to show them all
the honor and courtesy possible. One of them was sent with all speed, to
carry news to his Master of their successful Embassy, which had proved more
prosperous than could have been expected. When therefore the Greek Emperor had
understood fully the the truth, the whole City was transported with joy, the
Churches were thronged with Votaries; and there was nothing to be seen every
where, but Bone-Fires, feastings, and a public rejoicing of all the People,
that extolled Tamerlan's Name, and praised him for his wonderful moderation.
The Greek Emperor called his Council, to consult whether it were not
convenient for him to go and meet Tamerlan, and express to him his thanks
Personally, for all his favors and labors. It was resolved that he should,
without delay, go in Person. Tamerlan understanding of this intent, seemed to
be very joyful. He commanded Axalla to meet the Emperor, the first day of his
departure, to assure him that Tamerlan would look upon it as a very great
honor, and would be mighty glad to see him in the City of Bursa. When the
Greekish Emperor was near the Gates, the Prince went to meet him, and received
him in great State and Pomp. They were together one whole day, which was spent
in expressions of kindness, affection, and acknowledgment, which they exchanged
one with the other. The next day the Greekish Emperor departed out of the
City, and the Prince accompanied him with the same obliging and noble manner as
he had received him. After his departure Tamerlan discovered an inclination to
see the famous City of Constantinople, which was then looked upon as the Wonder
of the World; but he desired to go incognito, that he might avoid all
jealousies and fears. Axalla managed this business so secretly, that the
Prince's departure was not known. He was there received by the Emperor
Emanuel, without Ceremony, as a private Person: But he endeavored by all
possible means, to satisfy Tamerlan's curiosity, and to show him all the
Rarities of the City: every day he entertained him with new delights and
satisfactions. He was the more pleased, because he was known to none but to
those unto whom he desired to discover himself; for he and all his Train were
clothed in Greekish Habits. Therefore, when he was gone, the Citizens were
surprised to hear that Tamerlan had been to see their City. The Greek Emperor
had shown him all the pleasant Gardens, and beautiful Palaces that stand near
the Sea, about a league or two round the City. They walked together as two
private Persons: Thus they spent five or six days, with much satisfaction on
both sides. Tamerlan did often confess since, that he had never seen a more
glorious City: that it was worthy, in regard of its advantageous situation, to
command the whole World. He looked with admiration, upon the rich and stately
Buildings; the rare Pillars, with all their Ornaments; the wonderful Pyramides
of such a prodigious height, which Constantine the Great had erected, in
imitation of those of Egypt. He admired all the beautiful Gardens, so neat and
curious; and declared that he was never sorry for his Expedition, because he
had thereby saved from burning and plunder, the noblest and most beautiful City
of the World. He was often heard to praise the Emperor Emanuel, for his
mildness and humanity. When he knew that Tamerlan delighted in beautiful
Horses, he gave him thirty of such a rare shape, strength, and excellency, that
they could not be matched in the World. He presented him also with the richest
Clothes of Gold and Silk in the Country: and sent great Gifts to all his Lords
and Princes of the Army: And whilst it continued in that place, he provided all
things needful for the Soldiers, in such plenty, that no Person had cause to
complain of want. At last, after fifteen days stay at Bursa, and a strict
Alliance concluded upon between the two Princes; Tamerlan, in pursuance of his
design, resolved to visit the Sultan of Egypt, before his departure to his own
Country, to chastise him, because he had assisted Bajazet against him; for in
all his proceedings he showed himself dreadful to the Enemies that had offended
him, and mild and courteous to his Friends.

CHAP. VI. Tamerlan's War and Expedition against the Sultan of Egypt.
THe Army departed very well satisfied from Bursa, which Tamerlan delivered to
the Greekish Emperor, after that he had driven away the Turks from all strong
Holds, and recovered all that they had won, since the beginning of Bajazet's
reign. All his Soldiers were fled, either beyond the Mountains, or over Sea
into Europe. There was no place in all Asia, that held for him; so dreadful had
Tamerlan's Army been to the Turks, that they forsook all their Possessions in
Asia. Andronicus Palealogus, the Emperors Nephew, accompanied the Army with
ten thousand chosen Horse, which his Uncle had sent with him to serve in the
Wars against the Sultan of Egypt, with whose Army Tamerlan had several
encounters, when they assisted Bajazet.

Amongst all these successes and prosperities, the Prince received the joyful
news of the birth of a Son, of which the Empress his Wife was happily
delivered: This caused the whole Army to congratulate their Princes happiness,
by public feasting, Bone-fires, and all other tokens of an universal joy. He
understood by the same express, that all things were in peace in the Empire,
that the old Emperor, his Uncle, was in perfect health, which pleased him
well; for he was afraid, that he should drop away in his absence, and that some
great Persons, or certain Favorites should cause a disturbance and a division
in his absence amongst his Subjects, tho the example of the other Rebels, who
had been sufficiently punished for their folly, ought to have made them wise;
and besides, when a Prince has his weapons in his hand, and is become dreadful
to Strangers, he need not much fear any rebellious intrigues and practices at
home amongst his own Subjects. For commonly men, that are the most ambitious,
follow him in the War; but when a Prince is soft and effeminate, the Soldiers,
that are without employment, runs to him, who makes the greatest complaints,
and who commonly vails his ambitious pretenses with an appearance of a just
grievance. In such a case, before a disarmed Prince is able to gather together
his Troops, and make new levies of Men to compose a Body of an Army, the
Rebellion may chance to be increased, and the Rebels grown so numerous, that
they may perhaps be too powerful for their inconsiderate Prince.

Six months were spent since Tamerlan's leaving of Samarcand. This time seemed
tedious to some, whose earnest desire to see their Country gave them a longing
to march that way. This caused many of them to murmur in the Camp, because the
Prince began to undertake a War in a far Country, which would not suddenly end.
This report, which might have had a dangerous sequel, obliged Prince Axalla to
acquaint the Emperor therewith.

He presently called his Army together, as soon as they were arrived to a place
convenient, and spoke to them at the general muster, in such terms as were able
to oblige them to undergo all hardship for their Princes service.

As soon as they were arrived at Calestrie a general review was ordered, where
the Emperor was in person, and spoke to the Parthians in this language.

Tamerlan's Speech to the Parthians.
I Cannot imagine, my dear Companions, that the desire of seeing again your
Native Country is so violent in you, or that you are weary to purchase more
Glory to our Nation, seeing that all the people of the World adventure all
things for that advantage which you have in hand, we have together for many
years obtained great Victories, which have raised the Parthians in reputation
above all other Nations, and spread their fame round about the World.

If you be weary to fight under my Command, Tamerlan shall accomplish his
glorious designs by other Nations than his own, and the Parthian, so much
renowned by the late successes obtained upon many people, shall see themselves
forgotten or miserably despised, through the shame that you shall have brought
upon them. I cannot think any such thing of you, fellow Soldiers, whose
Reputation is spread all over the World, I will not, nor ought not to believe
it. Follow me therefore, and let us go courageously and fight the Mamelucks.
You know very well, though they live at a distance from us, they have
endeavored to withstand our successes by joining their forces with the Ottoman
Armies to oppose us: Will you suffer me to revenge my self upon them without
your help? Would you have the Tartarians and my Allies have a share in my
Victories, whilst you shall go and be idle at home? Will you lose the benefit
of so glorious an enterprise?

As soon as the Prince had ended his speech, all the Parthians cried out with a
loud voice, that they would die with him; and that, saying they had attended
upon him in China, they would now follow him all over the world; but they
entreated him to have compassion of their Wounds, of their gray hairs, so as at
last to set some bounds to their labors, and his Conquests. This he promised
them in such an obliging and mild manner, that they were all very well
satisfied. The Emperor spoke not a word to the others, for they were glad of
the advantage they had over the Parthians, to have seen them ready to disband
and forsake the Army. So that, when Tamerlan rode before the Scythian Cavalry,
they all cried with one voice, Victorious Emperor, what mean you, March on,
March on, we will follow all over the World. These words gave a great
contentment to the Prince, for the Parthians and Scythians were his best
Soldiers. He was therefore glad of an opportunity to increase their emulation.
To oblige them the more to be faithful to him, the Prince commanded a strict
inquiry to be made for all persons diseased or wounded, and besides their
ordinary salary he appointed them and others to receive from the Treasurer of
the Army extraordinary wages.

Then the Army marched forward with much joy and assurance of success. The
Vanguard, commanded by Axalla, and Andronicus, went before. Tamerlan had news
how that the Sultan of Egypt was very active in gathering his men together to
defend himself and his Country; though he could easily guess how difficult a
matter it was to stop the Terror and fury of a victorious Army, that had
overthrown the most dreadful Monarch of all Asia.

These considerations made the Mamelucks look about. But the Sultan was a young
Prince promoted to that high dignity by his extroardinary courage and rare
Virtues, but he had no great insight in War. But since his Election he had not
given any proof of his valor and affection to his people. He saw himself the
Lord of a large Continent and of many strong Towers well provided and
fortified; therefore out of an high conceit of his own greatness, and of the
confidence that he had in himself, he resolved to try whether fortune would
favor him; but rather than to lose so fair an opportunity of declaring his
courage, he was willing to hazard his own ruin. As the wining of a battle was
all his hopes, he made for that purpose all necessary preparations to be ready
to fight when ever he should be required; and in case the victory should fall
to his Enemies share, he had so ordered his affairs, that he might fly to some
safe and secure place of advantage, where he might recover his loss, and be in
a Condition to venture a second Battle.

As soon as the Emperor was well informed of his intention, he advised with
Axalla and Andronicus which way he should turn the head of his army, that he
might force the Enemy to come the sooner to a battle. It was resolved by them,
that it should take the way through Caramania and march strait to Gevolach.
This was the first frontier Town belonging to the Mamelucks, and nearest to the
Turks dominions, who had conquered all the Country as far as that place, when
the peace had been concluded between these two Nations. Bajazet had endeavored
to have it, that he may receive sure succors that way from the Sultan, and
strengthen himself the more against the powerful enemy, that was coming against
him. Therefore this Town, which was of a strong situation, had been furnished
with all necessaries by the Sultan for a stout resistance.

Axalla advancing with his Vanguard sent a Summons to the Townsmen to yield
speedily, or to expect a severe punishment for their foolish confidence and
temerity. The Inhabitants returned this answer. That they were obedient
Subjects, and had express orders to fight it out, and resist as long as they
could, and that they would rather suffer death than fail in their duty and
fidelity to their Prince and Country.

When the Emperor heard their obstinacy he was wrath, that a small Town should
be so bold as to attempt to stop his power, seeing that he had met with no
place able to resist him since his departure from Samarcand, for all Cities
sent him their Keys when he was yet at a distance from them. But seemed to
dissemble a while his displeasure, and commanded Axalla to go beyond it toward
Aleppo, which willingly was surrendered, because there was no other Garrison
there but of the natural Inhabitants.

In the mean while Tamerlan, being highly incensed at this great affront of
those of Gevolach, was resolved to besiege it; for that purpose he caused it to
be surrounded, and his Infantry to make their approaches by the means of his
Engines and Artillery. They gave a furious assault, but were driven back with
the loss of about twelve hundred. Tamerlan, more angry than before at this
repulse, caused the Town to be assaulted the second time, the Prince was then
wounded, but mauger the enemies stout resistance, Tamerlans men won the Walls,
from whence they shot continually and killed a great many within. At this same
time the Prince was informed that the Sultan was hastening to succor and
relieve Gevolach, according to his promise to the Inhabitants. This news caused
him to repent, that he had suffered Axalla to advance so far before the rest of
the Army. To amend his fault, he resolved to go and join with him, hoping by
this means to surprise the Enemy, who doubtless would think that Axalla was
alone, and would not imagine, that Tamerlan could be so near at hand, for this
purpose he left the Prince of Taenais, with thirty thousand men, to continue
the siege, and marched with the rest of his Army without baggage toward
Borgas. There he heard that the Sultan was gone over the River at Confingan,
with about threescore and fourteen thousand horse, and one hundred thousand
foot. In pursuance of his design, he understood at Aleppo the place where the
Enemy was encamped, intending to surprise him, for that purpose he sent Axalla
about half a days journey before, and followed him with the remainder of the
Army. Fourteen or fifteen of the Scouts were cut in pieces before their
Comrades could help them, because the ways were uneven and crooked.

The Enemy was misinformed, they Imagined that only the Troops about Aleppo
were near them which Axalla commanded.

They fell therefore upon him sooner than he expected; without delay he gave
notice of it to the Emperor, at the same instant entreating him to make all
speed and advance forward, and that he would endeavor to dally with the Enemy
to give him more time to come up to him, and for that intent he would pitch
upon a convenient ground to fight.

At this news the Prince dispatched away Calibes with twenty thousand horse,
they were so happy as to join with the rest in good time, because of a long and
narrow passage which led into a valley, through which the Enemies were forced
to go softly.

This accident gave time to Axalla to send Tamerlan word, and to post himself
in the most favorable place that the Country afforded; for otherwise he had
been constrained to retreat back to the Emperor in the best order that he
could possibly observe.

Having therefore planted himself in that place, he assaulted the Enemy with
small parties as they came down from the Mountain. For at the bottom they
intended likewise to draw up their men for the fight; in the mean whiles
Cabiles was come in with his Ten thousand horse, which encouraged Axalla the
more; for before he had but thirty thousand horse and Ten thousand more led by
Andronicus, but these were for the most part of Albania very good Soldiers.
This Prince desired of Axalla to grant him the first onset, which he dared not
to refuse him for fear of displeasing him. He begun the fight so furiously that
he overthrew and killed a great many Enemies, but he was one of the first
killed; mortally wounded in this charge and unhappily killed for want of a
timely releif. He was without doubt a Prince of an Heroic Spirit, for in that
tender age he showed sufficiently that he did not degenerate from the Honor and
Noble minds of his Ancestors.

Axalla succeeded him with his Body of horse partly Parthians, partly
Christians, who were paid by Tamerlan: with this Body he prevailed so well upon
the Sultans Troops, that he scattered them and broke in as far as the Infantry,
where he had need of new courage and resolutions to withstand the fury of that
body of foot. But his party, who had been always used to overcome, wherever he
led them, engaged against the foot, which so much success, that they had almost
defeated them and put them to flight, but Axalla recalled them back.

In the heat of the Battle, a body of five and twenty thousand of the Enemies
horse, where the Sultan was in person, charged Calibes furiously, and was
received with the same gallantry at that instant. Axalla returned back from the
Infantry, which he had left half overthrown, and seeing Calibes engaged and
worsted, he assaulted the Mamelucks upon the Flanks and disordered them, but a
body of fifteen thousand horse, which stood behind the infantry, with orders
not to fight, but when they saw great need, broke in upon Axalla's party, in
the same manner put them in disorder, killed Axallas horse, wounded him and
took him Prisoner. A cowardly horse man at that instant, without staying to
observe what followed, clapped spur to his horse, and with all speed went to
meet the Emperor to tell him this news, which afflicted him to the heart,
because he reposed himself much upon Axalla's courage, skill and experience.
This caused him therefore to make the more haste, he came into the Battle so
seasonably, that had he not arrived as he did the Victory had been lost, he had
sent before Ten thousand horse, and followed with five and twenty thousand more
of his stoutest Soldiers, besides he had five and twenty thousand of his
Auxillary Troops upon the Wings.

His coming changed the face of the battle, for the Sultan, not knowing any
thing of this body of men that were going to fall upon him, he being not able
to discover them at a distance, because of a Valley through which they passed,
he was strangely surprised, when he saw them first appear; at that very time,
when the Troops Commanded by Calibes and Axalla resisted in a disorder. The ten
thousand Horse sent before, came in fresh and charged the Mamelucks, who
thought they had already won the day, the Emperor also at that instant
followed with all his Cavalry and Infantry. So that the Sultan was forced to
sound a retreat, for he was not able to withstand so great a fury, and saw that
the whole Army was come against him. Then he perceived, but too late, his
rashness and unadvisedness in that he had not sent to view his enemies Army. In
the mean while Axalla had disingaged himself from the Soldier that had taken
him prisoner. He was a foot a little while, but being known by one of his men
he was mounted again, and they understood that he had but a light wound.

The Emperor, to hinder the Sultan from rallying his men, pursued his Victory
three full leagues. This unhappy Prince had three Horses killed under him, in
the engagement, where he performed the duty both of a Captain and of a common
Soldier. But he had committed a fault that was not to be remedied. Tamerlan
was guilty of as great a mistake, by sending the Vanguard so far before which
might have cost him very dear, had it not been for Axalla's subtilty in
dallying with and keeping off the Enemy with light skirmishes, for otherwise
the Emperor could not have came in timely enough to succor his oppressed and
disordered Troops.

Thus it happens frequently, the greatest faults and mistakes in War are turned
by Providence into Stratagems of Wars, when it intends to favor the party, as
it did Tamerlan in this occasion. His diligence in assisting his men caused him
to win this notable Victory, which broke the heart of the War, and brought it
to a period sooner than most men expected. It was known afterward that the
Sultan had been conselled to lengthen the war, which was a wise and a safe
advice, but his fury and courage could admit of no delays, he made too much
haste to his ruin.

This battle was bloody, near Fourscore thousand men lost their lives on both
sides, but no person of any note of Tamerlan's Army, but Andronicus and three
Parthian Captains of great worth. All the equipage of the Sultan was taken the
next day, and a great deal of plunder.

The Prince sent messengers to all his Allies to acquaint them with the
Victory, and chiefly he sent to the Greek Emperor to express his grief, for
the Death of Prince Andronicus, entreating him to appoint some other person in
his stead, to command the Greeks. He sent also messengers to publish the News
of this great victory in all his Kingdoms, and to give an account of it to his
Uncle the Emperor.

In this place the Army was not able to subsist long, because it was so
numerous, and the Country between the Mountains narrow and barren in many
places; Tamerlan therefore sent his Troops about, and caused his Army to take a
little more Elbow room, but he sent Axalla with all the Cavalry of the Vanguard
to pursue after the Sultan, and not suffer him to have any time to rest. He
fled toward Egypt with forty thousand horse.

The happy News of this Victory soon came to the Ears of the Prince of Tanais,
who sent it to the besieged within Gevolach. They were mightily afflicted when
they heard it.

A while after Tamerlan sent him orders to punish them for their folly by
destroying the City with fire and sword, and sparing none, that they might be
an example to all other places, and hinder them from resisting his power. This
command was soon after put in Execution; for the Town was won by assault, the
peoples courages failing them, through the many losses they had suffered, and
the daily watchings and skirmishes; for the Prince of Tanais gave them no time
to breath: After this he came to the Emperor, who was refreshing himself in
Aleppo.

But after the Sultans retreat into Egypt, he fortified all his Towns, and sent
for supply of men and money from all his Allies, he placed his Garrisons in all
the places needful, and caused all the Country to be ruined and burned, through
which Tamerlans Army was to pass in the road to his Country. He spared nothing
that could be serviceable to him, to make him, if it were possible, quit the
desire of marching that way; this caused so great a scarcity in this numerous
Army, that the Emperor was obliged to review his Companies, and leave behind
all useless persons; afterward he divided his Army into three bodies, the
first he commanded, the second was led by Axalla, the third by Calibes; the
carriages and baggage he left behind guarded by a party of foot. Calibes was
ordered to take the way toward the River Euphrates, through that Country which
confines upon Persia, to subdue it. The Emperor himself took the way along the
Sea Coast. And Axalla through Arabia. The Prince commanded threescore thousand
horse and an hundred thousand foot. Axalla fifty thousand foot and forty
thousand horse, and Calibes thirty thousand horse and fifty thousand foot. All
that Country seemed to be covered over with men; nevertheless, there was such
an exact discipline and a rule observed in the Army, that provisions were
brought in plentifully, and there was nothing wanting for man or beast.

In the mean while Axalla pursued after the Sultan, and obliged him to make
more speed to divide his Army, most of his men in his necessity forsook him. It
was said that he fled into Arabia, where it was not possible for the Tartars
great Army to follow him; only with four thousand horse, it was possible to
defend himself and vex a more numerous party, because of the scarcity of
provisions. In this juncture of affairs, all the Maritine Towns opened their
gates to Tamerlan, as Megate, Arnan, Tortosa, Gibellete, Barnt, and Nephthalim.
But Damascus, where there was a Garrison of the Sultan, obliged Tamerlan to
besiege it, this was a strong Town, where the Sultan had appointed Prince
Zamadren to be governor. He behaved himself well, and made a stout resistance,
but when the Artillery had opened a breach in the Wall, the Prince of Tanais
assaulted it and won it, only the Citadel an admirable Castle, looked upon as
impregnable, held out; but the Governor, admitting all that sought shelter
there, hastened the surrender; for when provisions began to fail, men pined
away with hunger, which caused them to offer to surrender it upon composition;
but the Prince would not grant them any, to punish them for their unadvised
resistance, when necessity began to press them they yielded themselves at the
Conquerours discretion, he caused some to be killed with the Sword, and others
were made Prisoners of War. This severity noised abroad in the Country obliged
all the Inhabitants, thirty leagues round to bring the keys of their walled
Towns to Tamerlan, who caused them to be used civily and courteously, and
imposed no other burden upon them, but to contribute according to their ability
to the Armies subsistence.

When Damascus was thus taken Tamerlan marched strait to Jerusalem, from whence
the Citizens had driven their Garrison, as all the Towns of Judea had also
done, they all yielded themselves to the Emperor, he received them with many
expressions of his goodness, restablish'd them in the free enjoyment of all
their privileges, promising to visit the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, according
to the custom of the Mohammedan Law, and for his sake he denied them nothing
that they could ask. From thence the Army went to Corazin, where a Garrison of
six thousand men had orders from the Sultan to defend themselves and their
Town, which they seemed to be resolved upon at first, but when they saw the
Army planted round about the walls with an intention to carry them, their
hearts failed them; so that they chose rather to implore the Princes favor,
who granted it to them freely, than to hazard a resistance without hopes of
releif. Some Troops were here left behind to give a check to certain Mamelucks
of Nassavia, who cut off many about the Army, Calibes had orders sent him to
besiege them and scatter the Troops that gathered themselves together about that
place to incommode and rob the persons, who brought provisions to the Army.

This retreat of the Sultan into Arabia was but a mere pretense, and a flying
report. He was gone into Egypt toward Cairo, having left behind several
parties to disturb and assault the Army in their march, and chiefly in the
narrow lanes and passages. He caused a grievous destruction to be made in the
Country round about to famish the Army, but Tamerlan's Cavalry followed him so
closse at the heels, that he had not time to do all the mischief that he
intended. The Inhabitants also for their own as well as for the enemies sake,
opposed and hindered the full execution of his design. When the Emperor was at
Miserit, he caused a Proclamation to be made, to forbid any to go beyond
Jordan, that he might the better preserve the Country from whence his Army had
their Provisions. He went as he had Promised to Jerusalem in the company of his
greatest Favorites, guarded with a party of Horse, to visit, as a religious
Prince, that Sepulcher, which is honored by all the Nations of the world, and
to present his gifts. When he was in the City, where the Inhabitants received
him with all possible honors, he saught for all the Antiquities of the old
Temple of Solomon, and was led, as the Pilgrims, through all the places where
Christ had preached and wrought Miracles. When he had ended his Prayers at the
Sepulcher, he gave large gifts. Two things chiefly gave him great content, when
he inquired of certain Monks and Religious Men at the Sepulcher, where their
Lords Body was? He is, said they, in Heaven at the right hand of God: Then
turning to his Mahumetan Train, he asked them where they thought that this
Prophet was? The Cherif, that stood next to him, replied, that he was a true
God, that he was gone before to sit in the first place in Heaven, where he
should be received also. As he came from Heaven so he was departed thither
again. Then the Prince fell upon his knees, and held his Name in great
veneration. And at his return to Samarcand, he built him a sumptuous Temple,
taking a great delight to hear men tell of his Miracles, and commanded that
some should mention them often in his hearing.

The other thing, that gave him a delight and admiration, was, when in viewing
all the places of devotion, he came to that at last, where Christ leaving his
Disciples ascended up into the glories of Heaven. There he left behind the
fashion of his foot, which caused him to wonder at it extraordinarily: And when
one told him that a Pilgrim had been here ravished in Spirit, he thought him
happy. Axalla with many other Christians were then with him.

In this manner, Tamerlan, by visiting the holy places and relics, gave a
great satisfaction to all the people, but the Jews could not endure but
exclaimed against him openly. He had never any affection for them, but named
them Wicked Men, and Cursed of God. He loved to see men sincere in their piety
and devotions, and was glad to have seen Axalla so liberal of his offerings to
the holy Sepulcher. In the mean whiles the Army was in their march to Tema
toward Egypt, the Emperor had notice, that the Slutan gathered his Troops
togeher from all parts, and was then at Alexandria. He himself, after the
performance of his devotions, followed the Army, and commanded the Vanguard to
go toward Damietta. He had been told that it was not to be taken by force.

The Sultan had secured it with a strong Garrison: It was a maritine Town, one
of the most noted of all Egypt, so that it was in great reputation. Many of
the Emperors followers labored to diswade him from attempting it, advising
him to adventure upon something else, telling him that it was no discreetion to
run his numerous army into a narrow piece of Land, but that he should rather
march higher into the Country, but all their reasons could not persuade him
from going thither, for he judged, that there was nothing that could put a stop
to his good Fortune. He therefore commanded Axalla to block up the Town, and he
followed him thither with the remainder of the Army.

When Axalla was there he sent in a summons, commanding them to submit, and
declaring to the Christian Inhabitants, who were there very numerous, what a
folly it would be for them to oppose his Emperors power. That his mildness and
goodness should rather oblige them to free themselves from the Tyranny of the
Moors and Mamelucks, who oppressed them beyond measure. He told them, that he
was a Christian as well as they, and therefore should be always very glad to
serve them. He caused also some of the Greek Captains to argue the case with
them. They dealt so effectually, that they persuaded them to adventure their
lives and endeavor to drive out of their City the Mamelucks, and all those who
held for the Sultan. They delayed not in the execution of this design, but with
their weapons in their hands, they got the command of one quarter of the City,
and opened one of the Gates to Axalla. All the Mamelucks were either killed or
taken Prisoners, and Damietta was yielded to the Prince. This News, which the
Emperor received in his march, caused him to expect a happy success in the
prosecution of his great design. He could not have hoped for such an easy
accomplishment of it, if this strong City had been in the Enemies hands, for by
its advantageous situation upon one of the branches of Nilus, it would have
ruined his Army and cut off all their provisions. But now, that it was in his
power, he could reasonably expect from all parts of Greece, as the Emperor
Emanuel had promised him all manner of things necessary for his Soldiers,
which were already coming to him by Damietta. He appointed there a strong
Garrison of two thousand Grecians, with a Governor, to keep for him the City.
They took the Oath of fidelity.

The Prince found this place according to his mind, and stronger than he had at
first imagined. The Inhabitants of Larissa submitted likewise, and would not
stand out against his invincible power. Garrisons were placed in all the places
situate near he Sea, that provisions might not be hindered to be brought to
the Army. This was one of his greatest cares to provide well for so vast a
multitude, that they might not want.

Tamerlan stopped a few days in Damietta, but sent his vanguard toward
Alexandria, but immediately after he followed them, and caused them to march
about toward Grand Cairo. The Sultan, who had provided himself for a stout
resistance in Alexandria, was surprised to hear of this unexpected charge: he
had no time to deliberate, but with all speed made what haste he could to
prevent Tamerlan. He entered into Cairo as the Army was in sight of it, with a
strong resolution to stop the entry of the Tartars, and preserve the passage of
the River that leads to Alexandria. It was reported that the Sultan gat into
Cairo with forty thousand horse, and threescore thousand foot; but Tamerlan
could not believe it. However he arrived there in very good time to preserve
his interest, for the Tartarian Army was at Buldat, seven leagues from the
City, at that time the slaves, who are very numerous there, had an intent to
revolt and open to us a gate, which they might have done with ease, had not the
Sultans coming hindered them. This therefore was a great let to the success of
the Tartarian Army, and the consequence of it troubled them not a little; for
fear of not being able to get provisions, which if they had happened to fail
them, they had been forced to raise their siege and depart. Notwithstanding the
Prince, whose courage nothing could terrify, drew near to the City with all
his Army, causing them to entrench themselves chiefly to preserve his Cavalry
from sudden attempts. He caused several attempts to be made upon the City,
wherein his men had always the advantage, by these assaults he had a trial of
their courages and resolutions, and endeavored to offer an opportunity to the
slaves to venture out and acquaint him with the posture of affairs within the
City. The Emperor was afraid of what might happen, and of the tediousness of
the Siege; therefore for that reason as well as to try the disposition of his
Enemy, if* he might oblige him to venture out, drew up his Army before the
City. He hoped that if he had been so bold as to venture out, during that
absence, there might be some stirring and revolt in the City amongst the
Inhabitants, weary of the Tyranny of the Mamelucks, or amongst the Slaves, unto
whom underhand he had promised their freedom. None dared look out, all the
benefit that he reaped by this action was, but to understand more fully the
situation of Cairo, and show the Inhabitants the strength and number of his
invincible Army. But at the same time he caused them to be dealt withal by
Slaves of their own Nation, who, flying from us unto the City, caused them to
understand, that the Emperor intended not to ruin them; that he had no
intention but to fight with the Mamelucks his enemies. This underhand dealing
caused such an impression in their minds, that they all agreed to free
themselves from the company of these troublesome Guests.

When the Emperor understood what success of this subtle negotiation, he
resolved to draw near with his Infantry, at half a mile from the Town, that his
approach might encourage the Citizens the more; for th^^y had sent word, that
they would rise in arms and fight for us against our enemies and theirs. Upon
this news, he sent for the Cheiftains of his Army, to open to them his mind, to
hear their advice, and give them the necessary orders for the carrying on of
his design with success. He told them, that he was come before that City,
imagining that it had been unprovided and without any Garrison, easy to be
won, that it had been able, if taken, to have caused his Army to subsist a long
time, and procure them great advantages, but that being prevented by the
Mamelucks, who were got in possession of it with all their Army, there was two
great inconveniences, that would attend upon him, if he did continue in the
siege: the first was the difficulty of getting provisions, for by endeavoring
to famish the besieged, he run the hazard of starving his own Army. The second
inconveniency was the excessive heats of the approaching Season, which would
prove so much the more dangerous to his men, because they were not used to
them; and if diseases and distempers should enter amongst them they would ruin
him and his designs. He told them also, that he had resolved to confine all his
desires to Cairo and Alexandria, and to proceed no further in his Conquests:
That after the subduing of these two places he would return to Samarcand laden
with the Spoils of Asia: That it would be a shame to them to fly away from an
enemy, whom they had lately beaten, and who, to avoid the sight of them, had
wandered up and down the Mountains and Deserts two Months: That they were got
into that City, because they trusted more to the strength of its walls and
bulworks, than to their weapons and courages. That it did become them to show
the vanity of this confidence of the Mamelucks; for if they sheltered
themselves in Strongholds and Walls, the Parthians and Tartarians had a more
numerous Army than theirs, and stouter courages, more used to overcome all
difficulties; therefore they were able to render those heaps of stones and
mortar useless, for at the first assault, they would be able to leap over all
the walls and barracado's with which the Enemies had fortified the streets of
the City; that all these things would not be able to secure the Mamelucks from
fear, and from flying before them. That if they would attach their enemies
unexpectedly, whiles they thought themselves safe within their Walls, and not
to be forced: That the very surprising attempt would half overcome them.

It is far more honorable (said he to them) to assault them than to fly away
from them shamefully, and and turn our backs to those who have seen our faces
so often to their loss. This is a special favor that the great God of hosts
has granted to us these twenty years, that we have been fighting with many
Warlike people, that we have never turned them our backs. We must therefore
disown the Parthian name, and forget all our former Victories and glory if we
forsake this Siege and depart; for it is certain in such a case our enemies
would never fail to pursue us, and cut short our provisions, and to publish
abroad, to our eternal shame, our flight; this would cause many of those that
fight for us forsake us in our need, and turn against us, and we should see
those, who have yielded to us, betray us, and become our enemies. The Emperor
made this discourse to his Captains to give them to understand that there was
but two ways to take, either to forsake the City and the Seige, or to fight
with the Enemy.

This speech astonished them with the Novelty and the greatness of the
enterprise; for they had never endeavored to force an Army retrenched within
strong Walls, and they were afraid of the sequel of such an attempt.
Nevertheless their honor and reputation, which they saw engaged, prevailed
upon them, and caused them to contemn all the dangers, and death it self, which
they foresaw as infallible. Whiles every one was thinking upon the enterprise,
with their heads hanging down with a great silence, Tamerlan desired Axalla to
speak and discover his mind; which he did in this manner. Worthy Prince,
wherefore do you desire to search our minds? Do you not yet know the
inclinations and courages of your Captains and Soldiers? Do you doubt whither
they will prefer the advancement of your glory to their own lives? wherefore do
you inquire from us our resolutions? Lead up only, and you shall see, whether
the great affection we have always had for you be now deminish'd: do you think
that the walls of Cairo are strong enough to resist our Courages and stop your
Cavalry? The first horseman, that shall put his head within the walls, will
open a way to the whole Army.

As Soon as Axalla had ended his speech, all the Captains cried out, and
entreated to be led to the fight, protesting that they were ready to Sacrifice
themselves for the Honor and Glory of their Prince.

The Emperor was mighty well satisfied with their affectionate expressions,
for which he returned them his hearty thanks. Therefore at the same time he
gave Orders for the assault, and divided his Infantry into three Bodies. The
Lieutenant General was to lead thirty thousand men. The Prince of Tanais was to
follow him with fifty thousand more. Axalla was to succeed him with a like
number of Infantry, with four thousand Horse armed with Lance and Buckler. The
Prince came a little after, with ten thousand Horse before him, and he himself
in the midst of fifty thousand Foot, who were followed by the rest of the
Cavalry, whom he commanded in person, having given the charge of the Infantry
to Axalla, in whom he placed his chiefest trust.

The Princes intent was to win one of the Towns of Cairo, and there to lodge
himself, that he might be able to advance by degrees. But it concerns us to
know, that the Sultan was in the City with all his forces, which amounted to
threescore thousand foot, and fifty thousand horse, of whom thirty thousand
were Mamelucks, brave Soldiers trained up in the art of war. The Tartars had
found what they were by experience. But his Infantry were not so skilful, for
they were but fresh Soldiers, newly raised in Arabia, Persia, and Lybia, and a
great many were but Slaves lately set at liberty, for his ordinary and standing
Foot had been overthrown in the last Battles.

The Prince had discovered to none but to Axalla the hopes that he had in the
rising of the Slaves and Moors. When therefore all things where readily
provided, he caused the first bo^^y of Foot to advance to the place that he had
appointed to attack the Enemy in the Front, when he saw them charge home, and
force the Sultans men into their Trenches, he caused them to be followed and
seconded by the Prince of Tanais with fifty thousand under his command. Then
the fight was most cruel and bloody.

In the mean whiles Axalla marched along certain palm trees, in a place that he
imagined was forsaken, to go to the assistance of his men by another way. He
was not mistaken, he found little or no resistance, so that with ease he broke
into the Trenches; he applied himself next to perform Tamerlans orders, and
fill up with boards and other materials, the holes and ditches, that the Horse
might get over, but as he was busy in this work, the Enemy came upon him with
twenty thousand men to hinder him. Axalla left three thousand to end the work
begun, and make a way with all speed for the Cavalry, and with the rest he
charged the Enemy.

The Mamelucks were coming to him in good order. They were too hard for the
Prince of Tanais, and had some advantage upon him, but it lasted not long, for
as soon as the way was made for the Horse, the ten thousand men charged the
Mamelucks in the Rear, where the Sultan was in person, after these, ten
thousand more were sent by the Prince, who with all his Cavalry followed next.
All together broke in upon the Enemy without delay, so that they had no time
but to fly to the second Trenches, which they had made, in the second Town. The
fight lasted seven whole hours, all this time it was not to be judged, which
party should gain the Victory. The Enemies defended themselves stoutly, but
when the Prince had driven them from their first Trenches, he sounded a
retreat, and was contented to lodge all night in that place, resolving the next
day to pursue the Victory.

One third of the Town was already in Tamerlans possession, whose Infantry were
quartered next to the Enemies second Trenches, which gave occasion to several
small skirmishes which happened most times to the advantage of the Tartars, who
behaved themselves most courageously.

That day fifteen or sixteen thousand men were killed on the Enemies side, and
seven thousand of Tamerlans. Dragnen Lieutenant General of the Infantry of the
Sultan died, with many other Officers who were in the heat of the battle.

It was generally confessed that Axalla's experience and good judgment, this
day were very useful in getting the Victory.

The same night news being brought to the Prince, that the Sultan had a design
to pass over the River, he gave order to ten thousand horse to post themselves
along the banks, when the Sultan heard of it, he imagined that all the Army had
been there, therefore he was not so bold as to venture his person at the
passage. At the break of day, the Emperor caused the Trenches to be filled up,
and the fight to begin by the Prince of Tanais of one side, and by Axalla on
the other. But after a slight resistance, when the Sultan perceived that his
Infantry drew back and left their Trenches to their enemies, the fear of the
coming of the Cavalry, caused him to forsake the Town. He performed this
design, which he had failed of in the night, by drawing up his Army in the void
space between the River and the Town, that he might be able to escape over into
Alexandria.

In the mean while the Prince having taken by force the second Trenches, the
Soldiers broke into the City and killed every one they met with, none being
able to keep them in, when the Emperor was informed of the way the Sultan took
to pass over the River, he followed him with all his Cavalry and all the foot,
that he could pick up from the plunder and spoils of the City, unto which they
were furiously bent. But the Sultan had provided in time, to secure his retreat
and passage, by getting into his power a narrow piece of ground secured from
the Rivers violence with strong stakes, there he posted fifteen thousand of his
best Soldiers, whom he called his slaves. The situation was such that they
were able to defend themselves, and could not be forced without Infantry. Such
as were brought to find them, were loath to leave their companions, to take all
the plunder, therefore they marched but slowly and without courage until the
Emperor himself had promised them, to take notice of them and give them
rewards. At their first coming up they assaulted these Troops, not without
difficulty, and loss of many men, but the enemies made an honorable retreat,
they cast themselves into the River, with one hand they swum, and with the
other held their Weapons. In this manner they escaped to the other bank. Part
of their Cavalry was cut in pieces, another part in the confusion ventured into
the River and were drowned, for they could not get over.

This was the last endeavor of the Sultan, who beheld with sorrow this great
and Stately City from an high place, when it was pillaging. He told his people
to comfort them, that they were not men who had ovecrome them, but a God, who
had sided with his enemies. So much, valor, prudence, and discretion, he had
taken notice of in the Tartarian Army.

The next night after the fight, he judged that the Tartarians would be busy
in dividing the spoils and that they would have no time to pursue him. He
withdrew himself with nine or ten thousand men, for the rest were either
scattered abroad or drowned in the River.

As soon as it was day he took the way of Alexandria, after that he had thanked
some of his slaves, who were a live after they had saved their Prince by their
stout and brave resistance for two hours against all the Tartarians Army, and
their honorable and glorious retreat at the end of this Noble action. Tamerlan
himself was so great an admirer of them, that he commanded those that were
taken to be brought to him, and out of a desire to use them in his service he
treated them kindly, and with gifts and other favors endeavored to win them
to himself, and though they all refused to forsake their former Masters
interest he sent them to the Sultan. The Prince was used to deal thus in that
generous manner with those whom he had overcome. He delighted to express his
bounty and clemency next after his valor and courage. There is nothing more
proper for a great Prince than to cause himself to be beloved by his merciful
and loving temper, as well as to render himself dreadful and respected by his
power and noble mind.

After this furious fight the Prince retreated a little back, lodging his men
between the River and the City, that he might secure and cover the rest of his
Army, which might otherwise have easily been defeated during the plunder of
that rich and wealthy Town.

This caused him to continue all night on horseback with some of his chief
Officers, for with them he rode up and down his Camp visiting every corner, and
praising his Soldiers for their courageous assaults. As soon as it was day he
went into the Town to take possession of the Castle, the ordinary abode of the
Sultans, where all their riches were treasured up. There he lodged and caused
all his Army to be quartered round about this Castle, which stands at one end
of the Town. He commanded by a Proclamation that all plundering should cease,
which had lasted four and twenty hours, and every Soldier had orders to return
to their colors, and to lodge in their quarters; the next day he sent out
another Proclamation to declare all the Inhabitants free, commanding that all
Prisoners should be released. In the Castle he found wonderful Riches and
inestimable Treasures laid up there by the Sultans, many years. There was the
more, because they had a law that forbid them to meddle with any thing there
but in great necessity, when the Kingdom was in want. It was thought that the
Sultan made the more have to get into Cairo before Tamerlan for fear of losing
these Treasures. Some say that he took out in the night many jewels. Others
speak as if he never entered into it, that he diminished nothing, for fear that
his men should imagine that he intended to forsake them, and they should
suspect the retreat he resolved to make. Others think that he never meddled with
these Treasures, because he could never dream of being faced in such a City,
accompained with such and so many faithful Soldiers. And when he saw himself
driven out against his expectation be ascribed the Victory to none but to a
Divinity, who had so powerfully assisted the Tartarians Army against his men
secured in such strong forifications.

The Emperor sent word to Calibes to inform him of his successes and progress,
and to deliver him a Commission to be Governor of Egypt. This happy news was
welcome in the numerous Army under his command, which marched along the River
Euphrates, it increased daily by the rendition of many Towns, which would not
oppose the Princes happiness; all Persia trembled at this sudden alteration, at
the fall of the Sultan. This Country, was then governed by several petty
Princes, some of them were Mehometans, but others Christians. The Emperor had
an intent to subdue them all.

In the mean while he gave all necessary orders for the preservation of Cairo,
and caused his Army to pass over the River, that he might complete his Victory,
for that purpose he marched to Alexandria, where the Sultan had taken
sanctuary. But before the departure of the Vanguard with Axalla at the head,
he rewarded liberally every Soldier, according to their deservings, and
courages.

He caused the Oath of fidelity to be administered to all the Inhabitants of
that great City, and of the Towns thereabouts, settling every thing in as much
peace as he could in so short a time; for that purpose he left in Garrison
there ten thousand men, carried away all such persons as he suspected, and
placed others in their stead. Therefore he led with him many persons in his
Army to place and settle in the conquered Towns, after this, the people came to
him from all parts, to submit themselves, and receive his commands from as far
as Cana. Ambassadors arrived not only from Arabia Felix, but also from Africa,
to acknowledge Tamerlan's Empire; for his Victories had struck a dread into all
neighboring Nations and People at a distance. He would not settle the affairs
of Egypt till his return to Cairo from Alexandria. The Rear of his Army he
sent thither with the Prince of Tanais, but he and his Household servants
embarked themselves upon the River Nilus, for their pleasure. It is said, that
he took a delight to take notice of the rapidity of this River in some places,
and its slowness in others.

The News was soon carried to Alexandria, that the Army was in their march to
besiege it, this made the people to rise up in Arms, the fear of a total ruin
caused them to send to the Sultan to entreat him to compassionate their
weakness, and to represent to him, that he could not make the same resistance
against so powerful an Army as he had done against others before. That it did
become him to yield to the present necessity, that he should do well to retire
into Lybia, whether Tamerlan's Army would never follow him, that if he would do
so, they would keep for him that faithfulness they had sworn to him. That he
need not doubt of their affections for him. That they desired him to save his
own person, and suffer time to perform the rest. After this message the Sultan
saw that all things turned against him, he resolved therefore to depart, he was
in hopes, that if the Army continued any long time about Alexandria, as they
were likely to do, that there would some change happen, which might alter the
face of his affairs, and offer him an opportunity to attempt something, with
this expectation he pacified his troubled mind, and with tears in his eyes, he
left the City, repeating often these Words, God is angry with our Nation, that
the time of the ruin of this flourishing Empire was come, that every one ought
to submit to the orders of Providence. That he had done all that could have
been expected from him to perform his duty in the defense of his people, and
answer their great esteem at his Election: that he hoped to gather up more
Troops, and return with a sufficient Army to free them from the slavery of a
Foreign Prince. These words spoken before a great multitude, were rerelated to
Axalla first, for he went before with the Van. He caused the Prince to
understand the News, and sent him word, that not only out of Alexandria, men
came to submit themselves but also from fifty leagues round about. The Prince
rejoiced to hear this prosperous march of his Army, because he saw a speedy end
to all his labors, and a possibility of returning to his own Country. He was
troubled that he had not got the Sultan into his custody, this consideration
hindered him from treating all such as held for him with that kindness, that he
expressed to all the World besides.

When the Princes Army was within one days march of Alexandria, Axalla was sent
for to meet him, and to bring with him some of the chief Citizens to take their
Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity. After this he made his entry with all his
Army, but caused them to go out again, and incamp about the Walls, only six
thousand horse and twenty thousand foot, he kept for his guard, and sent Axalla
with his Vanguard to pursue after the Sultan. In the mean while the Emperor
continued a long time about Alexandria, in expectation of some news from
Calibes. He had sent Lochistan, his great Chamberlain to succeed him, a man of
great worth, who had always commanded a party of ten thousand horse, and had
always been with him.

Calibes took from his Army the same number of horsemen to accompany him into
Egypt with his equipage to wait upon the Prince, whom he had no need to
solicit, for Tamerlan knew so well the deservings of every one, and that which
they were able to perform, that in their absence as well as in their presence,
honors and Governments, employments and affairs were conferred upon them
without their seeking, the Prince was so just in the distribution of his
favors. Therefore no body did bribe for the Offices of his Army, for the
employments in his House and State; for they proceeded always from his free
motion.

When Axalla was departed out of Alexandria, the sad news was brought that the
Emperor his Uncle lay very sick. He had left with him the Empress his wife,
the Daughter of this old man, whom he knew to be wise and prudent, this
consorted him not a little. He knew, that if by chance his Uncle should die,
she would take care to keep the Kings and Princes his Vassals, and all his
other Subjects in peace. But he could not easily imagine, that after so many
victories and successes, which were noised all over the World, any would be so
fool^^sh and bold as to attempt a rebellion against him* the Empress sent him
also word, that in expectation of his return she would provide all things
needful to circumcise the Son, whom God had given them, and who was able to
undergo that painfu^^ ceremony. All these things settled his mind s^^ that he
resolved to depart home wards, as soon as he had secured the Conquest of Egypt.

News came to him also from China, that the Chinese had endeavored some stirs,
but Odmar had severely punished them in a bloody battle, where the Kings
brother had been killed, this had secured the Emperor on that side. Odmar
after the rebellion had enlarged and prosecuted the conquests of his Master,
but the Old Emperor had sent him orders to appease all things, and to preserve
only what he had conquered beyond the River of Flezan.

When Axalla was departed with the Vanguard, he terrified all the Inhabitants
of Africa; for the people imagined that all the Emperors Army followed him, so
that two and twenty petty Kings of that Country sent to him their Ambassadors
to submit themselves to his mercy. But the Sultan in his flight was forsaken of
all men, his Soldiers returned back in Troops to yield to Axalla every day.
Arsambei also his Lieutenant General sent to have the Emperors safe conduct,
which was granted to him. He came therefore and entreated him, that seeing his
Master had been driven out of all his dominions, he would be so gracious to him
as to admit him in his service; the Princes humanity received him kindly and
granted him all that he could desire; so* that Arsambei swore to be faithful to
him. But this perfidious Traitor had another design in his mind. He had
promised the Sultan to assassinate the Emperor. That he might succeed the
better in this execution of this Villainy, he had caused four thousand
Mamelucks to be received in the service of Tamerlan in Alexandria. They were to
assist him in this wicked attempt in Alexandria, where he was busily employed
in settling his conquered Countries in peace. The Execution was intended in a
morning, when the Prince, according to his custom, should give public
audience to the complaints that were usually made to him. His guards were ten
thousand men, but then there were not above twelve hundred that waited upon him
every day. The Traitor Arsembei had made several of the inhabitants of the Town
acquainted with their design, they were to rise up in Arms at the same moment
of time that the Prince should be killed, which they thought to be more
feasible than really it was, the four thousand Mamelucks were in the Town to
act as soon as they shall have a command. Three weeks more passed after the
murder was appointed and resolved upon before the day appeared for the
execution of it, it was but the day before, that the Prince had given him one
of the most beautiful and stoutest Horses of his Stables. He had also given
order to his people to pay him a great respect, this Villain therefore drew
near to the Emperors person in his Tent, which was open to all, that desired
to make their addresses to him.

We must take notice, that the City of Alexandria is built in such a manner,
that all the Houses are flat on the Top, so that it is possible to pass over
them, from one to the other. In this place Arsembei had appointed those persons
to be ready, to help him at the same moment, that he should have accomplished
his wicked purpose: at a distance the Prince perceived him drawing toward his
person, he asked him what he desired, for he wondered to see him in this place,
which was designed only for such as could not have access at other times to his
person, as Soldiers and the meaner sort of people, and not for a man of the
quality of Arsembei. He could not imagine, what might be the cause of this
appearance. He observed him again, and saw that his countenance changed its
color, which caused him to fix his eyes upon him, and take notice of his
motion. Arsembei at that instant, with his drawn Sword in his hand ran to him,
but the Prince drew his likewise as speedily, and leaping back two or three
paces to avoid the stroke, with a back blow, he cut almost in two the Varlets
arm, lifted up to aim at him; at that moment every one ran to help, and succor
the Prince. The first man struck him down with a blow upon the head, the wound
was not mortal, the Emperor would not suffer him to be killed there, that he
might learn from him his associates, but this Villain broke out into
Lamentation, and complaint at the destiny of his good Master, because this last
attempt, an expression of his affection for ^^im, had been useless. The Prince
asked him, wherefore he had spared him in a just War, and in the fight, to
assassinate him now in a treacherous manner, after so many protestations of his
service and love, but he made no other answer, but this, Let me die, let me die.
The great Cady or Lord Chief Justice seized upon him, who together with the
Lords of the privy Council examined him. In the mean while the City and Camp
were all in Arms. And the Princes Guards were mounted on Horseback. All the
Guards were doubled, the Haven was secured, and the Emperor went home to his
Lodgings, glad of so narrow an escape, without harm from so a great danger.

But the Captains and Soldiers crowded about the Palace with an earnest desire
to behold him with their eyes, offering to face the Guards, that would not
suffer them to enter. They asked to look upon him with threatening words; for
they would have thought him dead had they not seen him. The Prince had a mind
to rest himself, but at last he was forced to yield to their impatient desires.
He went out to them, assuring them that he was well and in health, but the Army
was not satisfied, he was constrained to get on horseback, and to ride about
the Camp. Then the apprehensions, that had possessed the Souls of the Officers
and Soldiers, vanished away by the presence of him, who they loved as tenderly
as their lives, and were succeeded by extraordinary motions of joy, so that the
Sky was filled with their loud acclamations and expressions of gladness.

The Offender was examined at the rack, he confessed all the design, and
required courageously that he might be brought to his end: according to his
deposition they went to seek the places where his associates were yet in number
about three hundred, they were all bound and carried to prison, and inquiry was
made for all others round about the City. Some of the Inhabitants, who had been
acquainted with the business, and had received Letters from the Sultan were not
spared. But the Prince, who was naturally an Enemy to all cruelty, seeing that
there was likely much blood to be spilled, resolved to depart out of
Alexandria, with an intent not to return to the City again, till all the guilty
persons should be discovered and punished.

This great City appeared with a sad countenance. In every Corner persons were
taken, and all suspected inhabitants were led to prison. As soon as they were
convicted they were executed publicly. Arsembei suffered first. He was
strangled, and for a remembrance of his horrid Treason, his head was fixed upon
a Pole in the Market place, and his Body quartered. All the Accomplices were
dealt with in the same manner, but some of the Citizens, that were unsuspected,
were cast into prison* and afterward sold for slaves, and transported into
another Country.

This was the end of this Tragedy, which was to begin by the Princes life, but
the Majesty of his looks, and his courageous resistance, helped to save him. I
have oftentimes, says Alhacent, heard him confess, that when Arsambei stood
before him, he imagined, that this Villain had some wicked design in his mind,
and that if he had not been afraid to break his promise that he had given him,
and injure that Reputation that he held in the World, he would have caused him
to have been stayed, as soon as he saw him appear, but he thought it sufficient
to look upon him. He protested for his part, that he feared no assassinations.
That he had a good Angel at his Elbows, meaning his guardian Angel, whom he
named Meaniel, he said, that he had orders from God to preserve him from all
ambushes. He caused his Image to be carried in his colors, and plucked down
all signs of the Cressant; the badge of the Ottoman Family, and instead
thereof, he erected an image of his Guardian Angel.

All this time Axalla was not idle. He had marched a great way into Africa with
the Army, and had subdued all the lower part of Lybia. The Emperor went
thither, and finding it a delicious Country he staid there to refresh his Army,
and dispersed them about, that they might have more convenience: Only Axalla
was with the Body of an Army. So that in expectation of the arrival of Calibes,
he was busy in setting these conquered Countries in peace. The heats at that
time were so violent, that the Soldiers were much the worse particularly the
Parthians, who live in a Country inclinable to cold more than to heat.

When the Prince understood, that all was quiet in Alexandria, he returned to
the City, where at his first arrival, several Ambassadors came to him, from the
Lords and Princes of Lybia and Barbary, to submit to him, and acknowledge him
for their Sovereign. Tamerlan required Hostages from all whose Countries where
bordering upon Egypt, but he desired from the rest nothing but their Faith,
and some outward expressions of their good will. Thus every one yielded homage
to this new Monarch, and by their submissions published abroad the largeness of
his Dominions.

After all this, the Prince seemed to have a stronger inclination than ever he
had before to return into his own Country. Age and Labor incline us naturally
to seek for rest. He often said, that he had heard his Father declare, That
when a man is five and forty, if Fortune has favored him till then, he ought,
if he be wise, to rest satisfied with the favors he has received, and
endeavor only to preserve what he has, than to get more. That unconstant
Fortune at that age is apt to change as suddenly as our bodies, and that the
wrinkles, which appeared upon his face, told him, that his youthful days began
to pass away, and that this decline made him fear that Fortune would retake
from all that she had given him. He was the more earnest and passionate to
return home, because he was resolved to imbellish the City of Samarcand, and
eternize there his name and memory; for that purpose he saught every where for
all skilful Artists, and men of industry, and of comely Bodies and
Countenances, to carry them to this City, that they might adorn it, and cause
it to be distinguished from all others. As this had been his Cradle he was
resolved to make it his Tomb, and to restore to the same ground, that which he
had borrowed from it. A certain Heathen, unto whom the Prince had shown the
stately Sepulcher, that he built for his body, which this man wondered at, and
asked him, where he would build another for his Soul. The Prince, with his eyes
lifted up toward heaven, answered him, That his Soul should return to the
place from whence it was taken, seeing that it was of a Divine Substance.

I may take notice of one remarkable passage more, he was reproved by a noted
Priest of the Mohammedan Faith, because he forced not all the People that he
subdued to make profession of the same Religion. My Friend, replied Tamerlan to
him, I shall never do that. I cannot but think that God delights in the
diversity of Religions amongst men. He hates only those that have no Religion,
or that deny him, such Persons I would willingly banish out of the World. It is
not but that I am fully persuaded, that the way and method of my worshipping of
him is the most pleasing to him. But I shall give liberty to every one in all
places of my Empire to adore him as they all believe that he ought to be, in
case their intent be to honor him alone and not to disgrace him by irreverence.

Therefore he thought that every one ought to continue in the Religion where he
was born, and brought up, in case one only God was worshipped. I thought fit to
publish these particulars of Tamerlans Religion, for there was no man, that
spoke of God with more respect and dread, which was so great, that none could
imagine a more sincere and more extraordinary devotion than that which he
expressed outwardly.

To return to the history. The Emperor received news that Calibes, in whole
place the great Chamberlain governed the Army, was in his way and near
Alexandria, which report caused an universal joy all over the Army, for his
coming was likely to hasten their departure to their native Country, where they
should rest from their labors and dangers, after the conquests of so many
Nations. Axalla was commanded at the same time to return with his Army, and the
parties that were dispersed abroad had orders sent them to gather together in
one body: the Emperor thought fit to take out of Alexandria seven or eight
thousand Inhabitans, placing other people in their stead, and to leave in
Garrison six thousand horse and ten thousand foot.

Whiles these things were doing Calibes arrived, and was received by the Prince
in that kind manner, that his services had deserved, he gave him his Commission
and Instructions what to do in his absence, and placed him under him as his
Lieutenant General, in Alexandria, and the Country round about. Zamolzan a man
of great reputation, he appointed forty thousand horse and fifty thousand foot,
to remain behind with Calibes. Some of them were placed in Garrisons, in the
strong Castles, and near the Seaside, and the rest were to be in readiness
together in one body, and to be commanded by Zamolzan until Calibes should
return from Cairo, whither the Prince intended to lead him, to take possession
there of his Government of Egypt and Syria, and of all the Countries of Lybia
and Barbary, which had submitted to him.

When the Emperor had thus settled all things, and understood, that all his
new subjects were ravished in admiration of his kindness, moderation and
justice, and were not sorry to be governed, and overcome by a Prince so worthy
to command, because of his rare qualities, and good inclinations, when he had
caused the Inhabitans of Cairo, Alexandria, and Syria, and of the Country
thereabouts, to swear to be faithful to him, he caused his Army to march
homewards.

The Van was commanded by Axalla, and the body of the Army, by the Prince of
Tanais; he had given his orders to Calibes, how he desired that he should
behave himself in his Government, and at his departure he embraced him as a
friend. From Cairo he marched strait to Jerusalem, whither he returned with few
of his followers, he staid there eleven days to visit again the Sepulcher of
Jesus Christ the God of Christians, every day he went thither to perform his
devotions He caused also some of the Ground of this place to be carried with
him to Samarcand to honor and sanctify, as he said the places there of
devotion.

He visited again the ruins of the Temple of Soloman, that he might after that
model build one like to it, at Samarcand. When he considered this City which
heretofore was the Royal Palace of David and Solomon, he lamented to look upon
the ruins, because it was not yet in its former splendour and glory, which
caused it to be admired heretofore by all the World. Such was the Love and
Inclination, that he had for things esteemed Holy and Religious. He had a
contempt for the Jews and could not endure them, for he expressed a detestation
of their cruelty in murdering him, who came to save them. The Emperor
therefore out of his affection for Jerusalem, made it a free City without
taxes, or subsides, or Garrison. He gave great gifts to the Monasteries, whom
he respected while he continued there.

As soon as the great Chamberlain was received as General in the Army, which
Calibes had left him, he went to besiege Meleg, a Town situate upon the River
Euphrates, but when he had battered the Walls and reduced the Inhabitants to
great wants, he was forced to raise the Seige, for the City was releived by the
Princes of Quillean and Caldar, and others, who had united together, being
thereunto encouraged by a false report that the Emperor had been defeated.
This news had caused all the neighboring Provinces to rise up in Arms; before
they were afraid to stir, but now they gathered together in an Army and marched
against the great Chamberlan to fight him, he had no orders from Tamerlan to
adventure his Army in a battle, he therefore retreated back and retrenched
himself along the River Euphrates, waiting there for the coming of the Enemies.
They attempted several times in vain, to force him to go out of the Trenches.
But he sent News to the Emperor of the present posture of his affairs, that he
might have some succor sent him, for he thought that the Enemies would not be
so bold to adventure upon him in his strength. But they were so proud to have
obliged him to depart from before Meleg, that they resolved to assault his
Camp, and the rather, because they imagined that they had filled his Army with
fears and apprehensions. They thought to succeed and to increase thereby the
Glory of their Soldiers, because the Chamberlain was but a young man, whom
they judged to be without experience in War, and fitter for a peaceable Court,
where he had been trained up, than for a Camp and an Army. They had never been
so bold if Calibes had yet commanded there, for amongst all the Commanders of
Tamerlan, Calibes was looked upon to be the most experienced and valiant
Captain next to Axalla. In a morning therefore they lodged their Army near the
Chamberlains Camp. He had given a strict command that no Soldier should offer
to go out, but to resist stoutly if they were assaulted. He drew up all his men
in order of battle, and with the advice and direction of some of his chief
Officers placed them in such a manner that he could succor and relieve them in
any place, where they might be assaulted, in this posture they waited for the
Enemy, who made to them with fury and great cries. There was fifty thousand
foot divided into two parties, that they might attack the Camp in two several
places. But the Tartarian Camp was so ordered that there was a place for the
Cavalry to go out and fight under the shelter of the Trenches. The Enemies had
not minded it, therefore they had sent away theirs beyond a small River,
whether they imagined that the Tartars would retreat in haste, for fear of
their foot, and by that means they would pursue and cut them off. In the
Chamberlains Camp were eighteen thousand horse and forty thousand foot, with a
great deal of baggage and many prisoners, whom the great Chamberlain had caused
to work so briskly in the Trenches, that they were stronger than the Walls of
the Town of Meleg. The fight lasted three hours, the Tartars defended
themselves bravely. And so many of the Enemies Army were destroyed, that the
Chamberlain imagined that he was able to assault them in his turn; for that
purpose, whiles his men dallied with the assailours, to keep them in heart, he
commanded out his Cavalry by that way mentioned before, which broke in upon the
Enemies infantry, so furiously, that they killed them at their pleasure, till
they were weary. At that instant he understood that the Enemies Horse were
coming back over the River to help their foot, which caused him to sound a
retreat into the Trenches, for he was not willing to hazard any thing but upon
good terms, knowing that this Cavalry was composed of thirty thousand men. The
Enemy lost this day five and twenty thousand of their best Soldiers, not only
by the sally of the Horse, but also at the assaulting of the Camp. The General
or chief Commander of this expedition, being the King of Armenia named Eleazar,
lost his Life in giving great testimonies of his courage and valor.

As soon as the Emperor had received the news sent to him from the great
Chamberlain of the rising of the Princes of Persia and Armenia, and of the
relief of Meleg, he dispatched away Axallae with the Parthians Cavalry, but he
had not marched three days journey, but he received the news of their
overthrow. He sent word of it to Tamerlan expecting at Damascus other orders.

As soon as the Emperor understood these things he caused them to be published
abroad, and sent word to Calibes, that he might, by dispersing the news amongst
the Troops, satisfy all discontented minds, who were persuaded that the
Chamberlains Army was totally defeated, the Emperor expressed more joy of this
Victory than for all that he ever won in his own person, some think that it
proceeded from a satisfaction to have not been mistaken in the choice he made
of the great Chamberlain, to act in an employ that seemed to be beyond the
capacity of a young man, for had he miscarried many would have exclaimed
against the Prince, to have pitched upon him, his wise conduct and valor won
him the praises of every one, and of Tamerlan also, who could not forbear to
commend him. It was then reported that the Emperor having a great desire to
re^^urn to his Kingdom and Patrimony, that he might secure it by his presence;
for fear that a longer absence or some other disgrace, should beget an
inclination in some of his people to be troublesome, was resolved for the
future to govern his Armies by his Lieutenants, and therefore before the Winter
he would pass over the Mountains of Imaus. He sent orders to Axalla to return
and stop in the road, in all strong places of Judea he places his Garrisons,
and in Syria. Of other Cities that he had no mind to guard he pulled down the
Walls, some people whom he suspected, he carried with him, put others in their
room, and in several Provinces he made new Collonies, as he had done in Egypt
and elsewhere. He sent home about this time, the succors of the Greek
Emperor, he caused the meanest Soldier to receive his pay, and treated so
liberally the Officers of the late Prince Andronicus, that they departed
wonderfully well satisfied, that Tamerlan was as much to be admired for his
magnificences: And gratitude, as for his other rare qualities, about this time
his Chancellor, whose advice he followed in many things, moved him in this
juncture of time, to seize upon the Empire of Greece before he returned to
Tartary, showing him how needful those Countries would be to him, now that he
had conquered the Territories of the Sultan, that great Princes are not to keep
their word and promises, no longer than they are useful for their Countery. He
represented to him, that he was the man, whom all the World looked upon, as
their Prince, that many Nations lived peacably under his protection, that he
ought not to neglect an advantage which would procure to the Parthians and
Tartarians much honor and glory, and that it was needful for him to take that
Empire into his hands, that he might make Constantinople, the chief seat of all
the conquered Countries, that he might have nothing but the Sea to limit his
dominions. Tamerlan returned him this answer, that he desired that the Empire
of the Parthians might have narrower bounds in observing the rules of Justice,
than to enlarge them by the commission of a crime. That the Emperor of Greece
was his friend, his neighbor and his Ally, that if he did offer to forget
himself, and break the bonds of aimity that tied them together, and the faith
which had been solemnly sworn, he would make him experience his power, and that
God would doubtless assist him in the prosecution of a just cause. I think,
said he, to him, my friend, I cannot do any thing more honorable, and more
glorious, for my Empire and for the Parthian Nation, than to make Posterity to
understand, that an Emperor of that Nation came from a far Country on purpose
to give a check to the boldness, and insolency of Bajazet, and to free the
Nobility of Greece from his unmerciful Tyranny, and though I could have taken
all their Country into my hand with ease, I have abstained from the surprisal
of a Great Empire, and of the most beautiful City of the world, so that I have
neglected all the motions of ambition to follow the rules of Justice and
equity, I may with reason boast, that I have not gained a more glorious Victory
than this, though I have conquered so many Nations and differing people, and
that my Armies have always been happy and successful. It is an ordinary thing
to win battles, and subdue Kingdoms, and Empires, many have performed these
things before me, but few of those Conquerours are to be found, who have caused
their ambition to submit, and be ruled by their justice, they have for the most
part when power was in their hands for their convenience, seized upon other
men's estates, and plundered the Provinces belonging to other men. I shall
recommend this example to Posterity, that equity has been always the rule of
my actions, the faith I keep to my enemies makes them to become my most assured
friends, what effect, think you, that it will have upon those who are already
mine, Will not my honorable and just proceedings secure and increase my well
wishers? Approve therefore my dealing, and persuade me not for the future to
act contrary to it. The Chancellor, who was a wise man, but inclinable to
ambition, submitted to such strong reasons and departed.

He told Alhacent immediately after all the particulars of this discourse, he
has therefore inserted it in his History, that the World might know the
excellent temper and the noble courage of this Prince. Therefore he, who shall
see in him so many rare virtues, will not easily ascribe, to mere chance or
blind fortune, which favors wicked men as often as it does the best natures,
his great successes and glorious conquests: but he will doubtless confess, that
his prosperities were blessings of Heaven, and rewards of his Piety and Virtues
in this life.

When the Emperor was at Damascus, he utterly ruined that City, because it had
resisted him, his Army lodged there eight days. Axalla, who expected him there,
had orders to send six thousand horse to the assistance of the great
Chamberlain: That he might pass more securely and more boldly over Euphrates to
the siege of Meleg, he took it in three days as well as Raffan. All the Country
thereabouts submited to the Prince, but chiefly the Cities upon the River
Euphrates. The Prince of Tanais commanded his party to stay for him at the
passage, that he might march with all his forces together toward the Emperor,
who embraced him very kindly, and in the presence of all his chief Officers,
extolled his valor and courage. He sent him afterward to his Government with
order to send back the six thousand horse, which had been sent to him, that
they might join with the Vanguard commanded by Axalla, from whence they had
been taken The whole Army marched in a line, Axalla upon the right hand, the
great Chamberlain upon the left, and the Emperor in the middle of the Troops.
The Prince of Tanais was with him, I shall not busy my self in reckoning up
all the Cavalry and Companies of Infantry in the Army, nor the great Captains
and Princes who commanded there, for fear of being too prolix in this
narration. I shall only say, that the Emperor arrived at Meleg, where he went
over Euphrates and separated ten thousand horse and fifteen thousand foot, to
send back to Calibes, that he might use them in case of need. The Prince of
Aracen had the command of them.

He was ordered first to march to Babylon and take it. The Emperor remained
still at Meleg, to wait and see the success of this Commission from Babylon,
the Prince of Aracen was to send to Calibes to know whether he should not want
greater assistances, for Tamerlan had notice that the Sultan was in motion with
a strong party. Calibes sent word that he saw no likelihood of any Rebellion,
because from all parts everyone submitted to the Empire of Tamerlan. After a
few days repose, in the same place, he caused his Army to march directly
toward Armeni^^ sending a party through Diabreroth, to chastise some petty
Kings, who had revolted from him, and subdue the Provinces that reach as far as
the mouth of Euphrates. All these things succeeded very happily and the little
Kings sent their Ambassadors to yield and promise him obedience. But for the
better understanding of this History, we must know that since the Christian or
Roman Empire, these people had been governed sometimes by the Turks, sometimes
by the Sultans, now by the Caliphs, at another time by the Lieutenant Generals
of the Romans, so has the strongest always held and commanded them* they were
continually pillaged and ruined by the several invasions of Foreign Armies.
But the Emperor seized into his hands the passages over Euphrates, that he
might with more case succor Egypt in case of need, which happened but little
after, for the Army was not farther than Armenia, when a messenger came post
from Calibes to desire help. The Prince of Aracen was immediately dispatched
and sent toward Egypt, and Tamerlan went himself to Babylon, to terrify the
more the Inhabitants in case they would offer to withstand him, and to assure
them of his bounty and mercy in case they would accept of it. He sent away
Axalla with the Vanguard in the way toward Armenia, to proceed on without
contrary orders.

In Eleven days Tamerlan marched to Babylon, which yielded, as all other
places thereabouts. He appointed the great Chamberlain to fortify Romedat,
because it was an advantageous post, and gave him the Government of all the
Country, near Euphrates as far as Armenia, recommending to him the Inhabitants
of Babylon, who had shown a great respect to their new Master, for they were
for the most part descended from the Tartars. For this City heretofore was
taken by the Prince of Sachetay his Father, who transported thither a Parthian
Collony to s^^cure it, but since that time* they were so much vexed by the
Persians and Mamelucks, that they were obliged to submit to them* Nevertheless,
they had a great affection for their Country, and a remembrance of their
Countrymen: for this cause, was the Prince favorable to them, and looked not
upon their City as a conquered place, but as his own Patrimony newly recovered
from the Enemy. It was first taken by Sahali, one of his Fathers Lieutenant
Generals, who had left a good name and esteem behind him in Sachetay, because
of his great services that he rendered to his Country. From this City the
Prince made haste toward Armenia, for Axalla had sent him word that a Persian
Prince, named Guines, was coming to make peace with him, and render him homage
for his Country. This news caused him with all speed to march toward him, and
out of a respect to him to meet him in the way. For Tamerlan had a great esteem
for him, because of his reputation of holiness, he thought himself happy to be
acquainted with such a religious and devout person. He left the conduct of the
Army with the Prince of Tanais to follow him, softly advancing before to the
place where Axalla waited for Guines to receive and welcome him.

The Emperor had also dispatched the Prince of Liseaceau and his Chancellor,
to assure him of his affection and joy to see him. For he was resolved to show
him all the honor that he could possibly express, and to gratify him in all
things. Tamerlan had news brought him that he was hard by coming to him with a
mean attendance accompanied with beasts of all kinds with which, he said, he
instructed men. The Emperor went to meet him in great State.

As soon as Guines perceived him at a distance, he lifted up his eyes to
Heaven, and prayed for the Princes greatness, and the propagation of his
Prophets Religion, but he excommunicated and cursed the Turks, as the Enemies
of his Faith. The Emperor was surprised to see him in such a contemptible garb
and appearance, but he was so far from despising him for it, that he honored
him the more. And because he was naturally a great admirer of such sort of
people, he gave him a present which the other accepted with Joy. He gave him
fifteen or sixteen thousand Prisoners taken from the Enemy, that he might
instruct them in the Principles of his Religion. This gift was so much the more
grateful to him, because thereby his power increased, and he hoped to make
these men imitate his manners and receive his Doctrine. But this seeming
devotion was not so pleasing to the Courtiers, as it was to the Emperor. For
they had good reason to blame the proceedings of this Persian Prince, who,
under a color of holiness and piety, knew how to take from his neighbors
their Country and Estates.

They blamed also Tamerlan, for suffering himself to be cozened with his
hypocrisies, and governed by that subtle Bigot. But when all things are
considered, that reverence that is due to Religion, and Tamerlans charitable
thoughts of others answerable to his own sincerity, will cause all wonder to
cease, for his undeserved respects to this great Cheat. I am not of opinion of
those that believe that a Sovereign Prince might ought not to have so much
regard to Religion, for it is a thing that never any man had cause to complain
of.

It was not without design that Guines visited the Emperor with all that
outward appearance of humility and devotion. Only his private benefit caused
him to take on this Mask. He was not strong enough to maintain a neutrality or
stop the passage of the Army. He desired therefore to insinuate himself into
the favor, and obtain the protection of its chief Commander. And as he found
the Prince inclinable to Piety, he thought that the best means to secure his
interest would be to make a profession of Virtue and Religion. He seldom went
from the Emperors Elbows, and declared himself to be the Protector of the
Nations that confine upon Persia, exhorting them all to imitate his example,
and yield obedience to the Emperor. This forced and interested humility proved
advantageous to him and to his successors, for it laid a foundation to his and
their future greatness, by his means all Persia submitted to him, Tauris only
excepted. This is a great rich and powerful City, having a great many Towns
belonging to it. It was governed by a Commonwealth, and could not suffer the
rising greatness of Guines, whose designs it labored to thwart.

There was a Captain named Talismahar chosen by the Inhabitants, for the
General of their Militia. And at that juncture of time they had made him their
Sovereign to command them in chief. This Captain understood how welcome Guines
had been to the Prince, and that without doubt, he would not fail to solicit
him, to besiege Tauris, and alter the Government. But he hoped that Tamerlan,
very passionate for his return, would not insist nor continue obstinate in this
design, if he should perceive the people resolved in a courageous defense.

As soon as he had settled every thing in his new principality, he dispatched
away Ambassadors to Tamerlan to understand his intentions. They had orders to
tell him, that Guines by a pretense of devotion and reformation in Religion,
usurped the lands of his neighbors, and by a damnable hypocrisy seized upon
other men's estates and inheritances. The Emperor seemed to be surprised to
hear that which he desired not to believe concerning Guines, and sent back word
to Talismahar, to come to him in person, and accuse Guines of the things he
laid to his charge. He sent him also word, that he intended to re-enter into
the possession of his ancient Rights in Persia, and that he would force all
those that would offer to withstand him or refuse to render what belonged to
him. He was very attentive to the Ambassadors discourse, for by it, he
discovered the means to enlarge his Empire through their divisions. He
understood likewise, That the Cloak of Religion is fit to hide many base
Cheats. But he would not discover his intentions, only he marched forward with
Guines in his company, and wheresoever he went, all people and persons
submitted and yielded obedience. According to his usual custom, he put new
Colonies into all fortified Towns, which might give him any jealousy. The
examample of Guines had a great influence upon all the Inhabitants, to oblige
them to obey Tamerlans Commands.

But his most earnest desire was to get Tauris, a considerable City, for its
greatness, strength, and power, and the chief of the Country. He endeavored to
win it by policy, for he sent thither his Agents to promise Talismahar, another
Government in his Empire. Which doubtless, he would have accepted willingly,
had it not been for Guines, his mortal Enemy, whom he saw so welcome to the
Prince. The fear therefore of his malice, caused him to persuade the
Inhabitants to endure all miseries rather than to fall under the command of
that false Prophet. The Emperor was vexed to understand their resolution, and
that Guines's favor with him and company was the greatest obstacle to the
surrending of this great City. Tamerlan acquainted him with it very kindly to
be sooner rid of him, for that purpose he loaded him with honors and gifts,
and obliged him to return to his own Country after fourteen or fifteen days
abode with him, Guines's Country stretches it self from Sancausan, as far as
the Caspian Sea. Axalla was then commanded to go forward with his Vanguard into
the Territory of Tauris, to destroy all that should offer to make any
resistance with fire and sword. By this means, and the advice of Guines, he
subdued the Provinces of Glauture and Taperestan, which till then resisted the
designs and invasions of the Tartars.

As soon as Talismahar understood that the Army was approaching into his
Country, he resolved to draw toward them with his Cavalry and Infantry to
strengthen the places which might stop and hold out against the Enemy. He had
with him thirty thousand good stout horse able to make resistance, commanded as
they were by an experienced General. The Tartarian Army was tired out with
their tedious journey and continual march besides they wanted provisions in
this season, in the beginning of the winter not fit for a Camp. But Talismahar
was chiefly troubled at the unconstancy of the Inhabitants of Tauris, who were
inclinable, if any mishap should fall upon his Army, to rise in arms against
him and mutiny in the City. This apprehension staid him in the place, and
caused him to send against the Tartars his Cavalry, under the command of his
Lieutenant, named Camares, a man of experience and faithful. He ordered him to
weary his enemies as much as possible, and not to venture to fight, but upon
surprizals, and in cases of advantage. For Talismahar knew for certain, that a
great Army, that must needs cover over a great compass of ground, could not but
scatter about. His design therefore was to cut off the loose Troops and the
skirts of the Army.

The Emperor foresaw his intent, therefore he wisely commanded Axalla to be
upon his guard, and to take heed lest his men should be surprised unawares, for
he was already in the Country belonging to Tauris, and had sent his summons to
a Town, named Cafechion, which Camares had strengthened with a party of
Soldiers. The Governor refused to yield, which caused Axalla to block up the
place, and with all speed he raised a mount on a sudden, from whence the
Tartars discovered their enemies upon the walls, and killed great numbers of
them. But this disadvantage was so far from affrighting them, that it seemed to
encourage them the more. So that Axalla weary of their obstinacy commanded a
general Assault, which forced them rather by the numbers of the besiegers, than
for want of courage in the besieged. The Tartarians spared none within the
Walls, but killed every man. Whiles they were busily employed in plundering the
Town, Camares arrived with a party of horse to relieve it, not knowing that it
was taken. In his way he met with ten thousand Horse sent to wait in the road.
For Axalla had imagined he would make this attempt. Camares sent four thousand
of his men to attack them, which they performed so courageously, that they
drove them to their body of horse, where Axalla was in person: in the mean
whiles Camares staid with the rest of his Army in good order, animating and
encouraging his men. But when he saw what had happened, he was afraid of the
coming of the whole Tartarian Army, therefore he sounded a retreat, and marched
still in good order, with an eye upon Axalla's motion not to be surprised. This
experienced Captain soon perceived his intent, therefore he ordered six
thousand Parthian horse to follow close after him, and to assault* if they
could, the enemies Cavalry, which was accordingly performed with courage. The
fight therefore was renewed between these six thousand Parthians and the four
thousand enemies horse without any appearance of victory on either side, but
they still continued in their retreat observing a good order till they came to
the passage of a River, where Camares seemed to entrench himself; for that
purpose he drew up all his men in order of battle, and seized upon all the
passages sending often his Troops to relieve them that were too hardly beset by
the Tartarians: but in the mean while Axalla had caused his Infantry to
advance, and to force one of the passages, but they found that Camares with his
men were gone a great way, having left behind them a garrison in Gorgechin, a
small Town, able to hold out eight or ten days; this was the way that he took
to weary and tire out the Tartarian Army: besides he made a destruction every
where of provisions and fodder, that his enemies Army might meet with no relief
in their march, hoping by this crafty proceeding to lengthen the war. But the
Inhabitants of Gorgechin had no such resolution, they had fresh before their
eyes the sad example of a neighboring Town sufficiently punished for its
obstinacy in resisting the Tartarian Army, they were not willing to fall into
the same calamity, but to improve the folly of their neighbors. This caused
them to desire to capitulate, which was granted, and the Town yielded up.

Axalla there understood that Camares was at Archiech, ten leagues off. He
detached ten thousand Parthian Horse, six thousand Scythian, and ten thousand
chosen Stradiots to see to surprise him. The better to compass his design he
sent a report before, that Gorgechin did yet hold out against him in
expectation of being relieved, only to cause Camares to stay. He advanced still
with that chosen party, and gave order to the rest of his Army to follow
speedily after him. By this subtlety he surprised the Enemies unawares in a
morning, as they lay encamped about a Country Town. In the way he met with a
thousand Horse, whom he put to flight, and pursued as far as their Camp. Then
he drew up his men in battle, in the avenues and ways thereabouts, that his
enemies might not escape without fighting. And because they were so penned up,
that there was but one way for Camares to retreat with his Army. Axalla placed
there all his infantry in the enemies view: when he understood that Camares had
nothing but horse with him, he caused several Trenches to be drawn to hinder
the horse from getting out. Of all these passages he had sent word to the
Emperor, who was marching speedily after him, having sent before in all haste,
the Prince of Tanais, with twenty thousand horse.

Camares thought that the whole Army had surrounded him, seeing therefore a
necessity, either to yield without resistance, or fight with disadvantage,
there being but one way for him to escape out, which was also strongly guarded,
he resolved to save himself betimes. For that purpose he had made a Trench a
long a little hill, under which he drew up his men with a full purpose to break
through four thousand Tartarian horse placed there to guard that passage. He
thought that he could easily cut in pieces so small a number, that stood in his
way, Therefore about midnight, the Moon yielding a great light, as Axalla was
riding about to visit his Guards with two thousand Horse, he understood, that
the Enemy was kindling fires about that Trench. He soon perceived their intent,
therefore he gave orders to have all his Horsemen ready mounted. This could not
be so soon done, but the enemies were making a way through the Guards at the
passage. They assaulted them at first with two thousand Horse, who found the
Tartars for the most part a foot and unprovided, so that they easily ran over
them. But as they were advancing, they met with another Trench which had been
drawn in opposition to theirs. This stopped them a while and gave time and
leisure to the Tartars to arm and succor their Companions. Their enemies
wanted no courage to resist and assault them, for they won the Trenches, which
they labored with the assistance of some foot to level. In this place the
hurly burly was great, and the fight bloody, for the Infantry being suddenly
broken, could not easily rally, but were almost all cut in pieces. But as they
advanced further than they should have done they gave an occasion and time to
six thousand of Axalla's horse, who were upon Guard about half a mile distant,
to come in good time to charge them in disorder.

In this manner Camares passed over the first Trenches, and was advancing
forward to disingage his men, when Axalla came in suddenly to him with two or
three thousand horse, whom he had found ready, seeing therefore the danger of
his men he charged without dispute, the enemy who was looking about for a way
to retreat with no intent to hazard a battle. Doubtless, they had escaped
through a passage, where they thought there had been no body, if they had not
met with six thousand men, whom Axalla had appointed to stop there. Cameres
attackt them in vain, he was driven back with loss, which caused him to try
another place lower with a purpose to fight his way through, if he could not
break through otherwise. When he saw himself pursued so close at the heels by
Axalla, with seven thousand Parthian horse and Stradiots, he faced about with
twelve or thirteen thousand men that he had yet left, and then like a furious
beast in despair, he fell upon Axalla's party. In this moment of time he showed
his wisdom and courage, and received the enemies charge without losing much
ground. At the second charge Axalla's horse was killed under him with a Lance,
but he was as soon mounted again, had it not been for the coming in of Damacen,
whom he expected, and who had orders to follow him with eight or ten thousand
fresh horse, he had been forced to a retreat. When this party came in they
found Axalla's men broken, though they yet obstinately held out against the
furious enemy. But the coming of these fresh Troops, routed and utterly
defeated them. When Camares saw unto what necessity he was driven, he
endeavored to rally all his broken Army, and to make way through his enemies,
but in this last attempt, he was killed in the fight performing actions worthy
of an immortal Name. All this was done in the night by the light of the Moon.
The Prince of Tanais was then in the Camp to guard it. The next day the
Emperor himself arrived, where the battle was fought, when he saw the number
of the slain, he could not sufficiently praise Axalla for his wisdom, care,
and carriage, but he would not pardon the unworthiness, the negligence, and
slothfulness of those Captains, that were then upon the Guard, who had been
surprised unawares. He caused two to be examined and tried, they were found
guilty, and punished according to the Law of Arms.

The Inhabitants of Archiecho had received into their Town, five or six
thousand of the sad remains of the Persian Army, but when they saw the rest
defeated, and Camares head they had no courage to withstand or make resistance,
they desired therefore Articles.

The Emperor granted them peace upon condition, that those Soldiers, that
were within their Walls, should not return to Tauris, but to any other place
whither they desired to go. They entreated leave to march to Lovain, and
promised to perform whatsoever the Inhabitants of Tauris should agree to. This
misfortune of Camares astonished them all, they could not but wonder that he
had shut himself up. If he had had, as they thought, more discretion, he had
easily found work for the Enemy a while, and doubtless in a retreat he might
have met with an opportunity to fall upon the Tartars with advantage. At that
instant the Emperor caused his Army to decamp, and went to lodge at eight
leagues from Tauris. The body of the Army was at Sederva, and the Van at Chiara.

As soon as Axalla had appeared with his Vanguard, before the Walls of Tauris.
The whole City was full of fears, but much more when Tamerlan had sent in a
Trumpeter with a message. They were then in their Town house. The faction of
Guines, though the weakest began to lift up their heads, when they saw the
contrary party troubled, requiring earnestly that the Emperors commands might
be obeyed. When they saw the others wavering they seized upon one of the Gates
of Tauris, resolved to let in Tamerlan with his Army, for they trusted in his
generosity and good disposition. But that we may better understand in what
trouble these people were in, we must know that as soon as they heard that
Tamerlan was upon their borders, they chose Talismahar for their Prince, who
before had been but their General. They swore to him to die rather a thousand
deaths than to yield to the Empire of the Tartars, or to hearken to any
accommodation, when they saw how all things were changed, they repented of
their former resolution, and of the choice they had made so unconstant are the
minds of the common people. They were so much the more dissatisfied with
Talismahar, because before he had declared that he was strong enough, not only
to withstand the Tartarians, but also to drive them again into their Country.
Now all these promises seemed to be but vain, on the contrary they saw the
enemies Army victorious and full of many sorts of people, Camares and his men
lately overthrown, and the Tartars drawing near their Walls to block them up
and punish them, if they offered to resist. They knew also that the Emperor
had sent them word that if they would submit to him, he would deal with them
kindly, and not suffer the Army to approach nearer than four leagues of their
City. Their Priests were the most obstinate to hold out, for fear of being
constrained to submit to the reformation of Guines. But his superstitions began
to appear less frightful to these Inhabitants. They commonly said to one
another: Shall we for fear of that which may chance never to happen, run
headlong into our certain ruin? Shall we be any longer cozened with the
promises of our new Prince, who has been defeated? Have we not heard of the
plundering of Cairo, and of the many Towns which Tamerlan has conquered? Who
knows whither he will force us to be under Guines? Whither he will not rather
choose to keep us in his own hands, that we may watch over that ambitious
Prince, whose wicked designs, he perceive^^ cloak'd with an appearance of
Devotion and counterfeit Piety? Let us free our selves from these fears by a
bold resolution. Let us acknowledge him for our Lord, who is the greatest of
all men, and is best able to maintain us in Peace and Plenty.

These discourses were openly spoken amongst the people, and the chief men were
not against this resolution, though they found themselves able to hold out a
siege of three months and more, but they knew at last that they should be
forced to yield, for to expect Tamerlans Death, a young and lusty Prince, was a
folly which they could not entertain. Therefore they concluded that the only
means to save themselves was to submit to him. Axalla, who was the nearest to
the City, was informed of the things that happened there, by his spies, he was
careful to let the Emperor know all. He thought it not expedient to be too
hasty in this juncture, whiles so many differing passions disturbed the
Inhabitants of Tanais, because they would oblige them to surrender and yield up
their City. When the faction of Guines saw the Citizens irresolution, they sent
Deputies to Tamerlan to understand his pleasure, and know what he would grant
them. This faction was scarce the sixth part of the Inhabitants, but a body
politic, as well as physic, cannot be wounded in one of its members, but the
whole must suffer an alteration, division in a politic body is a gangrene,
which increases continually and devours the soundest part. When Talismahar
understood of this deputation, which had been without his privity, he knew not
what remedy to apply to the public distemper.

He saw a powerful enemy at the Gates, a great division in the City, he was
loath to increase and anger it, and cause a general revolt by the punishment of
the guilty. He chose rather with patience to withdraw himself, and observe at a
distance how affairs would be transacted. It concerned the faction of Guines
not to stop where they had begun, therefore they concluded with the Emperor,
though of themselves they could not make up above thirty thousand men in case
of need, but the Prince had promised them all the assistance that they should
want. So that when the Deputies were returned back, they proclaimed every where
his mildness and goodness, that he intended not to do any wrong to the City,
and that he desired but a submission from the Inhabitants, and that the new
Prince should be yielded up to him. They said moreover, that tho some
fantastical Fools had elected him, they would not, to please their humor, lose
and destroy such a flourishing City, and so many brave men. When the tumult
increased by little and little, the chief Inhabitants were persuaded in their
assembly to send for the Deputies of the faction of Guines, to hear from their
mouth, what the Emperor had spoken to them. They came with a great Train of
their followers, and declared publicly, that the Emperor had assured them
that he would not injure their persons or goods. That he would preserve their
City in all its privileges, in case they would own him for their Prince, and
forsake him whom they had lately elected, and his party. As soon as these words
were spoken every one cried out, Let the Emperor live, and let them perish,
who will not acknowledge him. The tumult increased and became so violent, that
neither the Senators nor the other Magistrates, nor the fear of the Soldiers
were able to hinder it from spreading all over the City. Talismahar was fled
into his Palace, and had it not been for some that desired him to stay within,
and not meddle with public business, he would have employed his Authority to
stop the Tumult. But then he found his own weakness, and took a resolution to
depart out of the City into the Mountains. The Emperor was well informed of
all th^^se proceedings by Axalla, who went to acquaint him with his resolution,
if he had approved of it, to take Talismahar in his retreat. After a serious
consideration the Emperor chose rather to suffer him to depart, and take
Tauris without blood shed, than to draw upon himself the ^^atred of the chief
Inhabitants by the overthrow ^^nd Captivity of their late Prince. Therefore he
commanded Axalla to let him escape, and suffer^^d him not that day to send his
Troops abroad. That the Citizens of Tauris might have more con^^dence in him,
when they saw him deal so mildly ^^nd lovingly with his Enemies.

The next night Talismahar departed out of Tau^^is with some of his party,
after he had governed as (...) Prince fifteen days, and as a General eight and
^^wenty years with a continual prosperity. He had ^^appily apposed and resisted
the Tyranny and ^^uperstition of Guines. And he might have yet ^^efended
himself from Tamerlan, had it not been ^^r Camares's overthrow and surprisal in
a narrow ^^ace, without Walls or Infantry. There is no ^^tion of our humane
life, which requires a greater precaution and foresight than War, and yet
events are very uncertain, and all things are hazardous. If Camares had
continued in Tauris, and had not misemployed the forces that he led away, that
Town had been able to withstand Tamerlan above six months. And in so long a
time there might chance some misfortune or alteration in so large an Empire, as
that of this great Monarch, besides the most numerous Armies are ruined with
long Sieges, Tamerlan's was tired out with a tedious march and continual
labor. And the nearness of their own Country, from whence the Soldiers had
been absent so long, would have obliged many and tempted them to disband and
forsake their Colors, But the Princes good fortune had ordered matter^^
otherwise, and the destiny of Tauris was that i^^ should acknowledge another
Lord without bloodshed. The new Prince Talismahar lately elected had doubtless
many worthy qualities, and was mo^^ deserving of this Principality than Guines.

At last all the City of Tauris agreed together, t^^ send Deputies to the
Emperor to entreat him (...) grant them eight days of respite, to treat with
(...) Majesty about yielding up of that City into (...) hands, and the
conditions. He made no dif^^culty to grant this request. The Inhabitants h^^
desired this time, that they might find a way (...) to fall under the command
of Guines, for they we^^ afraid, that he would force upon them his
supers^^tion, and the reformation of their Prophets La^^ Their Deputies were
sent, and carried with the^^ th^^se Articles, which they requested of Tamer^^^*
First, they entreated his Imperial Majesty to g^^ them a Governor of his own
people, such a (...) as he thought most fit, promising him all obedience, as
the faithful Subjects of his Majesty, upon condition that they might not be
separated from his Majesty's Empire, nor be forced to yield to any other
Prince, particularly Guines. This Article pleased the Emperor well, though he
had suffered Guines to expect, that he would give him the government of that
Commonwealth. Secondly, they requested, that they might be maintained in the
enjoyment of all their privileges, as true Subjects of the Tartarian Empire,
under which they desired to live and die, and belong to the successors of
Tamerlan, and not to the Empire of Persia. The third related to the Tribute,
which they were willing to pay, but entreated his Majesty to moderate the taxes
in regard of the continual Wars, which they had maintained against Guines, in
defense of their own liberties.

The Emperor after the hearing of these requests granted them freely, and his
design was to prevent all future mischiefs and divisions amongst these people,
he enacted that every one should enjoy a freedom to embrace what Religion he
liked best, whither that which was according to Guines's Rule, or the pure Law
of Mahomet, or according to Haly's interpretation. And that the Jews and
Christians likewise should have full liberty to profess their Religions, as
they had formerly.

All things being thus ordered, they submitted to the Prince, and the very next
day three hundred of the chiefest Citizens, in the name of the other
Inhabitants took the Oath of Allegiance.

The Emperor was desirous to make his Entry into the City, for that purpose,
he sent before him Axalla, with five thousand horse and thirty thousand foot,
to provide all things needful. The Inhabitants put all the fortifications into
his hands, he took possession of the Gates of the Town, and caused all the Arms
of the Citizens to be brought, and that without noise, for the people were
persuaded that they should live in peace, under a Prince able to keep them in
peace, and defend them against all enemies. When all things were ready, the
Emperor arrived with much Pomp, and attended upon by all his Courtiers. He was
received with great applause, and adored by every one.

Tamerlan was not a little joyful to have gained so great a City to his Empire
without bloodshed, but the next day, the sad news of his Unkles decease dashed
all his joys. The Empress sent him word, that his Death had occasioned some
stirs in the Empire, but she had crushed them, by the taking and imprisonment
of the chief Authors. This loss afflicted him, but not so much as if he had not
prepared to receive it. Had it not been for the great care of the Empress, the
Old Man in his painful and tedious sickness had been carried away by Death long
before. Tamerlan wisely suppressed his grief as well as the news, and would not
suffer it to fly abroad in his Army for fear of any new motions: But he pitched
upon Prince Axalla, in whom he placed his greatest confidence, to send him to
the Empress to help her with his good advice, and assist her as Lieutenant
General, with a large Commission and Power, for he was well beloved by, and had
a great Authority with the Soldiers. This faithful Servant left the Army and
set forward with thirty thousand horse, publishing every where, that the
Emperor followed him at the heels. But he staid sometime behind to secure his
interest there, and frustrate as much as he could the intentions and designs
of Guines, upon that Country.

Axalla, who hated all hypocrites, caused Tamerlan to be persuaded, that this
devout Knave aimed at the Monarchy of Persia. He wished him therefore to weaken
as much as he could that man's faction. The Emperor was always inclinable to
believe that Guines was a very real and honest man, whatever was told him by
others, therefore he could never be obliged to ruin or cross his affairs. This
Indulgence and too great credulity, proved hurtful to the Princes Posterity,
for while he was alive, Guines kept himself within the bounds of moderation,
but after his decease, he published abroad his ambitious intent. This is an
excellent Lesson for the greatest Monarchs, who commonly look no farther than
the time present, and are content with the submissions and outward homages
which their virtue and reputation draw from such as stand in awe of them. They
neglect to look into the time to come, and endeavor to secure for their
posterity, things that Death is going to take from them. In truth the ruin of
this faction of Guines, settled peace in the Kingdoms of Persia, and caused
Tamerlans successors to enjoy it a long while.

This subtle man had won the Chancellor, and some of the chief of the
Emperors Council, by persuading them, that his manner of serving God was the
most agreeable with the Law of the Prophet. Tamerlan had no intent to imitate
it, but he would not contradi^^ it. He sent for some of the most learned
persons in the Law to reconcile the differences. At last when much time had
been spent in vain, and he saw that the reconciliation was impossible, and that
every one held to that interpretation which he fancied best he never attempted
it any more. After this conference about Religion, he caused the Persians to
take the ^^ath of Allegiance. He paid off his army, and rewarded every man
according to his deservings. He gave the Government of Persia to the Prince of
Tanais to command there, as his Viceroy, and left him b^^sides, the Troops
appointed for the guarding of the Province one hundred thousand foot, with
orders to send them abroad to Winter in the Towns, as well to refresh his
Soldiers as to oblige, by that means the whole Country to continue faithful to
him. He led with him the rest of his Troops and Prisoners, for he had given a
great many to Guines, to instruct them in his Religion, but this Hypocrite
trained them up in War, and after Tamerlans death, used them with success to
further his affairs in Persia. The Prince had Guines then with him, he labored
to persuade him, that his desire to have Rule, aimed at nothing, but the
advancement of the Prophets Religion. Tamerlan pretended to believe him, yet
nevertheless Guines, a cra^^ty man, perceived that the Emperor suspected and
understood him. But to remove out of his mind this Jealousy of his person, he
followed and attended upon him every where, with great care and diligence. He
saw that his absence could in no case injury his affairs, and that the
Tartarians would furnish him with ways and methods to succeed in his purposes.

The Emperor persuaded also many great Lords of Persia to undertake with him a
Journey to Samar^^^d. He was glad of their Companies, that he might draw them
from their homes and cure them of their fierceness and haughty spirits, which
made them look upon themselves, as so many petty Princes and Kings. He was
willing that they should see his Court in all its glory, his Pomp and
Magnificence, and by his mildness and kind dealing, oblige them to continue
faithful to his interest: this wrought so much upon them, that whiles he lived
all Persia was obedient to him, and furnished a great many good Soldiers to
fight under his banners, and people out of its bosom to secure Syria, and the
Sultans Country.

Tamerlan therefore having left the Prince of Tanais to govern Persia in his
absence, he departed with his Troops toward Sachetay. This march of the Army
was much like a Triumph: The prisoners went before, and amongst them was
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor, who was chained for fear that he should offer
violence to himself. This was an instance of the Worlds unconstancy, but his
misfortune had neither made him milder, nor more tractable. In his lowest
misery, he abated nothing of his pride and haughty mind. All the people of the
Country, through which Tamerlan passed, sung forth his praises, and loaded him
with Prayers and Blessings for his Victories. At last he arrived at Samarcand
with all the riches and spoils, and was received in a most glorious manner.
Near two months were spent in feastings, plays, and all manner of public
rejoycings. The Emperor then called to mind a Vow that he had made, to build a
most glorious Temple with an Hospital. Accordingly he now laid the foundations,
and Dedicated it to the Only Immutable and Incomprehensible GOD. And for the
better carrying on of the work, he had sent for all the able Artists, to employ
them in building this Temple and Hospital, and in other glorious structures for
the embellishing of this great City, for he had an intent to enlarge Samarcand
and to render it as big again as it was before, for that purpose, he had marked
out the streets, and caused ground to be given to such as desired to build, and
if persons, were poor and not able, he delivered to them out of his Exchequer
moneys to carry on their work. He gave liberty to all prisoners, that would
dwell in the City, and settle their abode, and granted large privileges to all
the Citizens. And though he spent much time in ordering the affairs of this new
City, he neglected not to manage and preserve the affections of his Soldiers.
He had caused all the names of the worthiest of them, who had behaved
themselves well, to be recorded, which Records he now called for, and, when
they expected no such matter, he gave them gifts and things answerable to their
behavior and services, and promoted some to employments, suitable to their
Capacities and Talents.

Whiles he staid at Samarcand, the Auxilliary Troops of the Moscovites were
refreshing themselves. Afterward he dismissed them with their full Wages, and
desired them to return his thanks to their Prince. Sinopes, a Nephew of Prince
Axalla, was ordered to conduct them through the Emperors Country, that they
might not be disorderly, and to renew the Alliance with the Great Duke, that he
might be secure of the borders of Pa^^thia, whiles he should be further at a
distance. At this time Tamerlan discovered in his privy Council the old
Emperors death. He caused his obsequies to be performed in the most glorious
manner, answerable to his Unkles deservings and grandeur. He spent eight days
in these funeral Ceremonies, and afterward left Bajazet in the keeping of the
Governor of Sachetay at Samarcand, to go and visit the Empress his Wife. But
as his greatest desire was to live in Peace and Union with his Neighbors and
Allies, and to preserve the Countries, that he had conquered, he thought fit
for that purpose to send N^^bazes one of his most understanding Ministers to
continue with the Prince of Tanais, and assist him with advice either in War or
for the suppression of the Cabals, which might rise to disquiet his Government
and Kingdom, or about the borders, and to help him to carry on the Emperors
interest and designs. During his absence nothing had happened amiss, but he
charged Nobazes to have a special care, to cause order and discipline to be
observed amongst his Soldiers as the best means to make them capable of the
services he expected from them.

The Emperor departed for Quinzay with all the Court, and his ordinary guard
of forty thousand horse and threescore thousand foot. After several days march,
he arrived through the acclamations and public rejoycings of all the people at
C^^mbalu, where he received the news of a battle won by Odmar, from one of the
Generals of the King of China. He gave him an account by letters, that in
pursuance of the Victory, he had taken three or four great Cities of that
Kingdom. So that the King had been forced to sue for peace the second time,
Odmar desired therefore instructions upon what conditions he should grant him
peace.

The Emperor sent him these conditions, which he should require. That the King
of China should pay him all the arrears of the Tribute of the former years,
unto which he was engaged by the first peace. That he should be obliged to come
to him and render him homage, as a vassal of the Empire. That whiles he should
be in the way the Army should depart. That all the Towns taken in this last War
should be restored, three only excepted at the Emperors choice. That for all
other things, they should be reduced to the same condition as they were before
this last breaking out, and that upon this condition, he should pay the
Emperors Army six months with all the charges of this War, which he had
kindled of his own accord.

The Emperor at the same time considered how to reward Odmar for his services,
he imagined no better way, than to promote him to the honor of his Alliance,
by giving him his own Sister in Marriage. He sent her therefore with a stately
equipage and Train. So great a token of his respects and love he conceived,
would engage him the more, to be true, faithful, and careful, for his Princes
interest and person, and the good of his Empire. It is not to be imagined with
what state and in what glory Tamerlan was welcomed into Cambalu; for the
Inhabitants of this great City, to take away from him the remembrance of their
former rebellion, endeavored, beyond all others, to express their zeal and
affection for him. The Prince was so well pleased with them, that he restored
all their privileges, which had been taken from them during Calix's revolt.
Every where when he passed by, there was nothing heard but Prayers and
Blessings from all the people, and thankful expressions from himself, for he
labored to win the hearts of his Subjects of this great Empire, which was
fallen into his hands. Not only the Towns and Cities did ring with applauses,
and shouts of joy, but also the Country round about were glad to see him well
and safely returned, when he passed by the Herds, these are certain Families,
that have no settled abode, but wander up and down the fields, when they are
weary in one place, they travel to another, and always stop where they meet
with most grass for their Cattle.

The Empress came to Cambalu to meet the Emperor, having left behind Axalla at
Quinzay, to command in her absence. And because this great City is nearest to
mount Althay, where the Scythian Emperors called Great Chams, are usually
interred from this City. The Emperor caused the Corpse of his deceased Uncle to
be carried with all the Pomp and State imaginable. He himself followed the
Hearse; and though it is not usual to see women in such occasions, he desired
(to express more honor to her Father) that the Empress should accompany the
body with him; they walked together. This he did, to give a greater authority
to the Empress in the Eyes of the World, that in case God should take him away,
before their Children were at Age* she might be thought worthy to govern the
Empire during their minority, as he himself judged her, by all the public
signs, that he could give in all occasions. The Prince was so much taken with
her behavior and virtuous carriage, that he would not love any other women,
nor suffer his affections to wander up and down upon meaner objects. Here he
had fixed his mind, here he had confined his desires and appetite. He looked
with contempt upon all other, neither their beauty, nor the charms of Wit, nor
the amorous inclinations of the female Sex, could prevail upon his inflexible
soul, and oblige him to that variety of amors, in which men of his Religion
and Elevation commonly indulge themselves. For as he was naturally very chaste,
he intended no other thing by his Marriage, but to have Children to perpetuate
his Name and Family, and succeed him in the Empire.

As soon as the funeral Ceremonies were over, and the Emperors Corpse laid in
the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, he returned to Cambalu, spending the Winter in
Races, in Tilts, and hunting all manner of Beasts. He had pi^^ched upon that
City, as nearest to China, from whence he desired to hear News often, intending
to go thither the following Summer, if necessity required, for he was resolved
to take care to preserve what he had Conquered there by his valor and good
Fortune, and to enjoy the fruits of his Labors. He was likewise busy in
perfecting the buildings, that he had begun at Samarcand, and in completing
them as soon as he could.

In the mean while, Axalla dwelt at Quinzay, well beloved of the Soldiers and
Inhabitants. They had an affection for him, because of his Mildness,
Liberality, Courage, Justice, and other admirable qualities. They all knew what
credit he had with the Emperor. Therefore they made their address to him, to
entreat him, to persuade the Emperor that they might have the advantage to see
him in their City, and to choose it, for to bring up the Prince his Son. At his
request the Emperor granted them their desire, appointing Axalla to govern him
with all the Country of Quinzay, as far as the Sea, beyond Cambalu, which
contains above four hundred Leagues, and more than three hundred Cities, with
an infinite number of Towns and Villages. This was properly the Empire of his
deceased Uncle. He made Axalla Lieutenant General under the Prince his Son, and
made him likewise the Governor of his person, so great a Confidence he had in
his Virtue, Fidelity, and Abilities. In this manner he rewarded him, for his
notable Services, and for the great Victories that he had got for him, by his
Virtue, Experience, and Courage. He looked upon him therefore as most able to
teach his Son, the Art of Keeping and Governing those many Nations, which
Axalla had helped to Conquer.

CHAP. VII. Cairo relieved with Provisions and Soldiers, when besieged by the
Sultan. His overthrow and Death. The Emperors Journey to Quinzay. The
Settlement of his affairs in China.
WHiles the Emperor was ordering his affairs at Cambalu, news was brought him,
that the Sultan had besieged Cairo three months with a powerful Army, and that
the Inhabitants of that great City, were so far from favoring his designs,
that they were very zealous and courageous in their defense for Tamerlans
interest. For that purpose, he had placed there a great many strangers.

Without this precaution, doubtless in this juncture, there had been many
Seditions and Plots for the betraying of the City, because Calibes had not then
forces enough to oblige the Sultan to raise his Siege without other assistance.
But in regard this business was of the greatest consequence for the Empires
preservation, he sent to the Prince of Tanais, Viceroy of Persia to send him a
party. This Prince was always desirous to purchase glory, and ready to obey
his Emperors orders, who had commanded him to assist his neighbor in time of
need. He gathered up therefore his dispersed Troops, old Soldiers, Parthians,
and Tartars, to the Number of about one hundred thousand, who had accompanied
the Emperor in all his Battles and Victories. They were desirous of Axalla's
presence, but next to him they thought none was better able to command them
than the Prince of Tanais, the Emperors Cosen German, who had been trained up
under Axalla; for in all the greatest difficulties and dangers, where Axalla
had gained so much honor, this Prince had accompanied and learned from him the
uneasy and hazardous Trade of War. In which he had in the Judgments of all
men, profited so much, that Axalla and he were looked upon, as the two Eyes of
the Empire and Tamerlan the Head, they were the^^ore seated at the two most
dangerous extremities of this great body, one in Syria, the other in Quinzay.

With this considerable body of an Army, unto which were added some Troops of
the great Chamberlain, which were at Babylon, the Prince of Tanais marched into
Syria toward Aleppo, where he met with Calibes, and found that he had got
together two hundred thousand good Soldiers. The Sultan was not ignorant, that
this Army was drawing to him, which had formerly overthrown him, but he
conceived some hopes, because Tamerlan was not there in person, nor his good
fortune, which always accompanied him; and because he was to fight with a
young Prince full of life and courage, whose too greedy desire of honor might
oblige him to undertake things too hastily or unadvisedly. He resolved
therefore to be wary, and by his late misfortune, to learn not to hazard a
battle in plain ground, but to wait for his enemies behind his Trenches. For
that intent he drew his Trenches along the River of Nilus; for only by that
way the City expected to be relieved; for it was not probable that so many
mouths could be supplied with necessaries, by Carts, or Camels, or by any other
carriage by Land. Therefore he dug his Trenches with ease, because the
Prince with his Army marched but softly. His most judicious Commanders advised
him not to approach too near the Town, till the provisions were ready to be
carried in. For that purpose the Prince of Tanais and Calibes had sent
Purveyours round about Syria, and upon the Sea Coast, and about the Islands of
Greece, to make provisions of Corn, w^^ was to be carried to Alexandria, and
from thence to Cairo. All their orders had been punctually executed.

In the mean while, the army was coming on, which as soon as the enemy
perceived upon the banks of Nilus, where the Sultan lay with his Soldiers on
both sides, with a bridge of Boats stretched over the River, he withdrew
himself into his fortifications. When the Prince was in sight of Cairo, he
found that the enemy could not incompass about all the Walls, that were too
large, but left a passage free to go in or out of the City. He went therefore
in, carrying with him several Carts and Beasts laden with provisions, which he
distributed by his Commissaries into all places that wanted.

By this he understood, that they had all things sufficient for fifteen days.
A Council of War was then called, where it was resolved that they should
endeavor to famish the Sultan, by cutting off his provisions, which he drew
from three or four Towns, which had yielded to him again, and solicited him to
besiege Cairo, assuring him, that it was to be taken with the Engine of Hunger.
For this purpose, whiles things and necessaries were providing at Alexandria,
to be sent to Cairo, whiles a Fleet of Ships of War were making ready to fight
with the Sultans Fleet, he posted himself above Cairo, and sent a Summons to
the Inhabitants of Maviare, commanding them to yield to the Emperor of Asia
his Master, threatening Fire and Sword, if they offered to resist* Their
refusal, caused the Army to besiege them, and with all speed to make their
approaches, there was a Tower very strong, that hindered the Tartars
proceedings, for from thence the besieged cast upon them artificial fires and
killed a great many men. The chief Engenier went to view this Tower, and
offered the Prince of Tanais to undermine it in four days, which accordingly
was performed. When the Tower was down they searched the Wall which was found
but weak and unable to resist the violence of the Engines, which soon cast a
great part to the ground. This encouraged the Tartars to assault the Town. They
won and plundered it, and put all to the Sword, except Women and Children. The
other Towns, terrified with this speedy expedition, seeing no likelihood of
succors to be expected from the Sultan, were yielded up at the first Summons
and admitted to composition. The Prince of Tanais placed in these Towns,
between two and three thousand horse and four thousand foot. He judged next,
that he was to lose no time, but with all speed relieve Cairo, for fear it
should be ^^educed to necessity with his Army. He saw that the Sultan, as a
judicious Commander, had so ordered his affairs, as either to cause him to
perish for want, or to render his attempts vain. The Governor of the Towns
lately taken, might have held out longer, as they were able and had promised
the Sultan, who had furnished them with all that they had required. A delay of
fifteen days had forced Tanais to forsake Cairo and the best part of Egypt.
The Sultan was not totally discouraged, though he had reason to be troubled at
this infidelity, and want of resolution. He sent for his Commissaries of
Provisions to know what he had in store, from them he understood that he had
enough for thirty days. He drove away from his army all useless and idle
persons, setting the^^ on the other side of the River, there to shift for
themselves and ly at his enemies mercy, such as were not to be useful to him in
the fight. He had news of the coming of the naval Army from Alexandria, which
caused him to provide betimes to oppose it.

In the mean time, the Prince of Tanais encamped with his Army beneath Ethied
and Sebeis near a River, which was a stream or a branch of Nilus, and was
fordable in diverse places. But the Sultan was with his Army at Buldao, whe^^ he
had strongly entrenched himself near the River on both sides of it. His Army
containe^^ threescore thousand foot, and forty thousand horse, the only remains
of his former unhappy Troop^^ He had caused them to expect the retaking of
Cairo, which would probably have opened him a way for the recovering of his
Kingdom. But when all passages in the upper Egypt were stopped and nothing
came to them from thence, they began then to despair of success. The Sultan
labour^^ to prevent all discontents, which might from hence arise, by assuring
his Soldiers, that in fifteen days for the most, the Tartarian Army would be
constrained to depart for want of Provisions, and that then the City would be
forced to yield for hunger. This persuasion caused them to abide still in their
Trenches without attempting any thing, for their chiefest care was to provide
for their own security near the River. They had a great number of armed boats
all over the River to stop the coming of any relief to the City. When the
Prince of Tanais saw that the enemy was so strongly fortified in his Trenches,
that it was not possibly to force him without running the hazard of a
misfortune, he employed his men in making another Trench, and other
fortifications for his own Camp, like that of the Enemies. For it is against
all policy and prudence, to stand with a naked Army near and against an enemies
Army well entrenched. The Tartarians were three times stronger than the Sultan,
both in horse and foot, but they were obliged for their safety to continue,
thus encamped near them, because they waited and expected the coming of
Calibes, who was with the Fleet, with an intention to carry in Provisions into
Cairo. And the Prince of Tanais was to assist him by Land, whiles he should
endeavor to make his way by water to the City.

Every day some parties went out to skirmish with the Enemies, to oblige them
to keep closer together in their Camp, and to understand the best place for to
assault it, when the time should serve. At last the Prince of Tanais had news
of the coming of Calibes, who desired him to send him twelve thousand of his
Army, and imbark them privately, at a rendevouz unknown to the enemy, for
Calibes trusted not too much upon the Troops, which he had picked up at
Alexandria, and because he intended to fight in person upon the River, to open
away for his Ships, or to perish in the attempt, he was resolved to have such
persons to assist him, whom he knew to be brave and resolute men. The Prince of
Tanais could have wished that Calibes had yielded to him the honor of
commanding the Fleet, but all his Captains represented to him, that it belonged
to him to choose, because he was in his own Government, and that the chiefest
and fiercest action was likely to be at Land. That doubtless, the Sultan would
send men aboard his Ships to help them, that in this case the Trenches would be
less guarded, and more easy to be taken; for the two Armies were but two
thousand paces from one another. And that in all likelihood the day would not
pass without an encounter at Land.

The Prince of Tanais desired it with passion, as a young Hero passionate to
win honor: But to qualify this natural heat within him, the Emperor had
placed near his person two great Lords, to keep in his courage and not suffer
it to run headlong, but to advise him and lead on the Soldiers, who were
accustomed to Tamerlans good fortune, and ready to attempt the greatest
difficulties, and overcome the most apparent dangers. ^^anais sent therefore
thirteen or fourteen thousand of his stoutest Soldiers to Calibes, under the
command of Sinopes, Axalla's nephew, Major General of the Infantry, or rather
Axalla's Lieutenant, who had that office all over the Empire, and when the
Emperor himself commanded in chief. Sinopes was a man of a great reputation,
having much improved himself in Axalla's tuition. When the Prince of Tanais
judged that the Fleet was at hand, near the Enemies Bridge fortified and
strengthened with Chains and Ropes, he caused all his horse to be ready, and
drew up his Infantry, sending forty thousand men to a place, that he had taken
notice of, less guarded than the rest. For the Enemies seeing him encamped
between them and the City, they imagined that the greatest assault would be
there, therefore they provided that side accordingly. They had neglected to
fortify a little Hill, which was of a great advantage to the party that should
have the command of it. Therefore the Prince of Tanais sent this day to assault
and take it. He had employed his men upon the water only to deceive the Sultan,
for after the taking of the Hill, he marched forward to the second Trenches, as
if it had been his design to assault and force them also, but it was only to
cause the Sultan to look that way, for he thought the whole Army had been
there, he prepared therefore for to defend himself on that side.

Whiles the Tartarian Army by Land, was thus at handy-blows with the enemy,
their Naval forces broke in upon the Boats, after a small resistance overthrew
them, before they could receive any help. For in the beginning of the dispute
the Tartars perceived that there was an Island in the River, where the Sultan
had raised a battery to shoot against them, they assaulted and carried it,
forcing their enemies to retreat into their Trenches* by this means they lost
the advantage of this place* which was fit to defend their bridge against the
Tartarian Navy. Next to the Island they assaulted the bridge, but at the first
onset, Calibes was sunk and drowned, and his party in disorder and discouraged,
but Sinopes, who commanded under him, growing more desperate by this loss,
renewed the fight with a greater resolution, and utterly broke the bridge,
setting the Fire to it with a Boat full of Wildfire. This courage of Sinopes
forced Victory to declare for him, and opened a passage for the Navy to the
City in view of the Enemies, who could no longer hinder or stop it, for the
Fleet lying under the Island, and some Engines that were placed upon the Land
shot into the Camp, so that they could not lift up nor show their heads.

This loss of Calibes was much lamented, for he was a man that had rendered
great services to the Emperor, who loved him well and trusted him. His body
was sought for amongst many others that perished in the Waters, but none could
distinguish it.

It was thought that twenty thousand men died on both sides that day, for few
escaped of Calibes left Wing. Sinopes gained much honor and reputation, by his
good conduct and undaunted courage. This action gave a beginning to his
preferment: It deserved to be well rewarded, for there was no possibility of
relieving the City, but by that way, for being in great want and so large, many
convoys had been required to furnish it, with Provisions till the succeeding
harvest, unto which there was then three months.

Afterward Sinopes encamped in the Island with some of the Army, to hinder the
enemies passage over the River. Nevertheless, for all his watchfulness, the
next night being very dark, they passed over to the other bank undiscovered, in
order to their retreat, which every one imagined would not be by Land, for they
had no Towns on that side, nor intelligence in Cairo nor Alexandria, every
thing was changed against them. So that had they resolved to go that way, they
must first have overthrown the Tartarian Army, which was too difficult a Task
for them. They were therefore obliged to pass over the River, and retreat that
way, for only on that side they had yet a Town that held for them. In the mean
while, the Prince of Tanais had always a watchful eye upon the Sultan and his
designs. But he was as much troubled what to do. In case the enemies after
their passage over the River, had obstinately hovered about Cairo. He had been
then constrained to remain there also, and so numerous an Army had famished
that great City, which had Provisions but for eight days. It was resolved in
Council, that the Army should decamp, as soon as possible, seeing that the City
had been relieved. They thought that the enemies Army being less in number, and
better provided with Provisions, would stay upon the place a longer time. It
was therefore concluded that the Army should be divided into two bodies, and
should attend on the further bank, and the hither side, and that Sinopes should
stay in the Island, to favor all the Convoys and Ships of Provision, intended
to sail to Cairo, and hinder the enemies attempts upon them. This resolution
was taken and kept very secret. But when the enemies had spent all their
Provisions, they sought to retreat as well as the Tartars, which they
endeavored to perform in the night. All the Boats and Ships, which they had
near the banks they made ready to go aboard, but the Eve before they seemed to
resolve to march into Syria, for that purpose, they sent out of their Trenches
some parties to assault the most advanced Guards, as if they had intended to
open a passage that way, by force of Arms.

Whiles this is doing, a great part of their Army were ready at the Rivers side
to go over. In the beginning of the night Fires were discovered more than
ordinary upon the bank, and most part of their Army was carried over. Sinopes
could never hinder them, for the nights obscurity helped them in their retreat.
The Sultan passed over first, leaving behind him his Lieutenant General to keep
the Camp with all his Infantry.

As soon as the day appeared, it was known that a part of their Army was on the
other side. The Prince of Tanais was willing to attack those that were left
behind in the Camp, but the oldest and most experienced Captains were not of
his opinion. They said that it was no easy matter to face threescore thousand
men in strong Trenches. And that it would be more wisdom to send a supply of
men and Engines to Sinopes, to strengthen him, that he might stop the passage
of such as would afterward venture to go over. Nevertheless, it was resolved,
that when the remainder should endeavor to follow after their Companions and
their Prince, that then the Tartarian Army should break into their Camp, and
charge them in their retreat.

The Sultan, seeing that his passage had been successful, sent word to the
remainder of his army to adventure over the night following, and that as many
as could should get aboard. And to encourage his men the more and hasten them,
he passed over again himself to them, for he knew nothing of the supply of men,
which Sinopes had received from the Land Army. As soon as Sinopes saw the
enemies he charged them desperately without delay. The Sultan himself was
wounded in performing the duty of a great Captain, he passed over the water
with a great number of his men to join with the other party. In this dispute,
the Sultan lost a great many men and some Boats were sunk, only twenty thousand
were remaining behind in their Camp, without any hopes of retreat to their
Prince. The Tartars assaulted and won their next Trenches, but the innermost
were so well fortified and guarded that the Commanders thought it no wisdom to
venture upon them, but rather to stay where they were than to hazard all upon
an uncertainty. They encamped therefore within the Trenches, in expectation of
that which they were to have by reason and the rules of War, sooner than by
force. Which happened accordingly, for as soon as the enemies saw themselves
penned up, and not able to look about, by reason of the Tartars approaches, they
sent to desire to parl^^y with them, which was granted. They sent to the Prince
of Tanais a Parthian Officer, who had a long time served under him, but being
left behind sick and taken by the Sultan, he entered himself in his service.
After some demonstrations of his strength, this Prince had made him Major
General of his Infantry. He desired to speak with the Prince of Tanais. He told
him that he had been sent with his Comrades from the Troops, which he besieged,
to entreat him to show them mercy, and not to spill any more humane blood, but
without it to accept of the Victory, which they offered into his hands upon the
conditions that he should propose. As the Prince of Tanais was visiting the
Trenches he heard the offer of this Colonel with Joy.

He gave them liberty upon this condition, that, for the time to come, they
should be Subjects and Slaves to the Emperor, and serve him in his Wars
wheresoever they should be commanded. All which they promised to perform. Some
were commissioned by the Prince of Tanais to receive their Oath. Only the
Lieutenant Geneneral of the Sultan, and some other Captains departed in a Ship
the night before, to follow after their Master.

This Prince, as we have taken notice, was wounded at the passage of the River,
which caused him to retreat with his Cavalry twenty leagues, to a place that
belonged to him yet. As soon as he was arrived, he died of his wounds, to the
great sorrow of his followers. The Prince of Tanais, who, as soon as he could,
pursued him, entered into this place, named Palema, a few days after his
death, and finding that he was not buried, shed Tears for his unhappy end,
commanding that he should be interred according to his Quality, and received
very courteously all his Servants. He had left behind him a Son, who had
carried with him all that would not yield to the Emperor. They fled to the
borders of Lybia, into certain Towns of a difficult access, because of the
Wilderness that lies in the way to them. There these poor men lived in hopes to
be revenged of the Tartars, and one day to restore their broken and ruined
fortunes.

In this manner ended this last War with the Mamelu^^ks. The Emperor was so
troubled at it, that he once resolved to march thither himhimself, but the news
of the Victory, and of the Sultans death hindered him. The Prince of Tanais was
mightily applauded for his prudent conduct, but Calibes's unhappy death dashed
all the Emperors joy. He was so worthy a man, that he could not be
sufficiently lamented, chiefly by Tamerlan, who lost in him a faithful servant
and and a Great Captain.

The Prince of Tanais had his Offices and Government bestowed upon him, with
order to make his ordinary abode in Syria and Egypt, to watch and look over
them, and keep those Provinces in peace. Sinopes was made Major General of the
Imperial army, which was commanded to return into Persia, under the leading of
the great Chamberlain, who came to the Army at the close of the War, with a
considerable body of men. For it was Tamerlans custom to cause one Army to
march after another, toward the places that wanted assistance. This happy
success of his Lieutenants showed how much it concerns a Prince to dwell in the
midst of his Dominions, that he might with more ease, and more speedily send
forth his succors to defend any part or Corner.

The King of China was then at the Emperors Court, to wait upon him, according
to the Articles of agreement concluded with him, which he confirmed in the
Princes presence, and swore obedience, and did him homage. The Emperor
endeavored to render himself dreadful to this Heathen King, who never kept his
promises, but when he pleased by showing him his strong Towns well furnished
with people. He was astonished to see so many men clothed so simply, chiefly
the Emperor, that wore nothing but a garment of colored Cloth, without any
Ornament. He took notice also, that all his attendants and Officers about him
looked as so many Kings by their Majestic contenances and behavior. Whiles he
was at the Court, news came of the Victory obtained upon the Sultan, he was eye
witness of the public rejoycings, which lasted eight days, spent in sports,
feasting, and other divertisements, after that he returned to his own Country.
The Emperor gave order next to distribute double pay to his Army, which was
returning out of Egypt into Persia, with the Great Chamberlain and Sinopes
Major General. Afterward he went to Quinzay, to see his Son, and satisfy the
impatient wishes of this great City, that desired passionately to enjoy him.
His presence was also needful to regulate all affairs, as he had done in other
places. Axalla had no mind to be too busy, because he had to do with a
numerous people, inclinable to commotions. He was therefore afraid so far to
concern himself as to give Tamerlan a disgust, or cause the people to murmur.
Therefore he often spoke it, that the ordering of the public affairs was a
great business, which none was capable of, but the Emperor. For the intent of
Tamerlan was to appoint the same Laws every where in his great Empire, to
command the use of the same Weights and Measures, that the same Tributes should
be settled in all parts, according to each man's ability, resolving as soon as
his Incomes were regulated, that he would make provision of Victuals, which
should be carried from place to place, according as his Army should need. He
was wont to compare an Army with the humane body, saying that the Captains were
to be looked upon as the head, the Soldiers as the feet and hands. Money was
the strength and the spirits, which keeps this body in motion, and food as the
belly from whence it was entertained.

Therefore he said, that when an Army can represent a perfect man, in all
respects, it is invincible, because it fights when it pleases, and may choose
whether it will hazard any thing, but upon good terms. When an Army miscarries,
this proceeds from some imperfection in the body, which may be lame or wounded,
or from the starved belly or the diseased head. Therefore when he sent the
Prince of Tanais against the Sultan, he was afraid of the head, and of the
belly of his Army. For the Prince was but young, and his men unfurnished with
necessary provisions* for he was wont a year before hand, when he intended to
make War, to gather up stores of food and fill up his Magazins, now this year
they had neglected this piece of policy, his victory therefore he ascribed to
his good fortune, which was loath to forsake him, rather than to the Wisdom of
his young General.

When the Emperor was near Q^^inzay, Axalla went out to meet him at two days
journey from the City, with the greatest Lords of the Country and the chief
Citizens, whiles the rest were making ready to welcome him in the most
magnificent manner, that they were able. This City is one of the richest in the
world, and one of the largest, very well situated upon small Islands or
Channels, cut from one end to the other, with stately buildings, and a great
many bridges for the convenience of the Inhabitants. It is a place of so great
Trade, that there comes to it continually all sorts of Goods, Stuffs, Precious
Stones, and chiefly spices. Tamerlan at his first arrival was presented with
the richest things of the City: They were valued above two Millions of Gold, to
not reckon many other rare things, which were given him, as tokens of their
subjection to him, and affection for him.

He seemed to be very desirous to see his Son, who was then but about seven
years old. He was brought up with much state, and with the care answerable to
his Quality. When he was first brought to him, he took notice that his head was
carefully covered, but he commanded that they should keep it uncovered, because
as he said, He that is called by his birth to govern Nations ought to use
himself to heat and cold, and to painful exercise, and not to indulge himself
in an effeminate life. Some told him that the Child was but tender, what
replied the Emperor will you make him a Woman? If he be not able to endure the
troubles and inconveniences of War, he is not worthy to succeed me, for there
must be no dainty and soft Prince to keep up the Empire of the Parthians. He
had sent the Empress to Samarcand, to be there brought to bed, she was received
with all the honors due to her Dignity, and the affection that the people
could express. This was the first time of her visiting of this City.

A little after, the Emperor had news brought him, that she was safely
delivered of her second Son, which he published abroad and seemed to rejoice at
it, appointing Tilts and magnificent Sports to express his gladness for several
days. In this time, nothing but feastings and public divertisements were seen
in all parts. The Emperor himself took a great delight in such pastimes,
because it gave him an opportunity to show the agility of his body, and his
dexterity to his Court and people, for he was judged the more worthy to command
them, the more he excelled in such like exercises.

After a months abode in Quinzay, and after he had visited the maritine Towns
near adjoining, he went to Samarcande traveling softly, for in the Road he
employed himself in hunting all sorts of beasts, and yet in the mean while took
a great care to provide for the safety of the Empire, for it was his usual
saying, that Pleasures and Sports were to him, as Wings to lift him up and ease
him from the Labors, which God had put upon him for the preservation of his
Subjects in peace.

The Inhabitants of Quinzay had so sincere a Love for him, that when he called
them together to oblige them to receive and submit to his new Laws, they made
no difficulty to yield to him, but embraced them with as much respect and
devotion, as if they had been commanded by God himself, for their reverence and
affection for his person made them submit. Whiles he continued in the City, the
most part of the people were employed in looking upon him, as the chief object
of their affections. Some of his Courtiers took notice of it, particularly
Axalla. Therefore they told him, that this City was worthy of his constant
abode. Not at all, replied the Emperor, if they did always see me, they would
quickly despise me, for it is a Maxim of State, that the Sovereign of this
great City, must not come to it oftener than once in ten years, and then he must
act as if he were upon a Theater in view of all the World, he must act a
serious and grave person, because the Inhabitants are naturally apt to be
disgusted with their Prince. He ought therefore, if he will be esteemed, to
seek to give them the best impression that he can.

Before his leaving of Quinzay, he sent with all speed Prince Axalla toward
China, with a Commission to examine, and end some differences between Odmar and
the King of that Country, that he might be able by his Wisdom to compose
them, and give him a just account at his return: As he had a great affection
for his faithful servants, he longed to see Odmar with him who had been absent
many years. He desired him to take the time of Axalla's abode in those parts.
The Emperor was resolved not to leave Cambalu, till after Axalla's return from
China. This was a very pleasing, and an honorable Commission to be sent into
those parts, where his courage was so well known and fresh in the remembrance
of all the Inhabitants, by his late noble exploits, but he was overjoyed to go
thither that he might do service to Odmar, his intimate friend: Tamerlan had an
excellent maxim, but contrary to that of most Princes, he labored to keep all
his Servants at Unity, and recommended to them love to one another, and
faithfulness in his service. The chief cause, that obliged the Emperor to send
Axalla into China, was to put a period to a dispute between that King and Odmar
about the restitution of a place, which had been promised to the King. There
seemed to be some personal differences between them. So that Axalla was judged
as the most pleasing person to this King to terminate this affair, because of
his mildness and courteous behavior.

When Axalla was upon the borders, he met with Prince Odmar waiting for him,
who received him with great Pomp and State, and feasted him three days.

After this he gave him an account of the public affairs, and departed to the
Court to see Tamerlan. But Axalla went to Pekin, where he was welcomed by the
Governor in that manner, that becomed the second person of the Empire. Axalla
gathered his Soldiers together and with the Army, he marched to Parchio upon
the borders of both Empires, as had been agreed upon before with the King of
China, but in his way passed by Quanton, that strong and populous Town, which
he had taken in three months contrary to the expectation of the whole Army,
and of the Emperor himself, who judged that it would have held out at least
six months. The Report of his coming caused a great multitude of people to
meet and welcome him, for every one could have desired him instead of Odmar,
because his way of dealing was so amicable, and his v^^rtues so much esteemed
of all the World. The Emperor, one of the wisest Princes of his time, saw
plainly that Odmar was not so fit to govern those Provinces, that he was too
grave and reserved, and not flexible, but that Axalla was of a contrary
disposition, that he had the gift to please all sorts of humors, and therefore
that he would be more grateful to these people. But Axalla could not be spared
from other places, where his presence were more needful, for he looked upon him
as the only person of his Empire, upon whom he could trust the whole concern of
his Kingdoms in case any accident or a disease should disenable, and take him
from the public management of affairs. From Quanton Axalla marched directly to
the appointed rendevouz* whither the King of China was going. When he had
advanced about fifty leagues into the Country lately conquered by Odmar, he
thought he should wrong the Majesty of his Emperor, whose person he did then
represent, by proceeding any farther to meet this Heathenish Prince, and that
it did more become him, to oblige him to come to him there, than to advance
into the Country, which had been restored to this King by the last Treaty, and
for which he paid Tamerlan a considerable Tribute.

When the King was arrived with all his Court to a little Town, at a league
distant from Porchio, he went out into a large Field where Axalla met him, with
more attendants than he had. He gave place to Axalla, and respected him as much
as if he had been the Emperor. Three times they met to confer together, for
the King of China insisted always upon the rendition of a Town, which the
Emperor had granted him, but Odmar refused to yield it, because it was a
strong place of importance. At last he seemed to be content with another,
farther in his Country, than the former, which stood in the midst of the
Tartarian dominions.

Axalla the judge of this controversy put him in possession of the latter,
because he perceived that the King had no sinister design, and that all his aim
was, but to have a place, where he might divert himself and take his pleasure.
But Odmar, an old Jealous pate, having been often deceived by this unconstant
Prince, had a contrary opinion of him, for he thought that he desired that
place, but to plot and contrive new designs to disturb the State. He had
sufficiently punished him for the last commotion, when the Emperor was in
Persia, for by one battle he won from him five and twen^^y or thirty Towns, and
above fourscore leagues of good land. So that Quinancifu was yielded up to him,
according to his desire. This Town he seemed to like better than the other, for
it is situate upon a River, at the entry of a beautiful Lake, which surrounds
it, and is full of many little Islands, where many stately houses were built
for the pleasure of the former Kings of China, who after preferred this abode
to their glorious Palaces in their great Cities.

The last meeting was under a rich Canopy, which Axalla caused to be erected:
The King of China came to him with the chief Officers of his Court. After some
disputes, this agreement was concluded; that the King should have liberty to
dwell in Quinancy, as often and as long as he pleased, but should not put in it
any Garrison or fortify it, that he should live in it as a private person, or
a Subject to the Emperor. That he might have three hundred men to guard him,
but that he should have no other mark of Sovereignty, but with the consent of
the Governor for the Emperor. That he should be obliged every time, that he
intended to go to Quinancy to give notice of it to the Governor, and that
before he set foot upon any of his Imperial Majesty's Lands. That he should
nevertheless, enjoy all the Lordship of the City, without any molestation from
the Emperors Officers. This Heathen King accepted these offers in such a
manner as discovered plainly, that all his engagements, promises, and oaths,
would not hinder him from a rebellion, nor from an endeavor to sieze upon that
pleasant abode, if an opportunity were offered to him, that he might shut
himself up in that City, the rest of his days, for he had an intent to give
over the Kingdom to one of his Brothers, because he was weary to suffer the
Tartarian bondage. In this particular, he showed the signs of a noble courage,
which deserves a better name than that of a barbarian or a heathen, usually
given to all his people, who are nevertheless, lovers of Learning and Civility.
As soon as Prince Axalla had dispatched these weighty affairs, he sent news to
the Emperor, to understand how well he would like his actions, and know when
he should return. In expectation of an answer he visited all the places newly
Conquered in China.

Tamerlans custom was to remove often the Governors of Cities and Provinces,
and to promote such as had well behaved themselves to better employments, or
more honorable and more profitable Governments: Odmar, being very old and
sickly, and therefore not fit to be upon the borders of an Empire, where the
Governor ought to be always in action, he resolved to keep with him, to
assist him with his good counsels, and the rather, because Odmar was not well
beloved by the People or the Soldiers. He purposed therefore to send in his
stead the Great Chamberlain, a young and brave noble man, of a strong and
healthy body, more likely to please his Soldiers, and new Subjects than the
other, and better able to undergo all the labors and troubles, which such an
employment at such a distance would require from him, for these reasons, he
would not suffer Odmar to return thither, but for Axalla, he had orders to come
back speedily. He was once thinking to send thither the Prince of Vauchefu in
Odmars place, that he might by that means reward him, for all the notable
services that he had received from him in so many occasions in his Armies, but
when he considered, that the Parthians are not obedient to strangers, and that
such a proceeding would give him an absolute command in his own Country, and
expose his faithfulness to a strong Temptation, he kept him near his person,
for some other employment.

He had not forgotten also the brother of this Lord, who had been useful to him
in his Armies, Tamerlan had no need of recommendations or solicita^^ions, to
oblige him to recompense his faithful Servants. He always kept in mind every
one that had well behaved himself in some brave action. Many times, when they
never thought upon any such matter, he would send for them, to place them
amongst his Counselors, or give them a Government or an Office. No body was
so bold as to ask these things from him, for he knew for certain, that those
that bribe these honors and advantages, will never behave themselves in them
for the Princes good or the benefit of the Subjects, but only to gratify
their own Ambition and Covetousness, for this cause he was wont to change his
Governors often, that their Governments might not become hereditary to their
Posterity. Those, whom he thus removed, were not thereby displeased, nor did
they think, that it was a token of the Emperors anger, for it was a rare
thing, if when he had thus removed a Governor, he did not bestow upon him
another, or some employment in his family. But when he pitched upon a man to
attend upon him, or command in his Armies, every one looked upon this choice,
to be the highest honor and promotion, for all over the Empire, that man was
obeyed as the Emperor himself. I have, says Albacent, seen in the beginning
of his Reign two Men, chosen in this manner, afterward four, at last he
increased them to seven, who were as the seven Pillars of this large Empire.
For the Prince trusted all his greatest and most weighty affairs in their
hands. They were obliged to give an account of their actions only to him and at
such times only, when they were called together to advise about the great
affairs of Peace and War. These were the things that could be asked from him,
which he would grant without scruple, Gold, Silver, Movables, Houses, Lands,
and other such things, which were not of such concernment, as to belong to the
public management of his Empire.

To end this digression, and return to Cambalu, where the Emperor was with
Odmar and Axalla, we must know, that the former being grown heavy, by the
number of his years, and unfit for action, whispered to him nothing but Peace,
and wished him to settle the affairs of his Empire. But the latter was desirous
of War and Battles, an enemy of rest. He discoursed to him of nothing but of
new expeditions and conquests. This furious passion made him wish heartily,
that the Prince would honor him, with an employment suitable to his temper and
inclinations, and to bestow upon Odmar a Government in a peaceable Country far
from the borders. In regard Odmar was related to the Emperor, Axalla judged
him the fittest person, because of his Age, Wisdom, and Experience in all
affairs, to be Governor of the young Prince brought up at Quinzay, for he
would be able to keep the people with ease in obedience. But this change could
not come but from the Emperors own inclination. No person was so bold, as to
presume to motion it to him. But providence favored Axalla's wishes by giving
him this opportunity to discover his mind.

The Idleness and Wantonness, which the General Peace all over the Empire had
begot, caused some troubles and mutinies in the Army, which was as the soul of
the Empire, and the terror of the whole World, for the Cheiftains had been
careless and negligent to keep the Soldiers in order. The irregularity was so
great, that the ancient discipline was slighted, and the Soldiers grown
insolent in regard of their late services and victories, refused to perform
their duties, or mutinied whenever they had a desire. They called in a
threatening manner, for the Emperor himself to command them in person.

When he heard first of these disorders, he was not a little troubled. Must he
to gratify a handful of Mutiniers, forsake that rest and quiet, which he
desires to enjoy for the few years that he has to live in the World? Must he
now expose himself and undergo new labors and pains, which he has endured so
long, and by which he has with the hazard of his Life settled the whole World
in Peace? In this unquietness of his mind, he sent for Odmar and Axalla to
advise with them. Axalla without delay endeavored to persuade the Emperor to
go to his Army, and leave the management of affairs at home to Odmars Wisdom
and Conduct. Now Tamerlan had begun to relish in the Cities a sweetness and
pleasure differing from that life, which men lead in the midst of Soldiers,
and the disturbances and dangers of War, though the latter had been formerly
more pleasing to him. This made him loath to engage himself afresh in such
perils and such an unquiet life. He was more desirous to enjoy in peace the
fruits of his Valor and Courage. And the rather, because he was then about
fifty years of Age: an Age that called upon him to see to preserve and secure
what he had purchased by his Victories. At last he turned himself toward
Axalla with these words, I should be esteemed ungrateful to Odmar for all his
good and faithful Services, if in his Old age, I did not contrive a way to
settle him in peace the rest of his days. The advice, that you have given me
in relation to him, I accept, and shall follow it. I consent therefore, that
Odmar take the Government of my Son, and of all the Country of Quinzay and
Cambalu, and that he end there his days peaceably in my service. But I intend
to reside in Sachetay, that I might be nearer Persia, where I will have my Army
incamp, unto which I shall add thirty thousand horse more, that it may be able
to keep the Country from Rebelling. But for you, I will have you go and command
it in person, I look upon you as the only man of my Empire best able to perform
the duties of this Office with credit, not only because the Soldiers have an
affection for you, but because I have always seen you careful to observe the
discipline of War. I trust my whole Empire in your hands by trusting you with
mine Army, which only is able to keep quiet so many large Provinces, and so
many Nations differing in manners, language, and customs, which you have
helped to subdue. I will take care, that nothing shall be wanting to this Army,
and that the clearest and most certain part of my Revenues shall be appointed
to pay them, and to reward those whom you shall judge worthy: I would have you
take a great care to oblige the Troops, to observe the Parthian discipline
without alteration. Let them lodge always in the Camp in the open Field. You
shall change this Camp every three months. Let them buy all necessaries
themselves and pay for them, without wronging any body, and let those that
shall break these orders be punished severely, I would have also my Army be
encamped in Persia, because the people are there more inclinable to rebellion
than elsewhere, and not so willing to obey, and because Syria i^^ near
adjoining. The Army therefore, will be sooner ready to carry a remedy to the
troubles that may arise in those parts.

After this discourse to Axalla, the Emperor told Odmar, that by putting as he
did, his Son into his hands, he did put his dearest treasure, and the chief of
all his Riches, and gave him the command of the two thirds of his Empire. That
he could not show him a greater assurance of being well satisfied with his
former services, than by delivering unto him this precious Pawn. That he should
command in Chief in his richest Provinces, where the people should honor and
respect him as himself. That all things were quiet and in peace, and fit for
his weakness and years. He sent also for his Chancellor, who was not present,
when these things were concluded. He commanded him to cause two Commissions to
be drawn, one for Odmar to be Governor of his Eldest Son, and his Viceroy in
all the Country of Quinzay, and Cambalu, as far as the Sea, and the Mountains
bordering upon China; and another for Axalla to be Lieutenant General of his
Army, with an express command to every Province, where it was to march, to obey
him as himself.

The news of this Commission, given to Prince Axalla, being noised abroad every
where as far as the Camp, made the Soldiers and Captains rejoice in an
extraordinary manner. Every one was glad of it, not only because of the worth
and deservings of the General, but also because of the good turns and
expressions of his affection, which he had given to every one. Chiefly Sinopes,
was overjoyed to hear this pleasing news, because he was related to Axalla, and
had been promoted by him to the chiefest Commands of the Army. Odmar was left
at Cambalu, to prepare for his Journey to Quinzay, and was mightily glad of his
employment. The Emperor gave him Instructions, how he should behave himself in
his Government, for the public good. He commanded him, that as soon as the
Young Prince his Son should attain to ten years of Age, that he should bring
him up in business, and that he should acquaint him with all affairs, that he
might learn betimes to do service to his Country; but before that Age, he would
not suffer him to know any thing of business, but that he should live as
Children of his Age. He was called Came Sentrochio or Tajochien, which word in
the Parthian tongue signifies, the Love of Men. This Name had been given him by
the Old Emperor his Grandfather in his Fathers absence. And this Name was not
improper, for he was mighty well beloved, chiefly in the Province of his
Nativity, from whence his Father could never take him, to carry him to
Samarcande, where the Empress his Mother lived, for the Inhabitants of Quinzay
imagined that if they lost the sight of him they should lose all. Therefore the
Emperor, was willing to gratify so extraordinary an affection, and their
earnest entreaties, to leave him at Quinzay.

When Tamerlan had settled all his affairs, he took the way to Samercande, where
he intended to make his constant abode, and to enrich and embellish this place
of his Nativity, that it might be worthy of his successors, and that there
they might constantly dwell. The Prince was grown solitary, for his inclination
to devotion had inclined him to a melancholy temper. He was so much delighted
with contemplation, and was weaned so much from the disturbances of Courts and
Armies, that some think that he would have forsaken the society of men, had not
a Principle of honor, and the interest of his Family retained him: He was
therefore, so far from thinking upon any new expedition, that all his thoughts
were employed how to keep what he had Conquered, for he was afraid of the
unconstancy of Fortune, that had always smiled upon him. He knew that her
frowns are not to be avoided, if men are not contented with the favors that
she has bestowed upon them, but still press her for more, and weary her by
their importunities. But we must not ascribe to Fortune alone, all the
happiness and the continual successes of Tamerlan, but to God, to the Great God
of Hos^^s, for whom he had a great respect and reverence. Therefore God
favored all his designs, gave victory to his Armies, and defeated all his
enemies.

In the mean while, Axalla was glad of his Commission, was busy in reducing
the Imperial Army to that posture that the Emperor desired. For this purpose,
he gathered together all the Old Soldiers, who had been disbanded, and who had
been too long at rest in his judgment, with them he formed a new Militia. He
sent toward Moscovy, to take from the Frontiers, some Troops of horse for his
own Guard, for he knew their faithfulness and courage! He marched some days in
the way with the Emperor, discoursing with him about the concerns of his Army.
And to that which he proposed to the Prince, he either diminished or added what
he judged convenient, for without flattery one may very safely say, that no
man, was more skilful in affairs of War than Tamerlan. Axalla was esteemed next
to him, best able to contrive or execute in the same manner, and as punctually
as the Prince was wont to do great designs.

The Emperor in his march was very slow, that all his attendants, who were
many in number might follow him, and because of a great deal of baggage and
carriages. Axalla only was weary of this slow pace, he longed to be at
Samarcande, where he was to enter into his office. So that when the Prince, who
loved hunting, because it is an image, of War, and an exercise that prepares
the body for greater labors, was desirous to stay in any place fit for this
sport, Axalla endeavored to draw him from it as much as he could toward
Samarcand. Tamerlan arrived thither about the end of the Summer.

The Empress had been brought to bed, and was up again. The whole City for the
birth of this young Prince, and for the safe arrival of the Emperor was full
of sports, plays, and other divertisements, which were again renewed at the
Child's Circumcision. But Axalla endeavored to lose no time, he solicited the
Emperor and his Ministers to furnish him with his Instructions, for in the
greatest times of pleasures the Emperor had his hours, which he spent in the
public affairs, from which nothing could take him off. When all things were
ready, Axalla took his leave of his Imperial Majesty, to go to the Camp. He had
with him twenty thousand horse, most young men of the Court, for the Emperor
desired these young blades to be brought up rather in the exercise of Arms,
than in the pleasures of a Town. It was his custom not to promote any to an
employment, till after he had been actually in Arms. Those persons only
excepted, who attended upon him.

About his time the Emperor received news, from the Prince of Tanais,
Governor of Syria and Egypt, that all things were quiet in his Provinces,
which gave him a great content. He took then a delight to embellish his City of
Samarcande, and chiefly in building a most glorious Temple, which he named the
Temple of Solomon; and appointed it to be his own and his Successors Tomb.

He caused the chief spoils, which he had taken from his enemies to be hung up
in it, and caused the several battles that he had won, and the Nations that he
had conquered to be engraven for Posterity to view. (And as he said) for to
acknowledge to his great God, the favors that he had received from him. He had
with him a great many Christians, skilful in several Arts and Sciences, whom he
had brought from all places, where he had been with his Armies, or who had been
recommended to him for their skill. For them he built a Temple and called it by
the Name of Jesus Christ the Son of God. Axalla, and many others of the same
Religion, were the best and chiefest Soldiers of his Army, for the Prince had
confidence in them. He trusted them as much as his natural Subjects, and more
than the most of the zealous followers of Mahomet. He had given orders, all
over his Empire, that Christians should have free liberty to exercise their
Religion, and that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, should be honored and
reverenced by all the World. The Christian devotions were performed every day
in the Army, without molestation or hindrance. And the Emperor had in his
dominions many Countries where the Inhabitants were all Christians. He gave
orders that they should have liberty to profess their own Religion, and be in
as much esteem and favor as those of the Mohammedan profession, because, as he
said, they worshipped but one only God, and that they denied all pluralities as
well as himself. He hated all Idolaters in such a manner, that wherever he went
he pulled down their Idols, he enslaved their persons, and commanded them to be
esteemed so. He could not have a greater joy than when any of his own or the
Christian Religion discoursed to him of holy principles and precepts. When
their lives were without vainglory he esteemed them the more. When they were
not like certain hypocrites, who had nothing but an outward sanctity, by which
they endeavored to surprise the minds of the people and to get an esteem
amongst men. He wondered most at the relation that was given him of men, who of
their own accord have forsaken the World, for Jesus Christ's sake, to live only
upon dry meats and without taste, in loansome Deserts, denying to themselves
all the pleasures of life, to embrace that which they judged to be most
pleasing to God. When he heard of the strange persecutions, which Christians
suffered under the Heathen Emperors, he was grieved, and this grief stirred up
in him an inward affection for those that were of that Religion.

So that this great Prince had in him two good qualities, which caused him to
be well beloved by all the World, Piety and Justice. Three times every week, he
executed Justice to his Subjects in the City of Samarcande, seating himself in
his Throne with a Majesty well becoming the Monarch of the greatest part of the
World: But all this glory, in which he appeared, hindered him not from valuing
the case of the poor and despicable, more than that of the rich. Other days
were designed to sit in Council with his chief Ministers, to consider of his
weighty affairs of State. In that place no person could be so bold as to
disguise the Truth, or to act or speak passionately without hazarding his
Princes displeasure. In this occasion, he showed not that indulgence, which he
expressed in all other occasions and actions of his life.

In this manner, he caused himself to be dreaded and beloved of all his
Subjects, and chiefly of his Domestics, whom he never put out of their
employments, but when he was thereunto forced by some ill behavior or relapses
in wickedness, which could not well be pardoned. He never dismissed those who
had served the Emperor his Uncle, but retained them all in his service and
increased their wages, to remove or quallifie in some respects, the displeasure
they had conceived for so great a loss. He bestowed great gifts upon strangers
to win their affections, and use them in times of need. This wise and judicious
dealing was not unknown to many great men of the Moscovites Court and Council,
who were the better every year for the Tribute, which their Master sent in
moneys to the Emperor. For he scarce kept any part of it for himself, but gave
it to them, that he might oblige them the more to be his Creatures, and send
him intelligence of any thing that related to his interest. He was so punctual
and exact in his Revenues, that those, who had the management of them, were
obliged to give him an account every three months. In an hour he viewed over
the Receipts and Expenses of his large Empire. He had a great respect for his
Super-Intendant or Lord Treasurer, for he was a man of noted integrity, free
from bribes or corruption. He received his orders from the Princes one mouth at
every moment. He had orders to pay off the Pensions of the Princes, and chief
Officers of the Crown without leaving this business to under Agents: Such
persons were to satisfy meaner Officers, and pay off the other expenses of the
Empire. But of all these payments the chief Treasurer was to be answerable in
his own person, and of all the misdemeanors of his underlings.

Therefore this Employment, was very dangerous in this Empire. Two were put to
death by the Executioner, because they had not preferred the Princes interest to
their own private benefit. Now the Revenues of the Emperor were not certain,
for he increased or diminished them according as need required.

After the death of the last Emperor, he caused all the current Coin to be
Stamped with his own Image, prohibiting all other of any former impression.
When he was at Samarcande, he reformed many things in his Incomes. The report
went about that he was resolved to make a great stock of moneys, but no man
knew the cause. He was naturally very liberal, which gained him the hearts of
all the World. When he had passed over a day without bestowing some Gift, he
commonly said that he had spent it in vain. By giving, he said, Men became like
God, whose Gifts never any body refused.

But to return to Axalla. As soon as he was in the Army, he caused all the Old
Orders to be renewed and published, which the Emperor observed, when he was
with them. They had been neglected every where through the Chieftains fault,
who, to destroy the ancient discipline, had brought in foreign customs not
fit to be observed by the Parthians and Tartarians. When therefore he had
called together all the Chief Commanders and other Officers, he represented to
them the disorders entreating them to endeavor with him a reformation, to
bring all things to their first State, and re-establish the ancient discipline,
which obliged them to be confined within their Camp, and there to cause their
Soldiers to subsist, who were grown heavy and idle by their abode in Cities
and Garrisons, whereas in the Camp the Soldier is used to work, every one in
his turn to strengthen their fortifications. For which purpose, there were
always in the Imperial Armies thirty thousand men appointed. To avoid all
confusion in the receiving of orders, amongst the Infantry, he gave an under
Officer to every ten Soldiers, which Officer was to be governed by another,
who was over one hundred men: And he was to be commanded by a Colonel, who had
a thousand, and he by another Superior Officer, who had ten thousand under him:
but all were to be governed by the Major General. Amongst the Cavalry there was
this Order, one hundred horse men were commanded by a Captain, who was under a
Colonel that was to be over a thousand, and he to be under a Superior Officer,
that commanded ten thousand. So that orders were to be distributed all over the
Camp, by the several Officers from the General. That he might better establish
this order, he mustered all his Army, and settled it in that manner. It
contained threescore thousand foot, commanded by six chief Colonels under the
General, and forty thousand horse with four chief Officers. Amongst them were a
thousand light horse named Stradiots. Besides these, the General had his
particular Guards to wait upon his person, they were in number two thousand
horse and four thousand foot. This was the condition of the Army styled
Imperial, the others had not that name. That which was in Syria was composed of
twenty thousand horse and forty thousand foot. That of China had the same
number, and that about Cambalu were as many. There were two others, one upon
the borders of Moscovy, and the other toward the Chersonessus, each containing
the same number of men. These inferior Armies were not to keep the Field, but
when need required, but the Imperial Army was one entire in one Body, governed
as we have said before, and able to strengthen the others, and assist them in
case of need.

Axalla, who could by no means endure idleness, employed all his care to settle
in good order the Army under his Command, and endeavored to find out all the
Engines of War, and Artillery used by Christians with so much success, as well
to attack as to defend Cities and Towns. In these arts he endeavored to be
skilful, and for that purpose, he made use of the Jews. For by their Trade in
all parts, they brought to him all the new Inventions, that they could meet
with in foreign Countries to communicate them to others, to whom they were
unknown. That which pleased him most was the Invention of Guns, which a Grecian
brought him, after the death of Andronicus with Powder, which he tried in the
presence of all the Army to their great astonishment, for they could not
imagine how it came to pass, that it should have so great a power and strength.
The advantages expected from it, caused the Emperor to be at a great expense,
to purchase some from Christians, and to fetch persons out of Europe, that
could make Gunpowder and cast Canon, and other pieces of Artillery. In the
Tartarian Army before this they had certain Engines able to cast great stones
or other shot with an incredible swiftness, but that was not to be compared to
great Guns and Powder. The Emperor commanded that the honor of bringing in
this new Invention should be ascribed to Prince Axalla, and caused it to be
recorded in the History of his time, for a remembrance of this great service,
which he had rendered him by this Invention for the glory and increase of his
Empire. The Emperor was not ungrateful to him, for he gave him above a million
of yearly Rent besides other gifts. Odmar had almost as much. And the Revenues
of the Prince of Tanais were very great. I shall not mention the pensions of
many other persons, who were rewarded beyond their deservings.

The meanest Soldier, that showed himself courageous by some noted action, was
sure of a recompense, which encouraged all the rest to behave themselves well,
and opened a way for him to rise to the highest Dignities of the Empire. In
this manner honors and rewards were distributed equally according to every
man's merits. This Justice which Tamerlan religiously observed was like a Chain,
that bound together all the several parts of the Empire, so that they were
thereby kept from falling asunder, and united against all assaults and attempts.

As soon as War was kindled it was speedily extinguished, because every one
brought his helping hand to stop the progress. There was an admirable order
established in all the new Conquests, that the people could not easily rebel.
But when any revolt happened against all expectation and precaution, the severe
punishment of the first offenders frighted the rest into a peaceable compliance.

By this means, through the courage and wise conduct of the Prince, this Empire
was become the greatest and most flourishing of the whole World, and was
doubtless at its highest pitch and growth.

Tamerlan was become heavy by the number of his years. His Children were
advancing in age, and all men began to adore the rising Suns, but the Emperors
affection for them, hindered him from being Jealous or displeased for the
extraordinary respects paid to their persons. He was afraid that after his
decease, indiscretion, flattery, or wicked Counsels, would separate and divide
their hearts with the Empire, which he delivered to them in peace. This fear
made him often sigh and wish for a third Son, that he might be able to
reconcile the two others together, when they shall be divided as it happens
often in great families.

This foresight of the time to come, proved to be well grounded, for in a
moment this great Monarchy was overthrown, by the divisions and hatred of the
two brethren, who could never be reconciled. About this time news came of a
revolt at Babylon, but Prince Axalla's sudden appearance there stifled all
commotions in their beginning and returned to his Camp. A little after, he had
another occasion offered him, to express his valor; for Natolia, began to
revolt to the Turks with some of the neighboring Provinces. He sent to
Tamerlan to give him information and receive his orders to march thither with
his Army to pacify all troubles and settle the Country in peace.

CHAP. VIII. Callepin, Bajazet's Son promoted to the Empire, after his Fathers
death. His War with Tamerlan. He is defeated by Axalla. Tamerlan's sickness and
death.
AS soon as Bajazet had ended his days in the City of Samarcande, and the news
was brought to the Turks, they took his second Son named Callepin to advance
him upon his Fathers Throne. This promotion, together with the fair hopes, that
he gave of his person, had encouraged them to raise a powerful Army to retake
again Natolia, which they judged the easier to accomplish, because the
divisions of the Greek Emperors family would not suffer him to intermedle in
the War, for his Brothers were in Rebellion against him, and kept him so
employed, that he had no leisure to look abroad to the affairs of Asia. But
Axalla being informed of their designs, sent word to the Emperor to acquaint
him with all their proceedings. This attempt of the Turks was not only against
the Greek Empire, but also against Tamerlan, who saw himself obliged to prevent
the mischief intended. Democares was secretly employed to gather together
Soldiers in Persia, to send them to Callepin, with whom he purposed to join
with his party. Axalla could not well proceed, before he had the Emperors
orders in so weighty a business. He sent him word, that his Army was in as good
a condition, as could be expected and ready for action. And that he thought it
best to meet the enemy in his own Country, and not expect h^^s coming into
Persia: for all the frontiers were secure and in peace, but in Persia the
Inhabitants were unconstant and not well confirmed in their obedience.

He sent word also to the Emperor that Lichibanes the Governor of Natolia,
had taken away all his Soldiers out of Bursa, pulled down the fortifications,
because he was not able to keep it, and that he was retreated with all his
Cavalry and Infantry to the foot of the Mountains, which he had seized with a
resolution there to expect the orders of his Imperial Majesty with more men,
which he wonted, because in all the Provinces, there was no Town of any
strength to make a resistance against the enemy. When the Emperor heard all
these things, he called together his Council, where it was resolved that Prince
Axalla should without delay with his Army march into Natolia to join with
Lichibanes. That Odmar, with the forces of Quinzay and Cambalu, should go
thither through the borders of Moscovia, and Zerisanes should strengthen his
Army with twenty thousand horse. That an Ambassador should be dispatched to
the Prince of Moscovia, to desire the ten thousand horse, which he was obliged
by his Treaty of Peace to send in such like occasions to assist Tamerlan. That
the Prince of Tanais likewise should secure his Government, and take with him
all his horse to meet the Army at the rendevouz.

That in the mean while, the Governor of Babylon should raise twenty thousand
horse and fifty thousand foot in Persia, besides other levies should be made in
all other Provinces. That to hasten him the more, Commissions should be sent
him from the Emperor with Commissioners to choose proper and able men, some to
bear arms, others for the works and labors of the Camp: Orders were also sent
to all the chief Cities of the Empire, commanding the Magistrates to make
provisions of victuals and other necessaries, and convey them safe to the Army,
by men appointed for that purpose. Zamay also the Governor of Sachetay was
ordered to go with all speed to Deristan to receive all the Troops, that should
come thither with the provisions for the belly, and other necessaries for
Soldiers, and send them to the Army. The Emperor caused it to be raised
abroad, that he would be himself at the Head of his Army, and punish the Turks
for their bold attempts.

In the mean while, the Imperial Army was marching to the borders, increasing
daily by the accession of new Troops. Axalla their General was overjoyed to be
employed in this glorious expedition, he had secret orders to put a period to
this War, and not to expect the Emperors coming, who advanced toward the Army
with a slow pace, being retarded by the indisposition of his body tormented
with a disease. He was desirous that Axalla should put an end to this War; for
that purpose, he had given him the whole Command over so much of his Treasure
as was needful, as well as over the Army.

The Prince of Tanais, who had orders to secure his Government, and then to
join with Axalla, sent several parties of horse before him to the Imperial
Army, with ten thousand foot, which he took out of Tauris, and eight thousand
horse. They were commanded by a Lord named Abiran, a faithful Servant of the
Emperors, and Axalla's real Friend.

In his way through Armenia, he drew out of the Garrisons twenty thousand horse
to join them with the Imperial Army, which consisted then of fourscore thousand
horse and one hundred thousand foot. Tamerlan had as many more gathered out of
Moscovy and the province of Sachetay, but he could not in six months join with
Axalla, for he was so diseased, that he could not make more haste. There were
some fears amongst his Courtiers, that his distemper would increase and grow
more dangerous, and that it would oblige him to return to Samarcande, because
the pain, which he felt in his side, became every day worse and worse, so that
it tormented his body, and had taken away his stomach, by degrees he grew
feebler. None but his chief Officers and Domestics knew this, they were all
afraid of death, which was not to be avoided. A certain Astrologer had foretold
that immediately before his death, he should win a battle against all the East.
Another sent him word to take heed of the thirteenth day of the Moon and the
ninth month of the year. These predictions made the Emperor believe, that he
should die in a battle and not in his bed, but this thought of leaving the
World, did in no wise trouble him, but often would speak of his mortality, and
of the debt he owed to Nature. He was expecting every day Odmar, who was coming
to him with the Young Prince his Son, for as he said; he intended to present
him to the Army, and to show him those persons who were to serve him, as soon
as God should take him out of the World. But he was very desirous to embrace
him once more, before he gave up the Ghost, and send him afterward to the
Empress, his Mother, to Samarcande with Odmar. And though his disease was very
troublesome, he had taken a resolution if need required to go over the Bosphore
of Thracia, to Canstantinople and into Greece, to encourage his men by his
presence, to endeavor to cut off, and root out all that dangerous brood of
Turks and secure his interest by that means in his new Conquests from all
future invasion.

Whiles the Emperor staid for the Prince his Son with a great longing, Axalla
was busy in his Army, spurred on with an earnest desire of Glory. He was so
speedy, that he entered into Turcomaniae at the same time, as fifteen thousand
Georgians, strong and warlike men, overtook his Army. He marched to Gorga,
where the Governor of the Provinces met him to welcome him and receive from
him, the Orders that Axalla had to deliver to him in the Emperors name, but he
would not undertake any thing till the coming of the Prince of Tanais, for that
purpose, he made all speed possible with fifteen thousand horse and thirty
thousand foot, which he brought with him. As soon as he was come up with his
party to the Imperial Army, Axalla according to Tamerlans orders, gave the
Prince the command of the Vanguard. The Governor of the Country had the Rear.
He was a person well esteemed by the Emperor, because of his virtuous
disposition. His Government reached as far as Persia and Syria.

But that we may better understand this part of the History, we must take
notice, that as soon as Tamerlan had conquered all Natolia, he gave a great
part of it back to the Greek Emperor upon condition, that he should pay as a
Tribute every year four hundred thousand Ducats of Gold, and eight hundred
thousands Livers of Silver. Axalla sent therefore to this Prince to acquaint
him with his coming to Gorga, where he gathered all the Troops together, which
Tamerlan sent from all parts to make up the body of an Army, which he himself
was in his march to command to do him the same good Offices, which he had
formerly done to his Father, therefore he entreated him to reconcile the
differences of his own family to prevent a foreign evil, which increased
visibly to the eye, and which would cast him into the same inconveniency as his
Father was before him, if he did not remedy it betimes. He sent to advise him,
that if he did not quench the domestic dissentions and troubles of his family,
he would but give an advantage to his mortal enemy, who would become stronger
through his weakness and troubles. This seasonable and wholesome advice, made
no impression upon the minds of this Prince or of his Brothers. They had shared
the Empire amongst themselves, and were at variance about their portions;
contrary to their desires, they helped to increase and enlarge the Turkish
Empire, whereof the Prince was likely to succeed their Father, without being
any ways related to him. They were so foolish as to be Jealous of Tamerlan's
Ambassadors and angry at the message, for they believed at first that the
succors that Axalla brought, were not above ten or twelve thousand horse, but
when they understood from the mouth of the Ambassador, an able and a wise man,
that the Army had so many thousand horse and foot as to make a dreadful body,
instead of rejoicing or expressing their thankfulness, they began to fear that
Tamerlan had sent his men against them, as well as against Callepin: Neither
the remembrance of Tamerlans former generosity expressed to their deceased
Father, nor the Ambassadors endeavors, to assure them of the Emperors good
and sincere intentions to do them no harm, could not remove these ill grounded
suspicions out of their minds. They were so blind and brutish, that they would
not admit of a Truce amongst themselves, so great was their hatred for one
another. At the return of this useless Embassy, Axalla understood where
Callepin lay with his Army, and how many men he had. Therefore after the
general musters, he marched to seek out the Enemy in Caramania Callepin was at
first astonished at the dilligent proceedings of the Army, but much more, when
at the return of the scouts, he understood its order, discipline and number of
men; for he had imagined that it would not be above ten or twelve thousand men.
When he had learned the truth, he called together his Council. All the
Commanders advised that Callepin, who was the only person alive of the Ottoman
family, should not hazard his person in the battle, that he was to be desired
to stay at a distance, and see the consequence and end of the fight. That
though his Army was strong and powerful, because the Persians and Mamelucks,
two warlike Nations, made up the greatest part of it: It was to be feared if
things succceded not well with them, they would conclude a peace to the
prejudice of the Turks with the victorious enemy. When Callepin understood that
the Emperor in person, was advancing after Axalla with another Army, as
numerous and as brave as the former, he began to repent that he had awakened
the drowsy Lion. The Greek Emperor also imagining, that all this Army was
designed to take from him his Country, as well as to drive away the Turks, sent
to conclude a league with Callepin, which after it was agreed too the Turk
desired some succors, to help him against Tamerlans Army, which was there
purposely to defend the Greek from the Turk the common enemy of both. He
alleged these reasons to strengthen his ridiculous fancy: That in all
appearance the Emperor would not be content, with such narrow limits to his
Empire as the Egean Sea, but would enlarge it beyond Constantinople. That they
ought to join together, for the security of their dominions, and repulse that
ambitious Prince into his own Nest in Tartary. That he could not approve his
Fathers proceedings, nor would follow his footsteps, for after his Fathers
decease, he had refused to give any encouragement to Tamerlans Governor in
Natolia: That his Army had advanced into that Province without his knowledge
and consent, and therefore he should endeavo^^r to beat him out. He labored to
make the Turk sensible of these things, that he might conclude a confederacy
with him to his own ruin; but the Tartars were so advanced, that tho they had
both ^^ desire to join, they could not have then the means; for the Ottoman
Army could not give back without destroying themselves. There was a necessity
for them to fight. The greatest part were Persians and Mamelucks, and banished
men driven but of their Country, because they would not submit to Tamerlan. It
was therefore very dangerous for them to delay the battle, or to retreat.

The Bassa, who commanded in the Turkish army, had fifteen thousand Persian
Horse, good fighting men, and thirty thousand. Foot led by the Prince of
Tauris, one of the banished men. The Mamelucks were in number about twenty
thousand Horse commanded by him that was chosen their Sultan, who near five
years had been making war in Arabia, but had been driven from thence by
Tamer^^an's men, and entertained by Callepin, whose Confederate he was, in
hopes, that if their affairs succeeded, he might receive from him such
assi^^tance as might help him to recover Syria and Egypt, and all the Dominions
of the Mamelucks. Besides these, there were twenty five thousand Turkish Horse,
and thirty thousand foot, with six thousand more, that Callepin had chosen for
his Guard. The grand Bassa was an experienced Warrior, and a brave Commander.
With these Troops he imagined himself able to overthrow the enemies Army. And
was the more encouraged to fight, because, he supposed, that the greatest part
of the Tartarian Forces were no cordial Friends of the ^^arthians, nor well
wishers to their Empire. This Bassa was the same who had been taken the day
before the great Battle, where Bajazet was made Prisoner, unto whom Tamerlan
gave his freedom and a stately horse. He boasted amongst his own men, that he
was acquainted with the Tartarians manner of fighting, and that the greatest
advantage which they had obtained was by the taking of Bajazet, but that more
had been killed on their side than on the Turks, which was very true. Therefore
in the Counsel of affairs, which Callepin had called together, this was his
advice, that they should not suffer their Prince to be in the Army the day of
the fight, for fear that he should fall into the same misfortune as his Father
before him.

Now in the Survey and Mustering of the Emperors Army, Axalla found that it
had fourscore thousand Horse, and one hundred and threescore thousand Foot.
Threescore thousand were old Troops kept in pay by Tamerlan; brave Soldiers
accustomed to fight. Sinopes, an excellent and a skillful Commander, led
fourscore thousand Foot, chosen men, of a stout resolution.

As soon therefore as the enemy drew so near, that Axalla had notice of their
march, he called a Council of War, and caused his Army to advance softly
toward them. He knew that Goualach, about thirty leagues off from the place
where he was with his men, was an advantageous p^^st to him, who should first
recover it; he caused therefore all his Army, very desirous of a battle, to
march thither. The Turks went slowly and would not forsake the Seaside, that
furnished them with plenty of all manner of provisions. In the Tartarian Army
there was no such abundance, for want began to be a complaint.

Axalla commanded a Parthian Captain, named Stucan, a Colonel of the light
horse, to advance toward the Turks, and to observe their motion, that he might
not be surprised unawares. This Officer, a man fit for a great undertaking,
very active and ingenious, had under his command a Soldier of that Country,
where the Turks were then encamped, who, understanding the language of the
place, and being faithful to his Leader, was able to do him service, in a
design that he had thought upon, and imagined to be f^^sable. But before he
would attempt it he took advise with Prince Axalla, who approved of it, and
encouraged him to accomplish it* For that purpose Stucan with three thousand
Horse advances before his Army ten leagues, as far as Regeni, where he met with
some Turks, whom he made Prisoners, and by them he understood, that the Van of
the Turks Army was in sight. He went out upon a high ground to take notice of
it, and resolved in the dark to enter into their Camp by the means of this
Soldier, that knew the language, and should pretend, that he had been sent to
show the way to two thousand Persian Horse, which he brought with him, and at
the same moment Stucan with his followers should enter in amongst the Turks,
and surprise them in disorder. All this happened according to the project and
their expectation; for two hundred men going before with this Soldier, they
entered in amongst the Turks, and were immediately followed by Stucan and his
party, that killed above three thousand of the Vanguard. The rest were afraid
to stir, for though all the Cavalry mounted at the first Alarm, they were not
so bold as to pursue after Stucan in his retreat, but stood to their ground,
imagining that the whole Army was at hand. They chose rather to lose a few
forerunners and loose Troops, than to endanger their whole body. When day
began to break the Turks Bassa wondered at his mistake, and to understand that
only three thousand Horse had done that execution and disordered his Army, for
he learned that the Tartarians were yet about ten leagues from his Camp. He was
highly incensed at this affront: When therefore he understood, by some
Runawayes, that provisions were but scarce in the Tartarian Army, he resolved
to wait for it, in the place where he was and to fortify himself in such a
manner, that he might not be forced to fight against his will. For by that
delay, he hoped to waste all Axalla's provisions and so to weary him, as to
oblige him to retreat back again. Now Axalla imagined not that the Bassa was so
well informed of the condition of his Army, but to prevent that design, he
purposed to lay a snare for him, and cause him to fall into it. A little after
his Army marched within five leagues of the Turks. Whiles the Trenches were
making, Axalla drew up his men in order of battle, and advanced with them,
within two leagues of the Turks Army in a plain ground, from whence he went in
person to take notice, how they lay entrenched in their Camp, from whence they
had their provisions, and what road their Convoys of victuals and their
Purveyours kept. When he had well observed all particulars* he resolved either
to force the enemies to fight him, or to lodge between them and the Sea, so to
cut off their provisions: For that purpose, he advanced with his Army to their
Trenches, as if he had an intent to assault them. In the mean while, without
noise, he had employed some to fortify a Camp and prepare lodgings for his
Army, toward the Sea. The Bassa would not look out of his Camp, therefore he
knew not what was preparing. He had taken notice, that the Tartarian Army had
faced him eight hours in order of battle, and expected to be assaulted in his
Trenches, which he earnestly desired, but when instead of that, news came to
him that they were encamped near his fortifications, between him and the Sea,
in a place where they would intercept all his provisions, and that he should
not be able to recover any without great danger and difficulty, he was
strangely surprised and astonished, which caused him to call together the
Officers of his Army, to advise what to do in this juncture. It was there
resolved, that if they understood that the Tartars would hinder them from all
correspondency with the Sea, that then they must fight, but before it was
resolved to endeavor by strong Guards and parties to draw provisions into the
Camp; according to this advice the Bassa, as soon as day appeared, sent out six
thousand Horse of his best Soldiers, toward the Sea, with orders if they met
with any opposition that then they should return into the Camp. They happened to
light upon the Tartarian main Guard, that charged them so vigorously that they
were beaten back, and forced to return faster than they came on. When the Bassa
saw what had happened he understood the Tartars design, and that there was a
necessity for him to hazard a fight. Therefore the next night he drew out some
of his Army to take possession of a Hill, which was nearer to him than to his
enemies, with an intent to annoy them with his Artillery, which he caused to be
planted there, as likewise to hinder Axalla from placing any Troops upon it,
because it was able to do a kindness to him that should have it first. As soon
as it was day Axalla had news that there was a stirring in the Turks Camp more
than ordinary, as if they intended to decamp. To understand the truth, he put
himself at the head of twenty thousand Horse, and with them he advanced to
observe their motion, resolved to fight them if they intended to retreat. But
when he took notice nearer of their Actions, he perceived their purpose, he
called therefore the Prince of Tanais, and Sinopes, telling them that he was
not willing that the Turks should entrench themselves upon the Hill which he
showed them, because it would be prejudicial to his Army, and that therefore it
was requisite to drive them from thence, before they were there well settled.

Sinopes had immediately orders to assault them with twenty thousand of the
stoutest Infantry of the Army. Axalla doubted not of the Victory, if he could
but succeed in this attempt upon those that were upon the Hill, which was
situate in such a place, that the Horse were not able to get near it, because
of a morish ground lying round about, near a league from the Hill. But the foot
could march up with ease. Axalla had great hopes of success, because he knew
the courages of his Infantry that he employed, which was the stoutest in the
World, and the noble and brave soul of Sinopes their Captain who led them on,
and would do all that could be expected from a skilful and resolute Commander.

The Tartarian Army stood in order of battle over against the Turks. The
Infantry was Commanded to advance, that it might back Sinopes, and be ready at
his motion to assist him. He was resolved, if the Enemy was obstinate to defend
this Hill to fight on foot, and to employ all his might and force to drive him
from thence. The Prince of Tanais was at the Head of his Cavalry over against
the Turks Horse. Neither of them was able to do any good to those that were to
fight for the possession of the Hill. Sinopes by Axalla's advice, had taken a
Compass round under a high piece of ground, which hindered the enemies from
receiving his motion, whiles he stood ready to assist them.

So that Sinopes broke in upon them with his twenty thousand foot and
disordered them, before they were aware. An Enemy surprised, is half overcome.
The Turks, astonished with this sudden onset, knew not whither all the
Infantry or but a part, had assaulted them. This conceit filled them with
apprehensions. At that time the rest of the Army stood in order of battle at
one end of the Marsh, and both Armies were in sight of one another very silent,
but when the Turks perceived what was acted upon the Hill, they made all haste
to help their Comrades and ressist the Tartars. The Bassa being a very skiful
Commander, sent away all his Infantry to s^^ccour his men, who had been broken
at the first charge of the Tartarian foot, and had left them the possession of
the Top of the Hill. By this means, they got the advantage of the ground, so
that they encountered the Turks with more ease, whereas the Turks stood upon a
shelving ground, which hindered them from using their Weapons with that
advantage as the others could. But the great companies of Janisaries, who were
marching to the assistance of their companions, had doubtless overpowr'd the
Tartarian foot, in possession of the Mountain, if Axalla, upon sight of their
approach, had not dispatched away at the same moment, twenty thousand more to
renew the fight, and keep up his men's courages against the Janisaries. And
after them he provided five and twenty thousand more, that he might march
himself at their Head, as soon as he should see any more advancing the Hill
from the Ottoman Army; for that purpose, he alighted off from his Horse to
command them in person. When the Prince of Tanais understood his intent, that
he would hazard his person in the battle upon the Hill, he sent to entreat him
to leave that to one of his Colonels of the foot, and to stay behind to give
his orders; telling him, That the whole Army made him the same request. Axalla
replied, that the business then in action was of a high concernment, and that
if the Hill were once gained, the Victory would follow with ease. And that he
was resolved to obey his orders that day and become his Soldier. At that
instant the rest of the Turks foot was observed to move. These were most of
them Janisaries, they gave a furious assault to the Tartarian foot, but when
Axalla came in with a chosen party, he beat them back and won all the Hill.
Before his departure, he caused Trenches to be drawn on that side which looked
toward the Turks Army, and left there to command Sinopes, who had purchased to
himself much honor and glory, by his brave conduct.

The Tartarians lost in the several assaults between fifteen and sixteen
thousand men, but the Turks near thirty thousand. The fight lasted from eight a
Clock in the morning till night. The Cavalry all that while stood still without
action looking upon the passages upon the Hill, for they could not advance to
it, because of the deep Marsh.

The Turks discouraged with this loss departed the next night, marching back
ten long leagues before they stopped. The Prince of Tanais, Stucan and the light
Horse followed them close at the heels, and Axalla with the rest of his Army
made after them, and encamped near the Sea, about two leagues distant from the
Turks, who were drawing toward Caramania.

As soon as the Bassa, had recollected his Spirits and was returned to himself,
he resolved to incamp and entrench his Army. But the Prince of Tanais, angry
that he had not been concerned in the Glory of the day before, would not give
him the leisure to fortify himself. Therefore he advanced forward to fight
him, so far and with such indiscretion, that when the rest of his Army behind
were about to fix their Tents, news came to them, that the Prince was engaged
against the Turks, and that unless he was speedily relieved, he would be cut
off with his party. This Report caused Axalla to sound a march and with his
Cavalry to advance before, when he was come to the banks of a small River in
his way, he saw the Prince of Tanais's mistake in venturing over, before he had
sent to see what enemies were on the other side, for the crafty Turks had
ordered ten thousand Persian Horse to stop the Princes party, by skirmishing
with them. They behaved themselves so bravely, that if the Bassa had not sent
away more to relieve the Persians, the Tartarians had cut them all in pieces.
But as his intent was but to keep them busy and employed, and to hinder them
from all possibilities of a retreat, he dispatched away twenty thousand Horse
more, to second the Persians, who seemed to be almost all broken. Then the
Tartars were forced to give back with great loss, if the Lord D' Halicen had
not come in with a fresh party, to assist the Prince of Tanais, they had been
routed, for the Prince lost two Horses under him, and was mounted upon the
third. Stucan was killed, and all his light Horsemen overthrown. When Axalla
perceived the fault of the Prince of Tanais, he was in despair to see so
glorious a Victory, which God had given him useless or lost through other men's
miscarriage, and folly. Turning therefore to his men in haste. Now my dear
Comrades, Cried he, we must fight not so much for the glory of the Parthians,
as for their lives and safety, and for the preservation of the whole Army, Go,
said he, to a body of ten thousand Horse, which he commanded to ride forward,
Go and keep up the fight, I will follow to relieve you or dye with you, that
our enemies may see that we will not part with the Victory out of our hands, at
so cheap a rate. A few minutes after, he advanced at the Head of forty thousand
Horse, divided into th^^ee bodies, which marched all three in a front keeping a
Trot. And with them he charged the Turks, who were already grown insolent and
proud of their success. For since the first onset of the Prince of Tanais, they
had always had an advantage upon him, and overthrown him in the third charge,
this poor Prince was cast to the ground and left as dead, so that his fall had
left them the Victory, had not the ten thousand Horse sent by Axalla given a
furious onset and beaten the enemies back. By this means Axalla had time to
advance, He was desirous to revenge the Parthians losses and snatch the Victory
out of the Turks hands, and because it was then within two hours of night, the
shortness of the time required them to make haste. He marched therefore strait
to the Enemy with an intent to oblige him to fight.

At that time the Bassa having yet had no hand in the action, wondered to see
his men, instead of driving before the ten thousand Horse led by the Lord of
Halicen, give back and retreat. He advanced therefore with fifteen thousand
fresh Horse, with a resolution to end the difference and gain the Victory. His
first charge caused the Tartars and Parthians to give back, but Axalla entered
into the fight in that moment, with all his Horse, and forced the Bassa's men
to give ground, for they were not able to abide the furious onset of the
Parthians, who had a full intent to be revenged for the loss of their
Companions; for that purpose, they cut in pieces a great many Spahis, and of
the rest of the Turkish Ca^^alry. A Governor of Natolia named Lenauen, who
commanded a reserve of ten thousand Horse, coming up to Axalla to join with
him, adventured against the Turks, but to his loss, for he had been broken and
his men disordered. The greatest part of them rallied near Axalla's person, and
charged with him to be revenged. They drove back the Turks Cavalry with that
success that they made them run in upon their Infantry, and forsook them
immediately afterward. Fear had so great a power upon their minds, and infused
a swiftness into their heels. The Tartarian Horse, seeing all out of order
amongst the Turks foot, dallied not with them, but broke in amongst the
thickest; had it not been for the dark night they would have killed every man
of them. Above twenty thousand, most part Janisaries, retreated in good order,
they got over a River and hindered by that means, the Tartarian Horse from
obtaining so complete a Victory as they desired.

The next day, as soon as it appeared, Axalla sent a party of Horse with the
Governor of Natolia to pursue after the flying Turks, and to hinder them from
rallying together in one body. It was a difficult matter to overtake them, for
they had marched all night, without stopping and that in good Order, commanded
by the Captain of the Janisaries named the Aga. They complained of their
Horsemen, who had forsaken them basely, when they were courageously resolved to
die for the Service of their Prince, rather than to yield or give ground.

Axalla, remaining still behind upon the bloody field, caused all the dead to
be put into the ground, the wounded to be taken care of, and sent the Prince of
Tanais into a secure place to be healed of a dangerous wound in his Leg,
received by an Arrow. He marched next after the Turks, for he had heard that
the Bassa had got together near fourteen thousand Horse. And that he might be
able to follow them with more speed, he left behind him all his bag and
baggage. And to separate them from the body of Janisaries, he took a nearer way
to them that he might get in with them, before they were joined together.

The Janisaries also marching a great pace got as far as the Sea side. Axalla
had commanded ten thousand Horse to follow them, and all his foot, that had not
yet been engaged to pursue and hinder them from escaping if it were possible.
They had marched a great way before and frustrated all the speed that could be
made after them, at Gallipoli they took Shipping and sailed over into Europe to
seek for Callepin, who was mightily incensed against the Bassa; for he accused
him, for having forsaken his Army by a shameful slight, because he had not
chosen an Honorable death to the safety of his Life.

In this last engagement, the Turks lost above five and forty thousand men, and
Axalla about twenty thousand. In both, his courage and prudent acting met with
great success and happiness. Much was ascribed to chance and fortune. Stucan
was found dead under his Horse and his Buckler over his Face. His death was
much lamented all over the Army, though his furiousness and indiscretion was
likely to have ruined them all. They rejoiced all for the safety of the Prince
of Tanais, who had been as it w^^e snatched out of the Jaws of death by a
Miracle.

Axalla congratulated him for his deliverance; but afterward with mild and yet
significant words, showed him his unadvisedness, in venturing to fight as he
did, and obliged him to purchase the Victory at a very dear Rate, with the loss
of twenty thousand men, whereas they might have gained it without any danger or
spilling of blood with a little patience. The Prince of Tanais laid the fault
upon Stucan and his light Horse, who were advanced too far, and protested that
he imagined not the body of the enemies Army so near him as it was. Prince
Axalla told him that the fear of what might happen, had obliged him to draw
with his Army as near to the River as he could.

All these great successes and Victories, which were able to puff up the minds
of the ambitious, raised in him no sign of joy, his Soul was rather drooping in
a great sadness, which proceeded from the news of the Emperors sickness, of
which the Physicians had no good opinion. The great fear of the mischiefs that
were likely to follow, and the notable alterations in the Empire, made him wish
that his employment would have suffered him to have gone and paid his respects
to his dear Master and Lord, and taken of him his last farewell. But his Duty
could not permit him to be absent at that time, he was forced to put off his
departure till another opportunity. He only writ to his Majesty to acquaint
him with the Victories that he had won. He caused his Letters to be Read in the
Council assembled for that and other purposes.

But to hinder the enemies retreat into the Mountains, he sent after them many
Troops of Horse, and followed them himself with the rest of the Army, for he
wished he could speedily put an end to this War.

The Persians came in every day by Troops, to submit themselves, and desire the
Conquerours Mercy and Pardon for their Revolt. They said, that they had been
earnestly solicited by their Prince, who was killed in the last engagement.
But that which surprised and rejoiced the Tartarian Army most was the Head of
the Grand Bassa, which was brought into the Camp by a Soldier, who had killed
him as he endeavored to fly away, after that the Persians had left him. This
was the same man, who had been Tamerlans prisoner before Bajazet was taken,
whom the Emperor sent back so generously. Axalla was always in pursuit of the
flying Troops of the Turkish Army, all the Mamelucks, he killed and allowed
them no quarter, because most of them had deserted the Prince of Tanais and
forsaken him shamefully. But all the rest were so well treated that in fifteen
days the whole Army was broken and scattered, and all the Maritine Towns taken
without much resistance; for they heard no news of Callepin, who was gone into
Europe.

After all this successful proceeding, the season of the year drawing toward
Winter, made the Army ask for their Wages. It was thought fit to please the
Soldiers, to send them toward Gevolach there to pass the Winter, in a fat and
plentiful Country, where they might live with ease and pleasure.

The Prince of Tanais, fearing least the Emperors sickness should cause an
alteration in men's minds, and troubles in his Government, resolved, after he
had discoursed with Axalla, to depart with his Troops into Persia. These two
Princes engaged themselves one to the other with an Oath to seek to promote and
favor one another interests. Axalla delayed the attempt upon the Empire of
Greece till the following Spring. He intended then to destroy it, because he
was resolved to disable that Emperor from helping the Turks, he having been so
indiscreet, as to side with them against his best Benefactor. He soon recovered
all the Towns that he had taken from the Tartars.

The Prince of Tanais was not advanced above twenty Leagues from the Army, when
the news of the Emperors death was brought to Axalla. He had been long in
expectation of a change, he was desirous of news, and yet afraid to hear what
would grieve him to the heart. He understood by the messenger, that this great
Prince was dead two days after he had received Axalla's Letters of the
Victory, which he had won. They caused him to rejoice, for he had a sound
judgment, till the last moment of his Life, and gave orders for the Government
of the Empire, with as much care as he had ever done before.

When Axalla received first this sad news, which he expected, he withdrew
himself aside to give way to his tears and violent grief: but he would not
suffer the Army to know what they had lost for some days, he suffered not
therefore his sorrow to appear before them, but sent speedily after the Prince
of Tanais, to acquaint him with the news, and entreat him to appoint him a
place, where he might meet and speak with him, that they together might consult
about their private concerns. According to his desire they met at a rendevouz.

The dispatch that Axalla received was signified by Sentrochio the new
Emperor, who sent him orders to leave, with the Governor of the borders,
forty thousand men, and to return with the rest of the Army through Persia.
This messenger was followed by a favorite of the new Emperor, who had orders
to assure Axalla of the Emperors affection, that he should have as great an
interest in him as in the Old Emperor deceased, and that he would ever
acknowledge the services that Axalla had rendered him, and those which he yet
expected from him. This Complement proceeded from his desire to win and prevent
him, and his fear of his power; for to speak Truth, he was as it were the
Commander of all the forces of the Empire, he had an authority over them, and
was highly esteemed, because of his noble behavior and late Victories over the
Turks, which all the Army acknowledged to be due to his experience and
resolution. But Sentrochi^^ knew him not well, for Axalla was a just and a
virtuous man, unable to commit a base action, which might blemish his
reputation or be contrary to his duty. Therefore he assured his new Lord, that
he would be true and faithful to him.

Whiles the Army refreshed themselves, Axalla and the Prince of Tanais had an
enterview at the place appointed. They promised to one another, with an Oath,
to be true and faithful to their several interests, and to make no distinction
of their concerns, whether they related to their governments, offices, or
pensions. They thought it convenient to conceal some few days the Emperors
death, but when Axalla was returned to his Army, the news was spread all about,
as commonly ill news is known before good. He called therefore the Army
together, and declared to them, That the Emperuor was dead.

When this was spoken, it was a lamentable thing to hear the Cries and the
Sighs that were all over the Camp. All wept, Captains and Soldiers, all
lamented for the loss of so good a Master and Benefactor. When silence was
made, he asked them whether they would not have for the Young Prince his Son,
the same affection as for the Father, and promise the same fidility. They
answered all, That they would. The General afterward caused the Officers of
the Army to engage themselves by an a new Oath, all the Colors to be covered
with black, and the Army to be paid off. He exhorted them again, to honor the
memory of Tamerlan the Great, who was not dead seeing that he survived in the
person of his Son, which he left behind him for their good. He told them, that
this Young Prince ought to be dear to them and esteemed, because of his virtues
and good qualities. That for the time to come they should all fight under his
Colors, and receive from his bounty the rewards due to their services and
labors. That therefore they ought to go to be known to him; and that for him
he would never forsake them, whiles breath was in his body, he would assist and
recommend them to his Majesty.

After this discourse Axalla chose the Soldiers whom he intended to leave with
the Governor of the Province to keep the Country in awe, and hinder the
enemies invasions: after some other Orders given, he marched away with the rest
of the Army, and advanced two great days journey toward Persia.

Whiles Axalla is in the way, let us take notice of some particulars of the
death of this great Prince, who left not behind him his fel^^ow in the World.
He had often sought in vain for help from the skill of the most famous
Physicians, but when he saw, notwithstanding all their endeavors, that his
distemper increased more and more, and that he could not avoid the payment of
the ordinary tribute of Nature. He called for Sentrochio his eldest Son, to
whom he spoke in the presence of Odmar, and of the chief of his Council. He
gave him an account of all the actions of his life beginning by the retreat of
his Father the Prince of Sachetay, from all worldly business to employ himself
in divine contemplation and Prayers. He told him, that when he left him the
Soveraignity of his Dominions, he gave him three great men to assist him to
bear part of his burden, and advise him for the best. That only Odmar, the
youngest of the three, was then alive. That he had been willing to submit to
their good Counsels in things relating to Peace and War, and had never any
cause to repent of it. That the great credit and reputation that he had gained,
when he was very young, by the famous Victory over the Moscovites, who were
become so dreadful to all Asia, was the effect of their wise counsels, rather
than the work of hazard or fortune. He told him, that the bringing down of the
Moscovites, whom he had made to be tributary to him, and the lusire of some
virtues that shined in him, had obliged his neighbors and his kindred to seek
his acquaintance and affi^^ity, and caused the Emperor his Uncle to alter his
design of dividing his Empire amongst the greatest Lords of his Court, whom he
loved best before; but then he rejoiced to prefer to them the Conqueror of the
common enemy of their Nation, and a Nephew for whom nature and the nearness of
blood pleaded in his heart. That it was this that had raised him to the Empire
of the Tartars, that gave him the Emperors Daughter in marriage, because he
hoped that he would ease him of his burden in his old age, by managing for him
his public affairs and scattering away all divisions and parties through the
reputation, and dread of his forces. He told him, that the Emperors
expectation had not been disappointed, that whiles he lived he honored and
loved him as his Lord and Father. That he had behaved himself so uprightly as
well toward his Father as toward his Subjects, that when the Emperor died he
succeeded to the Throne without any contradiction or commotion, for all showed
themselves willing to obey. So that he succeeded, as well to the affections of
the people, as to the authority over them. That since twenty years that he had
enjoyed this vast Empire, he had been always faithfully served. That he gave
God thanks that the promises; which the Emperor his Uncle had made of the
rewards, which were due to his Subjects for their services, he had had
opportunity and means to discharge; for the happiness of his Armies had enabled
him to pay all his Unkles and his own obligations and debts. He continued to
him his discourse in this manner. I leave thee, my Son, these for thy Servants,
who deserve all of them to be Kings. Honor them and reign amongst them. They
will serve thee affectionately, and will pardon the mistakes and miscarriages
of thy youth. Their remembrance of Tamerlan, and their own virtues will oblige
them to be true to thy concerns, and to their duty.

After this, taking Odmar by the hand, he removed him from the place where he
sat to make him go to the right side of his bed, and then casting once more his
eyes upon his Son on the left side, he spoke to him thus again. This side shall
be kept for Axalla, who is absent. His faithfulness and his affection for me,
and his Noble Actions are so known and famous all over the Empire, and to my
self, that I will say no more of him. I command you, my Son, to believe Odmars
and Axalla's Counsels, as I have always done to my advantage, for the Prince
of Tanais I shall say nothing of him, his service^^ and fidelity speak
sufficiently for him. He told him also, that because he was his Kinsman, he
knew that the Prince would suffer death rather than act contrary to his duty.
That he recommended to him all the Princes, Lords, and Captains, who were then
before his eyes, and those that were absent, who had served him so faithfully
in so many Wars, whereof the Victories and successes had gained so much glory
to the Parthian name, and rendered the Empire one of the most flourishing of
the World. That he left it to him to command it, because he was his Son, though
there was no other deserveing in him, but the hopes that he gave of his person.
Afterward he reached out his hand to all the Princes and Lords about his bed,
with these words directed to his Son. In these persons chiefly your Empire and
happiness will consist. Then he beckned to his Chancellor to draw near, and
asked from him his Seal, which he delivered to the young Prince, and caused the
Prince to restore it again to the Chancellor. He was afterward a while
without speaking, but presently he began again, my Son, said he, Love justice,
show it to the poor as well as to the rich; to the mean man as well as to the
great; it is your Office, your Chancellor will sometimes help you: Remember
that the sword that you bear is only to put in execution^^ the decrees of
justice; therefore the Wars that you shall undertake must be just, then you may
promise to you self success.

Whiles he was talking thus to the Prince, the Chancellor being near his
person, a great noise was heard in the next Chamber. The Emperor enquired what
might be the cause. A Lord at that instant coming in, sent from Axalla, brought
with him tidings of two great Victories, which his Army in Natolia had obtained
against the Turks. This messenger gave him an account of all the passages of
the two engagements, which had been managed with Wisdom and valor by his
brave General; he told the Emperor at last that his Valliant Soldiers were in
hopes to see his Majesty amongst them as soon as the season of the year would
permit, to subdue the Empire of Greece, which would be easily accomplished,
because the enemies were discouraged and in a great fear. But the Emperor, who
was then no longer desirous of earthly honors, answered with a smiling
countenance* That he had never questioned the affections that his Soldiers had
to promote his glory, but that he knew himself called by a greater Lord than
himself to a happyer conquest and to a higher place, unto which he was going.
Tell, said he, to that Lord, Tell Axalla, that I desire him, for the time to
come, to obey my Son. Then taking from his finger a Ring of a great value, he
delivered it to him with this order. Carry this token of my Love to your
General, and let him take it as an assurance, that I am well satisfied with his
services and fidelity. He inquired afterward whether all the Officers, that
were known to him in his Army were in health, and recommended every one of them
to his Son according to his quality and deservings. Then the Prince of Tanais
came again into his mind. He desired his Son to love him as his Kinsman* and to
maintain him in the Offices and Governments, which he had given him, because he
was worthy of them; for he assured him, that the Prince would be faithful to
him. Then with a louder voice than before he told Sentrochio. That if ever he
had a^^y reason to be absent from his Army in times of War, he should not trust
it in any other persons hands but Azalla. But he advised him to command it
himself as often as he could, for it was dangerous to trust it in other hands,
and it was the duty of the Parthian Emperors to dwell with their Soldiers in
the Army, as a Father amongst his Children. He told him by the practice of this
lesson he should be able to keep the great Empire that he left him, and render
himself by his virtue worthy to succeed him. At last he advised him to be mild,
courteous to his friends, dreadful to his enemies, but when they shall sue for
Peace refuse them not, forgive your private wrongs, but punish severely the
wickedness committed against the state of your Subjects. All this while the
young Prince wept bitterly, but Tamerlan, when he held this discourse, had a
greater Majesty and beauty upon his countenance than ordinary. He sent away
afterward his Son to the Empress his Mother to endeavor to comfort her by his
presence.

When the young Prince was gone he called for Odmar, and recommended to his
care his young Son, entreating him to Love him, and to be faithful to him. He
told him also, that it was his will that his second Son should be brought up
and taught to obey his Elder Brother. I know for certain that the peace and
preservation of this Empire depends upon the Union and Love of the Brethren.

He sent for them both a while after to give them his last blessing, when they
were before him he commanded the youngest to be obedient to his elder Brother,
and both, he commanded to honor the Empress their Mother; when he gave them
his blessing it was observed that he touched the head, of Sentrochio, and put
it down lower with his hand, but he lifted up the head of the younger by
hea^^ing up his chin. This was looked upon as a presage, that Letrochio the
youngest should rise to the Empire, and overthrow the power of his brother, as
it happened afterward, when they quarrelled, by their variance they ruined the
Empire of Tamerlan.

The Emperor passed the next night very quietly, about break of day, according
to his custom he called for those persons who had any business with him. The
Letters* that were to be sent to Axalla, concerning the victories that he had
got, were brought to him, which he signed without pain or without discovering
any alteration in his countenance. But a few minutes after, when sleep began to
cease upon his senses, they that were about him perceived that his soul was
departing to another world. They sent to call for the young Emperor, who came
in good time to close his eye lids, shedding a fountain of tears as well as the
rest of his Servants.

Two hours after Sentrochio was proclaimed Emperor, and Letters were dispatched
to all the Governors of the Provinces, signed with his hand: After this the
Army was called together by his orders, to the Soldiers he gave money and great
gifts, to his Fathers old Servants entertaining them with a speech. But would
not offer to change any thing in the Army, till he had seen Prince Axalla, and
bin with the Imperial Army. When this young Prince came to be Emperor he was
not above nineteen years of age. He was beautiful and much like his Father.
Every one judged that he would be able, with the assistance of his wise
Consellours, to maintain with Honor his large Empire. But the too great
affection of the Empress for Letrochio caused a jealousy in the eldest
Brother, which set them at a distance, and divided them and the Empire. In this
particular, They became like their forefathers, and imitated their follies,
for they ruined, by the divisions and hatred of Brothers, the Empire of their
predecessors, which Tamerlan had recovered and raised up by his virtue and
courage, and rendered the most glorious and most flourishing Empire of the
world.

FINIS.

