A PEACE, BUT NO Pacification.

A PEACE, BUT NO PACIFICATION. OR, An Answer to that new Design of the Oath OF
PACIFICATION AND ACCOMMODATION. Lately printed. A subject for all that love
true peace and liberty, to consider.

By John Saltmarsh, M.M.A.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop, and are to be sold at the Castle in
Cornhill. 1643.

A PEACE, BUT NO PACIFICATION.
IT is a notion more Platonicall than real for a private man to think he can
arbitrate Imperial differences, and it is rather an act of Fancy than
Judgment, a policy of Imagination, than State, for the soul of one is of no
just latitude nor comprehension for a design of that breadth, as the
Pacification of a Kingdom, and when the judgment proves too narrow for the
design, the design must needs fall short of the requisite proportions; and
further, they that would intervene in such controversies, and mysteries of high
Accommodations, must be situated geometrically for both sides, and stand upon
so much vantage ground, as he may have a full prospect over all particulars,
whether springing or full blown. As for instance, if you would compose the
King and Parliament, you must either have a right and clear cognizance of
both, and see almost the veriest atoms in the state of both, or else you shall
do right to neither; for the least things are of moment in States, and
Politickes, and I do believe it is impossible for any to be so qualified an
Arbitrator for our supreme disputes, being so full of new Revolutions, and
Interpositions, especially now, when an Almighty power seems to mingle, and
incorporate his own Interests with ours, and engage us upon new Fundamentals.

And though Accommodation be such a subject as will gain both Readers and
parties, yet it is of dangerous consequence, to write unto the spirits of men,
of things that may retard and stay their public pursuits; especially now in a
time of an Irish Accommodation; for there are few in such haste after their
enemies, but they will stay a while and talk with any that can parley and
discourse of Peace; and the music of Pacification is so sweet, as many could
willingly let their engagements fall out of their hands to hearken and follow
such tunes: we should be far better Statesmen for these times, if we first
labored to find the true elevation of things, for when we have such
intrinsecall variations in our State and Church, it cannot be an act of
commensuration to weigh designs at the beam of old Politics and Conveniences,
and they that would now place us upon old bottomes, are such in whom the old
interests prevail more than the new, and if we take hold of them to guide us,
they will at length bring us back into as bad a condition as we have forsaken;
although they may seem to lead us about a while through some new and pleasing
conceptions to entertain us from observation. It was a smooth fallacy of the
Prophet, who led his enemy so far, as he suffered him not to see the mistake,
till he had brought him into the midst of Samaria. The peace and prosperity we
have had, have wrought in us such principles of ease and indulgency, as makes
us industrious in projectings after Pacifications, never looking forward at
inconsistencies, nor behind at consequences, nor about us, at the season, and
other circumstances.

For Accommodations in the latitude of the notion, are of such a contexture,
and intermingled constitution, as they usually take in various and equal
principles from both. Now I appeal to any whether the others Principles either
Religious or Civil be consistent with ours now, and whether they be such as
can dwell together, or incorporate, whether their essences and operations be
not diverse, and being so contrariant as we see, and having wrought out each
others interests into several independencies and stations already, how shall
these be reconciled! unless we attain hereafter to live under those heavenly
and prophetical influences, where Antipathies and Contrarieties are made
friends, Where the Lion and the Lamb lie down together, and the children play
with the Cockatrice.

Again, Accommodation is the putting an untimely period to our Reformation,
which by that must necessarily be prevented in the period it aimed at, because
it seems to be met in the half way, and we bespeake it to stop, and bring
with us a new design rather of diversion, than advancement or propagation.

And again, these times are such as the infuosins are stronger, and the
principles too, being enabled not only by many divine influences and
providence and concurrencies; but carried on with Arguments, and reason, and
treatises, which the contestations of former ages in this Kingdom never knew;
each party assuring their side with a more learned Artifice, so as men are now
acted as well by conscience as passion, as well by Judgment as resolution, and
this is one reason with me that not any such pacification can well be
transacted, for both sides have been so Argumentatively and rationally
informed, and have taken in their own fundamentalls so deeply, and in so much
divinity, and assurance, as it is not possible nor probable to mediate a
reconciliation till you have loosened and unhinged the one; and therefore these
Maxims of Moderation and Accommodation are rather the issues, and ingenious
experiments of Melancholy spirits, who please themselves and others in these
storms, and gloomy seasons, by painting twilights and calm enterludes; or
else the subtle incantations of some that are no right wishers to the cause:
and do we not further see how the wars and broils of preceding ages, left
always a turbulent and inflaming remainder in the dispositions of men? so as
the old differences and effusions did only forsake the broader and wider
passages of Battles, and sought out straiter, those of Emulations, Duells,
and Quarrels, and men have rather fought the great Contentions over again in
the Abridgements afterward, so as the war was still the same in such unsound
Pacifications, only the method was new, and the blood of those warm
distempers flowed down only in narrower channels, and thus when civil
contentions, and National flames are forced back again by the hand of an
immature Pacification, they brake out in as many particular combu^tions, as
summed up, would make a competent destruction. And besides all these
considerations, the Parliamentary party have obliged themselves by Vows and
Covenants, and so are not such masters of times and circumstances, as their
enemies are; (having given up their own relations and self policy, and
involved them in more universal and sublime ends) but their enemies (whose
interests are of a lighter and easier, and more sequacious constitution) are
ready to turn with all advantages of State, and every civil or gainful
emergency; and though they be men of obligations, and Covenants too, yet their
Covenants are rather like engines of Policy and Religion, to open and shut at
pleasure, and to set down and take up their souls and affairs to the
necessities, conveniences, and occasions of State: and this overthrowes the
very substratum and fundamental of this new Oath; for when there has been
such private landing places and secret Posternes in their own Covenants, to
go out and come in at, it is most likely that if they find not the like
liberty again in another, they will force it; it being now made by wicked
Counselors one branch of the Prerogative to be transcenden^ to Obligation, and
Protestation, and Covenant, and to make the supremest violations and evasions
lawful, but the woe will not fall so directly upon the Covenanter, as upon
those that have mistaught him, and drawn out his good intentions into the
labyrinths of their own art, these are the ministers of seducement, and by
such are the best (...) carried on, (having made some virtue their friend for a
time, or some peculiar disposition of their master at their first insinuation.)

And though the Author of the Pacificating Oath would persuade us of the
terrors, and judgments, such Oaths would cast upon the violators, as if the
violation brought with it (like a boding Comet) the sparklings of an heavenly
indignation; yet we must know that Princes as they are exalted into the divine
notion of Gods, so their Favorites make them believe that their political
deity can secure them; and then there are ever some State Casuist at hand too
who can heal their distempers with many a blandishment and evasion, so as I
know not whether to admire more the glory, or infelicity of a Crown, for there
is a Divinity which is calculated merely for the Meridian of Princes, and will
fit no lower condition; and there is an order of Prerogative Divines, who only
study the disinteressings and disobligings of their Prince: now I would gladly
know what remedy he has reserved for us in case of violation (it being too
apparent how the supremest may be misinstructed and abused,) all I can find
out, is an heavenly indignation and revenge; and he must know, this is not an
immediate judgment which treades always on the heels of a transgression, but
may be powered upon the next succeeding Throne, or at least in the evening of
the offendour; for there are certain graduall effluxes of the Divine Wrath,
and many stays and periods which his Infinite Wisdom makes, and is not
accountable to our Tribunals; and what shall a State do then in this space and
intervall to judgment? for being then made passive again, it becomes a
subject to as much, if not more Tyranny, than before: and usually the revolt
of Prerogatives, and the Relapses are more dangerous than the first excess: as
the wrath of Pharaoh and Saul after some particular violations grew more
implacable and violent: and as we see in civil Stories of our own: and the
reason why a relapsing power becomes more vindicative, because there is a
capacity of revenging recovered, and there seems to lie nothing in their way
to break the stroke.

Nor let the Author of the new Oath think he can be more ingenious in
contriving, than some Ministers of State in eluding, nor so exquisite in the
form, as they in their suggestions and infusions for violation: Cap. 29.
and whatsoever he tells us of the ancient transaction in such cases, I must
answer him, that if he can revive the Tanti nimirum est Rerump: firma and
valida fundamenta poni, quoram non postremum hoc fuit, ut fides ac iuramentum
civitatem regerent. Live.
ancient reverence and simplicity and faith of those ages with the ancient
transaction, then I shall allow more to his president: but he knows that the
Principi nihil iniustum quod fructuosum; Expediret autem fingere contrarium
atque ita iuramentum concipere, non afficiam populum iniuriis. Lib. 5. pol. c.
9.
Machiavillisme of later times have made a Maxim in the science of Politickes,
how to overwit their own obligations, and have made it one part of the
perfection of a Statist, Sic Julius 11 Pontifex iactare ausus est, turpissimo
hercule exemplo se foedera and societates cum Gallis Germanisque non aliter
contrahere quam fallendi gratia.
to be too wise for engagements: and though the wisdom of the first coalition
in this State made it their surest design to seal the Inauguration by an
Oath, yet we see there is no infallibility in such counsels and acts; no
protection from the violence of evil counsel: and such has been the
declination of States of late, that Oaths were but in the reputation of
Politic forms with many, unless it be with those who drive on a holier
design, as that of Reformation, and with such, Covenants and Oaths have their
just reputation, as it appears in the late transactions of Scotland, and other
Reformed Kingdoms, and of England now; and this appears to be the opinion of
this Author too, for in his sixth page, he urges much the stately and
sanctimonious form or solemnity, as of necessity amongst Plebeians, so as by
that very notion, he pleads the Pomp and Ceremony of an oath so as if he would
have it by that access of some glorious luster, to dart the people into an
obligation, as well as the Prince; when as there are many safer, and more
natural means to becalme the jealousies of Subjects, even a real application
to their affections, in the motions of Justice, Quale erat Atheniensium and
hodie multorum principum viro populum nullis iniuriis affectum iri, Plebs enim
iuramento hoc contenta, and veluti secura de reliquis non admodum erit
sollicita, etiamsi postea magnis iniuriis afficiatur.
and Peace, and Religion; and that people shall never take umbrages, where the
goings of the Prince are clear and discerneable, and not shaded by the crowde
of Privadoes and bad Ministers; but in a word, when the first and Primitive
oath which is the highest and most supreme rise of an obligation, is not
inviolable, nor includible, what strength and assurance, can be in derivatives
and supplementals of the same nature?

Nor do I think it a design of that happy and wholesome constitution as some
take it, I mean an oath of Pacification, for satisfaction of jealousies, for
there is an art to take away all jealousies, and in the room bring delusions
of assurance, and so thicken and incrassate the satisfactions, that people
shall in time forfeite their liberties in a mist, and scarce believe they are
oppressed, till they be oppressed almost beyond a remedy; and this nation has
been ever easily carried on into such an incredulity and misbeliefe, and have
often served many years apprentiship both of ignorance and bondage.

Nor will any wise man suppose that to be a good condition for any State,
especially for a government so mixed as ours, which ought ever to be looking to
the just Interests of one another, especially after a season of encroachment
and exorbitation: for to take in such a remedy as shall leave no Jealousy
behind it, is to take in such a quantity of Opium as will rather bring a
Lethargy than a kindly rest, and rather make a Kingdom stupid than peaceable;
surely those remedies are best, which keep States waken and sensible, and the
eyes of the Kingdom open. And as there is a jealousy in some which is but a
virtuous luxuriancy of love and affection, and tends only to the preservation
of honor and propriety in the suspected party, so there is in the best States:
and sure there is no such way to keep things in their own rights and
privileges, but such a sollicitous and careful vigilance, and wise suspicion.

That which I now conceive to be the only Interest of our Reformation, is not a
Pacification but a Peace. For a Pacification is a more proper and safe notion
for foreign States than our own, for a Pacification is but the accommodating
of a difference, and a meeting of several principles, and a resolving to agree
with one another, without any further incorporation, but this cannot be
intrinsecall nor natural enough for us of the same kingdom, this is no such
indistant complication as we should now aim at, and as our new and holy
fundamentals call for: our purest and soundest peace would be from a succumbency
and invalidity, when on the worse part the opposition is spent and exhaled,
then there is no fear, that there will break forth any fresh and mutual
Contendings, and there must needs be more security in that peace where all
possibility of resistance is taken away, than where there lives two natures of
proportional abilities and passions, which would prove like the two men in the
Fable, who being weary with beating one another, took truce for an hours
refreshment, and fell fresh to their blows again.

A Peace then and not a Pacification is our assertion, and I hope all who value
a Reformation according to their Covenant, will pursue those things which make
for that, and suffer themselves not to be taken off their holy and famous
resolutions for Peace, by any fair or specious argument for Pacification,
Pacification being but the half way to Peace, and this I conceive is the Peace
which will make both England and Scotland happy, not so much by inventing any
new engines to bind our Kings in chains, and our Princes in fetters of iron,
but by endeavoring such an extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, and malignity, as
our Peace may be rather secured by a disability of contending, than by any new
Oath or possibility of resisting.

For any further Criticisme upon the Author I have none; I confess he reasons
well upon many particulars, and makes his ink rise high, and dash handsomely
upon those that stand about the Throne, and had he reached further with his pen
even to a Peace, and writ but beyond a Pacification, he had writ well.

A Review.
I Shall gather his design into this compend. An Oath and ceremonious form
for the King, another for the Queen, and the temeration being so dangerous,
he thinks we are secured sufficiently: and he presumes, (having laid down
this form) to lay upon it this weight, the honor of God, safety of Religion,
P. 1.
justice of Parliament. I confess the Oath abstractively considered is able to
bear this, and a larger superstructure; but when concretively and pactionately
taken, let all judge who knows there is a revolution in the highest Orbs, and
a changeableness and mutability in every thing to the very borders of
immortality.

In the ceremonious form he seems to aim especially at the satisfaction of
the people, P. 6.
and he pleads for the attiring and apparelling the Oath in some glorious
ceremonies: but popular satisfactions in true Christian States are more solidly
obtained by just and free and regular redresses: I know very well that gusts of
discontent will be blowing sometimes from the people upon the best
administrations, but they will soon blow over, God having obliged himself not
to suffer the rod of the wicked to rest upon the lot of the righteous.

And for the Oath to the Queen, P. 1.
I only expose to the consideration of any, what security or assurance is
there in such Fundamentals which an Absolution or Dispensation, or other
Jesuitical engine can overturne at pleasure, though I could tell him more too,
for at the privilege of this Oath he must needs let in a toleration of that
which the condition of our Covenant cannot comply with.

(...) word, for any such obligationall happiness, let the States of Holland
reply, who have had too sad experience of the many effusions which the
ministers of that tyrannous Philip had contrived, and especially now, in the
season of the universal Apostasy, wherein Faith shall not be able to grow up
to so just a stature as formerly, being a qualification (says that holy
assertion) scarce to be found on earth.

And though this way of obligation and satisfaction has been made use on ( as
he says) by God and man, yet we must know God has an essential immutability
to insure his oath, and man had a fidelity then, which was not so well
acquainted with the artifice of reservation, equivocation, and elusion.

Conclusion.
NOw consider the frailty and uncertainty in such foundations as oaths, the
complexion and obligation of our late Covenants, the evasions and machinations
of a reconciled enemy, the inconsistency of our principles and theirs, the
fresh feuds from the remainders of an old combustion, our deep engagements, our
small purchase for the expense of so much blood and treasure, and tell me if
there be any security but in some things beyond an Accommodation.

To the Reader.
I Have no other quarrel to the Book than its incongruitie to our Reformation
and Covenant, and civil liberty and security, though it may be this is a
misfortune rather of the Authors affection than intention; which making too
much have after Peace, fell into this error of Pacification: I could wish his
excellent expressions had flowed in a better channel: nor would I be mistaken
by others in what I do, for I undertake not to write in a Politic, out a
rational capacity.

Quod si Pompeius and Caesar conjungi possint, me satis vicisse putabo. Bald.
in Ep. ad Cico^.

FINIS.

