Strange and Wonderful NEWS FROM THE County of WICKLOW IN IRELAND, OR, A Full
and True RELATION of what Happened to one Dr. MOORE, (Late Schoolmaster in
LONDON.)

How he was taken Invisibly from his Friends, what happened to him in his
Absence.

AND HOW, And by what means he was found, and brought back to the same place.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for T. R. 1678.

A Wonderful Relation Or what happened to Dr. Moore In the County of WICKLOW
in IRELAND.
DR. Moore having lately purchased an Estate in the County of Wicklow, did
(together with Mr. Richard Vniack, and one Mr. Laughlin Moore) about three
weeks since, go down to view his concerns there: And being come to their Inn,
at a place called Dromgreagh near Baltinglass, where they intended to Lodge
that Night; the Doctor began a discourse of several things that happened to him
in his Childhood near that place, and that it was about 34 years since he had
been in that Country: That he had been often told by his Mother, and several
others of his Relations, of Spirits which they called Fairies, who used
frequently to carry him away, and continue him with them for some time, without
doing him the least prejudice: But his Mother being very much frighted and
concerned thereat, did as often as he was missing, send to a certain Old Woman,
her Neighbor in the Country, who by repeating some Spells or Exorcisms, would
suddenly cause his return. Mr. Vniack used several Arguments to dissuade the
Doctor from the belief of so idle and improbable a Story; But notwithstanding
what was said to the contrary, the Doctor did positively affirm the truth
thereof. And during the dispute, the Doctor on a sudden starting up, told them
he must leave their Company, for he was called away. Mr. Vniack perceiving him
to be raised off from the ground, catches fast hold of his arm with one hand,
and intwined his arm within the Doctor's arm, and with his other hand graspt
the Doctor's shoulder; Laughlin Moore likewise held him on the other side: But
the Doctor (maugre their strength) was lifted off the ground. Laughlin Moore's
fear caused him presently to let go; but Mr. Vniack continued his hold, and was
carried above a yard from the ground, and then by some extraordinary
unperceived force was compelled to quit. The Doctor was hurried immediately out
of the Room, but whether conveyed through the window, or out at the door, they
being so affrighted none of them could declare.

The two Gentlemen being greatly surprised at the strangeness of the accident,
and troubled for the loss of their Friend, called for the Innkeeper, to whom
they related what had befaln their Companion. He seemed not to be much
terrified thereat, as if such disasters were common thereabouts; but told them,
That within a quarter of a mile there lived a Woman, who by the Neighborhood
was called a Wise-woman, and who did usually give Intelligence of several
things that had been lost, and of Cattle that were gone astray, and he doubted
not but if the Woman were sent for, she could resolve them where their Friend
was, and by what means conveyed away. They forthwith sent a Messenger for the
Woman, who being come, Mr. Vniack demanded if she could give them any account
of a Gentleman, one Dr. Moore, that had been Spirited out of their Company
about an hour before. The Woman told him she could, and that he was then in a
Wood about a mile distant, preparing to take Horse; that in one hand he had a
Glass of Wine, in the other a piece of Bread; that he was very much courted to
eat and drink, but if he did either, he should never be free from a
Consumption, and pine away to death. Mr. Vniack gave the Woman a Cobb, and
desired her to use some means for preventing his eating and drinking. She
answered, He should neither eat nor drink with them: And then struck down her
hand, as if she were snatching at something. When she had thus done, she often
repeated a Spell or Charm in Irish, the substance whereof was; First she runs
his Pedigree back four Generations, and calls his Ancestors by their several
Names; then summons him from the East, the West, the North, and the South, from
Troops and Regiments, especially from the Governor mounted on the Sorrel
Horse, etc. And after having repeated the Charm, she gave them an account of
the several places the Doctor should be carried unto that Night.

As first, from the Wood to a Danes Fort about seven miles distant, where there
should be great Revelling and Dancing, together with variety of Meats and
Liquors; to the eating and drinking whereof he should be very much importuned,
but promised she would prevent his doing either. And from that Fort he was to
be carried twenty miles farther, where there would likewise be great Merriment,
and then to the Seven Churches; and toward Daybreak should be returned safe
to the company of his Friends, without any damage or mischief whatsoever: and
so took leave of Mr. Vniack and Mr. Moore.

About six a clock the next morning, Dr. Moore knocked at the door, and being
let in, desired Meat and Drink might be provided for him, for that he was both
hungry and thirsty, having been hurried from place to place all that Night: And
after having refreshed himself, discoursed of the manner of his being taken
away; That it seemed to him there came into the Room about twenty men, some
mounted on Horseback, others on foot, and laid hold on him; That he was
sensible of Mr. Vniack's and Mr. Moore's endeavors to have kept him, and of
the force they used; but it was all to no purpose, for had there been forty
more they would have signified nothing; That from the House he was carried to a
Wood, about a mile distant, where was a fine Horse prepared, and as he was
about to mount, a Glass of Wine was given him, and a crust of Bread; but when
he offered to eat and drink, they were both struck out of his hand; That from
thence he went in the same Company that had taken him away, to a Danes Fort
about seven miles from the Wood; That he imagined himself to be mounted on a
white Horse, whose motion was exceeding swift, and when they came to the Fort,
their Company multiplied to about three hundred large and well-proportioned Men
and Women: He who seemed to be Chief, was mounted on a Sorrel Horse; that they
all dismounted and fell to dancing, and that it came to the Doctor's turn to
lead a Dance, which he did remember the Tune he danced unto.

That after the dancing, there appeared a most sumptuous Banquet, and the
Governor took him by the hand and desired him to eat; which he several times
attempted, but was prevented by something that still struck the Meat out of his
hand: And so gives an account how from thence he was carried to the several
places the Old Woman had mentioned the Night before; and that about break of
day* he found himself alone within sight of the Inn.

Mr. Vniack was so curious as to go seven miles out of his way, to see the
Danes Fort, and the Doctor was his Guide; who traced the path he had traveled
the Night before so exactly, that if his Horse went but a yard out of the
track, he would presently turn him into it again; and that upon view of the
Fort, he found the Grass so trodden down, and the Ground beaten, as if five
hundred men had been there.

This was related by Mr. Vniack in the presence of one Dr. Murphey, a Civilian,
Dr. Moore himself; and Mr. Ludlow, one of the Six Clerks of the High Court of
Chancery, November 18. 1678.

FOr satisfaction of the Licenser, I certify this following Relation was sent
to me from Dublin, by a person whom I credit, and recommended in a Letter,
bearing date the 23d of November last, as True News much spoken of there.

John Cother.

FINIS.

