Licensed

November 27. 1671.

map of the islands of Benganga and Coma A. The Fretum that parts the Islands
B. The Town C. The Lesser River D. The Marsh where Henry Schoten took
possession


Cacique of Benganga.
a chief of Benganga Vasques de Pagna de Lysbon.
depiction of Vasquez de Pagna compass rose Cross sculpsit


THE Hairy-Giants: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF TWO ISLANDS in the SOUTH SEA, Called by
the name of Benganga and Coma:

Discovered By HENRY SCHOOTEN of Harlem; In a Voyage began January 1669, and
finished October 1671.

Also, a perfect Account of the Religion, Government, and Commodities of those
Islands. Together with the Customs and Manners of the Inhabitants; which are of
an extraordinary Stature, viz. Twelve foot high, or thereabouts.

Likewise, a Description of the Compass and Situation of those Islands, with
their Longitude and Latitude.

Whereunto is annexed an APPENDIX for the Instruction of Mariners.

Written in Dutch by Henry Schooten; and now Englished by P.M. Gent.

London, Printed by A. Maxwell, for John Watson, and are to be Sold by James
Collins at the Kings-Arms in Ludgate Street, 1671.

TO THE READER
READER,
IT was this Consideration that gave birth to the Adventure of the Renowned
Columbus, That the parts of the Earth and Sea discovered, made up but half the
Globe: And he could not imagine that the Wisdom of the Creator would design so
vast a Compass as must make up the other part only for Fishes to inhabit Upon
this principle of reason, which carried with it a great probability of Success,
He first solicited Henry the Seventh of England; but being denied there, he
made his Address to Ferdinand King of Castile, who by the persuasion of
Elizabeth his Queen set out a small number of Ships, which after some Months
sailing Westward (not without the murmurings and despair of the Seamen) at
length discovered an unknown, yet habitable World. This Success of Columbus
sounded by the Trump of Fame awakened the sloathful and incredulous World, who
before would believe nothing possible but what their eyes could behold, or
their outward senses fathom: The World thus awakened, and having wiped their
eyes with the Gold of COLUMBINA, saw more clearly their former Errors: Now the
Golden-Age returns again Gold is exchanged for trifles, such as Knives,
Hatchets, etc. which were valued at six times their weight in Gold; and Pearls,
and Diamonds bear but an equal value with glass: But this lasted not long; for
immediately such multitudes of Ships lanched out with expectations of gain,
that they soon exhausted the discovered Mines, and reduced it almost to an
equal value with that of Europe. Ferme omnes sceleratus amor nunc urget Habendi.

What crouding to the West! with what cunning do they catch and enclose the
Wind, from what corner so-ever it comes, and make it serve their purpose! What
prying is now into the private recesses of Thetis! Never was more rapes
committed upon the Virgin-Rivers than in this age.

Heu crescit Scelerata sitis, nullusve petendi,
Cogendive pudor --
-- Quid non Mortalia pectora cogit
Auri Sacra fames.
Several Discoveries was made, so that none lost their labor; and since that
time many places have been discovered, and yet there remains above a fourth
part undiscovered; this gave me encouragement to take upon me this Adventure,
though not without great trouble and care, such as the want of many Necessaries
for my self and Seamen, which were much afflicted with a desperate Sickness,
that did deprive me of most of them; but I accidentally met with a vessel that
lent me some of her men, which gave me greater encouragement to proceed in my
Discovery, which Divine Providence did bless with success; for in four days
after I came out of Fretum le Mair, I discovered the Land, which in the
following Treatise I give you a relation of.

I do not doubt but this Discovery will be beneficial to Europe many ways;
first as it may encourage several others to proceed in the like Adventures
which may happily find out other Lands, and likewise these particular Islands
may be beneficial, they being very fruitful, not over-peopled; abounding with
many rich Mines, besides Pearls and precious Stones, with many other rich
Commodities. The Inhabitants are a people very humane, witty, and intelligent,
ready to receive any Instructions, and may be easily brought to Traffic.

If you accept of this my pains in the Discovery and Relation, I shall think my
time well bestowed, and may possibly by your acceptance be encouraged to make a
second Adventure, in the mean time

I rest your Friend Henry Schooten.
Amsterdam October 30. 1671.
A Description OF THE ISLANDS OF BENGANGA and COMA.
SECT. I. A Voyage from Amsterdam into the Southern Sea.
ON January 1, 1669, We set Sail from Amsterdam in the Vessel called the
Flying-Faulcon: The Design of our Voyage being wholly Discovery. We made way to
the Southern Sea; the twentieth of August following we came to the Streights of
Magalan; and on the twenty sixth we had a sight of Terra del Fuega, by which we
Coasted three or four days, and then left; passing through Fretum le Mair into
the Main-Ocean called Mare del Zur: on the sixth of September following we took
an Observation, and found our selves in the Latitude of fifty degrees fourteen
minutes. The Wind at East and by South; we sailed directly before the Wind; and
on the tenth of September in the Evening we discovered Fire, an assured
testimony of some Land: but early in the Morning we were better c^^firmed in
our belief, being in sight of the very Land, and within a mile or thereabouts
of it: we Coasted along several days, and could spy no Towns or Houses, but
discovered many good Ports and Promontaries. On the thirtieth of September we
discovered another piece of Land separate from this by a River or Fretum, a
League and half in breadth. We still continued our Discovery by Coasting along
this Land likewise. About the Eighteenth of November following we came to the
other end of the Fretum before discovered, by which we knew it to be an Island
that we had discovered, and by computation Judge both the Islands to be in
Compass about three hundred Leagues: we ventured into this Fretum, and at our
entrance, I gave it the name of Fretum del Schooten. As we passed along we
could discover on the Banks, People of an extraordinary size, and hairy: Having
sailed about seven Leagues we discovered a River running Eastward up into the
first Island; into this River we ventured, and having sailed about a mile, we
discovered a Town (as we supposed by the great quantity of Smoke that ascended
from thence); at length drawing nearer to it we espied Houses, or rather Hills
as they seemed to us by their Grass-Coverings; before this Town we cast Anchor,
and made an Observation, and found our selves in the Latitude of fifty Degrees
thirteen Minutes, South; and the Longitude Two hundred seventy five Degrees
thirty Minutes. We had not rid at Anchor above three hours before we could espy
a Canoo coming over to us from the Town; the reason of which we could not well
apprehend; at length drawing near to us, we espied in it an European, as his
Complexion and Habit did show; he had in his hand a shattered torn Jack-flag,
in which we might discover something of the Portugal Arms: Being come to the
Ship-side, he saluted us with these words, Dios vos guarda hermanos; which in
the Portuguese language signifies, God save you my Brethren: I then returned
his Salutation in his own language, saying, Sea bien veni do Hermano. Welcome
Brother; and invited him into the Ship: which Invitation he willingly accepted,
and came into the Ship; our Seamen would have taken the men in the Canoo into
the Ship, but he would not suffer them, telling us they were Slaves, and ought
not to be so much Countenanced: We took this Portuguese into the great Cabin,
and gave him the best Entertainment our Ship could afford; after three or four
hours stay in our Ship, he took his leave, and gave us an Invitation to his
House, which he told us was in that Town we saw; and promised likewise to send
Canoo's for the whole Ship's Company, which he accordingly performed in the
Morning following.

The Natives that Rowed in the Canoo's were all hairy, having no other
Clothing than what Nature had furnished them withal; and the least of them by
computation above Eleven foot high; by these Gygantick men, we were safely
conducted to the Town, which consisted of about a thousand Houses, built of
Timber, and covered over the top with Boughs of Trees wreathed together; and
over them were placed very curiously Gr^ensads, which make their Houses look
like so many Hills covered with Grass.

At length we were Conducted to this Portuguese House, who it seems was
Governor of this Town, and Cacique, or King of that part of the Country: His
House was built after the same manner with the rest, bur much bigger.

At the Entrance to his House he received us with a great deal of Expressions
of Joy, and conducted us into a very fair Room, where we were plentifully
entertained with roasted Venison, and Wine in abundance

Having pretty well satisfied our selves, he discoursed with us concerning our
Adventures, and related to us the manner of his Adventures, since his coming
from Lisbon, after this manner.

SECT. II. The Adventures of Vasques de Pagna, from the year 1646, to November
1670; as it was related by himself to Henry Schooten.
I Vasques de Pagna set sail from Lisbon in the year One thousand six hundred
forty-six, upon the same account that you did from Amsterdam, and by accident
made this Island: being curious in the Discovery, I first Coasted about the two
Islands, and then put into the Fretum, that parts the two Islands; and
observing this River that runs up into the Country, I ventured into it;
resolving to venture so far till I could see either Houses or Inhabitants; but
by the neglect of my Mate, not being careful enough in sounding the Channel, my
Ship unfortunately struck upon a Sand, and split in a very short time, giving
us little space to shift for our lives; in this straight every Man endeavoring
to save himself, my self with two more got safe to the Shore; but of the rest
of our Company I never could hear of since, and therefore conclude they were
all drowned. We sought about for shelter from the Cold and Rain, it being about
the time of the Winter-Solstice, at which time it is rather Colder than it is
with you in Europe. At length we found a large hollow Tree, into which we
entered, and slept for that night.

The next Morning as soon as we could see, we went to the Waterside to see
whether any thing was driven a shore, or floated near to Land; when we came
there we espied several pieces of our Ship floating about; and walking along by
the shore we found a Barrel of Biscuit, and near to that our Jack-Flag, both
which we took up and went away very joyfully toward our Arbor, where we
secured them, and gave thanks to God for his great mercy in making such
Provision for us: Upon this Biscuit we lived about three Months, and spent our
time in Prayers, and walking the Grounds near to the Tree, retreating upon the
least noise to our Harbor: In the second Month one of my Companions fell sick
and died, and at three Months end my other Companion.

Now was I left in a miserable Condition, my Company dead, and my Victuals
almost spent; but however I comforted my self with these thoughts, that the
same God that hitherto had so plentifully provided for me, would still take
care of me; I now resolved to travel up farther into the Country, and if there
were any Inhabitants (for as yet I had seen none) to commit my self to their
mercy; being thus resolved, I thought to leave some Memorial behind me, that if
it should happen that any European should light upon this place, they might
know what Adventure I had made; I therefore took the Jack-Flag, and with a
black-lead Pencil writ these Words as plain as I could, Vasques de Pagna of
Lisbon was here; and then secured it in a convenient place in the Tree, where
it might be secure from the injuries of weather. Then I took the remainder of
the Biscuit, and desired God to prosper my Journey, and traveled into the
Country.

In two days travel I discovered hairy people, such as you see; at first I was
something fearful of them, but my fear was soon taken away, for I found them to
be more fearful of me, admiring at my Clothes and Complexion; and were ready to
adore me. Walking a little further, I could espy, as it were, a grove of Hills
which were their Houses, whose pleasant Verdure was very delightful; being come
near to the Town, I was surrounded with hundreds of these Hairy-people,
admiring me, and making offers to adore me, supposing I was a god; but I did
what I could to hinder them. At length it came to the King's ear, who came
himself with several Priests to visit me, and made signs to me to let them know
what I was; first lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and then pointing to me, and
then to the Heavens again; but I let them understand by the like signs, that I
did not come immediately from Heaven, but hoped to go thither; and this I did
by first pointing to the Earth from whence I came, and to the Heavens whether I
hoped to go. With which they were well satisfied, and conducted me to the
Caciques House (for so they call their Kings): The Cacique telling his Priest
(as I have been since informed by his Daughter my Wife) that I was of
Celestial Extract, and fit for no Company but the Gods and Kings. At this
Palace I fared very well; and having very small hopes of returning to my
Country, or seeing any of Europe, I thought it my best way to assure my self of
a Being amongst them, and this I did by ingratiating my self with the Cacique's
Daughter, whom I found very ready to receive any kindness from me; her Father
likewise casting a pleasant aspect on both, did give me encouragement to make
some offers of Amors, which was kindly received, and we in a short time
married according to the Custom of the Country; of which with their other
Rites and Customs, I shall give you a full account hereafter. Being married, he
gave me Two hundred Slaves, and bid me choose out a place in the Island to
inhabit, and build a Town that might be called by my Name.

Having taken my leave, I with my Wife and Slaves with store of all sorts of
Provision, came toward this place, which I the rather made choice of, because
it was the place I formerly had taken possession of; likewise hoping, that
being near to this River, some European might at some time or other happen to
sail into it, as I had done.

SECT. III. A Continuation of the Relation, with the manner of the Portuguese
treating us.
HAving given us this relation of his Adventure, he carried us and showed us
the hollow Tree they first lodged in, which stands at the entrance to his
House, painted with a sort of red Paint, like to our Oker, but much brighter
color; with which Commodity that part of the Country does much abound: Then
he carried us, and showed us the places where he formerly had buried his
Companions, over whose Bodies he had caused to be erected Pyramids, covered
with Moss, and curiously checkered with Boughs of Trees woven together
crosswise. Having done this, he carried us into a stately large Room, whose
Wall instead of Tapistry was bedeck't with Flowers and growing Moss, and
checkered with Boughs after the manner of the Pyramids (before mentioned); on
the upper end of which, on a Seat or Bank, sat his Lady with Four Children;
his Lady was near Twelve Foot high, his Eldest Son, about Twenty years of age,
was more than Twelve foot; his Second Son about Sixteen years of age, above Ten
foot; his two Daughters younger, one was Nine foot, and the other Seven foot in
height. But that which was most remarkable, was, that his Second Son and
Eldest Daughter were smooth as we are, and yet retained the Nature of the
Country as to height.

Being pretty well satisfied with our entertainment and diversions, we desired
his leave to return to our ship, but he would not grant it, telling us that we
should lie there that night; and then conducted us into another large Room,
wherein was Hammocks provided for us to lie upon; here he treated us again with
two or three Movyles of Wine, (which Movyle contained about a Gallon); having
drank up our Wine, he bid us goodnight, and left us to our repose.

Next morning as soon as Sun was up, he came to us, and asked us how we slept,
and called for a Movyle of Wine for our Morning's-draught, and caused likewise
some Venison to be brought to us, with which having broke our fast, he carried
us to see his Town, and the Church which he had built. He told us, at his first
coming to this place he was both King and Priest. And that he had converted his
Wife, and had baptized her and all the inhabitants of the place, being all as
his domestic Servants; but since, the people increasing, he had constituted
other Priests. After this discourse in the Church, we returned to his House,
where he gave order for a Dinner to be provided for us, in the mean time he
entertained us with a farther relation of the Government and Customs of this
Island in these words following.

SECT. IV. Of the Government, Religion, and Customs of the Inhabitants: With
the nature of the Soil, and the several Commodities of the Island Benganga.
THis Island wherein you are, is called by the Natives Benganga, Governed this
thousand years by the Family of Gangois, of which Family my Father-in-law is;
who is called by the name of Conumbro Bengangois: his chief seat is Cubugnello,
the Town where I was Entertained and Married. He is the Absolute Monarch of the
Island, and has Forty petty Kings that live about him, that do Homage, and
pay Tribute to him yearly.

They worship in all parts of this Island, except mine, the Devil, who appears
to them very often in a misty cloud, uttering or mumbling out some words
concerning his will; which if they do not punctually perform, some great
misfortune happens, either to them or their Children soon after. They believe
that they that live well here, and do no man any injury, and obey the Laws of
the Cacique, they shall enjoy much happiness after death, in pleasant fields,
behind the Hills. At three times of the year they offer Sacrifices to their
Dieu (as they call him) who appears in a Cloud upon a high Mountain all the
time of their Sacrificing; and these Sacrifices are sometimes Goats, and
sometime Children.

Their manner of Marriage is in this manner: The Parents of both parties being
first agreed, the Father of the Maid brings out his Daughter to the Youngman,
and they immediately upon the first sight declare to their Patents their liking
or refusal of each other; if they declare their liking, the Father of the
Damosel in the presence of one of their Fritazeers, or Priests, gives his
Daughter to the Young Man, and with her gives her Dowry, which is one or more
Servants, according to his ability and their former agreement; after this the
Fritazeer offers a Sacrifice to the Dieu, and the Marriage is celebrated. They
are here allowed to have but one Wife; and if either die, they are not
permitted to marry again: Both Men and Women here are very chaste and temperate
in meat and drink: Their Women are not so fruitful as in Europe, it being a
rare thing for one to see four Children in a Family. Theft and Murder are here
severely punished with cruel Tortures unto death; so that a stranger may safely
travel in this Island without fear of harm, except it be from Bears which lurk
in the Woods, with which this Island is well stored.

The Commodities of this Island are Saunders, Palm Trees, Konock a sort of
paint, Cassanack a kind of Pults of which they make their bread; great plenty
of Goats and Deer, Fowl of several sorts, Fish in abundance, Otters and Beevers
good store. Here are also several Gold and Silver Mines, but they are not much
regarded by the Inhabitants, they adorning themselves more with Pearl and
Amber, with which this Country is well stored. Their Drink is Palm-Wine, which
they make after this manner: They bore a hole in the tree, and put into the
hole a hollow Cane, and at the end of the tap they hang a vessel to catch the
liquor: in an hours time if the Tree be any thing large, there will run out a
gallon; this liquor is fit to drink presently, and is very pleasant and
spiritous, intoxicating the brain, as soon as the most generous Wine in Europe;
here are several acres of ground yearly planted with these Trees, which serve
for the use aforesaid. They have here a certain Tree which they call
Cocotonuch, of the Bark of which they weave a Cloth which serves them for
Hammocks and Mantles which they use in the Winter time; it being full as cold,
or colder about June as it is in Europe in December. The people here by reason
of their Temperance and Chastity live longer than they do in Europe; the
generality of them living till they are a Hundred and twenty, or a Hundred and
fifty years of age: The like reason might be given for their extraordinary
stature.

The Women here are very comely, and well featured; their faces indifferently
smooth, but the Men are so rough and hairy in the face, that they look like so
many Island-shocks.

Thus having given you an account of the Country in general, I shall give a
particular account of my own Jurisdiction.

SECT. V. A Discourse of the Government of Terra de Pagna, the particular
Jurisdiction of the Portuguese Vasques de Pagna.
THis part of the Island that you are now in, is called by me Terra de Pagna
after my own name. My Government and Laws are of two sorts, after the manner of
the Europeans, viz. Ecclesiastical and Civil: My eldest Son I have made Judge in
all Civil matters; and my second Son in Ecclesiastical: The Ten Commandments is
the rule of our Government; the Lords Prayer and Creed the rule and foundation
of our Devotion: These things I have taught them in their own language, and
they have them so imprinted in their memory, that I think there is no person in
my bounds that is above ten years of age, but will readily repeat them.

The Limits of my Jurisdiction is ten Leagues round from the River. In it are
four Towns near so big as this, governed by Deputies.

SECT. VI. A Continuation of the Relation.
HEre he was interrupted, notice being given that Dinner was ready, unto which
we was conducted: Here was a noble Entertainment, with Venison of several
sorts, Fowl plenty, and Wine in abundance; his Lady and Children honoring us
with their Company. During our sitting at Dinner, his Lady who had learnt to
speak Portuguese, made several Enquiries of us concerning Portugal and Europe;
asking us if Europe was as big as this World she lived in? We told her, That
this place was as small in comparison of Europe as this Town was to the whole
Island of Benganga. After this manner we discoursed, till night drawing near,
put us in mind of going to our Ship; we therefore earnestly desired leave to
depart, which the Governor very unwillingly granted, but made us promise that
(if God would permit) we would return again, or at least acquaint the European
World with this place, and more especially his own Country; desiring them to
send over some Religious men to assist him in planting the Gospel amongst these
miserably deluded people.

Thus we took our leave, and came to our Ship, where we reposed for that night,
and the next morning weighed Anchor and hoised our Sails, and departed,
saluting the Town with all our Guns, which we suppose put the Natives into some
fright, not being acquainted with those noises. As we passed along the Fretum
we espied some few hairy men of the same stature with those of Benganga.
Passing by a great Marsh, where there was no danger of Ambush, we ventured
ashore, and struck down our Ancient in token of possession, giving it the name
of Coma, by reason of the Hairy Inhabitants. Having done this, we came again to
our Ship, and in Ten Months time arrived at Amsterdam sufficiently satisfied
with our Discovery.

This is a true Relation of our Voyage and Discovery.

Henry Schooten, Master. Cornelius Groot. Mate.


FINIS.
An APPENDIX. The Qualifications of such as undertake a Voyage for Discovery:
With several Precepts to be observed by them.
SECT. I. Of their Qualifications.
FIrst, It is requisite that they be men of middle age, of a good healthy
Constitution, all their Senses firm, and in their full vigor, that they may be
able to go through any dangers or hazards that may happen to them in such an
uncertain Adadventure.

II. They must be well skilled in the Arts of Arithmetic, Geometry, Gunnery
and Fortification, Trigonometry, Astronomy, and Navigation.

SECT. II. Precepts to be observed by such as undertake these Adeventures.
FIrst, Let them be provided with a good strong Ship, store of Provision,
Weapons defensive and offensive, with a sufficient quantity of Ammunition, and
convenient Instruments for prospection and observation.

II. Let the Seamen be healthy, stout, resolute Blades, such as are resolved
against all dangers that may happen.

III. Let them be very curious in their Observations, and calculate the
Longitude and Latitude of all places they touch at.

IV. Let them keep their Journal Book exactly; truly and faithfully recording
all the passages of the Voyage, as the several changings of the Wind; the rumbs
and distance of sailing upon those rumbs; the true sounding of the Channels in
those Harbors they enter, and what rocks or sands they meet with, giving some
necessary rules and cautions for shunning those dangers.

V. Let them carefully observe the variation of the Compass, with the Currents,
and trade-Winds.

VI. Let them use their utmost endeavor to understand the Religion, Customs,
Manners, and Commodities, with the Inclinations of the Inhabitants, and commit
it to writing, that they may give a true acccount of them when they return home.

VII. Let them be curious in observing the Clouds; by the clearness of them
whereof, they may know when they draw near to land: for by their passing over
the land, wanting a supply of Vapors, the Clouds become more white and clear,
as Columbus observed and experienced.

VIII. "When in the daytime they observe the Clouds gathering together in
heaps near the Horizon, looking blew, and a section appear on that part of the
Hemisphere, or by night discover fire, they may be certain they are approaching
to land.

IX. When they come near to the land, let them first coast along by it, and
curiously observe the Creeks and Harbors, their manner of bearing, with their
forms or figures.

X. When they have coasted so long that they are sufficiently satisfied of the
figure and situation of the place, and have found out a convenient River,
either broad enough to secure them from any attempt the Natives may make upon
them from shore; or else whose banks are distant from Woods or other
Ambusheado's.

XL. When they find an opportunity to venture ashore, let them go well armed,
that they may awe the Natives; who when they see their store, or bonpointed
arrows do not pierce them, as they do their own Countrymen, will be ready to
offer divine adoration to them; but let them be very prudent in this case;
neither absolutely hindering it, yet modestly denying such adoration, by
pointing to the heavens, letting them know there they ought to pay their
devotion; for by absolutely hindering their Adoration, they thinking you to be
men, will make other attempts upon you, as the Indians did upon the Spaniards
at their first coming thither, by holding them so long under water till they
were confirmed they were mortal.

XII. Let them be very careful when they are permitted to traffic, and live
quietly amongst the Natives, that they show good examples to them by their good
lives and conversations; let them be just in all their dealings, punctual to
their promise, and civil to the Natives in general.

FINIS.

