BOOKS lately Printed for W. Rogers.
A Sermon Preached at White Hall, before the Queen, on the Monthly-Fast-Day,
September 16th, 1691. 4o;

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The Eighth Edition. 12o;

Both by the most Reverend Father in God, John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Sermon Preached on the 28th of June, at St. Andrew's Holbourn. By the Right
Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of Norwich.

A Sermon Preached on the 28th of June, at St. Mary le Bow, on Sunday the Fifth
of July, 1691. at the Consecration of the most Reverend Father in God John Lord
Archbishop of York; and the Right Reverend Fathers in God, John Lord Bishop of
Norwich, Richard Lord Bishop of Peterborough, and Edward Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. By Joshua Clark, Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Bishop of Norwich. 4o;

The Necessity of Serious Consideration, and speedy Repentance, as the only way
to be safe both living and dying. 8o;

The Lambs of Christ fed with the sincere Milk of the Word of God, in a short
Scripture Catechism. 12o;

The Folly of Atheism demonstrated to the Capacity of the most unlearned
Reader. 8o;

These Three by the Reverend Mr. Clement Elis, Rector of Kirby in
Notinghamshire.

Reflections upon two Books, one Entitled, The Case of Allegiance to a King in
Possession. The other, An Answer to Dr. Sherlock' s Case of Allegiance to
Sovereign Powers in Possession: on those parts especially, wherein the Author
endeavors to show his Opinion to be agreeable to the Laws of this Land. In a
Letter to a Friend. 4o;

The Dean of St. Pauls's SERMON BEFORE THE QUEEN, On the 12th of February,
1691/2.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, February the XIIth, 1691/2.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun overagainst St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleetstreet. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before HER MAJESTY At WHITE HALL, Febr. 12. 1691/2.
IV. MATT. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil.


THE Temptation of our Savior, after his fasting Forty Days, is a very proper
Subject for our Meditation at this time; and suggests so many useful
observations, that I shall not wast any time in a needless Preface; but shall
1. Consider in general, what concerns his Temptation; and 2. Explain the Nature
of those particular Temptations wherewith the Devil assaulted him.

1. In general, Concerning our Savior's being tempted by the Devil: Now to
tempt, is to make a Trial and Experiment; and when the Devil tempts, it is to
try, if he can persuade, or seduce us from the Fear, and Worship, and Obedience
of God.

1. Now in the first place it is very observable, that Christ himself, when he
became Man, was tempted of the Devil; and there is no greater mystery in this,
than that he was liable to hunger and cold, and had all the innocent Appetites,
Inclinations, Infirmities of Human nature; that is, That he was a true and real
Man. The Ancients generally conclude, that the Devil did not know at this time,
how great a Person our Savior was, even the Eternal Son of God; for it is
hardly credible, that had he known this, he would have made so vain and
hopeless an attempt on him: It is likely enough, he thought him to be some
extraordinary person; He knew by the Ancient Prophecies, that the Messiah was
to appear; and knew from the Prophet Daniel, that the time for his coming was
accomplished; nay, it is probable, he knew all the circumstances of his Birth,
and heard that testimony God gave him at his Baptism, This is my beloved Son;
but he saw he was a Man, though an extraordinary Man; and might not know that
he was any thing more; and having formerly foiled our first Parents in
Paradise, in the State of innocence, hoped for the like success again.

Now if Christ himself was tempted by the Devil, none of us must hope to
escape; tempted we shall be, and therefore must take care to stand upon our
guard, and to fortify our Minds against all temptations.

And this encouragement we have from the example of our Savior, that to be
tempted is no Sin, unless we yield to a temptation; for He was tempted as we
are, yet without sin; and we cannot imagine, had it been a sin to be tempted,
that God would have permitted the Devil to have tempted our Savior; which may
ease the fears of some Melancholy Christians, who are afflicted with evil and
tempting thoughts which their Souls abhor; for whatever the cause of such
thoughts be, whether a frighted and disturbed imagination, or the suggestion of
wicked Spirits, they can no more defile the Soul, which abhors and rejects them
with grief and indignation, than they can the Paper, on which they are writ.

Nay, hence we learn, that God many times exercises those with the greatest and
most difficult Trials and Temptations, who are most dear to him. He had no
sooner proclaimed Christ his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, but he
leads him by the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil.

This Life is a State of Trial and Probation; and Temptations, though they
create some trouble and difficulty to good men, yet do them no hurt. If good
Men Conquer, Temptations do but exercise, increase, and confirm their Graces,
and make them great and illustrious examples to the World, glorify the Divine
Power in the Victories and Triumphs of his Servants, over the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil; give them a secure hope in God, and a transporting sense of his
Love, and prepare great rewards for them in the next Life. And if they happen
in any particular encounter to be overcome, as St. Peter himself was, when he
denied his Master; yet they rise again with glory, and the sense of their sin,
and the shame of a defeat, fills them with sorrow, indignation, self-revenge,
gives them new spirit, vigor, activity, resolution, makes them more patient of
hardships and sufferings, more unwearied in doing good, more humble and modest,
and more perfectly resigned to the Will of God, to dispose of them and their
Services to his own Glory, as he pleases.

God does not train up those whom he Loves, and whom he prepares for Glory, in
ease and softness; Whom the Lord loves he chastneth; and scourges every son
whom he receives: And the more difficult Temptations he exposes us to, the
greater honor he does us; the more glorious will our Triumphs, the richer and
brighter will our Crowns be. Let us then behold our Savior in the Wilderness,
separated from human conversation, and all the comforts of Life, in the midst
of wild Beasts and tempting Spirits, and not think, that God uses us hardly, if
at any time he lets loose the Tempter upon us, and gives him power over all we
have, as he did in the Case of Job, to afflict us in our Relations, our Bodies,
our Estates, good Names, or whatever gives us the sharpest and keenest sense of
suffering; and is the most difficult exercise of our Faith.

2. Let us consider the time, when our Savior was tempted, viz. immediately
after his Baptism, being full of the Holy Ghost, 4. Luke. 1.

1. As soon as our Savior was baptized, he was led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness. For Then in my Text relates to the time of his Baptism; and St.
Luke tells us, this was done in his return from Jordan, where he was baptized
by John.

By this Religious Rite, our Savior had devoted himself to the immediate
service of God in the Salvation of Mankind, and was inaugurated into his
Prophetic Office, by that Testimony which was given to him by a Voice from
Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and this was the
Critical time, both for the Devil to tempt, and for our Savior to baffle all
his temptations, and to triumph over him.

Could the Devil have conquered our Savior in this first assault, there had
been an end of this Glorions design of man's Salvation, when he had enslaved and
captivated the Savior himself; and therefore he began as early with the second
Adam, as he did with the first, though not with the like success. Had our first
Parents resisted the first temptation, we had been happy for ever; but they
yielded and brought death upon themselves and their Posterity; but the seed of
the Woman, whom God had promised, should break the Serpents Head, who was made
manifest to destroy the works, the Kingdom and the Power of the Devil, by God's
order and appointment, first encounters him in his own person, resists his most
furious assaults, makes him retreat with shame and despair, as foreseeing his
own destiny, and the final destruction of his Kingdom. As the old Serpent
seduced our first Parents in Paradise, and brought sin and misery, and death
into the world, so it was very fitting that the Savior of Mankind should give
the first proof of his Divine Power in conquering the Tempter.

This gives us great encouragement to fight under Christ's Banners against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; for the Captain of our Salvation has already
conquered, and if we are not wanting to our selves, we shall be more than
Conquerors through Christ who strengthens us.

He knows what the power of temptations is, and what measures of Grace are
necessary to resist them; and if we do not forsake him, he will not forsake us.
He has conquered himself, and knows how to conquer; and if we faithfully adhere
to him, we shall conquer too.

Nay, in case we should some time be conquered, this has made him a merciful
and compassionate High Priest, being in all things tempted like as we are: He
knows the weakness of humane nature, and the power and subtilty of the Tempter,
and prays for us, as he did for St. Peter, That our faith fail not; that if we
fall, we may rise again by Repentance: And this is a mighty Consolation, That
if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is not only a Propitiation for our Sins, but was tempted also,
as we are.

2ly. St. Luke observes, that our Savior was full of the Holy Ghost, (which he
received without measure at his Baptism, when the Holy Ghost descended like a
Dove, and rested on him) before he was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to
be tempted of the Devil.

For Human Nature (and it was the Human Nature of Christ on which the Holy
Ghost descended) cannot resist such powerful Assaults without Divine
Assistances. And the Example of our Savior assures us, that God will not
expose us to any Temptations, without giving us proportionable measures of
Grace to resist them: That if we are at any time conquered, it is not for want
of power, but for want of will to conquer: that is, the fault is wholly our
own, and we cannot blame God for it.

I doubt, there are few men in the World, but the Devil (had he the full power
of tempting) could find out some Temptations too big for them; but the Divine
Goodness is seen, as well in restraining the power of the Devil, that we shall
not be tempted above what we are able to bear, as by the strengthening our minds
by the internal Assistances of his Grace; and therefore our Savior has taught
us to pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, (...), from
the wicked One, which does not signify, that we may never be tempted, which is
impossible, while we live in Bodies of Flesh and Blood, and are encompassed
with all the Flattering Objects of Flesh and Sense; but that God would not give
us up into the power of the Devil, to be tempted above what we are able.

Some of the Ancients observe from this Story, That when we devote and
consecrate our selves to God, we must expect to be tempted as our Savior was:
As for bad men, who are the Slaves and Vassals of the Devil, he cannot so
properly be said to tempt, as to govern them; for he is the Spirit that works
in the Children of disobedience: but when men desert his Service, he is very
busy to recover his Slaves again; but then our comfort and security too, is,
That when we give up our selves to the Service of God, he takes us into his
protection; the wicked One cannot touch us without his leave, and he always
proportions our Trials to our Strength.

3dly, Consider the Place of our Savior's Temptation: He was led by the Spirit
into the Wilderness, where there were no tempting Objects, but yet there the
temping Spirit found him.

Some men think, that the surest way to get rid of Temptations, is to get out
of the World; to withdraw themselves from Human Conversation; or to make a show
of doing it, without doing it; as if the Devil could not follow them into a
Desert, or a Cell. While we live in Bodies of Flesh and Blood, we may be
tempted wherever we are: If we mortify our Sensual Appetites, and our love to
this World, we may live very innocently in the World; if we do not, we can
never get rid of the World, but wherever we go, we carry it in our hearts.

Do these men imagine, they can never be tempted to lust, unless they daily see
and converse with beautiful Women? or that they cannot love the World without
living in a Court, and enjoying all the ease and luxury of a plentiful Fortune?
or that it is not possible to despise the World with as much haughtiness and
vanity of mind, as any Man has, who most admires it? That a Monk cannot be as
proud as an Emperor, and glory as much in a sullen Retirement, in Voluntary
Austerities, in an Affected Poverty, in a Vain Opinion of extraordinary
Sanctity, as any Man can do in Wealth and Power? Whence came all those
Superstitions, which have corrupted both the Faith and Worship of Christianity,
and done more mischief to the Church and Religion, than all the looseness of a
Secular Life, but from Deserts and the Cells of Monks and Hermites? Which
proves that the Devil has his Temptations for the Wilderness, as well as for
the Court; for the most Religious Devotees, and Melancholy Enthusiasts, as
well as for the Men of this World; and those the most dangerous Temptations
too; which as experience tells us, open a backdoor for Pride and Ambition, and
Secular Power, and a general corruption of Manners to enter into the Church,
and into the Lives of Christians: And therefore we must guard our selves
against the Tempter as well in our greatest solitudes and retirements from the
World, as in a crowd of business. We must have a care of the temptations of
Devotion, and Mortification, of Fastings and Penances, of a sullen discontent
at this World, as well as of the temptations of a busy Life, and of an easy
and prosperous Fortune.

4thly, I observe, That Christ was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil; that is, It was God's appointment, not his own voluntary
choice. And this Teaches us manfully to resist Temptations, when the Providence
of God, and the unavoidable circumstances of our Condition bring us into
Temptations, but not presumptuously to thrust our selves into them.

There is always danger in Temptations, especially when we rashly venture upon
them. Let not him that puts on his Armor, boast, as he that puts it off,
is true in our Spiritual Warfare. We have seen great Men conquered, even St.
Peter himself; and therefore Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall, and not unnecessarily venture too near a Precipice, where he may be in
danger of falling.

Our Savior has taught us to pray, that God would not lead us into Temptation,
as I observed before; much less then ought we to lead our selves into
Temptation. We may easily presume too far upon the Strength of our Faith, our
Courage, our Resolution, as St. Peter did, who had he been more diffident of
himself, had kept out of the High-Priest's Hall, and escaped the Temptation,
which he could not resist.

We daily see, that Men who presume upon the Strength of their Constitution,
and use their Bodies ill, destroy their Health, and shorten their Lives, while
Men who feel their own weak and crazy Temper, live on with Care to a good Old
Age; and thus it is with respect to the Mind, as well as to the Body:
Presumption will destroy those, whom Fear and Caution will secure; and
therefore, let us not be highminded, but fear.

There are a great many ways, whereby Men expose themselves to Temptation, and
tempt even the Tempter; some of which are very obvious: As to keep Ill Company,
whose Conversation is a daily Temptation: Sloth and Idleness, which betrays Men
to any Wickedness, which offers itself: For it is an uneasy thing to have
nothing to do, and that itself is a Temptation, and the Devil never wants
Business to employ such Men in; and I know nothing worse than this, but when
Men choose such Business, as is nothing else but Idleness and Vanity, or can
only minister to their own, or to other Men's Lusts.

But there are other ways, whereby Men thrust themselves into Temptations,
without considering what they do. I might name many, but shall content myself
with some few at present, which are least observed, and which prove Snares to
good Men; as for instance: To impose upon our selves constant Tasks of
Religion, that we will Read and Pray so much, and so often every Day, and
observe voluntary Fasts, and abstain from such innocent Diversions, etc. which
Men commonly resolve in some great Heats and Fits of Devotion, which they fancy
will continue in the same fervor, but never do; and then these Tasks grow very
uneasy, as every thing of Religion does, when it grows a Task; and then they
degenerate into dullness and formality, and then Men either leave them off, and
with that are tempted to leave off Religion itself; or they are so very cold,
that they fancy themselves spiritually dead, and fall into Melancholy, into
Desentions, into Despair itself.

It is a dangerous thing for Men by rash and arbitrary Vows, to tie themselves
up from doing that, which otherwise they might very innocently do, and which
they will be strongly tempted to do, when they have vowed not to do it. The
Guides of Souls know, that this is no imaginary Case, but what they so often
meet with, and see such ill effects of, that it is very fit to warn Men of the
snare. Were there no other reason against the Monkish Vows of Celibacy,
Poverty, and Obedience, I should think this sufficient, that considered only as
perpetual Vows, they are a dangerous State of Temptation; and for my own part,
I would never advise any Man to make a perpetual Vow to do, or not to do any
thing, which it is not perpetually his Duty to do, or not to do.

Thus to marry with Persons of a disagreeable Age, or a disagreeable Humor, or
a contrary Religion, is to put our selves into a state of Temptation; but such
particular Instances would be endless, and therefore I forbear

If God lead us into Temptation, he will give us sufficient strength to resist,
if we improve his Grace; if we lead our selves into Temptation, and God leave
us to the power and subtilty of the Tempter, the sin and the folly is our own.

5thly, I observe by what means our Savior conquered the Devil's Temptations,
and that was by the Authority, and by the Word of God: It is written, Man shall
not live by bread alone. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. These are such Answers, as would admit of no Reply; for the Authority of
God can never be answered.

And thus we must conquer also, if ever we will conquer, by a firm Faith in
God, and Belief of his Word: Faith is our Shield, and the Word of God is the
Sword of the Spirit, and we have no other fure Defense against all Temptations.

This ruined our first Parents in Paradise, when their Reason and Natural
Powers, were in their greatest Vigor, Perfection, and Integrity, that instead
of insisting on God's Authority, they ventured to reason the Case with the
Tempter. Set aside the Authority of God, and the Devil will quickly out-wit,
and out-reason us; he is skilled in all the Arts of Deceit, and Methods of
Persuasions, and without God's Authority, our Courage, our Resolution, our
Honor, out Reason itself, even all the Rants and triumphant Speculations of
Philosophy, will fail us in the Day of Trial: to Tempt, is either to deceive,
or to persuade, and there is no other secure defense against either, but the
Authority, and the Word of God. The wisest Reasoner may be imposed on by so
artificial a Tempter; but God can neither deceive, nor be deceived, and then
while we believe God, and have regard to his Commands, we cannot be deceived
neither: And what is able to resist all the Terrors and Flatteries of the
World, and the Flesh, but the Authority of that God, who is our Maker, and our
Judge? What insignificant Names are Virtue and Vice, how weak and feeble is the
sense of Decency and Honor, and the Dignity of Human Nature, and of a Life of
Reason (after we have read or writ so many Volumes about it) when we feel the
soft Charms of Pleasure, and our Eyes are filled with visible Glories? Who
would not part with a fine Thought or two, with some pretty Notions of Moral
Beauty, and Intellectual Pleasures, for a Happiness which may be seen and felt?
But the Authority of GOD, the firm belief of his Promises and Threatenings, the
hopes and fears of another World, are beyond all other Persuasions, unless any
thing can persuade a Man to be eternally miserable.

This may suffice to be spoke in General, concerning our Saviors Temptation;
we come now to consider,

II. The particular Temptation, wherewith our Savior was Assaulted, and they
are Three.

1. The First was to relieve his Hunger, after his long fasting by working a
Miracle: And when the Tempter came to him, he said, if thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

This was a very artificial Temptation, which it may be, none but Christ
himself would have been aware of: For what hurt was it, for the Son of God to
work a Miracle? What hurt was it for a Man, who was Hungry to relieve his
Hunger? For here was no Temptation to excess, but to satisfy the necessities
of Nature: What hurt was it for him, who afterward fed so many Thousands by
Miracles, in this great Distress, to have wrought a Miracle to satisfy his own
Hunger? This was very Plausible, and looked like very charitable Advice, but
yet there was a secret Snare in it.

1st, For this was made a Trial, whether he were the Son of God or not, If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread: Now had he complied
with this, it had argued a distrust of his Relation to God, and of the Love of
his Father; and this was a Temptation to Sin. Thus the Tempter dealt with our
first Parents, made them jealous of God's good Intentions toward them, and by
that Tempted them to Disobedience. The Serpent said unto the Woman, ye shall
not surely die. For God knows, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. That is, God
envies your Happiness, and therefore has forbid you to Eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil.

Thus the Devil suggested to our Savior, that he had great reason to Question,
whether he were the Son of God, because he was destitute of all the Comforts
and Supports of Life, and after forty Days Fasting, had nothing in the
Wilderness to Eat, unless he would turn Stones into Bread.

And though this part of the Temptation our Savior takes no notice of in his
Answer, but scorns it; yet we find it makes a very powerful Impression upon
other Men, who are apt to measure God's Love or Hatred by present things; when
they are Prosperous, they conclude they are the Favorites of Heaven; when they
are Afflicted and meet with cross Events, then God is angry with them and has
forsaken them: And though this argues such a stupid Ignorance of Christianity,
that one would think, it could be no Temptation to a Christian, yet it is too
Notorious, that three parts of the Melancholy, the Desertions, nay despair of
many Christians, is owing to no other Cause: they think their Condition safe
for the next World, while they are Prosperous in this, but as soon as the World
begins to Frown they are irrecoverably Damned; but would such men consider,
that our Savior himself wanted Bread in the Wilderness, and had no place,
whereon to lay his Head; it would cure these Desertions if there be no greater
Guilt, which a strait Fortune awakens the sense of, which I doubt is too often
the Case.

2dly, There was another Snare in this, to persuade our Savior, to supply the
necessities of Nature by extraordinary means, without the immediate Direction
and Command of God; for this had been a distrust of God's Care and Providence,
to have relieved his own wants by preternatural and uncommanded Methods: And
therefore to this he Answers, It is written, man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. That is, Bread
indeed is the ordinary Provision God has made for the support of Man's Life, but
when these ordinary and natural Provisions fail, he has other ways to support
Life, as he fed the Israelites with Manna and Quails in the Wilderness, and
gave them Drink out of a Rock, but then we must patiently and securely expect
by what means God will provide for us, and till the word proceed out of his
mouth, till we have some particular Command and Direction for it, we must take
no Extraordinary, Uncommanded, much less Forbidden ways, to preserve our Lives:
for this is want of trust in God, or want of Submission to his Will. Extreme
want and necessity is almost an irresistible Temptation to human Nature, to
distrust the ordinary Provisions of Providence, and to provide for our selves
by what means we can; and to justify what we do by such necessities: it
requires a great degree of Faith and Trust in God, when we have no Prospect of
ordinary Succors, patiently to expect God's Provision, without going out of
Gods way: But thus our Savior was tempted, and has taught us how to conquer
this Temptation, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God: If Bread fail, we must expect by what other
means God will supply our Wants, and not transgress those Laws God has
prescribed us, how desperate soever our Condition seem to be.

2dly, The next Temptation is in the other extreme, to presume so far upon his
Interest in God's Favor and Protection, as to make dangerous and vainglorious
Experiments of God's care: He set him upon a pinnacle of the temple, and said
unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it is written, He
shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time, thou should dash thy foot against the stone.

When the Tempter perceived, that Christ wholly relied on the Directions and
Authority of Scripture, he inforces his Temptation with Scripture too,
misunderstood and misapplied. And these are the most dangerous Temptations of
all, which impose upon Men with a show of Religion, as our late Experience of a
wild Enthusiastic Age will tell us; when nothing so bad could be thought of,
but some Men had Scripture-Examples, or Precepts, or Prophesies, or Parables,
to justify it; and therefore we must be aware of this, as well as of all the
other Arts and Stratagems of the Tempter.

In answer to this our Savior proves, that this Text could not mean, that God
would command his Angels to bear him up in their hands, if he should fling
himself from the Pinnacle of the Temple, because we are expressly forbid, to make
such Experiments of God's Protection, as this: It is written, Thou shall not
tempe the Lord thy God.

To tempt is to try, and to tempt God is to try what he will, or can do for us,
beyond his Promise, and beyond the ordinary Methods of his Providence;
especially when we either murmur against God, for not answering our
unreasonable demands, or presume upon his favor to do that, which he has
forbid us to do, or expect his Protection and Blessing, when we put our selves
out of the ordinary Protection of his Providence: it were easy, had I time to
give instances, of all these ways of tempting God; the Temptation of our
Savior concerns the last I mentioned, out of a vainglorious humor, and a
presumption of God's peculiar favor to us, voluntarily without any reasonable
pretense, much less necessity, to thrust ourselves into apparent and
unavoidable Dangers, and expect God should save us by Miracles: for this is
what our Savior was tempted to, to fling himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, in a presumptuous confidence of God's care of him, that he would
command his Angels to bear him up in their hands.

This looks like Faith in God, a plerephory of Hope, and full assurance of his
Love, but indeed is Vanity, Pride, Insolence, Presumption, and a tempting of
God. It is such an Affront and Indignity, as wise Men will not bear from their
best Friends, when they impose upon them, not to do them a real kindness, but
to gratify their vanity and humor in such Demands, as a wise Man cannot
honorably grant.

And yet there is a more dangerous and fatal Presumption then this, when men
have such a strong Imagination of their being the Sons, the Chosen and Elect
People of God, that they think they cannot do any thing to forfeit God's Love:
they may make more bold with God's Laws then other Men, for God sees no sin in
his people; nay indeed, that it is no Sin to advance themselves, and the Cause
they have Espoused, which they call the Glory of God, by extraordinary means,
that is, by transgressing all the known and ordinary Rules of Justice and
Charity.

These are dangerous Temptations, and we have seen the miserable Effects of
them, and therefore let no man think, that he is so great a favorite of Heaven,
as to have God at his beck to save him by Miracles, when he wilfully exposes
himself to such Dangers, as nothing but Miracles can Deliver him from; much
less to think, that God will alter the nature of Good and Evil for his sake;
that he will dispense with his Laws, (Laws which are as Eternal and
Unchangeable as his own Nature) when ever such vain Enthusiasts pretend to
serve themselves, and his Glory by the breach of them, It is written, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

3. These two Temptations were managed with great Art to deceive, the third is
open and barefaced. The Devil in express words tempts him to Idolatry, with
the Promise of all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them; which he
had drawn a beautiful Landscape of, and showed him from a high Mountain: All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: Or as St.
Luke relates it: All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for it
is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. Which in some sense
was true at that time; not that the Devil had the Supreme and Absolute disposal
of Kingdoms, for St. Paul assures us, that all the Powers even of the Pagan
World, were of God and ordained by God. But yet he 13 Romans 1.
was at that time the God of this World, and had a more visible Kingdom than
God himself. The true Worshippers of God were at that time chiefly confined to
Judea, a very little spot of Earth, but all the Power and Glory of the World
was in the hands of Idolaters, who Worshipped the Devil and wicked Spirits: And
the force of the Argument is, as if he had said to our Savior, You call your
self the Son of God, and Worship him, but will God do that for you, which I can
and will do, if you Worship me: You your self see, that he has no Kingdom but
Judea to bestow on you, and that also is at present in the Hands of my
Worshippers; but what is that to all the Kingdoms of the World, which are at my
disposal, and which you see your self are mine and under my Government. But our
Savior without disputing the value of this World, or what Power the Devil had
in the disposal of it, chides away the Tempter with Indignation, be gone Satan,
For it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. But though Christ refused this proffer, his pretended Vicar has taken it,
and revived the old Pagan Idolatry for the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory
of them.

This is the prevailing Temptation to this day, to corrupt Religion, the Faith
and Worship of God for some temporal Advantages: too many Men think that the
best Religion, which will best serve a secular Interest; And we have reason to
think, that too many do this, and know what they do; that their furious Zeal
for a false Religion is not all Ignorance and Mistake, but an undissembled Love
of this World: For can we think, that the Devil never tempted any Man but
Christ, knowingly and willingly to renounce the true Religion, and the true
Worship of God for this World? No doubt he does, and very often prevails too;
and these knowing Idolaters who make a downright bargain to Worship the Devil
for the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them, are those who abuse the
Ignorant and Credulous with a false and hypocritical Zeal.

But let us remember, that we must Worship the Lord our God, and him only must
we serve: Let us remember what our Savior tells us, What shall it profit a
man, if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Or, What shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? Let us remember, that the end of Religion is to
please God, to Glorify him, to be like him, and to enjoy him for ever, and
this will give us a secure Victory over the World and the Devil, Which God of
his infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

