Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker R. in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Gilberto, Arch. Episc. Cantuar. a
sac. Dom.
April 15. 1673.
AN ANSWER To several late TREATISES, Occasioned by a Book entitled a
DISCOURSE Concerning the IDOLATRY Practiced in the CHURCH of ROME, AND The
Hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. By Edward Stillingfleet D. D.
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. The First Part.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

THE General Preface.
IT is not for any pleasure I take in Controversy, nor out of a Resolution to
maintain what I have once written, that I expose my self again to the Censures
of Some, and the Rage of others, in Defense of our Church against the Church of
Rome: But out of a just sense of the Weight and goodness of the Cause I have
undertaken; which (if my affection to it has not strangely blinded my
judgment) does highly concern us as Men, as English Men, and as Christians.
For it is the Cause of Sense and Reason, against the absurd Doctrines they
impose on both; it is the Cause of our Nation against the Usurpation and
Tyranny of a Foreign Power; it is the Cause of the true Faith and Christianity,
against the Errors and Corruptions of the Roman Church. To abandon such a Cause
as this, were to betray the things which ought to be most dear to us: for we
cannot be reconciled to that Church on any easier terms, than renouncing our
Sense and Reason, enslaving our Country, and hazarding our Salvation. And what
can they give us in exchange for these?

It was the last of those three Heads, which gave occasion to the late so much
railed at, and so little confuted Book: which no sooner appeared, but as if
some dreadful Monster had risen out of the earth, some crossed themselves and
kept as far out of the sight of it, as they could; others made hideous out-crys
and grievous complaints; and the more fearful sort were forbidden either
looking on it, or entertaining any discourse about it. Upon which I pleased my
self that I had not added another Chapter to the Book; for if that number had
agreed with the ten particulars, it had passed among them for the Beast with
seven Heads and ten Horns; and they would have been glad their City upon seven
Hills could have been so excused. But this unusual noise and clamor awakened
the curiosity of many who love to see strange sights; and that which otherwise
might have been wholly neglected as a Book, was enquired after and looked into,
being represented as a Monster.

But when they found that this evil Spirit (as they accounted it) which
themselves had raised, was not to be laid again by hard words and ill language;
they began to consider what other course was to be taken to suppress it. And
forthwith there starts up a Young Sophister among them, and bids them be of
good heart; for by letting fly at him some Squibs and Crackers he did not
question, but he should put this Monster into such a Rage, as to make him fall
upon himself; which design being highly approved; in a short time came forth
that dapper piece, called Doct. Stillingfleet against Doct. Stillingfleet. It
was a notable plot, and cunningly managed, as the Reader may see by the
following Answer to it. After him a Graver Person undertakes the service;
Ha^^^mull. hist Jesuit. ordin. c. 8.
but as Hasenmullerus tells us, when Ignatius Loyola sent one of his Brethren
at Rome to dispossess a Person, he gave him this instruction, that he should be
sure to come behind the Devil, if he would drive him out; accordingly this N.
O. steals quite behind my Book, and began to confute it at the wrong end,
hoping by that means to drive out the evil Spirit which he supposed to lodge in
the Body of it. Which he has performed with great dexterity and success, as
the Reader may be fully satisfied in the Reply here following. These two I
undertook, before any other appeared, and intended to have published these two
Answers by themselves; but finding others that had written against me on the
same argument I was willing to bring as much as I could together to prevent
confusion or repetition. All which relating to the Principles of Faith, and the
Rosolution, and Rule of it, I made account to have dispatched at once; but
finding the Book begin to swell into too great a bulk, I have respited some
parts of it to another opportunity.

When those two men had done their Feats, an ancient and experienced Exorcist;
(and yet for all that no Conjurer) saw plainly this Spirit must be conjured
down; and thefore knowing the great efficacy of Charms, he gives his Book the
Title of (...) Stillingfleeton. Which words put me almost in as great a fright
as the Holy Chair would have done; I began to consider, whether Mengus or any
other of their skilful men had ever used those Emphatical words before; but I
am willing to believe it was the sole invention of J. V. C. And I doubt not but
they will do well hereafter in Exorcisms, especially after the holy Potion,
when the person to be dispossessed is made sufficiently sick with Rue and
Sallet-oyl and other excellent Physic for Devils. I find by some of their
Authors, it is a great matter to get the right name of the Spirit; this J. V.
C. has hit unluckily, in calling this Monster the Leviathan sporting in the
waters, since they have thrown out so many empty vessels for him to play with.
And his three books of Charms, have been no unpleasant entertainment; But he is
gone; and I love not to tread hard on the graves of my enemies. What there
appears material in him (if anything do so) I shall consider it in its proper
place; chiefly for the sake of my Judicious Adversary Dr. T. G. who was the
first and I think the only person that has discovered his Book to be a Learned
Treatise.

But my generous Adversaries, finding so little success in single attempts,
they next fall upon me with Chain-shot; viz. A Collection of several Treatises
against Doct. Stillingfleet. To make up the number, they bring in one before
published, to try an experiment what force that can have in conjunction which
had none of it self.

The first undertaker therein, is, the very calm and (according to his new
Christian Name) Serene Mr. Cressy, the man that has learnt to mortify
passions by Mystical Divinity; but is so far from being sublimed and rectified,
by that Chemical way of devotion, that he seems yet to remain in the very dregs
of them: the man, that has so accustomed him-self to Legends, that he cannot
write against an Adversary, without making one of him. And although there be
many very pleasant ones in his Church History, yet I hardly think there are
many more wonderful, than (if his insinuations had any color of truth in them)
the first part of my life had been. For by making me so active in those times,
when I was incapable of understanding what they were, he seems to represent me
as one that had so passionate a zeal for Presbytery in my cradle, that I would
suck of none but a Scottish Nurse; that the first word I pronounced was
Covenant; that I would go to School to none but Lay Elders; and was cursing
Meroz before the Parliament at eight years old. Is not this a hopeful beginning
for a good Legend? S. C. p. 79.
Will he, says he, or they damn the execrable Covenant? as though, I had ever
any thing to do with it but when I renounced it! If I should tell him, that as
great a Friend as he takes me to have been to Presbytery and the late times,
even then I was entered into Episcopal Orders by a most worthy and learned
Prelate of our Church; that, I never subscribed any Address to the Usurpers, as
some in the World have done, and those who would now be thought the Kings most
loyal Subjects; that I never drew off any one person from their Allegiance to
the King to submit to to the Popes Nuncio, (let those who did it clear
themselves) even such an Apology would give too much countenance to so pitiful
a Calumniator. I thank him that he has not charged me with laying the first
platform of Presbytery at Geneva, or having a hand in the first and second
Admonitions in the days of Queen Elizabeth; and I might as will charge him with
the Gunpowder Treason, as he does me with any thing about the Covenant. By this
we may guess what Ecclesiastical History we are to expect from him, who writes
so at random about the matters of our own times. But the man is to be pitied;
he was under one of Mother Juliana's fits, he writ with a good mind, but he
knew not what. Some vent must be given to a violent fermentation, else the
vessel might burst asunder; and I hope the good man is somewhat more at ease,
since he purged away so much Choler. I assure him I can with pleasure read what
he wrote with rage; and laugh at the violence of such passions, which like a
Gun ill charged may give fire and make a great noise, but does the greatest
mischief to him that holds it. If I would pursue him through all his heats, I
must undergo the Ordeal-tryal, touch firebrands without hurting my self: which
although I might do, yet I know my Adversaries are so implacable, that even
that would not convince them of my innocence. I leave him therefore to grow
cooler and wiser; but I beseech him for his own sake, that he would attempt no
more the justifying the union of nothing with nothing, S. C. p. 46.
and for the sake of Religion, that he would not call God any more an
incomprehensible Nothing; a Description fit only for the Atheists Catechism. If
there were any thing in his railing Book which looked like reason or argument I
might perhaps at my leisure be persuaded to answer it; though I do not love to
have to do with mad men, no not in their lucid intervals.

The next that follows is one that goes about to vindicate the Roman Churches
devotions and Doctrine of Repentance and Indulgencies, he is a mere pattern of
meekness, compared with S. C., he writes pertinently and without the others
bitterness and passion. His great endeavor is to clear the honor of his
Church, from the absurd Doctrines and practices charged upon it. And the force
of all, Roman Doctrine of Repentance, etc. vindicated p. 19.
he says lies in this, that where the Church has defined nothing in her
Councils, it is to no purpose to object that such Doctrines are taught by some
in it; for those who defend their separation from the Communion of a Church by
reason of its erroneous or corrupt Doctrines must make it appear that those are
taught by it, and the belief of them also exacted from its subjects. To this
purpose S. C. likewise speaks (in some of his lucid intervalls) and I perceive
this is become a common Topic among them, to take off the odium of such
opinions and practices as they are willing enough, but ashamed to defend, which
I shall in this place briefly remove. The thing I was to prove was, that
persons in the Communion of the Roman Church do run great hazard of their
Salvation: for which I instanced particularly in several opinions and practices
which are very apt to hinder a good life which is necessary to Salvation. Now a
twofold Question here arises. 1. Whether the Church may justly be charged with
those Doctrines and practices? 2. Whether, although the Church may not directly
be charged to have decreed them in her Councils, yet so much countenance and
encouragement be not commonly given to them in that Church, that particular
persons do run great hazard of their salvation by reason of them? For which we
are to consider, that it has been the method of the Roman Church to allow many
more things in common belief and practice than it has dared for very shame to
decree in Councils, especially when such things have been objected by her
enemies. In this case it has been thought the most prudent course for the
Councils to speak deceitfully and in general terms, so as to give as little
advantage as may be to their enemies, and yet to retain ground enough to uphold
their former opinions and practices: Which still continuing in Vogue and
reputation, become so much the more dangerous to men's Souls, because their
Councils having had opportunity to have declared effectually against them were
so far from it, that by their doubtful expressions they have left ground enough
for the continuance of them. Now from hence the Directors of Conscience among
them frame their opinions, and the people think it their duty blindly to follow
them; and supposing any one among them should scruple any such Doctrine or
practice, to whom must he resort but to his Confessors, and will any such dare
to condemn what is generally received although not decreed by Councils? or if
he should, dare any person rely on his private judgment when it is contrary to
the most received Doctrine or practice? Besides, the promises of Infallibility
are supposed by them to be primarily made to the Church, and only by way of
representation to the Council; and therefore Doctrines or practices generally
received and allowed by the Teachers of the Church and the Guides of
conscience, must be received by them as true and good; for otherwise those
promises would fail to the Church in its diffusive capacity, and consequently,
supposing no General Council, it were possible for the most erroneous and
pernicious Doctrines and practices to prevail in the Church, which must utterly
overthrow all pretense to Infallibility. But in our present case we need not
run so far, for I shall here prove that in the most material points insisted on
by N. O. viz. the Doctrine of the efficacy of the Sacraments ex opere Operato,
and of Indulgences, we do justly charge the Church of Rome even in the decrees
of her Councils with laying such a foundation, as does overthrow the necessity
of a good life. The way he takes to vindicate those points from this
consequence is this, That the Sacramenta mortuorum, P. 44.
viz. Baptism and Penance which confer justifying Grace do require a subject
rightly disposed; And the Sacramenta vivorum, viz. Confirmation, Eucharist and
Extreme unction, do require the receiver to be actually in a State of Grace;
the same, P. 47.
he says of Indulgences, that the benefit of them does suppose a man put into
a State of Grace by the Sacrament of Penance; P. ^9.
so that the whole matter is put upon this issue, whether their Doctrine
concerning the conditions by which a man may be put into a State of Grace, be
not such as does overthrow the necessity of a good life? And it being
acknowledged that the Sacrament of Penance does confer the Grace of
justification on all persons rightly disposed for it, our only business is to
enquire what necessary conditions their Church requires in order to it. For
which we appeal to the words of the Council of Trent, for Session 14. c. 4.
That plainly determins, Et quamvis sine Sacramento Poenitentiae per se ad
justificationem perducere peccatorem nequeat (attritio); tamen cum ad Dei
gratiam in Sacramento Poe^ite^tiae impetrandam disponit. Council. Trident. sess.
14. c. 4.
that imperfect contrition or attrition although it cannot bring men to
justification without the Sacrament of Penance, yet it does dispose men for
obtaining the Grace of God by the Sacrament of Penance. If we join this now
with another decree of the same Council, viz. Si quis dixerit Sacramenta novae
Legis non continere Gratiam quam significant, aut gratiam ipsam non ponentibus
obicem non conf^rre -- Anathema sit. Sess. 7. Can. 6.
that the Sacraments do conferr Grace on all those who are disposed to receive
it; Si quis dix^rit non dari gratiam per hujus modi Sacramenta semper and
omnibus, qua^tum est ex part Dei, etiamsi rite ea suscipiant, sed aliquando
and aliquibus, A^athemae sit. Can. 7.
I leave it now to any one to judge, whether from hence it does not necessarily
follow, that all those that have but imperfect contrition, or bare attrition
for their sins, are by the Sacrament of Penance put into a State of Grace,
according to the Doctrine of the Council of Trent? And how far this overthrows
the necessity of a good life, will appear from the explication of contrition
and attrition given by the same Council. Sess. 14. c. 4.
Contrition is defined, to be, a grief of mind and detestation of sin
committed, with a purpose of sinning no more; therefore imperfect contrition or
attrition must be such a grief and detestation of sin past, as implies but an
imperfect purpose of sinning no more. From which it evidently follows, that by
the Doctrine of this Council a man may be put into a State of Grace without so
much as a firm or perfect purpose of sinning no more. And can there be a
Doctrine invented by men that does more effectually destroy the necessity of a
good life than this does? For the State of Grace puts a man actually into the
favor of God; and supposing him to fall into mortal sin afterward, all he
needs to do, is only to repeat the same kind of attrition and receive the
Sacrament of Penance and he is perfectly sound again and recovers the Favor of
God. I know the Council there says, That this attrition must exclude
voluntatem peccandi, as O. N. observes; but that implies no more than a man's
not having at that time a purpose to sin again; and the Council distinguishes
it from the propositum non peccandi de caetero, or the purpose not to sin
again, which the Council applies to contrition as the other to attrition. And
Cajetan himself quoted by O. N. calls it an imperfect purpose of not sinning.
P. 45.
So that after all the evasions which have been yet, or can be produced, the
Roman Churches Doctrine of Repentance and Indulgences does most dangerously
obstruct devotion and a good life. I desire therefore O. N. and his Brethren to
be a little more sparing in their censures of us as unfaithfully representing
the Doctrine of their Church, for we understand it much better, and represent
it more truly, than they desire.

But supposing the words of the Council were ambiguous in this matter, what
better help can we have to understand it, than the sense of their most eminent
and learned Instructours of Conscience? and those not of the single Order of
Jesuits, as some would have it believed, but of all sorts among them. Melch.
Cano Relect. de Poenit. part. 6. p. 932.
Melchior Canus who was far enough from being a Friend of the Jesuits, says
expressly, although a man knows he has not contrition but bare attrition, he
may come to the Sacrament and receive grace by it; for which he gives this
reason, because Baptism and Penance, are Sacramenta mortuorum; and therefore
those who are under mortal sin if they have attrition whereby the impediment is
removed may not only come to them, but go away with the Grace conferred,
because the Sacraments always conferr Grace, where the impediment is removed.
And he is followed herein, Morinus de Poenit. Sacramento l. 8. c. 4. n. 27.
says Morinus, not only by Lopez, Pesantius, Nicol. Isambertus Professor of
Divinity at Paris, but by the fargreatest number of their modern Divines. I
shall not so much as mention the Jesuitical Casuists whose Testimonies are
produced in the Jesuits Morals, La Morale de Jesuits ^^v. 2. chapter 2. ^. 253.
or Provincial letters, such as Filliutius, Amicus, Sa, Escobar, Bauny, etc.
But I shall name some of far greater Authority among them. O. N. frequently
cites Paul Layman with expressions of esteem, Layman. Theol. Moral. l. 5.
tract. 6. c. 2. sect. 2.
and he determins that true contrition is not necessary to the Sacrament of
Penance after the commission of mortal sin, but attrition is sufficient
although a man know it to be only attrition. If they had made attrition only
necessary to the Sacrament of Baptism, they might have pleaded, that they had
not destroyed the necessity of a good life afterward to preserve the Grace
conveyed in Baptism; but we see in the case of mortal sin afterward toties
quoties no more is necessary but a new Act of Attrition, and that not only when
a man mistakes it to be contrition; but though a man knows it to be bare
attrition. I confess Cardinal Tolet, Tolet. Sum Cas. l. 3. c* 4.
although he asserts the substance of the Doctrine, yet he says attrition only
serves when it is mistaken for contrition; Morinus de Poenit. l. 8. c. 4. n. 1.
but this Morinus tells us the later Divines laugh at and explode. Lugo de
Poenit. disp. 5. sect. 9. n. 130 135.
Cardinal Lugo not only contends for the Doctrine, but asserts it to be the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent, viz. that attrition with the Sacrament of
Penance is sufficient for the Grace of Justification; and quotes Suarez,
Vasquez and Maeratius, as sufficiently proving from the words of the Council,
that attrition is the next disposition to the Grace of justification conveyed
by the Sacrament; and this attrition he there shows against Sylvius, does not
imply an imperfect love of God above all; which is directly contrary to O. N.
And in another place he proves, O. N. p. 45.
that a man is not bound always to contrition for his sins although they be
mortal; Lugo disp. 7. sect. 11. n. 201.
for says he, if he were, then a man having attrition cannot be excused but
only by invincible Ignorance from a new mortal sin in coming to the Sacrament
of Penance without contrition, because some time is commonly supposed to
intervene between a man's attrition and his justification by the Sacrament, in
which time he would sin mortally by omitting contrition, if he were obliged to
it; but this, says he, is against the common opinion of Divines, that a man
contracts any new guilt by omitting contrition. Nay he afterward determins,
Sect. 13. n. 263.
that a man that has received the Sacrament of Penance with bare attrition is
not bound, under the guilt of mortal sin, for omitting it, to an act of
contrition at the point of death; which is, he says, the commonly received
opinion among them, and he quotes Diana, Coninch, Becanus, Layman, Fagundez,
Faber, Turrianus, Salas and others for it. The great argument he brings, is,
because Confessors do not think themselves obliged to put men in mind of an act
of contrition at that time as necessary, as common experience shows. And are
not such Confessors excellent Guides to Heaven the mean while? If they be, they
have found out a much broader way and wider gate than ever Christ intended.
What not one single act of contrition necessary! No, not at the point of death!
What pity it is for sinners, you have not the keeping of Heaven-gates? How do
they want the Sacrament of Penance in Hell, for no doubt there is attrition
good store there! But above all of them commend me to honest Gregor. de
Valentia, Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 7. q. 8. pua^. 4. sect. Secundo potest.
who not only makes contrition unnecessary, but says it is rather a hindrance
to the effect of the Sacraments. From whence Morinus justly infers, Morin. de
poenit. l. 8. c. 4. n. 15.
that a Confessor ought not to persuade the Penitent to Contrition; nor the
penitent to endeavor after it. Nay Morinus shows, that grave men and famous in
their Church do assert that a Penitent having received the Sacrament of
Penance, Id. ib. n. 26.
is not bound to so much as one act of contrition or the Love of God in order
to his reconciliation with God. Yea, although a man has hated God to the last
act of his life if he receives the Sacrament of Penance, they deny that it is
necessary for him to be contrite for his sins or to love God. Nothing could go
beyond this but what follows in him, Sacramentorum Evangelicorum supra legaliaa
praestantiam and praerogativam in hoc potissimum fulgere, quod Evangelica
gravissimo Contritionis, and Dilectionis Dei jugo nos liberaverint. Morin. de
Poenit. l. 8. c. 4. n. 26.
that the excellency of the Evangelical Sacraments above the legal consists in
this, that the Evangelical Sacraments have freed us from the most heavy yoke
(...) of contrition and the Love of God. O admirable Guides of Conscience! I do
not at all question but Jews, Turks and Heathens have a much better and truer
notion of Repentance, than these men; the Pagan Philosophers were Christians to
them. And what injury have I done them now, in charging such things upon them
which obstruct devotion and overthrow the necessity of a good life? For I
hardly think it possible to contrive a Doctrine more effectual for that end,
than to tell men that the Sacraments of the Gospel do free men from that heavy
yoke Contrition and the Love of God.

But supposing there were no such Foundation for this Doctrine in the Council
of Trent, as we see there is would there be no danger to men's Salvation, if
their Confessors generally told then these things, and they knew it to be the
current opinion among them? Is there (...) danger of falling into the ditch
when the Blind lead the Blind, unless General Council expressly allow of it?
(...) there no danger by Empericks a^^ Mountebanks, unless the whole Co^ledge
of Physicians approve them? An^ of all sorts of Empericks, the worst a^^ such
Casuists and Confessors. Is ther^ no way to magnify the Sacerdotal office
unless they have a Power to Trepan Soul into eternal flames for want of true
repentance; by making them believe the Priests absolution with bare attritio^
will make all even with God? Or (...) this Doctrine only a Decoy to draw great
sinners into your nets? And all this while is your Church innocent, which at
least sees and will not reform these things? In A. D. 1665. 24. of September
and 18. May, 1666. the Congregation of the Inquisition at Rome under Alexander.
7. took upon them to censure 45. several Propositions of the late Casuists,
Index Exp^rg: Alex. 7. n. 87. 88.
as scandalous and pernicious to the Souls of men, but not one of them relates
to this Doctrine of repentance, although the Jansenists in France had
complained of it. Whence could this arise but from looking on it as the
Doctrine of their Church? Indeed I find that on May 5. 1667. The Pope caused a
Decree to be published straightly forbidding all persons in their debates about
Attrition, to condemn each other; but it is worth our while to understand, what
this controversy was, viz. Whether bare attrition does require an act of the
love of God; and although the Negative be there said to be the more common
opinion, yet the Pope would not have the others that affirmed it to be
censured. But not the least word against the sufficiency of bare attrition. Are
any of the Books censured which assert this Doctrine? Nay, they are published
with great approbations. Are any of the Defenders of it discountenanced? Nay,
they are Persons in the highest esteem, dignity, and Authority among them. Are
any cautions given to Confessors to beware of these Doctrines? Nay, these very
Books are purposely written and approved for their instruction and use. And if
their Church be innocent after all this, so was the Jewish Church in our
Saviors time; for the corruptions that were then among them had no decree of
the Sanhedrin, that I find, for them; it was only their Schoolmen and Casuists,
the Scribes and Pharisees which introduced them. And yet our Savior thought
men's Souls in danger, when he bid them beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. I
confess when we debate the causes of Separation from their Communion, we think
it then reasonable to allege no more, than what they impose on all to believe
and practice (and we have enough of all Conscience in that kind without going
farther) but when we represent the hazard of Salvation to particular persons,
we may then justly charge them with the pernicious Doctrines and practices
which are received and allowed among them, although not decreed by the Church
in Councils. For otherwise it would be just, as if one should say to a man,
that asked him, whether he might safely travel through such a Country? yes,
without doubt you may, for although there be abundance of Thieves and
High-waymen, yet the Prince or the State never approved them, or gave them
license to rob Travelers. Do you think any man would venture his person or his
purse, on no better security? Yet such security as this, if it were true is all
that such moderate men as O. N. or his Brethren can give as to the Roman
Church; for they dare not deny the bad consequence of the Doctrines and
practices charged upon them, but only say, the Church has not decreed them. So
much I thought necessary to say to this newest and most plausible pretense,
which is made use of by the best Advocates for the Roman Church.

And now farewell to Moderation; for the two next which appeared on the Stage
against me, were two Jesuits; the one sent over a Book, which if we look only
at the bulk and thickness was a very substantial one, called by an odd
Antiphrasis, Reason and Religion: I have endeavored to draw off all the Spirit
I could find in it, in the following discourses, but I am forced to leave a
vast quantity of Phlegm and Caput Mortuum behind. I shall say no more of him
here, having occasion to speak so much of him in the Discourses about the
Principles of faith, which will in a little time be ready to appear.

The other is the stout Defender of lgnatius Loyola and the whole Order of
Jesuits; What, one man undertake to defend the Jesuits as to their Principles
and Practices! and that in this Age, which so well understands their Maxims and
Conduct! and in England too, where those of other Orders and the Secular
Priests love them so dearly! But nothing is too brave or difficult, for a
Jesuit to attempt, however he comes off in it. As to Ignatius Loyola, I will
come to terms with him; if what he confesses as to his ignorant zeal, pious
simplicity, frequent visions and ecstasies, extravagant preaching, unmannerly
contempt of Superiors do not prove him a Fanatic, I am content to let him go.
But what if Ignatius himself being grown old, did suspect such frequent
ecstasies and visions for illusions? I desire him to look Ribadineira, Ribadin.
(...) l. 5. c. ^.
in his larger life to that purpose. But this matter of Fanaticism must be
referred to another place. I shall now only give a taste of the Jesuits
excellent way of defending the principles destructive to Government which I
charged his Order with.

The first was, that Government was so originally in the People, that they by
their Representatives may call their Sovereign to an account and alter the form
of Government. Now mark this Answer. P. 38.
This principle (whatsoever truth it may have in speculation) is by no means to
be preached to the People, who are apt enough of themselves to stretch cases
and pick quarrels with their best Governors, yet was it taught many Ages
before the Jesuits were so much as thought of. Welfare the man for his
plain-dealing; the Doctrine it seems is true enough, but the people are not fit
to be trusted with the management of it, no, not in their places and callings;
no, no, let the Jesuits alone with these things, they know just the very nick
of time, when to be Judges and Executioners too.

The next principle is, the Popes power of deposing Princes, to which he again
answers roundly. P. 39.
You are then to know, Sir, that the Doctrine was long ago taught by almost all
Orders and Professions, Seculars, Regulars, Divines, Lawyers, before the
Jesuits were in Being. A very Catholic Doctrine it seems it is! What a stir
do other people make with mincing this matter, I know not how; give me a man
that speaks out, and lets Princes understand what their general Doctrine is in
this matter, lest they may possibly be deceived, as though it were only the
bold assertion of some few Persons among them. What wonder then says he, if
Bellarmin and 3. or 4. more Jesuits were carried away with such a Torrent of
Doctors who went before them? Nay, in my opinion the only wonder is, how any
Persons among them dare think otherwise, this Doctrine having as he tells us, so
Catholic a consent to the truth of it. But in earnest Sir, is the Doctrine
true, or false Nay, Sir, I beseech you to excuse me in that: for as he says,
afterward about the Popes power (...) absolving Subjects, I beg leave to wave
such curious controversie^: What, P. 50.
a Jesuit beg leave to wave curious controversies! What is become (...) all
their vast Tomes of Scholastical an^ Casuistical Divinity? Are no curious
controversies handled in them? An^ were you bred up among them and yet ha^^
controversies merely because curious* No, no, We understand you better than so
That is only a curious controversies with you which endangers your safety, if
you speak out, for it is a needless kind of curiosity for a man to betray
himself. Here in these practical Countries it is sometimes dangerous speaking
Truth in their sense; but at such a speculative place as Rome is, there those
may be wholesome and Catholic Truths, which ^ere are but niceties and
curiosities. But does he not say, P. 40.
the Jesuits have solemnly renounced the Doctrine? Yes, but have a care how far
you believe him: we poor simple Islanders might understand by this, that they
had declared it to be false and pernicious. There is no such matter I will
assure you, but upon the stirrs in France they renounced the publishing it,
they renounced it as they were in France, but thought it good Doctrine at Rome:
they are forbidden to treat any more of it, because of the odiousness of it to
Princes, and that is all the renouncing they ever meant.

The third Principle is, the lawfulness of killing Kings, as to which, he
says, he cannot name the person that ever taught it in those Terms: a good
reason for that, because when they would have them killed they call them
Tyrants. And so grants Dominicus Soto and Marian have asserted it, he might
have namse more if he had pleased. I could not des^ a more pleasant task than
to pursue (...) through the remainder of his discourse wherein he undertakes to
vindicate the Jesuits practices, but these have been much exposed by men of
their own Region, that I may spare my pains in the Preface; and we may easily
guess h^ hard he was put to it, when he mak^ the letter of the Bishop of
Angelopol to be forged at Port Royal by the Ja^ senists. And thus he has
shifted (...) fault from the Indies to Europe, (...) to vindicate some Papists
there fre^ Idolatry, P. 21.
he charges others here with forge^* And ^et to this as a full Answer, the
(...) Ans^erer of the Seasonable Discour^ does referr us. And out of his
admiral learning and skill in History desires (...) Adversary, for his
satisfaction that the can be no danger of Resuming Abbey Lan^ of Popery should
return, to go into Germany where there are so many Papist and Protestant
Princes, P. 13.
Noble men and Gentlemen, that have (especially since the Treaty at Munster)
either Bishoprics, Abbeys or the like confirmed to them by the Pope. How!
confirmed to them by the Pope! what will not these men dare to say? I perceive
Ignorance serves them for other purposes than merely to be the Mother of
Devotion. If at least this worthy Author could be Ignorant of so notorious a
thing as Pope Innocents Bull published on purpose to Null the Treaty at
Munster, Sanctissi^^^ Domini N. D. Innocenti^ Divina Providentia Pap^. 10.
Declaratio nullitatis Articulorum Nuperae Pacis Germaniae Religioni Catholicae,
Sedi Apostolicae, Ecclesiis, aliisque l^^is piis ac Personis, and Iuribus
Ecclesiasticis quomodo libet praejudicialium. Romae ex Typographia Reverend.
Can^^^ Apostolicae. A. D. 1651.
as prejudicial to the Catholic Religion, to the Apostolical See, to Churches
and other Holy Places and Persons and Ecclesiastical Rights. In the body of the
Bull he says, that his Nuncio there (who was afterward Pope Alexander the
seveth) did protest against these Articles, as void, null, unjust, and agreed
upon by persons that had no power, and that they were to be so looked on by
all. But the Pope did not think this sufficient, but declares all those
Articles that related to liberty of Religion, Church Lands, or any
Ecclesiastical Rights, or brought any the least prejudice to them or might be
thought or pretended so to do, to be null, void, invalid, unjust, damned,
reprobate, vain, and without any force or power, and that they shall remain so
for ever; and that no person, though never so much sworn to observe those
articles shall be bound by such oath; no right, title, plea, prescription,
shall accrue to any by virtue of them: and therefore out of the Plenitude of
Apostolical power he does absolutely damn, reprobate, null and cassate all
those articles and protests before God of the nullity of them; and restores all
persons and places to their ancient possessions notwithstanding them, with very
much more to the same purpose. This was dated at Rome apud Sanctam Mariam
Majorem sub Annulo Piscatoris die 26 November. and solemnly published there the
third of Jan. 1651. in the eighth year of his Pontificat. Call you this, Sir,
the Popes confirming them! Is it credible that he who in the beginning of his
Answer had charged the late Protestant Books, (which he most ingeniously calls
Libels) to be crammed with nothing else but what we know to be false, should
within a few Pages have the confidence to affirm in the face of the world so
notorious an untruth? But I leave this ingenious Author, to be Chastised for
this and other his extravagancies, by his worthy Adversary, and return to my
own.

After all these unsuccessful attempts at last the Knight himself resolves to
encounter the Dragon; and accordingly he buckles on his armor, mounts his
stead, and, according to all ancient and modern Pictures of the combat, directs
his lance into the very mouth of it; wisely considering, if the head were
mortally wounded, the whole Body would fall to the ground. After him at a
convenient distance follows his Squire I. S. who had a particular spite at the
Dragons Tail, and without fear or wit falls unmercifully upon it, and in his
own opinion, has chopped it into a thousand pieces. But such mischievous
creatures whose strength lies scattered in all their parts, do often rise up
when they are triumphed over as dead, and give their most deadly wounds, when
they are thought to lie gasping for breath.

It happened that when T. G's. Answer to the first part of my Book came out, I
was before engaged in the Defense of the Protestant principles of faith against
the Guide in Controversies and E. W. (the Author of those two learned Treatises
as T. G. calls them, P. 312.
Protestancy without Principles, and Religion and Reason) part of which being
then in the Press, I was forced to go through with that, before I could take
his Book into consideration. And thereupon I resolved to dispatch all those
which relate to the Principles of Faith together; and then to proceed to the
Principles of Worship in answer to him, which (God willing) I intend as soon as
the former part is finished.

All that I shall take notice of him here, is to represent the ingenuity of his
dealing with me in his Preface, wherein he charges me with dissenting from the
Doctrine of the Church of England in accusing the Church of Rome of Idolatry.
And by this one Instance I desire the Reader to judge what Candor and
sincerity he is to expect in his Book.

For the sense of the Church of England I appealed to the Book of Homilies: not
to any doubtful, or general or single passage therein, but to the design of one
of the largest and most elaborat^ Homilies in the whole Book; consisting of
three several parts, the last of which i^ said not to be merely for the People
but for the instruction of those who were t^ teach them. The design of that
last part is thus set down. Book of Hom. second Tome. p. 46.
1. That Popish Images and the Idols of the Gentiles are all one concerning
themselves. 2. That they have been and be worshipped in our time in like form
and manner as were the Idols of the Gentiles. And for that Idolatry stands
chiefly in the mind, it shall in this part first be proved that our
Image-maintainers, have had and have the same opinions and judgment of Saints
whose Images they have made and worshipped as the Gentiles Idolaters had of
their Gods; and afterward shall be declared that our Imagemaintainers and
worshippers have used and use the same outward rites, and manner of honoring,
and worshipping their Images, as the Gentiles did use before their Idols, and
that therefore they commit Idolatry, as well inwardly as outwardly, as did the
wicked Gentiles Idolaters; and this that Homily is intended for the proof of:
which it does very fully. But, says T. G., why did I not appeal for the sense
of our Church to the 39. Articles? As though the approbation of the Book of
Homilies were not one of them, viz the 35. The second Book of Homilies the
several Titles whereof we have joined under this Article (among which Titles
the second is this of the Peril of Idolatry) does contain a godly and wholesome
Doctrine and necessary for these times. Which Articles were not only allowed
and approved by the Queen, but confirmed by the subscription of the hand of the
Archbishop and Bishops of the upper House, and by the subscription of the
whole Clergy in the nether House of Convocation A. D. 1571. Now I desire T. G.
to resolve me whether men of any common understanding would have subscribed to
this Book of Homilies in this manner, if they had believed the main Doctrine
and design of one of them had been false and pernicious? as they must have done
if they had thought the practice of the Roman Church to be free from Idolatry.
I will put the case that any of the Bishops then had thought the charge of
Idolatry had been unjust, and that it had subverted the foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority, that there could have been no Church, or right
ordination if the Roman Church had been guilty of Idolatry; would they have
inserted this into the Articles, when it was in their power to have left it
out? and that the Homilies contained a wholesome and Godly Doctrine, which in
their consciences they believed to be false and pernicious? I might as well
think that the Council of Trent would have allowed Calvin's Institutions, as
containing a wholesome and Godly Doctrine; as that men so persuaded would have
allowed it the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry. And how is it possible to
understand the sense of our Church better, than by such public and authentic
acts of it, which all Persons who are in any place of trust in the Church must
subscribe, and d^clare their approbation of them? This Homily has still
continued the same, the Article the very same, and if so they must acknowledge
this has been, and is to this day the sense of our Church. But says T. C. the
subscribing the Book of Homilies, as containing a godly and wholesome Doctrine,
does not evince that every particular Doctrine contained in it is such. Be it
so: but I hope it does evince that the Subscribers did not think the main
Doctrine of any one Homily to be false? Surely there is a great deal of
difference between some particular passages and expressions in these Homilies,
and that which is the main design and Foundation of any one of them. But in
this case we are to observe, that they who deny the Church of Rome to be guilty
of Idolatry, do not only look on the Charge as false, but as of dangerous
Consequence; and therefore although men may subscribe to a Book in general as
containing wholesome and godly Doctrine, though they be not so certain of the
Truth of every passage in it, yet they can never do it with a good conscience
if they believe any great and considerable part of the Doctrine therein
contained to be false and dangerous. Such a subscription would be as apparently
shuffling and dishonest as is the evasion of this Testimony which T. G. makes
use of for want of a better.

I shall in the next place show the current Doctrine of the Church ever since
the Reformation to have been agreeable to this Homily of the Peril of Idolatry.
In the Injunctions published by K. Edward VI. A. D. 1547. the extirpation of
Popery is called the suppression of Idolatry and Superstition. In the second
year of Edward VI. Archbishop Cranmer published his Articles of Visitation,
whereof the 6. and the last are about the taking away Images, Pictures, and all
other Monuments of feigned miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry and Superstition. In
the second Liturgy by Edward VI. after the Communion, was a Rubric annexed, in
which the Adoration of the Host is expressly called Idolatry. This is that very
Rubric, of which T. G., according to his excellent skill in the offices of our
Church, P. 214.
says it is not yet more then a dozen years since it was inserted into the
Communion Book; which he might have found above a 100. years before in the Book
of Edward VI.

In the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, A. D. 1559. Art. 2. and 23. all
Shrines, Tables, Pictures, etc. are commanded to be taken away and destroyed
and all other Monuments of feigned miracles, Idolatry and Superstition. And
that (...) may not think it was only a sudden hea^ at the first Reformation
which made the^ charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry, long after in A form
of Thanksgiving in the 37. of Queen Elizabeth A. D. 1594. Popery is called that
Idolatrous Religion: as it was in the Beginning of her Reign in the excellen^
Apology for the Church of England And I desire him, or any one else, (...)
produce any one Bishop or Divine of not^ in the Church of England, who during
all her Reign did deny the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry. But why
then was it not inserted in the 39. Articles? in which T. G. observes, P. 19^.
the Adoration of Images is not rejected as Idolatry, but only as a fond thing,
vainly invented, nor as repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, but as being
rather repugnant to the word of God, which plainly gives us to understand, that
they had done their endeavors to find a command but could not. A most
ingenious Criticism! when himself and all others of their Divines yield that
adoration of images, which our Church charges them with, Art. 22. (viz. not
barely worshipping but adoration of images) to be Idolatry and plainly
repugnant to Scripture. Were the composers of our Articles so senseless as not
to think Idolatry repugnant to Scripture; or not to think adoration of images
to be Idolatry; or not to think the Church of Rome guilty of it, when the
Article says The Romish Doctrine concerning worshipping and adoration as well
of Images as of Relics, etc? It is not merely the practice used in the Church
of Rome, but their very Doctrine concerning adoration of images which is here
charged; and can any Church teach adoration of images and not be guilty of
Idolatry? And for his Criticism about being rather repugnant, it had been
utterly lost if he had looked into the Latin Articles where the words are, immo
verbo Dei contradicit; whereby it appears that rather is not used as a term of
diminution, but of a more vehement affirmation.

I now come to the exceptions he takes to the particular Testimonies I produced
of the most eminent Bishops and Divines of our Church, ever since the
Reformation, who have all concurred in this charge of Idolatry. Two parts in
three he excepts against as incompetent witnesses in the case: how few of the
Jury would any Malefactor allow if such frivolous exceptions might serve his
turn?

The two first he excepts against are the two Archbishops Whitgift and Abbot
as Puritanically inclined. But as it unhappily falls out, one of them was never
mentioned by me, and the other never till now suspected for a Puritan. The
Abbot I mentioned was not George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, but Robert
Abbot Bishop of Salisbury; and it is the first time we ever heard that a Bishop
of Salisbury was suspended from his Metropolitical jurisdiction. But they of
the Church of Rome have a faculty of doing greater wonders with five words,
than Changing a Bishop into an Archbishop. I hope he understands the Church he
is of, better than that he has left, or else we are like to have a sad account
of History from him. But why I beseech you, after all his zeal and
indefatigable pains for the Church of England, must Archbishop Whitgift be
thrown away to the Puritans? If he had proved T. C. at the same time
Archbishop of Canterbury, there might have been some reason to suspect
Whitgift to have been of the Puritan side; for all the world know they were
great adversaries on that very account of the Puritan cause. But was not
Whitgi^^ for the Lambeth Articles? And wh^ then? Are the Dominicans Puritans
and no Papists? If your Church may have liberty not to determine those nice
points why may not ours? and so both parties remain of our Church, as long as
they contradict no received Articles among us. But the Lambeth-Articles were
never intended for any more than as Respons^ Prudentum to silence disputes in
the university. And I believe none of the Puritan party after that, took
Archbishop Whitgift to be a Patron of their cause.

But if these will not serve his turn, (...) have others ready, whom for mere
sham^ he will not say were Puritans, or Puritanically inclined. And the first
of these is an Archbishop too, and that is Archbishop Bancroft; and if he be
cast out for a Puritan, surely there never was any Bishop of the Church of
England. In his Sermon preached at Paul's Cross on 1 John 4. 1. he has these
words speaking of the Papists. P. 30.
The Popish false Prophets will suffer the people to try nothing, but do teach
them wholly to depend on them; and to that purpose they have indeed three
notable sleights. First they forbid them the reading of the Scriptures. And the
better to be obeyed therein they will not permit the Scriptures to be
Translated into the Vulgar Tongue. Whereof it came to pass that the people were
so easily seduced, and drawn from Christ to the Pope; from his merits to the
Saints, and their own merits; from his bloody sacrifice, whereby only sins are
remitted, to their most dry and fruitless sacrifice; from the spiritual food of
his Body and Blood, unto a carnal and Capernaitical Transubstantiation; from
the calling upon his name to an Invocation of Saints: and from their sure trust
and confidence in his death to a vain imagination of the virtue of their
Masses, Pilgrimages, Pardons, and I know not what intolerable Superstition and
Idolatry. I hope Archbishop Bancroft may for once pass for no Puritan with T.
G. But what will he say, if the only persons he produces as most partial of his
side, do give in evidence against him? Bishop Mountague is the first, whose
words are these in the Book cited by him. Appeal p. 263.
Our predecessors and Fathers coming late out of Popery, living near unto
Papists and Popish times, conversing with them, having been nuzzled and brought
up amongst them and knowing that Images used to be crept unto, incensed,
worshipped, and adored among them, etc. What thinks he, is not this all one as
to charge them with Idolatry? And more plainly in his former Book, Answer to
the Gagg. p. 319.
But whatsoever you say, however you qualify the thing with gentle words, we
say in your practice you far exceed; and give them that honor which is Latria
a part of Divine respect and worship. And afterward says, the people go to it
with downright adoration, and your new Schools defend that the same respect is
due to the representer, as must be given to the representee. So that the
Crucifix is to be reverenced with the the self-same honor that Christ Jesus
is. Ablasphemy not heard of till Thomas Aquinas set it on foot. Clear these
enormities, and others like these, then come and we may talk and soon agree
concerning honor and respect unto Relics or Images of Saints, or Christ;
till then we cannot answer it unto our Maker, to give his honor unto a
Creature. His next is Pet. Heylin; And now I hope we have at last hit upon a
man far enough from being a Puritan; yet this very Person gives plain evidence
against him. For i^ his 4th. Sermon on the Tares preached a^ White Hall January
27. 1638. P. 110.
H^ has these words. So it is also in the point of Images, first introduced
into the Church for ornament, History, and imitation. Had they staid there it
had been well, and no faul^ found with them. -- But when the Schools began to
State it, that the same Veneration was to be afforded to the Type and
Prototype, then came the Doctrine to the growth. When and by whom, and where it
was first so stated is not easy to determine, and indeed not necessary. It is
enough that we behold it in the fruits. And what fruits think you could it
bear, but most gross Idolatry, greater than which was never known among the
Gentiles? Witness their praying not before, but to the Crucifix, and calling on
the very Cross, the wooden and material Cross, both to increase their
righteousness and remit their sins. And for the Images of the Saints, they that
observe with what laborious Pilgrimages, magnificent processions, solemn
offerings, and in a word, with what affections, prayers, and humble bendings of
the body, they have been and are worshipped in the Church of Rome, might very
easily conceive that She was once again relapsed into her ancient Paganism.
With much more to the same purpose. His only person remaining, is Mr.
Thorndike, a man of excellent Learning and great piety, but if we should grant,
that he held some thing singular in this matter; what is that to the constant
opinion of our Church? and yet even Mr. Thorndike himself in a paper sent by
him (...) some whom T. G. know's, not long before his death, says, That, to
pray to Saints for those things which only God can give (as all Papist do is by
the proper sense of the word^ downright Idolatry. If they say* their meaning
is by a figure only to desire them to procure their requests of God: How dare
any Christian trust his soul with that Church which teaches that which must
needs be Idolatry in all that understand not the figure? So that upon the whole
matter T. G. cannot produce any on^ Person of our Church that has clearly an^
wholly acquitted the Church of Rome from the charge of Idolatry. It seems then
(...) Church has been made up of Puritans i^ T. G's. sense of them. But if
these do no^ satisfy him what does he think of the Archbishop and Bishops and
Clergy of the Convocation. A. D. 1640. Were (...) these Puritans too? And yet
in the sevent^ Canon they have these words. And albeit at the time or Reforming
this Church from that gross Superstition of Popery, it was carefully provided
that all means should be used to root out of the minds of the people, both the
inclination thereto and memory thereof; especially of the Idolatry committed in
the Mass, for which cause all Popish Altars were demolished, etc. What can more
express the sense of our Church, than the concurrent opinion of Archbishops,
Bishops and Clergy of both Provinces met in Convocation? When we see they so
lately, charged the Church of Rome with Idolatry.

Let us now consider what exceptions he takes against the other witnesses
produced by me. Jewel, Bilson, Davenant, all eminent Bishops of our Church and
of great learning, are cast away at once, as incompetent Persons. But why so?
Why, says T. G. they were all excepted against by our late Sovereign K.
Charcles I. in his third paper to Henderson. That is a shrewd prejudice indeed
to their Authority to be rejected by a Prince of so excellent a judgment and
so Cordial a friend to the Church of England. But it is good to be sure whether
it be so or no. All that he says of Bishop Jewel is this, and though I much
reverence Bishop Iewel' s memory, I never thought him infallible. So then, he
must he Puritanically inclined; but whence does that follow? not surely from
the Kings reverencing his memory, for that were to reflect upon the King
himself; not from his not thinking him Infallible. For I dare say, the King
never thought the Pope infallible; must be needs therefore think him a Puritan?
Surely never man was such a Friend to the Puritans as this T. G. who without
any ground gives them away some of the greatest honors of our Church, and (if
the Testimony last cited be of any force to prove one a Puritan,) all mankind,
and himself too: for I plainly perceive by this Preface that he is not
infallible. Yet for all this we will not let go Jewel, no nor Bilson, Davenant,
White, Usher, Downam, what ever T. G. says against them. Indeed K. Charles
excepts against Bilson for his Principles of civil Government, but not a word
of his disaffection to the Church of England: For Bishop Davenant, the King
says he is none of those to whom he appealed, or would submit unto, and with
very good reason, for the King had appealed to the practice of the primitive
Church, and the Universal consent of Fathers; therefore Bishop Davenant was a
Puritan. It seems they have been all Puritans since the Primitive times; and I
hope the Church of Rome then has good store of them, for that is far enough
from the Fathers or the Primitive Church. But how comes Bishop White in for a
Puritan, being so great a Friend of Archbishop Laud; why, forsooth, Heylin
reports that for licensing Bishop Mountagu's Appello Caesarem, it was said,
that White was turned Black. And can thou for thy heart, good Reader, expect
a more pregnant proof? It was a notable saying, and it is great pity, the
Historian did not preserve the memory of the Author of it; but by whom was it
said? that must be supposed by the Puritans; and could none but they be the
Authors of so witty a saying? But suppose they were the Puritans that said it?
it is plain then, they thought him no sound Puritan, for they hold no falling
from Grace. All then that can be inferred from this witty saying is, that White
sunk in his esteem among them by this Act. And is it not possible for them to
have an esteem for those who are not of their own Party? Concerning Archbishop
Usher, Dr. Heylin was known to be too much his enemy, to be allowed to give a
Character of him: and his name will not want a due veneration as long as
Learning and piety have any esteem among us.

But he is most troubled what to do with six that remain, viz. King James,
Bishop Andrews, Archbishop Laud, Isaac Casaubon, Doct. Field, and Doct.
Jackson; these he could not for shame fasten the name of Puritans upon (as he
does with scorn on Bishop Downam, Reynolds, Whitaker, and Fulk; whose
testimonies I said to prevent cavils, I need not to produce although they are
all capable of sufficient vindication.) For King James, he says, that in the
place cited by me he says expressly, that what he condemns is adoring of
Images, praying to them, and imagining a kind of Sanctity in them, all which
are detested by Catholics. Was ever man put to such miserable shifts? Are not
these King James his words. But for worshipping either them, (Relics) or
Images, I must account it damnable Idolatry. And does not King James a little
after take off their distinctions and evasions in these words, and they worship
(forsooth) the Images of things in Being, and the Image of the true God. But
Scripture forbids to worship the Image of any thing that God created. Yea
the Image of God himself is not only expressly forbidden to be worshipped but
even to be made. Let them therefore that maintain this doctrine, answer it to
Christ at the latter day, when he shall accuse them of Idolatry; And then I
doubt if he will be paid with such nice Sophistical distinctions. Is all this
nothing but to charge them with such practices which they detest? Does he not
mention their Doctrine, and their distinctions? Did not King James understand
what he said, and what they did? It is plain he charges them with Idolatry in
what they did, which was that I brought his Testimony for. The like answer he
gives to the rest of them, viz. that they charged them, with what they thought
they did, but the Papists deny that they do any such thing: i. e. in plain
Terms, they charge them with Idolatry, but the Papists deny they commit it. And
so they do when I charge them with it; so that T. G. by the very same reason
might have acquitted me from charging them with it, and have spared his Book.
Is not this now an Admirable way of proving, that they do not charge them with
Idolatry, because the Papists deny they commit it? Who meddles with what they
profess they do, or do not? I was to show what these Persons charged them with.
And do any of these excuse them by saying any doctrine of theirs was contrary
to these particulars? do they not expressly set themselves to disprove their
distinctions upon which their doctrine is founded? and show the vanity of them
because their open and allowed practices do plainly contradict them; and show
that they do give divine honor to Images however in words they deny it. But
this way of defending them is, as if those whom St. Paul charges that they
professed that they knew God but in works they denied him, should reply to him,
how can we deny him in our Works, since we profess him in our Words? Just so
says T. G. how can they be charged with Idolatry, since they profess to do no
such thing? A^though such persons, as those I mentioned, did not understand
both what the Papists said for themselves and what they did notwithstanding.
And now I joy^ with T. G. in desiring the Reader may be judge between us,
whether I have betrayed my trust in pretending to defend the Church of England;
and whether in charging the Church of Rome with Idolatry I have contradicted
the sense of it? since I have made it appear that her most true and Genuin
sons, the most remote from all suspicion of disaffection to her, or inclination
to Puritanism, have concurred in the same charge which I undertook to make good.

But there is one blow yet remaining in his Preface, which I must endeavor to
ward off, otherwise it will be a terrible one to the Church of England; for by
this charge of Idolatry, he makes me to subvert the very foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority in it. This it is to charge home. For, says he, it
being a received Maxim and not being denyable by any man of common sense, that
no man can give to another that which he has not himself, it lies open to the
Conscience of every man, that if the Church of Rome be guilty of Heresy, much
more if guilty of Idolatry, it falls under the Apostles excommunication. (Gal.
1. 8.) and so remains deprived of the Lawful Authority to use and exercise the
power of Orders; and consequently the Authority of Governing, preaching and
Administering the Sacraments, which those of the Church of England challenge to
themselves, as derived from the Church of Rome, can be no true and lawful
Jurisdiction, but usurped and Antichristian. And so farewell to the Church of
England, if the Church of Rome were not more kind in this case than T. G. is.
Hitherto we have seen his skill in the affairs of our Church, and now we shall
see just as much in the Doctrine of his own. For does not the Council of Trent
make Orders a Sacrament? and one of those which does imprint an indelible
character? Council. Trident. sess. 7. can. 9. sess. 23. can. 4.
and does not that Council pronounce an Anathema against those, that denied the
validity of the Sacrament administered by one in mortal sin, in case he observes
the essentials of it* How then can T. G* ^scape excommunication from his own
Church, that denies the validity of the Sacrament of Orders in case of the sin
of the Givers of it? If the validity of the Sacrament does not d^pend on the
worth or quality of the Ministers of it but upon the essentials and the
institution of Christ, how can the fault of the persons hinder the conveyance
of that Authority, which they are only the bare instruments to convey? Does T.
G. think so in all other Sacraments? as in case of Baptism; that supposing the
Ministers of it have been guilty of Heresy or Idolatry, the Sacrament loses
its effect? Well fare then the Donatists, whose opinion this was, and in whom
it has been condemned by the Church. If it be not so in other Sacraments how
comes it to be thus in Orders? which he must acknowledge, to be as much a
Sacrament as Baptism; or else he must renounce the Council of Trent. And it is
observable, that the very argument used by the Donatists and others, was the
same which T. G. here produces, viz. his common maxim of Reason, and not
denyable by any man of common sense that no man can give to another, that which
he has not himself; to which this answer was given, that the Instrument was
not the giver, V. Vasquez. in 3. p. Thom. disp. 137. c. 3. n. 20.
but the first Institutor, and in case the Minister keep to the Institution,
the Grace of the Sacrament may be conveyed by him though he has it not himself.

But, methinks, if T. G. had forgotten the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, he
might have looked into some one or other of their own Authors to have informed
himself better of their Doctrine in this matter. Vasquez has a Chapter on
purpose to prove that an Heretical, excommunicated, suspended Bishop is a
sufficient Minister of Ordination; Vasquez. in 3. p Th. disp. 243. c. 1.
and says that all the Schoolmen and Summists are agreed in it, and that there
can be no doubt at all made of it. And did none of these men understand the
principle that is undeniable by any man of common sense? what a back-blow is
this to those of his own Church? for Vasquez says this is determined as a
matter of faith among them, that the validity of a Sacrament does not depend on
the probity or faith of the Minister. And he denies it to be in the power of
the Church to hinder the effect of ordination in an excommunicated Bishop,
because it cannot blot out his Character, or take away his power. Estius says,
Est. in Sente^t. l. 4. disti. 25. sect. 3.
that no Crime how great soever, whether haeresie, Schism, or Apostasy, no
censure how heavy soever, as excommunication, can hinder the validity of
ordination by a Bishop, although it be of those who are not subject to his
jurisdiction, in case he observes the lawful rites of ordination as to the
essence of the Sacrament; for this reason, because ordination belongs to the
power of Order, which being once received can never be lost; but those things
which belong to Jurisdiction, as absolution and excommunication, have no
effect, where that Jurisdiction is taken away. And this Doctrine they all
ground upon St Augustins discourse against the Donatists; Aug. ^l. 2. c. Epist.
Pa^^ca. c. 13. 17. c. Donat. l 1. c. 1. l. 3 c. 1^.
and upon the practice of the Church at that time which did receive those who
were ordained among the Donatists, without scrupling their Orders; as not only
appears by the testimony of St. Augustine but by the decree of an African
Council to that purpose; Aug. E^ist. 50. Epist. 162. c. c^ss. l. 2. c. 11. 12.
and that not only at first, but when the Schism was Grown inveterate. Co^ex
Ca^. Eccles. A^ic. c. 63.
And yet Francis Hallier a late Doctor of the Sorbon, tells us, Apud. Ba^samon.
Et Zonar. ^. 71.
that the Donatists were not barely Schismatics, Hallier de ordi^. sacris. p.
2. Sect. 4. c. 5. ss. 1. n. 4.
but they were adjudged heretics, for asserting that the efficacy of
Sacraments did depend upon the quality of the persons, and not upon the merits
of Christ. The same Author vehemently disputes against those, who assert that
the power of Order can be lost by the sin of the person, and shows that
Doctrine has been condemned by several Councils before that of Trent; as of
Arles, P. 2. sect. 3. c. 2. sect. 5. 6 7.
of Orleans and Constance: and undertakes to answer all the instances brought
from Antiquity to the contrary; as either understood of such heretics, Sect.
4. c. 5. s^ct. 1.
which did not retain the essentials of the Sacrament or only implying the
fault committed in giving or receiving them at the hands of such persons, but
not any invalidity in the Sacrament it self. And afterward he proves that
Heretics are capable of ordination. But if these, and many others of their
later Writers will not satisfy him, I desire him to consult their more ancient
Authors, To. Aquin. suppl. q. 38. art. 2.
Thom. Aquinas determins that Heretics and those who are cut off from the
Church, may give orders as well as administer other Sacraments, the reason he
gives is, that a power in Consecration is given to a Bishop, which can never be
taken from him, although he will not allow it to be called a Character. For
several, especially of the ancient Schoolmen would not have consecration to
imprint a new Character; but they were never able to give an intelligible
account of what they meant by the Character as distinct from that Sacramental
power which was conveyed by consecration and they granted to be indelible as
the other was, some making it an extension of the Character of Priesthood,
others a bare extrinsecal denomination added to it; but however they held it
such as could no more be taken away than the Character of Priesthood. (...). l.
4. ^^ist. 25. q. 2.
Cardinal Bonaventure says, that the validity of Sacraments among Heretics,
was a Question much in dispute among the ancient Doctors, but that it has been
determined by St. Augustine, that they are valid if they preserve the essentials
of them: and in the matter of ordination he says, that the power of Orders,
although it be not a distinct Character, yet because it is built upon, it can
no more be taken away than the Character it self: but whatever is founded upon
Jurisdiction as the power of excommunication and absolution may be taken away.
But I need not mention any more particular Writers, since Morinus acknowledges,
that for 400. years the opinion of the validity of Orders conferred by
Heretics, Mori^. d^ Sacris Ordi^at. pa^. 3. Exercit. 5. c. 1. n. 12
has only obtained in the Roman Church. Before that time, he proves at large
that it was more disputable, as appears by the Master of the Sentences, who
accounts it a perplexed and almost insoluble difficulty because of the
different opinions of Doctors about it; but afterward St. Augustins opinion
was generally received both among the Schoolmen and Canonists; and is now
become a matter of faith in the Roman Church at least by consequence, since the
Decrees of Councils. And although Morinus will not allow that any decree of
their Church has passed in this matter, yet he says, there has been so long
and so universal a consent of Doctors in this point, Exer^it. 5. c. 8. n. 7.
that it ought to be instead of a Law, which they ought not to violate. By this
we may judge of the learning and skill of T. G. in the Doctrine of his own
Church.

But if he would not look into the Controversal Writers of their Church, yet if
he had but searched into the practice of the Church either in ancient or modern
times he would have been ashamed to have made use of such an Argument to
overthrow all Ecclesiastical Authority among us. I grant that in some
tumultuous Ages of the Church, Ordinations have been adjudged null through the
defaults of the Persons, but then it was merely for breaking the Canons of the
Church; so it was in the case of Formosus, for breaking the Canons against the
Translations of Bishops; in the case of Ebbo Archbishop of Rhemes, whose
ordinations were nulled by Hincmarus and the Council of Soissons, for not being
Canonically restored after deposition but upon appeal to the Pope they were
pronounced valid: in the Case of Pope Constantine for precepitating Orders to
secure the Popedom; in the famous case of Photius, whose ordination was
declared Null by the opposite faction on the same grounds; but all these things
were done in troublesome times, when one party sought a pretense against the
other. But if we regard the more general practice of the Church, we shall find
when far greater objections than these were made, yet Ordinations have been
allowed; although made by Heretics. I shall offer him the fairest terms he can
desire, and for the practice of the Church referr him to his own dear second
Council of Nice, and the modern practice of the Roman Church. The Question of
the validity of Ordination by Heretics was at large debated in the first
action of the second Council of Nice, upon the submission of Basilius,
Theodorus, and Theodosius, Hypatius and others who had been Bishops of the
opposite party, which John the Vicar of the Orient there declared to be worse
than any former heresy: upon which the Question was proposed, whether upon
renouncing their heresy they might be received as Bishops, and the orders be
allowed of those who were ordained by them during their Heresy? Hypatius
appealed to the custom of the Church; then the Canons of Councils and writings
of the Fathers were brought into Council: Tarasius produced the Canon of the
Council of Nice, allowing the Ordinations of the Cathari, and the imposition of
hands there mentioned he understands only for benediction, and not for
ordination: and the Council of Ephesus making no distinction between those
ordained by Nestorians and others; (for therein the force of that third Canon
must lie which Tarasius thought so plain) from St. Basil, allowing those
Bishops which communicated with Isoes or Zoius and Saturninus; from the Council
of Ephesus allowing the Orders of the Messaliani or Euchitae; from the Council
of Chalcedon allowing the Bishops upon their repentance, which had joined with
Dioscorus: and more particularly, for those which had been ordained by
Heretical Bishops, it was there showed, that Anatolius the President of the
fourth Council was ordained by Dioscorus in the presence of Eutyches; that John
Bishop of Jerusalem after he had renounced the Acephalists by whom he was
ordained, was received and submitted to as Bishop by the Orthodox; that many of
those who sat in the sixth Council were ordained by Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus,
and Petrus, who were in that Council declared to be Heretics; and for 50.
years together Tarasius says, they had no other ordinations: upon these
evidences of the practice of the Church, this Council of Nice declared
likewise, that the ordination of Heretical Bishops was valid.

For the modern practice of the Church of Rome, I appeal to the allowance
therein given to the Ordinations of the Greek Church, although the Greek Church
be charged with Heresy; and that ever since the notorious Schism in the time
of Michael Cerularius A. D. 1053. In the time of Innocent the third some Greek
Clergymen living in the Dioceses of Latin Bishops, yet received ordination
from Greek Bishops, which made the Latin Bishops suspend them from the
execution of their Office, the Pope, hearing of it, sends to his Legate, wherein
he consents to the suspension in case it were done without leave from the Latin
Bishop; but if leave were obtained he takes off the suspension; Extra^. de
temp. (...). C. quod Trasl.
because this custom is allowed in the Church* I need not produce more
particular instances in this kind, Morin. de sacris ordinat. part. 1. c. 3. 4.
5.
which may be seen at large in Morinus; because in all the attempts of
reconciliation in the several Councils held to that purpose, as at Lions, and
Florence, where all the matters in difference were most fully handed, there was
never any objection made to the Greek Ordinations. But most remarkable to this
purpose is the Bull of Clement the seventh containing in it a former Bull of
Leo the tenth, Leo Allatius de aetat: Et inte^st. in collat: Ordin. p. 5. 14.
Isaaac. Habert. Po^tifical.
published by Leo Allatius, by Isaacius Habertus, and by Morinus, wherein their
Ordinations and other rites and customs are expressly allowed. And to this day
says Morinus they are allowed in Rome not only to perform other parts of
divine service according to their customs in the Church of St. Athanasius,
Graec. in praef.
but to ordain Priests after their own manner; Morin. de Sacris Ordin. p. 1. c.
4.
for which they had a Bull of Urban the eighth.

And now I desire T. G. to consider a little his undeniable maxim, that no man
can give to another that which he has not himself, whether he does in earnest
think that his own Church is so bereft of all common sense, as not to
understand the force of this Maxim? and if it thought it of any weight in this
matter, how it could ever approve the Ordinations of Heretics, or decree that
the Sacraments retain their efficacy, where the essentials of them are
observed, whatever the faith or manners of the Instruments be?

And this was all I intended in this Preface; of the rest of his Book, the
Reader may expect an account as God gives health and opportunity.

The Contents.
PReface to the two first Answers. p. 1. A particular examination of the
Pamphlet entitled Doct. Stillingfleet against Doct. Stillingfleet. Of the
insufficiency of J. W.'s way of answering. p. 13. No contradiction about the
charge of Idolatry. p. 18. A distinct answer to his propositions. p. 26. In
what sense the Church of Rome is owned by us as a true Church. p. 29. His
Appendix about Idolatry considered. p. 34. The second contradiction examined.
p. 39. The charge of Fanaticism defended. p. 50. No contradiction in the charge
of divisions p. 65. The conclusion. p. 71.
An Answer to the Book entitled Doct. Stillingfleets Principles considered.
The occasion of annexing those principles. p. 75. Of the notion of
Infallibility. p. 79. N. O's concessions. p. 85. His principles laid down. p.
95. His exceptions answered. p. 98. His proofs of Infallibility examined. p.
110. Of the Arguments from Scripture for Infallibility. p. 116. Of the argument
from Tradition for it. p. 123. Of the argument from parity of Reason. p. 137.
Of the Authority of the Guides of the Church in ten Propositions. p. 142. The
case of Vigilius and Honorius at large discussed p. 154, 159. The different
case of the separation of dissenters from our Church, and our separation from
the Church of Rome. p. 180. Of the means to attain the sense of Scripture
without an infallible Guide. p. 186. Of the necessity of a Judge in
controversies. p. 191. The way used in the Primitive Church for finding the
sense of Scripture through several Ages of the Christian Church from the most
authentic Writers of them. p. 198. Church Authority not destroyed by my
principles. p. 260. What Authority we allow to Governors of the Church. p. 267.
The Roman Churches way of suppressing Sects compared with ours. p. 286.
ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 13. read the Church. p. 26. l. 14 for and r. that p. 49. l. ^
for here r. wh^re p 176* l* 23. r. Eutychianism. p. 177. l. 8. r. followed. p.
17. l. 5. r. Patriarchal. p. 182. l. 14. for by r. ^e. p. 189. l. 22. r.
Apocalyptic^ p. 209. l. 30. for Boo r. Book. p. 225. marg r. Vales. not. ad
Eusch. p. 273. (...) r. Euclid. p. 271. l. 7. for he makes this, r. this is
made. p. 280. l. 5. blot ^. one the.

The Preface.
WHen I Published the late Book,. 1^
which has so much enraged those of the Church of Rome against me, Of the
Nature of these Answers.
I thought I had reason to expect that a just Answer should be made to it; but
they have taken an effectual course to undeceive me; for by this new way I
perceive, their utmost ambition is to have something abroad which among
themselves may pass for an Answer. Which put me in mind of what I have heard a
great Person said, when he had undertaken to manage an ill cause before a
public Audience, and one of his Friends asked him what he meant by it, trouble
not your self, said he, our own side will be sure to believe me. It was surely
some such presumption as this, which made the learned Authors of these two
elaborate Pamphlets to appear in such a manner in Print, as if it were no great
matter what they said, so their people might have this to say, and (if they
can) believe it too, that my book is answered. If this be all their cause will
afford, it deserves rather to be pitied than confuted; if it will bear more,
they are as bad managers of it as their enemies could wish. For however I was
threatened before hand that such answers were coming abroad, every line of which
would fetch blood; yet, as cruel as they are when we are under their lash, I
found that which they designed for my punishment to give me no small pleasure:
and I never had so good an opinion of the mercifulness of their Church as when
I saw with what feeble hands they chastised me. I had heard so much of their
rage, that I expected their greatest strength would be employed upon me; and I
could not tell what Zamzummims they might hitherto keep in the dark, whose arms
were not to be made use of, but upon some special occasion when an Adversary
was to be dispatched all at once and so perfectly subdued as never to appear
more. While I was preparing my self for this kind of Martyrdom, out come these
mighty men of valor, who have beaten nothing that I know of, but the air and
themselves; for they have neither tied my tongue, nor broke my heart, nor
fetched one drop of blood that I can yet find; all which were things I was told
would be done, when these answers came abroad; which threatenings made so loud a
noise, that I heard the report of them not only nearer home, but from very
distant persons and places.

But lest I should be thought only to despise my Adversaries (which I confess
they have given me no small occasion to do) I shall bestow a particular
examination upon what they have offered by way of Answer to my Book.. 2.
Only I think it reasonable in the first place to take notice of their present
way and method of Answering, Of their common way of Answering our Books.
wherein they make use of as many artifices, as they do in gaining Proselytes.
When we set our selves to Answer their Books, we endeavor to state the
Controversy plainly, to examine their proofs, to apply distinct Answers to
their Arguments fairly represented in their own words, and to render the whole
Discourse as clear and perspicuous as may be, that all persons may be capable
of judging on which side the greatest strength and evidence lies. This is the
mighty advantage which a good cause gives us; we make use of no tricks to
deceive men, nor Sophistical cavils to confound and perplex things; we dare
appeal to the judgment of any impartial person, who will take the pains to
examine the matters in difference between us. But in their late dealings with
us, they seek to avoid the main things in dispute, and abhor any methodical
proceeding; one man picks out a sentence here and there to answer, another a
page or two together, a third leaps from one thing to another, as if resolved
to pass by the greatest difficulties; but he is a man of courage indeed, that
dares fall upon the rear, and begin to confute a Book at the end of it, so that
if he lives long enough, and get heart, he may in time come to the beginning:
And if we observe them all, they look for nothing so much as some cleanly way
of escape, and if they can but raise such a dust as to fly away without being
openly discerned to do so, this they hope those of their own side will be so
kind and partial as to call a Victory. These are no general accusations, but
such as are easy to observe in their dealings with me as to my former Book,
and that lately published. But to judicious men, all these little arts and
shifts are either plain acknowledgements of a baffled Cause, or an Argument of
a weak and unskilful management.

If the Book it self be a little too troublesome to be meddled with,. 3.
it is best to fall upon the Author, Of their Ca^^mnies against me.
and it is a hard case if by false and ridiculous stories, or open calumnies,
or at least base and ugly insinuations, they cannot diminish his reputation;
and then they hope the Book will sink with its Author. But we are not Ignorant
whose cause is wont to be managed by such devices as these are, and from whom
they have learnt this method of confuting Adversaries. As for all their railing
accusations against me; I shall not so much as desire God to rebuke them, but
only pray that he would pardon them; and if I must thank them for any thing, it
is for giving me the occasion for exercising so great a charity. I have learnt
of him who when he was reviled, reviled not again, not only to forbear
reproaching them in the same manner, but to return them good for evil, and to
pray for them while they calumniate me. I have so much the less reason to
wonder that my Book should be charged by them with no less than Blasphemy, Mat.
26. 65.
since the Author of our Religion himself was so, and suffered under that
accusation. But wherein I pray does this blasphemy lie? have I uttered any
thing that tends to the reproach of God or true Religion? have I the least word
which malice it self can stretch to the dishonor of Jesus Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles, or the Holy Scriptures written by divine Inspiration? no; I
challenge the boldest of them, and most malicious, to produce any thing I ever
said or writ that does but seem to look that way. Have I made the practice of
true devotion ridiculous, and the real expressions of piety the subject of
scorn and derision? No, so far from it, that it was only a just zeal for the
Honor and practice of true Religion made me willing to lay open the ridiculous
Fanaticisms of some pretended Saints in the Roman Church. And must they be
allowed to charge Fanaticism on us, and think it far from Blasphemy to
represent the Enthusiastic Follies of the Sectaries among us; and when they
are guilty of the very same, or greater, may not we show their unjustice and
partiality, without being accused of Blasphemy? But some of these are Canonized
Saints, as S. Brigitt, S. Catharine, S. Francis, and S. Ignatius; which is so
far from making the Cause of their Church better, that to my understanding it
makes it much worse. For although Fanaticism be disowned by our Church, it
seems it is not barely countenanced and allowed in the Church of Rome, but
Canonized and adored. That which I insist upon, is this; either we have no
Fanatics, or theirs are so; for by the very same rule that ours are so, theirs
must be too; for our Fanatics do pretend as high to the Spirit and divine
Revelation as any of theirs; only there is this remarkable difference between
their Fanatics and ours, that ours are among us but not of us, but theirs are
both. Now if any one who pretends to Inspiration and Enthusiasm cannot be
charged with Fanaticism without blasphemy, we must be exposed to all follies
and contradictions imaginable; and to what purpose are we bid to try the
Spirits whether they be of God or no, 1 J^h 4. 1.
i. e. whether their pretense to divine revelation be true or false? If there
may be false pretenses to Inspiration, we are to examine the grounds of them,
and to judge accordingly; and all false pretenders to Inspiration, let them be
Canonized by whom they will, are the highest sort of Fanatics; and the greater
honor is given them, the greater dishonor it is to the Christian Religion.

But these things shall be more largely discussed in their proper place:. 4.
I now only take notice of the injustice of their calumny with which they have
made so much noise among injudicious people: Expo^ing Fanaticism no disservice
to Christianity.
and I should not have been so much concerned about it, had I not found
suggestions to the same purpose in the Authors of the two Pamphlets. Dr. (...)
against Dr. Stilling^^^t. p. 11.
The one of them very kindly makes no difference between Lucian, Porphyrius and
me, but only some interest which does bias me another way; and verily
believes, good man, that were it not for that, I could flurt with as much
piquancy and railery at Christian Religion, as I do at the Roman. In which base
suggestion there is no color of truth, but only that he very honestly
distinguishes the Christian, Religion and the Roman from each other; as indeed
they are in many things as different from each other as truth from falsehood,
wisdom from folly, and true piety from gross Superstition. If he had called me
an Atheist in plain terms, the grossness of the calumny might have abated the
force of it; but there is no such way to do a man mischief, as by fly
insinuations and shrewd suggestions introduced with I verily believe, and
expressed with some gravity and zeal. But you who are so good at resolving
faith, what is this verily believe of yours founded upon? Have you the
authority of your Church for it? have you any evidence of reason? or rather,
have you it by some vision or revelation made by some of those Saints, whose
Fanaticism is exposed? or do you verily believe it, as you verily believe many
other things, for no reason in the world? If I should tell you I have made it
my business to assert the truth of the Scriptures, and Christian Religion
therein contained, in a large Discourse several years since published; such is
your charity, that you would tell me, so did Vaninus write for Providence, when
he denied a Deity. If I should make large Apologies for my innocence, and
publish a confession of my faith, with protestations that no interest in the
world could remove me from it; you might tell me, where there is no guilt what
need so much ado? In plain terms, I know but one way to satisfy such as you
are, but I will keep from it as long as I can, and that is to go to Rome and be
burnt for my faith; for that is the kindness there showed to those who contend
for the purity of the Christian Religion against the corruptions of the Roman.
But such calumnies as these, as they are not fit to be passed by, so are they
too gross to need any further answer. I shall however declare my mind freely to
you; if I had no other notion of the Christian doctrine, than what I have from
the Doctrines of your Church as contrary to ours; no other measures of
Christian piety than from your mystical Theology; no better way to Worship God
than what is practiced among you; no greater certainty of Inspiration from God
than of the Visions and Revelations of your late Saints; no other miracles to
confirm the Christian doctrine than what are wrought by your Images and Saints,
I should sooner choose to be a Philosopher, than a Christian upon those terms.
And I verily believe (to answer yours with another) that the frauds and
impostures of the Roman Church have made more Atheists in Christendom, than any
one cause whatsoever besides: for when men resolve all their faith into the
testimony of a Church whose frauds are so manifest, and confessed by your best
Writers, M^^^h. Ca^. loc. T^col. l. 11. p. 534.
such as Melchior Canus, and Ludov. Vives; what can they who know no better,
Lud. Viv. a^trad. (...). l. 5.
but suspect the Inspirations and Miracles of former Ages, who see such false
pretenses to them so much magnified, and the Fanatic pretenders Canonized on
that account? And I am so far from thinking it any disservice to the Christian
Religion to expose these Fanaticisms, that I again verily believe that
Christianity will never obtain as it ought to do among men, till all those
hypocritical cheats be yet more laid open to the view of the World; which if
any one have but the courage and patience to undertake, it would be as great,
and a much more useful labor than the cleansing of the Augean Stable. Dr.
(...) Princip. con^id. (...).
This is not to make sport and recreation for the Atheist and debauched, nor to
give occasion to such persons to turn the Inspirations of Holy-Scripture into
matter of Drollery and Buffonry, as the author of the second Pamphlet
tragically declaims; any more than our Saviors unmasking the hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees was the destroying the Law of Moses; or the discovery of
cheats and impostors does give occasion to suspect the honesty of all mankind:
Nay so far is it from that, that we think the separating of Fanaticism from
true inspiration to be one of the best Services that can be done to the
Christian Religion, which otherwise is in danger of being despised or rejected
by the considerate part of mankind. But I would fain know of these men, whether
they do in earnest make no difference between the Writings of such as Mother
Iuliana and the Books of Scripture; between the Revelations of S. Brigitt, S.
Catharine, etc. and those of the Prophets; between the actions of S. Francis
and Ignatius Loyola and those of the Apostles? if they do not, I know who they
are that expose our Religion to purpose; if they do make a difference, how can
the representing their visions and practices reflect dishonor upon the other,
so infinitely above them, so much more certainly conveyed down to us with the
consent of the whole Christian World? Thus much may here suffice to represent
the arts our Adversaries are driven to, to defend themselves; I cannot blame
them that they would engage Religion on their side, but so have all Fanatics
in the World as well as they; and I cannot for my heart see, but this heavy
charge of Blasphemy and undermining Religion does as justly lie on them, who
deride the Fanatics among us, as on those who have discovered the Fanaticism
of the Church of Rome.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE PAMPHLET, Entitled, Dr. Stillingfleet against Dr.
Stillingfleet.
HAving thus far laid open their present way of dealing with their
Adversaries,. 1.
I now come to a particular consideration of these two Pamphlets; The
insufficiency of his way of Answering.
and begin with that called Dr. Stillingfleet against Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
The Author of which is to be commended for so noble an enterprise (which few of
the Champions of former Ages could accomplish) viz. to make his Adversary fall
by his own sword. But the mischief of it is, these Romantic Knights do hurt no
where but in Paper and their own imagination. But I forget his grave
admonition, P. 14.
that I would treat these matters seriously, and lay aside drollery. To be then
as grave as he can desire, there are these two things which I design to prov^^
against him. 1. That on supposition I di^^ contradict my self, in the way he
insists upo^n it, that were no sufficient answer to my Book. 2. That I am far
enough from contradicting my self in any one of the things which (...) insists
upon.

1. Supposing what he contends for were true, yet my Book remains unanswered;
the design of which was to show that no man can join in the Communion of the
Roman Church without great hazard of his salvation. If I had any where said the
contrary, this indeed would have made it evident that I had contradicted my
self. But what then? does the force of all the arguments used by me in this
last Discourse fall to the ground, because I was formerly of another opinion?
Let me ask these revolters from the Church of England one question; whether
they do not now more plainly contradict themselves as to their former opinions,
than they can pretend that I have ever done? I desire to know, whether this
makes all their present arguments for the Roman Church of no force? If they
think their present reasons ought to be answered whatever contrary opinion they
had before; why, on supposition I had contradicted in a a former Book what I
say in this, must this render all that I have said, or can hereafter say in
this matter, invalid? Does the strength of all lie upon my bare affirming or
denying? was it ever true because I said it? if not, how comes it to be untrue
now, because I deny it? I do not remember I was ever so vain, to make use of my
own authority to prove a thing to be true, because I believed it; and if I had,
the world is not so vain to believe a man one jot the sooner for it. If my
authority in saying or denying be of no importance to the truth of the thing,
then he may prove that I contradict my self, and yet all the arguments of my
Book be as strong as ever. I do not desire any one to follow my opinion because
it is mine, but I offer reason and authority for the proof of what I say; if
those be good in themselves, they do not therefore cease to be so, because they
are, or seem to he inconsistent with what I have said elsewhere. So that
self-contradiction being proved, overthrows not the reason of the thing, but
the authority of the person; and where things depend merely upon authority, it
is a good argument, and no where else. If a witness in a Court contradicts
himself, his testimony signifies nothing; because there is nothing else but his
authority that makes his testimony valid; but if a Lawyer at the Bar chance to
speak inconsistently, if afterward he speaks plain and evident reason, does
that take off the force of it, because he said something before which
contradicted that plain reason? If the Pope, or those who pretend to be
infallible, contradict themselves, that sufficiently overthrows their pretense
of infallibility; for he that changes his mind, must be deceived once; but for
us fallible mortals, if we once hit upon reason and truth, and manage the
evidence of it clearly, that reason does not lose its former evidence, because
the same persons may afterward oppose it. Suppose I should be able to prove
that Bellarmine in his Recognitions contradicts what he had said in his former
Books; does this presently make all his arguments useless, and him incapable of
ever appearing in controversy more? Does this make all his authorities false
and his reasons unconcluding? does it hence follow that he spoke no where
consistently, because once or twice, or perhaps as often as his neighbors, he
contradicted himself? But my grave Adversary, I. W. imagines that we Writers of
Controversies are like Witnesses in Chancery, and are bound to make Affidavits
before the Masters of this Court of Controversy; and that whatever we say is
to be taken as upon our oath; this indeed would be an excellent way of bringing
Controversies to an issue, if we were to be sworn whether such a thing as
Transubstantiation were true or false; and I cannot tell whether this, or
laying wagers, or the Popes infallibility be the best way to end such
Controversies; for any one of them would do it, if people could but agree about
it. But now my Adversary says, that if a man once contradict himself he is to
be looked on as a perjured person, and whatever he says, his word is not to be
taken. This he not only begins with, but very triumphantly concludes with it in
these words, and this alone may suffice to annul* whatever he has hitherto, St.
against St. p. 14.
or shall hereafter object against us; for a witness, who has been once
palpably convinced to have forsworn or contradicted himself in matters of
moment, besides the condign punishment he is liable unto, he does vacate all
evidences produced by him, against his Adversary, and deserves never more to be
heard against him in any Tribunal. I see now what it is they would be at, no
less than perpetual silence and being set in the Pillory with that Pamphlet on
my forehead Dr. Still. against Dr. Still. for being guilty of contradicting my
self, would satisfy I. W. and his Friends; This I suppose was the meaning of
stopping my mouth for ever, when this Answer was to come out. But now I
perceive it is so dangerous a thing, I had best stand upon my defense, and
utterly deny that I have contradicted my self in any thing, in which I. W. has
charged me.

2.. 2.
To make it then out that this is a groundless charge, I must go through the
several particulars insisted on.

The first is in the charge of Idolatry; No contratradiction about the charge
of Idolatry.
but how do I contradict my self about this? had I vindicated the Church of
Rome from Idolatry in my Defense of Archbishop Laud, this had been indeed to
contradict my self: but this is not so much as pretended; and if it were,
nothing could be more easily confuted; for in that very Book, as it falls out
very happily, there is a discourse to the same purpose, proving the Church of
Rome guilty of Idolatry, Rational Account. p. 596, 606.
in Invocation of Saints and the worship of Images, and that the Heathen, in
the worship of inferior Deities and Images, might be excused on the same
grounds that those of the Church of Rome do excuse themselves. Here is then no
appearance of a contradiction in terms; and it is only pretended to be by
consequence, viz. from yielding that the Church of Rome and we do not differ in
Fundamental points, and that the Church of Rome is therefore a true Church;
from whence he inferrs, that it cannot be guilty of Idolatry: because to teach
that, would be a Fundamental error, and inconsistent with the Being of a true
Church: and therefore to charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry, and to allow
it to be a true Church is a contradiction. This is the substance of what he
says upon this head: to which I shall answer by showing, 1. That this way of
answering is very disingenuous. 2. That it is Sophistical, and proves not the
thing which he intends.

1. That it is a disingenuous way; because he barely opposes a judgment of
charity concerning their Church, to a judgment of reason concerning the nature
of actions, without at all examining the force of those reasons which are
produced in the Book he pretends to answer. Can I. W. imagine, that any one who
enquires into the safest way for his salvation, and hears the Church of Rome
charged with Idolatry in her worship, by arguments drawn from the plain Law of
God, the common sense of mankind, the repugnancy of their way of worship to the
conceptions we ought to have of the divine nature, the consent of the ancient
Christian Church, the parity of the case in many respects with the Heathen
Idolaters, should presently conclude, that all these arguments are of no force,
merely because the person who made use of them, had upon another occasion
judged so charitably of that Church, as to suppose it still to retain the
essentials of a true Church? I will put a case paralled to this; suppose one of
the Church of Judah should have called the Church of Israel in the time of
Jeroboam a true Church, because they acknowledged the true God, and did believe
an agreement in that common acknowledgement to be sufficient to preserve the
essentials of a Church among them; and afterward the same person should go
about to convince the ten Tribes of their Idolatry in worshipping God, by the
Calves of Dan and Bethel: would this be thought a sufficient way of answering
him, to say, that he contradicted himself, by granting them a true Church and
yet charging them with Idolatry? whereas the only true consequence would be,
that he thought some kind of Idolatry consistent with the Being of a Church.
Might not such a person justly say, that they made a very ill use of his
charity, when he supposed only that kind of Idolatry which implies more Gods
than one, to unchurch a people; but however, those persons were more concerned
to vindicate themselves from Idolatry of any kind, than he was to defend his
charitable opinion of them; and if they could prove to him, that this inferior
sort of Idolatry does unchurch them as well as the grosser, the consequence of
it would be that his charity must be so much the less, but their danger would
be the same. This is just our case with the Church of Rome; we acknowledge that
they still retain the Fundamental articles of the Christian faith, that there
is no dispute between them and us about the true God and his Son Jesus Christ,
as to his death, resurrection, glory, and being the proper object of divine
worship; we yield that they have true Baptism among them, in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and we looking upon these as the essentials of a
true Church, do upon that account own that Church to be so: but then we charge
the Roman Church, with gross corrupting that Worship which is proper to the
divine nature, by her worship of Images, adoration of the Host, and Invocation
of Saints; which being done, not in express terms against the worship of the
true God, but by consequence, we do not think this does destroy the Being of a
Church among them; although it makes the salvation of persons in her communion
extremely hazardous: and after we have gone about to prove this by many and
weighty arguments, is it reasonable for any one to tell us that we contradict
our selves, and therefore our arguments do signify nothing? whereas in truth,
here is no appearance of a contradiction to that which is our own sense in this
matter. For what shadow of a contradiction is it, to say, that the Roman Church
is a true Church, and yet is guilty of Idolatry; supposing that we believe some
sort of Idolatry which is very sinful, not to be yet of so high a nature as to
unchurch those who practice it; And we choose the Instance of the ten Tribes
for the ground of this charity. If they can prove that all sorts of Idolatry do
necessarily destroy the essentials of a Church, the consequence is, we must
have less charity for them, than we had before; And such a concession from us
does not show their guilt to be less, but only our charity to be greater.
Suppose a man should exceed in his charity toward a person guilty of some
grievous faults, and say, he believes he may be a pious man for all this; but
withal severely reproves him for his faults, and tells him the danger he
continually runs by such actions; would it be fair for such a man to answer
him, that his reproofs were not to be regarded, because he contradicted
himself, for he told him he believed him to be a pious man, and yet upbraided
him with those faults which were inconsistent with piety? what would the
consequence of this be to the thing it self? would this make those faults ever
the less, because he judged so charitably of the person notwithstanding his
committing them? But when we allow the Church of Rome to be a true Church, we
are far from understanding by that a sound or a good Church free from
corruptions, which would be the most proper sense to found a contradiction
upon, in this matter of Idolatry; but we mean no more by it, than as a man is a
true man though he has the plague upon him; those which we account the
essentials of a Church we deny not to it, but withal, we contend that it is
overrun with such corruptions in worship, as do mightily endanger the
salvation of those who live in the communion of it.

2. Having thus discovered the disingenuity of making so bad a use of our
charity against us, I now come to show how Sophistical this way of answering
is,. 2. The Sophistical cavils in this argument.
by a closer examination of it.

First, The starting of a new objection answers no argument, and all that this
amounts to is only raising a new difficulty; whereas he ought in the first
place to have answered all the arguments I had brought to prove them guilty of
Idolatry; and when he had done this fairly and plainly (which for some good
reasons he had no mind to do) he might then have insisted on the inconsistency
of it with principles owned by me; but to do this without giving an answer, so
much as to any one argument, is a clear evidence of a sophistical and cavilling
humor, rather than of any intention to satisfy an inquisitive mind.

2. The force of this objection lies in the different sense and meaning of
several expressions made use of by him, which being explained, the objection
will signify nothing. For if we rightly understand the notion of Idolatry, the
manner of teaching it, the sense of Fundamental errors and a true Church, as
it is owned by me, the very appearance of any contradiction vanishes.

I agree in the general, that the true notion of Idolatry is, giving the honor
due only to God to a mere creature; and I desire no greater advantage against
the Church of Rome, than from such a concession; but then we are to understand,
that this may be done several ways. 1. When the worship proper to the true God
is given to a false God. 2. When the true God is acknowledged and worshipped,
but the unity of the Godhead is denied, and many false Gods are joined with
him in the same worship. In these two sorts of Idolatry, I acknowledge that the
true God is rejected, either wholly in the first way, or by consequence in the
second. But withal I say, that the giving the Worship to a creature which is
due only to God may be consistent with the acknowledgement of one Supreme God,
and that these ways. 1. When one Supreme God is acknowledged, but no difference
is put between the external Worship of him and creatures. This was the Idolatry
of the wiser Heathen, who did in their consciences acknowledge that there was
but one true and supreme God, but yet gave the same worship to inferior
Deities, that they did to him. These men might have pleaded for themselves, for
all that I know, as much to their advantage, as those of the Church of Rome do
against me. 2. When the worship proper to the true God is given to an Image: or
the supposing of God to be truly honored by us, by prostrating our selves
before any corporeal representation of him. This likewise the Heathen were
guilty of. St. Paul has long since told us of some, who profess that they know
God, Tit. 1. 16.
but in works they deny him; so there may be some who may profess a worship due
only to God, but in their actions may contradict it. As suppose a company of
rebellious men, should declare over and over that they acknowledge but one
Sovereign Power of this Nation, invested in the person of the King; but yet,
should take upon themselves to raise forces, to appoint great Officers of
State, and require that the very same outward reverence and honor be given to
them, which is given to the King himself; would any man in his sense say, that
because these men still declared the supreme Authority to be in the King, that
there was no Treason in such actions? or that those persons contradicted
themselves, who allowed that their profession was such as became good subjects,
but their actions made them guilty of Treason. The same we say of the Church of
Rome; we confess they own the supreme Power of the world to be in one true God,
and we have no controversy with them about the essential Doctrines of Religion
(which is, that we mean by their being a true Church) but withal we say, they
overthrow what they say in their own practice, they rob God of the honor due
only to him, by giving it to Angels, and Saints, and Images and other
creatures. And what contradiction now is there in all this, and a Church
agreeing with us in the object of worship in general, should act contrary to
its own profession, by requiring those things to be done, which take away from
God that honor which is due only to him, and giving it to creatures? And this,
if I understand it, is all that this first contradiction in the charge of
Idolatry does amount to.

To appply this now to his own propositions, for the greater clearness and
satisfaction of all indifferent persons*. 3. A distinct answer to his
propositions.


His first Proposition I agree to, viz. That it is an article of faith, and a
Fundamental point of Religion, that the honor which is due only to God is not
to be given to a mere creature. But I desire it may be taken notice of, that
this proposition is Sophistically expressed; for although it be no dispute
between us, whether that honor which is due only to God, may be given to a
creature, yet it is a very great one, and the foundation of the charge of
Idolatry, what that honor is which is due only to God: and in case we can
prove that they do give to mere Creatures any part of that honor which is due
to God, it cannot at all excuse them to say, that they acknowledge it to be
Idolatry to give that honor, which they suppose to be due only to God, to a
mere creature. This proposition therefore, though in it self true, is
captiously set down, and with an intention only to deceive unwary readers, as
will appear by the next proposition.

2. To teach Idolatry is to err against the formentioned article of faith and
Fundamental point of Religion; i. e. to teach Idolatry, is to teach that the
honor which is due only to God is to be given to a mere creature. That this is
to teach Idolatry, no one questions; but our question is, Whether they who do
not teach this Proposition, may not teach men to do those things, whereby the
worship due only to God will be given to a mere creature? If he can prove, that
they who do not in terms declare that they do not dishonor God cannot
dishonor him; if he can demonstrate, that those who do not teach that the
honor which is due only to God is to be given to a creature, cannot possibly
by any actions of theirs rob him of that honor which is due to him: this will
be much more to his purpose than any thing he has yet said. And this
proposition, if he had proceeded as he ought to have done, should not have been
a particular affirmative but an Universal Negative; For it is not enough to
say, that to teach Idolatry is to teach that the honor which is due only to
God is to be given to a creature, but that No Church which does not teach this
can be guilty of Idolatry; for his design being to clear the Roman Church, his
Proposition ought to be so framed that all particulars may be comprehended
under it. But because he may say, his immediate intention was, not to clear
their Church from Idolatry, but to accuse me of a contradiction, I proceed to
the next Proposition.

3. A Church that does not err against any article of faith, nor against any
Fundamental point of Religion, does not teach Idolatry. This proposition is
likewise very Sophistical and captious; for by article of faith and fundamental
point of Religion is either understood, the main fundamental points of doctrine
contained in the Apostles Creed, and then I affirm, that a Church which does
own all the Fundamentals of doctrine, may be guilty of Idolatry, and teach
those things, wherein it lies; but if by not erring against any article of
faith, be meant, that a Church which does not err at all in matters of Religion
cannot teach Idolatry, the Proposition is true, but impertinent.

4. That the Church of Rome does teach Veneration of Images, adoration of the
Host, and Invocation of Saints, is agreed on both sides.

5. That the Roman Church does not err against any article of faith or
Fundamental point of Religion; This being that concession of ours, from whence
all the force of his argument is taken, must be explained according to our own
sense of it, and not according to that which he puts upon it; which that it may
be better understood, I shall both show in what sense this concession is made
by us, as to the Church of Rome, and of what force it is in this present debate.

For the clearer understanding in what sense it is made by us, we are to
consider the occasion of the Controversy about Fundamentals between us and the
Church of Rome:. 4. In what sense the Church of Rome is owned by us as a true
Church.
which ought to be taken from that Book to which he referrs. There we find the
occasion of it to be, the Romanists contending that all points defined by the
Church are Fundamental, Rational Account. p. 47.
or necessary to salvation, on the account of such a Definition; upon this the
controversy about Fundamentals was managed against them, with a design to
prove that all things defined by the Church of Rome are not Fundamental, or
necessary to be believed by all persons in order to their salvation, because
they were so defined. To this purpose I enquired. 1. What the grounds are, on
which any thing does become necessary to salvation? 2. Whether any thing whose
matter is not necessary, and is not required by an absolute command in
Scripture, can by any means whatsoever afterward become necessary? 3. Whether
the Church has power, by any proposition or definition, to make anything
become necessary to salvation, and to be believed as such, which was not so
before? For the first, I proposed two things. 1. What things are necessary to
the salvation of men as such, or considered in their single or private
capacities? 2. What things are necessary to be owned in order to salvation by
Christian Societies, or as the bonds and conditions of Ecclesiastical
communion? For the resolving of this I laid down these three Propositions.

1. That the very being of a Church, does suppose the necessity of what is
required to be believed in order to salvation.

2. Whatever Church owns those things, which are antecedently necessary to the
Being of a Church, cannot so long cease to be a true Church. And here I
expressly distinguished between the essentials of a Church, and those things
which were required to the Integrity or soundness of it, among which latter I
reckoned the worship of God in the way prescribed by him.

3. That the Union of the Catholic Church depended upon the agreement of it in
things antecedently necessary to its being. From hence I proceeded to show,
that nothing ought to be owned as necessary to Salvation by Christian
Societies, but such things which by all those Societies are acknowledged
antecedently necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church. And here I
distinguished between necessary articles of faith, and particular agreements
for the Churches peace. I did not therefore deny, but that it was in the power
of particular Churches, to require a Subscription to articles of Religion,
opposite to the errors and abuses which they reformed; but I denied it to be
in the power of any Church to make those things necessary articles of faith,
which were not so before. And here it was I showed the moderation of the Church
of England above that of Rome; in that our Church makes no articles of faith,
but such as have the testimony and approbation of the whole Christian world of
all Ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self: but the Church of
Rome imposes new articles of faith, to be believed as necessary to salvation;
as appears by the Bull of Pius 4. This is my plain meaning, which half-witted
men have stretched and abused to several ill purposes: but not to wander from
my present subject, what is it that I. W. can hence infer to his purpose? viz.
that from hence it follows that the Church of Rome does not err against any
article of faith, or any point necessary to salvation; which if it be only
meant of those essential points of faith, which I suppose antecedently
necessary to the Being of a Church, I deny it not, but do not see of what use
this concession can be to them in the present debate: since in the following
Discourse I made the ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church the best measure of
those things, which were believed to be necessary to salvation: so that the
force of the argument comes to this, whatsoever Church does embrace the ancient
Creeds cannot be guilty of Idolatry; but the Church of Rome does embrace all
the ancient Creeds by my own concession, therefore it is a contradiction for me
to grant that they hold the ancient Creeds, and yet to charge them with
Idolatry. And these matters being thus made plain, there is no great difficulty
to answer, by denying the major Proposition, and asserting that a Church which
does own all the articles of faith which are contained in them, may yet teach
and practice those things, which take away from that worship which is proper
only to God, and give it to mere creatures; as I have proved the Church of Rome
does in the worship of Images, adoration of the Host, and Invocation of Saints.
But to make this yet more plain, there are two things we consider in a Church,
the essence, and the soundness of it; as in a man, we consider his being a man
and his health: when we discourse of his mere Being, we enquire into no more
than those things which make him a man, whether he be sound or not: so in a
Church, when we enquire into the essentials of it, we think it not necessary to
go any farther than the doctrinal points of faith; the reason is, because
Baptism admits men into the Church upon the profession of the true faith in the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and whatever is sufficient to make a member of the
Church, that is in it self sufficient, being embraced, to make a Church; but
when we enquire farther into the moral integrity, or soundness of a Church,
then we think our selves bound, not barely to know what is acknowledged and
received, but how far it is so; and whether that Church which owns the
Fundamentals of Christian faith, does not by gross and damnable errors corrupt
the Worship of God, and debauch those very Principles which they profess to
own. And in this respect none of us ever said, That the Church of Rome did not
err; nay we do say and have manifestly proved, that she has erred against the
Christian faith, by introducing palpable errors in doctrine, and manifold
Superstitions and Idolatries in practice. From hence it plainly appears, that
the concession I. W. urges me with of the Church of Rome being a true Church
signifies nothing, in the sense by me intended, which contradicts the charge of
Idolatry; unless they can prove that none who own the Apostles Creed, or their
Baptism, can so long as they so do, teach Idolatry, or be guilty of giving the
honor due only to God to mere creatures. These things being thus explained, I
hope the Sophistry of this way of arguing is made so evident, that no man of
understanding, that resolves not before hand what to believe, is capable of
being deceived by it.

Before I come to the next contradiction charged upon me,. 5.
I shall for the diversion of the Reader, His Appendix considered.
and the suitableness of the matter, take notice of his Appendix, wherein I. W.
goes about so pleasantly to prove me an Idolater, by a notable trick, which it
seems came into his head a little too late, after he had finished this worthy
Treatise. I should have suspected it had been intended only for a piece of
Drollery, but that the man so severely rebukes me for it, and withal talks of
nothing less than demonstration in the case. What? (thought I) is it come to
this at last? and am I become an Idolater too, who was never apt to think my
self inclined so much as to superstition? but what can not the controverting
Wit of man do, upon second and serious thoughts? All the comfort I found left
was toward the conclusion, wherein he confesses that the same argument proves
the Prophets, Dr. St. against Dr. St. p. 21.
Evangelists and Holy Ghost himself to be Idolaters; Nay then, I hoped there
was no great harm to be feared in so good company; and by that consideration
armed my self against this terrible assault. But at last as he made nearer
approaches to me, I found no mischief was like to come, but what I brought upon
my self; for he charged me with nothing but my own Artillery, and the train
that was laid to blow me up was fetched from my own stores; only he had
disposed it in a way fittest for this deep design. But the best of it was, his
plot went no farther than my Idolatry, and both lay only in Imagination. For
there he makes the seat of my Idolatry, which he demonstratively proves must be
so by my own argument. I shall therefore conside^ what that was, and with what
great art he imploys it against me. Among other arguments to show that the
prohibition of worshipping Images was not peculiar to the Jews, but of an
unalterable nature, I insisted upon Gods declaring the unsuitableness of it to
his own infinite and incomprehensible nature, Roman Idolatry. p. 55. 2. edi^.
which could not be represented to men, but in a way which must be an infinite
disparagement to it. Isa. 40* 19, 22.
To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare to him? It is he
that sits upon the circle of the earth, etc. and the reason given of the Law
it self was, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16.
because they saw no s^militude of God; from hence I showed, that the wisest
Nations and Persons among the Heathen looked on the Worship of God by Images,
as unsuitable to a Divine and Infinite Being, and that the Gospel still more
discovered Gods Spiritual nature, and the agreeableness of Spiritual Worship to
him; that the Apostles urged this Argument against the Heathen Idolatry; and
the Fathers of the Church thought the reason of this Law did equally oblige us
with the Jews; now by what art does he from hence prove me necessarily to be an
Idolater, as well as they of the Church of Rome, who Worship God by Images
against the very words and reason of this Law? (...)* 20.
The argument is briefly summed up by himself thus: Whoever Worships God
represented in a way far inferior to his greatness is an Idolater; but
whosoever Worships God represented to him without the Beatifical vision, either
by words or by imaginations as well as Images, he Worships God in a way far
inferior to his greatness; ergo, whoever worships God represented unto him
without the Beatifical vision is an Idolater: but Dr. St. Worships God without
the Beatifical vision (no doubt of it) ergo, Dr. St. is an Idolater: there is
no help for it. Nay, from hence he proves, that I cannot so much as think of
God without Idolatry my self, nor Preach of him without provoking others to it.
O the insuperable force of reason, and the dint of demonstration! but the
mischief is, all this subtilty is used against the Lawmakers and not against
me. Did I not cite the words of God himself, who therefore did forbid the
making any likeness of him, because nothing could be like him? Is there no
difference between having imperfect conceptions of God in our minds, and making
unworthy representations of him to our senses, with a design to worship them?
Why did not God as well forbid the one as he did the other? Were the Israelites
then in the Beatifical vision? were their conceptions of God suitable to his
incomprehensible nature? if not, why were they not forbidden as well to think
of God as to make any Images of him? Is God as much disparaged by the necessary
weakness of our understandings, as by voluntarily false and corporeal Images of
him? Nay does not God design to prevent the error of our Imaginations by such
prohibitions as those are? and thereby commands us to think worthily of him,
and when we pray to him, to consider him only as an Infinite Being in his
Nature and Attributes? I do not know what Imaginations others have of God; it
may be those in the Church of Rome measure all by themselves, and God by their
Images of him, and thence conclude, that no men can think of God, but as they
picture him, like an Old man sitting in Heaven; but I assure them, I never had
such an Imagination of him, and if I had, should think it very unworthy of him.
I know no other conception of God, but of a Being infinitely perfect; and this
is rather an intellectual apprehension, than a material imagination of him. I
am assured that he is, by mighty and convincing arguments, but to bring him
down to my Imagination, is to contradict the evidence that I have of his Being;
for the same reasons which convince me that he is, do likewise convince me that
he is infinite in power, and wisdom, and goodness. If I thought otherwise of
him, I should know no reason to give him the Worship of my mind and soul.
Although my conceptions cannot reach his greatness, yet they do not confine it,
nor wilfully debase it; they do not bring him down to the meanness of a
Corporeal Image. But because we cannot think highly enough of God, must we
therefore devise ways to expose him to contempt and scorn? And we cannot but
despise a Deity to whom any Image can be like. But such absurd and silly
arguments deserve no farther confutation. They indeed may take more liberty,
who write to those who are bound not to judge of what is writ, but only to cry
it up. As for us, who think it not fit to have our People in such slavery, we
dare not venture such idle stuff among them.

I come therefore to the second contradiction he charges me with, 6.
which is, concerning the danger of salvation which they are liable to who
communicate with the Roman Church, The second contradiction Examined.
when yet I acknowledge that Church to be a true Church, and therefore to be a
true way to salvation: and withal Arch B. Laud, whom I defend, does grant a
possibility of salvation to those in the Church of Rome. The force of this
contradiction depending on these concessions, I shall, 1. Show in what sense
they are granted by us. 2. Examine the strength of the propositions he draws
from hence, toward the making this a contradiction.

1. Concerning the Roman Church being a true Church: The Archbishops Adversary
having falsely charged him with granting the Roman Church to be a right Church,
he complains of his injustice in it; (...) p. 293.
and says, that it is a Church and a true Church he granted, but not a right
Church; for Truth only imports the Being; right, perfection in conditions; thus
a Thief is a true man, though not an upright man. So a corrupt Church may be
true, as a Church is a company of men which profess the faith of Christ, and
are baptized into his name; but it is not therefore a right Church either in
Doctrine or Manners; and again says, It is true in that sense, as ens and
verum, being and true, are convertible one with another; and every thing that
has a Being is truly that Being which it is in truth of subtance. The Replyer
to him, P. 295.
says, that the notion of a Church implies Integrity and Perfection of
conditions; upon which I gave him this Answer, That he did herein betray his
weak or willful mistakes of a Church morally for Metaphysically true. If he
could prove it impossible for a Church to retain its Being that has any
errors in doctrine, or corruptions in practice, he would therein do something
to the purpose; but when he had done it, all that he would get by it was, that
then we should not so much as acknowledge the Roman Church to be Metaphysically
a true Church; and therefore the Reader is left to judge, whether his Lordships
Charity for, or his Testimony against their Church was built upon better
grounds. By this it is evident in what sense it was granted, that the Roman
Church was a true Church.

2. Concerning possibility of salvation in that Church; To the question that
was asked my Lord of Canterbury, whether a person might be saved in the Roman
faith? Arch B. Lands Conference. p. 280.
he gives this Answer, that the Ignorant that could not discern the errors of
that Church, so they held the Foundation and conformed themselves to a
Religious life might be saved: P. 282.
and after explains himself more fully, that might be saved grants but a
possibility, no sure or safe way of salvation; the possibility, I think, says
he, cannot be denied to the Ignorants, especially because they hold the
Foundation and cannot survey the building. And the Foundation can deceive no
man that rests upon it: But a secure way they cannot go, that hold with such
corruptions when they know them. P. 285.
And again, Many Protestants indeed confess, there is salvation possible to be
attained in the Roman Church; but yet they say withal, that the errors of
that Church are so many, (and some so great, as weaken the Foundation) that it
is very hard to go that way to Heaven, especially to them that have had the
truth manifested. P. 299.
And in another place, I do indeed for my part (leaving other men free to their
own judgment) acknowledge a possibility of salvation in the Roman Church: but
so as that which I grant to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as
they are Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the
Foundation Christ himself, not as they associate themselves wittingly and
knowingly to the gross Superstitions of the Roman Church. And I am willing to
hope there are many among them, which keep within that Church, and yet wish the
Superstitions abolished which they know, and which pray to God to forgive their
errors in what they know not, and which hold the Foundation firm and live
accordingly, and would have all things amended that are amiss, were it in their
power. And to such I dare not deny a possibility of salvation, for that which
is Christ's in them, though they hazard themselves extremely, by keeping so
close to that which is Superstition, and in the case of Images comes too near
Idolatry. Rational Account. p. 622.
These are my Lord of Canterburies own words, and laid together in my Defense
of him, which I. W. ought to have represented, if he had designed any thing but
Sophistry and trifling. But his game had been then quite spoiled; the fine
sport of making contradictions had been lost, and his cross purposes had come
to nothing.

I now come to see what contradictions he wire-draws from hence by the help of
his Propositions.

1. Whoever is in a condition, wherein he is certainly saved, is in no danger
or probability of being damned. If by he is certainly saved, he speaks of the
event, then he were a hard hearted man that would not grant, that he that is
actually saved is in no danger or probability of being damned; if he means it
of a certain way to salvation, then it is yet capable of several meanings. For
to be in a certain way may imply one of these three things. 1. That the way it
self is so plain that a man cannot miss of it. 2. Or that the way is in it self
certain, but there are so many bypath and turnings lying hard by it, that it
is a very hard matter for any man to keep in it. 3. To be in a certain way, is,
when not only the way it self is certain, but a man keeps constantly in that
way. According to these several senses this Proposition may be understood; if
by it be meant. 1. He that is in a certain way to salvation, is in no danger or
probability of being damned, i. e. he that keeps constantly in that way which
will certainly lead him to Heaven, the Proposition is true, but impertinent;
but if by it be meant no more but this, that he is in a way which in it self
leads to Heaven, but there are so many cross and bypath near it, that though
it be possible for him to hit it, yet it is extremely hazardous, no one can
imagine that such a one is in no probability of miscarrying, for we say he is
in very great danger of it, notwithstanding the tendency of the way it self.

2. Prop. Whoever lives and dies in a true way to salvation, having conformed
to its directions, or whoever has done all that was necessary to attain unto
salvation is in a condition, wherein he is certainly saved. The Sophistry of
this is so palpable, that the weakest eye may discern it; for it supposes that
true way to salvation wherein he lives to be a very safe and secure way, i. e.
that it be not only true in it self, but free from such errors and corruptions
which may endanger salvation; and in that sense it is true, but very far from
the purpose. For none of us did ever yield that the Roman Church is a safe way
to salvation; nay it is expressly denied by my Lord of Canterbury, as well as by
me. But here lies still another piece of Sophistry to be taken notice of,
whoever has done all that was necessary to attain salvation, is in a condition
wherein he is certainly saved; no doubt of it; but the doing all that is
necessary to salvation is not bare believing the necessary articles of faith,
contained in the Creed, but obeying the Will of God; which cannot be done by
those who wilfully adhere to gross and open violations of it; as I have charged
the Church of Rome to do, in her solemn acts of Worship. Their cause certainly
is at a very low ebb when such pitiful Sophistry, must pass for reasoning and
demonstration among them. Never men had more need of a self-evidencing cause,
as well as propositions, than they; so little help do they contribute to it by
their Writings.

3 Prop. The Roman Church is a true way to salvation, and teaches all that is
necessary to attain unto it. This is granted, he says, by me and other
Protestants, when we acknowledge the Roman Church to be a true Church; but in
what sense, I have already explained, so far as to leave no color of arguing
from hence to any contradiction in me. For this true way to salvation in our
sense is no more, but that the Church of Rome does acknowledge so much of
Christian faith, as is sufficient to save men, on condition they live
accordingly, and do not by gross corruptions in doctrine or practice render
that faith ineffectual to them: but withal we assert and maintain, that to
these necessary articles of Christian faith, the Church of Rome has added such
errors and corruptions, as make the salvation of any person extremely
hazardous, who lives in the communion of it. And let them have all the comfort
from hence which they can, I am sure they have not this, that they have brought
me to contradict my self by such concessions as these.

By this, his last Proposition comes to nothing; whoever lives and dies in the
communion of the Roman Church, having conformed to her doctrine, lives and dies
in a true way to salvation having conformed to its directions, and has done all
that was necessary to attain to it. Which evidently supposes that we yield that
the doctrine of the Roman Church, is a safe way to salvation, which we utterly
deny; all that we assert is, that so much of the common Principles of
Christianity, as is retained in the Roman Church is sufficient for the
salvation of those, who do not wilfully corrupt them by bad opinions and
practices, or if they have, do repent sincerely. But for those who conform
themselves to the doctrine and directions of the Roman Church as such, we are
far from ever saying that such live and dye in a true way to salvation; for
this were to make those doctrines and directions to be as holy and innocent as
we believe them to be false and pernicious. See now what a contradiction here
is; for me to assert the Church of Rome to be a true Church, because it retains
the Fundamentals of Christianity; and yet to make the condition of those who
live in it so hazardous in point of salvation, by reason of the gross errors,
which men are bound to believe as necessary points of faith; and horrible
Superstitions which they must conform to, if they follow her directions. Surely
he could not but know this to be our meaning, and consequently to have no
shadow of contradiction in it, no more than is in this plain Proposition, That
a possible way to salvation may yet be very dangerous. But though Iugglers know
their own cheats, they would lose their trade if they made them known to the
people. Something must be said to amuse them, and this seemed the prettiest
way, to confound them, by dazeling their eyes with such appearances of
contradictions: and thereby to persuade their own party, that they need not
fear the the attaque of such an enemy who falls foul upon himself. But it is
nothing but the mist he casts before their eyes, can make any have such an
imagination; it is but making things clear, and then nothing but order and
agreement appears.

But yet he quarrels with me, St. against St. p. 7.
for making the case of living in willful sin and in the corruptions of the
Roman Church parallel with each other; 1. because I will not grant that a
willful sin, such as adultery, to be a true way to Heaven; and does he think
that I ever imagined Idolatry and gross superstition to be so; If I grant that
in the Church of Rome they have a true way to Heaven, it is as other debauched
Christians have, who own faith enough to save them, but their destruction comes
from not living agreeably to it. 2. Because I grant more to them than to Jews
or Pagans, yet they may be saved if they do repent. True, but they are not in
so great likelihood of repenting, as those who own the Fundamental articles of
the Christian faith, and have a sincere desire in general to serve God
according to his will; the Grace of God being more plentiful, where the
Christian faith is owned, than where it is rejected; upon which account Jews
and Heathens are in more danger of not repenting, and consequently of salvation
than those that live in the Roman Church. 3. Because I grant a greater capacity
of salvation to Roman Catholics than they do to Protestants; but they do not
d^ny it to Protestants if they repent. But the difference lies in the nature
and acts of the rep^^tance required; We say a (...) repentanced and a virtuous
sincere mind, which desires to know and do the will of God may be sufficient,
together with a particular repentance of all known miscarriages; but they say
such a repentacne is necessary for us, as does imply a disowning our Church, as
such wherein no salvation is to be had, and a joining with the Communion of the
Church of Rome: therefore the question about their charity and ours, is about
the possibility of the salvation of persons living and dying in the communion
of either Church; We say on the conditions before mentioned, men may be saved,
though they do not in terms renounce their communion, but they say that none
who do not return to their communion can be saved; and in this we justly charge
them with horrible uncharitableness, when many of their Writers allow a greater
possibility of salvation to mere Heathens. 4. Because Archbishop Laud grants a
greater capacity of salvation than other Protestants; but in what sense I have
already showed. 5. That this is in effect to say, that it is a true way to
Heaven if they go out of it. Not if they go out of it so far as it is true, but
so far only as it is false and dangerous. If a man were going the right way
from London to York, as far as Stamford, and there went quite out of his way
into the Fens, here his life is in danger; if I should tell this man that the
way from London to York was a certain way, that the way he went in as far as
Stamford was a true way, and if he had kept in it, would have brought him to
York, but the way he is now in is very dangerous, and if he does not return,
his life is in perpetual hazard; is this all one as if I should tell him, while
you were in the true way, you must go out of it? No such sense can be put upon
such words, by any man that has sense; and for others, we give them leave to
cry nonsense and contradiction.

All his other petty objections run upon the same palpable mistake, P. 8.
and it would be but repeating the same thing to answer the other remaining
cavils upon this Argument.

I come therefore to the sore place indeed,. 7.
the touching whereof has made them to kick and wince so much at me; The
charge of Fanaticism de^ended.
and that is the Fanaticism of the Roman Church. Which made them complain to
Caesar, that it was a new crime, and never heard of before. What? they; the
sober, the judicious, the wise people of the Church of Rome turned Fanatics!
it is false, it is impossible; nay, it is absolutely and utterly impossible to be
true; and none but Atheists can charge them with it. This has been their
common way of answering to this new charge; but not one wise word has been
said in a just Vindication of themselves, by giving answer to those many plain,
and undeniable Instances I have produced. I wished for no other trial than to
be bound to bring forth their own Authors, and to make good the Authorities I
had cited, and my fidelity therein; but they have fairly declined this way of
trial. But how then can they free themselves from this imputation? we have men
of art to deal with, and it is some pleasure to observe the skill they use in
warding off a blow they did not look for. But if they have nothing more to say
then I. W. can help them to, the charge will stick the faster, for his attempt
to clear them of it.

He begins with a description of Fanaticism, P. 8.
which, he says, does necessarily contain a resistance of authority; and for
this, very unhappily quotes my own words. By Fanaticism we understand either an
Enthusiastic way af Religion, or resisting authority under pretense of
Religion; just as if one should say the true notion of Idolatry implies the
renouncing the true God, and to prove it should quote words of mine to this
purpose, That Idolatry is either renouncing the true God, or worshipping the
true God by an Image: for as in that case, it is evident, I make two sorts of
Idolatry; so it is as plain in this, that I make two branches of Fanaticism,
whereof the one is, an Enthusiastic way of Religion, the other resistance of
authority under the pretense of Religion. But if this be the true notion of
Fanaticism, why does he not speak one word in vindication of them, from that
very kind of Fanaticism, which I had charged them to be so deeply guilty of?
Had I not proved by plain testimonies, that the most Fanatic principles of
Rebellion were owned by the Jesuitical party among them? Fanaticism of Romans
Church. s. 16. p. 299. 2. ^d.
viz. the Kings deriving his power from the people, and the peoples authority
to call the King to an account, and if they see good to take away his power and
change the Government: and not only so but to take away his life too? Had I not
proved by clear and late Instances, that the party which owns these principles
is to this day the most countenanced and encouraged at Rome? and any honest men
among them, as to these principles, are on that account hated and persecuted,
as P. W. and his Brethren. But why no answer to this charge? These are things
they cannot deny, and yet dare not confess them to be true. If I. W. answer
again, let him speak out like a man, and either confess and detest these
Principles, or we shall charge them farther with this worst and most dangerous
sort of Fanaticism. My duty and just zeal for his Majesty's interest and
security, will not suffer me to let go this part of the charge against them,
although they would fain have it passed over in silence, as though never a word
had been said concerning it. This is one of the best arts I have met with in
this Pamphlet; for unwary Readers will not remember the charge, when they find
no answer: but if I. W. had attempted to answer it, his shuffling and tricks
might have made the deeper impression in the Readers minds. Remember then this
charge stands good against them, without so much as their pretending to answer
it.

To come now to the other part of Fanaticism, viz. an Enthusiastic way of
Religion: and here to proceed clearly, I shall lay down the method of his
Defense, and then examine it. The strength of his Defense lies in these
Propositions.

1. That Fanaticism does necessarily contain a resistance against authority.

2. No particular ways of Religion, countenanced by a competent authority, are
Fanaticism.

3. Those things which concern religious Orders and Method of Devotion, which I
charge them with, are countenanced by a competent authority, viz. The Authority
of that Church.

4. That Church cannot countenance Fanatism which obliges all persons to
submit to her judgment.

So that here are two Principles by which I. W. thinks to vindicate their
Church from Fanaticism; viz. competent authority, and submission of judgment
to the Church. To show the invalidity of this answer, I shall do these things.

1. Show the insufficiency of it.

2. The monstrous absurdities consequent upon it.

1. If this answer were sufficient, he must make it appear, that there have
been none charged by me as Fanatics in their Church, but such as have
submitted themselves and their judgment to the authority of their Church. For
let us consider the occasion of this charge, and we shall presently discern the
insufficiency of this way of answering it. The occasion was, that my Adversary
made all the Sects and Fanaticisms among us to be the effect of the
Reformation; what answer could be more proper in this case, than to show, that
there were as wild and extravagant Fanaticisms before, as have been since?
which is a plain evidence that cannot be the cause of them, to which they
imputed them. To make this out, I searched into the several sorts of
Fanaticism, and gave instances very clear of as great Fanatics in the times
before the reformation, as have been since: from the many pretenders to
immediate Revelations among them, who were persons allowed and approved by
their Church, and some of them Canonized for Saints; but besides these, I gave
such other Instances of Fanaticism among the Friars, and others of their
Church, as were never heard of in the world before; as the broachers and
maintainers of the Friars Gospel, which was to put out of doors the Gospel of
Christ; the Spiritual Brethren of the order of S. Francis called by several
names, but especially that of Fratricelli, who continued long, spread far, and
more distrubed the Church than any since have done, the Dulcinistae in Italy,
the Alumbrado's in Spain, etc. What does he now say concerning all these? were
these countenanced by a competent authority among them? did they submit their
judgment to the Church? if neither of these be pretended in reference to them,
then this answer must be very insufficient, because it does not reach to the
matter in charge.

2. For those who were as he says, countenanced by authority, and did submit
themselves to the Church, yet this does not clear them from Fanaticism; but
draws after it these monstrous absurdities.

1. That prevailing Fanaticism ceases to be Fanaticism; like Treason, which
when it prospers none dare call it Treason; an excellent way, this, to
vindicate the Fanaticism of the late times, which because countenanced by an
authority, supposed competent enough by some who then writ of Obedience and
Government, it ceased to be Fanaticism; and all the wild and extravagant heats
of men's brains, their Enthusiasms and Revelations were Regular and orderly
things, because countenanced by such Authority as was then over them.

2. By this rule the Prophets and Apostles, nay our Lord himself, were
unavoidably Fanatics; for what competent authority had they to countenance
them? The Jewish Church was not yet cast off while our Savior lived, but
utterly opposed his doctrine and Revelation, as coming from a private Spirit of
his own; according therefore to these excellent Principles, our B. Savior is
made a mere Fanatic, because he wanted a competent Authority of the present
Church to countenance him; the same was generally the case of the Prophets, and
of all the Apostles. But what rocks and Precipices will a bad cause drive men
upon? If that which makes Fanaticism or not Fanaticism, be the being
countenanced or not countenanced by this competent Authority, these horrible
absurdities are unavoidable; and all Religion must be resolved into the will
and pleasure of this competent Authority. But I need not take such pains to
prove this, for my brave Answerer I. W. sets it down in his own words. St.
against St. p. 9.
Moreover, otherwise all the particular manners of Preaching or Praying
practiced by the Prophets, and all their extraordinary visions and revelations
would be flat Fanaticism; but because they were countenanced by a competent
authority, they could not deserve that character. Excellent doctrine for a
Popish Leviathan! are you in earnest sir? do you think the Prophets had been
Fanatics, in case of no competent authority to countenance them? What
competent authority had the Prophet Elijah to countenance him, 1 King 19. 18.
when all the Authority that then was, Romans 11. 3.
not only opposed him but sought his life? What competent Authority had any of
the Prophets who were sent to the ten Tribes? what had Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and
the rest of them? It seems then, all these excellent and inspired persons are
cast into the common herd of Fanatics, for want of this competent Authority to
countenance them. And yet this is the Man (merely because I lay open the
Fanaticism of some their pretended Saints, such as Ignatius Loyola and S.
Francis) who ranks me with Lucian and Porphyrie: has he not himself a great
zeal for Religion the mean while, resolving all revelation into his competent
authority? and not only so, but paralleling the expressions and practices of S.
Brigitt, and Mother Juliana, (than which scarce any thing was ever Printed more
ridiculous in the way of Revelations) with those of the holy Prophets and
Apostles? If a man designed to speak mischievously against the Scriptures and
Divine Revelation, he could not do it more to purpose than I. W. has done in
these words? when he compares things whose folly is so manifest at the first
view, with that divine Wisdom, which Inspired those holy persons, whom God sent
upon particular messages to his people, and gave so great assurance that he
sent them; and who delivered matters of great weight and moment, and not such
tittle tattle as those two Women's Books are fraught withal. But if this be the
way they have to vindicate them from being Fanatics, it is absolutely the
worst that could be thought of; for it cannot discover so high an opinion of
them, as it does a very mean one of the Books of Scripture, and the Divine
Revelations therein contained. I could here earnestly entreat the wiser men of
that Church, for the honor of God, and the Christian Religion, not to suffer
such inconsiderate persons to vindicate their cause, who to defend the
extravagant infirmities of some Enthusiastical women among them, are so forward
to cast dirt and reproach upon our common Religion, and those Revelations from
whence we derive it. But I forbear; only it is a shrewd sign, if this way be
allowed, of a wretched cause, that cannot be maintained without plunging those,
who rely upon their word, into the depths of Atheism. But these are not things
to be so slightly passed over, they deserve a fuller and severer chastisement.
For the present, this is enough to show, what monstrous absurdities this way of
vindicating their Church from Fanaticism has brought I. W. to. Yet in one
respect he deserves some pardon, for they are wont to write their answers upon
the common Themes out of some staunch Authors, who considered a little better
what they writ; But this was a new charge, and neither Bellarmin, Becanus, nor
any of their old beaten soldiers, could give them any assistance; they found
not the Title of the Fanaticism of the Roman Church in any of their
common-place-Books; therefore plain Mother-wit must help them, and so it has
bravely. But before they again attempt this matter, I desire them to consider
these things, least they should in a desperate humor utterly give up the cause
of Religion, finding themselves unable to defend that of their Church.

1. Whether there can be any greater Fanaticism, than a false pretense to
immediate divine Revelation? For what can more expose men to all the follies
and delusions imaginable, than this will do? what actions can be so wild and
extravagant but men may do, under such a pretense of immediate Revelation from
God? what bounds of order and Government can be preserved? some may pretend a
Revelation to take up Arms against their Prince, or to destroy all they meet
(which is no unheard of thing) others may not go so far, but may have
revelations of the unlawfulness of Kingly Government; others may pretend
revelations of a new Gospel, and a more spiritual dispensation than has been
yet in the World, as the Mendicant Friars did.

2. Whether we are bound to believe all such who say, They have divine
revelations? or whether persons may not be deceived in thinking they have
revelations, when they are only delusions of their own Fancies or the Devil? if
not; then every one is to be believed who pretends to these things, and then
all follies and contradictions must be fwallowed which men say they have by
immediate revelation; and every Fanatic must be believed, to have divine
revelation who believes himself, though he be only deluded by his own
Imagination, or become Enthusiastical by the power of a disease in his head, or
some great heat in his blood.

3. Whether there must not be some certain rules established whereby all
persons, and even competent authority it self, must proceed in judging these
pretenses to revelation, whether they be true or false? for if they proceed
without rule, they must either be inspired too, or else, must receive all who
pretend to divine revelations: if there be any certain rules, whereby the
revelation is to be judged; then if any persons receive any revelation against
those rules, whether are other persons bound to follow their judgment against
those rules?

4. Whether there can be any more certain rule of judging, than that two things
evidently contradictory to each other, cannot both come from divine revelation?
For then God must contradict himself, which is impossible to be supposed, and
would overthrow the faith of any divine revelation. And this is the plain case
of the revelations made to two famous Saints in the Roman Church, S. Brigitt
and S. Catharine; to one it was revealed, that the B. Virgin was conceived with
Original sin; to the other, that she was not: both these have competent
Authority, for they were both Canonized for Saints by the Roman Church, and
their Revelations approved, and therefore (according to I. W.) neither of them
were Fanatics, though it is certain that one of their Revelations was false.
For, either God must contradict himself, or one of these must be deceived, or
go about to deceive, and what greater Fanaticism can there be, than that is? if
one of these had only some Fanatic Enthusiasm, and the other divine
Revelation, then competent authority and submission to the judgment of the
Church, is not a rule to judge Fanaticism by; for those were equal in both of
them.

5. Whether there be an equal reason to look for revelations now, as in the
time of the Prophets, and our Savior, and his Apostles? or whether God
communicates revelations to no other end, but to please and gratify some
Enthusiastical tempers? and what should be the reason he should do it more now,
than in the age wherein revelations were more necessary? In those times God
revealed his mind to men, but it was for the benefit of others; when he sent
them upon particular messages, as the Prophets, or made known some future
events to them of great importance to the Church, as the coming of the Messiah,
etc. or Inspired them to deliver weighty doctrines to the world, as he did both
the Prophets and Apostles: why should we think, that God now, when the
revelations of these holy and inspired persons are upon record, and all things
necessary to his Church are contained therein, should vary this method of his,
and entertain some melancholy and retired women, or other Enthusiastical
persons with visions and revelations of no use to his Church?

6. Whether God does ever Inspire persons with immediate revelations without
giving sufficient evidence of such Inspiration? For if he did, it were to leave
men under a temptation to Infidelity without means to withstand it; if he does
not, then we have reason to examine the evidence, before we believe the
revelation. The evidence God gave of old was either the Prophecy of a
succession of Prophets, by one whose commission was attested by great miracles,
as Moses, who told the Israelites, they were to expect Prophets, and laid down
rules to judge of them by; or else by miracles wrought by themselves as by the
Apostles whom our Lord sent abroad to declare his will to the world. And where
these are not, what reason is there to receive any new Revelations as from God,
especially when the main predictions of the New Testament are of false
Prophets, and false Miracles?

7. Whether the Revelations of their pretended Saints being countenanced by the
Authority of their Church, be equally received among them, with the Revelations
contained in Scripture? if they be, then they ought to have equal reverence
paid to them, and they ought to read them as Scripture, to cite their Authority
as divine, and to believe them as infallible as Christ and his Apostles; if
they be not, than whatever they pretend, they are not looked on as divine
revelations by them, as manifestly appears, because they are wholly rejected by
some of the wisest of them, doubted of, and disputed by others, as it were
easy to prove were it not too large a subject for this discourse, but by none
received as writings of divine authority, and equal with the Scriptures, which
they must be if they came from the same Spirit. And since they are not, it is
evident that they are no otherwise esteemed among themselves, than as the
Fanatic heats of some devout persons of disturbed and deluded Fancies; whom
notwithstanding they are willing to cherish, partly because they are loath to
discountenance any pretense to an infallible Spirit in their Church, and partly
that there may never be wanting matter to make Saints of, when the Pope thinks
fit, and good consideration is offered. This may suffice to make good this
charge of Fanaticism against the Roman Church; and to show that I am as far
from the appearance of any contradiction therein (although their Revelations
are not from a real one) as I. W's vain and Sophistical talk is from any
appearance of reason.

The last contradiction charged upon me,. 8.
is, No contradiction in the charge (...) divisions.
about the Divisions of the Roman Church. The occasion of which discourse was,
that divisions were objected to me as another consequent of the Reformation;
upon which I thought my self obliged to enquire into the Unity of their Church,
and I have at large proved from undeniable Instances, attested by their own
Authors, that they have no reason to insult over other Churches on account of
their divisions, nor to boast of their own Unity and Peace. For I have there
proved that there have never been greater disturbances in the Christian World,
than what they call the means of Unity, viz. the Popes Authority, has
procured, no where greater or more lasting Schisms, no where fiercer disputes
about matters of order and doctrine, than among them. I considered all their
salvo's and from them showed, that if they have no divisions among themselves
neither have we; nay the same arguments which prove they do not differ in
matters of faith from each other, do likewise prove that they and we do not
differ from each other in those things. And what says I. W. to all this?
Instead of healing their own divisions, he only designs to prove me to be
divided against my self, that he might make up the full Tale of his
contradictions.

But I. W. had so much forgot himself as to make good the very thing I
designed; and by that very argument he uses to prove that I contradict my self,
he manifestly proves that there are no more divisions in matters of faith,
between the Roman Church and us than there are among themselves. This I shall
make very evident, but I must proceed as he does with his Propositions.

1. No divisions from the Roman Church are divisions of the Roman Church. This
is a very subtle principle of unity among them, and by this rule there would be
an admirable Unity in the Roman Church, if the Pope himself were left alone in
it. For all others would only be divided from it, and I would allow the Pope to
be at a very good Agreement with himself, which is more than I. W. will allow
me: In this case indeed there would be Unity, but where would be their Church?
Suppose a shepherd should boast of the excellent Government of a great Flock he
had under his command, and the Unity and peace they lived in; and a by-stander
should tell him that he saw others pretend to the same authority over that
flock that he did, and part followed one and part another, he saw some of the
chief of the Leaders set themselves against him disputing his authority, he saw
many of the sheep continually fighting with each other, and some had wholly
forsaken him; would it not be a pleasant thing for this shepherd to say that
notwithstanding all this they had great peace and Unity, because as many as did
not quarrel were very quiet, and those that were divided from his Government
were not under it? But our question is, whether such authority be the means to
preserve the whole flock under Government, when we see it prevents no divisions
but causes many? He might have spoken more to the purpose if he had framed his
Proposition thus, there can be no divisions in the Roman Church, but such as
divide men from it; and in that case the Roman Church would have been reduced
to a very small number. But if there may be such divisions which are as
contrary to Unity and peace as divisions in matters of faith are, to what
purpose is it to show that they have none in one kind if they have very great
in all others? But although this be not sufficient to demonstrate their Unity,
yet it is enough for his purpose, if it does show that I contradict my self.
But where lies the contradiction? The force of it lies here. I charge them with
divisions in matters of faith, when divisions in matters of faith make them not
to be members of the Roman Church; therefore there can be no divisions in the
Roman Church in matters of faith. Again (for in these two arguments the
substance of his own propositions is couched by himself) All those who assent
unto the ancient Creeds are undivided in matters of faith; but all Roman
Catholics assent unto the ancient Creeds; ergo, all Roman Catholics are
undivided in matters of faith, and consequently it is a calumny in me to say
they are divided in these matters. Now, what an easy matter is it to disposses
me of this Spirit of contradiction, which he imagines me possessed with? I need
no holy water, or sacred charms and exorcisms to do it with. There needs no
more but understanding what is meant by matters of faith; when matters of faith
are spoken of by me in the place he refers to, Rational (...). p. 56.
it is evident to every one that reads it, and by his own words I speak only of
the Fundamental and necessary articles of faith, which are necessary to the
salvation of all and to the very being of a Church; of which kind I say none
ought to be esteemed, that were not admitted into the ancient Creeds. But when
I charge them with divisions in matters of faith, I do not mean that they
reject the ancient Creeds, but I take matters of faith in their own sense for
things defined by the Church; and if I. W. had sought for any thing but words
to raise cavils upon, he might have found it so explained in the very place
where I speak of this. For that discourse is to answer an objection of theirs,
Divis. of the Romans Church. s. 15. ^ 397. 2. ed.
that they do not differ in those things which they esteem matters of faith;
and particularly I insisted upon that, that they cannot be sure whether they
differ in matters of faith or no, because they are not agreed what makes things
to become matters of faith. Can this be understood any other way than of their
own sense of matters of faith? And is not this fair dealing to make me
contradict my self because where I argue against them I take matters of faith
in their sense, and where I deliver my own opinion, I take them in another
sense? And this being the sense of matters of faith the trifling of his arguing
appears; for do all these cease to be members of their Church who dispute any
thing which others account matter of faith among them? Are the Jesuits all out
of the Church of Rome, because they deny the efficacy of Grace which the
Domini^ans account a matter of faith? Are the Iansenists and oral Traditionists
divided from the Church of Rome because they deny the Popes Infallibility which
the Jesuits account a matter of faith? If not, then all divisions in matters
and articles of faith, are not divisions from the true Church and from all her
members; and so his second Proposition comes to nothing: and so likewise the
third, that all divisions in matters of faith, so esteemed by them, are
divisions from the Roman Church.

But the fourth and fifth Propositions are the most healing Principles that
have yet been thought on. Fie for shame! why should we and they of the Church
of Rome quarrel thus long? we are very well agreed in all matters of faith, and
I shall demonstratively prove it from the argument of I. W. drawn from his two
last Propositions. All who assent unto the ancient Creeds are undivided in
matters of faith, by Prop. 4. but both Papists and Protestants do assent unto
the ancient Creeds; ergo, they are undivided in matters of faith And has not
I. W. now done his business, and very substantially proved the thing he
intended? But I hope we may enjoy the benefit of it, as well as those of the
Church of Rome; and that they will not hence forward charge us with dividing
from their Church in any matters of faith, since we are all agreed in owning
the ancient Creeds; and seeing, we cannot be divided from the Church but by
differing in matters of faith according to his Propos. it follows that we are
still members of the true Church, and therefore neither guilty of heresy nor
Schism. But if those who do own and assent to the ancient Creeds may yet be
divided in matters of faith, as they charge us by rejecting the definitions of
the Roman Church, then there is no shadow of a contradiction left in my
charging them with differences in matters of faith among themselves, though I
say, they own the ancient Creeds.

And now,. 9.
Reader, thou see what all these pitiful cavils are come to; The Conclusion.
P. 14.
and what ground there has been for them to glory in this Pusionello, that
with a sheet and a half has compelled me, as he says, to be my own
Executioner. But these great Heroes must be allowed to relate their famous
adventures, with some advantage to themselves: it might have been enough to
have rescued the Lady, but not only to destroy the Giant (as any man must be
accounted whom such Knights encounter) but to leave him grovelling in the
ground and gasping for breath, and that by wounds he forced him to give
himself, this is beyond measure glorious. Go thy way then for the eighth
Champion of Christendom, enjoy the benefit of thy illustrious fame, sit down at
ease, and relate to thy immortal honor thy mighty exploits; only when thou
have done, remember thou have encountered nothing but the Wind-mills of thy own
imagination, and the man whom thou thought to have executed by his own
hands, stands by and laughs at thy ridiculous attempts. But I forget, that I am
so near his Conclusion, wherein he does so gravely advise me that I would be
pleased for once to write Controvesies, not Play-Books: his meaning I suppose,
is, that I would return to the old beaten road where they know how to find a
man, and have something to say because others have said something before them;
and not represent the ridiculous passages of their Fanatics; for the defense
of which they are furnished with no Distinctions out of their usual Magazines,
their present Manuals of Controversy. I shall be contented to wait their
leisure if they have any thing material to say; as I. W. gives me some hopes,
when he says, that other more learned pens (I shall be glad to see them) will
give me a more particular and complete answer. I hope not in the way of
cavilling; if they do, I shall hereafter only contemn them; but I am afraid of
their good intentions by the Books he mentions as such considerable things in
answer to my Vindication of Archbishop Laud, viz. the Guide in Controversies,
and Protestancy without Principles; if others write as they have done, I shall
take as little notice of them as I have done of those. Cannot a dull Book come
out with my name in the Title, but I must be obliged to answer it? no, I assure
them I know better how to spend my time. I say still, let a just answer come
forth, that deals by me as I did by the Book I answered, and then let them
blame me, if I neglect it. But at last he gives one general reason why no great
matter is to be expected to come abroad in Print: not, but that they have men
of learning among them: No doubt of it: but alas for them! they are so
persecuted in the Printing Houses that nothing of theirs is suffered to come
abroad, only by great good fortune this complaint is in Print and comes abroad
openly enough. How long I pray have these days of persecution been? For,
whatever you imagine I was so far from having any hand in it, that the first
time I ever heard of it, was from your complaints. Have you not formerly
complained thus, when Books too many have been Printed and published in
England? And what assurance can you give us that you do not still complain
without cause? But, not to suffer you to deceive the people any longer in this
kind (by pretending that this is the reason why you do not answer our Books,
because you have no liberty of the Press) I have at this time a Catalogue by me
of above two hundred Popish Books Printed in our own language (which I shall
produce on a just occasion) a considerable part whereof have been published
within the compass of not many years. And yet all possible efforts are used by
us (says I. W.) to hinder their Doctors from showing their learning; P. 14.
this of late we must needs say, they have very sparingly done; but all the
arts we have, cannot hinder some of them from showing their weakness, as this
I. W. has very prodigally done in this Pamphlet.

Finis.
AN ANSWER TO THE BOOK, Entitled, Dr. Stillingfleet's Principles Considered.
ALthough I write no Plays,. 1.
yet I hope I may have leave to say the scene is changed; The occasion of
annexing the Principles.
for instead of the former Sophister, one now comes forth in the habit of a
grave Divine, whom I shall treat with the respect due to his appearance of
Modesty and Civility. I pass by therefore all those unhandsome reflections in
his Preface, which I have not already answered in mine, and come immediately to
the main Controversy between us, which I acknowledge to be of so great
importance as to deserve a sober debate. And the Controversy in short is this,
Whether Protestants who reject the Roman Churches Authority and Infallibility,
can have any sufficient Foundation to build their faith upon? This we affirm,
and those of the Church of Rome confidently deny; and on this account do charge
us with the want of Principles, i. e. sufficient grounds for our faith. But
this may be understood two ways. 1. That we can have no certainty of our faith
as Christians without their Infallibility. 2. Or that we can have no certainty
of our faith as Protestants, i. e. in the matters in debate between their
Church and ours. These two ought carefully to be distinguished from each other:
and although the Principles I laid down, do reach to both these, yet that they
were chiefly intended for the former, will appear by the occasion of adding
them to the end of the Answer there given. The occasion was, my Adversaries
calling for Grounds and Principles; upon which I there say, that I would give
an account of the faith of Protestants in the way of Principles, P. 483. ^ 2.
ed.
and of the reason of our rejecting their impositions. The first I undertook on
two accounts. 1. To show that the Roman Churches Authority and Infallibility
cannot be the Foundation of Christian faith, and so we may be very good
Christians without having any thing to do with the Church of Rome. 2. That this
might serve as a sufficient answer to a Book entitled Protestants without
Principles. Which being in some part of it directed against me I had reason,
not only to lay down those Principles, b^t to do it in such a manner as did
most directly overthrow the principles of that Book.

Which being only intimated there, I must now to make my proceeding more clear
and evident, produce those assertions of E. W. for which mine were intended.
Protestants without Principles, Chap. 1.
In the first Chapter he designs to prove, That all men must be infallible in
the assent they give to matters of faith. For, says he, If they disown such
infallible believers, they must jointly deny all infallible faith: P. 17.
and a little after, an Infallible verity revealed to us forcibly requires an
answerable and correspondent infallible faith in us: and therefore he asserts a
subjective Infallibility in true believers. And from hence he proves the
necessity of Infallible teachers; P. 18.
for infallible believers and infallible teachers, P. 19.
he says, seem near correlatives. In the second Chapter he says, he that
hears an infallible teacher has the Spirit of truth, P. 20.
and he that hears not an infallible teacher wants this Spirit of truth; by
which he does not mean an infallible Revealer of the doctrine at first; but the
immediate teachers of the revealed doctrine, P. 21.
for, says he, no man can be a Heretic that denies the objective verities
revealed in Gods word, unless he be sure that his teacher reveals those
verities infallibly. P. 22.
He proposes the objection of a Simplician, as he calls him, that he builds his
faith and Religion, not on any Preachers talk but on the objective verities
revealed in Scripture: to which he answers, that unless he first learn of some
infallible Oracle, the sense of Scripture in controverted places, he can never
arrive to the depth of Gods true meaning, or derive infallible faith from those
objective revealed Verities. He yet farther asserts, P. 23.
that every Catechist, or Preacher that has a lawful mission, and is sent by
the infallible Church to teach Christ's Sacred Doctrine, if he Preach that
doctrine which Christ and his Church approves of, is then under that notion of
a member conjoined with an Infallible Church, infallible in his teaching* and
thence concludes, P. 24.
that infallibility does accompany both teachers and hearers: and from denying
this Infallibility, P. 25.
he says, follows an utter ruin of Christian Religion yea and of Scripture
too. And afterward he goes about to prove that no man can have any divine
faith without infallibility in the proponent; P. 42, 43.
for, faith he, as long as the Infallibility of a Revelation stands remote from
me for want of an undoubted application made by an infallible Proponent, it can
no more transfuse Certainty into Faith, than Fire at a great distance, warm.
This is the sum of the Principles of that Metaphysical wit; but sure a man must
have his brains well confounded by School Divinity and hard words, before he
can have common sense little enough to think he understands them. But because I
never loved to spend time in confuting a man, who thinks himself the wiser for
speaking things, which neither he nor any one else can understand; I rather
chose in as short a way as I could, to put together such Propositions, as might
give an account of Christian Faith without all this Iargon about Infallibility.
In order to this, I first laid down the Principles wherein all parties are
agreed; and then such Propositions as I supposed would sufficiently give an
account of our faith, without any necessity of such an infallibility as he
makes necessary for the foundation of it.

But for our clearer proceeding in an Argument of this importance,. 2*
it will be necessary to state and fix the notion of Infallibility before I
come to particulars. Or the notion of infallibility.
For as it is used it seems to be a rare word for Iugglers in Divinity to play
tricks with; for sometimes they apply it to the object that is believed, and
call that infallibly true; sometimes to the subject capable of believing, and
say persons ought to be infallibly certain that what they believe is infallibly
true; and sometimes to the means of conveying that infallible truth to the
faculties of men, and these they say must be infallible, or else there can be
no infallible certainty of any thing as infallbly true. But the subtilty of
these things lies only in their obscurity; and the School-man is spoiled when
his talk is brought down out of the clouds to common sense: I will therefore
try to bring these things out of their terms to a plain meaning; and surely we
may speak and understand each other in these matters without this doubtful term
of Infallibility. For if it signifies any thing, we may make use of the thing
it signif^es in stead of the word, and by applying the thing signified by it,
to that which it is spoken of, we shall soon discern how justly it is
attributed to it. Infallibile is that which cannot be deceived; now if no one
will say, That a proposition cannot be deceived, it is absurd to say that it is
infallibly true; therefore the matters revealed considered as objective
verities, as our schoolman speaks, are not capable of Infallibility; which
cannot belong to the truth proposed, but to him that propounds or believes it.
For to be deceived or not to be deceived, are proper only to persons; and the
impossibility of being deceived does in truth belong only to an infinitely
perfect understanding; for what ever understanding is imperfect, is of it self
liable to error and mistake. And yet an understanding liable to be deceived
may not be deceived, and be sure it is not. The highest assurance of not being
deceived, is from Gods revealing any thing to men; for we know it impossible
that God should be deceived, or go about to deceive mankind in what he obliges
them to believe as true. This then is granted, that whatever any person speaks
immediately from God, he cannot be deceived in it; but men may be deceived in
thinking they speak from God when they do not. There is then no difficulty in
the first, that what ever persons are inspired by God are infallible in what
they speak; but the main difficulty is about the assurance which God gives to
men that they are inspired. Two ways it may be conceived that men cannot be
deceived in this matter. 1. If God inspires every particular person with the
belief of this, and gives him such evidence thereof as cannot be false. 2. Or
if God shall inspire some persons in every Age to assure the World, that those
before them were inspired: but notwithstanding this, particular persons may be
deceived, in believing those inspired who are not; and to prevent this, nothing
can be sufficient but divine revelation to every particular person that he has
appointed those infallible Guides in his Church, to assure men that he had at
first settled his Church by persons that were infallible; but then, why might
not such a particular Revelation assure men as well immediately that Christ and
his holy Apostles were infallible, as that the Guides of the present Church are
infallible? For it is unconceivable that persons should be more infallible in
judging the Inspiration of the present Guides, than of the first Founders of
the Church. And supposing men not inspired, they may be deceived in believing
this infallibility of the present Church, and if they may be deceived, how can
their Faith be infallible? so that nothing can make the faith of particular
persons infallible, but private inspiration which must resolve all Faith into
Enthusiasm and immediate revelation. And nothing can be more absurd than to
say, That there are infallible Believers without infallible Inspiration; or
that an infallible Proponent can transfuse infallibility into faith, unless the
infallibility of that Proponent be first made known to the Believer in such a
way as he cannot be deceived in. For in matters of divine Revelation, the main
thing we are to enquire after, is the infallibility of those who delivered this
doctrine to the World. And although the reason of believing what God says, be
his own infallibility, which is natural and essential to him; yet the reason of
my assenting to this or that doctrine, as coming from God, must be an assurance
that God has secured those persons from mistake whom he has employed to make
known the doctrine to the World. Those persons then whom God inspired, are the
Proponents of matters of faith to us: and if they give us sufficient reason to
believe that they were inspired, we are bound to believe them, otherwise not.
But to suppose that we cannot believe the first infallible Proponents, unless
there be such in every Age, is to make more difficulties, and to answer none.
For then all my belief of the infallibility of the first Proponents, must
depend on the evidence which the present Guides of the Church give of their
infallibility, who yet cannot pretend to the same evidence which they had: and
here is no difficulty answered, for we are certainly bound as much to enquire
into the reason of our believing the present Guides of the Church infallible,
as the Apostles: and if men cannot be infallible in believing the Apostles,
unless there be other infallible Proponents in every Age, to assure them that
the Apostles were inspired, why must not the infallibility of these present
Proponents be likewise so attested as well as of the Apostles? and what
undoubted application can be made of the Churches infallibility, unless there
be some other infallible Proponent still to transfuse certainty into my belief
of that, by virtue of which, I must believe all other matters of Faith, which
is the Churches Infallibility? So that the last Proponent must either be
believed for himself without any further evidence, and then the shorter way
would be to believe the first so, or else there will be an endless
infallibility; or at last all must be resolved into the Enthusiasm of every
particular person, if we do not rest satisfied with the rational evidence which
those persons, who were inspired by God, did give to the World that they were
sent by him: and then let the World judge whether Christ and his Apostles did
not give stronger evidence that they were sent from God, than the Pope or the
Guides of the present Church do? and if so, whether i^ be possible for men to
do greater disse^vice to Christianity, than to suspend our belief of the
Inspiration of the Founders of the Christian Church, on a thing, at least, far
less evident than the thing to be believed by it is? but in plain English, on a
thing notoriously false; and only the arrogant pretense of an usurping Faction,
which thinks it easier boldly to say that it cannot be deceived, than to defend
it self against the just accusations both of deceiving, and being deceived.

These things being premised,. 3.
I now come to consider how far N. O. has showed the invalidity of the
Principles laid down by me, N. O^. concessions.
for the end for which I intended them. The design of them was to show, that we
may have sufficient Certainty of our Faith, without the Infallibility of the
Roman Church; the Answerer has yielded some things and denied others. I shall
therefore first lay down his Concessions, and see of what force they are to the
issue of this Controversy, and then come fairly to debate the matters in
difference between us.

I. For his Concessions.

1. He yields, That there is no necessity at all of Infallibility under natural
Religion: which was implied in the second and third Propositions which are
granted by him.

For in the second Proposition I assert, Prop. 2.
That Man being framed a rational Creature capable of reflecting upon himself,
may antecedently to any external Revelation certainly know the being of God,
and his dependence upon him; else there could be no such thing as a Law of
Nature, or any Principles of Natutural Religion: which, he says, may be
granted.

All supernatural and external Revelation, Prop. 3.
must suppose the truth of Natural Religion; for unless we be antecedently
certain that there is a God, and that we are capable of knowing him, it is
impossible to be certain, that God has revealed his Will to us by any
supernatural means. Let this be granted, says he. From whence it follows that
we have sufficient certainty of the Principles of Natural Religion, without any
such thing as Infallibility.

2. He yields, That Reason is to be judge concerning divine Revelation; which
appears by the next Proposition.

Nothing ought to be admitted for Divine Revelation, Prop. 4.
which overthrows the certainty of those Principles which must be antecedently
supposed to all Divine Revelation: for that were to overthrow the means whereby
we are to judge concerning the truth of any Divine Revelation. Of which, he
says, Let this also be granted.

3. He yields, That the Will of God may be sufficiently declared to men by
writing, for he grants the tenth Proposition, which is this.

If the Will of God cannot be sufficiently declared to men by writing, Prop. 10.
it must either be, because no writing can be intelligible enough for that end,
or that it can never be known to be written by men infallibly assisted; the
former is repugnant to common sense, for words are equally capable of being
understood, spoken or written; the latter overthrows the possibility of the
Scriptures being known to be the Word of God. This, says he, is granted.

4. He yields, That the written will of God does contain all things simply
necessary to salvation. For in his consideration of the 14. Proposition, P. 22.
S. 15.
these are his words: Mean while as touching the Perfection of holy Scriptures,
Catholics now, as the holy Fathers anciently, do grant that they contain all
points, which are simply necessary to be of all persons believed for attaining
salvation.

5. He yields, P. 52.
That no person is infallibly certain of or in his Faith, because the Proponent
thereof is infallible, unless he also certainly know, or have infallible
evidence that he is infallible; only he adds, That for begetting an infallible
assent to the thing proposed, it is sufficient if we have an infallible
evidence either of the thing proposed, or of the Proponent only. Which is all I
desire as to this matter. But he quarrels with me for saying, Proposition 21.
It is necessary therefore in order to an infallible assent, that every
particular person be infallibly assisted, in judging of the matters proposed to
be believed: Because, says he, it is not necessary to have an infallible
evidence of the truth of the things proposed, i. e. from the internal
principles that prove or demonstrate them; but it is enough that he have an
infallible or sufficiently certain evidence only of the infallibility of the
external Proponent* Where there are two things to be taken notice of. 1. That
by the matters proposed to be believed, he would seem to understand me only of
the things that are to be believed by virtue of any Proponent supposed
infallible; whereas I meant it of all such things to which an infallible assent
is required, and chiefly of that by which we are to believe the things
revealed; as for instance, that the Church is infallible, is in the first place
to be believed upon their principles, and either an infallible assent is
required to this or not; if not, then infallibility is not necessary to faith;
if it be, then this infallible assent must be built on an infallibility
antecedent to that of the Church; and then my consequence necessarily follows,
that the ground on which a necessity of some external infallible Proponent is
asserted, must rather make every particular person infallible, if no divine
Faith can be without an infallible assent, and so renders any other
Infallibility useless.

2. That he explains infallible evidence by that which is sufficiently certain,
which is mere shuffling: for he knows well enough that we contend for
sufficiently certain evidence as much as they; our only Question is about
infallibility, whether that be necessary or no? If sufficiently certain
evidence will serve for the Churches Infallibility, why may it not for the
Scriptures, or any matters of Faith contained therein? If they mean no more by
Infallibility but sufficient certainty, why do they make so great a noise about
it, as though there could be no Faith and we no Christians without
Infallibility? when we all say that the matters of Faith have sufficient
certainty, nay the highest which such things are capable of. Is infallible
Faith come to be sufficiently certain only? for all that I know an infallible
Pope may by such another explication become like one of us.

6. He yields, That a right and saving faith may be without any infallible
assurance concerning the Churches Infallibility. Which, he says, P. 54.
is abundantly declared by Catholic Writers. I only desire to know, why a like
right and saving faith may not be had concerning the Scriptures, without their
Churches infallibility? For from hence it follows, that an infallible assent is
not requisite to saving faith; directly contrary to my former Adversary E. W.
for one says, it is necessary to faith, and the other, that it is not. But
above all, how will he ever answer this to Mr. I. S. who has written a whole
Book purposely against this Principle, as impious and atheistical? Methinks
this way of defending the main foundation of their Faith by Principles so
directly contradicting one another looks a little scandalously, and brings an
odd suspicion upon their Cause, as if it were very hard to be made good, when
our Adversaries cannot agree by which of two quite contrary Principles it was
best be maintained.

7. He yields, P. 56.
That the utmost assurance a man can have of the Churches Infallibility, is
only moral; but to make it up, he calls it a moral infallibility; which, how
strangely soever it sounds, yet his meaning is good; for it is such an
infallibility, as is not infallibility. Has the dispute been thus long among
us, whether infallibility be necessary or no to faith, and now at last one
comes and tells us, Yes surely, a moral infallibility is necessary. I have
heard of a ho^ dispute between two Gentlemen about Transubstantiation, very
earnest they were on both sides; at last another falls into their company and
asked them what it was they were about; they told him Transubstantiation: very
well, said he, but I pray tell me what you mean by it; one said it was standing
at the Eucharist, and the other kneeling. Much such another explication is this
here of Infallibility, only this is somewhat worse, for it is joining two words
together which destroy each other; for if it be only moral Certainty, it is not
infallible; if it be infallible, it cannot be barely moral. I expect to hear
shortly of an accidental Transubstantiation, a coordinate Supremacy, as well
as a moral Infallibility. But we are to suppose that by Infallibility he means
no more than Certainty, because he explains it by the Certainty of universal
Tradition: this were well enough, if in the precedent Page he had not said, P.
55.
That a particular person may be infallible in the assent he gives to some
matter proposed, viz. to this, that the Church is infallible; I would fain
understand what this infallible assent is grounded upon, and if the evidence be
only sufficiently or morally infallible, which are his own terms, how the
assent which is built upon it, comes to be more than so. It is very pleasant to
observe how Mr. Cressey, and some other late Writers of their Church are
perplexed about this word Infallibility, as if they had a Wolf by the ears,
they cannot tell how to hold it, and they are afraid to let it go. And very
loath is is our N. O. to part with the sound of Infallibility, although his own
Concessions perfectly overthrow it, as will yet further appear by this last,
viz.

8. That moral Certainty is a sufficient foundation for Faith. This will appear
by my 27. Pro^. 27.
Proposition, which is this: The nature of certainty does receive several names
either according to the nature of the proof, or the degrees of the Assent. Thus
Moral Certainty may be so called, either as it is opposed to Mathematical
evidence, but implying a firm assent upon the highest evidence that Moral
things can receive: Or as it is opposed to a higher degree of Certainty in the
same kind, so Moral Certainty implies only greater Probabilities of one side
than the other. In the former sense we assert the certainty of Christian Faith
to be Moral, but not only in the latter. P. 67.
To which he says, This Principle is granted, if importing only that
Christians have or may have a sufficiently certain and infallible evidence of
the truth of their Christianity. Whereby it is plain that though he uses the
term infallible, yet he means no more than I do, or else he ought not to have
brought that as an explication of my principle which is contrary to it, as in
this Controversy, Moral Certainty is opposed to strict demonstration and
Infallibility. But if he by infallibility means only sufficient certainty, I
shall be content for quietness sake, that he shall call it Infallibility, if he
pleases. And that he can mean no more by it, appears not only by what he has
said before, but by what he says afterward in these words. P. 94.
A Natural or Moral Certainty (though not such a one as cannot possibly be
false, but which according to the Laws of Nature and the common manners and
experience of Men is not false) is sufficient on which to ground such a faith
as God requires of us; in respect of that Certainty which can be derived from
humane sense or reason, and which serves for an introductive to the reliance of
this our faith upon such Revelation as is believed by us divine; and which if
divine, we know is not possibly fallible; In respect of its relying on which
Revelation, an infallible object, and not for an Infallible Certainty as to the
subject, it is that this our Faith is denominated a Divine Faith. Now this
Natural or Moral Certainty is thought sufficient for the first rational
Introductive and Security of our Faith, not only by the Doctor in his 27.
Principle, but also by Catholic Divines in their Discourses of the Prudential
Motives. Very well said, and I were a very disingenuous man, if I should not
heartily thank him for so free a Confession, by which, if I understand any
thing, he very fairly gives up the Cause of Infallibility, as to the necessity
of it in order to Faith: As will easily appear by the managing of it, so far as
I have been concerned in it. It is evident to any one that will cast an eye on
the Controversy of Infallibility, between the Archbishop and his Adversaries,
that it was raised on this account, because those of the Church of Rome
asserted, that the Infallible Testimony of the Church was necessary in order to
the believing the Scriptures to be the Word of God: and so much is endeavored
to be defended by him who pretended to answer my Lord of Canterburies Book, who
goes upon this Principle, That this is to be believed with a divine Faith, and
a divine Faith must be built upon an infallible Testimony; the falsehood of
which, I at large showed in the Discourse of the Resolution of Faith. Since the
publishing whereof, the Metaphysical Gentleman before mentioned, pretended to
answer that part of it which concerns Infallibility and Moral Certainty. Some
of his assertions I have laid down already, as contrary to this of N. O. as may
be; for he not only asserts the necessity of Infallibility for a foundation of
Christian Faith, but spends some Chapters in rambling talk against Moral
Certainty. The Title of one of which is, ^rot. without Princip. Chap. 6.
Faith only Morally Certain is no Faith. I desire N. O. and E. W. to agree
better before they go abo^^ to confute me; and to what purpose should^ trouble
my self with answering a man who^ Principles the more ingenuous of their ow^
Party disown, as well as we? For not on^^ N. O. here makes Moral Certainty a
sufficien^ ground for Divine Faith, Guide in Controv. disc. 5. chap. 10. S. 134.
but the Guide 1^ Controversies, another of my Adversaries, a^serts the same,
when he says, And indee^ from what is said formerly, that a Divine Faith may
be had by those who have had (...) extrinsecal even morally infallible (I see
now from whom N. O. learnt these terms) motive thereof, it follows that Divine
Faith does not resolve into such motives either as the formal cause, or always
as the applicative introductive, or condition of this divine faith. And a
little after, Sect. 135.
That it is not necessary that such Faith always should have an external
rationally infallible ground or motive thereto (whether Church Authority or any
other) on his part that so believes. By these concessions it appears that the
cause of Infallibility, as far as it concerns the necessity of it in order to
Faith, is clearly given up by these persons; and if others be still of another
mind among them, I leave them to dispute it among themselves.

Thus far then we are agreed; 4.
I now come to consider where the controversy still remains, N. O's.
Principles laid down.
and why the rest of my Principles may not pass as well as these. In order to
this, I must, by taking a view of his several exceptions and answers, draw
together a Scheme of those Principles which he sets up in opposition to mine;
and if I do not very much mistake, they may be reduced to these three.

1. That God has given an infallible assistance to the Guides of the Church in
all Ages of it, for the direction of those who live in it.

2. That without this infallible assistance there can be no certainty of the
sense of Scripture.

3. That all the Arguments which overthrow the Churches Infallibility; do
destroy the Churches Authority.

These, as far as I can perceive, contain the whole force of his
Considerations; and in the examination of these the remaining discourse must be
spent; In which I shall have occasion to take notice of whatever is material in
his Book.

1. The main controversy is, whether God has given an infallible assistance
to the Guides of the Church in all Ages, for the conduct of those who live in
it? For if he has not, my Adversary cannot deny, but the Principles laid down
by me must hold. For in case there be no infallibility in the Guides of the
Church, every one must be left to the use of his own understanding, proceeding
in the best manner, to find out what the Will of God is in order to salvation.
We do not now dispute concerning the best helps for a person to make use of in
a matter of this nature; but the Q^estion is, whether a man ought to resign his
own judgment to that of the Church, which pretends to be infallible as to all
necessaries for salvation? or supposing no such infallibility, whether a person
using his Faculties in the best manner about the sense of Scriptures, with the
helps of divine Grace, may not have sufficient certainty thereby what things
are required of him in order to happiness? Hereby I exclude nothing that may
tend to the right use of a man's understanding in these things, whether it be
the direction of Pastors; the decrees of Councils, the sense of the Primitive
Church, or the care, industry, and sincerity of the Enquirer; but supposing all
these, whether by not believing the Guides of the Church to be infallible, the
foundation of this persons faith can be nothing else but a trembling Quicks
and, as N. O. speaks in his Preface; only from the supposing an errability in
the Guides of Gods Church. And a little after he lays down that as his
fundamental Principle, that the only certain way not to be misled, will be the
submitting our internal assent and belief to Church Authority; or as he
elsewhere speaks, to the infallible Guideship of Church Gover^ors. P. 1^.
Here then two Questions necessarily arise: 1. Whether there can be no
certainty of Faith without this infallibility? 2. What certainty there is of
this infallibility?

1. Whether there can be no certainty of Faith without Infallibility in the
Guides of the Church, and submitting our internal assent and belief to them?
For the clearing of this we must consider what things are agreed upon between
us, that by them we may proceed to the resolution of this Question.

1. It is I suppose agreed, That every man has in him a faculty of discerning
of truth and falsehood.

2. That this Faculty must be used at least in the choice of infallible Guide;
for otherwise a man must be abused with every pretense of Infallibility, and
George Fox may as well be followed as the Pope of Rome; and to what purpose are
all prudential motives and arguments for Infallibility, if a man must not judge
whether they be good or no, i. e. sufficient to prove the thing?

3. That God is not wanting in necessaries to the salvation of mankind.

4. That the Books of Scripture received on both sides do contain in them the
Will of God in order to salvation.

5. That all things simply necessary to salvation are contained therein, which
is a concession mentioned before.

These things being supposed,. 5.
the Question now is, N. O's. exceptions answered.
Whether a person not relying on the infallibility of a Church, may not be
certain of those things which are contained in those Books in order to
Salvation? For of those ou^ present enquiry is, and not about the sense of the
more difficult and controverted places; and if we can make it appear that men
may be certain as to matters of salvation without infallibility, let them prove
(if they can) the necessity of infallibility for things which are not necessary
to salvation. But of the sense of Scripture in those things afterward; I now
enquire into the certainty men may attain to, of the necessaries to salvation
in Scripture: and concerning this, I laid down this Proposition.

Although we cannot argue against any particular way of Revelation from the
necessary Attributes of God, Prop. 13.
yet such a way as writing being made choice of by him, we may justly say, that
it is repugnant to the nature of the design and the Wisdom and Goodness of God
to give infallible assistance to persons in writing his Will for the benefit of
Mankind, if those Writings may not be understood by all persons who sincerely
endeavor to know the meaning of them in all such things as are necessary for
their salvation.

This Principle, P. 13.
he says, is unsound; which, if he can prove, I may have more reason to
question it than I yet have. And I assure him I expect no mean proofs to shake
my belief of a principle of so great importance to the Christian Religion. For
it being granted by him, that all things simply necessary to salvation, are
contained in the Books of Scripture, I desire to know whether things simply
necessary ought not to be delivered with greater plainness than things which
are not so? Whether God appointing the Evangelists and Apostles to write these
things, did not intend that they should be so expressed as they might most
easily be understood? Whether our Saviors own Sermons vere capable of being
understood by those who heard them, without some infallible Interpreter?
Whether the Evangelists did not faithfully deliver our Saviors Doctrine? If
they did, how that comes to be obscure now, which was plain then? so that
either Christ himself must be charged with not speaking the Will of God
plainly, or the Evangelists cannot be charged with not expressing it so. There
are no other Books in the World that I know of, that need an infallible
Interpreter: and we can tell certainly enough what any other Religion requires,
supposing it to be written in the same way that the Christian is: Is it not
possible for a man to be certain what the Law of Moses required of the People
of Israel, by reading the Books of that Law, without some infallible Guides* Do
the ten Commandments need an Infallible Comment? Or can we have now no
certainty of the meaning of the Levitical Law, because there is no High Priest
or Sanhedrin to explain it? And if it be possible to understand the necessaries
of that dark dispensation in comparison with the Gospel, are o^r eyes now
blinded with too much light? Is not Christianity therefore highly recommended
to us in the New Testament, because of the clearness and perspicuity wherein
the Doctrines and Precepts thereof are delivered? And yet after all this,
cannot the most necessary parts of it, he understood by those who sincerely
endeavor to understand them? By which sincere endeavor we are so far from
excluding any useful helps, that we always suppose them. The s^m then of what
he is to confute, is this* that although the Apostles and Evangelists did
deliver the Mind of God to the World in their Writings, in order to the
salvation of Mankind, although they were inspired by an infinite Wisdom for
this end, although all things simply necessary to Salvation are contained in
their Writings, although a Person uses his sincere endeavor by all Moral
helps, and the Divine Grace assisting him to find out in these Writings the
things necessary to Salvation, yet after all he cannot certainly understand the
meaning of them. Which to me appears so absurd and monstrous a Doctrine, so
contrary to the honor of the Scriptures and the design of Christianity, that
if I had a mind to disparage it, I would begin with this and end with
Transubstantiation. For in earnest Sir, did not our Savior speak intelligibly
in matte^s of so great importance to the Salvation of Mankind? Did he not
declare all that was necessary for that end, in his many admirable discourses?
Did not the Evangelists record his words and actions in writing, and that as
one of them says expressly, That we might believe that Jesus is the Christ,
Ioh. 20, 31.
the Son of God, and that believing we might have life through his name? And
after all this, cannot we understand so much as the common necessaries to
salvation by the greatest and most sincere endeavor for that end? But it is
time now to consider his exceptions against this Principle: which are these.

1. That God may reveal his mind so in Scripture as that in many things it may
be clear only to some persons more versed in the Scriptures, P. 13.
and in the Churches Traditional sense of them, and more assisted from above
according to their employment; which persons he has appointed to instruct the
rest. But what is all this to our purpose? our Question is not about may be's,
and possibilities of things, but it is taken for granted on both sides, that
God has revealed his mind in writing; therefore he need not make the
supposition of no writings at all, P. 14.
as he does afterward: the Question is, Whether these Writings being allowed
for divine revelations of the Will of God, he has expressed the necessaries to
salvation clearly therein or not? That God may delivers his mind obscurely in
many things, is no question; nor that he may inspire persons to unfold his
mind, where it is obscure; but our question is, whether or no these Writings
being acknowledged to contain the Will of God, it be agreeable with the nature
of the design and the Wisdom and Goodness of God for such Writings not to be
capable of being understood in all things necessary to salvation, by those who
sincerely endeavor to understand them? But when I had expressly said, things
necessary for salvation, why does he avoid that which the dispute was about,
and only say many things in stead of it? I do not doubt but there are many
difficult places of Scripture, as there must be in any ancient Writings penned
in an Idiom so very different from ours. But I never yet saw one difficulty
removed by the pretended Infallible Guides of the Church; all the help we have
had, has been from mere fallible men of excellent skill in Languages, History,
and Chronology, and of a clear understanding; and we should be very unthankful
not to acknowledge the great helps we have had from them, for understanding the
difficult places of Scripture: But for the Infallible Guides, they have dealt
by the obscurities of Scripture, as the Priest and the Levi^e in our Saviors
Parable, did by the wounded man, Luke 10. 31, 32.
they have fairly passed them by, and taken no care of them. If these Guides
did believe themselves infallible, they have made the least use of their Talent
that ever men did; they have laid it up in a Napkin, and buried it in the
earth, for nothing of it ever appeared above ground. How could they have
obliged the World more, (nay, it had been necessary to have done it for the use
of their Gift) than to have given an Infallible sense of all controverted
Places; and then there had been but one dispute left, whether they were
infallible or not? but now, supposing we believe their Infallibility, we are
still as far to seek, for the meaning of many difficult places. And supposing
God had once bestowed this Gift of Infallibility upon the Guides of the Church,
he might most justly deprive them of it, because of the no use they have made
of it; and we might have great reason to believe so from our Saviors words,
Mat. 25. 29.
To him that has shall be given, but from him that has not, shall be taken
away even that which he has. So that not making use of this Talent of
Infallibility, gives us just reason to question, whether God continues it,
supposing he had once given it to the Guides of the Church, since the Apostles
days: which I see no reason to believe.

2. His next exception is from a saying of Dr. Fields, P. 14.
who, he says, seems to advance a contrary Principle in his Preface to his
Books of the Church. But O the mischief of Common-place-Books! which make men
write what they find, and not what is to their purpose. For after all, Dr.
Field does but seem to advance another Principle in his opinion, and does not
so much as seem to do it in mine. For that learned and judicious Writer sets
himself purposely to disprove the Infallibility of the Church in the beginning
of his fourth Book; and is it probable that any man of common understanding
would assert that in his Preface, which he had disproved in his Book? It is a
known distinction in the Church of Rome of the Church Virtual, representative
and essential; by the two first are meant Popes and Councils; and of these two,
Dr. Field says, Field of the Church l* 4. ch 5. p. 350.
that they may err in matters of greatest Consequence; yet these are N. O's.
infallible Guides, whose conduct he supposes men obliged to follow, and to
yield their internal assent to. Concerning the essential Church, he says, Chapter
2*
That it either comprehends all the faithful that are and have been since
Christ appeared in the flesh; and then, he says, it is absolutely free from
all error and ignorance of divine things, that are to be known by Revelations;
or as it comprehends only all those Believers that are and have been since the
Apostles times; and in this sense, he says, the whole Church may be ignorant
in sundry things, which are not necessary to salvation; but he thinks it
impossible for the whole Church to err in anything of this nature. But in
things that cannot be clearly deduced from the Rule of Faith, and word of
divine and heavenly Truth, we think it possible, that all that have written of
such things might err and be deceived. But if the Church be taken only as it
comprehends the Believers that now are, and presently live in the world, he
says, it is certain and agreed upon, that in things necessary to be known and
believed expressly and distinctly, it never is ignorant, much less does err.
Yea in things that are not absolutely necessary to be known and believed
expressly and distinctly, we constantly believe that this Church can never err,
nor doubt pertinaciously, but that there shall ever be some found ready to
embrace the truth, if it be manifested to them, and such as shall not wholly
neglect the search and enquiry after it, as times and means give leave. But if
we mean by a Church, any particular Church, Chapter 5.
he determines, That particular men and Churches may err damnably, because
notwithstanding others may worship God aright; but that the whole Church at one
time cannot so err, for that then the Church should cease utterly for a time,
and so not be Catholic being not at all times; and Christ should sometimes be
without a Church; yet, that errors not prejudicing the salvation of them that
err may be found in the Church, that is at one time in the world, we make no
doubt; only the Symbolical and Catholic which is and was being wholly free
from error. Which several expressions amount to no more than this, that there
will be always some true Christians in the World; but what is this to
infallible Teachers and Guides, in a Church that pretends to be Catholic
against all the sense and reason in the World? And is it now imaginable after
all this, that Dr. Field should make any particular Church infallible? No, all
that he means in his Preface, is this, that among all the Societies of men,
persons who have not leisure or capacity to examine particular Controversies,
ought diligently to search which is the true Church, and having done this, to
embrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment, i.e.
Suppose a man by that very Book of Dr. Fields should be convinced that the
Church of Rome is a very corrupt and tyrannical Church, and the Church of
England is a sound and good Church (which was the design of his writing it,) he
being thus far satisfied, ought to embrace the communion of this Church, and so
follow her directions, and rest in her judgment, so, as not to forsake her
communion for any cavils that are raised about particular Controversies of
which he is not a capable judge. And does this make the Church of England
infallible? If we say that a man being first satisfied of the skill and
integrity of a Lawyer, ought to follow his directions, and rest in his
judgment; does this make that Lawyer infallible? so we say here, the resting in
the judgment of a Church, of whose integrity we have assurance beforehand,
implies only the supposition of so much honesty and skill in a Church, as may
overrule the Judgments of persons who either have not leisure or capacity to
understand particular Controversies which require skill in Languages, search
into the Fathers and later Writers on both sides. If we say, that unlearned
persons ought in such things to trust the learned, whose integrity they have no
ground to suspect, this does not certainly make the more learned infallible?
But we may rest in the judgment of those whom we have no reason to suspect,
though we believe them not to be infallible: and it was the former Dr. Field
meant, and by no means any infallibility, unless he plainly contradict himself.

3. He excepts, P. 15.
That this brings in an inerrability of every particular Christian in all
points necessary, if such Christians will, that is, ^f only they shall
sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them. The force of this Argument
will be easily discerned if we put another parallel to it, viz. That they who
assert from Scripture the assistance of Divine Grace to the sincere endeavors
of men, do make all men imp^ccable if they will; as well as those who assert,
that God will not be wanting in necessaries to salvation to those who sincerely
endeavor to know them, make all such men so far infallible, if they will. If
any one thing be plain in Scripture, the goodness of God is; and who can
believe that, and yet think that he will suffer those who sincerely endeavor
to know what is necessary to their salvation, not to understand it? But
besides, how often does the Scripture promise a greater degree of knowledge to
the meek and humble, Psalm. 25. 9.
to the diligent and industrious; James 1. 5.
to those that ask and seek wisdom from him, Luke 11. 13.
to those that do the will of God, to whom our Savior has expressly promised,
John 7. 17.
that they shall know of his doctrine, whether it be of God or no? And if this
be the inerrability he means, he sees what grounds we have to assert it. But we
understand not by it, that such persons cannot err in their judgments about
what things are necessary, and what not; nor that they cannot err in other
things which are not so necessary to salvation; but that Gods goodness is so
great, and his promises so plain, and his word so clear in necessary things,
that no one who sincerely endeavors to know them, shall ever miss of
salvation. And if such an infallibility will satisfy them, we do not deny it
to Popes themselves, or other Guides of the Church, on condition they do not
think themselves infallible beyond these bounds; for they are only the meek and
humble whom God has promised to teach his way, and not such who will be
infallible whether God will or no.

His other exceptions from this principle destroying Church Authority, from the
parity of reason for Church Governors, and the controverted places of Scripture
shall be considered afterward.

2. I now come to examine what certainty there is for this Infallibility?. 6.
Here I shall lay down some principles of common reason, N. O's. Proofs of
Infallibility examined.
by which we may better understand the force of his arguments.

1. That the Proof ought always to be more evident than the thing that is to be
proved by it. For otherwise it is of no advantage to the proof of it, if it
have but the same degree of evidence; but is a great prejudice to it, if it
have less: so that if the proofs of Infallibility be equally obscure and
difficult with those things which are to be believed by virtue of it, this
Infallibility is of no use; but if they be less evident, the pretense of it is
both very ridiculous and prejudicial to the Christian Faith.

2. The greater concernment any Law is of, and the greater danger in mistaking
the meaning of it, the more plain and distinct ought the terms of that Law to
be. As a Law about the succession of the Crown ought to be framed with all the
clearness and distinctness imaginable, because the peace and security of a
Nation depends upon it. So in case Christ has appointed any Successor in the
Government of his Church, or entailed Infallibility upon the Guides of it: this
being a matter of such infinite concernment to the whole Church; it is most
unreasonable to conceive that whatever other parts of his Will were obscure,
those which relate to the matter of Succession and Infallibility, should be so;
but rather so plain, that no one can miss of understanding them, because the
weight of all the rest depends upon these two; and it is so horrible a
presumption in any to pretend to them, in case they have no right to them, and
the danger so great in relying upon them if there be no such thing.

3. A Law of such universal concernment to the Faith and Peace of the Christian
Church being supposed, the practice of the best and purest^ Ages of the Church
must be supposed agreeable thereto, i. e. that in all matters of difference
they did constantly own these infallible Judges, by appealing to them for a
final issue of all debates, and resting satisfied with their decisions. But if
on the contrary, when great differences have happened in and nearest the first
times, no such Authority was made use of, but other ways put in practice to
make an end of them; if when it was pretended, it was slighted and rejected;
nay, if the persons pretending it, were proceeded against and condemned, and
this not by a popular Faction, but by just and legal Authority; we may thence
conclude that such Judges have arrogated that power to themselves, which was
not given them by the Supreme Legislator. These things being premised, I come
to his particular Arguments, which lie scattered^up and down; but to give them
the greater strength, I shall bring them nearer together. And they are drawn
either from Scripture, or Tradition, or parity of Reason.

1. From Scripture. And in truth the only satisfactory Argument in a matter of
so great concernment to the Christian Church, ought only to be drawn from
thence, unless we will suppose the Scripture defective in the most important
things. For this being pleaded as a thing necessary for the Peace of the Church
by some, and for the Faith of Christians by others; so much greater the
necessity of it is, so much clearer ought the evidence of it to be in
Scripture, supposing that to be intended to reveal the Will of God to us in
matters of the greatest necessity. But it cannot be denied by our Adversaries,
that the places produced by them for a constant Infallibility in the Guides of
the Church, do not necessarily prove it; because they are very capable of being
understood, as to the Infallibility only of the Apostles in the first Age and
Foundation of the Christian Church: is it then to be imagined that if Christ
had intended such an Infallibility as the foundation of the Faith and Peace of
his Church, he would not have delivered his mind more plainly and clearly than
he is pretended to do in this matter? How easily might all the contentions of
the Christian World have been prevented, if Christ had caused it to be
delivered in terms so clear, as the nature of the thing does require? If he had
said, I do promise my Infallible Spirit to the Guides of the Church in all
Ages, to give the true sense of Scripture in all controversies which shall
arise among Christians, and I expect an obedience suitably to all their
determinations: or, more particularly, I appoint the Bishops of Rome in all
Ages for my Successors in the Government of the Church, who shall be the
standing and infallible Judges of all Controversies among Christians; this
dispute might never have happened among us. For we assure them that we account
the peace of the Church so valuable a thing, and obedience to Christ's Commands
so necessary a duty, that we are well enough inclined to embrace the doctrine
of Infallibility, if we could see any ground in Scripture for it. But we cannot
make persons infallible by believing them to be so, but we may easily make our
selves fools, as others have done, by believing it without reason. The
controversy then is not, whether Infallibility in the Guides of the Church be
a desirable thing or not, for so we say impeccability is too; but the question
is, whether there be any such thing promised by Christ to the Guides of his
Church, and whether all Christians on that account are bound to yield their
internal assent, as well as external obedience to all their decrees? which we
deny, and desire to see it clearly proved from his words who alone could grant
this Infallibility.

For if an infallible Judge be therefore necessary, because the Scripture is
not sufficiently clear for ending of Controversies, and that God has actually
constituted such a Judge, cannot be proved but by Scripture, surely we have all
the reason in the World to expect that the Scripture should be abundantly, and
beyond all contradiction clear in this point, to make amends for its obscurity
in the rest: For if this Point be not clearly proved, we are never the nearer
an end of Controversies: because the business stops at the very head, and they
may beg their hearts out, before we shall ever be so good natured as to grant
it them without proof. And they who have been so bold (shall I say? or
blasphemous) as to charge our Lord with want of discretion, in case he have not
provided his Church with such an Infallible Judge, do certainly render him much
more obnoxious to this imputation, in supposing him to have constituted such a
Judge, if he have no where plainly declared that he has done so. And let them,
if they can, produce one clear Text of Scripture to this purpose, which by the
unanimous consent of the Fathers is so interpreted; and which, to the common
sense of Mankind, is more sufficiently clear for the ending this Controversy,
than the Scripture is said by them to be in other necessary Points of Faith.
And till they have done this, according to their own way of arguing, we have as
much reason to deny their Infallibility, as they have to demand our assent to
it, upon the presumed obscurity and insufficiency of Scripture.

When I came thus prepared to find what the Considerator would produce in a
matter of such consequence, 7.
I soon discerned how little mind he had to insist upon any proofs of that, Of
the Arguments from Scripture for Infallibility.
which is his only Engine to overthrow my Principles. For after the most
diligent search I could make, the only Argument from Scripture I found
produced, was from the Old Testament, (where I confess I least looked for it)
but however, this is thought so considerable as to be twice produced; (...).
25. 26.
and yet is so unlucky, that if I understand any thing of the force of it, it
p^oves the Judges in Westminster Hall to be infallible, rather than the Pope,
or any Guide of the Christian Church. For the force of the Argument lies in
Gods appointing Judges under the Law, (...) 17. 10. 11, 12. (...).
according to whose sentence matters were to be determined, upon penalty of
death in case of disobedience. But what then? does this imply infallibility?
no, that he dares not stand to, but absolute obedience,; which we are ready to
yield when we see the like absolute command for Ecclesiastical Judges of
Controversies of Religion, as there was among the Jews for their supreme Judges
in matters of Law. But of this place I have already spoken at large, Ration.
Account. p. 1. chapter 8. Sect. 2. p. 239.
and showed how impertinently it is produced for Infallibility in the Book, he
often referrs to, and might, if he had thought fit, have answered what is there
said before he had urged it again, without any new strength added to it.

But since he produces no other proof for it, I must consider how he goes about
to weaken mine against it. Two things I insisted upon against such a pretense
of Infallibility, viz. That such a pretense implying an Infallible Assistance
of the Spirit of God, there were but two ways of proving it, either, 1. By such
miracles as the Apostles wrought to attest their infallibility, or 2. By those
Scriptures from whence this Infallibility is derived. Concerning both these I
laid down two Propositions.

1. Concerning the Proof by miracles. The Proposition was this.

There can be no more intolerable usurpation on the Faith of Christians than
for any Person or Society of men to pretend to an Assistance as Infallible in
what they propose, Prop. 16,
as was in Christ or his Apostles, without giving an equal degree of evidence
that they are so assisted as Christ and his Apostles did, viz. by miracles as
great, public, and convincing as theirs were; by which I mean such as are
wrought by those very persons who challenge this Infallibility, and with a
design for the conviction of those who do not believe it.

To this he answers: P. 27.
1. That I am equally obliged to produce miracles for the Churches
Infallibility in Fundamentals, which I had asserted in the defense of the
Archbishop. But this admits a very easy answer; for when I speak of
Infallibility in Fundamentals, I there declare that I mean no more by it, than
that there shall be always a number of true Christians in the World. And what
necessity is there now of miracles for men to believe, since they receive the
doctrine of the Gospel upon those miracles by which it was at first attested.
Neither is there any need of miracles to show that any number of men are not
guilty of an actual error in what they believe, supposing they declare to
believe only on the account of that divine Revelation which is owned by
Christians; for in this case the trial of doctrine is to be by Scripture. But
in case any persons challenge an Infallibility to themselves antecedently to
the belief of Scriptures, and by virtue of which, they say, men must believe
the Scriptures, then I say such persons are equally bound to prove their
infallibility by miracles as the Apostles were.

2. Not resting in this, he proceeds to another answer, P. 28, 29.
the sum of which is, That the Infallibility of the Church not being so large
or so high as the Apostles, but consisting only in the Infallible delivery of
the same doctrine, there is no necessity of miracles in the present Church. To
this I answer, That the doctrine of the Gospel may be said to be new two ways;
1. In respect of the matter contained in it, and so it was new only when it was
first revealed. 2. In respect of the person who is to believe it: so it is new
in every age to those who are first brought to believe it. Now the Apostles had
their infallibility attested by miracles, not barely with a respect to the
revelation of new matter, for then none would have needed miracles but Christ
himself, or the Apostles that made the first Sermons; for afterward the matter
was not new, but the necessity of miracles was to give a sufficient motive to
believe, to all those to whom the Gospel was proposed; and therefore miracles
are said to be a a sign to unbelievers. 1 Cor. 14. 22.
For by these, Unbelievers were convinced that there was sufficient ground for
receiving the doctrine of the Gospel on the Authority of those who delivered
it; Heb. 2. 4.
God himself bearing them witness with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Suppose then, any of the Apostles after their first preaching continued
only to inculcate the same doctrine for the conversion of more Unbelievers; in
this case the evidence of miracles was the reason of relying on the Authority
of those persons for the truth of the Doctrine delivered by them. From whence
it follows, that where the Christian Faith is to be received on the Authority
of any persons in any Age, those persons ought to confirm that Authority by
miracles, as the Apostles did. For without this, there can be no such Authority
whereon to rely, antecedently to the embracing the Christian Faith. Now, this
is the case of the Church of Rome they pretend not to deliver any Doctrine
wholly new, but what was one way or another delivered by Christ and his
Apostles; (although we therein charge them with fraud and falsehood) but
yielding this, yet they contend that no man can have sufficient ground for
believing the Word of God, but from their Churches Infallibility; in this case
it is plain that they make their Churches Infallibility to be as much the
reason of persons believing, as the Infallibility of the Apostles in their time
was; and therefore I say, they ought to prove this Infallibility in the same
way, and by miracles, as great, public, and convincing, as the Apostles did.
3. Yet he is very loath to let go the miracles of their Church, done in later
times as well as formerly. P. 29.
It would be too large a task in this place to examine the miracles of the
Roman Church, (that may be better done on another occasion,) all that I have
here to say is, that all the miracles pretended among them, signify nothing to
our present purpose, unless those miracles give evidence of the Authority and
Infallibility of those by whom they were done; and they would do well to show,
where ever in Scripture God did bestow a gift of miracles upon any but for this
end: and what reason there is that God should alter the method and course of
his providence, in a matter of so great concernment to the Faith of Mankind.
Such miracles as were wrought by Christ and his Apostles we defy all other
Religions in the World to produce any like them to confirm their Doctrine; but
such as the Church of Rome pretends, scarce any Religion in the World but has
pretended to the same. And for his most credible Histories he vouches for them,
I hope he does not mean the Church History written by S. C. nor any other such
Legends among them; if he does, I assure him they have a very easy Faith that
think them credible. And if all miracles that are so called, by those among
whom they are done, be an Argument, P 30.
as he says, of the security of salvation in the Communion and Faith of that
Church wherein they are done, I hope he will be so just, to allow the same to
the Arrians, Novatians, Donatists, and others, who all pretend to miracles as
well as the Church of Rome, as any one that is versed in Church History may
easily see. But of this more at large elsewhere.

2. Concerning the proof of Infallibility from Scripture, I said down this
Proposition.

Nothing can be more absurd, Prop. 17.
than to pretend the necessity of such an infallible commission and assistance
to assure us of the truth of those Writings, and to interpret them; and at the
same time to prove that Commission from those Writings from which we are told,
nothing can be certainly deduced, such an Assistance not being supposed; or to
pretend that Infallibility in a Body of men, is not as liable to doubts and
disputes, as in those Books from whence only they derive their Infallibility.

He grants the former part of this, P. 37.
if by it be intended to prove such Commission only, or in the first place from
these writings. But, he says, a Christians Faith may begin either at the
Infallible authority of Scriptures, or of the Church: It seems then, there may
be sufficient ground for a Christians Faith, as to the Scriptures, without
believing any thing of the Churches Infallibility; and for this we have reason
to thank him, whatever they of his own Church think of it. For, by this
concession we may believe the Scriptures Authority, without ever believing a
word of the Churches Infallibility; and let them afterward prove it from
Scripture if they can. Nay he goes yet farther, and says, That the
Infallibility of Scriptures as well as the Church may be proved from its own
testimony: but he first supposes, that the Infallibility of one of these, be
first learnt from Tradition. And therefore in the remainder of his discourse on
this Subject, he shows how the Infallibility of the Church may be proved from
Tradition not showing at all how the Infallibility of the Church can be proved
from Scripture.

Scripture being thus deserted,. 8.
as to the proof of the Churches Infallibility, Of the Argument from Tradition
for Infallibility.
I must pursue him to his other Hold of Tradition. The method of his discourse
is this; That the Infallibility of the Guides of the Church was antecedent to
the Scriptures; P. 38, 39.
That the Apostles did not lose their infallibility by committing what they
preached to writing; That their successors were to have this infallibility
preserved in them, if there had been no writings; and cannot be imagined to
have lost it because of them, because these give testimony to it; That this
Infallibility is preserved by Tradition descending from Age to Age, as we say
the Canon of Scripture is delivered to us; And lastly, That the Governors of
the Church always held and reputed themselves infallible, appears by their
Anathematizing dissenters. In this Discourse there are some things supposed
without reason, and other things asserted without proof. The Foundation of all
this Discourse proceeds upon the supposition that the same Infallibility which
was in the Apostles, must be continued in their Successors through all Ages of
the Church, for which I see not the least shadow of reason produced. Yes, says
he, supposing there had been no Writings, and no Infallibility, Christian
Religion would have been no rational and well grounded, no stable and certain
Religion. Two things in answer to this, I desire to be informed of: 1. What he
thinks of the Religion of the Patriarchs, who received their Religion by
Tradition, without any such Infallibility? 2. What he thinks of those
Christians who receive the Scriptures or Churches Infallibility by virtue of
common and universal Tradition (which is certainly the ground of the one, and
supposed by him to be of the other) whether the Faith of such persons be
rational and well-grounded, stable, and certain, or not; if it be, then there
is no such necessity of Infallibility for that purpose; if it be not, then he
does hereby declare that the Faith of Christians is irrational and
ill-grounded. For whatsoever is received on the account of Tradition antecedent
to the belief of Infallibility, cannot be received on the account of it; but
the belief of either Scriptures or Churches Infallibility, must be first
received by virtue of a principle antecedent to the Scriptures or Churches
Infallibility, viz. Tradition. By this it appears, that his very way of
proving, destroys the thing he would prove by it: For if the Tradition may be a
sufficient ground of Faith, how comes Infallibility to be necessary? But if
this Infallibility be not necessary without the Scriptures, much less certainly
is it now, since it is acknowledged on both sides, that the Apostles were
infallible in their Writings, and that therein the Will of God is contained as
to all things simply necessary to salvation. But these successors of the
Apostles were not deprived of their infallibility by the Apostles Writings; No
certainly, for none can be deprived of what they never had; but where are the
reasons all this while, to show that there was the same necessity of
Infallibility in the Apostles successors, as was in them? Two I find rather
intimated than insisted upon. 1. That the Church would otherwise have failed,
if there had been neither Writings nor Infallibility; But if this Argument hold
for any thing, it is for the necessity of the Scriptures, and not of
Infallibility; for we see God did furnish the Church with one, and left no
footsteps of the other. We do not dispute how far the Church might have been
preserved without the Scriptures, we find it has been hard enough to preserve
it pure with them: but we always acknowledge the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness
of God, that has not left us in matters of Faith and Salvation to the
determinations of men liable to be corrupted by Interest and Ambition, but has
appointed men inspired by himself to set down whatever is necessary for us to
believe and practice. And upon these Writings we fix our Faith, as on a firm
and unmovable Rock; and on the veracity of God therein contained and expressed,
we build all our hopes of a Blessed Eternity. And one great benefit more we
have by these divine Books, that by them we can so easily discover the fraud
and imposture of the confident Pretenders to Infallibility. Which is the true
reason why the Patrons of the Church of Romes Infallibility have so little
kindness for the Scriptures, and take all occasions to disparage them, by
insinuating that they are good for nothing but to breed Heresies in the Heads
of the People; upon pretense of which danger, they hide this Candle under a
Bushel, lest it should give too much light to them that are in the House, and
discover some things which it is more convenient to keep in the dark.

2. He says, The Infallibility of the Apostles successors, receives a second
evidence from the testimony thereof found also in these Writings. I confess I
have seen nothing like the first evidence yet, to which this should be a
second; but if by the first be meant that which I mentioned before, this is a
proper second for it. Neither of them, I dare say, intend any mischief to any
body; both first and second are forced into the Field, where they stand only
for dumb shows, and wonder what they are brought for. But whereabouts I pray
does this second Testimony stand? what are its weapons? I hope not Dic
Ecclesiae, nor Dabo tibi Claves, nor any of the old rusty Armor which our
modern Combatants begin to be ashamed to appear with in the Field. And to speak
truth, N. O. seems to understand his Art better than to meddle with such heavy
and Antique Armor, which every one has been foiled with that has undertaken
to combat with them; only it seems a little for the credit of their Cause to
point to such a Magazine, which in the days of Ignorance and Credulity, the
Romantic Age of the Church, was in great request. But we must now buckle our
selves to a new manner of Combat, which is from the Tradition of the Church,
and that of the very same nature with what we have for the Canon of Scripture.
This I confess is bright shining Armor, and may do great service if it will
hold; but that must be judged upon trial, which I now set my self to. But we
shall find that no weapons formed against Truth can prosper: and it has been
long observed of Rome that it could never endure a close Siege.

The Question now is, whether they of the Roman Church have the same universal
Tradition for the Infallibility of the Guides of it, which we have for the Canon
of Scripture? which he asserts. It is I suppose agreed on both sides, That the
Tradition on which we receive and believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God
was universal as to all Ages and Times of the Church; that from the beginning
all disputes in Religion among true Christians, were built upon the supposition
of it; That in no Age any persons were allowed to be good Christians who made
doubt of it; That every Age does afford plentiful testimonies of the belief of
it. This is that universal Tradition we receive the Scriptures upon; and let
any thing like this be produced for the Infallibility of the Guides of their
Church, and we yield up the Cause to them. Can any fairer terms than these be
desired? But we expect proofs, and so I perceive we may do to the Worlds end. I
commend the Ingenuity of N. O. for endeavoring to escape out of the circle any
way; but I believe they think themselves as wise, who still dance within it,
knowing the impossibility of doing any good in this other way. The only
Argument he insists upon is so weak, that I wonder he had not considered how
often it had been answered by their own Writers. For it is certain that
Provincial Councils as well as General, have Anathematized dissenters, and
pronounced them Heretics, which is his only Argument to prove this Tradition
of the Churches Infallibility; B^ll de Council. l. 2. c. 10.
and they had no way to answer it, but by saying, this does not imply their
Infallibility. And if it does not in the case of Provincial Councils; why
should he think it does in the case of General? For the Anathema's of
Provincial Councils did not relate to the acceptance of their Decrees, either
by the Pope, or the whole Church, as N. O. supposes, but did proceed upon their
own assurance of the truth of what they decreed; otherwise their Anathema's
would have been only conditional, and not absolute and peremptory as we see
they were. But I need give no other answer to this Argument than in the words
of Dr. Field whom N. O. appealed to before, Field of the Church, l. 4 c 4.
viz. That Councils denounce Anathema not because they think every one that
disobeyeth the Decree of the Council to be accursed, but because they are
persuaded in particular, that this is the eternal truth of God which they
propose, therefore they accurse them that obstinately shall resist, as St. Paul
wills every Christian man to Anathematize an Angel coming from heaven, if he
shall teach him any other doctrine than he has already learned: yet is not
every particular Christian free from possibility of erring. If the Argument
then were good from Anathematizing dissenters, and calling them Heretics,
every particular person must by it be proved Infallible; who are bound to
Anathematize even Angels from Heaven in case of delivering any other doctrine
from the Gospel; so that this, which is his only Argument in stead of proving
an universal Tradition would prove an universal Infallibility.

Let the Reader now judge in his Conscience, whether here be any thing offered
in the way of Tradition for the Churches Infallibility, that may bear the least
proportion with the Tradition on which we receive the Scriptures? And yet if
this had been true, it had been almost impossible that any one Age should have
passed without remarkable testimonies of it. For no Age of the Church has been
so happy as not to have occasion for an Infallible Judge of Controversies, if
any such had been appointed by Christ: and therefore it cannot be imagined, but
that Christians must in all Controversies arising have appealed to him, and
stood to his determinations; which must have been as well known in the practice
of the Church, as Judges trying Causes in Westminster Hall. But I challenge him
to produce any one Age since the Apostles times to this day, wherein the
Infallibility of a standing Judge of Controversies appointed by Christ, has
been received by as universal a consent as the Authority of Scripture has been
in that very Age. Nay, I except not that Age which has been since the Council
of Trent; for the Scriptures of the New Testament have been received of all
sides, but the Infallibility of a standing Judge is utterly denied by one side,
and vehemently disputed between several parties on the other. Some making only
the Essential Church infallible, others the representative in Councils, others
again the virtual, viz. the Pope. And supposing any infallible Judge necessary;
it stands to reason it should be rather in one than in a multitude, and rather
in a constant succession of Bishops in one See, than in an uncertain number who
cannot be convened together as often as the necessities of the Church may
require. But this is so far from being received as an Universal Tradition in
that very Age wherein we live, that only one busy Party in the Roman Church
do maintain it, Many others eagerly opposing it, and all the Princes and States
in Christendom do in their actions, if not in words, deny it. And is not this
now an Universal Tradition fit to be matched with that of the Scriptures? I had
once thought to have brought testimonies o^t of every Age of the Christian
Church manifestly disproving any such Tradition of Infallibility; and that not
only of private persons when there were no Councils, but from the most solemn
Acts of Councils, and the confession of their own Writers; but that would swell
this Answer to too great a Bulk, and is not needful where so very little is
offered for the proof of it. And yet I shall be ready to do it, when any thing
more important requires it.

I now return to his exceptions against the latter part of the former
proposition, viz. That Infallibility in a Body of men, is as liable to doubts
and disputes, as in those Books from whence only they derive their
Infallibility. The plain meaning of which is, that it is a foolish thing to
make use of a medium as uncertain as the thing which is to be proved by it; and
therefore if the Infallibility of the the Church be as liable to doubts and
disputes as that of the Scriptures, it is against all just Laws of reasoning to
make use of the Churches Infallibility to prove the Scriptures by. And to this
no answer can be proper, but either by saying that there is no absurdity in
such a way of proving; or else that the Infallibility of the Church is more
certain and evident than that of the Scriptures. Which I should be glad to see
undertaken by any man who pretends to sense; which N. O. does too much to
meddle with it; and therefore fairly shuffles it off, and turns my words quite
to another meaning, as though they had been spoken of the doubtful sense of the
Decrees of Councils, which although elsewhere I had sufficient reason to speak
of, yet that was not pertinent to this place. But this was a way to escape by
saying something, though not at all to the purpose; and yet he gives no
sufficient answer to that sense he puts upon my words, by bringing a Commentary
upon them out of words used by me in another Discourse. Wherein I did at large
argue against the Infallibility of General Councils, Rat. Account. part* 3. chapter
1. Sect. 4. p. 510.
and after disproving it in general, I undertook to prove, that no man can have
any certainty of Faith as to the Decrees of any Council; because men can have
no certainty of Faith that this was a General Council, that it passed such
Decrees, that it proceeded lawfully in passing them, and that this is the
certain meaning of them; all which are necessary in order to the believing
those Decrees to be infallible with such a Faith as they call divine. The words
produced by him do speak of the doubtful sense and meaning of the Decrees of
Councils, by which I show that men can have no more certainty of the meaning of
them, than of doubtful places of Scripture, not as though I supposed it
impossible for Councils to give a clear decision in matters of controversy, so
as that men might understand their meaning; but I expressly mention such Decrees
as are purposely framed in general terms, and with ambiguous expressions
pressions to give satisfaction to the several dissenting Parties; for which I
instanced in some of the Council of Trent, whose ambiguity is most manifest by
the disputes about their meaning raised by some who were present at the making
of them. I am far enough from denying that a Commentary may make a Text
plainer, or that a Judges sentence can be clearer than the Law; or that any
Council can, or has decided any thing clearer than the thing that is in
controversy; which are his exceptions: but I say, if Councils pretend to do
more than the Scriptures, and to decide controversies for the satisfaction of
the World, and that men ought to have that certainty of Faith by them, which
they cannot have by the Scriptures, they ought never to be liable to the same
ambiguity and obscurity upon the account of which the Scripture is rejected
from being a certain rule of Faith. For, as he says well, Infallibility alone
ends not Controversies, but clearness; clearness in the point controverted:
which if Councils want, they are as unfit to end Controversies as the
Scriptures can be pretended to be. But this is not the thing intended by me in
this Proposition and therefore it needs no farther answer; for the only subject
of that Proposition, is the Infallibility of the Church, and not the clearness
of the Decrees of Councils.

But I cannot admire the ingenuity of this way of answering me, by putting
another sense upon my words than they will bear; and by drawing words out of
another Discourse, without showing the purpose for which they are there used,
and leaving out the most material passages which tended to the clearing of
them. If N. O. thinks fit to oppose that whole Discourse against the
Infallibility of General Councils, and set down fairly the several Arguments, I
should be then too blame not to return a just answer: but I am not bound to
follow him in such strange excursions, from the 17. Proposition of this Book to
a single passage in a larger Book, and from that back to another at a mighty
distance in the same Book; which being dismembered from the Body of the
Discourse, must needs lose much of their strength. Yet with all the
disadvantage he takes them (which is such, that the best Book in the World may
be confuted in that manner) he has no great cause to glory in the execution he
has done upon them. In answer to my Lord of Canterburies Adversary, who
boasted of the Unity of the Roman Church: Rat. Acc^unt. p. 1. chapter 4. p. 101*
because whatever the private opinions of men are, they are ready to submit
their judgments to the censure and determination of the Church, I had said,
that this will hold as well or better for our Unity as theirs, because all men
are willing to submit their judgments to Scripture, which is agreed on all
sides to be infallible. Against these words thus taken alone N. O. spends two
or three Pages; which might have been spared, if he had but fairly expressed
what immediately follows them in these words. If you say it cannot be known
what Scripture determines, but it may be easily what the Church defines: it is
easily answered, that the event shows it to be far otherwise, for how many
disputes are there concerning the power of determining matters of Faith? to
whom it belongs, in what way it must be managed, whether Parties ought to be
heard in matters of Doctrine, what the meaning of the Decrees are when they are
made, which raise as many divisions as were before them; as appears by the
Decrees of the Council of Trent, and the later of Pope Innocent relating to the
five Propositions; so that upon the whole it appears setting aside force and
fraud, which are excellent Principles of Christian Unity, we are upon as fair
terms of Union as they are among themselves. I do not therefore say, that the
Church of Rome has no advantage at all in point of Unity, but that all the
advantage it has, comes from force and fraud, and setting these aside, we are
upon as good terms of Union as they; and we do not envy them the effects of
Tyranny and Deceit. It is the Union of Christians we contend for, and not of
Slaves or Fools; we leave the Turk and the Pope to vie with each other in this
kind of Unity, (although I believe the Turk has much the advantage in it) and
I freely yield to N. O. that they have a juster pretense to Unity without Truth
than we. Which is agreeable to what he pleads for, P 43.
that they are more united in opinion than we; united in opinion, I say, true
or false, says he, here matters not; we speak here of Union not of Truth. P.
44.
This and the following of Tyranny, which we complain of, are the two fairest
Pleas for their Union I ever met with. But this is not a place to examine the
pretenses to Unity on both sides, that I have at large done in a whole Chapter
in the late Book, and if N. O. had intended any thing to purpose against me on
this subject, he ought much rather to have fallen on a just Discourse than two
such lame Clauses as he makes these to be by his citation of them. And when he
does that, he may hear more of this Subject; in the mean time Infallibility is
our business.

And therefore I proceed to the third Argument made use of by N. O. for the
proof of Infallibility in the Guides of the Church, 9.
which is from parity of Reason. Of the Argument for Infallibility from Parity
of Reason.
Because, I say, Prop. 13.
that it is repugnant to the nature of the design, and the wisdom and goodness
of God to give infallible assurance to persons, in writing his Will for the
benefit of mankind, if those Writings may not be understood by all persons who
sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them in all such things as are
necessary to their salvation; from hence he inferrs, That if every Christian
may become thus infallible in necessaries, from 1. a clear rule. 2. a due
Industry used; 3. and a certainty that it is so used; may not the
Church Governors still much rather be allowed Infallible, and so retain still
their infallible Guideship; and the people also, the more clear the rule of
Faith is proved to be, the more securely be referred to their direction? and
have we not all reason to presume that the chief Guides of the Church (even a
General Council of them, or if it be but a major part of this Council, it is
sufficient) in their consults concerning a point necessary to salvation
delivered in Scripture, use at least so much endeavor (for more needs not) as
a plain Rustic does, to understand the meaning of it, and also the like
sincerity? For what they define for others, they define for themselves also,
and their salvation is as much concerned as any other man's is, in their
mistakes. And next, why may not these Governors upon such certainty of a
sincere endeavor and clearness of the rule take upon them to define these
points and enjoin an assent to and belief of them to their subjects; especially
since it is affirmed that all those from whom they require such obedience, if
they please to use a sincere endeavor may be certain thereof as well as they?
And are we not here again arrived at Church-infallibility, if not from
extraordinary divine assistance, only sincere endeavor being supposed? And
thus do not his conditional Infallibility of particular persons in
necessaries, the condition being so easy, necessarily infer a moral
impossibility of the Churches erring in them; especially those necessaries
being contracted to the Apostles Creed, as it is by some.

To lay open the weakness of this Discourse, which appears fair and plausible
at first view, I shall give an account of these two things.

1. What Infallibility I attribute to private persons.

2. How far the parity of reason will extend to the Infallibility of the Guides
of the Church.

1. As to the Infallibility by me attributed to private persons; no such thing
can be inferred from my words; and I wish N. O. would have kept to my own
expressions, and not foisted in that term of Infallibility, without which all
his Discourse would have betrayed its own weakness. For take the terms which I
laid down, and apply them to the Guides of the Church, and see what a mighty
Infallibility springs from them. For if it be repugnant to the nature of the
design, and to the wisdom and goodness of God to give infallible assurance to
persons in writing his Will for the benefit of mankind, if those Writings may
not be understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of
them in all such things as are necessary for their salvation, how does it hence
follow that the Guides of the Church must be infallible in teaching matters of
Faith? If I had asserted that particular persons were infallible in determining
what was true, and what not; then I grant the Argument would have much more
held for those whose office it is to guide and direct others. But what he means
by men's being infallible in necessaries, I do not well understand; for it is
capable of three several meanings: 1. That either men are infallible in judging
of necessaries to salvation; 2. or, That men are infallible in teaching others
what art necessaries to salvation. Or 3. That men are infallible in believing
such things as are necessary to salvation, i. e. that such is the goodness of
God, and the clearness of Scriptures, that no man who sincerely desires to know
what is necessary to salvation shall be deceived therein; and what is this any
more than to assert that God will not be wanting in necessaries to mankind; and
although I know no reason for using the term of Infallibility thus applied, yet
the thing it self I assert in that sense, but in neither of the other: and what
now can be inferred from hence by a parity of reason, but that the Guides of
the Church, supposing the same sincerity shall enjoy the same privilege, which
I know none ever denied them; but what is this to their infallibility in
teaching all matters of Faith? which is the only thing to be proved by him. If
he can prove this as necessary for the salvation of mankind as the other is,
then he would do something to his purpose, but not otherwise. So that all this
discourse proceeds upon a very false way of reasoning from believing to
teaching, and from necessaries to salvation, to all matters of Faith, which the
Guides of the Church shall propose to men.

2. But may we not infer, that if God will not be wanting to particular
persons in matters necessary to their salvation, much less will he be wanting
to the Guides of the Church in all matters of Faith? No certainly, unless it be
proved that their Guidance is the only means whereby men can understand what is
necessary to salvation; which is utterly denied by us, God having otherwise
provided for that, by giving so clear a Rule in matters necessary, that no man
who sincerely endeavors to know such things shall fail therein. But will not
the same sincerity in the Guides of the Church, extend to their knowing and
declaring all matters of Faith? This is a thing possible, and supposing God had
entrusted them with the infallible delivery of all matters of Faith, were not
to be questioned; but that is the thing still in dispute, and is not to be
supposed, without proving it by plain evidence from those Books which are
agreed on both sides to contain the Will of God. Besides, that no man that is
acquainted with the proceedings of the Council of Trent, will see reason to be
over-confident of the sincerity of Councils so palpably influenced by the Court
of Rome as that was. But however is it not fit in these matters that particular
persons should rather yield to the guidance of others, than to the conduct of
their own reason? Which is N. O's. farther Argument in this matter, viz. That a
Fallibility being supposed, it is more fitting to follow prudent and
experienced, though fallible persons direction rather than our own. To this I
answer in these following particulars.

1. That God has entrusted every man with a faculty of discerning Truth and
Falsehood; 10.
supposing that there were no persons in the World to direct or guide him. Of
the Authority of the Guides of the Church
For without this there were no capacity in mankind to be instructed in matters
of Religion; and it were to no purpose, to offer any thing to men to be
believed, or to persuade them to embrace any Religion. To make this plain, I
will suppose a Person come to years of understanding, not yet professing any
particular Religion to whom the several Religions in the world are proposed by
men persuaded of the truth of them, viz. the Christian, the Jewish, and the
Mahumetan: He hears the several arguments brought for each of them, and has no
greater opinion of the teachers of one than of another, I desire to know
whether this person may not see so much of the truth and excellency of
Christian Religion, above the rest as to choose that and reject all the rest. I
hope no one will deny this; now if a man does here upon his own judgment and
reason choose the Christian Religion, so as firmly to believe it, then God has
given to men such a faculty of judging, that upon the proposal of truth and
falsehood, he may embrace the true Religion and reject the false, and such a
Faith is acceptable and pleasing to God; Otherwise no man could embrace
Christianity at first upon good grounds.

2. This faculty is not taken away, nor men forbidden the exercise of it in the
choice of their Religion by any principle of the Christian Religion; for our
Savior himself appealed to the Judgment of the persons he endeavored to
convince; John 5. 36, 9.
he made use of many arguments to persuade them, he directed them in the way of
finding out of truth, he reproved those who would not search into the things
delivered to them. All which were to no purpose at all, if men were not to
continue the exercise of their own Judgments about these matters. Accordingly
we find the Apostles appealing to the Judgments of private and fallible
persons concerning what they said to them, 1 Cor. 10. 15
although themselves were infallible, and had the greatest Authority over them;
we find them, not bidding the Guides of the Church p^ove all things and the
people held fast that which they delivered them; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
but Commanding them indifferently to prove all things and hold fast that which
is good, i. e. what upon examination they found to be so; we find those
commended, who searched the Scriptures daily whether the things proposed to
them were so or no. Acts: 7* 11.
So that we see the Christian Religion does not forbid men the exercise of that
faculty of judging, which God has given to mankind.

3. The exercise of this faculty was not to cease as^oon as men had embraced
the Christian Doctrine. For the precepts given by the Apostles do belong to
those who are already Christians, and that concerning the matters proposed by
their Guides; nay they are expressly commended to try and examine all pretenses
to Infallibility and Revelation upon this great reason because there should be
many false pretenders to them. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they be of God, 1 John 4. ^
for many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Gal. 1. 8.
They are commanded not to believe any other Gospel though Apostles or an Angel
from Heaven should preach it; and how should they know whether it were another
or the same if they were not to examine and compare them? Jude v. 4.
They are bid to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints;
it might be a new Faith for any thing they could know, if they were not
competent Judges of what was once delivered: Mat. 24. 4, 5. 23* 24.
They are frequently charged to beware of Seducers and false Guides, Acts. 20.
29* 30.
that should come in the name of Christ and his Apostles; they are told, 1 T^m.
4. 1
that there should come a falling away and departing from the Faith; 2 Thessalonians.
2. 3.
and that the time will come when men will not endure sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.
3, 4.
and shall turn away their ears from (...) truth and believe fables; 2 T^ess.
2. 9, ^0.
that such shall come with all deceivableness of unrighteousness; with powers
and signs and lying wonders. To what end or purpose are all these things said,
if men being once Christians are no longer to exercise their own Judgments,
but deliver them up into the hands of their Guides? What is this, but to put
them under a necessity of being deluded when their Guides please? and as our
Savior says, Matt. 15. 14.
When the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch.

4. The Authority of Guides in the Church is not absolute and unlimited but
confined within certain bounds. Which if they transgress they are no longer to
be followed. (...) 1. 8.
So St. Paul says, if we or an Angel from Heaven teach any other Gospel let
him be accursed, so that the Apostles themselves though giving the greatest
Evidence of Infallibility were no longer to be followed than they held to the
Gospel of Christ. And they desired no more of their greatest Disciples whom
they had Converted to the Christian Faith, ^ Cor. 11. 1.
than to be followers of them as they were of Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 14.
they told them they had no dominion over their faith, although they were far
more assisted with an infallible Spirit, than any other Guides of the Church
could pretend to be ever since. Therefore no present Guides, what ever names
they go by, ought to usurp such an Authority over the minds of men which the
Apostles themselves did not challenge; although there were greater reason for
men to yield up their minds wholly to their guidance. We are far from denying
all reasonable and just authority to be given to the Guides of the Church; but
we say that their Authority not being absolute is con^ined to some known rule;
And where there is a rule for them to proceed by, there is a rule for others to
Judge of their proceedings; and consequently men must exercise their Judgments
about the matters they determine whether they be agreeable to that r^le or not.

5. Where the Rule by which the Guides of the Church are to proceed has
determined nothing, there we say the Authority of the Guides is to be submitted
unto. For otherwise, there would be nothing le^t, wherein their Authority could
be shown, and others pay obedience to them, on the account of it. Therefore we
plead for the Churches Authority in all matters of mere order and decency, in
indifferent rites and ceremonies; and think it an unreasonable thing to (...)
the Govern^u^s of a Christian society the Privilege of Commanding in things
which God has not al^ ready determined by his own Law. We plead for the
respect and reverence which is due to the Lawful constituti^ns o^ the Church
whereof we are members; and (...) the just Authority of the Guides it, in the
exercise of that power which is committed to the Governors of it; as the
successors of the Apostles in their care of the Christian Church, although not
in their Infallibility.

6. We allow a very great Authority to the Guides of the Catholic Church in
the best times of Christianity; and look upon the concurrent sense of Antiquity
as an excellent means to understand the mind of Scripture in places otherwise
doubtful and obscure. We prosess a great Reverence to the Ancient Fathers of
the Church: but Especially when assembled in free and General Councils; We
reject the ancient heresies condemned in them; which we the rather believe to
be against the Scripture, because so ancient, so wise and so great persons did
deliver the contrary doctrine, not only to be the sense of the Church in their
own time but ever since the Apostles. Nay we reject nothing that can be proved
by an universal Tradition from the Apostolical times downwards; but we have so
great an opinion of the Wisdom and Piety of those excellent Guides of the
Church in the Primitive times, that we see no reason to have those things
forced upon us now, which we offer to prove to be contrary to their doctrine
and practice. So that the controversy between us is not about the Authority of
the Guides of the Church, but whether the Guides of the Apostolical and
Primitive times ought not to have greater Authority over us, than those of the
present Church in things wherein they contradict each other? This is the true
State of the Controversy between us; and all the clamours of rejecting the
Authority of Church Guides are vain and impertinent. But we profess to yield
greater reverence and submission of mind to Christ, and his Apostles, than to
any Guides of the Church ever since: we are sure they spoke by an Infallible
Spirit, and where they have determined matters of Faith or practice, we look
upon it as arrogance and presumption in any others to alter what they have
declared. And for the Ages since, we have a much g^eater esteem for those
nea^est the Apostolical times and so downwards, till Ignorance, Ambition, and
private Interests swayed too much among those who were called the Guides of the
Church. And that by the confession of those who were members of it at the same
time; which makes us not to wonder that such corruptions of doctrine and
practice should then come in: but we do justly wonder at the sincerity of those
who would not have them reformed and taken away.

7. In matters imposed upon us to believe or practice which are repugnant to
plain commands of Scripture, or the Evidence offense, or the grounds of
Christian Religion; we assert that no Authority of the present Guides of a
Church, is to overrule our faith or practice. For there are some things so
plain, that no Man will be guided by another opinion in them; If any
Philosopher did think his Authority ought to overrule an Ignorant Man's opinion,
in saying the snow which he saw to be white was not so; I would fain know
whether that Man did better to believe his eyes or the prudent, experienced
Philosopher? I am certain, if I destroy the Evidence of sense I must overthrow
the grounds of Christian Religion; and I am as certain if I believe that not to
be bread which my senses tell me is so, I must destroy the greatest Evidence of
sense; and which is fitter for me, to reject that Evidence which assures my
Christianity to me, or that Authority which by its impositions on my faith
overthrows the certainty of sense? We do not say that we are to reject any
doctrine delivered in Scripture which concerns a Being infinitely above our
understanding, because we cannot comprehend all things contained in it; but in
matters liable to sense and the proper objects of it, we must beg pardon if we
prefer the grounds of our common Christianity before a novel and monstrous
figment, hatched in the times of Ignorance and Barbarism, fostered by faction,
and imposed by Tyranny. We find no command so plain in Scripture that we must
believe the Guides of the Church in all they deliver, as there is that we must
not worship Images, that we must pray with understanding, that we must keep to
our Saviors Institution of the Lords supper; but if any Guides of a Church
pretend to an Authority to evacuate the force of these Laws, we do not so much
reject their Authority, as prefer Gods above them. Does that Man destroy the
authority of Parents, that refuses to obey them, when they Command him to
commit Treason? That is our case in this matter, supposing such Guides of a
Church which otherwise we are bound to obey, if they require things contrary to
a direct Command of God, must we prefer their Guidance before Gods? If they can
prove us mistaken we yield, but till then the Question is not, whether the
Guides of the Church must be submitted to rather than our own reason? but
whether Gods authority or theirs must be obeyed? And I would gladly know
whether there be not some Points of faith, and some parts of our duty, so
plain, that no Church Authority determining the contrary ought to be obeyed?

8. No absolute submission can be due to those Guides of a Church who have
opposed and contradicted each other, and condemned one another for error and
here^y. For then in case of absolute submission a Man must yield his assent to
contradictions; and for the same reason that he is to be a Catholic at one
time, he must be a heretic at another. I hope the Guides of the present Church
pretend to no more infallibility and Authority than their predecessors in the
same Capacity with themselves have had; and we say they have contradicted the
sense of those before them in the matters in dispute between us. Yet that is
not the thing I now insist upon; but that these Guides of the Church have
declared each other to be fallible by condemning their opinions and practices;
and by that means have made it necessary for men to believe those not to be
infallible, unless both parts of a contradiction may be infallibly true.
Suppose a Man living in the times of the prevalency of Arrianism, when almost
all the Guides of the Church declared in favor of it, when several great
Councils opposed and contradicted that of Nice, when Pope Liberius did
subscribe the Sirmian confession and Communicated with the Arrians, what advice
would N. O. give such a one if he must not exercise his own Judgment, and
compare both the doctrines by the rule of Scriptures? must he follow the
present Guides even the Pope himself? Then he must join with the the Arrians.
Must he adhere to the Nicene Council? but there were more numerous Councils
which condemned it. What remedy can be supposed in such a case, but that every
person must search and examine the several doctrines, according to his best
ability, and judge what is best for him to believe and practice? No answer can
be more absurd in this case than that which some give, that Liberius only erred
in his External profession of faith and not in the belief of it; for we are now
speaking of such as are to be Guides to others, and on whose direction they are
to rely, which must be something which may be known to them. Supposing then,
that Liberius when he subscribed and joined with the Arrians, was a Catholic
in his heart this takes as much off from the Authority of a Guide, as Error
would do. For who dare rely upon him who acts against his conscience and
believes one way and does another? Would any in the Church of Rome think it fit
to submit themselves to the direction of such persons, whom they were assured,
did not believe one word of what they professed; but joined in communion with
that Church only for some temporal ends? But in truth Liberius went so far,
that Hilary denounces an Anathema against him, and all that joined with him.
Neither was this the only case of this nature to be supposed; for the Councils
of Ephesus and Chalcedon proving ineffectual for the suppression of the
Nestorian and Eutychian heresies, and rather greater disturbances arising in
the Church after the later of these, because the writings of Theodorus of
Mopsuestia and Theodoret against Cyril, and of Ibas to Maris the P^rsian not
being therein condemned which were suppo^ed to favor the Nesto^ian heresy, the
Nestorians increasing their faction under the Authority of those writings, and
the Eutychians making that their plea for rejecting that Council because it
seemed to favor Nestorianism; the Emperor Justinian by the persuasion of
Theodorus of Caesarea resolves to have those three Chapters (as they were
called) condemned, hoping by this means to persuade the Eutychian faction to
accept the Council of Chalcedon and thereby to settle peace in the Church,
which was then miserably rent and divided. To this end by the consent of the
four Eastern Patriarchs, he publishes an Edict wherein he condemns the three
Chapters, and Anathematizes those who should defend them; to this Edict the
Guides of the Eastern Church subscribed; (...).
But Vigilius then Pope, (although Victor ^ununensis, a Writer of that Age
says, that he had given it under his hand to Theodora the Empress, that if he
might be made Pope he would condemn the three Chapters) yet now being by
violent hands thrust into the chair, he changes his mind, and declares against
the Edict; and threatens excommunication to those who approved it as being
contrary to the Catholic faith, established in the Council of Chalcedon; and
accordingly Stephanus his Legate withdrew from the communion of the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Upon this, the Emperor sends for Vigilius to Constantinople,
who being come thither excommunicates the Patriarch of Constantinople and all
who condemned the three Chapters, or joined with those who condemned them; and
the Patriarch of Constantinople again excommunicates him; but after 4. or 5.
months time, these excommunications were taken off: and Pope Vigilius after
that publishes a decree wherein the three Chapters were condemned by him, with
a Salvo to the authority of the Council of Chalcedon. Which made the Bishops of
Africa, Illyricum and Dalmatia to fall off from him, and Rusticus and
Seb^stianus t^o Deacons of his own Church; whom the Pope excommunicated for so
doing. Yet the Emperou^ himself was not satisfied with that Sa^vo, and the Pope
not yielding without it, a General Council was called at Constantin^p^e to put
an end to this Controversy; to which the Pope being solemnly invited refused to
come, the Council however proceeds in the examination of the three Chapters;
during their session, Vigilius publishes his Apostolical decree or
Constitution, to the whole Catholic Church, with the assistance of 16. Bishops
of Italy, Africa, and Illyricum, and three Roman Deacons; wherein the Pope
defends the three Chapters, and defines in the conclusion of it, That it should
be lawful for none to write or teach any thing about these matters, contrary to
his present Definition; or to move any farther question about them.
Notwithstanding which Definition of the Popes, the Council proceeds to the
condemning the three Chapters, and to the Anathematizing those who did not
condemn them. That this is the true matter of fact, I am content to appeal to
the Acts of the Council, the Edict of Justinian, the Popes own Decree, or the
Writers of that Age, or the most learned persons of the Roman Church, Ba^o^ A.
D. 546. 547 55^. Petav dogmat. Theolog. Tom. 4. l 1. c. 18
such as ^aronius, Petavius and Petrus de Marca, who have all given an account
of this Controversy. I now desire to know, what a person in that time should do
who was bound to yield an internal assent to the Guides of the Church? Petr. de
Marca, dis^rt. de Vigilii decr^to.
must he believe the Pope? He not only contradicts the Council but himself too;
for it now appears by a Greek Epistle first published by Petrus de Marca out of
the King of Frances Library that Vigilius being banished by Justinian did
afterward retract his own decree so solemnly made, and confirmed the Council.
Would not a man now be in a pretty condition that were bound to believe one in
all he said that so often contradicted himself? Must he believe the Council?
what then becomes of the Popes infallibility? when they were so far from
receiving the Popes definition (though done in such a manner, in which
Bellarmin says, Bell. de Romans Pon^it. l. 4. c. 3.
the Pope cannot err, viz. When he teaches the whole Church;) that they reject
his decree and determine the quite contrary. I know but one way of evading this,
(which is that commonly insisted on by those of the Roman Church,) viz. that
all this was not a Controversy about (...) but persons. So indeed some of the
(...) ours of Vigilius said, when they endeavo^red to extenuate the matter as
much as they could finding that the Bishops of Africa, and many in Italy broke
off from the Communion of the Roman Church on the account of this quarrel; But
I desire any one in this matter to look to their Judgment who were con^erned
in this quarrel; and if men are bo^nd to believe their Guides* they ought to
believe them when they tell them what is a matter of faith. And from the
beginning of this controversy it was accounted a matter of faith, not only by
the Emperor, but by the Pope, by the Council, and by the Bishops who opposed
the Council; and must we trust them in other things and not in this? Besides,
the very proceedings of the Council manifest it according to Be^larmins own
rules; for says he, B^lla^m. de Council. Auctor. 2. c. 12.
we then know a thing to be matter of faith, when the Council declares it to be
so, or them to be heretics who hold the contrary; or, which is the most
common, when they denounce Anat^ema, and exclude from the Church, those who
hold otherwise; all which agree to this, as will appear by the last collation
of that Council. And Pope Vigilius in the Greek Epistle now published in the
Tomes of the Councils, wherein he approves the 5th Council, not only condemns
the three Chapters as contrary to says, but Anathematizes all those who should
defend them and like an Infallible Judge very solemnly recants his former
Apostolical decree, though delivered by him upon great deliberation, an^ with
an intention to teach the whole Church. I wonder who there could be in that
Age; that believed the Pope to be an infallible Guide? not the Eastern Bishops;
who excommunicated him, and decreed directly contrary to him; not the Western,
for they likewise excommunicated him, and not only forsook his Communion, but
that of the Roman Church: but did he believe himself infallible, when he so
often changed his mind, and contradicted himself in Cathedra? If he did, he was
without doubt a brave man, and did as much as man can do.

This Controversy was scarce at an end, (for the Bishops of Istria continued in
their separation from the Roman Church for 70. years, which was till the time of
Honorius A. D. 626.) when another was started, which gives us yet a more ample
discovery of the more than fallibility of the Guides of the Church in that Age,
when a Pope was condemned for a Heretic by a General Council; in which case, I
would fain know whether of them was infallible? and to which of the Guides of
the Church a man owed his internal assent, and external obedience? This being
an Instance of so high a nature, that the truth of it being supposed, the
pretense of absolute Authority and Infallibility in the Guides of the Roman
Church must fall to the ground, no wonder, that all imaginable arts have been
used by those of the Church of Rome to take away the force of it; among whom
Pighius, Baronius, Bellarmin, Petavius, and Petrus de Marca have labored
hardest in acquitting Honorius, but have proceeded in different ways; and the
two last are content the Pope should be condemned for simplilicity and
negligence, the better to excuse him from heresy; but one would think these two
were as contrary to the office of a trusty Guide, as heresy to one that
pretends to be infallible. But the better to understand the force of this
Instance, I shall give a brief account of the matter of fact, as it is agreed
on all sides; and the representing the divisions among the Guides of the Church
at that time, will plainly show how unreasonable it had been, to have required
absolute submission to such who so vehemently contradicted each other.

We are therefore to understand, that the late Council at Constantinople being
found unsuccessful, for bringing the Eutychians and their offspring, to a
submission to the Council of Chalcedon, another expedient was found out for
that end, viz. that acknowledging two natures in Christ they should agree in
owning that there was but one will and operation in him after the Union of both
natures: because will and operation were supposed to flow from the Person and
not barely from the nature; and the asserting two wills would imply two
contrary principles in Christ which were not to be supposed. This Expedient was
first proposed to Heraclius the Emperor by Athanasius the Patriarch of the
Iacobites, or Paulus the S^verian and approved by Sergius Patriarch of
Constantinople, and by Cyrus of Alexandria, and Theodorus Bishop of Pharan near
Egypt. Cyrus proceeded so far in it as by that means to reconcile the
Theodosiani, a sort of Eutychians in Alexandria, to the Church, of which he
gives an account to Sergius of Constantinople and sends him the Anathema's
which he published, among which the 7th. was against those who asserted, more
than one operation in Christ. Sergius approves what Cyrus had done; but
Sophronius a learned Monk, coming to Alexandria vehemently opposed Cyrus in
this business; but Cyrus persisting he makes his address to Sergius at
Constantantinople, and tells him of the dangerous heresy that was broaching
under the pretense of Union; after some heats Sergius yielded, that nothing
should be farther said of either side. But Sophronius being made Bishop of
Jerusalem, he publishes an Encyclical Epistle wherein he asserts two operations
and Anathematizes those who held the contrary and were for the Union; and
writes to Honorius then Pope, giving him an account of this new heresy of the
Monothelites; the same year Sergius writes to him likewise of all transactions
that had hitherto been in this matter, and desires to know his judgment in
such an affair, wherein the Peace of the Church was so much concerned. Honorius
writes a very solemn letter to Sergius, wherein he condemns the contentious
humor of Sophronius, and makes as good a confession of his faith as he could,
in which he expressly asserts that there was but one Will in Christ and agrees
with Sergius that there should be no more disputing about one or two operations
in Christ. Accordingly Heraclius by the advice of Sergius publishes his
Ecthesis or declaration to the same purpose, which was approved by a Synod
under Sergius; but opposed by John 4. Bishop of Rome, yet still maintained at
Constinople not only by Sergius, but by Pyrrhus, and Paulus his successors,
who were both excommunicated by Theodorus succeeding John; after him Pope
Martin calls a Council, wherein he condemns all the Eastern Bishops who
favored this new heresy, and the two Edicts of silence published by Heraclius
and Constans: but was for his pains sent for to Constantinople and there dyed.
These contentions daily increasing, after the death of Constans, Constantinus
Pogonatus resolves to try all ways for the peace of the Church; and therefore
calls a General Council at Constantinople A. D. 680. Council. Constat. 3. Act.
13.
where the Heresy of the Monothelites was condemned; and the Writings of
Sergius, Cyrus, Theodorus and Honorius in this matter, as repugnant to the
doctrine of the Apostles, and decrees of Councils and the judgment of the
Fathers; and agreeable to the false doctrine of Heretics and destructive to
souls: and not content merely to condemn their doctrine, they further proceed
to Anathamatize, and expunge out of the Church the names of Sergius, Cyrus,
Pyrrhus, Petrus, Paulus, and Theodorus: and after these, Honorius, as agreeing
in all things with Sergius and confirming his wicked doctrines.

Here we are now come to the main point; we see a Pope delivering his judgment
in a matter of faith concerning the wh^le Church condemned for a Heretic by a
General Council for so doing: either he was rightly condemned or not; if
rightly, what becomes of the infallibility of the Pope when he pretends to
teach the whole Church in a matter of faith? If not rightly, what becomes of
the authority and sincerity of General Councils, if a Council so solemnly
proceeding should condemn one for Heresy, that not only did not err; but if
some may be believed, could not? Surely the Council never thought of that, when
they make no scruple of condemning him with the rest. What? were Pope Agatho's
Legates there present, and could not inform the Council of their presumption in
judging the Infallible See? But no such thing was heard of in those times;
these latter Ages have been only blessed with the knowledge of this unerring
privilege; and happy had it been if all the records of former times had been
burnt, that no Instances might have been brought to overthrow it. Yet wit and
industry have not been wanting to bring poor Honorius off, if it had been
possible: the sum of all may be reduced to these 3. Answers. 1. Either that the
Acts of the Council are falsified. Or. 2. That the Pope did not err in faith.
Or. 3. Supposing he did err, it was only as a private person and not as Head of
the Church.

1. That the Acts of the Council are falsified. This is a shrewed sign of a
desperate cause, when against the consent of all ancient Copies, both Greek and
Latin, and the Testimonies of several Popes and Councils afterward, learned
men are driven to so miserable a shift as this. The first I find, who made this
answer was Albertus Pighius, and after him Baronius and Bellarmin have embraced
it: but the more ingenuous men of their own Church have been ashamed of it.
Can. lo^. Theol. l. 6. c. 8.
Melchior Canus confesses that not only this General Council, but the seventh,
and eighth under Adrian, and that several other Popes have confessed the truth
of the thing; and therefore he does not see how Pighius can vindicate Honorius
in this matter. Francise. Toa^^ens. de 6. 7. 8. Synod. Flor. A. D. 1551.
Franciscus Torrensis (afterward better known by the name of Turrianus) a man
highly applauded by Baronius, Hosius, Lindanus, and others, writ a Book of the
6. 7. and 8. Synod, wherein he severely chastises Pighius for his ill usage of
this sixth Council, and says that in this matter he showed more prejudice than
judgment. For, whereas he suspects that the letter of Honorius to Sergius was
not sufficiently examined and compared with the Original, this betray's says
Turrianus, his great negligence in reading the Acts of the Council; for in the
latter end of the 12. Session, it is expressly said that the Authentic Latin
Epistle of Honorius was produced and compared by the Bishop of Porto; Besides
how comes, says he, the name of Honorius to be no less than 9. P. 11. 12.
times in the Council? and if all this had been by the Greeks corrupting the
Copies, surely they would never have left that passage remaining concerning the
corrupting the letters of Mennas and Vigilius: How comes Leo 2. in his Epistle
to the Emperor wherein he confirms the Council, P. 14.
to Anathematize Honorius by name as guilty of heresy; some indeed, says he,
may say this is counterfeit too, (so do Baronius and Binius) but they have
nothing but their bare conjecture for it, no argument, or authority to confirm
it. Not only the Greek Writers, but the Latin confess he was there condemned,
so does Bid, says he, so does the Pontifical Book in the life of Leo 2. and
in the Council under Martin at Rome the Epistle of Paulus to Theodorus was
read, wherein was mentioned the consent of Honorius and Sergius, and no one
there opposed it. Humbertus Legate of Leo 9. in his Book against the Greeks
reckons Honorius among the condemned Monothelites. P. 24.
How came all the Copies to be corrupted at once, as he farther urges, that
there are none left sound to correct others by? But that which he insists upon
as the strongest argument of all is, from Hadrian 2. who calling a Council at
Rome for the condemning of Photius, for Anathematizing him, has these
remarkable words; that no Bishop of Rome was Anathematized before unless it
were Honorius who after his death was condemned for heresy, (...). Allocutio 3.
Hadriani 2. ad Co^c. To. Tom 8.
in which case alone it is lawful for inferiors to resist the^r Superiors and
to reject their doctrine; although even there, Conc. Genesis ^d Lu^. Par. 1671. P.
1^ 91.
they would never have done it if the Bishop of the first See had not consented
to it. A very considerable Testimony; not only to prove that Honorius was
comdemned for heresy, but that a Pope may be guilty of it and be lawfully
proceeded against for it, and that Pope Agatho did himself consent to the
condemnation of Honorius. Notwithstanding these arguments of Torrensis,
Baronius seeing that no other defense could be made, persists in the same
accusation of Forgery: and out of his own head frames an improbable story of
the corrupting the Copies of the Council by Theodorus, who being, says he,
Baron. A. D. 681. n. 29.
Anathematized as a Monothelite, expunged his own name and put in that of
Honorius. A fiction so groundless and unreasonable, that nothing but mere
despair could drive a man of common understanding to it. For there is not the
least countenance for it in any Author; not the least color of probability in
the thing. For, that, all the Copies of the Council should be corrupted by one
man, and neither the Popes Legates present at the Council nor any else should
take notice of it; That, no succeeding Popes should discover it, when they were
concerned to vindicate Honorius, but did own the thing to be true; that
Theodorus then living should be condemned, before it was known whether he would
submit to the Council or not; that, in the seventh and eighth Councils this
should not be at all suspected, but the condemning Honorius expressly mentioned
in both; that, a man at that time deposed from his Patriarchat of
Constantinople should be able to make such a razure and forgery in the Copies
of the Councils; that the Emperor Constantine who took so much care about the
Council should suffer such a thing to be done, do all make this figment of
Baronius so remote from any likelihood, that Baronius had need to have prayed
as once a man upon the rack did, that he might tell probable lies. But all the
miscarriages of Baronius in this matter are so fully laid open by one of their
own Church, Francis. Combesis Historia h^res. Monotheli^^r. c. 2.
that I need not Insist any longer upon it; to whom no answer has been given
but that substantial one of an Index Expurgatorius. Alex 7. Index Expu^g^tor.
p. 277.
Bellarmin likes this way of answering the difficulty about Honorius; but the
greatest strength he adds to Baronius is only saying, Bellarm. de Romans
Pontifice l. 4. c. 11.
without doubt it is so: and he grants that the Seventh and Eighth Council did
believe that Pope Honorius was condemned, but he says they were deceived by
the false Acts of the Council. But however they must believe that the Pope
might fall into heresy and be condemned by a Council for it. Yet Bellarmim has
a fetch in this case beyond Baronius viz. That either the Acts of the Council
are falsified, or the Council was guilty of intolerable impudence and error in
condemning Honorius without reason; For all the evidence they produce against
him is from his Epistles in which, says he, nothing is contained, but what is
sound and orthodox; And this was the second way of defending Honorius viz. that
he did not err in faith at all; Petav dogmat. Theol. l. 1. c. 21. s. 11
and this way is taken by Petavius, and others; and was the way intended by
Petrus de Marca, as appears by the account given of his design by Baluzius;
Bal^zius de vi a Petri Marcae p. 28. 29.
which was first to prove by most evident arguments, that the Acts of the
Council were never corrupted by the Greeks, against the opinion before
mentioned, and next that he was truly condemned by the Council; but not for
heresy, but only for negligence and remissness. I think there needs nothing to
show the weakness of this, but barely reading the Anathema of the Council
against him, which is not, for bare negligence but for confirming the wicked
doctrines of Sergius. And I am apt to think, that learned person saw the
weakness of his design too much to go on with it: and Baronius and Bellarmin
saw well enough, that whosoever was there Anathematized it was upon the account
of heresy that he was so; and therefore Baronius would make men believe the
Anathema belonged to Theodorus and not to Honorius. Petavius thinks that
Honorius was deceived, Petav. ib. ^ect. 13.
but it was only by his simplicity and weakness, not understanding the
Controversy aright. So of old John 4. and Maximus in his dispute with Pyrrhus
defended Honorius, that he spoke indeed of one Will, but that, say they, was to
be understood only of one Will in his humane nature. Combesis. c. 2. sect. 3.
Which as Combesis says, is a more pious than solid defense of him; and would
as well serve, for Sergius and Cyrus, for Heraclius his Ecthesis and Constans
his Type, as Honorius his letter. For who ever will peruse them, will find they
all proceed on the same argument, that there could not be two wills in Christ
but one must be contrary to the other. But that which I insist on is this, that
it is certain the Council approved by the Pope did condemn him for heresy; I
desire therefore again to know whether he was rightly condemned or not; if he
was, then the Pope must be guilty, and so not infallible; if not, than the
Council must be, according to Bellarmin, guilty of intolerable impudence and
error; but in either case, there was no infallibility in the Guides of the
Church which could require our internal assent to what they declared. But
another defense is yet be^ind, which is, that though the Pope did err, yet it
was in his private Capacity, and not as Head of the Church. But when does he
act as Head of the Church if not, when he is consulted about important matters
of faith, as this was then supposed to be, by two Patriarchs; and when the
Church was divided about them; and there upon solemnly delivers his opinion?
This is then a mere subterfuge when men have nothing else to say; I conclude
therefore this Instance of Honorius with the ingenuous confession of Mr. White,
that things are so clear in the cause of Honorius, Tab^lae su^^rag. p. 130.
that it is unworthy any grave Divine to pawn his own honor and that of
Divinity too, in sowing together Figleaves to palliate it.

Thus far I have shown that those who pretend the most to be infallible Guides
of the Church have opposed and condemned each other; from whence it necessarily
follows that no absolute submission is due to them, unless we can be obliged to
believe contradictions. I might pursue this much further, and draw down the
History of these contradictions to each other, through the following Ages of
the Church; wherein Bishops have been against Bishops, Popes against Popes,
Councils against Councils, Church against Church; especially after the breach
between the Eastern and Greek Churches, the Greek and the Roman, and the Roman
and those of the Reformation; But a man who is bound to rely only on the
Authority of his Guides, must suppose them to be agreed; and in case of
difference among them, he must first choose his Religion and by that his Guide.

9. In the present divided State of the Christian Church, a man that would
satisfy his own mind, must make use of his judgment in the choice of his
Church, and those Guides he is to submit to. Unless a man will say, that every
one is bound to yield himself absolutely to the Guidance of that Church which
he lives in whether Eastern or Greek, Roman or Protestant: which I suppose N.
O. will never yield to, for a reason he knows because then no Revolter from us
could be justified. The true State then of the present case concerning the
Guides of the Catholic Church is this; that it has been now for many Ages
rent and torn into several distinct Communions; every one of which Communions,
has particular Guides over it, who pretend it to be the duty of men to live in
subjection to them, because every Church does suppose it self to be in the
right; now the Question proposed is, whether it be not fitter for me to submit
to the Guides of the Catholic Church, than to trust my own judgment? I should
make no scruple in all doubtful matters to resolve the affirmative, supposing
that all the Guides of the Catholic Church were Agreed; for I should think it
arrogance and presumption in me to set up my own private opinion in opposition
to the unanimous consent of all the Guides of the Catholic Church, in such a
case; but that is far from ours, for we find the Christian World divided into
very different Communions. The Eastern Churches are still as numerous, though
not so prosperous as the Roman; the extent of the Greek Church alone is very
great, but besides that, there are two other distinct Churches in those parts
who break off Communion with the Greek on the Account of the Councils of
Ephesus and Chalcedon; and the latter sort especially are very far spread in
those parts, from Armenia to the Abyssine Empire. Jacob. de Vitriaco hist.
Orient. Cap. 77.
In the time of Iacobus de Vitriaco, he says these two Churches were said to
be more numerous than the Greek and the Latin; and Bellonius in these later
times assures us, Bellonii Obser. l. 1. c. 35.
that the rites of the Greek Church do yet extend farther than the Latin. What
then makes these Churches to be left out in our Enquiries after the Guides of
the Catholic Church? Are these such inconsiderable parts of the Body, that no
regard is to be had to them? I believe upon a strict examination,
notwithstanding the reproach of heresy and Schism, which those of the Church of
Rome cast upon all but themselves, they will be sound much more sound parts of
the Catholic Church, than the Roman Church is Five great Bodies or Communions
of Christians are at this day in the World. 1. The most Eastern Christians,
commonly called Nestorians whether justly or no I shall not now examine, these
are spread over the most Eastern parts, and all live in subjection to the
Patriarch of Muzal. 2. The Iacobites, who are dispersed through Mesopotamia,
Armenia, Egypt and the Abyssine Empire, and live under several Patriarchs of
their own. 3. The Greek Church, of which, besides the Moscovites, are to be
reckoned the Melchites or Suriani, and the Georgians; for though their language
be different, they all agree in Doctrine. 4. The Roman Church, taking under it
all in the Eastern parts who have submitted to the Bishop of Rome. 5. The
Protestant Churches who have cast off subjection to the Pope, and Reformed the
corruptions they charge the Church of Rome with. Now of these 5. parts, 4. of
them are all agreed, that there is no necessity of living in subjection to the
Guides of the Roman Church; but they are all under their own proper Guides, Which
they do not Question will direct them in the right way to Heaven. Only those of
the Church of Rome take upon themselves against all sense and reason to be the
Catholic Church, and so exclude 4. parts of 5. out of a capacity of Salvation;
and challenge Infallibility as belonging to the Guides of it alone. In this
case, the Arrogance of the pretense, the uncharitableness of rejecting so
mighty a number of Christians from the possibility of Salvation, are sufficient
to make any Man not yield up his Faith at the first demand; but to consider a
while, whether there be no other Churches, or Guides in those Churches? when he
finds so many and those not inferior to the Roman Church in any thing save
only in pomp, pride, and uncharitableness; and all opposing those arrogant
pretenses of Authority and Infallibility in it, what reason can he have,
supposing that he is to submit to any Guides, that he must submit only to those
of the Roman Church? Why not as well to those of the Eastern, Greek, or
Protestant Churches? If any one goes about to assign a reason, by charging them
with heresy, or Schism, he unavoidably makes him Judge of some of the greatest
difficulties in Religion, before he can submit to his Infallible Guides. He
must know what Nestorianism, Eutychianism, Monothelism mean, how they came to
be heresies, whether the Churches accused be justly charged with them? He must
understand all the subtilties of Personalitie, subsistence, Hypostatical Union;
whether the Union of two natures in Christ be substantial, natural, or
accidental? whether it be enough to say that the Divine and humane are one by
inhabitation, or one by consent, or one by Communion of operation, or one by
Communion of dignity and honor, all which the Nestorians acknowledged, only
denying the union of two natures to make one Person? supposing a man be come to
this, he must then be satisfied that the present Eastern Christians do hold the
Doctrine of the old Nesiorians, for they acknowledge Christ to be perfect God
and perfect Man; and that the B. Virgin may be called the Mother of the Son of
God, or the Mother of the Word, but they stick only at calling her the Mother
of God. Then for the other Churches which are charged with E^tychianism, he
must understand, the exact difference between nature and Person, for if there
cannot be two natures without two Persons, then either the Nestorians were in
the right who asserted two Persons, or the Eytychians who denied two natures;
but this being granted, he must be satisfied, that, those called Iacobites are
Eutychians, although they disown Eutyches, and follow Dioscorus, asserting that
there were two natures before the Union, and but one after; and that Dioscorus
was rightly condemned in the Council of Chalce^on; but supposing they are
willing to leave the dispute of two natures, on condition, that the humane
nature be only made the Instrument of the Divine in its operations, whether
they are justly charged with heresy in so doing? All these things a Man must
fully be satisfied in, before he can pronounce those Churches guilty of heresy,
and so not to be follow. But supposing those Churches be rejected, why must
the Greek, which embraces all the Councils which determined those subtle
controversies? Here comes the mystery of the procession of the Holy Ghost to be
examined, whether from the Father alone or from the Father and the Son? but
supposing this to be yielded, why may he not join with those Churches, which
agree with the Church of Rome in all those points, as the Protestant Churches
do? Here a Man must examine the notes of the Church, and enquire whether they
be true notes, whether they agree only to the Roman Church? And one of the
greatest of those notes being consent with the Primitive Church, a Man that
would be well satisfied, must go through all the disputes between us and the
Church of Rome, and by that time he is well settled in them, he will see little
use, and less necessity of an Infallible Guide. So that a Man who would satisfy
himself in this divided State of the Christian Church, what particular
Communion he ought to embrace and what Guides he must follow, must do all that,
for the preventing of which an Infallible Guide is said to be necessary. i.e.
he must not only exercise his own judgment in particular controversies, but
must proceed according to it, and join with that Church which upon Enquiry he
judges to be the Best.

10. A prudent submission is due to the Guides of that Church, with which a
person lives in Communion. Having showed that absolute submission is not due,
all that can be left is a submission within due bounds, which is that I call a
prudent submission. And those bounds are these following.

1. Not to submit to all those who challenge the Authority of Guides over us,
though pretending to never so much Power and Infallibility. When N. O. would
persuade me to submit my understanding to the Infallible Guides of the Church;
He must think me a very easy man to yield, till I be satisfied first that God
has appointed such to be my Guides, and in the next place that he has
promised Infallibility to them. And that is the true State of the Controversy
between us and those of the Church of Rome in this matter; they tell us we are
bound to submit to the Guides of the Church; we desire to know whom they mean
by these Guides; and at last we understand them to be the Bishop of Rome and
his Clergy. Here we demur, and own no Authority the Bishop of Rome has over
us; we assert that we have all the Rights of a Patriachal Church within our
selves, that we owe no account to the Bishop of Rome of what we believe or
practice; it is no Article of our Creed that God has made him Judge either of
the quick or the dead; We have Guides of our Church among our selves, who have
as clear a succession and as good a title as the Bishops of any Church in the
world. To these, who are our Lawful Guides, we promise a due obedience, and are
blame worthy if we give it not; but for the Bishop and Clergy of Rome, we own
none to them, let them challenge it with never so much confidence, and arrogant
pretenses to Infallibility. So that here is a contest of Right in the case,
antecedent to any duty of submission, which must be better proved than ever it
has yet been, before we can allow any dispute, how far we are to submit to the
Guides of the Roman Church?

2. Not to submit to those who are Lawful Guides in all things they may
require. For our dispute is now about Guides supposed to be fallible, and they
being owned to be such may be supposed to require things to which we are bound
not to yield. But the great difficulty now is, so to state these things, as to
show that we had reason not to submit to the Guides of the Roman Church, and
that those of the Separation have no reason not to submit to the Guides of our
Church. For that is the obvious objection in this case, that the same pretense
which was used by our Church against the Church of Rome, will serve to justify
all the Separations that have been or can be made from our Church. So my
Adversary N. O. in his preface says, that by the principles we hold, we excuse
and justify all Sects which have or shall separate from our Church. In answer
to which calumny I shall not fix upon the persuasion of conscience, for that
may equally serve for all parties; but upon a great difference in the very
nature of the case, as will appear in these particulars.

1. We appeal to the Doctrine and practice of the truly Catholic Church in the
matters of difference between us and the Church of Rome: we are as ready as
they to stand to the unanimous consent of Fathers, and to Vincentius Lerinensis
his Rules, of Antiquity, universality and consent; we declare, let the things
in dispute be proved to have been the practice of the Christian Church in all
Ages, we are ready to submit to them: but those who separate from the Church of
England make this their Fundamental principle as to worship, (wherein the
difference lies,) that nothing is Lawful in the worship of God, but what he
has expressly commanded; we say all things are Lawful which are not forbidden,
and upon this single point stands the whole Controversy of separation as to the
Constitution of our Church. We challenge those that separate from us to produce
one person for 1500. years together, that held Forms of prayer to be unlawful;
or the ceremonies which are used in our Church: We defend the Government of the
Church by Bishops to be the most ancient and Apostolical Government, and that
no persons can have sufficient reason to cast that off, which has been so
universally received in all Ages since the Apostles times: if there have been
disputes among us about the nature of the difference between the two orders,
and the necessity of it in order to the Being of a Church, such there have been
in the Church of Rome too. Here then lies a very considerable difference, we
appeal and are ready to stand to the judgment of the Primitive Church for
interpreting the letter of Scripture in any difference between us and the
Church of Rome; but those who separate from our Church will allow nothing to be
lawful but what has an express command in Scripture.

2. The Guides of our Church never challenged any Infallibility to themselves;
which those of the Church of Rome do, and have done ever since the Controversy
began. Which challenge of Infallibility makes the Breach irreconcilable while
that pretense continues; for there can be no other way but absolute submission
where men still pretend to be infallible: It is to no purpose to propose terms
of Accommodation between those who contend for a Reformation, and such who
contend that they can never be deceived; on the one side, errors are supposed;
and on the other, that it is impossible there should by any. Until therefore
this pretense be quitted, to talk of Accommodation is folly, and to design it
madness. If the Church of Rome will allow nothing to be amiss, how can she
Reform any thing? and how can they allow any thing to be amiss, who believe
they can never be deceived? So that while this Arrogant pretense of
Infallibility in the Roman Church continues, it is impossible there should be
any Reconciliation: But there is no such thing in the least pretended by our
Church, Article 21.
that declares in her Articles, Articl. 3.
that General Councils may err, and sometimes have erred even in things
partaining to God; and that all the proof of things to be believed is to be
taken from Holy Scripture. So that as to the Ground of Faith there is no
difference between our Church and those who dissent from her; and none of them
charge our Church with any error in doctrine; nor plead that as the reason of
their separation.

3. The Church of Rome not only requires the belief of her errors but makes
the belief of them necessary to Salvation: which is plain by the often objected
Creed of Pius 4. Wherein the same necessity is expressed of believing the
additional Articles, which are proper to the Roman Church, as of the most
Fundamental Articles of Christian Faith. And no Man who reads that Bull can
discern the least difference therein made between the necessity of believing
one and the other; but that all together make up that Faith, without which no
man can be saved; which though only required of some persons to make profession
of, yet that profession is to be esteemed the Faith of their Church. But
nothing of this nature can be objected against our Church by dissenters, that
excludes none from a possibility of Salvation merely because not in her
Communion, as the Church of Rome expressly does: for it was not only Boniface 8.
who determined as solemnly as he could, Council. Lateran. A. D. 15 16. s^ct. 11.
that it was necessary to Salvation to be in subjection to the Bishop of Rome;
but the Council of Lateran under Leo 10. decreed the same thing.

4. The Guides of the Roman Church pretend to as immediate authority of
obliging the Consciences of men, as Christ or his Apostles had; but ours
challenge no more than teaching men to do what Christ had Commanded them, and
in other things, not commanded or forbidden, to give rules, which on the
account of the General Commands of Scripture, they look on the members of our
Church as obliged to observe. So that the Authority challenged in the Roman
Church encroaches on the Prerogative of Christ, being of the same nature with
his; but that which our Governors plead for, is only that which belongs to
them as Governors over a Christian Society. Hence in the Church of Rome it is
accounted as much a mortal sin to disobey their Guides in the most indifferent
things, as to disobey God in the plain Commands of Scripture: but that is not
all they challenge to themselves, but a power likewise to dispense with the
Law's of God, as in matter of marriages, and with the Institution of Christ as
in Communion in one kind; and promise the same spiritual effects to their own
Institutions as to those of Christ, as in the 5. Sacraments they have added to
the two of Christ, and to other ceremonies in use among them.

5. Setting aside these considerations, we dare appeal to the judgment of any
person of what persuasion soever, whether the reasons we plead for separation
from the Church of Rome be not in themselves far more considerable than those,
which are pleaded by such, who separate from our Church? i.e. Whether our
Churches imposing of three Ceremonies declared to be indifferent by those who
require them, can be thought by any men of common sense so great a burden to
their Consciences, as all the load of superstitious fopperies in the Roman
Church? whether praying by a prescribed form of words be as contrary to
Scripture, as praying in an unknown tongue? Whether there be no difference
between kneeling at the Sacrament upon Protestants Principles and the Papists
adoration of the H^st? Whether Transubstantiation, Image worship, Invocation of
Saints, Indulgences, Purgatory, the Popes supremacy, be not somewhat harder
things to swallow, than the Churches power to appoint matters of order and
decency? Which particulars make the difference so apparent between the
separation of our Church from the Church of Rome, and that of dissenters from
our Church; that it seems a very strange thing to me that this should be
objected by our Enemies on either side. And thus much may suffice to clear this
point of submission to the Guides of a Church, of which I have the more largely
discoursed, not for any difficulty objected by N. O. but because the thing it
self did deserve to be more amply considered. But some other things relating to
Church Authority I must handle afterward, and therefore now return to my
Adversary.

The next thing to be debated is,. 11. Of the s^nse of Scripture.
what assurance we can have of the sense of Scripture in doubtful places, if we
allow no Infallible Guides to interpret them? For that is the second main
principle of N. O. that without this Infallible Assistance of the Guides of the
Church, there can be no certainty of the sense of Scripture. And it is chiefly
o^ this Account that N. O. does assert the necessity of Infallible Guides of
the Church: For as appears by his concessions he yields that the Churches
Infallibility is not necessary to the foundation of faith; P. 37.
for men* faith, he says, may begin at the Infallible Authority of Scriptures;
but the main groun^ on which he contends for the necessity of Infallible Guides
is for the interpretation of controverted places and giving the true sense of
Scripture: P. 6. 14.
for which he often pleads f^^ necessity of an external Infallible Guide*
Because God has referred all in the dubio^ sense of Scripture to the direction
of his Ministers their spiritual Guides, P. 47.
whom he (...) over them to bring them in the Unity of the Faith to a perfect
man; Ephesians. 4. 11, 13, 14.
and that they may not be tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, by the sleight of those who lie in wait to deceive. And without
which Guide St. Peter observes, that in his time some persons (for any thing we
know diligent enough) yet through want of learning, and the instability of
adhering to their Guides, being unlearned, says he, and unstable, wrested some
places of Scripture, hard to be understood, to their own destruction. 2 Pet. 3.
16.
Therefore these Scriptures are also in some great and important points hard to
be understood. And afterward, he says, that Christians who have sufficient
certainty of the truth of Christianity, P. 67.
may be deficient in a right belief of several necessary Articles of this
Christian Faith, if destitute of that external infallible Guide therein:
without which he determines that men must fluctuate and totter, and vary one
from another, whilst the Scriptures are ambiguous in their sense and drawn with
much art to several Interests. The force of all which, comes to this, that we
can arrive at no certainty of the sense of Scripture in Controverted places,
without an external Infallible Guide: and therefore we are bound to submit to
him.

Here are two things to be discussed. 1. What necessity there is for the
Salvation of persons, to have an infallible interpretation of controverted
places of Scripture? 2. Whether the denying such an Infallible Interpreter
makes men incapable of attaining any certain sense of doubtful places? For if
either it be not necessary that men should have an infallible interpretation;
or men may attain at a certain sense without it, then there can be no color of
an argument drawn from hence to prove the necessity of an infallible Guide.

1. We are to enquire into the necessity o^ such an infallible interpretation
of doubtf^^ places of Scripture. There are but three grounds on which it can be
thought necessary either that no man should mistake in the sense of Scripture,
or that the Peace of the Church cannot be preserved, or that men's Souls cannot
be saved without it. If i^ were necessary on the first account, then every
particular person must be infallible; which being not pleaded for, we must
consider the other two grounds of it. But here we are (...) take notice, that
the matter of our prese^^ enquiry is concerning the clearness of Scripture in
order to the Salvation of particul^^ persons; of which the Proposition laid
dow^ by me expressly speaks. If therefore N. O. do any thing to overthrow this,
he mu^^ prove, not that there are doubtful and controverted places which no one
denies, but that the sense of Scripture is so doubtful and obscure in the
things which are necessary to men's Salvation, that persons without an
Infallible Guide cannot know the meaning of them. If he prove not this, he does
not come near that which he ought to prove. We do not therefore deny, that
there are places of great difficulty in the Books of Scripture; but we assert,
that the necessaries to Salvation do not lie therein; but those being plain and
clear, men may be saved without knowing the other. As a Seaman may safely
direct his compass by the Stars, although he cannot solve all the difficulties
of Astronomy. Can any man in his senses Imagine that Christ's coming into the
world to dye for sinners, and the precepts of a holy life which he has given,
and the motives thereto from his second coming to Judge the World, are not more
plain than the Apocalyphical visions, or the proofs for the Church of Romes
Infallibility? If a person then by reading and considering those things which
are plain, may do what Christ requires for his Salvation; what necessity has
such a one to trouble himself about an Infallible Guide? For either he may go
to heaven without him, or not? if he may, let them show the necessity he is of
to that end, which may be attained without him; if not, then the things
necessary to Salvation cannot be known without him. Let this be proved, and I
will immediately yield the whole cause: and till it be proved my Principles
remain unshaken. But says N. O. the Scripture is obscure in some great and
important points, because S. Peter says, that men unlearned and unstable,
(though it may be diligent enough) wrested some places of Scriptures hard to be
understood to their own destruction. But does S. Peter say that the Scriptures
are so hard to be understood that sober and devout minds cannot learn therein,
what is necessary to their Salvation? This had been indeed to their purpose:
but it is far enough from St. Peter's. He only says that in St. Paul's Epistles
there are some difficult passages, which men that wanted judgment and
constancy, and it may be diligence too, were ready to pervert to their own
mischief. But if there be such difficulties, is there nothing plain and easy?
if bad men may pervert them, may no^ good men make a good use of them? If some
may destroy themselves by their own weakness and folly, may not others be saved
by their diligence and care? If it were proved by N. O. that St. Peter charged
all this upon them for want of adhering to their Guides, that would approach
nearer his business; but if St. Peter had intended any such thing as N. O.
insinuates, what fairer opportunity had there been of preventing this
Instability in others by telling them, that God had appointed infallible Guides
in his Church to prevent such abuses of Scripture, and that, so long as they
adhered to them, they were safe; but there is not the least word in St. Peter
to this purpose, when it had been most necess^ry to have given such advice; but
he only bids them, 2 Pet 3. 17, 18.
have a care of imitating the inconstancy of such wicked men, and grow in the
grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ. If on so fair and just an occasion
offered, St. Peter himself whom they believe to have been Head of the Church at
that time, and at Rome at the writing of this Epistle, does wholly omit
referring men in the sense of obscure places to Infallible Guides; what can we
else infer but that St. Peter knew of no such appointment of Christ, or thought
no such thing of necessity for his Church. For if he had, such was his care and
faithfulness, he would never have omitted so necessary a thing; if the
Salvation of men's souls had depended upon it.

If it be not then necessary to men's Salvation to have an infallible
interpretation of doubtful places; 12. Of a Judge of Controver^^es.
for what other end can it become necessary? Is it, that without this, the
Churches peace cannot be preserved, because Controversies arising in the
Church, no issue can be put to them, unless there be an infallible Judge to
determine which is the true sense of Scripture? For it is impossible That
Scripture it self should be judge, because the Controversy is about the sense
of Scripture. So that either there is no way left to determine Controversies,
or there must be an infallible judge to deliver the sense of Scripture in
^oubtful places. This is the force of all that I know can be said in this
matter; to which I answer.

1. The strength of this argument depends upon the supposition of the necessity
of determining Controversies in Religion by a living Judge, who must pronounce
sentence between the parties in (...). Which supposition, how plausible soever
it seems, is not built on any sufficient fo^ndation of Scripture or Reason. For
the weakness of humane understanding, the power of Interest and passion, and
the ambi^^ity of words, are as apt to beget disputes in Religion as in any
other things; so that we have (...) ca^se at all to wonder that there should
happen to be Controversies among men about there (...); when we see them daily
happen about the Laws of every Country. The only Question now is, whether as
the necessities of people have made it necessary that there should not only be
Laws but Judges, who should be as the most equal Arbitrators to put an end to
such differences as may happen among men about matters of Right and Law, it be
thus in Religion too? And this Question is plainly about a matter of Fact i.e.
whether Christ has appointed such Judges in all Ages, who are to determine all
emergent Controversies about the difficult places of his Law? And in this case
we think it is all the reason in the World, that they who Affirm should Prove,
especially, when they Affirm a matter of their own Right, and challenge a
submission from others on the Account of it. We desire them who challenge to be
our infallible Guides, that they would show their Commission, and produce their
Patent: For as we are ready to yield obedience, if they crave it, so we think
it Treason and Tyranny in them to usurp it, if they have it not. And it is to
no purpose to talk of the Benefits that would come to the world by an
infallible Judge of Controversies, unless they first prove that there is one.
But we must not allow men to prove things to be, merely because they think it
fitting they should be; for that is to make themselves Wiser than Christ and
rather to tell him what he should have done, than prove what he has done. What
if* Christ having provided for the necessaries of Salvation by a clear
Revelation should leave other things in the dark, to exercise the Wits of some
and the Charity of others? What if, he thought it sufficient to oblige men to
the greatest honesty and Integrity in knowing and doing the Will of God, and
has promised to pass by the errors and failings men are subject to barely as
men? What if, he foresaw this matter of ending Controversies would be an
occasion of raising one of the greatest in the Christian World, and become a
pretense of the most intolerable Tyranny over the minds of men? And therefore
what if, he thought it reasonable to leave the failings of men's understandings
and lives upon the same terms, so as to give sufficient means to prevent
either, but not effectually to hinder men from falling into either of them?
What if, the nature of Religion will not bear such a determination of
Controversies as civil matters will? because, civil matters concern the right
and wrong of particular persons, in which it is not the sentence of the Judge
so much as the Civil force whereby it is backed which puts an end to the
dispute; but in matters of Religion, the ending Controversies can be no effect
of force and power, but of reason and conviction of Conscience; and all the
pretended infallibility in the World can never satisfy my mind, unless I be
first assured of that infallibility. In all civil causes, it is agreed on both
sides that such Judges are appointed to determine cases of Law; and on the
supposition of this men proceed to trial before them; but in our case this is
the main thing in dispute, and he that pretends to be the Judge is the most
accused party, and what reason can there be, that only on the pretense of
greater peace, if Controversies were referred to an infallible Judge, we must
therefore allow every one that pretends to it to be such an infallible Guide?
And we must on the same ground allow every one, if we must not first be
satisfied of the grounds on which it is challenged by any one. And withal,
since Christ is the best Judge of what is fittest for his Church, we must see
by his Laws whether he has made it necessary for all Controversies to be ended
by a standing Judge, that should arise about the sense of Scripture? If he has
not done it, it is to no pu^pose to say, it is fit he should have done it; for
that is to upbraid Christ with weakness and not to end differences in his
Church.

2. Supposing it necessary that Controversies should be ended, it may as well
be done without an infallible Judge of the sense of Scripture as with one; for
all that is pretended to be done by an infallible Judge is to give a certain
sense of controverted places; so that men are either bound to look on that
which they give as the certain sense on the account of the infallibility of the
Interpreter, or that such an infallible interpretation being set aside, there
is no way to know the certain sense of Scripture. If the first, then no man can
be more certain of the sense of any doubtful place, than he is of the
infallibility of his Interpreter: I desire therefore to be resolved in this
case. I am told I can arrive at no certainty of the sense of doubtful places of
Scripture without an infallible Interpreter, I say the places of Scripture
which are alleged for such an infallible Judge are the most doubtful and
controverted of any; I would fain understand by what means I may come to be
certain of the meaning of these places, and to find out the sense of them? Must
I do it only by an infallible Guide? but that is the thing I am now seeking
for, and I must not suppose that which I am to prove. If I may be certain
without supposing such an infallible Guide of the meaning of these very
doubtful and controverted places, than why may I not by the same way of
proceeding arrive at the certainty of any other less doubtful and obscure
places? unless there be some private way to come at the sense of those places
which will hold for none else besides them, which is not so easy to understand.

2. I come therefore to the second enquiry, which is about the means of
attaining the certain sense of Scripture in doubtful places, without the
supposition of an infallible Guide. It will not I hope be denied, that the
Primitive Christian Church had a certain way of understanding the sense of
doubtful places, as far as it was necessary to be understood, and that they
wanted no means which Christ had appointed for the ending of Controversies. But
I shall now show, that they proceeded by no other means than what we use, so
that, if they had any means to come to a certain sense of Scripture, we have
the same; and it would be a very hard case if by the use of the same means we
cannot attain the same end. I shall therefore give an account of the proceeding
of the Primitive Church in this weighty Controversy concerning the sense of
Scripture in doubtful places; and if no such thing was then heard off as an
infallible Judge, it is a plain demonstration, they thought there was none
appointed; because the disputes that happened then required as much the
Authority of such a Judge as any that are at this day in the Christian Church.

In the first Ages of Christianity, there were two sorts of Controversies which
disturbed the Church; 13. The way used in the Primitive Church f^r finding the
sense of Scripture
one was concerning the Authority of the Books of the new Testament, and the
other concerning the sense of them. For, there was no one Book of the New
Testament whose Authority was not called in Question, by some Heretics in
those first Ages. The Gnostics, (by whom I understand the followers of Simon
Magus Menander, Saturninus and Basilides), ha^ framed a new Religion of their
own under the name of Christian, and had no regard to the Writings either of
the old or new Testament, but had a Book of their own, which they called the
Gospel of Perfection. But as Epiphanius well observes, (...). ^6. sect. 2. 3.
no man that has understanding, needs Scripture to refute such a Religion as
theirs was; for right reason alone was sufficient to discover the folly and
filthyness of it. (...)
The followers of Cerinthus and Ebion acknowledged no other Gospel but that of
St. Matthew; (...)
and that not entire, but with diverse corruptions and interpolations according
to their several fancies. Cerdon and Marcion allowed no Gospel but that of St.
Luke, C. 29. L. 3. c. 11.
which they altered according to their pleasure, cutting off the Genealogy and
other places, and inserting many things as it served most to their purpose, as
may be seen at large in Epiphanius. Epipha^. hae^. 42.
Some say, the Valentinians received no other Gospel but that of St. John, (as
the Alogi in Epiphanius rejected that alone,) but I do not find that Valentinus
did reject any, but added more; Iren l. 3. c. 11.
for Irenaeus charge the Valentinians only with adding another Gospel, which
they called the Gospel of Truth; and Tertullian expressly says, that Valentinus
therein differed from Marcion, T^rtull. de praecip haeret. c. 38.
that Marcion cut off what he pleased with his sword, but Valentinus corrupted
it with his pen; for although he allowed all the Books of the New Testament,
yet he perverted the meaning of them. Eusebius tells us that the followers of
Severus rejected the Epistles of S. Paul and the Acts of the Apostles; Eus. b.
hist. Eccl^s l. 4. c. 29.
and interpreted the Law, and the Prophets and the Gospels after a peculiar
sense of their own. So that we see those who undertook to confute these
Heretics were not only to vindicate the true sense of Scripture, but to
dispute with such, who did not own the same Books which they did; and therefore
were forced to use such ways of arguing as were proper to them: as may be seen
at large by the proceedings of Irenaeus, and Tertullian against them. But
because the Valentinians and Marcionites did endeavor to suit their
extravagant fancies to the Scriptures allowed by them, it will be necessary for
us, to enquire by what means they went about to clear the true sense of
Scripture from their false Glosses and Interpretations. Irenaeus in the
beginning of his Book, relating at large the Doctrines of the Val^ntinians,
(...) l. 1. c. 1.
says, that by the perverse interpretations and corrupt expositions of the
Scripture, they drew away unstable minds from the true faith; for they
pretended to find out deeper and more mysterious things in the Scripture, than
others were acquainted with, viz. That Christ intimated the 30. Aeons by not
appearing till the 30. year of his Age. That the parable of men called at the
first, the third, the sixth, the ninth, the eleventh hour referred to the same
thing, for those hours make up the number of 30. That St. Paul often mentions
these Aeons and the pro^uctions of them; that the duodecade of Aeons was
employed in our Saviors ^isputing with the Doctors at 12. years of Age, and in
the choice of the 12. Apostles: and the remaining 18. By his abiding 18. months
as they said with his Disciples after his resurrection: and where ever in
Scripture they met with words suitable to the description of their Aeons, they
pretended that they did refer to their notions, but were obscurely expressed on
purpose: for which end they made use of Parables, and the first of St. John and
many passages in St. Paul's Epistles. What course now does Irenaeus take to
clear the sense of Scripture in these controverted places? Does he till them
that God had appointed Infallible Guides in his Church, to whom appeal was to
be made in all such cases? Nothing like it, through his whole Book; but he
argues with very good reason that no such thing as they imagined could be
intended by the Scripture.

1. From the scope and design of the Scripture, which ought chiefly to be
regarded; whereas they only took some particular passages which served most to
their purpose, without looking to the series of the discourse wherein they
were. Therefore says he, they make only a rope of sand, when they apply the
Parables of our Savior, or the sayings of the Prophets or Apostles to their
opinions; Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
for they pass over the order and connection of the Scriptures; and as much as
in them lies loose the members of truth from each other; and then transform and
change them from one thing to another, thereby deceiving men. As if, says he,
a man should take an excellent Image of a Prince, done with a great deal of art
in precious stones; and remove those stones out of their proper places and turn
them into the shape of a Dog or a Fox, ill put together, and should then
affirm, that because the stones are the same, that this Image of a Dog or a
Fox, was the Image of the Prince made by such an excellent Artist: after the
very same way, says he, do they use the Scriptures. Or as he afterward
expresses it, they take several words and names here and there, and put them
together, much after the way of those who would apply the words of Homer to any
argument proposed to them; which some have done so artificially, that unskilful
men have been persuaded that Homer did mean that very thing when he wrote his
Poem. As one did the going of Hercules to Cerberus so exactly in the words of
Homer, (put together in the Greek fragments of Irenaeus,) that those who did
not consider upon what different occasions those words were used by him, some
being spoken of Ulysses, some of Priamus, some of Maenelaus, and Agamemnon, and
some of Hercules, might Imagine that the Poet intended to describe what the
other expressed by him. But he that will examine the several places will find
that the words indeed are Homers, but the sense his that so applied them. So it
is in this case, the words are the Scriptures, but applied quite in another
way, than they were intended; the stones are the same, but yet the Image of the
Fox is not to be taken for that of the Prince: and when he has taken the pains
to put every thing in its proper and due place, he will then easily find out
the deceit. And by the help of this rule Irenaeus vindicates the places of
Scripture, which the Valentinians made use of; and makes it evident that could
not be the sense of them which they put upon them. As he does particularly
prove that St. John by the beginning of his Gospel could not mean the first
Ogdoad of the Valentinians. To the very same purpose does Tertullian argue
against their way of interpreting Scripture; Tertull. de praescrip. haeret. c.
39.
That although it seems to have wit and easiness in it, yet it is no more than
is often practiced on Virgil and Homer as well as the Scriptures. For we have
seen Virgil, says he, with the same words turned quite to another sense; as
Hosidius Get a made the Tragoedy of Medea, Pet. Scrive i^ fragmata ^^
Tragicorum. p. 187.
out of Virgil (some fragments whereof are still extant) and one had explained
Cebes his Table in Virgils words; and many had applied the words of Homer in
their Cento's to different purposes, and not only some of late, Isidor: Or^gin.
l. r. c. 38.
but Isidore* says, that Prob^ and Pomponius before his time had mad^ Virgil
Evangelize. Therefore it is n^ wonder, says Tertullian, that the Scripture
should be so abused, it being much more fruitful, and applicable to several
purposes than other Writings are. Nay says he, I am not afraid to say, that
the Scriptures were so framed by the Will of God, that they might afford matter
for Heretics to work upon; since I read that there must be heresies, which
cannot be without the Scripture. And surely then, he did not Imagine that God
had appointed an infallible Judge on purpose to prevent the being of Heresies,
by giving an infallible sense of Scripture.

2. From the repugnancy of the sense they gave to other places of Scripture.
Irenaeus observes, Iren. l. 2. c. 46.
that the Heretics delighted most in dark places, and left the plain ones;
whereas we ought most to rely upon the plain places and by them interpret the
obscure. For such who loved God and the truth would study most those things
which God put under our command and knowledge: and those are things which are
plain before our eyes, and are open and without ambiguity laid down in
Scriptures; and to these Parables and dark places ought to be fitted, and by
this means they may be interpreted without danger, and of all alike and the
body of truth remains entire with a suitableness of all its parts. But without
this every man interprets as he pleases, and there will be no certain rule of
Truth; but every interpretation will be according to the opinion of the
Interpreter, and m^n will contradict each other as the Philosophers did. And by
this means men will be always seeking and never finding because they cast away
the means of finding. Seeing therefore, says he, that all the Scriptures both
Prophetical and Evangelical are plain and clear, and may be heard alike of all:
they must be very blind that will not see in so great light, but darken
themselves in Parables, wherein every one of them thinks he has found a God of
his own. And from hence he very much blames the Heretics, since they could not
so much as pretend that any thing was plainly said for them in Scripture, but
only intimated in dark sayings and parables, that they would leave that which
is certain and undoubted and true, for that which was uncertain and obscure.
Which, he says, is not to build the house upon the firm and strong ro^k; but
upon the uncertainty of the sand; on which it may be easily overturned. This
excellent rule for interpreting Scripture Irenaeus makes great use of in his
following discourse, and in the very next Chapter urges this as the Consequence
of it, that having truth for our Rule, and so plain Testimony of God, men ought
not to perplex themselves with doubtful Questions concerning God, but grow in
the love of him who has done and does so great things for us, and never fall
off from that knowledge which is most clearly revealed. And we ought to be
content with what is clearly made known in the Scriptures, because they are
perfect, as coming from the w^rd and Spirit of God. And we need (...) ^onder if
there be many things in Religion above our understandings, since there are so
in natural things which are daily seen by us: as in the nature of Birds, Water,
Air, Meteors, etc. of which we may talk much, but only God knows what the truth
is. Therefore why should we think much if it be so in Religion too? wherein are
some things we may understand and others we must leave to God, and if we do so
we shall keep our faith without danger. And all Scripture being agreeable to it
self, the dark places must be understood in a way most suitable to the sense of
the plain.

3. The sense they gave of Scripture was contrary to the Doctrine of faith
received by all true Christians from the beginning: which he calls the
unmovable rule of faith received in Baptism; Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
and* which the Church dispersed over the Earth did equally receive in all
places; C. 2.
with a wonderful consent. For although the places and languages be never so
distant or different from each other, C. 3.
yet the faith is the very same as there is one Sun which inlightens the whole
World; which faith none did enlarge or diminish. And after having shown the
great absurdities of the Doctrines of the Enemies of this faith, in his first
and second Books, in the beginning of the third he shows that the Apostles did
fully understand the mind of Christ, L. 3. c. 1.
that they preached the same Doctrine which the Church received, and which,
after their preaching it, was committed to writing by the Will of God in the
Scriptures, to be the pillar and ground of Faith. Which was the true reason why
the Heretics did go about to disparage the Scriptures because they were
condemned by them: C. 2.
therefore they would not allow them sufficient Authority, and charged them
with contradictions, and so great obscurity that the truth could not be found
in them without the help of Tradition, which they accounted the key to unlock
all the difficulties of Scripture. And was not to be sought for in Writings,
but was delivered down from hand to hand; for which cause St. Paul said we
speak wisdom among them that are perfect. Which wisdom they pretended to be
among themselves. On this account the matter of Tradition came first into
dispute in the Christian Church: And Irenaeus appeals to the most eminent
Churches and Especially that of Rome, C. 3.
because of the great resort of Christians thither, whether any such tradition
was ever received among them and all the Churches of Asia received the same
faith from the Apostles, and knew of no such Tradition as the Valentinians
pretended to. C. 4.
and there was no reason to think, that so many Churches, founded by the
Apostles or Christ, should be ignorant of such a tradition; and supposing no
Scriptures at all had been written by the Apostles, we must then have followed
the Tradition of the most ancient and Apostolical Churches, and even the most
Barbarous nations that had embraced Christianity without any Writings: yet
fully agreed with other Churches in the Doctrine of Faith, for that is it he
means by the rule of faith, viz. a summary comprehension of the Doctrine
received among Christians, such as the Creed is mentioned by Irenaeus; L. 1. 6.
2.
and afterward he speaks of the Rule of the Valentinians in opposition to that
of the sound Christians. L. 4. Praebat.
From hence Irenaeus proceeds to confute the Doctrine of the Valentinians by
Scripture and Reason in the third, L. 5. Praehat.
fourth and fifth Books: All which ways of finding out the sense of Scripture
in doubtful places, we allow of and approve; and are always ready to appeal to
them in any of the matters controverted between us and the Church of Rome. But
Irenaeus knew nothing of any Infallible Judge to determine the sense of
Scripture; for if he had, it would have been very strange he should have gone
so much the farthest way about, when he might so easily have told the
Valentinians that God had entrusted the Guides of his Church, especially at
Rome with the faculty of interpreting Scripture, and that all men were bound to
believe that to be the sense of it which they declared and no other. But men
must be pardoned if they do not write that which never entered into their Heads.
After Irenaeus, Tertullian sets himself the most to dispute against those who
opposed the Faith of the Church; and the method he takes in his Boo of
Praescription of Heretics is this.

1. That there must be a certain unalterable Rule of Faith. Tertull. de
praescript haeret. c. 8.
For he that believes, does not only suppose sufficient grounds for his faith,
but bounds that are set to it; and therefore there is no need of further search
since the Gospel is revealed. This he speaks to take away the pretense of the
Seekers of those days, C. 9.
who were always crying, seek and ye shall find: to which he replys, that we
are to consider not the bare words, but the reason of them; And in the first
place we are to suppose this, that there is one certain and fixed Doctrine
delivered by Christ which all nations are bound to believe, and therefore to
seek, that when they have found they may believe it. C. 10
Therefore all our enquiries are to be confined within that compass; what that
Doctrine was, which Christ delivered: for otherwise there will be no end of
seeking.

2. He shows what this Rule of Faith is, by repeating the Articles of the
Ancient Creed, which he says was universally, received among true Christians
and disputed by none but Heretics. C. 13.
Which Rule of Faith being embraced, then he says, a liberty is allowed for
other enquiries in doubtful or obscure matters. For faith lies in the Rule; C.
14
but other things were matters of skill and curiosity; and it is faith which
saves men, and not their skill in expounding Scriptures: and while men keep
themselves within that Rule, they are safe enough, for to know nothing beyond
it, is to know all.

3. But they pretend Scripture for what they deliver, and by that means
unsettle the minds of many. To this he answers several ways.

1. That such persons as those were, ought not to be admitted to a dispute
concerning the sense of Scripture; because they rather deserved to be censured
than disputed, for bringing such new heresies into the Church; C. 16.
but chiefly because it was to no purpose to dispute with them about the sense
of Scripture, who received what Scriptures they pleased themselves, and added
and took away as they thought fit. C. 17.
And what can the most skilful men in the Scripture, do with such men, who deny
or affirm what they please? therefore such kind of disputes tended to no good
at all, where either side charged the other with forging and perverting the
Scriptures, C. 18.
and so the Controversy with them, was not to be managed by the Scriptures, by
which either none, or an uncertain Victory was to be obtained.

2. In this dispute about the sense of Scripture, the true Ancient faith is
first to be enquired after, for among whom that was, there would appear to be
the true meaning of Scripture. C. 19.
And for finding out the true faith, we are to remember, that, Christ sent
abroad his Apostles to plant Churches in every City, from whence other Churches
did derive the faith, C. 20.
which are called Apostolical from their agreement in this common faith at
first delivered by the Apostles; that, the way to understand this Apostolical
faith is to have recourse to the Apostolical Churches; C. 21.
for it is unreasonable to suppose that the Apostles should not know the
Doctrine of Christ, 22.
C. 23.
C. 24.
C. 25.
C. 26.
C. 27.
(which he at large proves) or that they did not deliver to the Churches
planted by them the things which they knew; or that the Churches misunderstood
their Doctrine because all the Christian Churches were agreed in one Common
faith: C. 28.
and therefore there is all the reason to believe that so universal consent
must arise from some common cause, which can be supposed to be no other than
the common delivery of it by all the Apostles. But the Doctrines of the
Heretics were novel and upstart; C. 29.
and we must say all the former Christians were baptized into a false faith, as
not knowing the true God or the true Christ if Marcion and Valentinus did
deliver the true Doctrine, C. 30.
but that which is first is true and from God, that which comes after is
foraign and false. If Marcion and Valentinus, Nigidius or Hermogenes broach new
opinions and set up other expositions of Scripture than the Christian Church
has received from the Apostles times, that without any farther proof,discovers
their imposture.

3. Two senses directly contrary to each other cannot proceed from the same
Apostolical persons. This Tertullian likewise insists upon to show that
although they might pretend Antiquity, and that as far as the Apostolical
times, yet the contrariety of their Doctrine to that of the Apostles would
sufficiently manifest the falsehood of it. For says he, the Apostles would
never contradict each other or themselves; C. 32.
and if the Apostolical persons had contradicted them, they had not been joined
together in the Communion of the same faith; which all the Apostolical Churches
were. But the Doctrines broached by these men, were in their seeds condemned by
the Apostles themselves; C. 33.
so Marcion, Apelles, and Valentinus were confuted in the Sadducees, and first
corrupters of Christianity. But the true Christians could not be charged by
their Adversaries with holding any thing contrary to what the Church received
from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God. For the
succession of the Churches was so evident, C. 36.
and the Chairs of the Apostles so well known, C. 37.
that any one might satisfy his curiosity about their Doctrine, especially
since their authentic Epistles are still preserved therein. But where a
diversity of Doctrine was found from the Apostles, that was sufficient evidence
of a false sense that was put upon the Scriptures. Thus Tertullian lays down
the rules of finding out the sense of controverted places of Scripture, without
the least insinuation of any infallibility placed in the Guides of the Church
for determining the certain sense of them.

But lest by this way of Prescribing against Heretics, he should seem to
decline the merits of the cause out of distrust of being able to manage it
against them, he tells us therefore elsewhere he would set aside the ground of
prescription, or just exception against their pleading, (for so prescription
signifies in him) as against Marcion and Hermogenes and Praxeas and refute
their opinions upon other grounds. In his Books against Marcion, he first lays
down Marcions rule, as he calls it, i.e. the sum of his opinion, which was
making the Creator of the World, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ two
distinct Gods, the one nothing but goodness, and the other, the Author of evil:
which opinion he overthrows from principles of reason, T^rtull. c. Mar. l. 1.
c. 2.
because there cannot be two infinitely great, and on the same grounds he makes
two he may make many more, C. 4. 5, 6.
and because God must be known by his works, C. 11. 12.
and he could not be God that did not create the World; and so continues
arguing against Marcion to the end of the first Book. In the second he
vindicates God the Creator from all the objections which Marcion had mustered
against his goodness. In the third he proves that Christ was the Son of God the
Creator; L. 3. c. 5.
first by reason and then by Scripture, and lays down two rules for
understanding the Prophetical predictions relating to the manner of expressing
future things as past, and the aenigmatical way of representing plain things:
afterward he proves in the same manner from Scripture and Reason, C. 8. 9.
that Christ did truly assume our nature and not merely in appearance; which he
demonstrates from the death and resurrection of Christ and from the evidence of
sense; and makes that sufficient evidence of the truth of a body that it is the
object of three senses, of sight, and touch and hearing. Which is the same way
of arguing we make use of against Transubstantiation, and if Marcion had been
so subtle to have used the Evasions those do in the Roman Church, he might have
defended the putative body of Christ in the very same manner that they do the
being of accidents without a substance* In the fourth Book he asserts against
Marcion the Authority of the Gospel received in the Christian Church above that
which Marcion allowed, L. 4* c. 4
by the greater Antiquity and the universal reception of the true Gospels; C. 5.
and after refutes the supposition of a twofold Christ one for the Jews and
another for the Gentiles from the comparing of Scriptures together, C. 7 and^^
which he does with great diligence and answers all the arguments from thence
brought by Marcion, to prove that Christ was an enemy to the Law of Moses. In
his fifth and last Book he proves out of the Epistles of St. Paul, allowed by
Marcion, that he preached no other God than the Creator, and that Christ was
the Son of God the Creator; which he does from the scope and circumstances of
the places without apprehending the least necessity of calling in any
Infallible Guides to give the certain sense and meaning of them.

Against Hermogenes, Tertull. adversus Hermog. c. 19.
he disputes about the eternity of matter; the Controversy between them he
tells us was concerning the sense of some places of Scripture, which relate to
the Creation of things; Tertullian proves that all things were made of nothing,
because it is not mentioned out of what they were made; Hermogenes proves they
were made out of matter; because it is not said they were made of nothing. To
determine therefore the sense of these places Tertullian shows from reason the
repugnancy of the eternity of matter to the attributes of God: C. 20. 21.
he compares several places of Scripture together, C. 22.
he reasons from the manner of the expressions and the Idiom of Scripture. I
adore, says he, the fullness of the Scripture which shows me both the maker and
the thing made; but the Gospel likewise discovers by whom all things were made.
But the Scripture no where says that all things were made out of matter. Let
the shop of Hermogenes show where it is written; and if it be not written let
him fear the woe denounced to those who add or take from what is written. He
examins the several places in dispute, and by proving that sense which
Hermogenes put upon them to be repugnant to reason, (as he shows to the end of
that Book) he concludes his sense of Scripture to be false and erroneous.

Against Praxeas, he disputes whether God the Father took our nature upon him,
T^rtull. adversus Prax^am. c. 20.
and the arguments on both sides are drawn from the Scriptures; but Tertullian
well observes, that they insisted upon two or three places of Scripture, and
would make all the rest though far more, to yield to them. Whereas the fewer
places ought to be understood according to the sense of the greater number. But
this says he, is the property of all Heretics because they can find but few
places for them, they defend the smaller number against the greater: which is
against the nature of a rule, wherein the first and the most, ought to oversway
the latter and the fewer. And therefore he sets himself throughout that Book to
produce the far greater number of places of Scripture, which do assert the
distinction between the Father and the Son; and consequently that it could not
be the Father who suffered for us.

Hitherto we find nothing said of an infallible Guide to give the certain sense
of Scripture, when the fairest occasion was offered, by those who disputed the
most concerning the sense of Scripture in the Age wherein they lived viz. by
Irenaeus and Tertullian.

I now proceed to Clemens of Alexandria who in his learned Collections, Clem.
Ale^ and. Stro^. ^.
proposes that objection, against Christianity, that there were many Heresies
among Christians, and therefore men could believe nothing. To which he answers,
That there were Heresies among the Jews and Philosophers; and that objection
was not thought sufficient against Judaism or Philosophy, and therefore ought
not to be against Christianity. Besides the coming of Heresies was foretold,
and what ever is foretold must come to pass. The Physicians says he differ in
their opinions, yet men do not neglect to make use of them, when they are sick.
Heresies should only make men more careful what they choose. Men ought thereby
to endeavor the more to find out truth from falsehood; as if two sorts of fruit
be offered to a man real, and waxen; will a man abstain from both, because one
is Counterfeit, or rather find out the true from the apparent? When several
ways offer themselves for a man to go in, he ought not therefore to sit down
and not stir a step further; but he uses the best means to find out the true
way and then walks in it. So that they are justly condemned who do not discern
the true from the false; for they who will, says he, may find out the truth.
For either there is demonstration or not; all grant demonstration, or evidence,
who do not destroy our senses; If there be demonstration there must be search
and enquiry made; and by the Scriptures we may demonstratively learn how
Heresies fell of, and that the exactest knowledge was to be found in the truth
and the ancient Church. Now the true searchers will not leave till they find
Evidence from the Scriptures. To this end, he commends the exercise of men's
reason and understanding, impartiality or laying aside opinion, a right
disposition of Soul, for when men are given over to their lusts they endeavor
to wrest the Scriptures to them. But he establishes the Scripture as the only
principle of certainty to Christians, and more credible than any demonstration:
which who so have tasted are called faithful, but those who are versed in them
are the truly knowing men. The great objection now is, that Heretics make use
of Scripture too: I but they, says he, reject what they please, and do not
follow the Body and Contexture of Prophecy; but take ambiguous expressions and
apply them to their own opinions: and a few scattered phrases without regarding
the sense and importance of them. For in the Scriptures produced by them, you
may find them either making use of mere names, and changing the significations
of them; never attending to the scope and intention of them. But truth, says
he, does not lie in the change of the signification of words (for by that means
all Truth may be overthrown) but in considering what is proper and perfectly
agreeable to our Lord and Almighty God, and in confirming every thing which is
demonstrated by the Scripture out of the same Scriptures. Wherein Clemens
Alexandrinus lays down such rules as he thought necessary to find out the
certain sense of Scripture, viz. by considering the scope and coherence of the
words, the proper sense and importance of them, the comparing of Scripture with
Scripture, and the Doctrine drawn from it with the nature and properties of
God, all which are excellent Rules, without the least intimation of the
necessity of any Infallible Interpreter to give the certain sense of doubtful
places.

After this time a great dispute arose in the Church about the rebaptizing
Heretics, managed by the Eastern and African Bishops against Stephen Bishop of
Rome. Here the Question was about the sense of several places of Scripture, and
the practice of the Apostles; as appears by the Epistles of Cyprian and
Firmilian; Cyprian. Epist. 74.
both parties pleading Scripture and Tradition for themselves. Firmil. inter
e^pas Cyprian 75.
But no such thing as an infallibility in judgment was pleaded by the Pope,
nor any thing like it in the least acknowledged by his Adversaries, who charge
him, (without any respect to his Infallible guideship,) with pride, error,
rashness, impertinency, and contradicting himself. Baron. Annal. ad A. D. 258.
n. 36. n. 52.
Which makes Baronius very Tragically exclaim: and although he makes use of
this as a great argument of the prevalency of Tradition, because the opinion of
Stephen obtained in the Church; yet there is no Evidence at all that any
Churches did submit to the opinion of Stephen when he declared himself, Eusebius.
^. l. 7. c. 5.
but as appears by Dionystus of Alexandria's Epistles, the Controversy
continued after his time; and if we look into the judgment of the Church in
following Ages, we shall find that neither Stephens opinion, nor his
Adversaries were followed; (for Stephen was against rebaptizing any Heretics,
and the others were for rebaptizing all, because one Baptism was only in the
true Church:) For in the 19. Canon of the Council of Nice the Samosatenian
Baptism is pronounced null? and the persons who received it are to be new
Baptized; Council. Arelat. 1. c. 8.
and the first Council of Arles decrees, that in case of Heresy men are to
receive new Baptism but not otherwise: The second Council of Arles puts a
distinction between Heretics; (...) 2. c. 16. 17.
decreeing that the Photinians and Samosatenians should be Baptized again; but
not the Bonofiaci no^ the Arians, but they were to be received upon renouncing
their Heresy without Baptism. Which seems the harder to understand since the
Bonosiaci were no other than Photinians. The most probable way of solving it
is, that these two latter sorts did preserve the form of Baptism entire, but
the Photinians and Samosatenians altered it: which St. Augustine says, Aug. de
haer^s. cap. 44.
is a thing to be believed. So Gennadius reports it that those who were
Baptized without invocation of the B. Trinity, were to he Baptized upon their
reception into the Church (not rebaptized because the former was accounted
null) of these he reckons not only the Paulianists and Photinians, G^^ad. de
E^cl^s d^gmat. c. 52.
but the Bon^s^^ci too and many others. Ba^il Epist. Ca^. 1. ad ^^^^^loch.
But St. Basil determines the case of Baptism, not from the form but from the
faith which they professed; a Schismatical Baptism he faith, was allowed, but
not Heretical, by which he means such as denied the Trinity; and therein he
says, S. Cyprian and Firmilian were to blame, because they would allow no
Baptism among persons separated from the Communion of the Church. Council
La^di^ea. c. 7* 8.
The Council of Laodicea decreed that the Novatians, Photinians, and
Quarto-decimans were to be received without new Baptism, but not the
Montanists, or Cataphryges: but Binius says there was one Copy, wherein the
Photinians were left out; and then these Canons may agree with the rest; and
Baronius asserts that the greater number of M. S. Copies leave out Photinians,
And withal he proves, Baron. Annal. Tom. 4. in Append.
that the Church did never allow the Baptism of the Photinians, though it did
of the Arians; by which we see that the Church afterward did not follow that
which Stephen pretended to be an Apostolical tradition, viz. that no Heretics
should be rebaptized; and from hence we may conclude that the Pope was far from
being thought an infallible Guide or Interpreter of Scripture, either by that,
or succeeding Ages; when not only single persons that were eminent Guides of
the Church (such as the African and Eastern Bishops were,) opposed his
Doctrine, and slighted his excommunications, but several Councils called both
in the East and Africa, and the most eminent Councils of the Church afterward
(such as the first of Arles and Nice) decreed contrary to what he declared to
be an Apostolical Tradition.

In the same Age we meet with another great Controversy about the sense of
Scripture, for Paulus Samosatenus openly denied the Divinity of Christ and
asserted the Doctrine of it to be repugnant to Scripture, and the ancient
Apostolical tradition. For this Paulus revived the heresy of Artemon; (...).
65. (...) Eccles^. ^istor. l. 5. c. 28.
whose followers, as appears by the fragment of an ancient Writer against them
in Eusebius, (supposed to be Caius) pleaded that the Apostles were of their
mind, and that their Doctrine continued in the Church till the time of Victor,
and then it began to be corrupted. Which says that Writer would seem probable,
if the holy Scriptures did not first contradict them; and the Books of several
Christians before Victors time. So that we see the main of the Controversy did
depend upon the sense of Scripture which was pleaded on both sides. But what
course was taken in this important Controversy to find out the certain sense
of Scripture? Do they appeal to any infallible Guides? Nothing like it. But in
the Councils of Antioch, in the Writings of Dionysius of Alexandria and others
since, they who opposed the Samosatenian Doctrine endeavored with all their
strength to prove that to be the true sense of Scripture, which asserted the
Divinity of Christ. It is great pity the dispute of Malchion with Paulus is now
lost, which was extant in Eusebius his time; but in the Questions and Answers
between Paulus and Dionysius; (...) b. l. 7. c. 30.
(which Valesius without reason suspects since St. Hierome mentions his Epistle
against Paulus) the dispute was about the true sense of Scripture which both
pleaded for themselves. Paulus insists on those places, which speak of the
humane infirmities of Christ, which he says prove that he was mere Man and not
God; the other answers that these things were not inconsistent with the Being
of the Divine nature, since expressions implying humane passions are attributed
to God in Scripture: But he proves from multitude of Scriptures, and reasons
drawn from them that the divine nature is attributed to Christ, and therefore
the other places which seem repugnant to it, are to be interpreted in a sense
agreeable thereto. The same course is likewise taken by Epiphanius against this
heresy: Epipha^. haeres. 64. Sect. 5.
who says the Christians way of answering difficulties was not from their own
reasons, but from the scope and consequence of Scripture: Sect. 6.
and particularly adds that the Doctrine of the Trinity was carefully delivered
in the Scriptures, because God foresaw the many heresies which would arise
about it.

But never any Controve^sie about the sense of Scripture disturbed the Church
more, than that which the Arians raised; and if ever any had reason to think of
some certain and infallible way of finding out the sense of Scripture the
Catholic Christians of that Age had. I shall therefore give an account of what
way the best Writers of the Church in that time took to find out the sense of
Scripture in the Controverted places. Of all the Writers against them
Athanasius has justly the greatest esteem, and Petavius says that God
inspired him with greater skill in this Controversy, than any others before
him. The principle he goes upon in all his disputes against the Arians, is
this, that our true faith is built upon the Scriptures, so in several places of
his conference with the Arian and in the beginning of his Epistle to Iovianus
and elsewhere. Therefore in the entrance of his Disputations against the
Arians, he advises all that would secure themselves from the impostures of
Heretics, Athans. Co^t. (...) Orat. 1. p. 287.
to study the Scriptures; because those who are versed therein stand firm
against all their assaults; but they who look only at the words, without
understanding the meaning of them are easily seduced by them. And this Counsel
he gives, after the Council of Nice, had decreed the Arian Doctrine to be
Heresy; and although he says, other ways may be used to confute it, yet
because the Holy Scripture is more sufficient than all of them, therefore those
who would be better instructed in these things, I would advise them to be
conversant in the divine Oracles. But did not the Arians plead Scripture as
well as they? how then could the Scripture end this Controversy, which did
arise about the sense of Scripture? This objection, which is now made so much
of against the Scriptures, was never so much as thought of in those days; or if
it were, was not thought worth answering; for they di^ not in the least desert
the proofs of Scripture, because their Adversaries made use of it too. But they
endeavou^ed to show that their Adversaries Doctrine had no solid Foundation in
Scripture, but theirs had i.e. that the Arians perverted it, because they did
not examine and compare places as they ought to do, but run away with a few
words without considering the scope and design of them; or comparing them with
places plainer than those were which they brought. Thus when the Arians
objected that place My Father is greater than I, Athanasius bids them compare
that with other places, such as My Father and I are one, Atha. Co^^. A^a^.
(...). p. 116. etc.
and who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equ^^ with God;
and by him all things were made etc. When Arius objected, to us there is but
one God of whom are all things, he tel^s him, he ought to consider the
following words, and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things; from whence
when Arius argued that Christ was only Gods instrument in creating things,
Athanasius then bids him compare this place with another, where it is said of
whom the whole body, Ephesians 4 16.
etc. Not barely (...) but (...). When the Arians objected, Christ's saying, all
things are delivered to me from my Father, Athanasius opposes that place of St.
John to it, By him all things were made; Thus when they objected several other
places, he constantly has recourse to John 1. 1, 2, 3. to Phil. 2. 7. 1 John
5. 20. and others which he thought the plainest places for Christ's eternal
Divinity; and by these he proves that the other were to be interpreted, with a
respect to his humane nature, and the State he was in upon Earth. So that the
greatest Defender of the Doctrine of the Trinity against the Arians saw no
necessity at all of calling in the Assistance of any infal^ible Guides, to give
the certain sense of Scripture in these doubtful places; but he thought the
Scripture plain enough to all those who would impartially examine it; and for
others who wilfully shut their eyes, no light could be great enough for them.
Indeed, when the Arians called in the help of any of the Ancient Writers to
justify their Doctrine, (...) c. (...). p. 549.
then Athanasius thought himself concerne^ to vind^cate them; as particularly
Dionysius of Alexandria. But, as he says, if they can produce Scripture or
Reason for what they say let them do it, but if not, let them hold their peace:
Thereby implying that these were the only considerable things to be regarded:
yet he shows at large that they abused the Testimony of Dionysius, who although
in his letters against Sabellius he spoke too much the other way, yet in other
of his writings he sufficiently cleared himself from being a savou^er of the
Arian Heresy. And although Athanasius does else where say, that the Faith
which the Catholic Church then held was the faith of their Forefathers, Ath^^
O^at. 1. C. Arian. ad Ad ^ph. C. Paul. Samosat. cp. ad S^rapi.
and descended from the Apostles; yet, he no where says, that without the help
of that Tradition it had been impossible to have known the certain sense of
Scripture, much less without the infallible interpretation of the Guides of the
present Church.

S. Hilary in his disputes against the same Heretics, H^ar. de T^ait. l. 1.
professes in the beginning that his intention was to confound their rage and
ignorance out of writings of the Prophets and Apostles: and to that end desires
of his Readers that they would conceive of God not according to the Laws of
their own beings, but according to the greatness of what he had declared of
himself. For he is the best Reader of Scripture, who does not bring his sense
to the Scripture, but takes it from it, and does not resolve before hand to
find that there, which he concluded must be the sense before he reads. In
things therefore which concern God, we must allow him to know himself best, and
give due Reverence to his word. For he is the best witness to himself who
cannot be known but by himself. In which words he plainly asserts that the
Foundation of our Faith must be in the Scriptures, and that a free and
impartial mind is necessary to find out the true sense of Scripture. And after
he had said in the second Book, that Heresies arise from misunderstanding the
Scripture, and charged in his fourth Book the Arians particularly with it, he
proceeds to answer all the places produced by them out of the old and new
Testament, by comparing several places together, and the antecedents and
consequents, and by these means proving that they mistook the meaning of
Scripture. So in the beginning of his ninth Book rehearsing the Common places,
which were made use of by the Arians, he says, Hilar. l. 9.
they repeated the words alone, without enquiring into the meaning, or
Contexture of them; whereas the true sense of Scripture is to be taken from the
antecedents and consequents: their fundamental mistake being the applying those
things to his Divine nature, which were spoken of his humane: which he makes
good by a particular examination of the several places in Controversy.

The same course is taken by Epiphanius, Phaebadius and others of the ancient
Writers of the Church, who asserted the Eternal Divinity of Christ against the
Arians. Epiphanius therefore charges them which mangling and perverting the
sense of Scripture; (...) 69. ^ 50.
understanding figurative expressions liter^^ly, and those which are intended
in a plain sense figuratively.

So that it is observable in that great Controversy which disturbed the Church
so many years, which exercised the wits of all men in that time to find out a
way to put an end to it, after the Guides of the Church had in the Council of
Nice declared what was the Catholic faith: yet still the Controversy was
managed about the sense of Scripture, and no other ways made use of for finding
it, than such as we plead for at this day. It is a most incredible thing, that
in a time of so violent contention, so horrible confusion, so scandalous
divisions in the Christian Church, none of the Catholic Bishops should once
suggest this admirable Expedient of Infallibility. But this Palladium was not
then fallen down from heaven, or if it were, it was kept so secret, that not
one of the Writers of the Christian Church in that busy and disputing Age
discovered the least knowledge of it. Unless it be said that of all times it
was then least fit to talk of Infallibility in the Guides of the Church, when
they so frequently in Councils contr^dicted each other. The Synodical Book in
the new Tomes of the Councils, Council. Gen^ral. Tom. 2. p. 84.
reckons up 31. several Councils of Bishops in the time of the Arian
Controversy, whereof near 20. were for the Arians, and the rest against them.
If the sense of Scripture were in this time to be taken from the Guides of the
Church, what security could any man have against Arianism? since the Councils
which favored it, were more numerous than those which opposed and condemned
it. Yea so mean was the opinion which some of the greatest persons of the
Church at that time had of the Guides of the Church met together in Councils,
that St. Gregory Nazianzen declares he had not seen a good issue of any of
them; Greg. Nazia^ Ep. ^5.
but they rather increased mischief than removed any; because of the contention
and ambition which ruled in them, therefore he resolved to come no more at any
of them. What? had St. Gregory so mean an esteem of the Guides of the Christian
Church to think that, ambition and contention should sway them in their
Councils and not the spirit of God, which certainly rules not where the other
do? Yet this de declares to be his mind upon consideration and experience in
that time, and if he had lived to those blessed days of the Councils of latter
Ages, with what zeal and Rhetoric would he have set them forth? Never was any
answer more jejune to this Testimony than that of Bellarmin, Bellar. de Council.
Author. l. 2. c. 7.
viz. that forsooth there could be no lawful Councils called in his time; and
why so I pray? was there not a good Authority to call them? But if that had
been the reason, he did not so little understand the way of expressing himself,
to assign the cause of it to contention and ambition, if he mean quite another
thing which he does not in the least intimate. And what if he were afterward
present at the Council of Constantinople? does that show, that his mind was in
the least changed? but in this Epistle he declares, how little good was to be
exspected from a Council, and yet afterward by the Emperors command he might
be present at one. August. C. Maxim. l. 3. c. 14.
St. Augustine in dealing with Maximinus the Arian expressly sets aside all
Authority of the Guides of the Church, as to the sense of Scripture in the
places controverted between them; for he says, I will neither bring the
Authority of the Council of Nice, neither shall you that of Ariminum; but we
will proceed by Authorities of Scripture that are common to both of us, and by
the clearest Evidence of reason. It seems then St. Augustine was far from
thinking that there could be no certainty of the sense of Scripture if the
Authority of the Guides of the Church be set aside. But by what means does he
then think, that men may come to any certainty about the true meaning of
Scripture? of that he is best able to give us an account himself having written
purposely in this subject in his Books of Christian Doctrine the substance of
what he there says may be comprehended in these Rules.

1. That the main scope of the Scripture is to persuade men to the Love of God
and our Neighbor, Aug. de Doctri. Christian l. 1. c. 35, 36.
without which, he says, no man does truly understand it; but whosoever
interprets Scripture to the advancing of that, though he may be mistaken as to
the sense of the words, yet his error is not dangerous.

2. That in order to the right understanding of Scripture men must apply
themselves to it with minds duly prepared for it; L. 2. ^. 7.
by a fear of God, humility, prayer, sincerity, and purity of heart.

3. That all those things which are necessary to Salvation are plainly laid
down in Holy Scriptures; This is in terms asserted by him, L. 2. c 9.
as a fundamental principle, that in those things which are plainly set down in
Scripture, all things are to be found which contain our faith and rule of life.
i.e. All things which are necessary to the Love of God and our Neighbor, and
consequently to the making us happy. And these things men ought especially to
read the Scriptures for; and the more they find of them, the larger their
understanding of Scripture is.

4. That the obscure places of Scripture are to be understood by the plain. For
which end he requires frequent reading, and using ones self to the language of
Scriptures, Ib.
and drawing examples from plain places to illustrate difficult, and those
which are certain to clear the doubtful. L. 3. c. 26.
For, scarce any thing, says he, is drawn out of the most difficult places, L.
2. c. 6.
but what is very plainly set down elsewhere.

5. That in regard of the infinite variety of Latin Interpreters (which it
seems were in his time) in matters of doubt it was necessary to have recourse
to the Original Hebrew and Greek: L 2. c. 10.
the knowledge of which tongues might therefore be necessary to the knowledge
of Scripture, because several words are preserved untranslated; but those being
few the necessity is not so great on their account, as the diversity of
Interpreters; C. 11.
for although those who had translated the Hebrew into Greek might be reckoned
up, the Latin Interpreters could not. Which diversity of translations does
rather help than hinder the understanding of Scripture, if the Readers of it be
not negligent; for some doubtful places are cleared by the difference of
readings.

6. Where the ambiguity lies in proper words, the clearing of it depends on the
circumstances of the place; L. 3. c. 4.
in so much that he determines, that it is a very rare and difficult thing to
find such an ambiguity in the words of Scripture, which may not be cleared from
the intention of the Writer, or comparing places, or searching the Original
Language.

7. Men must carefully distinguish between proper and figurative expressions;
for to understand figurative expressions literally is to subject our
understanding to carnal conceptions of things; L. 3. c. 5.
and that is, says he, a miserable slavery of mind, to take signs for things;
such signs he tells us under the Gospel are the two Sacraments of Baptism and
the Lords supper. C. 9.
The great difficulty herein, lies in the finding out the difference between
proper and figurative expressions, for which he lays down this rule, if the
words of Scripture command what is good and forbid what is evil, c. 15, 16.
it is no figurative expression; but if it forbids what is good, or command any
thing that is evil, it must be figuratively understood. For which he instances
in those words of our Savior unless ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood of
the Son of man ye shall have no life in you. Which seeming to command something
evil, must be figuratively understood of Communicating in the Passion of
Christ, and calling to mind that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

8. There is no danger in different senses being given of the same place of
Scripture, if every one of those senses appear by other places to be agreeable
to Truth: L. 3. c. 26.
This being supposed that the person do sincerely enquire after the sense of
the Author; For, says he, that Divine Spirit might easily foresee how many
several senses those words are capable of, which being agreeable to other parts
of Scripture, though not the particular meaning of those words, the mistake
cannot be dangerous therein.

9. Where such a sense is given which cannot be proved by other certain
Testimonies of Scripture, it must be made manifest to be the sense by clear
Evidence of Reason. L. 3. c. 28.
But he rather approves the way of proving the sense of Scripture by other
places of Scripture, where the interpretation is doubtful. So that the way in
doubtful places which he prescribes is this, either to draw such a sense from
them as has no dispute concerning its being a true Proposition, or if it have,
that it be confirmed by other places of Scripture.

Besides these, he lays down the 7. rules of Ticonius the Donatist which are
not of that consequence to be here repeated; that which I take notice of is,
that St. Augustine thought the rules he gave sufficient for understanding the
meaning of Scripture in doubtful places; but he does not in the least mention
the Infallibility of the Guides of the Church as a necessary means for that
end. But he does assert in as plain terms, as I have done, that Scripture is
plain in all necessaries to Salvation to any sober enquirer, and what ever
consequences are charged upon me for making that a Fundamental principle, must
reflect as much upon St. Augustine as me; and I do not fear all the objections
can be made against a principle so evident to reason, and so agreeable not only
to St. Augustine, but the Doctrine of the Catholic Church both before and after
him.

The next after St. Augustine who has purposely writ of this argument about the
sense of Scripture is Vincentius Lerinensis: Vincent. Lerin. Commonitor. p. 4.
about 4. years after St. Augustins death and 3. after the Council of Ephesus,
who seems to attribute more to the Guides of the Church than St. Augustine does,
yet far enough short of Infallibility. He says, that every man ought to
strengthen his faith against Heresy by two things, first by the Authoriry of
the divine Law, and then by the Tradition of the Catholic Church: which
tradition he makes necessary, not by way of addition to the Scripture, for he
allows the perfection and sufficiency of that for all things; but only to
interpret Scripture by giving a certain sense of it, there being such different
opinions among men about it. For all the Heretics whom he there names had
different senses of Scripture, as Novatianus, Sabellius, Donatus, Arius,
Macedonius, Photinus, etc. But then he bounds this tradition within the compass
of the universal consent of Antiquity as well as the present Church; or as he
expresses it, within those things which were believed every where, always, and
by all persons. That we may therefore consider how far these rules of
Vincentius will serve for explaining the sense of Scripture, we are to take
notice of the restrictions he lays upon them

1. That they are to be taken together, and not one of them separate from the
rest. As for instance, that of Universality in any one Age of the Church, being
taken without the consent of Antiquity, is no sufficient rule, to interpret
Scripture by. For Vincentius does suppose that any one Age of the Church may be
so overrun with Heresy, that there is no way to confute it, but by recourse to
Antiquity. For in the case of the Arian heresy, he grants that almost the
whole Church was overspread with it, and there was then no way left but to
prefer the consent of Antiquity before a prevailing novelty. In some cases the
Universal consent of the present Church is to be relied upon against the
attempts of particular persons, as in that of the Donatists; but then we are to
consider, that Antiquity was still pleaded on the same side that Universality
was, and supposing that all the Ancient Church from the Apostles times had been
of the same mind with the Donatists, the greater number of the same Age
opposing them, would have been no more cogent against them, than it was
afterward for the Arians. It is unreasonable to believe that in a thing
universally believed by all Christians from the Apostles times the Christian
Church should be deceived; but it is quite another thing to say, that the
Church in any one or more Ages since the Apostles times may be deceived;
especially if the Church be confined to one certain Communion excluding all
others, and the persons in that Church have not liberty to deliver their
opinions, for then it is impossible to know what the Judgment of the whole
Church is. And so universality is not thought by Vincentius himself to be alone
sufficient to determine the sense of Scripture; supposing that universality to
be understood according to the honesty of the Primitive times for a free and
general consent of the Christians of that Age in which a man lives; but since
the great divisions of the Christian world, it is both a very hard matter to
know the consent of Christendom in most of the Controverted places of
Scripture, and withal the notion of Universality is debauched and corrupted,
and made only to signify the consent of one great Faction, which is called by
the name of the Catholic Church, but truly known by the name of Roman.

2. That great care and Judgment must be used in the applying those Rules; for

1. The consent of Antiquity is not equally evident in all matters in dispute,
and therefore cannot be of equal use.

1. There are some things wherein we may be certain of such a consent, and that
was in the Rule of Faith, as Vincentius and most of the ancient Writers call it
i.e. the summary comprehension of a Christians duty as to matters of faith,
which was not so often called the Symbol as the Rule of Faith, that I mean
which was delivered to persons, who were to be baptized and received into the
Church, this the ancient Church Universally agreed in as to the substance of
it. And as to this Vincentius tells us his Rule is especially to be understood.
Commonit. 1. c. 39. ^^
For says he, this consent of Antiquity is not to be sought for in all
questions that may arise about the sense of Scripture, but only or at least
chiefly in the Rule of Faith: or as he elsewhere explains himself, Commonit. 2.
c. (...).
alone or chiefly in those Questions which concern the Fundamentals of the
Catholic Doctrine: which were those contained in the Rule of Faith, delivered
to all that were to be baptized. Suppose men now should stretch this Rule
beyond the limits assigned it by Vincentius, what security can there be from
him that it shall be a certain rule, who confined it within such narrow bounds?
Not that I think, his Rules of no use at all now; no, I think them to be of
admirable use and great importance to Christianity, if truly understood and
applied. i.e. When any Persons take upon them to impose any thing upon others
as a necessary matter of faith to be believed by them, we can have no better
rules of Judgment in this case than those of Vincentius are, viz. Antiquity,
Universality and Consent; and whatsoever cannot be proved by these Rules ought
to be rejected by all Christians. To make this plain, the Ancient Creeds we
allow on both sides to have been universally received by the Catholic Church;
but now the Church of Rome adds new Articles to be believed, we desire to put
the whole matter upon this issue: Let the Popes Supremacy, the Roman Churches
Infallibility, the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. be proved
by as Universal Consent of Antiquity as the Articles of the Creed are, and then
let them charge us with Heresy if we reject them. But we say the measure of
Heresy in the Ancient Church was the rejecting the Rule of Faith universally
received among Christians, this Rule of Faith, we stand to, and say no other
can be made upon any pretense whatsoever, Vincent. Commonit. 1. a^. 26. ad 35.
as Vincentius at large proves; but what ever things are obtruded on the belief
of Christians, which want that Universal consent of Antiquity, which the Rule
of Faith had, we are bound by Vincentius, from plain Scripture, to shun them as
profane novelties and corruptions of the Christian Faith. These Rules
therefore are not barely allowed, but pleaded for by us, in the test of
Articles of Faith, as to which Vincentius tells us, if not the only, yet the
chief use of them is.

2. But suppose the Question be not, concerning the express Articles of this
Rule of Faith, but concerning the sense and meaning of them, how then are we to
find out the consent of Antiquity? For they might all agree in the words and
yet have a different notion of the things. Petav. Dogm. Theol Tom. 2. in
praefat.
As Petavius at large proves, that there was an ancient Tradition for the
substance of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and yet he confesses that most of the
Writers of the ancient Church did differ in their explication of it from that,
which was only allowed by the Council of Nice: L. 1. c. 8. sect. 2.
And he grants, that Arius did follow the opinion of many of the Ancients in
the main of his Doctrine, who were guilty of the same error that he was before
the matter was thoroughly discussed. Here now arises the greatest difficulty to
me in this point of Tradition; the usefulness of it, I am told, is for
explaining the sense of Scripture: but there begins a great Controversy in the
Church about the explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, I desire to know
whether Vincentius his Rules will help us here? Hier. A o^. 2. c. Russi^ 1.
It is pleaded by St. Hierome and others, that the Writers of the Church might
err in this matter, or speak unwarily in it before the matter came to be
thoroughly discussed; if so, how comes the Testimony of erroneous or unwary
Writers to be the certain means of giving the sense of Scripture? And in most
of the Controversies of the Church this way has been used to take off the
Testimony of persons, who writ before the Controversy began, and spoke
differently of the matter in debate. I do not deny the truth of the allegation
in behalf of those persons; but to my understanding it plainly shows the
incompetency of Tradition for giving a certain sense of Scripture, when that
Tradition is to be taken from the Writers of the foregoing Ages: and if this
had been the only way of confuting Arius, it is a great Question how he could
ever have been condemned, if Petavius or St. Hierome say true? But since a
General Council has determined the contrary to the opinion of these Writers
before, which Council has been received by the Universal Church, I will not
deny that they had better opportunities of knowing what the sense of the
Ancient Church was, when so many writings were extant which are now lost, than
we can have at this distance; and therefore we yield all submission to a
Council of that nature and proceeding in that manner which that of Nice did;
who did not merely determine that Controversy by the number of Writers on
their side before them, but by comparing the opinions afterward with the Rule
of Scriptures; and in this regard we acknowledge a great Reverence due to the
decrees of such General Councils as that was. Therefore next to the Rule of
Faith we allow a great veneration to the determinations of lawful General
Councils Universally received; which Vincentius himself pleads for: But
supposing no general Councils or such which are not allowed, or received for
such; we are yet to enquire into the ways of finding out Catholic tradition,
which may interpret Scripture. For this end he proposes another means which is,
The gathering together the opinions of those Fathers alone; C. 39.
who living holily, wisely and constantly in the faith and communion of the
Catholic Church have died in that faith, or else for it. But still with this
reserve, that what either all or many of them manifestly, frequently and
constantly, as it were by a Council of them, have confirmed by their receiving,
holding, and delivering of it, that ought to be held for undoubted, certain and
firm; but whatsoever any one though holy and learned, though a Bishop,
confessor or Martyr, has held against the opinion of others that ought not to
be looked on as the judgment of the Church, but as his own private opinion,
and therefore not to be followed. Which words I shall not examine with all the
severity that some have done, for then the proving these conditions to have
been observed by any one person would require more pains, and be less capable
of resolution than the matter it self is; but I say, that in most of the
Controversies this day in the Christian world, it may be much more satisfactory
to examine the merits of the cause than the integrity of the witnesses, these
conditions being supposed. And yet after all this, we must not misunderstand
him, as though this way would serve to confute all heresies; For he tells us
yet farther.

2. This course can only hold in some new and upstart heresies i.e. in case of
the pretense of some new revelation when men pretend to some special grace
without humane industry to discover some divine truth, not known before; C. 37.
but in case of ancient and inveterate heresies; C. 39.
he says we have no way to deal with them, but either only by Scripture, or
else by plain decrees of General Councils, for when heresies have been of long
continuance, then, says he, we may have ground to suspect they have not dealt
fairly with the Testimonies of ancient times. And thus we see what Vincentius
has offered toward the resolution of this great Question, how we may be sure
of the certain sense of Scripture in controverted places; wherein is nothing
contained but what we are willing to stand to; and very far from the least
supposition of any infallibility in the present Guides of the Church for that
end.

Thus far I have taken the pains to search into the opinion of the Primitive
Church in this important Controversy; which I might carry yet farther, if it
were at all needful. The substance of what is delivered by them is this, that
if any Controversy arise in the Church concerning the sense of Scripture, if
the Persons do not allow the Scripture, then we are to proceed by the best
means we can have without it, viz. The tradition of Apostolical Churches from
the beginning; if they do allow the Scripture then we are to examine and
compare places of Scripture with all the care and judgment that may be. If
after all this, the dispute still continues, then if it be against the ancient
Rule of Faith universally received, that is a sufficient prescription against
any opinion; if not against the Rule of Faith in express words, but about the
sense of it, then if ancient General Councils have determined it which had
greater opportunities of knowing the sense of the Apostolical Church than we,
it is reasonable we should yield to them; but if there have been none such,
then the unanimous consent of Fathers is to be taken, so it be in some late and
upstart heresies, which men pretend to have by Revelation or some special Grace
of God. Now either all these means were sufficient or not to find out the sense
of Scripture, if not, then the ancient Church was wholly defective and wanted
any certain way of finding out the sense of Scripture; if these were
sufficient, then there is no necessity of infallibility in the Guides of the
Church to give us a certain sense of Scripture: which was the thing to be
proved.

But N. O. toward the conclusion of his Book produces St. Augustine for the
Churches Infallibility,. 14. S. Augustins Testimo^^ examined p. 85.
in delivering the sense of Scripture in obscure places; which being contrary
to what I have already said concerning him, must be examined before I conclude
this discourse about the sense of Scripture.

The place is out of his Answer to Cresconius concerning the obscure point of
Rebaptization; in these words, since the holy Scripture cannot deceive, Aug. c.
Cresco^. l. 1. c. 33.
let whosoever is in fear of being deceived by the obscurity of this Question,
consult the same Church about it, which Church the holy Scripture does without
all ambiguity demonstrate. And before, the truth of the Holy Scriptures is held
by us in this matter, when we do that which has pleased the Universal Church,
which the Authority of the Scripture does commend, etc. All which is false and
said to no purpose says N. O. if the Scripture be not clear in this, that this
Church can determine nothing in such important contests contrary to the verity
of the Scriptures, and that we ought to give credit to what she decides; for
then it would not be true, what he says the truth of the same Scripture in this
matter is held by us: and he who is in fear of being deceived by the obscurity
of this Question, is no way relieved in following the sentence of the Churth.
To which I answer,

That St. Augustine does not suppose, that men cannot attain to any certainty of
the the sense of Scripture in this matter without the Churches Infallibility;
for, he says, in the Chapter preceding, that in this matter we follow the most
certain Authority of Canonical Scriptures; but he puts the case that no certain
example could be produced out of Scripture, then he says, they had the truth
of the Scriptures when they do that which pleased the Universal Church, etc.
For the explaining St. Augustins meaning, we are to consider, that there were
two Controversies then on foot in the Church with the Donatists, the one
concerning Rebaptization, the other concerning the Church the former he looks
upon as more intricate and obscure, by reason not only of the doubtfulness of
Scripture, but the Authority of about seventy Bishops of Africa, who had
determined for it, among whom St. Cyprian was chief, which we see in all his
disputes with the Donatisis on this subject he is very much perplexed with;
therefore St. Augustine finding that Controversy very troublesome, was willing
to bring it to that issue, that what the Catholic Church after so much
discussing the point had agreed upon should be received as the truth. By this
means the dispute would be brought to that other Question, which he thought
much more easy, viz. Which was the true Church, the Catholic or the
Donatists: but by no means does St. Augustine hereby intend to make the Churches
Authority to resolve all doubts concernig Scriptures; but he thought it much
easier to prove by Scripture which was the true Church, than whether
rebaptization were lawful or not. And accordingly his very next words are, but
if you doubt whether the Universal Church be that which the Scripture commends,
I will load you with many and most manifest Testimonies of Scripture to that
end. Which is the design of his Book of the Unity of the Church: wherein he
shows, Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 4. 5, 19.
That those Testimonies of Scripture which speak of the Universality of the
Church, are very plain and clear: and needed no interpretation at all, that in
this case we are not to regard what Donatus, C. 10.
or Parmenianus, or Pontius has said; for neither, says he, are we to yield
to Catholic Bishops themselves, if they be at any time so much deceived as to
hold what is contrary to Canonical Scriptures. By which it is evident that he
supposed no infallibility in the Guides of the Church. And in terms he asserts,
C. 16.
that the Church is to be proved by nothing but plain Scriptures, neither by
the Authority of Optatus, or St. Ambrose, or innumerable Bishops, nor Councils,
nor Miracles, nor visions and Revelations, (whatever N. O. thinks of them) now
St. Augustine supposing there was much less ambiguity in Scripture in the
Controversy of the Church than in that of Rebaptization, he endeavors to
bring them to a resolution in the other point for the clearing of this: and so
he only pursues the method laid down in the Books of Christian Doctrine, to
make use of plainer places of Scripture to give light to the darker. And when
they were convinced by Scripture that the Catholic Church was the true Church
of Christ, he does not question but they would follow that which was the
sentence of the Catholic Church. But here lies the main difficulty, on what
account the sentence of the Church was to be followed? In order to the
resolution of it, we must take notice of these things.

1. That all the proofs which St. Augustine brings for the Church do relate only
to the extent and Universality of it, and not to any Infallibility that is
promised to it; as will easily appear to any one that will read his discourses
on that subject against the Donatists.

2. That he asserts no infallibility in the highest Authority of the Church;
which in many places of his Books of Baptism against the Donatists he makes to
be a Plenary or General Council; Aug. de Baptis. c. Donat. l 2. c. 1. c. 9. l.
4. c. 6. l. 2. c. 4. l. 3. c. 10. l. 6. c. 2.
whose Authority, he says, was to be preferred before that of St. Cyprian, or
any particular Councils either in his time, or before it; which he calls the
Authority and decrees of the Universal Church. So that we see he resolves all
the Authority of the Church in this matter into that of a General Council:
(whether that of Arles, or Nice is not to my purpose to enquire) and we shall
then see what his opinion is of the Churches infallibility by that which he
delivers of General Councils; as well as any other Church Authority compared
with the Scriptures, in these remarkable words. Who knows not that the sacred
Canonical Scripture is contained within its certain bounds, De Bapt ^ Do^at. l.
2 c. 3:
and is so far to be preferred before all latter writings of Bishops that there
can be no doubt or dispute at all made, whether that be true or right which is
contained therein; but all latter writings of Bishops which have been or are
written, since the Canon of Scripture has been confirmed, may be corrected if
in any thing they err from the Truth, either by the wiser discourse of any more
skilful person, or the weightier Authority of other Bishops, or the prudence of
more learned men, or by Councils: And even Councils themselves that are
Provincial yield without dispute to those which are General, and called out of
all the Christian World; and of these General Councils the former are often
amended by the latter, when by some farther trial of things that which was shut
is laid open, and that which was hidden is made known without any swelling of
sacrilegious pride, or stifness of arrogance, or contentin of envy; but with
holy humility, Catholic peace and Christian Charity. Can any one that reads
this excellent Testimony of St. Augustine delivered in this same matter, ever
imagine he could so plainly contradict himself; as to assert the Churches
infallibility in one place and destroy it in another? Would he assert that all
Councils how General soever may be amended by following Councils, and yet bind
men to believe that the decrees of the former Councils do contain the
unalterable will of God? A lesser person than St. Augustine would never thus
directly contradict himself, and that about the very same Controversy, which
words of his cannot be understood of unlawful Councils, of matters of fact or
practice, but do refer to the great Question then in debate about rebaptizing
Heretics; and hereby he takes off the great Plea, the Donatists made from the
Authority of St. Cyprian and his Council, which they continually urged for
themselves.

3. He grants, that the arguments drawn from the Churches Authority are but
humane, and that satisfaction is to be taken from the Scriptures in this
Controversy. De Bapt. l. 3. c. 4.
For mentioning the obscurity of this Question, and the great debates that had
been about it before the Donatists time among great and good men, and diverse
resolutions of Councils and the settlement of it at last by a plenary Council
of the whole World; but lest, says he, I should seem to make use only of
humane arguments, I produce certain Testimonies out of the Gospel, by which,
God willing, I demonstrate how true and agreeable to his Will the Doctrine and
practice of the Catholic Church is. De Baptis. l. 2. c. 14.
And else where he appeals not to the Judgment of men, but to the Lords
balance, viz. To his Judgment delivered in Scripture, and in this same case
when he was urged by the Authority of Cyprian, C. C^e^cor. l. 2. c. 31. 32.
he says, There are no Writings they have not liberty to judge of, but those
of Scripture, and by them they are to Judge of all others, and what is
agreeable to them they receive, what is not they reject, though written by
persons of never so great Authority. And after all this is it possible to
believe that St. Augustine should make the Churches decree in a General Council
infallible? No: the utmost by a careful consideration of his mind in this
matter that I can find, is; that in a Question of so doubtful and obscure a
nature as that was, which had been so long bandied in the Churches of Africa,
and from thence spread over all the Churches of the Christian World, it was a
reasonable thing to presume that what the whole Christian World did consent in
was the truth, not upon the account of infallibility, but the reasonable
supposition that all the Churches of the Christian World, would not consent in
a thing repugnant to any Apostolical Doctrine or Tradition. And so St.
Augustins meaning is the same with Vincentius Lerinensis as to the Universal
attestation of the Christian Church in a matter of Tradition; being declared by
the decree of a General Council, and that decree Universally received but only
by the litigant parties in Africa. To which purpose it is observable that he so
often appeals to the Universal consent of Christians in this matter; after it
had been so thoroughly discussed and considered, by the most wise and
disinteressed persons, C. Cr^s^on. Io. de Bapt.
and that consent declared by a Plenary Council before himself was born. C.
Do^at.
So that if Authority were to be relied upon in this obscure Controversy, L.
1. c. 18.
he says, L. 2. c. 9.
the Authority of the Universal Church was to be preferred, L. 3. c. 10.
before that of several Councils in Africa, L. 4. c. 6, 7
of the Bishops and particularly St. Cyprian who met in them. L. 5. c. 4
And whereas St. Cyprian had slighted Tradition in this matter, L. 6. c. 2.
Christ having called himself Truth and not custom, L. 4. c. 7.
St. Augustine replys to him; That the custom of the Church having been always
so and continuing after such opposition and confirmed by a General Council, and
after examination of the reasons and Testimonies of Scripture on both sides, it
may be now said, that we follow what Truth has declared. Wherein we see with
what modesty and upon what grounds he declares his mind, which at last comes to
no more than Vincentius his Rules of Antiquity, Universality and Consent.
Especially in such a matter as this was, which had nothing but Tradition to be
pleaded for it, the Apostles, De Bapt. ^. Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
having determined nothing of either side, in their Books as St Augustine
himself at last confesses in this matter. The most then that can be made of the
Testimony alleged out of St. Augustine is this, that in a matter of so doubtful
and obscure a nature wherein the Apostles have determined nothing in their
Writings, we are to believe that to be the truth, which the Universal Church of
Christ agreed in those times, when the consent of the Universal Church was so
well known by frequent discussion of the case and coming at last to a
resolution in a General Council. In such a case as this, I agree to what St.
Augustine says, and think a man very much relieved by following so evident a
consent of the Universal Church: not by virtue of any infallibility, but the
unreasonableness of believing so many, so wise, so disinteressed persons should
be deceived. Let the same evidences be produced for the consent of the
Universal Church from the Apostolical times in the matters in dispute between
our Church and that of Rome, and the Controversy of Infallibility may be laid
aside; For such an universal consent of the Christian Church I look upon as the
most Authentic Interpreter of Holy Scripture in doubtful and obscure places.
But let them never think to fob us off, with the consent of the Roman Faction
for the Universal Church, nor of some latter ages, for a Tradition from
Apostolical times, nor of a packed Company of Bishops for a truly General
Council. And thus much may now serve to clear that important Controversy about
the sense of Scripture in doubtful places.

The last thing to be considered is, whether the same arguments which overthrow
infallibility,. 15. Of Church Authority.
do likewise destroy all Church Authority? For this is by N. O. frequently
objected against me; for, he says, thus it happens more than once in these
Principles laid down by me, that in 100 forward a zeal in demolishing the one,
viz. Church Infallibility, P. 50.
the other is also dangerously undermined, viz. Church Authority. And therefore
out of his singular regard to the good of our Church, he says, it concerns my
Superior to look to it, whether their Churches and their own Authority suffers
no detriment from my Principles, and, again, he says, my Principles against
Infallibility conclude, the uselessness of any Ecclesiastical Authority to
teach men, as of an Infallible to assure men of the truth of those things,
which by using only their own sincere endeavor they may know without them. P.
84.
And lastly, he says, my Principles afford no effectual way or means of
suppressing or convicting any Schism, P. 98.
Sect or Heresy, or reducing them either to submission of judgment or
silence. And therefore he desires the prudent to consider; whether the
Authority of the Church of England is not much debilitated and brought into
contempt, P. 99.
and daily like to wane more and more by this new taken up way of its Defense.
My Answer is, that I have carefully examined and searched my Principles and
find no such Gunpowder in them for blowing up Authority either of Church or
State. For all that I can discover, they are very innocent and harmless; and if
all other men's had been so, we had never heard so much talk of this way, of
undermining and blowing up. But is it not a pleasant thing to see, all of a
sudden, what zeal these men discover for the preservation of our Churches
Authority? Alas good men! It grieves them at the very heart, to see the
Authority of our Church weakened and that by its own members. What would not
they do for the strengthening and upholding of it? What pity it is, such a
Church should not stand, whose very enemies take such care for its
preservation; And are so ready to discover the pl^ts of its own children
against it? B^t to be ^ure, there is mischief intended when enemies discover
it; not by those whom they accuse, but by the honest Informers; who would be
content to hold their peace, if they thought they could not sow mischief by
pretending to discover it. It is a pretty plot to make those who design to
defend our Church to be the underminers of it, and the most professed Enemies
its surest Friends. But such plots are too fine to hold, and too thin not to be
seen through. How is it I beseech N. O. that my principles undermine all Church
Authority? Have I any where made the Church a mere shadow, and an insignificant
Cipher, a Society depending only on the pleasure of men for its subsistence and
Authority? This had been indeed to the purpose, but not the least word tending
that way can be drawn out of any Principles of mine. For I verily believe that
the Church is a Society instituted by Christ himself, and invested with
Authority necessary for its Government and preservation. But though I cannot
deny such an Authority I may render it wholly useless. I cannot conceive any
such malignant influence in any Principles of mine, but if there be, it must be
from one of these things. 1. Either because I deny Infallibility in the Guides
of the Church. Or 2. Because I say that the Scriptures are plain in things
necessary to salvation. Or 3. Because I deny the Authority of the Church of
Rome. Or 4. Because I am not for such an effectual way of suppressing Sects and
Heresies as is in use in the Roman Church. But I hope to make it appear that
none of these do in the least tend to weaken, or bring into contempt the Church
of Engl^nds authority, nor the just Authority of any Church in the World.

1. Not the denial of Infallibility. This N. O. seems to suppose to be the very
Faux in the Gunpowder Plot, the instrument of setting all on Fire. But is there
any thing peculiar to my Principles herein? Have not all who have written
against the Church of Rome opposed the pretense of Infallibility? how then come
my principles to be of so mischievous a nature above others? But I pray, Sir,
are Authority and Infallibility all one in your account? We suppose that
Magistrates and Parents, and Masters have all of them an unquestionable
Authority but I never heard yet of any man that said they wre infallible: or
that there was no ground to obey them, if they were not. Why may we not then
allow any Authority belonging to the Governors of the Church, and yet think it
possible for them to be deceived? Is this a sufficient reason for any man to
cast off his subjection to his Prince, because it is possible he may require
something unlawful? or to disobey his Parents, because they do not sit in an
infallible chair? or to slight his Master, because he is not Pope? These are
strange ways of arguing about matters of Religion, which are ridiculous in any
other case. If the possibility of being deceived destroys no other Authority in
the world, why should it do that of the Church? The Magistrate does not lose
his Authority though we say we are to obey God rather than men, and
consequently to examine whether the Laws of men are not repugnant to the Laws
of God, which implys that he may require what it is our duty not to do. The
Authority of Parents is not destroyed, because in some cases we are bound to
disobey them, when they command men to destroy or rise up in arms against their
Sovereign. How comes it then to pass, that all Church Authority is immediately
gone, if we do but suppose a possibility of error in those which have it? But
it may be said it is their office to be Guides, and if we do not follow them
absolutely, we renounce them from being our Guides. To which I answer, there
are two sorts of persons that stand in need of Guides, the blind and the
Ignorant; the blind must follow their Guides because of an incapacity of seeing
their way, the Ignorant for want of Instruction. Yet neither of these are bound
to believe their Guides Infallible, and to follow them at all adventures. For
even the blind by their own sad experience of frequent falling into ditches or
knocking their heads against Posts may have reason to question, if not the
skill, yet the sincerity of their Guides, and though they must have some, may
seek new ones. The ignorant follow their Guides only upon the opinion of their
skill and integrity; and when they see reason to Question these, they know of
no obligation to follow their conduct over rocks and precipices; if they are so
careless of their own welfare, others are not bound to follow them therein. But
we are not to presume persons so wholly Ignorant, but they have some general
Rules by which to Judge of the skill and fidelity of their Guides. If a Person
commits himself to the care of a Pilot to carry him to Constantinople because
of his ignorance of the Sea, should this man still rely upon his Authority, if
he carried him to find out the North West passage? No: though he may not know
the particular Coasts so well; yet he knows the East and West, the North and
South from each other. If a stranger should take a Guide to conduct him from
London to York, although he may not think fit to dispute with him at every
doubtful turning, yet is he bound to follow him when he travels all day with
the Sun in his face? for although he does not know the direct road, yet he
knows that he is to go Northward. The meaning of all this is, that the
supposition of Guides in Religion does depend upon some common principles of
Religion that are or may be known to all, and some precepts so plain that every
Christian without any help may know them to be his duty; within the compass of
these plain and known duties, lies the capacity of persons judging of their
Guides; if they carry them out of this beaten way, they have no reason to rely
upon them in other things: if they keep themselves carefully within those
bounds, and show great integrity therein, then in doubtful and obscure things
they may with more safety rely upon them. But if they tell them they must put
out their eyes to follow them the better, or if they kindly allow them to keep
their eyes in their heads, yet they must believe them against their eyesight,
if they persuade them to break plain Commands of God and to alter the
Institutions of Christ, what reason can there be that any should commit
themselves to the absolute Conduct of such unfaithful Guides? And this is not
to destroy all Authority of faithful Guides, for they may be of great use for
the direction of unskilful persons in matters that are doubtful and require
skill to resolve them, but it is only to suppose that their Authority is not
absolute nor their direction infallible. But if we take away this Infallible
direction from the Guides of the Church, what Authority is there left them? As
much as ever God gave them, and if they will not be contented with that, we
cannot help it; and that it may appear how vain and frivolous these exceptions
are, I shall now show what real Authority is still left in the Governors of
the Church, though Infallibility be taken away. And that lies in three things.

1. An Authority of inflicting censures upon offenders; which is commonly
called the Power of the keys, or of receiving into and excluding out of the
Communion of the Church. This the Church was invested with by Christ himself,
and is the necessary consequence of the being and institution of a Christian
Society, which cannot be preserved in its purity and peace without it. Which
Authority belongs to the Governors of the Church, and however the Church in
some respects be incorporated with the Commonwealth in a Christian State, yet
its Fundamental Rights remain distinct from it: of which this is one of the
chief to receive into and exclude out of the Church such persons which,
according to the Laws of a Christian Society, are fit to be taken in or shut
out.

2. An Authority of making Rules and Canons about matters of order and decency
in the Church. Not merely in the necessary circumstances of time and place, and
such things the contrary to which imply a natural indecency; but in continuing
and establishing those ancient rites of the Christian Church, which were
practiced in the early times of Christianity, and are in themselves of an
indifferent nature. Which Authority of the Church has been not only asserted
in the Articles of our Church, but strenuously defended against the trifling
objections of her Enemies, Art. 20.
from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason. And I freely grant, not only that such
an Authority is in it self reasonable and just; but that in such matters
required by a Lawful Authority (such as that of our Church is) there is an
advantage on the side of Authority, against a scrupulous Conscience, which
ought to overruled the practice of such who are the members of that Church.

3. An Authority of proposing matters of faith and directing men in Religion.
Which is the proper Authority of Teachers, and Guides, and Instructers of
others; which may be done several ways, as by particular instruction of
doubtful persons, who are bound to make use of the best helps they can, among
which that of their Guides is the most ready and useful, and who are obliged to
take care of their Souls, and therefore to give the most faithful advice and
Counsel to them. Besides this, there is a public way of instructing by
discourses grounded upon Scripture to particular congregations, assembled
together for the worship of God in places set apart for that end and therefore
called Churches. And those who are duly appointed for this work, and ordained
by those whose office is to ordain, viz. the Bishops, have an Authority to
declare what the mind and Will of God is, contained in Scripture in order to
the Salvation and edification of the Souls of men. But besides this, we may
consider the Bishops and representative Clergy of a Church as met together for
reforming any abuses crept into the practice of Religion or errors in
Doctrine; and in this case we assert that such a Synod or Convocation has the
power and Authority within it self (especially having all the ancient rights of
a Patriarchal Church) when a more general consent cannot be obtained to publish
and declare what those errors and abuses are, and to do as much as in them
lies to reform them, viz. by requiring a consent to such propositions as are
agreed upon for that end, of those who are to enjoy the public offices of
teaching and instructing others. Not to the end that all those propositions
should be believed as Articles of Faith; but because no Reformation can be
effected, if persons may be allowed to preach and officiate in the Church in a
way contrary to the design of such a Reformation.

And this is now that Authority we attribute to the Governors of our Church,
although we allow no Infallibility to them. And herein we proceed in a due mean
between the extremes of robbing the Church of all Authority of one side; and
advancing it to Infallibility on the other. But we cannot help the weakness of
those men's understanding, who cannot apprehend that any such thing as Authority
should be left in a Church, if we deny Infallibility. Other diseases may be
cured, but natural incapacity cannot.

2. Not, the making Scriptures plain to all sober enquirers in matters
necessary to Salvation. This is that principle which N. O. makes such horrible
out-crys about, as though it were the Foundation of all the heresies and Sects
in the World. This, he says, makes all Ecclesiastical Authority useless; for
what need is there of Bishops, Presbyters, or any Ecclesiastical Pastors among
Protestants, as to the office of teaching or expounding these writings, P. 15.
if these in all necessaries are clear to all persons, who desire to know the
meaning of them: But not content with this modest charge in comparison, in
another Treatise; he makes this the very height of Fanaticism, Fanaticism
Fanatically imputed to the Roman Church. p. 93.
in spite of Mother Iuliana and their Legendary Saints: because, forsooth,
this is to ground all our Religion upon our own fancies, enquiring into the
true sense of divine Revelation; and therefore, good man, seems troubled at it,
P. 96.
that he can by no means in the world absolve me from being not only a
Fanatic, but a Teacher of Fanaticism. In earnest, it was happily found out, to
return this heavy charge back upon my self with so much rage and violence; (for
although N. O. be a modest man, yet S. C. is a mere fury) for not merely
Fanaticism, P. 92.
pure putid Fanaticism follows from this principle, Fanaticism without vizard
or disguise, P. 89.
and all this demonstratively proved from this Principle, But all our Church is
immediately gone with it; Men may talk of dangerous plots for undermining and
blowing up of Towns and Forts and Parliaments, but what are all those to the
blowing up a whole Church at once? For since that Train of my Principles has
been laid, nothing like the old Church of Engl^nd has been seen. It is true,
there are the same Bishops, the same Authority, the same Liturgy and
Ceremonies, the same ^^^achers and Officers that were; but what are all these
to the Church of England? For from hence it follows (if we believe S. C.) that
the ^overnours of our Church have no Authority to teach truth, P. 99.
or to condemn er^^urs; and a^l the people are become Prophets, and all their
Articles, Constitutions and Ordinances have been composed and enjoined by an
usurped Authority. Very sad consequences truly! but like deep plots they lie
very far out of sight. For to my understanding, not one of these dismal things
follows any more from my Principles, than from proving that S. C. and N. O.
both stand for the same Person. Which will easily appear to any one ^^e that
will but consider. 1. The intention of those Principles. 2. The just
consequence of them.

1. The intention of those Principles; which was plainly to lay down the
Foundations of a Christians faith living in the Communion of our Church; (which
is expressed in as perspicuous terms before them as may be;) and to show that
the Roman Churches Infallibility is no necessary Foundation of Faith. Now, this
being the design of those Principles, to what purpose should I have gone about
therein, to have stated the nature and bounds of the Authority of particular
Churches. I no where in the least exclude the use of all means and due helps of
Guides and others for the understanding the sense of Scripture; and I no where
mention them; because my business was only about the Foundation of Faith, and
whether Infallibility was necessary for that or no? If I have proved it was
not, I have gained my design; for then those who deny the Church of Romes
Infallibility may never the less have a sure Foundation, or solid Principles to
build their Faith upon. Now to what purpose in an account of the Principles of
Faith should I mention those things, which we do not build our faith upon, I
mean the Authority of our Guides; for although we allow them all the usefulness
of helps; yet those are no more to be mentioned in the Principles of resolving
Faith, than Eulids Master was to be mentioned in his Demonstrations. For
although he might learn his skill from him; yet the force of his Demonstrations
did not depend upon his Authority. I hope it now appears, how far I am from
making Church Authority useless; but I still say our Faith is not to be
resolved into it, and therefore is not to be reckoned as a Principle or
Foundation of Faith. To that end it is sufficient to prove. that men in the due
use of means, whom I call sober enquirers, may without any Infallible Church,
believe the Scriptures, and understand what is necessary to their Salvation
herein: If this may be, then I say it follows (Princ. 15.) that there can be no
necessity supposed of any infallible Society of men, either to attest or
explain these Writings, among Christians. Not one word that takes away the use
of Authority in the Church, but only of Infallibility; but it may be said that
although it might not be my intention, yet it may be the just consequence of
the Principles themselves

2. Therefore I shall now prove that no consequence drawn from them can infer
this. For what if all those things which are necessary to Salvation are plain
in Scripture, to all that sincerely endeavor to understand them, does it hence
follow that there can be no just Authority in a Church, no use of Persons to
instruct others, must all the people become Prophets and no bounds be set to
the liberty of Prophesying? These are bad consequences; but the comfort is,
they are not true. If I should say that the necessary Rules for a man's health
are so plainly laid down by Hippocrates, that every one that will take the
pains may understand them; does this make the whole profession of Physic
useless, or license every man to practice Physic that will, or make it
needless to have any Professors in that faculty? When the Philosophers of old
did so frequently inculcate that the necessaries for life were few and easy;
did this make all Political Government useless, and give every man power to do
what he pleased? Men of any common understanding would distinguish between the
necessaries of life and civil Society; so would any one but S. C. or N. O. of
the necessaries to Salvation, and to the Government of the Church; For men must
be considered first as Christians, and then as Christians united together: as
in civil Societies they are to be considered first as men, and then as Cives;
to say, that a man has all that is necessary to preserve his life as a man,
does not overthrow the Constitution of a Society, although it implys that he
might live without it: so when men are considered barely as Christians no more
ought to be thought necessary for them as such, but what makes them capable of
Salvation; but if we consider them as joining together in a Christian Society,
then many other things are necessary for that end: For then there must be
Authority in some and subjection in others, there must be orders and
Constitutions, whereby all must be kept within their due bounds, and there must
be persons appointed to instruct the Ignorant, to satisfy the doubting, to
direct the unskilful, and to help the weak. It belongs to such a Society not
barely to provide for necessity but safety, and not merely the safety of
particular persons but of it self; which cannot be done without prudent orders,
fixing the bounds of men's employments, and not suffering every pretender to
visions and Revelations to set up for a new Sect, or which is all one a new
Order of Religious men. How comes it now to pass that by saying that men,
considered barely as Christians, may understand all that is necessary to their
Salvation, I do overthrow all Authority of a Church and make all men Prophets?
Do I in the least mention men's teaching others, or being able themselves to put
a difference, between what is so necessary and what not; or does S. C. suppose
that all that understand what is necessary to Salvation have no need to be
ruled and governed? If he thinks so, I assure him I am quite of another
opinion, and do make no question but that Government ought to be preserved in a
Church, though the necessaries to Salvation be known to all in it; and so I
suppose does any one else that in the least considers what he says. By this we
see, that S. C's. recrimination of Fanaticism on our Church, by virtue of this
principle is as feeble as the Defense he has made for his own, of which he may
hear in due time. But if there be any Fanaticism in this principle, we have the
concurrence of the greatest and wisest persons of the Christian Church in it:
Two of them especially have in terms said as much as I have done, St. Augustine
in his Books of Christian Doctrine already mentioned: and St. Chrysostom in as
plain words as may be. (...). Chrysostom. in 2. (...) These. Hom. 3.
All things are plain and right in the holy Scriptures; all necessary things
are manifest. Let S. C. now charge all the dreadful consequences of this
principle on St. Chrysostom, and tell him that he destroyed all
Church Authority, and laid the Foundation for the height of Fanaticism? Nay S.
Chrys^stome goes much higher than I do, for he says (...), etc. If I had made
the Guides of the Church so useless as St. Chrysostom seems to do in these
words what passionate and hideous out-crys would, S. C. have made? And by this
let the skill or ingenuity of S. C. be tried, who says, S. C. p. 117.
that I cannot find out one single short sentence in Antiquity to support the
main pillar of my Religion, which he supposes this principle to be; and for the
finding out the sense of Scripture without the help of Infallibility, I have
produced more out of Antiquity in this discourse, than either he or his whole
party will be able to Answer.

3. Not the denying the Authority of the Church of Rome. Which I must do till I
see some better proofs for it, than I have ever yet done. But how does this,
destroy all Authority in a Church? can there be none, but what is derived from
Rome? I do not think, I do in the least diminish the Kings Authority, by
denying that he derives it from the Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogol:
although they may challenge the Lordship of the whole Earth to themselves: and
may pretend very plausible reasons that it would be much more for the quiet and
convenience of mankind to be all under one universal Monarch, and that none
have so fair a pretense to it, as they that have challenged the Right of it to
themselves: and yet for all this, I do verily believe the King has an
unquestionable right to his Kingdom, and a just Authority over all his
subjects. The time was when the first of Genesis would serve to prove the Popes
title, and the Suns ruling by day was thought a clear argument for his
supremacy; but the world is now altered and all the wit and subtility that has
been since used has not been able to make good that cracked title of Universal
Pastorship, which the Bishops of Rome have taken to themselves. But although we
disown the Popes Authority as an unjust usurpation, we assert and plead for the
Authority of the Church and the Bishops who are placed therein, who derive
their power to Govern the Church from Christ and not from the Pope. And I dare
appeal to any Person, whether the asserting the Bishops deriving their
Authority from Christ or from the Pope, be the better way of defending their
Power? We are not now disputing what Authority were fit to be entrusted in the
Popes hands, supposing all other differences composed, and that things were in
the same State wherein they were in the times of the 4. General Councils; in
which case, it ought to be considered, how far it might be convenient to give
way to such an Authority so apt to grow extravagant, and which has been
stretched so very far beyond what the Canons allowed, that it has challenged
Infallibility to it self; but the thing at present under debate, is, whether
the disallowing the Papal Hierarchy does overthrow all Authority in the
Episcopal; which is in effect to ask, whether there be any other power besides
the Popes in the Church? for if there be any other, the denying the Popes
Authority over us cannot in the least diminish the just Authority of Bishops.

The only considerable Question in this case, is, whether the rejecting that
Hierarchy which was in being at the the time of the Reformation, does not make
way for the peoples rejecting the Authority of our Bishops, and consequently no
Authority in the Church can be maintained, unless we again yield to the Papal
Authority. This I suppose to be N. O. meaning, Praeface to Principles
considered.
when he tells us by Church Authority he means that Superior and more
comprehensive Body of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; which in any dissent and
division of the Clergy, according to the Church Canons ought to be obeyed. And
any particular Church divided from this more universal cannot with the least
pretense of reason challenge submission from her subjects, since she her self
(and particularly the Church of England) refused the same to all the Authority
extant in the world, when she separated her self. To this I answer,

That the Church of England in Reforming her self did not oppose any just
Authority then extant in the World. It is to no purpose to make such loud
clamours about our Churches refusing submission to all the Authority then
extant in the World, unless there be better Evidence produced for it, than we
have yet seen. For it is very well known that the dispute was then concerning
the Popes Supremacy over our Church, which we have all along asserted to have
been a notorious encroachment upon the liberties of our Church. And the Popes
usurpations were (...) injurious both to the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Government, that those who adhered to the Religion of the Roman Church yet
agreed to the rejecting that Authority which he challenged in England. Which is
sufficiently known to have been the beginning of the Breach, between the two
Churches. Afterward, when it was thus agreed that the Bishop of Rome had no
such Authority as he challenged, what should hinder our Church from proceeding
in the best way it could for the Reformation of it self? For the Popes
Supremacy being cast out as an usurpation, our Church was thereby declared to
be a Free Church, having the Power of Government within it self. And what
method of proceeding could be more reasonable in this case, than by the advice
of the Governors of the Church and by the concurrence of civil Authority to
publish such Rules and Articles, according to which Religion was to be
professed and the worship of God settled in England? And this is that which N.
O. calls refusing submission to all the Authority then extant in the world; was
all the Authority then extant, shut up in the Popes Breast? was there no due
power of Governing left, because his unjust power was cast off, and that first
by Bishops, who in other things adhered to the Roman Church? But they proceeded
farther and altered many things in Religion against the Consent of the more
Universal Church. It is plain since our Church was declared to be Free they had
a Liberty of enquiring and determining things fittest to be believed and
practiced; this then could not be her fault. But in those things they decreed,
they went contrary to the consent of the Universal Church: Here we are now come
to the merits of the cause; and we have from the beginning of the Reformation
defended, that we rejected nothing but innovations, and Reformed nothing but
Abuses. But the Church thought otherwise of them. What Church I pray? The
Primitive and Apostolical? that we have always appealed to and offered to be
tried by. The truly Catholic Church of all Ages? That we utterly deny to have
agreed in any one thing against the Church of England. But the plain English of
all is, the Church of Rome was against the Church of England; and no wonder,
for the Church of England was against the Church of Rome; but we know of no
Fault we are guilty of therein; nor any obligation of submission to the
Commands of that Church. And N. O. does not say, that we opposed the whole
Church, but the more Universal Church, i. e. I suppose the greater number of
Persons at that time. But does he undertake to make this good, that the greater
number of Christians, then in the world, did oppose the Church of England? How
does he know that the Eastern, Armenian, Abyssin and Greek Churches did agree
with the Church of Rome against us? No: that is not his meaning; but by the
more Universal Church, he fairly understands no more but the Church of Rome.
And that we did oppose the Doctrine and practices of the Church of Rome we deny
not; but we utterly deny that to be the Catholic Church; or that we opposed
any lawful Authority in denying submission to it. But according to the Canons
of the Church we are to obey, in any dissent or division of the Clergy, the
Superior and more comprehensive Body of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. What he
means by this, I do not well understand, either it must be the Authority of the
Pope and Councils of the Roman Church, or a General Council of all the
Catholic Church. For the first, we owe no obedience to them, for the second,
there was no such thing then in the world, and therefore could not be opposed.
And for the Canons of the Catholic Councils before the breaches of
Christendom, no Church has been more guilty of a violation of them, than the
Church of Rome, since the Rules of the Fathers have been turned into the
Royalties of S. Peter. We are no Enemies to the ancient Patriarchal Government
of the Christian Church, and are far more for preserving the Dignity of it,
than the Roman Church can be: For we should think it a happy State of the
Christian Church, if all the Patriarchs did enjoy their ancient power and
privileges, and all Christendom would consent to a truly Free and General
Council; which we look on as the best expedient on earth, for composing the
differences of the Christian World, if it might be had. But we cannot endure to
be abused by mere names of titular Patriarchs, but real Servants and
Pensionaries of the Popes, with combinations of interested parties instead of
General Councils, with the pleasure of Popes instead of ancient Canons. Let
them reduce the ancient Government of the Church within its due bounds; let the
Bishop of Rome content himself with the privileges he then en^oyed; let
debates be free and Bishops assemble with an equal proportion out of all
Churches of Christendom; and if we then oppose so gener^l a consent of the
Christian Church, let them charge us with not submitting to all the Authority
extant of the world. But since, the State of Christendom has been so much
divided, that a truly General Council is next to an impossible thing, the
Church must be Reformed by its parts, and every Free Church, enjoying the
Rights of a Patriarchal See, has according to the Canons of the Church a
sufficient power to Reform all abuses within it self, when a more general
consent cannot be obtained. By this we may see how very feeble this charge is
of destroying all Church Authority by refusing submission to the Roman
Hierarchy: and how very pityful an advantage can from hence be made by the
dissenting parties among us, who decry that Patriarchal and ancient Government
as Antichristian which we allow as Prudent and Christian. But of the
difference of these two case, I have spoken already.

4. But yet N. O. says, my principles afford no effectual way or means in this
Church of suppressing or convicting any Schism, P. ^98.
Sect or Heresy, or reducing them either to submission of judgment or
silence: Therefore my Principles are dest^^ctive to all Church Authority. To
which I answer,

1. That the design of my Principles was to lay down the Foundations of Faith,
and not the means of suppressing heresies. If I had laid down the Foundations
of Peace and left all Persons to their own judgments without any regard to
Authority, this might have been justly objected against me; but according to
this way, it might have been objected to Aristotle that he was an Enemy to
civil Government, because he does not lay down the Rules of it in his Logic,
or that Hippocrates favored the Chemists and Mountebanks, because he says not
a word of the College of Physicians. If I had said any thing about the
Authority of particular Churches, or the ways of suppressing Sects; then how
insultingly had I been asked; What is all this to the Foundations of Faith?
Excellent Protestant principles of Faith! They begin now to resolve faith into
the Authority of their own Church: or else to what end is this mentioned, where
nothing is pretended to but laying down the Foundations on which Protestants do
build their faith? But although there be no way of escaping impertinent
objections, yet it is some satisfaction to ones self to have given no occasion
for them.

2. I would know what he understands by his effectual means of suppressing
Sects or Heresies. We are sure the mere Authority of their Church has been no
more effectual means, than that of ours has been; but there is another means
they use which is far more effectual viz. the Inquisition. This in truth is all
the effectual means they have above us; but God keep us from so Barbarous and
Diabolical a means of suppressing Schisms; The Sanbenits have not more pictures
of Devils upon them, than the Inquisition it self has of their Spirit in it;
however that Gracious Pope Paul 4. attributed the settling of it in Spain to
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; Jacob Simanca Enchir. judic* viol. Relig.
Tit. 68. n. 18.
not that Holy Ghost certainly, that came down from Heaven upon the Apostles;
but that which was conveyed in a Portmantue from Rome to the Council of Trent.
But if this be the effectual means he understands, I hope he does not think it
any credit to the Authority of their Church, that all who dispute it must
endure a most miserable life or a most cruel death. All the other means they
have are but probable; but this, this is the most effectual. How admirably do
Fire and Faggots end Controversies! No general Council signifies half so much
as a Court of Inquisition; and the Pope himself is not near so good a Judge of
Controversies as the Executioner, and Dic Ecclesiae is nothing to take him
Jailer. These have been the kind, the tender, the primitive, the Christian
means of suppressing Sects and Heresies in the Roman Church! O how
compassionate a Mother is that Church, that takes her froward Children in her
hands to dash their brains against the stones! O how pleasant a thing it is for
Brethren to be destroyed for lack of Unity! How beautiful upon the 7. Mountains
are the Feet of those who shed the Blood of Heretics! Never were there two men
had a more Catholic Spirit, than Dioclesian and Bishop Bonner. Men may talk to
the worlds end of Councils and Fathers and Authority of the Church and I know
not what insignificant nothings; come, come, there is but one effectual means,
which the good Cardinal Baronius suggested to his Holiness, Arise Peter, kill
and eat. Let the Heretics talk of the kind and merciful Spirit of our Savior
who rebuked his Disciples so sharply for calling for fire from Heaven upon the
Samaritans, Luke 9. 55.
and told them they did not know what Spirit they are of: let them dispute
never so much against the cruelty and unreasonableness of such a way of
confuting them; let them muster up never so many sayings of Fathers against it;
yet when all is done, what ever becomes of Christianity, it was truly said of
Paul 4. that the Authority of the Roman See depends only upon the office of the
Inquisition. And that we may think, he was in good earnest when he said it,
Onuphrius tells us it was part of the speech he made to the Cardinals before
his death. Onuphr. vit. Pauli 4.
Was not this think we, a true Vicar of Christ? a man of an Apostolical Spirit?
that knew the most effectual means of suppressing heresies and Schisms and
advancing the Authority of the Roman See. And that we may not think their
opinion is altered in this matter, one of the late Consulters of the
Inquisition has determined that the practice of the Roman Church in the office
of the Inquisition is reasonable, Del. bear de officio Inquisit. part. 1. dub.
162. Petit. 5. n. 8.
pious, useful, and necessary; Which he proves by the Testimony of their
greatest Doctors. And by which we may easily judge what N. O. and his Brethren
think to be the most effectual means of suppressing Sects and Heresies, with
the want of which we are contented to be upbraided. But setting this aside we
have as many reasonable means, and I think many more of convicting dissenters,
than they can pretend to, in the Roman Church.

3. It is very well known that we do endeavor, as much as lies in us, to
reclaim all Dissenters; but God never wrought Miracles to cure incorrigible
persons, and would not have us to go out of the way of our duty to suppress
Sects and Heresies. The greatest severities have not effected it, (which made
one of the Inquisitors in Italy complain that after 40. years experience, Ger.
^usdragi Epistol. ad Cardinal. Pisan.
wherein they had destroyed above 100000. Persons for heresy, (as they call
it) it was so far from being suppressed or weakened that it was extremly
strengthened and increased. What wonder is it then, if dissenters should yet
continue among us, who do not use such Barbarous ways of stopping the mouths of
Heretics with burning lead, or silencing them by a rope and flames. But we
recommend as much as they can do to the people the virtues of Humility,
Obedience, due submission to their Spiritual Pastors and Governors, and that
they ought not to usurp their office, and become their own Guides: which N. O.
in his conclusion blames us for not doing. Yet we do not exact of them a blind
obedience, we allow them to understand the nature and Doctrine of Christianity,
which the more they do, we are sure they will be so much the better Christians
and the more easily Governed. So that we have no kind of Controversy about
Church Authority it self but what it is, and in what manner, and by whom to be
exercised; but surely N. O. had little to say, when from laying down the
Principles of Faith, he charges me with this most absurd consequence of
destroying all Church Authority.

I have thus far considered the main Foundations upon which N. O. proceeds in
opposition to my Principles, there is now very little remaining which deserves
any Notice: and that which seems to do it as about Negative Articles of Faith,
and the marks of the True Church I shall have occasion to handle them at large
in the following discourse.

FINIS.

