A LETTER TO ANONYMUS, In Answer to his Three Letters TO Dr. SHERLOCK ABOUT
Church Communion.

LONDON: Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in Ludgate Street.
1683.

A LETTER TO ANONYMUS, In Answer to his Three LETTERS to Dr. SHERLOCK about
Church Communion.
SIR,
I Am very sorry, that my Silence and Patience has been mistaken by you for an
affront and neglect; which is such a provocation, as I find some sort of great
minds cannot bear.

But yet that you may have a little mercy, I shall give you a brief account of
the reason, why you had not an Answer before.

I did not answer your first Letter in so public a manner as you desired,
because I believed your Objections were such, as no body was concerned in but
your self; and I cannot think it decent to trouble so numerous an Auditory with
every particular man's conceits. I did not answer your Second Letter, because by
the Temper and Spirit of it, I easily foresaw, that it would end in a public
Quarrel; and if I must be in Print, I henceforth resolve to Correct the Press
my self, and not to suffer any man to Print my private Letters for me. But yet
I called at Mr. R's Shop, whither you directed me, several times, to have
Invited you to a private Conference, but could never see him, till I
accidentally met him in the street, the same day I received the present of your
Printed Letters. The reason why I Printed those Discourses, which you heard me
Preach, was because they were designed for the Press, before they were designed
for the Pulpit, and before I dreamed of your terrible Queries; and were Printed
and Preached exactly by the same Copy, excepting the Introduction to fit them
to a Text, which you know is very convenient for a Sermon. And the reason why I
sent you one of those Tracts, when it was Printed, was because I did hope you
might have had understanding enough, upon a careful perusal of it, when it lay
before you, to have answered those Objections which you made against it, at the
first hearing.

And now Sir, I come to consider the Contents of your First Letter; you have
made some Repetition of what I Discoursed, and a very good Repetition to be
done by memory, which gives you the commendable Character of a diligent and
attentive hearer: but when you had the Discourse before you in Print, you ought
not then to have depended upon your memory, but to have given me my own again
in my own words and order, and with that dependence and connection, in which the
whole strength of that Discourse consists; and to have applied your Queries
distinctly to those parts of the Discourse, which they related to: Had you done
this, you would either have been able to have resolved your own Queries, or
would more effectually have convinced me of my mistake, or at least have given
your Readers better satisfaction in the pe^tinency of what you say; but now you
have only given us a heap of Queries, which it is no easy matter to know to
what they relate.

As for your Repetitions, the Reader who desires satisfaction may compare them
with what I have writ, which is exactly the same with what I Preached: and as
for your Queries, you know how easy a thing it is to ask Questions; however, I
will endeavor to find out to what they belong, and give as plain and short an
Answer to them as I can; for I assure you, I am not at leisure now to write a
long Book upon this Argument, and therefore it is a great comfort to me, that
there is no need of it.

After your Repetition of what you could remember, or what you thought fit to
take notice of in my Sermon, you give us a very mistaken Summary of it.

To sum up (say you) what I take to be the force of all this. p. 4.


The Apostles and their Successors were by our Savior invested with a power of
receiving Members into his Church upon his Terms, and with such Rites as they
should think fit; and they who are not so received into the Church, have no
right to any of the blessings promised to the Members of Christ's Body.

This Power is by an uninterrupted Succession, derived upon the Governors of
our National Church, wherefore all others, that pretend to the exercise of this
Power within this Nation, are Usurpers; and all the Laity Baptized by their
Pastors, not being duly admitted into any particular Church, are so far from
being Members of Christ's Body, that they are Usurpers and Traitors to that
Power, which is derived from him in a right line. Durus hic Sermo.

Had you not told the World in your Title Page, that you are a Layman, to make
your Triumph over a poor undone Dr. of Divinity the more glorious, I should
have taken you to be the Founder of some new Sect of Conjectural Divines; and
truly you are so happy in your guesses, that I believe few men will ever be
able to outdo you in this Art. For there is not one word of all this matter in
the Discourse, which you pretend to sum up, as it was delivered by me. That to
which you seem to refer, is contained in one short Paragraph, which I shall
Transcribe, and leave the most fanciful Reader to try his skill to sum it up as
you have done. Having before asserted, that God only can Constitute a Church,
Resolut. of Cases, p. 5.
I added, And I think it is as plain, that the only visible way God has of
Forming a Church (for I do not now speak of the Invisible Operations of the
Divine Spirit) is by granting a Church Covenant, which is the Divine Charter
whereon the Church is Founded, and investing some persons with Power and
Authority to receive others into this Covenant, according to the terms and
conditions of the Covenant, and by such Covenant-Rites, and Forms of Admission,
as he is pleased to Institute; which under the Gospel is Baptism, as under the
Law it was Circumcision.

I was discoursing of Gods visible way of Forming a Church, which I asserted to
be by granting a Church Covenant, which is that Divine Charter on which the
Church is Founded; but then lest any one should question, how men are admitted
into this Covenant, I added, that God had invested some Persons with Power and
Authority to receive others into this Covenant by Baptism; and by receiving
them into Covenant, they make them Members of that Church, which is Founded on
this Covenant.

Now what of all this will any sober Dissenter deny? Here is no dispute, who is
invested with this Power, what form of Church Government Christ Instituted,
whether Episcopal or Presbyterian; here is no Dispute about the validity of
Orders, or Succession, or in what cases Baptism may be valid, which is not
Administered by a valid Authority; This did not concern my present Argument,
which proceeds upon a quite different Hypothesis, viz. the necessity of
Communion with the one Church and Body of Christ, for all those who are, or
would be owned to be Christians, or Members of Christ's Body. I make no inquiry,
by whom they have been Baptized, or whether they were rightly Baptized or not;
but taking all these things for granted, I inquire whether Baptism do not make
us Church Members; whether it makes us Members of a Particular or Universal
Church; whether a Churchmember be not bound to Communion with the whole
Catholic Church; whether he that separates from any sound part of the
Catholic Church, be not a Schismatic from the whole Church; whether we be not
bound to maintain constant Communion with that particular Church, in which we
live, and with which we can, when we please, Communicate occasionally; whether
it be consistent with Catholic Communion, to communicate with two Churches,
which are in a state of Separation from each other: if you have any thing to
say to these matters, you shall have a fair hearing; but all your Queries,
which proceed upon a mistaken Hypothesis of your own, do not concern me; and
yet to oblige you, if it be possible, I shall briefly consider them.

1. Your first Query is, Whether a Pious Dissenter supposed to be received into
the Church by such as he believes to be fully invested with sufficient Power,
is in as bad a condition as a Moral Heathen, or in a worse than a Papist.

Ans. The Catholic Church has been so indulgent to Heretics and Schismatics,
as to determine against the Necessity of Rebaptization, if they have been once,
though irregularly baptized. This you may find a particular account of, in the
Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still. p. 22. etc. But the question is,
whether if they continue Schismatics, whatever their other pretenses to Piety
be, their Condition be not as dangerous, as the Condition of Moral Heathens and
Papists.

2. Whether the Submission to the Power and Censures of this Church, (which all
must own to be a sound Church) be part of the Divine Covenant, which Unites the
Members of the Catholic Church to God and to each other.

Ans. This is a captions question, which must be distinctly answered. A general
Submission and Obedience to the Authority and Censures of the Church, though it
cannot properly be called a part of that Divine Covenant whereon the Church is
founded, which primarily respects the promise of Salvation by Christ through
Faith in his Blood; yet it is a necessary Church Duty, and Essential to
Church Communion, and so may be called a part of the Covenant, if by the
Covenant we understand all those Duties which are required of baptized
Christians, and Members of the Church, by a Divine positive Law, as Obedience
to Church Governors is.

But then Obedience to the Church of England is not an universal Duty incumbent
on all Christians, but only on those, which are, or ought to live, in
Obedience to this particular Church: for the particular exercises of
Church-Authoritie and Jurisdiction is consined within certain limits, as of
necessity it must be; and though all Orthodox Churches must live in Communion
with each other, yet no particular Church can pretend to any original Authority
over another Church, or the Members of it, as is the constant Doctrine of
Protestants, in opposition to the Usurpations of the Church of Rome. But I
perceive Sir you know no difference between the Authority and Power, and the
Communion of the Church.

But you add, If it be, then as he who is not admitted into this Church, is no
Member of the Catholic, and has no right to the benefits of being a Member of
Christ's Body: so is it with every one, who is excluded by Church Censures,
though excommunicated for a slight contempt or neglect, nay, for a wrongful
cause.

Truly Sir, I know not how any man is admitted into the Church of England, any
otherwise than as he is admitted into the whole Catholic Church, viz, by
Baptism, which does not make us Members of any particular Church, but of the
Universal Church, which Obliges us to Communicate with that part of the
Catholic Church wherein we live; and whoever lives in England, and renounces
Communion with the Church of England, is a Schismatic from the Catholic
Church.

And whoever is Excommunicated from one sound part of the Catholic Church, is
Excommunicated from the whole. But then, there is this difference between
Excommunication and Schism; the first is a Judicial Sentence, the second is a
Man's own Choice; the first is not valid unless it be inflicted for a just
cause, the second is always valid, and does in its own nature cut Men off from
all Communion with Christ's Body. I say in its own Nature, for I will not
pretend to determine the final States of Men, for I know not what gracious
allowances God will make for some Schismatics, no more than I do what favor
he may allow to other Sinners.

But you proceed. If it be no part of the Divine Covenant, then a Man that
lives here may be a true Member of the Catholic Church, though he is not in
Communion with this Sound Church.

This is another Horn of your formidable Dilemma. If Obedience to the
Authority and Censures of the particular National Church of England is no part
of the Divine Covenant, then those Baptized Christians, who live in England,
are not bound to the Communion of the Church of England, and may be Catholic
Christians for all that. As if because the Subjects of Spain are not bound to
obey the King of England, therefore English Men are not bound to obey him
neither, but may be very good Subjects for all that.

We are bound by the Divine Law, to live in Communion with all true Catholic
Churches, and to obey the Governors of the Church wherein we live; and
therefore though Obedience to the Church of England be not a Law to all the
World, yet it is a Law to all English Christians inhabiting in this Church. But
your way of arguing is, as if a Man should say, It is a Divine Law to obey
Civil Magistrates, but there is no Divine Law that all the World should obey
the King of England, France or Spain, therefore French or English Subjects are
not bound to obey their own Prince. Oh what comfortable Doctrine is this to
some Men!

You proceed. But you will say (which I think is not much to the question) that
he ought to Communicate, if Communion may be had.

Yes, I do say this; and I believe by this time you see, or at least others
will see, that it is much to the question.

But then Query, whether the Dissenters may not reply, that they are ready to
Communicate, if the Communion be not clogged with some things, which are no part
of the Divine Covenant.

Yes, they may reply so if they please, or Anonymus for them; but whoever does
it, the reply is very weak and impertinent. It is weak, because Obedience to
Authority, in all lawful things, is in a large notion part of the Divine
Covenant: And it is very impertinent, because the Supposition of Communicating,
where Communion may be had, supersedes that Query. For Communion cannot be had,
where there are any sinful Terms of Communion: and though I assert, that the
Church must be founded on a Divine Covenant, I never said, that nothing must be
enjoined by the Church, but what is expressed in that Covenant. A Corporation,
which is founded upon a Royal Charter, you know, may have Authority to make
Bylaws, which shall oblige all the Members of it, and so are Terms of
Communion with it; and yet it is the Charter, not these Bylaws, whereon the
Corporation is founded. I was not concerned to Examine the Terms of Communion,
(that is, and will be done by other hands) but, supposing nothing Sinful in our
Communion, whether all Christians, that live in this Church, are not bound to
live in Communion with it.

Q. 3. Your next Query concerns the Derivation of Church Power from Christ
himself, without any immediate Derivation from other Church Governors; which
does not at all concern my Doctrine of Church Communion; for whether it be so
or so, still we are bound to maintain Communion with all sound parts of the
Catholic Church; so Church-Authoritie be Derived from Christ any way, it is
well enough, but then we must be sure that it is so: and if Christ have
appointed no ordinary way for this, but by the hands of Men, who received
their Authority immediately from himself, I know not who can appoint any other
way.

But may not a Layman preach the Gospel and gather a Church in a Heathen
Country, where there is none of the Clergy to do it? I suppose he may; and if
you please to consult the Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilling fleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 331, etc. you will find this case largely
debated.

But it seems it does not satisfy you, that this be allowed only in case of
Necessity, for then up start two other Queries.

1. Whether this will not put the being of our Church upon a very hazardous
issue, and oblige your self to prove, that it was a true Church before the
Reformation?

Ans. This is no hazard at all, for the Church of England was certainly a true,
though a corrupt, Church before the Reformation, as the Church of Rome is at
this day. A true Church is that which has every thing Essential to the being of
a Church, though mixed with such other Corruptions, as make its Communion
dangerous and sinful, as a Diseased Man is a true Man; and remove these
Corruptions, and then it is not only a true, but a sound Church, as the Church
of England is at this day. And if you will not allow this, I doubt, Sir, all
private Christians will be at as great a loss for their Baptism, as the Church
will be for Orders. But the case of a True and Sound and Catholic Church,
Vindicat. p. 64. etc.
if you please, you may see Stated in the same Book to which I referred you
before.

And thus your second Query is answered, that though this Church was
Antichristian before the Reformation, yet there was not the same Necessity for
private Christians to usurp the Ministerial Office without a regular
Authority, as there is for a Layman in a Heathen Nation, because an
Antichristian, that is, the most corrupt Church, retains the Power of Orders,
as well as of Sacraments.

As for that Independent Principle, that Christ has instituted a Power in the
Church to ordain her own Officers, you may see it Examined in the Defense of
Dr. Still. Vnr. of Sep. p. 306, etc.

But what now is all this to me? I don't charge our Dissenters with Schism from
the Invalidity of their Orders, but for their causeless and sinful Separation.
Let us suppose, that they have no need of any Orders, or that such Orders as
they have are good, or that they had Episcopal Orders, and were Governed by
Bishops of their own, as the Donatists were, yet they would be never the less
Schismatics for that, while they separate from the Church of England, and from
each other. If Orders be necessary, and they have no Orders, then they are no
Churches at all; if they have true Orders, and are true Churches, but yet
divide Christian Communion by Separating from any Sound part of the Christian
Church, they are Schismatics.

4. Q Whether from the Supposition, that there ought to be but one
Church Covenant throughout the Catholic Church, that there cannot be one true
Church within another, and that the Nature of Catholick-Communion is such, that
one ought to be ready to Communicate with any Sound Church, from which one is
not hindered by reason of the Distance of Place? it does not follow.

Ans. Fair and Softly! let us first consider the Suppositions, before we
consider what follows from them; for you have so misrepresented, so eurtailed
these Propositions, and so mixed and blended things of a different Nature, that
it is necessary to restore them to their true Sense and proper Place again,
before we can tell what follows.

I asserted, that the Christian Church is founded upon a Divine Covenant, and
since God has made but one Covenant with mankind in Christ Jesus, therefore
there can be but one Christian Church throughout the World, Resol. of Cases, p.
8.
founded on this one Covenant.

Having explained the general notion of Church Communion, p. 10.
which signifies no more than Church Fellowship and Society, that to be in
Communion with the Church is to be a Member of the Church, I came to enquire,
what made a Separate Church. For if there be but one Church and one Communion,
p. 19.
of which all true Christians and Christian Churches are or ought to be
Members, then those Churches, which are not Members of each other, are Separate
Churches. And for a fuller explication of this, p. 20.
I observed several things.

I. That there must be but one Church in one Place. Because there is no other
Rule of Catholick-Communion, but to Communicate in all Religious Offices, and
all Acts of Government and Discipline, with those Christians with whom they
live. For to Renounce the Ordinary Communion of Christians, or true Christian
Church, is to divide the Unity and Communion of the Church; and to withdraw our
selves from Ordinary Communion with the Church in which we live, p. 21.
into distinct and separate Societies for Worship, is to Renounce their
Communion, and when there is not a necessary cause for it, is a Schismatical
Separation.

And a little after I added, If all Christians are Members of the one Body of
Christ, nothing can justify the distinction of Christians into several
Churches, but only such a distance of place, as makes it necessary and
expedient to put them under the Conduct and Government of several Bishops, for
the greater Edification of the Church in the more easy and regular
Administration of Discipline. And therefore nothing can justify the gathering
a Church out of a Church, and dividing Neighbor-christians into distinct
Communions. Now then let us consider what follows.

1. You say, either that the French Protestants have no church here, but are
Schismatics in not Communicating with ours; Or that ours is guilty of Schism,
in making the Terms of Communion so straight, that it is not the Duty of of
every one (though a licensed Stranger) to Communicate with this Church.

Ans. If any Foreign Church among us, which by Royal Favor is allowed the
Observation of their own Discipline and Rules of Worship, Renounce Communion
with the Church of England, or Communicate with our Separatists, she is
Schismatical her self; as the Protestant Churches in France, Geneva, or Holland
would be, should they do the like. But if there be any reason to allow those
Foreigners, which are among us, to Form and Model their Congregations according
to the Rules of their own Churches to which they originally belong, this is no
more a Schism, than there is between the Protestant Churches of France and
England, which own each others Communion.

A bare Variety of Rites and Ceremonies makes no Schism between Churches; our
Church pretends not to give Laws to other Churches, in such matters, but leaves
them to their Liberty, as she takes her own: and why an Ecclesiastical Colony
may not for great reasons be Transplanted into another Church, as well as a
Civil Colony into another Kingdom, while they live in Communion with each
other, I cannot tell. It is a different thing to gather a Church out of a
Church, and to Transplant some Members of one Church into another (maintaining
the same Communion, though with some peculiar an different usages) with the
consent of the Church to which they come.

The case of Strangers and Natives has always been accounted very different,
both upon a Religious and Civil account: Every particular National Church has
Authority over her own Members, to direct and Govern her own Communion, and
prescribe the Rules of Worship; but as she does not Impose upon other Churches
at a distance, so she may allow the same liberty to the Members of such Foreign
Churches, when they live within her Jurisdiction, without breach of Communion:
for tho the Communion of the whole Christian Church is but one, and all true
Catholic Churches are Members of each other, yet the Authority and
Jurisdiction is different; every Church challenging a peculiar Authority, which
it exercises in its own Communion; and therefore for the Church of England to
suffer Foreign Churches to observe their own Customs and Usages, is not to
allow of distinct and separate Communions in her own Bowels, (which were
Schismatical,) but only to exempt such Congregations of Strangers from her
particular Jurisdiction, and to leave them to the Government and Authority of
the Church to which they belong.

There was no such thing indeed allowed in the Primitive Church, as distinct
Congregations of Foreigners under a different Rule and Government; and it were
very desirable, that all Christians who have occasion to live in other
Countries, would conform to all the innocent and laudable customs of the Church
where they sojourn, which seems most agreeable to Catholic Communion; but yet
distinct Congregations of Foreigners, who own the Communion of our Church, tho
they observe the customs of their own, are not Schismatical, as the Separate
Conventicles of Dissenters are.

2. But does it not follow from the obligation to communicate, or to be ready
to communicate with any true Church where distance does not hinder, that a
Member of the Church of England is not obliged to constant Communion with that
Church, but may occasionally communicate with the French Church, nay with
Dissenters too, if he believes that any of their Congregations is a true Member
of the Catholic Church?

Ans. This is a great Mastery of Wit, to turn my own Artillery upon me. I prove
the Dissenters to be Schismatics, because they set up a Church within a
Church, whereas there ought to be but one Church and one Communion in one
place, every Christian being bound to Communicate with the sound part of the
Catholic Church in the place wherein he lives; for according to the Laws of
Catholic Communion, nothing but distance of place can suspend our obligation
to actual Communion; Hence you conclude, that we must Communicate with
Schismatics, if there be any among us, or so near to us, that distance does
not hinder our Communion. But you should consider, that our obligation to
Catholic Communion does equally oblige us to renounce the Communion of
Schismatics whether at home or abroad; and tho we should allow them to be true
Churches, yet if Schismatical, they are not Catholic Churches, and therefore
not the objects of Catholick-Communion.

But however, we may lawfully Communicate with the French Church that is among
us, as occasion serves. Yes, no doubt we may, because they are in Communion
with us. But then follows the Murdering consequence, that a Member of the
Church of England is not bound to a constant Communion with her. I pray, why
so? every Member, as a Member, is in constant Communion; Resol. of Cases, p. 10.
for to be in Communion with a Church, is to be a Member of it, as I proved at
large: but then Church Communion does not primarily respect a Particular but
the Universal Church, p. 13.
and therefore it is no interruption of our Communion with the Church of
England to Communicate actually with any Church, which is in Communion with
her: for as all Christians, who are neither Heretics nor Schismatics, are
Members of the Catholic Church, so they are in Communion with the Catholic
Church, and every sound part of it. The State of Communion is constant with the
whole Catholic Church, the acts of Communion are performed sometimes in one
part of it, sometimes in another, as our presence, abode, or occasions,
require; and thus it is possible actually to Communicate with the French
Church, either in England or out of England, without interrupting our Communion
with the Church of England; for the Communion is one and the same in all
Christian Churches, which are in Communion with each other, though they may
observe different Rites and Modes of Worship.

And this I suppose is a Sufficient answer to that other untoward consequence,
that if the Members of the Church of England may occasionally Communicate with
the French Church, then Constant Commnnion is not always a Duty, where
occasional Communion is lawful; I suppose, because we are not bound to a
constant actual or presential Communion with the French Church, though we may
occasionally Communicate with it.

But certainly, Sir, Had you ever considered, what I discourst about constant
and occasional Communion, you would not have made such an Objection as this:
For this is a Modern distinction, which has no sense at the bottom, as I
plainly showed. But however, by constant Communion, our Dissenters understand
the performing the Acts of Communion, always or ordinarily in the same Church;
and by occasional Communion, performing the Acts of Communion sometimes, or as
occasion serves, in another Church; now with respect to this Notion of constant
or occasional Communion, as it signifies the constant and ordinary, or the
Occasional Acts of Communion, must that question be understood, whether
Constant Communion he a Duty, where Occasional Communion is Lawful; the meaning
of which question is this, whether when other reasons and circumstances
determine my Personal Communion Ordinarily to one Church, it be not my Duty to
Communicate ordinarily with that Church, if I can lawfully Communicate
sometimes with it: and there being no other reason to justify non-Communion
with any Church with which I am bound for other reasons Ordinarily to
Communicate, but only Sinful Terms of Communion, and there being no Color for
such a Pretense, where occasional Communion is acknowledged Lawful, (for Sinful
Terms of Communion make occasional as well as constant Acts of Communion
Sinful) I hence conclude, that it is a necessary Duty to Communicate constantly
or ordinarily with that Church in which I live, if it be Lawful to Communicate
occasionally, or sometimes, with it.

But if any Man will be so perverse as to understand this Question, as you now
do, not of the Communion of a Church which for other reasons we are bound to
Communicate Ordinarily with, but of any Church with which I may Lawfully
Communicate as occasion serves, it makes it an absurd and senseless
Proposition, to say, that constant Communion (by that meaning presential and
personal Communion) is always a Duty, where occasional Communion is lawful. For
at this rate, if occasional Communion with the Protestant Churches of France,
Geneva, Holland, Germany, be Lawful, it becomes a necessary Duty for me to
Communicate always personally and presentionally with all these Churches at the
same time, which no man can do, who can be present but in one place at a time.
But yet thus far the Proposition holds universally true, that whatever Church I
can occasionally Communicate with without Sin, I am also bound to Communicate
constantly with, whenever such reasons, as are necessary to determine my
Communion to a particular Church, make it my Duty to do so. And no man in his
Wits ever understood this Question in any other sense.

But this you think cannot be my meaning; For accorcording to me, no Man is
obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more than another, provided the
distance is not so great, but that he may Communicate with both.

It is wonderful to me, Sir, how you should come to fasten so many absurd
Propositions upon me; and I would desire of you for the future, if you have no
regard to your own Reputation, yet upon Principles of Common Honesty, not to
write so hastily, but to take some time to understand a Book, before you
undertake to confute it.

Where do I say, that no man is Obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more
than of another? I assert indeed, that no Baptized Christian is a Member of any
particular Church, considered merely as particular, but is a Member of the
universal Church, and of all sound Orthodox Churches, as parts of the Universal
Church. This puts him into a State of Communion with the whole Church, without
which he cannot be properly said to perform any Act of Church Communion, though
he should join in all the Acts and Offices of Christian worship: But is there
no difference between being a Member of the Universal Church, and of all
particular Churches, which are Parts and Members of the Universal Church, and
not to be Obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more than of another? The
first supposes, that every Christian, whatever particular Church he actually
Communicates in, is a Member of the whole Christian Church, and of all
particular Sound Churches; the second supposes the quite contrary, that
Christians are so Members of one Church, as they are not of another; that
constant Communion in a particular Church confines their Church Membership to
that particular Church in which they Communicate.

So that the question is not, what Church I must be a Member of; for every
Christian is a Member of the whole Church, not merely of this or that
particular Church; but what particular Church I must Communicate in: now our
Obligation to Communicate in a certain particular Church, results from the
place wherein we live; The Church in which we were Born and Baptized, and have
our Ordinary abode and Residence, the Church which is incorporated into the
State of which we are Natural Subjects, if it be a true and sound Christian
Church, Challenges our Communion and Obedience.

Now in the same place, there never can be any Competition between two
Churches, because there must be but one Church in the same place, and therefore
there can be no dispute in what Church we must constantly Communicate, which
must be the Church in which we live.

But is there not a French, and a Dutch, as well as an English Church in
London, and since distance of place does not hinder, may we not choose, which
of these we will ordinarily Communicate with?

I answer no, we have only the Church of England in England. The French Church
is in France, and the Dutch Church is in Holland, though there is a French and
Dutch Congregation allowed in London. These Congregations belong to their own
Original Churches, and are under their Government and Censures; but there is no
Church Power and Authority in England, but only of the Church of England, and
therefore though we may occasionally Communicate with the French Congregation,
our Obligation to constant Communion is with the Church of England, which alone
has Authority and Jurisdiction in England to require our Communion and
Obedience: one particular Church is distinguished from another not by a distinct
and separate Communion, which is Schismatical, but by distinct Power and
Jurisdiction; and that Church within whose Jurisdiction we live, can only
Challenge our Communion; and I suppose no Man will say, that in this sense, we
live in the French or Dutch Church, because there is a French and Dutch Church
allowed among us.

5. Your next Query is, Whether a true Christian, though not visibly admitted
into Church Communion, where he wants the Means, has not a virtual Baptism in
the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, according to 1. Peter, 2. 21.

Ans. What this concerns me, I cannot tell. I speak only of the Necessity of
Visible Communion in Visible Members, you put a question, whether the want of
Visible Admission by Baptism, when it cannot be had, may not be supplied with
the answer of a good Conscience toward God. I hope in some cases it may,
though I do not hope this from what St. Peter says, who only speaks of that
Answer of a good Conscience, which is made at Baptism, not of that, which is
made without it. But what God will accept of in this case, is not my business
to determine; unbaptized Persons are no Visible Members of the Church, and
therefore not capable of Visible Communion, and therefore not concerned at all
in this dispute.

6. Query, Why a professed Atheist, who has been Baptized, and out of Secular
Interest continues a Communicant with this Church, is more a Member of the
Catholic Church than such as are above described.

Ans. Neither Atheists nor Schismatics are Members of the Catholic Church.
But this is a vile insinuation against the Governors and Government of our
Church, as if professed Atheists were admitted to Communion. Though possibly
there may be some Atheists, yet I never met yet with one, who would profess
himself an Atheist. If I should, I assure you, I would not admit him to
Communion, and I hope there is no Minister of the Church of England would; and
I am sure, no Man, who had any kindness for the Church, with which he pretends
to hold Communion, would ask such a question.

7. Query. Whether as the Catholic Church is compared to a Body of Men
incorporated by one Charter should upon supposition of a possibility of the
forfeiture of the Charter to the whole Body, by the Miscarriages of any of the
Officers, does it likewise follow that the Miscarriages of any of the Officers,
or the Church Representative, as I remember Bishop Sanderson calls the Clergy,
may forfeit the Privileges given by Christ to his Church, or at least may
suspend them? As suppose a Protestant Clergy taking their Power to be as large
as the Church of Rome claimed, should deny the Laity the Sacraments, as the
Popish did in Venice, and here in King John's time, during the Interdicts, quid
inde operatur?

Ans. Just as much as this Query does, the reason of which I cannot easily
guess. I asserted indeed, that as there is but one Covenant on which the Church
is founded, so there can be but one Church to which this Covenant belongs; and
therefore those, who divide and separate themselves from this one Body of
Christ, Resol. of Cases, p. 8. etc.
forfeit their right to this Covenant, which is made only with the one Body of
Christ; which I illustrated by the instance of a Charter granted to a
particular Corporation, which no Man had any interest in, who divided himself
from that Corporation to which this Charter was granted: but what is this to
forfeiting a Charter by the Miscarriages of Officers? I doubt Sir, your Head
has been Warmed with Quo Warranto's, which so affect your Fancy, that you can
Dream of nothing else.

I was almost afraid, when your hand was in, I should never have seen an end of
these Questions; and I know no more reason, why you so soon left off asking
Questions, than why you asked any at all; for I would undertake to ask five
hundred more, as pertinent to the business as most of these. You have not
indeed done yet, but have a reserve of particular Queries; but general Queries
are the most formidable things, because it is harder to find what they relate
to, than how to Answer them.

You have three sets of Queries relating to three several Propositions, besides
a parting blow of four Queries relating to my Text.

The first Proposition you are pleased to question me about is this, That our
Savior made the Apostles and their Successors Governors of his Church, with
promise to be with them to the end of the World. Which I alleged to prove,
that when the Church is called the Body of Christ, it does not signify a
confused multitude of Christians, but a regular Society under Order and
Government.

Now Sir, is this true or false? if it be false, then the Church is not a
governed Society, is not a Body, but a confused heap and multitude of
Independent Individuals, which is somewhat worse than Independent Churches. If
it be true, why do you ask all these Questions, unless you have a mind to
confute our Savior, and burlesque his Institutions: but since I am condemned
to answer questions, I will briefly consider them.

1. Whether our Saviors promise of Divine Assistance, did not extend to all
the Members of the Church, considering every man in his respective station and
capacity, as well as the Apostles, as Church Governors? For which you may
compare St. John with St. Matthew.

Ans. No doubt but there are promises, which relate to the whole Church, and
promises which belong to particular Christians, as well as promises which
relate peculiarly to the Apostles and Governors of the Church, in the exercise
of their Ministerial Office and Authority: but what then? Christ is with his
Church, with his Ministers, with particular Christians, to the end of the
World, but in a different manner, and to different purposes; and yet that
promise there is peculiarly made to the Apostles, including their Successors
also; for the Apostles themselves were not to continue here to the end of the
World, but an Apostolical Ministry was.

2. Therefore Query, Whether it signifies any thing to say there is no promise
to particular Churches, provided there be to particular Persons, such as are in
charity with all Men, and are ready to communicate with any Church which
requires no more of them, than what they conceive to be their duty; according
to the Divine Covenant?

Ans. It seems to me to be a harder Query, what this Query means; or how it
concerns that Authority, which our Savior has given to his Apostles for the
Government of the Church; to which this Query relates. I asserted indeed, that
Christ has made no Covenant with any particular, but only with the Universal
Church, which includes particulars as Members of it; nor has he made any
promise to particular Persons, but as Members of the Church, and in Communion
with it, when it may be had upon lawful terms. Whoever breaks the Communion of
the Church without necessary reason, tho he may in other things be a very good
natured man, yet he has not true Christian Charity, which unites all the
Members of the same Body in one Communion; and tho the Church may prescribe
Rules of Worship, which are not expressed in the Divine Covenant, this will not
justify a Separation, if she commands nothing which is forbid; for the very
Authority Christ has committed to his Ministers, requires our obedience to them
in things lawful; and if Men will adhere to their own private Fancies in
opposition to Church Authority, they are guilty of Schism, and had best
consider, whether such pride and opinionativeness will be allowed for excuse.

3. Whether if the promise you mention be confined to the Apostles, as
Church Governors, it will not exclude the Civil Power.

Ans. There are peculiar promises made to Church Governors, and to Civil
Magistrates; their Authority and Power is very distinct, but very consistent.

4. What was the extent of the promise, whether it was to secure the whole
Church, that its Governors should never impose unlawful Terms of Communion, or
that there never be a defection of all the Members of the Catholic Church, but
that there should always be some true Members?

Ans. The promise is, that Christ will be with be them in the discharge of
their Ministry, and Exercise of their Power, and this is all I know of the
matter; our Savior gave them Authority to Govern the Church, and this was to
last to the end of the World, as long as there is any Church on Earth, which is
all I cited it for, and so much it certainly proves.

The Second Proposition: you raise Queries on, is this. It Is absurd to gather a
Church out of a Church of Baptized Christians.

This I do indeed assert, that since the Church is founded on a Divine
Covenant, and to be in Covenant with God, and to be Members of his Church, is
the same thing; therefore Baptism whereby we are received into Covenant with
God, makes us Members of the Church also; and this makes it very absurd, to
gather a Church out of Churches of Baptized Christians, which supposes that
they were not a Church before: instead of considering the reason, whereon this
is founded, as every honest Writer should do, you only put a perverse Comment
on it.

By which (say you) I suppose you mean, That Men ought not to Separate from
such, and live in a distinct Church Communion from any Church of Baptized
Christians; which I conceive needs explaining. But if this were true, it were
plain enough, but the fault is, that it is not true; for we may Separate from
any Church of Baptized Christians, if their Communion be Sinful; which
justifies a Separation from the Church of Rome, and answers your two first
Queries.

But indeed the Proposition, as asserted by me, does not so much as concern a
Separation from a Church, let the cause be what it will, just or unjust. For
the Independents, who are the Men for gathering Churches, do not own, that they
Separate from any Church, but that they form themselves into a Church State,
which they had not before, and which no Christians, according to their
Principle, have, who are not Members of Independent Churches. Baptism, they
acknowledge, makes Men Christians at large, but not Church Members, which I
showed must needs be very absurd, if the Church be a Body and Society of Men
founded on a Divine Covenant; for then Baptism, which admits us into Covenant
with God, makes us Members of the Church; and they may as well rebaptize
Christians, as form them into new Church-Societies.

This I suppose may satisfy you, how impertinent all your Queries are under
this head.

Your two first concern the Separation from the Church of Rome, which was not
made upon Independent Principles, because they were no Church, but because they
were a corrupt Church.

3. Whether every Bishopric in England be not so many Churches within the
National. Ans. Every Bishopric is a distinct Episcopal Church, and the Union
of them in one National Communion, makes them not so many Churches, within a
National, but one National Church; which you may see explained at large in the
Defense of Dr. Still. Vnr. of Separation.

4. And therefore Independent and Presbyterian Churches are indeed within the
National (Churches within a Church, which is Schismatical) but not one National
Church, as Bishoprics are.

5. And therefore tho we should allow them to have the External Form and all
the Essentials of a Church (which is a very liberal grant) yet they are not in
Catholic Communion, because they are Schismatics.

6. And this is all I am to account for, that they are not in Visible Communion
with that one Church and Body of Christ to which the promises are made. But
what allowances Christ will make for the mistakes of honest well-meaning Men,
who divide the Communion of the Church, I cannot determine. I can hope as
Charitably, as any Man, but I dare not be so Charitable, as to make
Church Communion an indifferent thing, which is the great Bond of Christian
Charity.

3dly. You take occasion for your next Queries, from what I say of the
Independent Church Covenant; you say, I suppose, that the Independents exclude
themselves from Catholic Communion, by requiring of their Members a new
contract, no part of the Baptismal vow.

I prove indeed from their placing a Church State in a particular explicit
Covenant between Pastor and People, that they separate themselves from the
whole Body of Christians; for no other Christians, which are not in Covenant
with them, are Members of their Church, nor can they be Members of any other
Church. Resol. of Cases. p. 10. 32.
And I proved that those are Separate Churches, which are not Members of each
other, and do not own each others Members for their own. For the Notion of
Church Communion consists in Church Membership, and therefore no Man is in
Communion with that Church of which he is no Member; and if no Man can be a
Member of a Church, but by such an explicit Independent Covenant, then he is a
Member of no Church but that, with which he is in Covenant, and consequently is
in Communion with no Church, but that particular Independent Congregation of
which he is a Member by a particular Covenant. And if those be Schismatics and
Schismatical Churches, which are not in Communion with each other, then all
Independents must be Schismatics, for they are in Communion with none, but
their own Independent Congregations. Let us now hear your Queries.

Q. 1. Whether any Obstack to Catholic Communion brought in by Men, may not be
a means of depriving Men of it, as well as Covenant or Contract?

Ans. Yes it may, but with this Material difference: Other things hinder
Communion as Sinful Terms of Communion, this Independent Covenant in its own
Nature Shuts up, Encloses, and breaks Christian Communion into as many Separate
Churches and Communions, as there are Independent Congregations. Sinful Terms
of Communion are a just cause of Separation; an Independent Church Covenant is
a State of Separation in its own Nature. The Communion of the Church may be
restored by removing those Sinful Terms of Communion, but there can be no
Catholic Unity or Communion in the Church under Independency.

Q. 2. If it may, which I suppose you will not deny, will you not then upon
this account, make the Church you live in more guilty than the Independents?
Baptism you own is the only thing, which admits into the Catholic Church, but
they require no new Covenant at Baptism, Ergo, they admit into the Church
without any clog or hindrance of humane Inventions.

Ans. Pray what comparison is there between the Church of England and
Independency? Whatever fault the Church of England may be charged with, as to
its Rites and Ceremonies (which I will not now dispute with you) yet all this
is capable of a Remedy; she may give occasion to Schism, if she imposes any
unlawful and Sinful Terms of Communion, but yet the Frame and Essential
constitution of the Church is not Schismatical; but Independency is Schism in
the very notion of it, and an Independent Conventicle is never capable of
becoming a Member of the Catholic Church.

But you say, I own that Baptism is the only thing which admits into the
Catholic Church, i. e. which makes us Members of the Universal Church, and all
sound parts of it, and that nothing else is necessary to make a Churchmember.
Very right! I do own this; but what is my owning this, to the Independents? For
they do not, and will not own it; they admit into their Churches, not by
Baptism, but by a Human and Voluntary Covenant, and will own none for
Church Members but such. Baptism at most gives Men only a disposition to be
Church Members, but does not make them Members of any Church.

But they require no new Covenant at Baptism, ergo, they admit into the Church
without any clog or hindrance of human Invention, that is, they admit to
Baptism without any new Covenant: because Baptism does not, as they believe,
admit into the Church, ergo, they admit into the Church without any clog of
human Invention. And yet Sir, I perceive you do not understand this matter
neither: for though what their practice is now I cannot tell, yet according to
their Principles, and former Practice, though they required no new Covenant of
the Child to be Baptized, yet they would Baptize no Children, but of such
Parents, as were in Church Covenant with them, which is the same thing; and a
much greater clog to Baptism, than the Sign of the Cross, which when I know
your exceptions against, I will consider them.

And now Sir, nothing remains of your First Letter, but some few Queries
relating to the meaning of my Text. Your Three first Queries come only to
this, whether every particular Church may not be called the Body of Christ. I
answer, no doubt but it may, and yet Christ has but one Body, and all the sound
Churches in the World are but one Body, and must be but one Communion. As you
may see proved at large in the Defense of Dr. Still. and the Vindication of
that Defense, and thither I refer you. But what you mean by Christ's
Metaphorical Body, I confess, I cannot tell, and therefore cannot answer that
Question.

Your Fourth Query, concerns the nature of Schism, which you would not have
consist in dividing Communion through difference of Opinions, but through want
of Charity, because the Apostle say, that the Members have the same care one of
another. Now methinks in the natural Body, should the Members divide from each
other, though they should pretend to love one another dearly, they would not be
thought to have such care of one another, as the Members of the same Body ought
to have. The Application is easy, and you may find this matter plainly stated
in the Defense to which I have so often referred you.

Thus Sir I have honestly answered all your Queries, which you sent me in your
First Letter, and which you challenge me, and conjure me as a Protestant Divine
to answer Categorically in your Second; whether they were so very considerable
as to deserve either to be Printed or Answered, I leave the Reader to consider.

Your Second Letter, though it be somewhat Peevish, yet creates me but little
trouble. It has brought forth but one Query, and half of that is already
Answered.

Whether, if the nature of Catholic Communion requires a readiness to
Communicate with any sound Church, and yet a Church obliges us to Communicate
with that alone, while distance does not hinder the occasional and frequent
Communion with others, is not that Church guilty of Schism in such an
Injunction contrary to the nature of Catholick-Communion?

Ans. No Church can be so supposed to forbid Communion with any Church, which
is in Communion with her: and as for Schismatical Conventicles, which you are
pleased to call sound Churches, it is the Duty of the Church to forbid all
Communion with them, how near soever they be. For Catholic Communion obliges
us only to Communicate in the Catholic Church, from whence Schismatics have
withdrawn and separated themselves; and whoever Communicates with Schismatics,
is in so doing a Schismatic.

Or at least, (as you proceed) is it not impossible, that he who Communicates
sometimes with one true Church, sometimes with another, can be a Schismatic,
or any more than an Offender against a positive human Law?

Ans. If such true Churches be Schismatical, he that Communicates with a
Schismatical Church, is Guilty of a Schismatical Act; and how is it possible,
it should be otherwise? Should a Man sometimes join with his Princes Forces,
and sometimes with his Enemies, and Fight sometimes on the one side, and
sometimes on the other, were he a Rebel or not? To be sure he is a Rebel when
he Fights against his Prince, though sometimes he Fight for him. We may, and
ought as occasion serves to Communicate with any Church, which is in Catholic
Communion; but where there are two opposite and separate Communions, to
Communicate with both, is like taking part on both sides; and if one be in the
right, and the other in the wrong, such a man cannot be in the right always.

Well but however, he is no Schismatic, but only an Offender against a
positive human Law. Yes, certainly he is a Schismatic, and an Offender, not
merely against human positive Laws, but against the Unity of the Church, and
the Evangelical Laws of Catholic Communion.

But this mention of Law puts me in mind of a passage or two at the beginning
of your Preface. You say, perhaps it is no absurdity to suppose, that Men may as
well continue Members of the National Church, notwithstanding their breaking
many positive Laws, made for the outward management and ordering of it, though
not Fundamental and necessary to its being; as he who incurs the penalty of any
Statute of the Realm about Civil affairs, may however be a sound Member of the
State, if he keep from Treason and other Capital Crimes.

Very right Sir! While Men continue in the Communion of the Church, they are
Church Members, though they may be irregular, and guilty of some Acts of
Disobedience; but methinks it is a little absurd to say, that those continue
Members of the Church, who separate from it: Schism and Separation from the
Church, is just what Treason and Rebellion is in the State, and such persons by
your own confession cease to be sound Members.

You add, Nay possibly, that there should be several Religious Assemblies,
living by different Customs and Rules, and yet continuing Members of the
National Church, is not more inconsistent, than, that particular places should
have their particular Customs and Bylaws, differing from the Common Law of the
Land, without making a distinct Government.

Ans. Whatever variety and difference in the Rules of Worship in several
Congregations, is consistent with one Communion, may be granted, when the
prudence of Governors sees it fit and expedient. But Mr. Humphry's project,
which I perceive you are nibling at, of making a National Church by an Act of
Parliament, which should declare Presbyterians, Independants, etc. to be Parts
of the National Church, is certainly the cunningest way of curing Schism, that
ever was thought on: but you may find that expedient for Union at large
considered in the Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still.

And thus Sir I proceed to your Third Letter, and here you run nothing but
Dregs and Lees; and I hope you will not think it any neglect of you, if I do
not answer you Paragraph by Paragraph, as I have done your first Letter, there
being little new in this, but only a Repetition of your old Queries: and though
you know Repetitions are very convenient to lengthen a Sermon, there is no need
of such Arts to lengthen this Answer, which is too long already.

Your first Charge upon me is, that I only amuse People with Equivocal Words
and Terms: Letters 3. p. 16.
that I play with the words, Church and Schism; which had been no fault, had I
played the right way with them, that is, had I ridiculed them, as you do, who
think them words only fit to be played with, who have found out a Church
without any Government, which is, p. 12.
only an Intreague between Clergymen on all sides, who will not allow
causeless Separation from a Sound part of the Catholic Church to be Schism, p.
17.
but place Schism wholly in want of Charity, and make it nothing else but some
Divisions and Contentions between the Members of the same Church, who still
live in Communion with one another; a true Independent Notion to justify
causeless Separations. Divisions in the Church are certainly very Sinful, and a
degree of Schism, as unnatural, as if the Members of the same Body should fight
with each other, while they are United to the same Body; but to divide from the
same Body is the perfection of Schism, unless a quarrel be a Rent and Schism,
but Separation be none.

You desire me to define, what I mean by a Church, when considered as Catholic
and Universal, and when taken in a more restrained sense. But this, I think I
have done already, if you had eyes to see it; and you may find it done more
largely in the Defense of Dr. Still. But would not any Man, who had ever seen
this discourse, which you undertake to confute, wonder to hear you ask me; p.
18.
whether a Man has a right to be of a particular Church as he is a Christian;
when the whole design of that Tract is to prove, that every Christian by being
so, is a Member of the Catholic Church, and has a right to Communicate with
all sound parts of the Catholic Church, and bound to Communicate with that
part of it, in which he lives?

In the next place you attempt to prove, that the Influences and Operations of
the Holy Spirit, are not confined to the Visible, p. 19.
but Invisible Church: but not to examine your proof of it, which is nothing to
the purpose, you may consider, that the Visible and Invisible Church on Earth
are not two, but one Church; not that every Member of the Visible Church is a
Member also of the Invisible, that is, every professed Christian is not a true
Believer; but whoever is not a Member of the Visible Church, and does not live
in Communion with it, when it may be had, is not, that we know of, a Member of
the Invisible Church.

We have no way to prove, that any Man is a Member of the Invisible, who is not
a Member of the Visible Church; and what we do not, and cannot know, does not
concern us; secret things belong to God, and with him it becomes us to leave
them. But this also you may find more largely discourst in the Vindication of
the Defense.

You urge the case of Pope Victor, who, as you say, in a Council or full
representative of that Church, p. 21.
excommunicated the poor Asians upon the Paschal Controversy. And that each
Church was far enough from owning each others Members for their own -- What
should the poor Lay-Christians do in this divided State? could they not
Communicate with both, or either, without danger of Schism themselves?

Ans. It is an easy matter to put hard Cases, almost about any thing; and if a
particular hard Case, which either may possibly happen, or has sometimes
happened, is sufficient to overthrow a standing and general Rule, and to
confute the most plain and convincing Evidence for it, there is nothing in
Religion can be firm and stable. In the very same manner Men Dispute against
the Being of a God, and a Providence, against the necessity of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, against the Apostolical Power and Ministry, and all
Church Government, against the necessity of Believing many fundamental Articles
of our Faith, because many, otherwise very good Men, from the Power and
Prejudice of Education, or through weakness of understanding, may be guilty of
some damnable Heresies.

But must there be no standing Laws or Rules, because there may happen some
hard and difficult Cases? Does not humane Power make Provision against such
Cases by Courts of Chancery, or the Prerogative of the Prince, and yet maintain
the Authority and Sacredness of Laws? And will we not allow God himself a Power
of Dispensing with Laws in hard Cases, without destroying the Authority of his
Laws? Is not Church Communion a necessary Duty, because it may so happen, that
sometimes I cannot Communicate with any Church? Is not Schism a very grievous
and damning sin, because it may happen, that Men may be unavoidably,
innocently, and without a Schismatical mind, engaged in a Schism?

I have evidently proved the necessity of Church-Unity and Communion, and the
evil and danger of Schism; and if you can answer the Scripture-Evidence
produced in this Cause, I will carefully consider it; but it is no confutation
of a plain Law, to urge hard Cases against it, which will overthrow all Laws,
that ever were made. If you imagine, or can produce any real Case, wherein it
is almost impossible for the Persons concerned to know, that they are guilty of
Schism, or to discover on which side the Schism lies, or to avoid it without
renouncing all Communion with the Church, which course soever they take, I
leave all such Cases to God, who knows, when it is fit to dispense with his own
Laws; and will take care of my own Duty according to Scripture-Rules, and not
hope to justify the ordinary breach of known Laws by some extraordinary Cases.

And yet the Case, which you propose, is not so unanswerable a difficulty, as
you imagine. Several Councils in Palestine, Eusebius. b. 5. cap. 23.
in Rome, in Pontus, and other places, Determine the Celebration of Easter on
the day of the Resurrection, not on the Fourteenth Day of the Month, which was
the Jewish Passover, (which dispute you call a Mistake in Arithmetic, but for
what reason I know not) the Bishops of Asia at the same time decree the
observation of Easter on the Fourteenth Day, whatever Day of the week it fell
on, according to the Ancient Observation of the Asian Churches. Pope Victor
upon this, writes to several Bishops very bitterly against them, and was very
desirous to have them Excommunicated, ^^p. 24.
and did as much as in him lay, denounce the Sentence against them.

But this was ill resented by other Bishops in Communion with him; and
particularly Ireneus wrote a Letter to him about it, and earnestly disswades
him from it, and did prevent it from taking effect, if we will believe
Eusebius. So far is it from being true, as you assert, that Pope Victor in a
Council Excommunicated the poor Asians; what he did was only his own Act, which
was displeasing to other Bishops, and which he was forced to undo. So that here
was a great deal of Heat and Warmth, and tendency toward a Schism, but no
Schism followed upon it, among the Catholic Churches.

But suppose Pope Victor had Excommunicated the Asian Churches, and this
Excommunication had taken effect, this could not make the Asian Churches
Schismatics: for there is a great deal of difference between being cast out of
the Communion of a Church, and forsaking the Communion of a Church. The first
is matter of censure, the second is our own choice; the First is an
Ecclesiastical Punishment, the Second when it is causeless, is Schism.

So that had the Church of Rome Excommunicated the Asian Churches, unless the
Asian Churches upon this, had made a Separation from the Church of Rome, this
Excommunication could not make them Schismatics, and therefore any one might
safely Communicate with them without partaking in a Schism.

Nor was it a just reason for the Asian Churches to have renounced the
Communion of the Church of Rome, though they had been Excommunicated by Victor;
for this had been to do as ill a thing as Victor had done, for no other reason,
but because Pope Victor had set them an example. And therefore we find Saint
Cyprian of another temper, when he and the African Bishops were threatened in
the same manner by Pope Stephen, upon occasion of that warm Dispute about
rebaptizing Heretics. At that very time, in his Epistle to Jubaianus, he
declares his resolution, not to break Communion with any Church or Bishops upon
that account, and therefore not with Pope Stephen himself, notwithstanding his
rash and furious Censures. And concludes, that Patience and Forbearance was the
best Remedy in such Cases, and therefore upon this occasion, he says, he wrote
his Book de bono Patientiae.

Well, but if the Asiatick Churches were not Schismatics, yet Pope Victor had
been a Schismatic, had he Excommunicated the Churches of Asia, or withdrawn
Communion from them. And this had made the case of the Roman Christians very
hard: for they must either have suspended Communion with both these divided
Churches, and lived without the comfort and advantages of Christian Communion;
or they must have rejected the Communion of their own Bishop, and Churches, or
have rejected the Communion of the Churches of Asia, or have maintained
Communion with them both, that is, with two Separate Churches, which according
to my Principles, is to Communicate in a Schism. If they Communicate with their
own Schismatical Bishop, this is to Communicate in a Schism, by Communicating
with a Schismatic; if they Renounce his Communion, when he imposes no new
unlawful Terms of Communion upon them, this is to Separate from a Sound and
Orthodox Church, for the sake of a Schismatical Bishop. If they Communicate
with the Churches of Asia, this is to break Communion with their own Bishop,
who has Excommunicated them* if they separate from the Churches of Asia for no
other reason, but because they are unjustly Excommunicated, this is to Separate
for an unjust cause, which is a Schism; if they communicate with both, they
Communicate with two Separate Churches, and therefore must be Schismatics on
one side or other. If you can find any more difficulties in this matter, you
may. And yet after all this, I do believe the Christians of Rome might have
Communicated both with the Roman and Asian Churches without Schism; and this I
believe upon these Principles, which I shall briefly explain, and confirm.

1. That the Personal miscarriage of the Bishop in the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Censures, cannot involve his whole Church in the guilt of
Schism, though it may make him a Schismatic: and certainly since Bishops are
but Men, and Subject to the like passions and infirmities, that other men are,
it would be a very hard case, if his personal Schism should be imputed to the
whole Church.

Though the Bishop have the chief Authority in the Church, yet it is hard to
say, that every abuse of his Authority is the Act of the whole Church; and
therefore the Church may not be Schismatical, when the Bishop is; and it is
possible to Communicate with a Church, whose Bishop is a Schismatic, without
Communicating in the Schism. And therefore though Victor had Schismatically
Excommunicated the Asian Churches, the Christians of Rome at that time might
have Communicated with the Church of Rome without partaking in Victors Schism.

For, tho a particular Church-Society consists in that Relation, which is
between the Bishop and his Clergy and People, yet it is possible, that the
Bishop in the exercise of his Authority may violate the Fundamental Laws of
Communion, on which the Christians of such a Church unite into one Body and
Society: and when he does so, it being an abuse of his Episcopal Authority, it
is his personal fault, which cannot affect the whole Church.

The case is very plain, where there is an Established constitution in a Church
(as it is in the Church of England) which obliges the Bishops as well as
People. For should any English Bishop require any thing of his Clergy or
People, which is contrary to the Established Laws and Canons of the Church, or
should exercise any Authority in Censures and Excommunications, which is not
allowed him by those Canons, this can in no sense be called the Act of the
Church, nor is any one bound to obey him in it; and though such a Bishop should
do any Schismatical Act, the Church is not Schismatical, because he did not
pursue the Laws of the Church, in what he did, but gratified his own Humor and
Passion. If the Church indeed Unites upon Schismatical Principles, as the
Novatians and Donatists did, whatever the Bishops do in pursuance of such
Principles is the Act of the Church, and if the Bishops be Schismatics, the
Church is so too; but when there is nothing Schismatical in the Constitution of
the Church, the personal Schism of Bishops cannot make their Churches
Schismatical.

And though the Primitive Churches before the Empire turned Christian had not
such a Firm and Legal Constitution, as the Church of England now has, yet a
Constitution they had, which consisted either of Apostolical Rules handed down
by Tradition, and confirmed by long custom and usage, or the Canons of
particular Councils, which in ordinary cases made standing Laws of Discipline
and Government, and in extraordinary cases provided for new Emergent
difficulties; and antecedently to all these positive Constitutions, they were
all under the obligation of that great Law of Catholic Communion. So that the
Government of the Church since the Apostles days, was never so entirely in the
Bishops Breast, that what he did, should be thought the Act of the Church, any
farther than as he complied with those Laws, by which the Church was to be
Governed: and therefore there was reason in those days to distinguish between
the Act of the Bishop and the Act of the Church.

As to show you this particularly in the case before us. The Church of Rome
from the time of the Apostles had observed Easter on the day of the
Resurrection, which is the first day of the week, or the Lords day, the Asian
Churches on the 14th day of the Month; and therefore the Bishop of Rome,
according to the Laws of that Church, might require all the Members of his
Church, to observe Easter according to the usage of the Church of Rome, and
might regularly inflict Church Censures upon the obstinate and refractory; and
this would be accounted the Act of the Church, because it was in pursuance of
the Laws and Constitutions of it. But there was no Canon, nor Custom in the
Church of Rome, to deny Communion to Foreign Churches, who observed their own
Customs in this matter, and would not conform to the Custom of the Church of
Rome. Nay, there was the Practice and Example of Former Times against it; for
Anicetus Bishop of Rome received Polycarp, an Asian Bishop, to Communion,
though they could not agree about this matter. And therefore when Victor
Schismatically Excommunicated the Asian Churches for this different observation
of Easter, it was his Personal Act, not the Act of the Church of Rome, which
had no such Law, and owned no such Custom: and therefore though this might make
Pope Victor a Schismatic, it could not make the Church of Rome Schismatical;
the guilt went no farther than Victors Person, unless other Persons voluntarily
made themselves guilty, by abetting and espousing the Quarrel.

So that had Victor persisted in his Excommunication of the Asiatick Churches,
none had been guilty of Schism but himself, and such as approved, and consented
to it, but the Body of the Clergy and People, who had not consented unto it,
had been Innocent, and therefore any Catholic peaceable Christian, who lived
in Rome in those Days, might have Communicated with the Church of Rome without
Schism.

The like may be said of the Quarrels and Controversies of particular Bishops,
which have sometimes ended in formal Schisms, and denouncing Excommunication
against each other; which cannot make their Churches Schismatical, any further
than they take part with their respective Bishops. For this is rather a
Personal Schism and Separation, than a Church Schism: neither of them Separate
from the Communion of the Church, under the Notion of such a Church, though
they Separate from each others Communion upon some personal Quarrels.

This was the Case of St. Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and some other Bishops in
those days, which were Catholic Bishops, and maintained Communion with the
Catholic Church, but yet Separated from each other, which is a very great
fault, as all Contentions and Divisions in the Church are, but has not the Evil
and Destructive Nature of a Church Schism.

But you will say, can we Communicate with a Church without Communicating with
its Bishop? or can we Communicate with a Schismatical Bishop, without
Communicating in his Schism?

I Answer, Yes, we may Communicate with a Schismatical Bishop, without
Communicating in his Schism. When Schism is his personal fault, our Communion
with him makes us no more guilty of it, than of any other Personal fault, our
Bishop is guilty of. While we take care to Communicate with him in no
Schismatical Act, no Man is bound to forsake the Communion of the Church for
the Personal faults of his Bishop.

So that the Roman Christians might Communicate with the Church of Rome without
Schism, notwithstanding Pope Victors Schismatical Excommunication of the Asian
Churches. And now the only difficulty that remains is, whether the Christians
of Rome might have Communicated with the Asiatick Churches notwithstanding
Victor had Excommunicated them, for if they could not, then they must
inevitably partake in Victors Schism, if his sentence obliged them to deny
Communion to the Asian Churches. And in answer to this we may consider.

2. That those, who Condemned the Excommunication of the Asian Churches, did in
so doing own their Communion, which is one way, and the Principal way of
maintaining Communion, between Churches at a Distance, who cannot actually
Communicate with each other.

3. That Victor being the Bishop of Rome, who had the supreme Authority of
receiving in, or shutting out of the Communion of that Church, if any Persons
of the Asian Communion had come to Rome, private Christians could not receive
them into the Communion of the Church without the Bishops Authority, and
therefore could not actually Communicate with them in the public Offices of
Religion, though they owned their Communion; but this is no more their fault,
than the Excommunication of the Asian Churches was; they Communicate with their
own Church, and would be very glad that the Asians, that are among them, might
be received into Communion, but they have no Authority to do it, and therefore
the fault is not theirs, for this is not to Renounce the Communion of the Asian
Christians, but is only a forced Suspension of Communion.

4. If the Christians of Rome should Travel into Asia, I doubt not, but that
they might very lawfully Communicate with the Asian Churches, notwithstanding
they were Excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome. For the Bishop of Rome had no
just cause to Excommunicate the Bishops and Churches of Asia, and therefore the
Sentence is void of it self; and the Roman Christians when they are in Asia,
are not under the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, and
therefore must not forbear nor suspend Communion with the Asian Churches,
unless they will justify this Schismatical Excommunication. The Jurisdiction
of a particular Bishop is confined within the Bounds of his own Church, and
every Christian is Subject to the Authority of the Church where he is; and
therefore though the Roman Christians at Rome cannot receive the Excommunicated
Asians to their Communion without the Authority of their Bishop, yet when they
are in Asia, where the Bishop of Rome has no Authority over them, they may and
ought to join themselves to the Communion of the Asian Churches, during their
abode among them, if the Asians would receive them without Commendatory Letters
from their Bishop, which they could not have in such a case as this.

Thus Sir, I have considered the Case you put about Pope Victors
Excommunicating the Asian Churches, which is not a real, but a feigned Case,
for there was no actual Schism upon it, as I perceive some body had told you,
there was. And yet supposing it had been so, I have shown you, how the Roman
and Asian Churches might have maintained Communion with each other, and that
the case of private Christians was not so desperate, as you represent it.

Your following exceptions concerning National Communion, Latters 3. p. 22.
and National Churches, and the possibility that there should be several Sound
and Orthodox parts of the Church at the same place, have been sufficiently
considered already: and you twit me so often with my repetitions, that though I
find you want very frequent repetitions to make you understand the plainest
sense, yet I will for my Readers sake and my own, correct that fault.

Your attempt to prove Congregational Churches from 1 Cor. 14. 23. has been so
often answered by p. 24.
the Presbyterian as well as Episcopal Divines, that to save my self the labor
of transcribing, I shall refer you to them, and particularly to the Defense of
Dr. Still. Vnr. of Separ. p. 392. etc. where you may find this matter largely
debated, in answer to Dr. Owen's Original of Churches.

You say, it is evident that one of these (Separate Churches) must needs be cut
off from Christ's Body. p. 26.
I readily grant it; for Christ has but one Body, which is one Communion; and
therefore two Churches, which are not in Communion with each other, cannot both
belong to the same Body, or the one Catholic Church; but the Church which is
the Schismatic, according to the Language of the Primitive times, is out of
the Catholic Church, extra Ecclesiam foris, as is discourst at large in the
Vindication of the Defense.

In the next place you endeavor to make me contradict my self, in talking of
occasional Communion and occasional Membership, and different Relations, when
elsewhere I assert, That the Communion of the Church does not make us Members
of any particular Church. But pray Sir, where do I assert this? I am sure I
assert the quite contrary, that Church Communion consists in Church Membership.
I say indeed, That Church Communion Primarily and Principally refers to the
Universal Church, Resol. of Cases. p. 13,
not to any particular Church or Society of Christians. That a Member is a
Member of the whole Body, not merely of any part of it. That Baptism, which is
the Sacrament of our admission into the Covenant of God, and the Communion of
the Church, does not make us Members of any particular Church, as such, but of
the Universal Church. And I do as plainly assert, that every true Catholic
Christian is a Member of the Universal Church, and as such is a Member of every
particular Church, which is a sound part of the Universal Church. That no Man
can properly be said to Communicate with any Church, whatever Acts of Communion
he may perform in it, who does not Communicate with it as a Member, and that
therefore to talk of Occasional Communion, in the sense of our Dissenters, is
as absurd as to talk of an Occasional Membership; these are the very Principles
on which I dispute against those absurd Distinctions of constant and occasional
Communion, p. 30.
which I confess to be absurd, and a Contradiction to all the Principles of
Catholic Communion, and therefore you are concerned to answer this absurdity,
not I. I have charged this absurdity upon our Occasional Communicants, and let
any man take it off, that can.

But are you not Sir, admirably qualified to Answer Books, without so much as
understanding the general scope and design of the Book you Answer, without
knowing what makes for you or against you?

As for your next Question, How does it appear? that it is necessary to
Communion with the Catholic Church, that we must perform the constant Acts of
Communion in that part of the Catholic Church, where we constantly live. You
ought instead of asking this Question, to have shown, that what proofs I have
alleged for this are not conclusive, or do not sufficiently prove the thing;
but your Question insinuates, that I have said nothing at all about it, or at
least that you do not know, that I have, though it be the Principal Design of
that discourse, and then I am a very careless writer, or you a very careless
Reader. But the Answer to it in short is this, That every Christian is Bound to
live in Communion with the Catholic Church, no Man lives in Communion with the
Church, who does not perform the External visible Acts of Communion, when he
may do it without sin; The whole Catholic Church being but one Communion,
whoever Communicates with any sound part of it, Communicates with the whole; no
Man can ordinarily Communicate in a Church, in which he does not ordinarily
live, and therefore if he be bound at all to the External and visible Acts of
Communion, he must perform them in the Church wherein he lives, and in so
doing, if it be a true Catholic Church, he lives in Communion with the whole
Catholic Church.

But you attempt to prove, That you are not bound to Communicate so much as
sometimes with a sound part of the Catholic Church, Ibid.
because you live where there is such an one.

And this you prove from Mr. Chillingworth's Authority, who says, that if you
(speaking to the Papists) require the belief of any Error among the conditions
of your Communion, our Obligation to Communion with you cease. Now is not
this an admirable proof, that we are not bound to Communicate with a sound part
of the Church, where we live, because we are not bound to Communicate with an
erroneous Church, which imposes the belief of her Errors as Terms of
Communion? Is not this a wonderful sound Church? And are not you a very subtle
Arguer?

You produce another passage of Mr. Chillingworth, by which I cannot tell what
you intend to prove, unless it be, that there is no need, there should be any
External or Visible Church-Society, so Men do but Profess the Faith of Christ;
which seems to be the sense of your foregoing Paragraph. But the words are
these; I believe our Savior ever since his Ascension, has had in some place
or other a Visible true Church on Earth, I mean, a Company of Men, that professed
at least so much as was necessary to Salvation; and I believe there will be
some where or other such a Church to the Worlds end. This is his answer to that
Popish Question about the perpetuity of the Visible Church; whereby it appears,
that this Company of Men he speaks of, are not single and scattered
Individuals, which are no Visible Church, but he means a Formed and Visible
Church-Society: and his Answer is true, though there were never a sound Church
in the World. For a corrupt Church, which retains all the Essentials of Faith
and Worship, is a true Visible Church, and this is the meaning of Mr.
Chillingworth's Answer; but how this proves, that there is no need there should
be any Visible Church at all, or that Christians are not bound to actual
Communion with the sound and Orthodox Church wherein they live, is past my
understanding.

At the same rate you defend your self against me in your Preface, by the
Authority of those two excellent Persons, the Dean of Canterbury, and the Dean
of Saint Paul's. Dr. Stillingfleet had asserted, That all things necessary to
Salvation, are plain in Scripture, to all that sincerely endeavor to
understand them; hence S. C. infers, That the Governors of our Church have no
Authority to teach Truth, or to condemn Errors, and all the People are become
Prophets, Answer to several Treatises, p. 272. etc.
and all their Articles, Constitutions, and Ordinances, have been composed and
enjoined by an usurped Authority; and if he had added, as he might have done
with the same reason, And all Church Communion is needless, it had been exactly
what you aim at in this Citation. The Dr. vindicates his Doctrine from such a
wild Fanatical inference. 1. By showing the intention of those Principles,
which was plainly to lay down the Foundations of a Christian Faith, living in
the Communion of our Church. And if this was his design, as he says, it was,
certainly he could neither before nor after say any thing, which should
overthrow the necessity of Church Communion; and then he can say nothing
against me, nor for you. 2. He distinguishes between the necessaries to
Salvation, and to the Government of the Church: that is, what is necessary for
every Christian, p. 275.
considered in a private Capacity to know and believe, to make him capable of
Salvation; and what care the Church must take to instruct the ignorant, to
satisfy the doubting, to direct the unskilful, and to help the weak; and not
barely to provide for necessity but safety, and not barely the safety of
particular persons, but of it self; p. 276.
which cannot be done without prudent Orders, setting the bounds of Men's
Employments, etc. i. e. though it is possible for a private Christian, who
lives alone, and has the use of the Bible in a Language which he understands,
by diligent and honest inquiries to find out so much truth, as is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, yet this does not overthrow the necessity of a settled
Ministry, and a regular Authority in the Church; all this I firmly assent to,
and yet do as firmly believe the necessity of Church Communion, when it may be
had upon Lawful Terms, and so does this Reverend Person also: and therefore I
cannot look upon your alleging his Authority against me, to have any other
design than to affront the Dean for his excellent Pains in vindicating the
Communion of our Church, and showing people the Evil and Danger of Separation.
He has sufficiently declared what his Judgment is about Separation, and
therefore I need not concern my self any farther to prove that he is not my
Adversary in this Cause.

At the same rate you deal with that great Man (as you deservedly call him) Dr.
Tillotson, who says, Preface.
I had much rather persuade any one to be a good Man, than to be of any Party
and denomination of Christians whatsoever; for I doubt not but the belief of
the Ancient Creed, provided we entertain nothing that is destructive of it,
together with a good life, will certainly save a Man; and without this, no man
can have reasonable hopes of Salvation, no not in an Infallible Church, if
there were any such to be found in the World. How does this oppose me, who
assert the necessity of Church Communion? Is the Catholic Church then, and the
Communion of Saints, no part of our Creed? and is not Schism destructive to
these great Articles of our Faith? or is Schism, which is the breach of
Christian Charity properly so called (which is the Love and Charity, which the
Members of the same Body, ought to have for each other, and consists in Unity
and Communion) consistent with a good Life, if by that we understand an
Universal goodness, of which Charity is the most vital and essential part?

But do you indeed think, Sir, that the Dean believes a Man may be saved
without Communion with any Church, when it may be had without Sin? when in the
very next Paragraph he so earnestly exhorts them to Communion with the Church
of England? I can easily forgive your usage of me, since I find you cannot Read
the best Books without perverting them, and that you never spare any Man's
Reputation to serve your Designs: for your Reproaches and your Commendations
are but different ways of abuse, though I confess, I should rather choose to be
reproached by you.

Your last Consideration is, whether it be a good way to convert Schismatics,
Letter 3. p. 29.
to prove that Schism is as Damning a Sin, as Murder or Adultery. Truly Sir,
St. Cyprian and St. Austin, and all the Ancient Fathers of the Church, thought
this a very good way, for they insisted very much upon this Argument; and if
Men will not forsake their Schism, though the Salvation of their Souls be
endangered by it, I am apt to think, that no other Arguments will persuade
them. And if this be true (as I verily believe it is, and shall believe so,
till I see the Third Chapter of the Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still.
fairly answered) I think it the greatest Charity in the World, to warn Men of
it; and if it should prove by their perverseness no Charity to them, it is
Charity to my own Soul, and delivers me from the guilt of their Blood, whether
such Doctrine Preach Men into, or out of, the Church.

And now for your parting Blow. Certainly if our Church required Conformity to
its Rites and Ceremonies as necessary to Salvation, It could not blame Men for
dividing from it. Yes certainly upon such a Supposition, the Church could and
would blame Men for their Separation, though it may be, they might not deserve
to be blamed: for no doubt, the more necessary the Church judges her
Constitutions, the more she will blame Dissenters.

But he, who tells us, or he says nothing, that the divine Spirit confines his
Influences and Operations to the Unity of the Church in such Conformity, not
only makes such Conformity necessary to Salvation, but imputes to the Church
the Damnation of many Thousands of Souls, who might expect to be saved upon
other Terms. That the Divine Spirit confines his influences (ordinarily) to the
Unity of the Church I do assert, but that this is in Conformity to the Church
of England, I do not assert. For Conformity to the Church of England is not
Essential to the Unity of the Catholic Church: for every Church has authority
to prescribe its own Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, in Conformity to the
general Rules of the Gospel. And therefore though the Unity of the Church is
necessary to entitle Men to the ordinary influences of Gods Grace, and
consequently is necessary to Salvation, yet Conformity to the Church of England
is not necessary to the Unity of the Church, because Christians who live under
the Government and Jurisdiction of other Churches, may and do preserve the
Unity of the Church without conformity to the Church of England. Obedience
indeed, and Subjection to Church Authority in all Lawful things, is necessary
to the Unity of the Church, and necessary to Salvation, and consequently it is
a necessary Duty to conform to all the Lawful and Innocent Customs of the
Church wherein we live; but this does not make the particular Laws of
Conformity, which are different in different Churches, to be necessary to
Salvation, unless you will say the Church has no Authority but only in things
absolutely necessary to Salvation; which destroys all the external Order and
Discipline of the Church, and charges all the Churches in the World, with
destroying Men's Souls, if any persons be so Humorsom and Peevish as to break
Communion with them for such Reasons. But such kind of Cavils as these, you may
find answered at large in the Vindication of the Defense; and thither I refer
you, if you desire to see any more of it.

Thus Sir, I have with great patience answered your Questions, not that they
needed or deserved any Answer, but that you might not think your self too much
despised, nor other weak People think your Questions unanswered. And now I have
given you an Answer, I shall take the Confidence to give you a little Ghostly
Counsel too, which you need a great deal more than an Answer.

I have not troubled my Head to inquire Scrupulously, who you are, nor do I use
to trust Common Fame in such matters: but though I know not you, yet I perceive
you know me; and if as you say, p. 1.
you have often heard me with great Satisfaction, and as you hope not without
edifying thereby, I think it would have become you to have treated me with a
little more Civility than you have done, if it be in your Nature to be Civil to
a Clergyman. And I wish more for your own sake, than for mine, you had done
so; for I thank God I have learnt not only by the precepts and example of my
great Master, but by frequent Trials, to go through good Report and evil
Report, and to bear the most invidious and Spightful Reflections with an equal
mind. But as contemptible as a Clergyman is now, these things will be
accounted for another day.

For it is very evident, that you have a great Spite at the whole Order,
whatever personal kindness you may have for some Men; they are but a Herd of
Clergymen, and you know no other use of a Bishop, but to oversee, admonish,
Preface.
and Censure those, who are apt to go beyond their due Bounds. I confess this
way of Railery is grown very fashionable, and I perceive you are resolved to be
in the Mode, and to be an accomplished Gentleman; but I never knew a man that
was seriously religious, who durst affront the Servants for their Masters sake.

But you Sir, are in the very height of the fashion, and think their Office as
contemptible, as their Persons generally are thought to be: you hope to be
saved without understanding the Notion of Church Government as it is intreagued
by Clergymen of all sides. And I hope you may be saved without understanding a
great many other things besides Church Government, or else I doubt your
Salvation may be hazardous.

But this is too plain a contempt of all Church Authority; for though the
Church of Rome has usurpt an unlimited and Tyrannical Power under the Notion of
Church Government, yet what has the Sound Church of England (as you own it)
done? What occasion did I give for this Censure? who have expressly confined the
Exercise of Church Authority to Church Communion, Resol. of Cases, p. 39.
to receiving in, and putting out of the Church. And if the Church be no
Society, I would desire to know what it is; and if it be a Society, how can any
Society subsist without Authority in some Persons to receive in and to shut out
of the Society? But the truth is, tho you pretend to be in Communion with the
Church of England, you make the Church it self a very needless and
insignificant thing, for you know no necessity of Communicating with any
Church, you will not allow it to be Schism to Separate from the Church, you
think it a pretty indifferent thing, whether Men be Baptized or not, or by whom
they are Baptized: what your Opinion is about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
I do not know, though if you are consistent with your self, I doubt that is a
very indifferent Ceremony too.

Truly to deal plainly with you, I think you have more need to be taught your
Catechism than to set up for a Writer of Books; and let me in time warn you,
what the consequence of this way you are in, is likely to be, which is no less
than a contempt of all revealed and instituted Religion, and consequently of
Christianity. Natural Religion may subsist without any positive Institutions,
but revealed Religion never did, and never can; for when God Transacts with
Mankind in the way of a Visible Covenant, there must be some Visible Ministers,
and Visible Sacraments of this Covenant. And when the Evangelical Ministers and
Sacraments fall into contempt, Men must think meanly of Christianity, and
return to what they call natural Religion, which is a Religion without a Priest
and without a Sacrifice; which cannot save a Sinner, but by uncovenanted Grace
and Mercy; which no Man can be sure of, and which no Man shall find, who
rejects a Priest and Sacrifice of Gods providing.

And to convince you of this, you may observe, that the contempt of the Notion
of a Church, of the Evangelical Priesthood and Sacraments, is originally owing
to Deists and Socinians, to those who profess to believe in God, and to worship
him according to the Laws of natural Religion, but believe nothing at all of
Christ; or to those, who profess to believe in Christ, but believe him only to
be a mere Man, and a great Reformer of Natural Religion, but make nothing at
all of his Priesthood and Sacrifice. If Christ be our great High Priest, and we
must hope for Salvation only in virtue of his Sacrifice, There must be some way
appointed to apply his Merits and Salvation to us, and this will convince us of
the necessity of Church Communion, and a visible Confederation by Sacraments of
divine appointment: See Vindic. of the Def. cap. 3.
But if Christ came only as a great Prophet to instruct us more perfectly in
the Rules of Virtue, and to give us more certain Hopes of a future State, there
can be no more necessity of a Church now, than there was in a State of Nature.
Christians may associate, if they please, for Acts of public worship, and they
may break Company, when they please, without any danger; and the Evangelical
Sacraments can be only significant Ceremonies, which may be used or let alone,
as every one likes best.

At this Rate you every where discourse; and I believe so well of our
Dissenters, that though they would be glad to be excused from the guilt of
Schism, yet they will not thank you, for excusing them upon such Principles, as
tend to undermine Christianity; and I believe so well of you, that though you
affect to talk in the modish way, yet you do not understand whither it tends:
and I hope this timely Caution may prevent your embracing those Principles,
whereon your Conclusions are Naturally Built.

Another thing I would warn you of, is, that these loose Principles of
Church Communion do not tempt you to Schism, and State-Factions, which usually
go together. You pretend indeed to be in constant Communion with the Church of
England; but according to the Principles of your Letters no Church in the World
can have any hold of you, every Man is a Communicant at his own pleasure who
thinks he may part without Sin; And it is much to be suspected, that no Man,
who is a hearty lover of the Church of England, can make such a Zealous Defense
for Dissenters, who has not some private reasons for his Zeal: and when Men are
not Endeared to each other by one Communion, it is to be feared they are linked
together by some other Common Interest. Now should you prove a Schismatic, to
say no worse, it will not excuse you, how many Fine Questions soever you can
ask about it.

And that which will greatly endanger you, is that great Opinion you have of
your self: for some men are so wanton as to espouse a Schism or Faction only to
show their Wit in Defending it, and to make themselves considerable by
espousing a Party. I will not so much wrong you, as to say that you have shown
any great Wit or Judgment in this Cause; but it is evident to every impartial
Man, who reads your Letters, that you have betrayed too great a conceit of
both, and that is a great deal the more dangerous of the two; for true Wit and
Judgment will secure Men from those mischiefs, which a vain conceit of it
betrays them to.

And now Sir, all that I shall add, concerns your way of Writing, which neither
becomes a wise Man, nor a fair Disputant; you have not offered any Argument to
disprove any one thing I have said, you have no where shown the weakness of my
Arguments to prove what I undertook, but have at all Adventures asked a great
many Questions, and generally nothing to the purpose. Now it had been easy to
have asked you as many cross Questions, which had been as good an Answer to your
Questions, as your Questions are to my Discourse; and thus People might have
gazed on us, and have been never the wiser. For to raise a great many
difficulties only tends to Skepticism, and will never end a Dispute. I am loath
to mind you of the Proverb, because I do not think the application belongs to
you; but yet it should make any Man of Wit ashamed of such Methods of Dispute,
wherein he may be outdone by a Man of no Wit.

I confess I have with some regret stole time from better Employment to answer
your Letters, but do not think my self bound to do so, as often as you think
fit to give a public Challenge. This Controversy, if you had pleased, might
have been ended more privately; which had been less trouble to me, though it
may be you thought it might have been less glorious to your self, which I
presume was your reason of first spreading your Letter in Writing, and then of
Printing it. I shall not envy your Glory; I had rather continue mean and
obscure in a humble Obedience to Church and State, than to raise the most
Glorious Triumphs and Trophies to my memory, by giving the least disturbance to
either. And that you and all sober Christians may be of the same mind, is the
hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your very Humble Servant. W. S.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger resulting from the
change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and
Stated, by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts.

8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether it be Lawful to Separate from a Church
upon the account of promiscuous Congregations and mixed Communions?

9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, and some
other parts of Divine Service prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. The
first Part.

11. Certain Cases of Conscience, etc. The second Part.

12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think
they can profit most.

13. A serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late
Cases about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church
of England.

14. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants.

16. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak
Brethren.

17. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc.

1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected.

3. The difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.


