A MESSAGE Sent from both Houses of Parliament to the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the 16 of March 1641, Concerning special matters.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to
the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

May it please your Majesty.
YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, having considered your Majesty's
Reply to their Answer, touching such persons as have been licenced by your
Majesty to pass into Ireland, do most humbly beseech your Majesty to
believe, that they shall always with thankfulness and joy receive from your
Majesty and satisfactory Answer to their just requests: And, as they hope, they
shall find in your Majesty a readiness to rectify those things, which have
been done to their prejudice, so will they be careful to remove all
apprehensions of their Actions or Speeches, which may seem to cast any
dishonor upon your Majesty.

For your Majesty's better satisfaction concerning the positive affirmation,
that many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels (after the
Ports were stopped by order of both houses) have been suffered to pass by your
Majesty's immediate warrant. May it please your Majesty to consider that herein
they have affirmed nothing but what they had cause to believe was true, the
grounds whereof they humbly present to your Majesty.

The first ground is this, that both Houses of Parliament, (having upon your
Majesty's commendation taken into their care the suppression of the Rebellion
of Ireland) had reason to be especially watchful over the Ports, because the
Rebels abounding in numbers of men for the most part ignorant of the use of
their Arms could by no means become dangerous or formidable to this Kingdom,
but by the access of Soldiers and Commanders, wherewith they were like to be
furnished either out of France or Planders, from both which places the passage
into Ireland is speedy and easy through this Kingdom, and thereof they could
not choose but be very sensible of whatsoever gave liberty or opportunity to
such a passage, as of a very hurtful and dangerous grievance, for prevention
whereof they did upon the seventh of November agree upon an Order and restrain
all passage into Ireland, but upon due and strict examination by such persons
as were trusted to make those Licenses.

A second ground that the other License granted to the Lord Delvin, and then
acknowledged by your Majesty's Answer, were such (both in regard of the persons
to whom they were granted, and the extent of the words in which they were
granted,) as were apt to produce such an effect as is mentioned in that
positive Affirmation, that is, to open away for the passage of Papists and
other dangerous persons to join with the Rebels, and to be Heads and
Commanders amongst them, which is thus proved.

The Warrant granted to Colonel Butler, (since the order of restraint by both
Houses of Parliament) did extend to all Ports of England and Scotland, and did
give free passage to himself and to his Company, without any qualification of
persons, or Limitation of Number, and this Colonel was himself a Papist, had
a Brother in Rebellion, and General of the Rebels in Munster, was expected,
and very much desired by those Rebels, who for a long time kept a Regiment to
be commanded by him, as we have been credibly informed.

The second was granted to a Son of the Lord Nettersfield, which Lord had
four sons in England since the Rebellion, one of which is settled in
England, three others intended to pass into Ireland, and were all dangerous
persons being Papists, bred in the Wars, in the service of the King of Spain,
and one of them lately become a Jesuit.

The third to the Lord Delvin extends to himself, and four persons more
unnamed, that one of those who should have past with him is taken to be a
Jesuit, and another who calls himself Ploncket, seems to be a man of some
breeding and quality, and like to have been serviceable to the Rebels, and to
have done mischief, if he had gone over.

The fourth to Sir George Hamilton, and three more unnamed; This Gentleman is
likewise a professed Papist, and may be doubted to be of the party of the
Rebels, one of that Name being mentioned in the instructions of Sempill the
Jesuit, amongst diverse other dangerous persons of the popish party in Scotland
and Ireland, which instructions were found in a ship stayed in Cornwall, which
was going into Ireland with diverse Jesuits, soldiers, and others for the
encouragement of the Rebels.

A third ground is this, That by virtue and Authority of these Licenses,
several persons have passed over, which are now in Actual Rebellion, and
Joined with the Rebels, and some have command amongst them which is thus proved.

One Captain Sutton, did by virtue and Authority of your Majesty's License
imbarque at White-haven, in the Coompany of Colonel Butler, and was driven
back by foul weather; Whereupon the Colonel stayed, and went to Chester, but
that Captain reimbarqued himself in the same Bottom, and passed into
Ireland, where he went into Rebellion with the Lord Dunsany, and has since
obtained the place of a Colonel amongst the Rebels, as we are very credibly
informed.

Two of the Sons of the Lord Nettersfield, one a Jesuit, and the other a
Soldier, passed into Ireland in December last, both of them by virtue of your
Majestes Warrant, as we have cause to believe, for that they went both together
in one Ship, and the License acknowledged to be granted by your Warrant must
needs be granted to one of them, seeing the other Brother, who lately
endeavored to pass over, did produce no License, and upon his Examination does
absolutely deny that he had any.

A fourth ground (which we humbly offer to your Majesty) is this, That your
Majesty cannot be assured that no other did pass upon your License, as your
Majesty does conceive, and are pleased to express in your Answer, and that we
had great cause to believe that diverse other had passed over by your Warrant,
besides the persons aforementioned, and that for these reasons;

1. Because we received such a general Information, that diverse now in the
head of the Rebels were passed by your Majesty's License, which being true in
part, and easy ^o be effected, in regard of the Nature and extent of the
Warrants, and probable to be attempted, in regard of the subtilty and
vigilancie of that party, to make use of all advantages, seemed to deserve
credit, which we should not have given to it, if it had been a naked
information without such circumstances.

2. Because we had concurring Advertisements from Ireland and Chester, that
diverse Priests, Jesuits, and popish Commanders had passed over, and were
landed there, and particularly some of Colonel Butlers Company, and that the
Officers of the Ports had kept no Entry of the names of these persons, or of
the Warrants by which they were transported.

These we hope will be sufficient to persuade your Majesty to believe, that as
we had some cause to give credit to the said Informations, so we had no
intention to make any ill use of them to your Majesty's dishonor, but did
impute the blame to your Ministers, who might have been more careful to have
informed your Majesty of the Quality of those persons named in your Licenses,
and so to have limited them, that they might not have extended to others, as
they did, how many and dangerous soever.

And they pray your Majesty to rest assured, that they shall always be tender
of your Honor and reputation with your good Subjects, and for this cause have
made this true Declaration of the full state of this matter, that they may
think no otherwise of it then the truth, and in all things shall labor to
establish a good understanding and confidence, betwixt your Majesty, and your
people, which they heartily desire, and pray for, as the chiefest means of
preserving the Honor, safety, and prosperity of your Majesty, and your
Kingdom.

FINIS.
To the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament now
assembled.
The humble (a) Petition of John (b) Salvin in the County of Durham, Gent.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas the Inhabitants of several Counties have by petition to this
Honorable House made known theirs and the Kingdoms grievances, your
Petitioner (though but a private member of the Commonwealth) suffering in like
manner, most humbly addresseth himself to this Honorable Assembly, for that
his private injuries are not only to himself, but have relation to the
public, as by the sequel will appear.

Your humble Petitioner having been here at London nine months, four in
obedience to the (c) House of Peers, the other five about his most necessary
and urgent occasions, is now in great want and penury, occasioned by some of
his nearest friends and familiar acquaintance who are (d) Papists, and of the
most dangerous of that sect in the County of Durham, yet through their wealth
are countenanced in their unconscionable ways by the Bishop of Durham his
Officers, Doctor Cousins and others, (e) which Doctor Cousins had (and has yet
when he resideth in the County) resort to Master George Collingwood of Dalden
his house, a great Papist, and one of your Petitioners oppressors, and there
had conference with his Priests, with whom he holds correspondence. And the
Bishop not withstanding he knows the houses of (f) Dalden, Hebburne,
Walworth, Thornley, Harbor house, and other places in the County, to be
receptacles of Priests and Jesuits, Nurseries of Popery, and to be frequented
by the Papists, in greater multitudes on their Saints days and Festivals, then
diverse Parish Churches in the County by the Protestants on the Lords day; yet
never did nor yet does take course (in these dangerous times) ^o discover or
suppress them and in time of common danger did make (g) dep^ty Lieutenants of
those, whose wives he knew to be professed P^pists, and their children so
educated and brought up. Neither does the Bishop wrong the County (only) by
his connivency and countenance to the P^pists, but by his oppressions in
imposing and gathering heavy and injurious assessements concerning the Militia,
and other affairs of the County, great profits arising thereby to his (h)
Officers and Servants, and in the exercising of his Ius Regale, the (i)
Inhabitants of the County feel his heavy and oppressive hand.

That though the Bishop knew your Petitioner and his children to suffer in his
estate, and for (k) Religion sake most unjustly, yet your Petitioners mother
and uncle being rich Papists, found his favor, although the Bishop expressed
himself upon the hearing of their most unnatural dealing against your
Petitioner and his children* that his mother and uncle did not deserve to have
at their death Christian burial.

That your Petitioners life and liberty through inexpressive grief, penury,
and want, ^re in danger, (l) his rents and present maintenance wrongfully
detained, your Petitioners mother and uncle withholding from him besides 120.
pounds per annum, and has damnified your Petitioner 3000. pounds and more, and
do (m) endeavor to get all his lands at a great undervalue, whereby your
Petitioner and his children suffer under the extremity of want and necessity,
because he will not condescend to their cunning and undoing practices.

That although his complaints may seem strange to this Honorable House, being
of a Nephew against an Uncle, a Son against a Mother, yet their (n) strange
usage of your Petitioner and his children, will plead your Petitioners just
excuse to your Honors, as he fully can make appear.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, for that he suffers the said
injuries and oppressions by the malignant party supported as aforesaid, and
has represented to your Honors nothing but what by his duty and the late
Protestation he ought to do in the behalf of the Church, King, and
Commonwealth: That this Honorable and grave Assembly will be pleased to
regulate the said dangerous enormities, by suppressing the aforesaid (o) places
and receptacles, which hitherto the Bishop and his Officers have connived at,
and concealed, being places (as now the times are) known to be dangerous for
entertaining Priests and Jesuits, and their confederates, to have often
meetings, and more now then before. And that the Bishop and his Officers may
make restitution of the moneys they have illegally levied and taken, to the
oppression of the whole County; and that your Petitioner may have such relief
against his Uncle and Mother, as from your great wisdoms and charities his
crying necessi^ies may seem to plead for redress; whereof he humbly waits,
never ce^sing to pray for prosperity on your consultations, etc.

To the Honorable the HOUSE of Commons now in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of John Salvin, Gent.
Shows,
THat in obedience to the agreement made by the Lords Comm ssioners at R^ppon
in the County of York, your Petitioner did contribute with the Inhabitants of
the County of Durham 21. pounds, 10. shillings for his proper part toward the
maintenance of our brethren the Scots, during their abode there, which is part
of the 26000. pounds that this Parliament was pleased to undertake the payment
of, in November last.

That your Petitioner preferred his humble Petition to this Honorable House for
a reimbursement of those moneys which he dutifully disbursed for the
Republique, upon which Petition your Petitioner receiving this answer from some
of the members of this Honorable House, that it would open a gap (if
condiscended unto) to others to sue for the like satisfaction, which according
to the present necessity, the public engagement could not afford. To which
exceptions your Petitioner in all humility, and under your Honors favor,
conceives these satisfactory reasons in his behalf.

1. That the County in general, having sent up Sir William Lambton, Sir Thomas
Riddell, Sir George Vane, Knights, and Thomas Davison Esquire, in December, to
petition this Honorable Assembly in their behalf, for repayment of the 26000.
pounds, the public necessities not affording it, rests contented.

2. That none of the Contributors of that County have occasion in that
deplorable way to press upon your Honors for relief, as your Petitioner
has. First, for that he is necessarily to be here in town about his urgent
affairs. Secondly, for that he has two daughters in London, the one newly
come out of Ireland, in want, and out of service, the other very weak and
infirm, spitting blood, and not able to make service, both of them with your
Petitioner like to perish for want of sustenance.

3. That in the stories of all Commonwealths, their benefactors have been found
to have, if not reward, yet (in time of distress) relief; wherefore your
Petitioner does humbly implore the Honorable House of Commons to take pity of
him, and to repay your Petitioner in this his time of great need (for relief
of him and his poor children) the moneys he (in duty) laid down for the
Common-good.

And he and they shall daily pray, etc.

(a) Discovering, in the practices of the Bishop of Durham, the hypocrisy and
tyranny of the Prelates.

(b) Discovering in his private sufferings the present dangers and grievances
of the County and the Kingdom.

(c) As a witness between Mr. Smart and Doctor Cousins, for which by the
procurement of the Doctor and his Popish adherents this Petitioner is highly
maligned of his friends, with whom they being Papists, the Doctor sideth.

(d) Rebecca Salvin his mother, George Collingwood his uncle, Lancelot Holby:
This George Collingwood is a very dangerous Papist, in great favor with the
Bishop, an agent for the Benedictines, and their Monasteries, and was a
collectour in our County for those moneys the Papists, by way of benevolence,
gave the Queen, toward the maintenance of the wars against the Scots. This
Lancelot Holby is a dangerous Papist, in favor with the Bishop and his
officers, and a Factour and Agent for the Jesuits and their Colleges beyond
the seas, and does sue in their behalf for moneys etc.

(e) Doctor Cousins viewing the Altar at Dalden, being demanded by Mr.
Collingwood what he thought thereof, made answer that if he had an auditory
that did understand latin he would say Mass unto them, for he holds the
Romans missall, and the new Service book intended for Scotland, not to differ
either in practice of Ceremony, or point of Doctrine. And Mr. Maxton a Prebend
of the Church of Durham took a comparison from a pair of bandstrings, saying,
there was no more difference betwixt the Service book intended for Scotland,
and the book of Common prayer, then if one pair of the strings should be but
a hair breadth longer then the other.

(f) Dalden and Hebborne are places near and adjoining to the sea, from whence
are exported and imported Priests Jesuits, Students, moneys, books, or what be
advantageous to the Papists.

(g) Sir William Blaxton deceased. Gerard Salvin Esquire living.

(h) To Sir William Darcy at one time sixty pound; to Mr. William Mallory one
forty pound, and other monyes since; much moneys to Mr. Thomas Laton, and
William Friseul.

(i) Rowland Place of Dinsdale Esquire N. Cook of Redmarshall. The poor of
Medridge.

(k) The petitioners mother being a Papist, presently after his fathers death,
took him from Saint Julians a Protestant School in Harfordshire, and sent him
beyond the seas to be brought up in popery, to which, being very young, he was
by far words soon won, but having since discovered the falsehood and
treachery of that religion, is become a true and sincere Protestant, and has
converted all his children whom he so educateth, for which his mother denies
him and them that maintenance that should come from natural and loving parents.

(l) By his tenant conspiring with his Papist friends, who labor to buy his
lands at a great undervalue, knowing the petitioner to be at a very low eb and
not able for the present to help himself under an unjust pretense, to have a
lease to be made to him by the petitioner for his life, will come to no
account, nor let him have his lands.

(m) Assisted by Edward Wright the Counselor at Law, who with them and the
priest of Dalden, has had meetings to that purpose, the petitioners mother and
uncle having won Edward Wright by great fees and large gifts: my uncle
holding this maxim never to fail. viz. That a man with money enough may
prevail, let his suit be never so unjust, and may moreover wade through
felony, murder and the like treason only excepted, in some of which he has
had success for himself and others.

(n) Known to the whole County, for which they are accounted monstrous.

(o) Where Lancelot Holby, as I am credibly informed, holds suspicious and
dangerous meetings.

FINIS.

