Generation-work: OR A Brief and Seasonable Word, offered to the view and
consideration of the Saints and People of God in this Generation, relating to
the work of the present Age, or Generation we live in.

Wherein is showed, I. What Generation-work is, and how it differs from other
works. II. That Saints in the several Generations they have lived in, have had
the proper and peculiar works of their Generations. III. That it is a thing of
very great co^cernment for a Saint to aeternal to, and be industrious in, the
work of his Generation. IV. Wherein does the work of the present Generation
lie. V. How each one in particular may find out that part or parcel of it, that
is properly his work in his Generation. VI. How Generation-work may be so
carried on, as that God may be served in the Generation.


The first part.

By John Tillinghast, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel, at Trunch in Norfolk.

Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generations, and Noah walked
with God. LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson for L^vewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley, 1655.

To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
Right Honorable,
AS the Lord Jehovah when he first chose Israel to be a peculiar people to
himself, out of all the Nations of the world, did give unto them righteous
Judges, Moses, Joshua Gideon, Sampson, Samuel, etc. such as were after his own
heart, and of his own raising up: So is it his promise to his people in the
last days (before the dross of Sion shall be taken away, and her tin purged,
and she called the City of righteousness, the faithful City) that he will
restore their Judges as AT THE FIRST, and their Counselors as AT THE
BEGINNING, Isa. 1.25, 26.

How high the faith and expectations of Gods people of late years have been, as
to the accomplishment of these things, is known to many, and what uncessant
prayers have been put up to the Throne of Grace, for the same, is best known to
the Lord. That you are raised up this day, to be the repairers of our breaches,
and the restorers of paths to dwell in, is (we hope) the long expected, and much
looked for fruit of this our faith and prayer; which as it does cause rejoicing
within many hearts, so has it fixed the eyes of most upon you to observe what
great thing that is which God by you is about to do for his poor people.

Not to teach you (Right Honorable) what is your work, but to declare what that
is which the Lord in the age we live in is about to do, and expects his people
should eye and follow him in, is the design of this little Treatise, which
although it had its conception some months since, and was then designed for
other hands, yet could it not be brought forth until this day, in which it
casts it self into yours, not so much seeking protection (for what is truth
will stand of it self, and what is not shall fall, though by men protected) as
that it might hereby become the more serviceable to that great interest it
pleads for, in doing of which, the Author has obtained whatsoever is herein
his end, desire, or joy.

And now (Right Honorable) God having raised you up, and put into your hands so
great an opportunity, let not the same be lost for want of any improvement
which may be made thereof; this is your day to honor God, and serve your
Generation; let this day slip, and it may be hereafter when you would do the
thing, you shall not have a day to do it. Men, wise men, good men, have fallen
before you, by putting off, and neglecting the work of their Generation take
Feed lest ye also fall through the same example of neglect; THE MORE EMINENT
GODS HAND HAS APPEARED IN RAISING OF YOU, THE MORE NAKED AND REMARKABLE WILL
IT BE IN THROWING OF YOU DOWN, IN CASE YOU FAIL HIM, AS OTHERS BEFORE YOU HAVE
DONE. But I am persuaded better things of you (Right Honorable) and things that
accompany diligence, though I am bold thus to speak: for surely the Lord, who
in an extraordinary way has brought you together, has some work more than
ordinary to do by you; wherein if you shall observe, making it your business to
follow him, ^^ing justly, relieving the oppressed, helping the fatherless;
^eading the cause of the Widow, and walking humbly before him, though the
Nations may rush against, you, as the rushing of many waters, yet the Lord will
rebuke them, and you shall be as a burdensome stone to all your Enemies round
about, who shall weary themselves with you, though all the people of the earth
should be gathered together against you; for behold the day is coming, in which
the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his people, and his indignation
toward his Enemies, which when you shall see, your hearts shall rejoice, and
your bones shall flourish like an herb, and your tongue shall speak and say, Lo
this is our God, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
Salvation: and when the light of this day is come, and the glory of the Lord
shall be risen upon you, it shall then never repent you, that you have put your
hands (though with your lives in them to the work of Christ, but whatsoever you
have herein done or suffered, shall now be your glory, joy, and Crown of
rejoicing, which that you may at this day from Christ obtain, and in the mean
time be faithful in his work, he shall continue to pray for, who is

Your Honors humble and unworthy Servant, John Tillinghast.
July 8. 1653.
To the Saints and people of God in England (Children of the same Father,
Members of the same Body, partakers of the same Spirit, having the same hope)
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
DEarly beloved in the Lord, It is not many years since that this poor Nation,
and you in the same, did sigh and groan by reason of that bondage, both Civil
and Spiritual, which we were in to the will, of tyrann call unjust oppressors,
and the superstitious innovations, and injunctions of Antichristi^n
Taskmasters. What your fears and prayers, yea resolutions to do for God, in
case of deliverance, were at this time, the casting your eye a few years back
again, and taking a view of the state of things without, according as the wheel
did then move, and the frame and carriage of your souls within under all, will
better remember you of, than I can tell you. How suitable the spirits and
actings of many of you who in this day were Gods remembrancers, and Sions
mourners, have since the time God has cast off the heavy yoke, and broken the
bonds of our oppressing persecutors, been to your past prayers and resolutions,
I fear (and yet I hope) when the violence of your distemper shall be over, and
you so far recovered as to weigh things in the balances of righteousness,
love, and impartiality, not so much others, as your selves will discern, and
first condemn. Jerusalem of old expected and waited for the coming of their
Messia^, or Christ their King, yet no sooner news abroad of his being born into
the world but upon the account of a mere worldly interest (viz. fear of tumults
and commotions which might hereupon arise betwixt Herod the usurper, and this
King, to the imbroiling of them in wars who now were in quiet, enjoying their
wealth in peace) they are troubled at it, Matthew. 2.3. I wish a worldly interest
may have no such effect now, as to beget trouble in the spirits of any, at the
coming forth of that mercy, which time was, they both prayed and waited for.
Surely as it savors of great ingratitude toward our most gracious Father to
call mercies given in as an answer of former prayers by the name of Judgments,
so also of no less sloth and negligence, when the glorious arm of God has
been made bare in working wonders for his people, for them to sit still, doing
little or nothing for him. That nothing done of late years comes as an answer
of these prayers put up whilst we were in the house of bondage, none of you
will or can deny: If any thing else be wrought which then we prayed not for, it
is either a superabounding of mercy, beyond what then we were able to ask or
think, or a trial of our faith; If a superabounding of mercy, shall we quarrel
with God and one another for that? and if a trial of our faith, shall we think
that strange which has been the ordinary way of Gods dispensations toward his
in all ages, when he gives forth mercy, then to try their faith, and like a
company of sullen Children shall we wrangle with our Father, and in a humersom
fit throw away our bread, because the crust is on it? O let it not be told in
Neighbor Nations that the God of England has been so kind to his people; and
Saints in England so unkind to their Father, and one unto another.

Why (O ye Saints) should you not all in this day go hand in hand about your
Fathers work? What hinders (unless the corruption of your hearts) your being as
active for the Lord, and as holy as you will? Why should the great work of the
Generation (wherein the cause and honor of your Father and Redeemer is so
deeply engaged) be at a stand, whilst each of you are driving on particular
designs, parties and interests? It is from you alone that God expects this
service; it is work the world cannot do, nor will God own them in the doing of
it; he calls for this from the hands of you his household Servants; neglect it,
and he can raise up others, even out of holes and corners, which shall do the
work, when you shall be thrown by. When the Jews (once the visible people of
God) neglected Generationwork, God threw them by, and brought in the Gentiles;
if Gentile-Churches now grafted in prove fruitless in this work, God may cut
them off, and graft in the Jews again. If those that are visibly the children
of Abraham put off Gods work, God can of stones (great and hard hearted
sinners) ra^se up children to Abraham, which shall do the same When the learned
and righteous Scriles and Pharisees will not own Christ, he can raise up poor
illiterate Fishermen, yea, Publicans (the worst of sinners) sitting at the
receipt of custom, for to do the thing. If Jerusalem the chief City will not
furnish Christ with instruments to carry his work on by, he can find men for
the same (where they were least expected) in the dark waste car^ers of Galilee,
and the little hole of Bethsaida, Joh. 1.44. Christ is never at a loss for
instruments, when he has work to do; That any of you are employed, it is more
his free grace toward you, than from any need that he has of you, he is not
beholding to you for doing his work, but it is you are beholding to him that he
will honor you in it. O therefore Saints awake, awake, put on your beautiful
Garments, shake your selves from your dust, the Sun of right^ousness is rising
upon you, the whole earth begins to be enlightened with his glory, it is now
high time to rouse up your spirits, awake out of sleep, to be up and doing.
Christ your Captain General is abroad in the field upon his march, in the way
to his Kingdom, he will make no halts, if you sleep, loyter, straggle or sit
still, you will be left behind, and lose the sight of your Leader; he will bear
no delays, if you will not now come and kiss him, subject your selves to him,
he will make a riddance of you, and throw you by, as he goes up to his Kingdom.
The times of former neglect God winked at, but now he calls upon all that make
mention of his Name, not to sit still, not to keep silence, nor give him rest,
till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. That you
may do this work, and the same in your hands may prosper I shall (as an
additional word unto the last general Head in the following Discourse) leave
with you these few particulars.

1 Endeavor union with your selves. Divisions will obstruct the work, Union
will further it. The great work in the Apostles time never went on so
gloriously and successfully as when the number of those that believed were of
one heart, and of one soul.

2 Strive after purity. The seven Angels that go out of the Temple with the
seven Vials, their clothing is pure and white linen, Rev. 15.6.

3 Desire God to lay you in with principles suitable to his work, neither below
it, nor above it. As a man's principles are, so will his actions be, principle
being the rule of action. Some men's principles are above generation-work, these
vilify and trample it as a low and carnal thing, and instead of laying
themselves out therein, they slumber and sleep, doing nothing at all. Others
principles are below the work, and instead of acting in it, they are offended
at it. He whose principles are above the work will not do it, for the thing is
low and base in his eyes; and he whose principles are below the work (in case
they continue so to be) shall not do it, for this is an evident sign that God
will lay him by; it being the way of God when he will use a man in a work, to
give him principles as high as that work, and when he will lay a man by, to
blind him first to that work, in which he will lay him by.

4 Carry a meek spirit along with you in the work. When Christ rode as King
into Jerusalem, he rode meek, meek; those that would accompany Christ to his
Kingdom, must be of that spirit their King is of. Moses never failed but once
in the work of his Generation, and it was then when he lost his meek spirit,
Number. 20.10. Eapounded, Psa 106.32. They angered him at the waters of st^ife, so
that it went ill with Moses for their sakes. But for what reason? see v. 33.
because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.
God is often times in the small and still voice, when neither in the Whirlwind,
nor the Earthquake, nor the fire, 1 King. 19.11, 13.

5 And lastly, Be much in praises. Praises in the last times shall have the
same efficaey and effect that prayer in former times has had. In Rev 15.
Whilst the Saints who have gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, are standing on the
Sea of glass, with the Harps of God, and singing the song of Moses, and of the
Lamb, v. 2, 3, 4. The seven Angels with the seven Vials full of the wrath of
God to be poured out upon the heads of the enemies of the Church, issue out of
the Temple, v. 5, 6, 7. And in Rev. 19.1, 3. it is observable, the final ruin
of Babylon comes in as an effect of the frequent praises of Saints; in v. 1.
They sing Hallelujahs -- I heard a voice of much people in heaven saying,
Hallelujah -- and v. 3. Again they said Allelujah, and what followed? her smoke
rose up for ever and ever.

These few perticulars coming to my mind whilst this Epistle was drawing up, I
thought good in this place to insert. I shall no longer detain thee (Spiritual
Friend and Reader) from the thing it self, which trears of that great work
which the cies and hearts of not a few of Gods people at this day are sixed
upon, and taken up with, in reading of which, if thou shall receive any light,
or reap any spiritual benefit, give all the praise to the Lord, and pray for
him, who is

A Companion in the tribulation, and Kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ, J.
T.

A brief and Seasonable Word, humbly offered to the View and Consideration of
the Saints and People of God in this Generation.
Especially to those in whose hands for the present the Work lies, relating to
the Work of the present Age or Generation we live in.
Act. 13.36. For David, after he had served his own Generation, by the will of
God fell on sleep.
THis Chapter for the greatest part contains a rehearsal of that divine and
heavenly Sermon preached by Paul at Antioch. The Subject Matter of his
Discourse is Jesus Christ, the particulars insisted on, are his Death and
Resurrection, the two main Pillars of Christian Religion, the two chief Heads,
or Common-places, to which Paul reduces his whole Gospel, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.

His scope in treating of these being to convince the Jews (who were in
expectation of the Messiah or Christ) That the Messiah was already come, dead
and risen again, and that this Jesus whom he preached unto them was he, and
also to persuade all sorts of men, whether Jews or Gentiles, who expected
Salvation, to look for it no where else but only from this Jesus who was dead
for sins, and raised again for the justification of sinners.

And it seems this was the A^^stles ordinary way, and method of preaching, not
only ^^e, but every where else, especially when he met with any Jews, as
appears, Act. 17.2, 3.

The words read are brought in under the last of these, viz. The Doctrine of
the Resurrection, as the Apostle was proving and clearing that, for having
evidenced Christ's Resurrection from the testimony of many who were
Eyewitnesses of the same, who had both seen him, and conversed with him after
he was risen, verse. 31. He for the further confirmation thereof, makes use of
that notable testimony of the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.10. who seeing beforehand
the Resurrection of Christ, spoke thereof on this wise, Thou shall not suffer
thine holy One to see corruption: Which words, says the Apostle, could not be
understood of David, for they do no way agree to him, who fell on sleep, was
laid unto his Fathers, and saw corruption, but they do most fitly agree to this
Jesus, who was dead, and by the power of God in three days raised again, and
so saw no corruption, and therefore must needs be understood of him, and by
them his Resurrection was Prophetically pointed out many hundreds of years
before the time.

And it seems that this Argument drawn from the words of David to prove the
Resurrection of Christ, was of no little force; For not only Paul the Apostle
of the Gentiles, but Peter also, the great Apostle of the Circumcision, makes
use of it to the same end and purpose that Paul does here, Act. 2.25, 26, 27
etc.

The words themselves that I have pitched upon, are not any part of the
Apostles Argument or proof, but somewhat worthy observation. David, brought in
by the way (as it were in a Parenthe is) whilst the A postle was following up
of his main Argument, which was, how that David fell on sleep, was laid to his
Fathers, and saw corruption, and that therefore this Prophecy of not seeing
corruption could not be meant of David himself, but must relate to Christ,
plainly importing his Resurrection.

But now there was something Antecedent to David's falling asleep, very
admirable and remarkable in him, which the Apostle will by no means let slip,
but sets it before all, as a thing worthy their imitation, which is, how that
David before he fell on sleep served his own Generation by the will of God.
For David after he had served his own Generation by the will of God fell on
sleep.

I shall first Paraphrase upon the words, and then come to my Observations from
them.

Served his Generation (i.e.) did the work of his Generation; What was the work
of his Generation David applied himself unto? he was not an Idler, a Sluggard
in his Generation. Timothy served with Paul in the Gospel, Phil. 2.22. (i.e.)
did the work of the Gospel together with Paul.

His own Generation, not another Generation; every Generation (as I shall show
anon) has its proper and peculiar Work. Now David made it his business to find
out and attend unto that Work which did properly belong to his Generation.

By the will of God. These words take in the ground or rise of David's
obedience, the matter and manner of it. The ground or rise was Gods will; God
willed David to do the work of his Generation, and because God willed him, he
did it; he served the will of God in serving his Generation, and therefore
served his Generation, because it was the will of God. The mattor of David's
obedience was not humane inventions, or men's traditions, but such things only,
as God did will, and call him to do in his Generation. The manner of David's
obedience was not in what way he listed, or in humane prudence judged best, but
in such a way as was most consonant to Gods will revealed to him; as he did not
of his own head frame the matter, so did he not determine of the way or
manner, but in both did set before him the will of God, and act according to
that will.

Not to grasp together all that lies in these words, my aim being only at this,
viz.

Doct. That it is an especial duty lying upon the Saints, to attend unto, and
be active in the work or works of their Generation.

Gods famous Worthies who have gone before us (whereof David here is instance)
have done thus, whose examples (though not in every thing, yet) in these things
are rules to us, and therefore we should do it; yea, its the will of God, this
David here grounds his obedience upon, which Will makes it as well our duty as
his, and therefore we ought to do it.

In the carrying on of this, I shall show,

1 What Generation-work is, and how the same differs from other works.

2 That Saints in the several Generations they have lived in, have ever had the
proper and peculiar works of their Generations.

3 That it is a thing of very great concernment for a Saint to attend to, and
be industrious in the work of his Generation.

4 Wherein does the work of the present Generation lie.

5 How each one in particular may find out that part or parcel of it that is
properly his work in his Generation.

6 And lastly, How Generation-work may be carried on so, as that God may be
served in the Generation.

First. What Generation-work is, and how different from other works.

Ans. Generation-work is that work, or those works which the way or manner of
Gods dispensations in the age a Saint lives in, calls him unto.

When either the condition of the Church or people of God, or the transactions
of God in the Age we live in, or the light of that Age calls us to some special
employment, we may look upon that Work to be the Work of the Generation.

So that in the Work of our Generation, although the matter of the work be no
other, then what the word has laid down, and is commanded in the general, yet
the call to the Work takes its principal rise from the way or manner of Gods
dispensations in, or unto that Age.

Hence the Work of the Generation differs from that Work which lies upon a
Saint to perform, as he is a Saint, for those Works are not limited to any one
Generation, but are common to all; what I stand bound to do as I am a Saint, I
am alike obliged to do in that respect, in whatsoever Age or Generation I live;
but now the work of my Generation, I stand bound to that by virtue of Gods
dispensations toward the Age I live in; in such manner, as that thing which
now is my work living in this Age, did I live in another Age, wherein the
dispensations of God were after another manner, would not be my work, but
another thing would be my work.

Hence likewise the work out Generation is different from the works of our
Callings, Staetion, relation, or present condition, for every of these bring
their several works, but these properly as they are such (i.e.) Works or Duties
flowing from my Calling, Station, in the world, Relation, or present condition,
are not the work of my Generation.

Though here I grant it, that the work of a Saints Generation, may fall in with
the works forementioned, either those which lie upon him as a Saint, or those
which are the proper works of his Calling, Station, Relation, or present
condition, (i.e.) the work of a Saints Generation, and these, may be one and
the same in Substance, though two in diverse respects, as I shall make out to
you.

1 For common Duties which lie upon a Saint, as a Saint. A Saint may have some
duties lying upon him as he is such a one, binding all Saints in all Ages, all
the world over, which yet in some times may be the very work of the Generation.

As for example. Believing is a work which lies upon a Saint as a Saint; A man
as he is a Saint is always, in whatsoever Age or Generation he lives in, bound
to believe, and have confidence in the promise and power of God; but it may so
fall out, that the dispensations of God toward his people may be such, as that
believing, which is an especial duty lying upon Saints in all Generations, may
be the great work God calls unto in that Age or Generation a Saint lives in. So
it was in the time of Moses, and therefore (as I conceive) did God so severely
punish the unbeleef of that Age, because this their fin was not only a neglect
of a great and common duty, but a neglecting the very work of their Generation.

Again, Prayer is a duty, which lies upon a Saint as a Saint, no praying man,
no Saint; for Saints have their denomination from calling upon the Name of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1.2. But now Prayer, a duty so general, and common to all
Generations, may be, as the case may fall out, one special work of that Age or
Generation a Saint lives in. And so (I take it) it was in Daniels time, when
Isreal's feturn from Babylon was approaching, and therefore Daniel is so stirred
up to pray, and his Prayer made so well-pleasing unto God, because he did not
the thing only as a common duty, but as the work of his Generation.

And on the contrary, upon the same ground we are now speaking of, God does
(as I conceive) forbid Jeremy to pray for the people of that time, because
Prayer though as a common duty it remained, yet did it then cease as any part
of the work of the Generation.

2 A Saint may have some duty lying upon him by virtue of his Calling, which
may also be the very work of his Generation.

As for example; Suppose a godly man be constituted a General, or an
Vnder-Officer in an Army, raised against some great and professed enemies of
Jesus Christ, at such a time as by Gods appointment, the ruin of these his
enemies draws near; for him to fight for, and under those, in their defense who
have given this power and command to him, is the very work of his Calling, that
which his place injoyns him unto; but now considering the cause he is engaged
in, which is the pulling down of some potent enemies of Jesus Christ, which God
in, or about that Age be lives in, has determined to ruin; So his fighting is
not only the work of his Calling, but the very work of his Generation also.

Again, put case a man is a Minister, the making known the truths of God to
others is the work of his Calling, in doing whereof he does no more then what
his Calling requires of him, but now as such a one studies and concrives,
making it his design, scope and aim, not only to speak truths (which another
man by being conscientious in his Calling may do) but to speak truths, and
truths in such a manner, as is most suitable unto, and may through the blessing
of God most conduce to the good and benefit of souls in those times and places
he lives in, so he does the work of his Generation.

And as a Soldier in the field may do the work of his calling by being
faithful unto, and valiant for those who entrust him, and (yet the work of his
calling and Generation being mixed) not eye all this while the work of his
Gen^ration. So may a Minister in the Pulpit do the work of his calling by
preaching truth soundly and powerfully, and yet (not having respect to what
truths the present Age, and the necessity of his hearers do in a more especial
manner rather than others, call for the opening and applying of) he may miss
the work of his Generation.

3 A Saint by virtue of his station and relation may have some duty lying upon
him, which may be the work of his generation, and yet the work of his station
and relation.

As for instance, A godly man is a Minister of a Family, for him now according
to his ability, to teach, instruct, and prin^iple his Wife, Children and
Servants, and to govern in his Family, is the duty of his station, or the place
God has set him in, and the duty of his relation also, as he is a Husband,
Father, Master, and when he does this, he does no other thing than what the
station God has set him in, and the bond of relation binds him to perform: Bu^
now when he does so govern in his Family, and so instruct and principle those
under him, and in relation to him, as that both himself and his may
acknowledge, and in some measure answer the call of Gods present dispensations
toward the age he lives in, whether to suffer, if the dispensation call for
that, or to be serviceable in any active way, to some special cause of God on
foot in that age, he does the work of his Generation; though his activity lie
within the bounds of his family, yet so long as what he acts tends to bring
himself and his, as much as may be, to answer the present dispensations of God,
he does the work of his Generation.

4 A Saint by virtue of the present condition he may be in, may stand obliged
to some duty, which yet may be the work of his Generation as well as of his
condition.

As to exercise faith and patience under sufferings for Christ, is the work of
a suffering condition; but now if my sufferings fall out in such an age wherein
the Church of God in general lies under persecution, then the exercise of faith
and patience under the Cross, is not only the work of my condition, but the
very work of my Generation, that which the dispensations of God in the age I
live in, calls for at my hands.

By what has been said, we see that such a case may be that in the substance
of the work, that work which lies upon a Saint as a Saint, and which is the
work of his calling, station, relation, and condition, may be the same with the
work of his Generation; and yet in diverse respects there may be such a vast
difference, that one man doing the same work, shall do more then that which
lies upon him, and every one else as Saints, or which his calling, station,
relation, or condition calls for, and another in doing the very same work,
shall do all this as well and better than he, and the work of his Generation
also.

From what has been spoken as touching this, the final conclusion is, that the
work of our generation is not any work distinct in substance from all other
works (for were it sout would be a thing more easy to find it out than indeed
it is) but the difference lies in considering the same work in diverse respects,
it is not diversity of work, so much as diversity of respect in working that
makes the difference.

Secondly, The next thing to be opened is, That the Saints in their several
Generations, have had, and still have their proper and peculiar works. My
meaning is, That there is some work, which is more properly the work of Saints
living in one generation, than it is of Saints living in another. Saints of
this Generation have some works which Saints of former Generations had not; and
Saints of former Generations had some works, which Saints of this Generation
have not.

For the making out of this, I shall draw a line through the several
Generations that Saints from the beginning have lived in, and take a view of
Saints, and of their work or works, each of them in their several Generations.

To begin with Noah (for I cannot point out all Generations from Adam
downwards, but such only upon which some remarkable actions of eminent Saints
dwelling in those Generations are fixed, thereby making them memorable to after
times) he besides all his other works had the proper work of his Generation,
which was to build an Ark for the preservation of his house, and the creatures
from the flood and universal deluge; by which he preached a real Sermon for one
hundred and twenty years to the Old World, all the while the Arc was a
preparing, and by which the Apostle says, Heb. 11.7. He condemned the world,
(i.e.) the persons of that Generation, and this work it was a work distinct
from the work of all other Generations.

Next to him Abraham had the proper work of his Generation, which was, to go
forth of his Country, and from his Fathers house, unto a Land which God should
show him, and there to follow God from one place to another, believing that one
day his seed should en^oy that Land that now he was a stranger in; but in the
mean time to dwell in Tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same
promise. This was not the work of after Generations, yet was it the work of his
and their Generations.

After him Mose and Aaron and other faithful ones in their days, had the
proper work of their Generation, which was to look up to God, and trust him for
meat, and drink, and raiment, and preservation in a barren wilderness where
none of these things were to be had, and where they lay open to cruel enemies
on every side, to the malice of cruel imbittered enemies. To trust God in such
an extraordinary way was not the work of after Generations, which yet was the
special work of this Generation.

Come to David's time, he also had the proper work of his Generation, wherein
(as our Text witnesses) he served God, which was to cut down Gods enemies
round about, and thereby to make room and provision for the house of God, which
was to be built at Jerusalem, here was his distinctive work.

Next after him comes Solomon, whose distinct work was, to build the Temple of
God, which his Father David had made room and provision for.

To pass over the works of many following Generations, let us come to
Jeremiah's time, had not Gods people in that age the proper work of their
Genenation? which was willingly to put their necks under, and quietly submit
unto the yoke of the King of Babylon, giving themselves up unto captivity until
seventy years should be accomplished. God did not give any such positive
commands unto other Generations.

After this in Ezra's, Nehemiah's, and Daniels time, these Worthies, and the
Saints of that age had the proper work of their Generation, which was, to go
forth of Babylon, and rebuild the Temple of God at Jerusalem, which
Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed.

Thus all along in the times of the Old Testament, Gods Church and people in
their several Generations have had their several works.

Let us look to the New Testament which dawned in John the Baptist, had not
John the proper work of his Generation? which was, to be the Forerunner and
Harbinger of the Messiah, to declare to the Nation of the Jews that the Messiah
whom they expected and waited for, was now approaching, and that the glorious
Kingdom of God, in the pure administration of the Gospel was at hand, and that
therefore it did behove every one now to have their eyes and hearts turned from
Moses toward him, and his administration, which was now approaching,

After him the Apostles in their time had the proper work of their Generation;
which was, to go forth and publish the glad tidings of salvation, which before
were cooped up within the narrow compass of Judea, to all the world, beginning
at Jerusalem, to gather Saints together, so fast as they were converted, into
Churches, and to appoint over these Pastors and Teachers, and also to give
Rules and Directions for the right ordering and governing of the Churches unto
the end of the world.

Let us come to the Saints of following Generations, had not they likewise
their proper works? which was in some to bear witness before the wicked world,
and the Heathen Tyrants and Infidels of those ages wherein they lived, to the
truth of that Doctrine they had received from the Apostles before them, by
sealing the same with their blood, and willingly giving themselves up (as sheep
to the slaughter) to the cruelties, tortures, massacres of the Paganish world,
in bearing testimony to the truth of Jesus.

Afterward the work of the next Generation, was to bear witness by writing,
preaching, and all sound Doctrine, against the damnable Heresies of Arrius and
his accomplices, and others, which through that little tranquillity which the
Church enjoyed under Constantine crept in, and overspread the Christian world.

In after ages for some hundreds of years together, the work of Saints in their
Generation was to bear witness by speaking and suffering unto the truth and
worship of Jesus, against the pernicious errors, and false worship of
Antichrist, and the boundless and swelling pride, and pomp of that man of sin.

In Generations since, the work has been to recover the truth and worship of
Christ, which was well nigh buried under Antichrists reign, to its ancient
purity, luster, and beauty; And so Luther, and the Saints and Worthies of his
Generation, as their principal work, did recover out of the jaws of the Beast,
the precious truths of Christ's Priestly Office, the glorious Doctrine of our
justification by Christ alone, which was well nigh swallowed up by the
Antichristian innovations of Masses, Crosses, Pardons, Penance, Purgatory,
Vows, Pilgrimages, solitary and single life, with other inventions of humane
wisdom, for the procuring a righteousness of our own.

And since him the great work of Saints in their Generations has been to
recover the Kingly Office of Christ, which the Lordly pomp and tyranny of the
man of sin and his followers had cast a mist upon, to set up Christ as sole
King and Governor in his Churches, as well as the only and alone High Priest
of his Saints.

Thus Saints all along from the beginning of the world in their several
Generations, have had their several works proper and peculiar to the
Generations they have lived in; so as that what has been the work of one
Generation, has not been the work of another; and what has been the work of
that other, has not been the work of that, unless at such time (as it fell out
in the Generations of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and also the several
Generations of the Saints under the Roman and Antichristian persecutions)
wherein the dispensations of God toward his people has continued the same,
and for substance alike for diverse Generations together, there the work has
been the same; for no substantial change in dispensation, there is none in the
work of out Generation, it being variation of dispensation that causes the
work of our Generation for to vary.

Third General Head; That it is a thing of very great concernment for a Saint
to attend unto, and be active in the work of his Generation.

Generation-work is the most neglected work of all others, with the generality
of Professors, who either consider not that such a work there is; or if they
do, yet they think that it belongs to others, not to them to mind it; but in
case they be industrious in those common duties which lie upon them as Saints,
and those special duties which attend their Callings, Stations, Relations, or
present condition, it is enough for them, and matters not, whether they be
active in the business of their Generation, yea or no. Yea many that are
employed therein do not sufficiently weigh the greatness of the work they have
in hand. I shall therefore here endeavor to show of how great concernment it
is for a Saint to attend unto, and be active in this work, which I shall lay
before you in some particulars.

1 God by his dispensations calls aloud for it. The dispensations of God have a
voice, and God often by these bespeaks a duty, or duties of his people, Mic. 6.9.
The Lords voice cries unto the City -- What voice is this? why merely the
voice of a dispensation, Gods dispensations being commands, Hear the Rod, and
who has appointed it; To disobey then the visible call of a dispensation, is
to disobey a command of God.

The hazarding our lives is a weighty matter, and if done carelessly, a great
sin, yet Hester upon the visible call of a dispensation ( viz. Gods cause and
people of God lying at the stake ready to suffer) runs this sore hazard; to
which though she was stirred up by Mordecai (as one Christian friend now may
stir up another, in such a capacity as Hester was, to befriend Gods cause, were
it now dying, as then it was) yet were not Mordecayes words her warrant, he
being not endued with a Prophetical Spirit, norspeaking as such (as his
doubtful speech she weth, Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for
such a time as this?) but the call of the dispensation.

Meroz was called by Gods dispensations to help the Lord against the mighty. We
read not of any particular command Merez had to do it, only the call of a
dispensation (Gods people were under oppressors, and God was up to deliver
them) which call Meroz neglecting. Meroz is doubly and bitterly cursed by the
Angel of the Lord for it, Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the
Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
help of the Lord to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Whereas
contrariwise Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite, having no other call but this
very call Meroz had (for though it were prophesied a woman should slay Sisera,
yet was not that revealed to her, or in case it were, yet no particular woman
named, that was no warrant for her) in obedience hereto slaying Sisera, is
doubly blessed, and that above women, as the other is doubly and bitterly cursed.
Verse. 24 25. Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Keni^e be;
Blessed shall she be above women in the Tent --

2 Generation-work is of all others the greatest work, and a neglect herein the
greatest sin. My meaning is, that that obligation wherein I stand bound unto
the work of my Generation, is a greater obligation, than that whereby I stand
bound to any other duty; and my fault or error herein is a greater and more
provoking error, than any other of my errors; which Assertion although it may
seem strange, yet it appears thus, in that God himself does more delight in,
and account of that duty performed, which is the work of our Generation, than
he does of the performance of any other duty, although it be a thing especially
commanded by himself; and on the other side, God is more displeased with, and
provoked by those errors that men commit in the work of their Generation, than
with any other of their errors whatsoever.

The first is evident in those words of Samuel to Saul 1 Samuel 15.22. Has the
Lord as great delight in burnt-offering, as in obeying the voice of the Lord?
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams.
The offering sacrifice was Gods command, and a principal part of his worship in
those days, yet when Saul out of pretense of obeying this command of God,
disobeyed God in that other special command of utterly destroying Amalek, which
was the great work God had to do, and Saul was employed in, in that Generation;
the Prophet from the mouth of the Lord does not only reprehend him, and condemn
his fact, but pronounces these two things upon this occasion now compared
together, that God did more abundantly delight in, and account of the obeying
of his voice in that work which was the work of Saul's Generation, than either
he did, or would do in Burnt-offerings, Sacrifices, or the fat of Rams, though
things of his own appointment: In a word, the meaning is this, that obedience
to God in that thing which is the work of our Generation, is more acceptable to
God than the performance of the most special acts of his worship, as Sacrifice
and Burnt-offerings in those days were.

Hence we find in Scripture (which serves further to evidence this) that when
special Ordinances or acts of worship have come in competition with the work of
the Generation, Ordinances and acts of worship, have yielded and given place to
that. Circumcision was a special Ordinance given to Abraham's seed, with that
severity that the uncircumcised was to be cut off from amongst his people; yet
forty years together, whilst Israel walked in the wilderness, the work of that
Generation being such as could not with safety to their persons admit of
Circumcision, which required some fixed abode, at least for some time (as Josh.
5.8.) which they were ever uncertain of, being to follow the motion of the
cloud (as Number. 9.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.) Circumcision though Gods Ordinance
(rather then God will alter the way of his dispensations, which he could easily
have done) for forty years together (till Israel was entered Canaan, and so from
under that dispensation of the cloud) must, and does yield and give place unto
the work of the Generation.

And which i^ yet more, not only special Ordinances, but also common duties
have given place to the work of the Generation. To keep inviolate Articles and
conditions of peace when made, though with a Turk, is a duty which the rule of
common equity and justice betwixt man and man requires. Yet Jael when the work
of her generation called for all the help she could lend it (though a league
were betwixt Jabin King of Hazor, and her Husband, yet) in the time of peace
(which peace too (as far as we can understand) betwixt her Husband, and this
King, was kept inviolate, as on Jabins part) she (taking her advantage) murders
Sisera the chief Captain of Jabin King of Hazor in his Tent, and is so far from
being blamed, as she is commended and blessed by the Holy Ghost for it.

And as this first is clear, so the other (viz. That neglect of Generation-work
is the greatest sin) is as evident, not only from the foregoing words of God to
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23. paralelling his disobedience herein with sins of the
highest, and of a scarlet dye; as Rebellion, Witchcraft, and Idolatry; but
also if we consider, how that of all the sins we read of in Scripture, we find
not any more provoking to the Lord, and falling so heavy upon the head of the
sinner, as offenses and neglects in the work of their Generation. The Spies who
were sent by Moses to view the Land of Canaan, because they sinned against the
work of their Generation, they presently dye of the plague before the Lord. The
whole Congregation of Israel (not Moses and Aaron excepted) because they
distrusted the power and goodness of God, whereas the great work of that
Generation was to trust God, and believe in his power and goodness, which
Lesson they were taught by the daily dispensations of God toward them, wherein
his power and goodness were manifested before them) have that heavy and dismal
sentence passed upon them, That they should never enter into the rest of
Canaan, but their Carcasses should fall in the Wilderness, Number. 14.29. which
afterward God in the way of his providence fulfilled upon them, causing them
to wander in the Wildemess forty years, until all that Generation was
consumed. And which is very observable, they, befides this, were guilty of many
other grievous sins, being Idolaters, Fornicators, Lusters, etc. as the Apostle
tells us, 1 Cor. 10. beginning, and yet for none of these is the sentence
passed upon them, but only for their miscarriage in that which was the work of
their Generation, Heb 3.19. They could not enter in because of their unbeleef.

Yea wherefore was the unbeleef of the Jews in our Saviors and the Apostles
time, punished so severely with a breaking off, and a rejection for now 1600
years together, but because therein they sinned against the work of their
Generation, which was to believe in Christ, and embrace him as the Messiah, who
they had long expected, and God in this age had sent amongst them? their
crucifying of Christ was a grievous sin; but because not a sin against the work
of their Generation, therefore they are not for that act rejected, but
contrariwise, after this the Gospel is by special command to be preached to
them, as Luke 24.47. but for not believing in Christ, and receiving him for the
true Messiah, which was the work of their Generation, they are rejected (as
Romans 11.20 -- because of unbeleef they are broken off) and so remain unto this
day.

To all which let me further add, that not in these only, but many examples
more, it seems to be Gods usual way in the execution of his wrath against
sinners, to write the sentence of their condemnation upon the forehead of this
sin, rather than any other. Saul sinned in offering sacrifice, and was then
threatened with the loss of the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13.13, 14. But the execution of
this threatening, and the unkinging of him comes in upon his miscarriage in that
of Amalek, a sin against the work of his Generation. Aaron sinned most foul^ly
in the business of the Golden Calf, and at another time in murmuring against
Moses, but the sentence passed upon him that he should dye in the Wilderness,
is for his not believing at the waters of Meribah, a sin against the work of
his Generation, Number. 20.12, 13. God usually writing the sentence of his
displeasure upon the forehead of the most provoking sin.

From what has been spoken my Assertion stands firm, viz. That the obligation
whereby I stand bound unto the work of my Generation, is a greater obligation
than that whereby I stand bound to any other duty, and my fault or error herein
is a greater error than any other of my errors. From which principle (before I
leave it) I shall draw another, which naturally flows out of it, viz. That it is
the duty of a Christian man, employed in Generation-work, when other works, and
this do stand in competition, to choose neglect in any duty, rather than in
that, wherein the work of his Generation lies, yeat^ break through all that he
may follow this, his obligation hereto being the greatest obligation, his
neglect herein the most provoking sin. Which thing though for the truth thereof
it need not blush, carrying its evidence with its self, yet in receiving of it,
use Christian wisdom, and much more in the practice.

And here as a Conclusion to all the rest, let me take the boldness for to add,
what has been sometimes the issue of retired thoughts, that for this reason
has God so gloriously, and eminently owned, beyond belief, and to admiration,
the never to be forgotten proceedings of the Army of England, because (though
they have seemed, at least been charged by slanderous Tongues and Pens, with
violating the bonds of relation) they yet have in all pressed on, and followed
after (though through a cloud of dismayed difficulties and dangers) the work of
their Generation.

3 In doing the work of our Generation, we are most serviceable to the design
of God, that is on foot in the age we live in. As there never yet was an age in
the world, wherein God was not driving on, one great design or other (although
the manifestation of his most glorious designs, and works of wonder, have ever
been limited to some particular Generations;) so has God in all ages declared
himself exceedingly well pleased with such of his children, whose obedience
has more directly fallen in with his design on foot in their age. Daniel
whilst he is praying and mourning, has the Angel Gabriel sent unto him with
this redoubled testimony from Heaven concerning him, that he was a man greatly
beloved, Chap. 9.21, 22, 23. Chap. 10.11, 19. Isay, Jeremy, and other godly men
prayed, yet do not we read of any such testimony given concerning them praying,
as here is concerning Daniel, Why so? the reason may be this, Daniels prayer
fell in with Gods design; God was upon a great design, to deliver his people
out of Babylon, this Daniel prays for, Gods design, and Daniels obedience meet
together, and therefore does God set a special stamp upon Daniels prayer.

Now in doing the work of our Generation, we are more serviceable to Gods
design, than we can be any other way; for there being only a respective
difference betwixt these two (the same work which respecting God, is his
design, respecting us, is the work of our Generation. Isreal's deliverance from
Babylon was in respect of Gods design; but in respect of Daniel, the praying
for this, was the work of his Generation) we cannot be active in the one, but
in so doing we become serviceable to the other; as Daniel by prayer became
instrumentally serviceable to Isreal's delivery. Which by plentiful ordinary
instance might be illustrated; but enough having been said for the
understanding of the Reader in these few words, I shall not multiply.

4 God has choice distinguishing mercy for that man that follows him in the
work of his Generation: as,

1 God will overlook many failings in that man. Caleb and Joshua were men, and
therefore had their failings as other men, yet because Caleb and Joshua did
cleave to God in that special work they were employed in, Number 14.6, 7, etc.
which was the work of their Generation, therefore God overlooking all their
other failings, as though they had none at all, pronounces of them that they
wholly followed the Lord, Numb. 32.12.

2 God will stand by that man and never leave him, that sticks close to him in
the work of his Generation. Abraham left his Country to attend to the work of
his Generation, and how did God in all perils stand by Abraham? Abraham was put
to it in Egypt, and like to loose his wife, God stood by him there, Genesis 12.
Abraham was engaged with four Kings, Genesis 14. God stood by him there, Abraham
was in a great strait at Gerar, Genesis 20. God stood by him there. Abraham stood
to the work of his Generation, and God for ever stood by Abraham.

3 God will own that man in case he live thereto in the work of the next
Generation, that abides faithful in the work of the present Generation he lives
in. It is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man and perfect in his
generations, and Noah walked with God; teaching us thus much, by speaking in
the plural number, that Noah was just, walking with God in the generations he
lived in before the flood came; and when the flood was coming, this Noah was
the only man that God did own in the work of that Generation. So Joshua was
faithful in the work of that Generation whilst Israel journeyed in the
wilderness, and how eminently did God own Joshua in the work of the next
Generation, when Israel entered into Canaan?

4 God will provide a hiding place for that man against those storms which may
fall upon the Generation he lives in, that is active in the work of his
generation. Noah had an Arc provided for him when a flood came upon the world
of ungodly men. In Ezekiels time, chap. 9. when the destroying Angels were to
pass through Jerusalem, a mark of deliverance was first to be set upon the
foreheads of all those that did sigh and cry for the abominations thereof,
which was the work God in such an age did call unto, as Isay 22.12, 13. Yea
though Noah, Daniel and Job (active men) living in a perverse backsliding
generation, cannot ward off Gods blow from the generation, yet they shall
deliver their own souls, Ezekiel. 14.13. to 22. Personal deliverances shall attend
such men in common calamities, and National desolations.

5 God will reveal his secrets to such. Noah in his time had the secret of
drowning the old world revealed to him. Abraham in his time the secret of
Sodoms destruction, the secret of Isiaels bondage in Egypt, the secret of the
Messiah's coming forth of his loins, discovered to him. David in his time had
that secret where the Temple should be built to him, 1 Chronicles. 22.1, 2. compared
with 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Daniel in his time the secret of Nebuchadnezzars dream, the
secret of the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, chap. 9.24, 25, 26. and of
the Jews conversion, chap. 12.11, 12. to him. And Peter and Paul in their time
the secret of the Gentiles conversion to them, Act. 10.9. to 17. Gal. 1.16, 17.
God having in all generations still made those keepers of his Cabinet, who have
been faithful in the work of their generations.

6 God has peculiar honor wherewith he will crown those persons that follow
him in the work of their generation. Moses was eminent in his generation, and
what peculiar honor had God for Moses? Number. 12.6, 7, 8. If there be a Prophet
among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a vision, and will
speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all
my house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. In the day of
Christ's humiliation, the Disciples of all other were most eminent in following
and owning of Christ, and what beculiar honor has Christ for them above
others? Mat. 19.^8. Verily, I say unto you, that ye which have followed ^e in
the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in ^he Throne of his glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

5 Neglect of Generation-work exposes a man to a ^orld of dangers: as

1 Danger of losing gifts and Talents. The sloathful ^ervant mentioned in the
Parable, Mat. 25. not impro^ng the Talent given him, to his Lords advantage, in
his ^eneration, has his Talent taken from him, v. 28.

Saul (though a wicked man) had two great Talents ^mmitted to him by God, a
Talent of a Kingdom, and a ^alent of common gifts of the Spirit, fitting him
for ^vernment, and the discharge of his Office as a King. which last is called
the Spirit of the Lord, yet but a common Talent of Government, as is clear,
because David is no sooner anointed King, and the right of Government his, but
this Talent is taken from Saul, as one who now had no longer to do with it, 1 Samuel 16.13, 14. Both these he loses by faultring in the work of his
Generation, as compare, 1 Samuel 15.26, 28. with Chap. 16, 14.

2 Danger of losing communion with God. Whilst David was abroad in the field,
hewing down Gods enemies round about him, which was the Masterpiece of work
God allotted him in his Generation, what sweet triumphant communion had he with
God, a clear testimony whereof is, Psalm. 108. (a Psalm most probably composed
in the day of his glorious Exploits, chronicled, 2 Samuel 8.) But afterward when
David sending forth his servants about that work, which was his work in his
Generation, betakes himself to his ease in his Palace, at the time of the Kings
going forth to battle, 2 Samuel 11.1. (which circumstance of time is therefore (I
take it) with such exactness noted, to give us to understand, that David ought
now to have been abroad in person, the work being Gods, and not to have sent
his Servants without him (though we may do our own work by a Proxy, yet Gods
work calls for our persons) how sadly does he lose his commumon with God,
falling into that foul sin in the matter of Vriah, which was a blemish upon
this holy man all his life time afterward; and which although it is sad to
consider, yet is observable concerning him, that notwithstanding God by his
Prerogative Royal, gave David not only the pardon of his sin, but also his life
(which now by, bloodshed, though a King, was by virtue of that positive
command, which admits of no exception, Genesis 9.6. forfeited) as 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Yet do we not read of any
thing remarkable (save only defending himself against some domestic
insurrections, and foreign invasions) done by him afterward, as before.

So also Solomon his son, whilst his thoughts ran upon the work of his
Generation, what communion had he with God, God appearing to him once and
again, and enduing him with wisdom (the thing he desired) above all that ever
were before or since him: But when afterward his heart was more taken up with
Women, than the work of his Generation, how did his former communion with God
dye, and he that before built a house for the worship of the true God, now
builds high places for Idolatry, 1 King. 11.7, 8. Which sad example ought to be
had in perpetual remembrance by such as are employed in Temple-work (the
business of this age) that it fare not with them as with the builder of the
material Temple, who first building gold to the true God, did afterward build
stubble to a false.

3 Danger of being laid aside by God. It has been the ordinary way of Gods
dispensations, as well in later as former times, to make use of some particular
instrument for some time in his work, whom afterward before the work has been
brought unto perfection he has laid aside, by which, although (as not
unlikely) Gods design may be to remove his peoples eyes from instruments to
himself, yet it is observable, God has seldom or never cashired a man by him
employed, till first by some means or other he has cashiered himself; and
which is more to be noted, the very thing which has occasioned the laying of
such instruments aside, has mostly, if not ever, been some miscarriage or
other in the work of their Generation, that being the fatal Rock such men split
upon.

Once more here let us review that of Saul, whom God was pleased for some time
to employ, as a scourge to the Ammonites, and Philistines, and yet afterward
by one error committed in the work of his Generation, he is for ever cashiered
by God, and put out of his work.

But more strange and worthy observation is that of Moses and Aaron, two
eminent instruments, and both godly, which God made singular use of in Egypt,
and at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness, and upon Mount Sinai, so appearing to
them, talking with them, especially to Moses, as never man befides him enjoyed
the like, yet these two so choice and worthy instruments, because they failed a
little in the work of that Generation, which was (as before was shown) to
believe in God, and trust his power and goodness, although their failing was at
such a time (which one would judge might render them excusable, at least less
guilty) wherein the whole Congregation erred with them, and (as it were) did
hurry them into it; yea and for Moses, he never failed but this time, so that
(this once excepted) he all along had followed God fully. Yet I say because
they failed God in that work, which was the work of the Generation; they for
that, and no other reason, are laid by as to the perfecting of that work ( viz.
bringing of Israel into Canaan) which most happily and prosperoufly was begun
and carried on a great way, under them as instruments, as Numb. 20.12. And the
Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye believe me not, to sanctify me in
the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this
Congregation into the land which I have given them. So exceedingly displeasing
to God are errors in the work of our generation, that he will not let such
things pass, no not in his dearest children, without some signal manifestation
of his displeasure. And which I cannot let pass without a further mark yet set
upon it, as a thing most worthy the serious thoughts of every one, and such in
especial, whom God above others, has used and honored in the work of the
Generation, is, how that one single failing in the work of the Generation, may
cause a Moses to be laid aside.

4 Danger of stumbling at the work of the Generation, and all the dispensations
of God about it. The Jews in Christ's time neglected the work of their
Generation, which was to believe in Christ, and receive him as the true
Messiah, whose coming their Nation was in expectation of, and the very work it
self (through this neglect) became a stumbling stone to them; they stumble at
it, to think they should receive this man for their Messiah, and stumbling at
the work, they likewise stumble at the several dispensations of God about it.
Christ comes of mean Parentage, they stumble at that, appears first from
Galilee, they stumble at that, works miracles, they stumble at that, is
followed by Publicans and sinners, they stumble at that; commits the Gospel to
poor Fishermen, they stumble at that: Neglect the work of thy Generation and
stumble at it: Stumble at the work of thy Generation, and stumble at all the
dispensations of God about it.

5 Danger of being blinded in, or shut out of the work of the next Generation,
in case thou live to see it. For God in his just judgment when men have shut
their eyes against, and withdrawn their hands from the work of the present
Generation, does blind these persons to, and will not honor them in the work of
the following Generation though yet they may live to see it.

The Scribes and Pharisees wilfully shut their eyes to the work of John's
Generation, and what followed? they see afterward the work of Christ in his
Generation, and of the Apostles in theirs, and through the just judgment of
God upon them, their eyes are shut, and they are blinded thereto.

A most pregnant place to our purpose we have, Ezekiel. 44. verse. 9. to 17. where
under legal phrases, and allusive terms, the Holy Ghost setting forth
Gospel Worship, speaks very pathetically of two sorts of Priests, belonging to
that Gospel-state. One were such as had defiled themselves with the pollutions
of the former Generation, by going astray to Idols when Israel went astray,
verse. 10, 12. who by way of punishment are to bear their iniquity, which is not
wholly to be turned out of the work of God, who will still use them in the
general, and more common acts of his worship, as verse. 11, 14. but to be set by
as to the more special and peculiar acts of his worship in the Generation,
because they polluted themselves with the Idolatries, and Superstitions of the
former Generations, as verse. 12, 13. Another sort of Priests there were, who
when Israel, and their fellow laborers went astray, and defiled themselves by
Idolatry, did notwithstanding walk closely with God, keeping their Garments
pure from the defilements of that Generation, these are privileged to draw near
to God in the more special acts of his worship, to come into his Sanctuary, and
perform the service (not of the outward Court only, but) of his Table, as verse.
15, 16.

The difference betwixt these is worthy yet a more narrow search. The one have
the charge of the gates of the house, verse. 11. the other Gods charge in his
house, verse. 16. the one shall only kill the burnt offering and sacrifice for
the people, verse. 11. the other shall stand before God to offer the fat, and
the blood, verse. 15. The one shall stand before the people to minister to them,
verse. 11. the other shall come near to Gods Table to minister to him, verse. 16.
The one shall bear all this as their shame for their former abominations, verse.
13. the other shall receive all this honor as a reward for their not partaking
in the abominations of the former age, verse. 15, 16.

The result of all is clearly this, That such persons who have played loose with
God in the former Generation, though live they may to see the next Generation,
and be employed in some common works; yet will not God use them in the special
works of that Generation, except such of them that shall renounce their former
pollutions, of which more hereafter.

6 Danger of becoming an Apostate, and an open enemy to the truths of God.
Demas forsakes Paul, and the work of his Generation, and what follows? he
becomes an Apostate, and exchangeth Heaven for Earth, embracing this present
world.

In the Apostles days the great work of that Generation was the constituting
of Churches, and Saints assembling themselves together for mutual edification
in Christian societies; and if you mind it, the Apostle lays the rise of that
Soul-damning sin of wilful Apostasy in a neglect of this, Heb. 10.25, 26. Not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; For
if we sin wilfully --

And which I cannot here pass over, that unpardonable sin against the Holy
Spirit, which our Savior himself charge the Scribes and Pharisees with, took
(as is apparent) its rise hence; For first, they neglect the work of their
Generation, viz. of receiving Christ, this neglect draws on an opposition; this
opposition, malice against Christ, this malice, brings forth blasphemy against
those very works of Christ, calling them Diabolical, which their consciences
now and then convinced them, were wrought by the power of God; this malicious
and deliberate blaspheming of what their Consciences, I say, now and then (for
they had apparent stumbling blocks before them, with which undoubtedly they did
sometimes blind Conscience) convinced them, was wrought by the finger of God,
is that very sin which Christ himself calls the Sin against the Spirit, that
has neither forgiveness in this world, nor that which is to come, Matthew.
12.24. compared with verse. 31, 32.

Let all hence tremble to oppose, or reproach the apparent works of God in
their Generation, lest --

Now to conclude, Whose ears hearing these things would not tingle? Whose
hearts considering these things would not quake, to be found guilty of the sin,
and exposed to the dangers that attend neglect of Generation-work?

Thus much concerning our third general Head: I now come unto our fourth, which
is,

4 Wherein does the work of this present Generation lie?

Answ. As the question is very weighty, and of great concernment, being the
Butt aimed at in my whole discourse, so that in the discussion hereof, I may in
the fear of God walk evenly, and (without winding or turning to any interest,
save that of truth) pitch (if possible) upon that which is the proper and
direct work of the generation we live in; It will be necessary in order
thereunto, to ^ay down some few general Rules, as way-marks, to guide ^he
Reader, to the discovery of that which is the proper work of his generation;
whatsoever generation he may be supposed to live in; which when particularly
applied to the present generation, will give us light into what is or may be
the proper work or works thereof, as

1 Be inquisitive to find out (according to Scripture account) the particular
age or generation it self, that it is fallen to thy lot to live in: which
though it be hard to do, yet in regard the wisdom of God in Scripture has set
some distinct and notifying mark upon every age, the same, by industry, and
waiting upon the Father of lights, for light, may be attained.

2 The former being done, add thereunto a narrow and impartial search for
discovery of those glorious and remarkable things, the accomplishment of which,
God in his word has promised and foretold, in and about this age.

In this way the holy man Daniel came to understand the work of his Generation:
First, he considered the time he lived in, to be about the end of the 70 years
captivity foretold by Jeremy.

2 He observes that there was a special promise of deliverance from this
captivity made to those times, Chap. 9.2. whereupon having discovered the work,
he addresseth himself to God by prayer for the doing of it, verse. 3, 4.

3 Observe Gods visible dispensations toward that age, and the various
transactions of things therein, how they correspond with the things foretold
and promised; for as has been already observed in Generation-work, it is
dispensation gives the Call.

4 Observe what work that is which is most opposed and raged against by Satan,
and wicked men in the generation. For it is most certain, that the work of the
generation (Gods cause and glory which above all things Satan hates, being
there imbarqued) has ever been the most opposed work by the Devil and his
Instruments. Was it not so in Moses his time? Nehemiah's time, John Baptists
time, the Apostles time, and since that in Luthers time, I spare to say, and in
our times too?

5 Observe what (not men of worldly wisdom and principles, but) the most
spiritual enlightened Saints have upon their hearts as the work of their
generation. For from the beginning it has been Gods way to make choice of such
for the discovery of Generation-work unto, before all others.

The Old world had its wise men, and men of rare inventions, Genesis 4.20, 21, 22.
Yet not these, but righteous Noah saw the work of the generation. Egypt in the
time of Moses was famous for its wise men, as also Babylon in Nehemiah's, yet
neither the one nor the other saw the work of those generations, but only a
poor handful of despised people that God had in either. Judea in Christ's time
was plentifully stored with learned Scribes, Doctors and Rabbis, yet not
these, but a company of poor disregarded Fishermen had the work of that
generation revealed to them. This, though alone it be not sufficient to
conclude the work, yet when joined with the rest, credit undoubtedly ought to
be given to it.

6 And lastly, Be much in prayer to God for light herein. The great work of the
Apostles generation, viz. The bringing in of the Gentites was revealed to Peter
and Paul both, even whilst they were in prayer, as Act. 10.9, 10. with chap.
22.17, 21.

Having thus by this general light paved out a way to walk in. My next work is
to see what particular light, by applying these things unto the present age,
may from hence be gained unto the work thereof.

And here according unto the method before prescribed, our first inquiry must
be after the age it self. What age is that most likely to be, that we are
fallen into?

In answer to which, my Assertion is, that it is most probable that we are
fallen into that very age in which the Jews are to be converted.

Now although here I must nakedly acknowledge, that I could heartily wish, for
their sakes, whose this little Book is, yet clearer and more unquestionable
grounds for the proof of this my Assertion, than those that this opinion
commonly stands upon: Yet in regard I know no clearer principle to demonstrate
(for bare conjectures are no proofs) the work of the Generation from, then this
taken for granted, that we are fallen into that age in which the Jews shall be
converted; and also in regard it is received for a truth (and so in case of
mistake I shall not be the first) by many late Christian Writers of worthy
memory, yea, with much confidence asserted by the Jews themselves, though under
another notion, than what we truly call it of conversion to Christ, as
Manasseth Ben. Israel, in his Book entitled, The hope of Israel, Sect. 29, 32,
35, 36. is proof; I shall therefore endeavor to give you (with as much
clearness and brevity as I may) the substance of that light, which by the
labors of godly judicious men, [as Brightman, Archer] has been let into that
Scripture, which is the main bottom to this opinion, leaving the Reader to
judge, and a little time to manifest the verity or falsity of what is written,
the which we have Dan. 12.1. compared with 11, 12. where Daniel has a promise
made to him of his peoples deliverance, and that at a certain time when Michael
should stand up, at that time shall thy people be delivered; (which words (as I
conceive) comprehend both the beginning and consummation of their deliverance,
to which, two distinct times are assigned, as afterward.) Now because this
thing was a great secret, and Daniels affection to Gods glory, and the good of
his own people, transported him with desire to know the particular time, he
therefore moves the Question, When shall this be? How long shall it be to the
end of these wonders? v. 6. Answer hereto is made so darkly, that Daniel hears,
but understands not; nand therefore although in words far different, yet (as by
the following answer appears) aiming still at the same thing, he puts the
Question again: What shall be the end of these things? Answer then is made, v.
11, 12. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be tak n away, and the
abomination that makes desolate be set up, there shall be a thousand two
hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the
thousand three hundred five and thirty days. The meaning whereof seems to be
this, that the beginning of the delivery of Daniels people ( viz. the Jews)
should fall out a thousand three hundred and ninety days ( i.e. so many years,
a day for a year being the Scripture account, as Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.4, 5, 6.)
after the taking away of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up the
abomination that makes desolate, and forty five years after that (for so many
days has the second number more than the first) that the great trouble, which
the Scripture not only here, but elsewhere plentifully reveals (as Ezekiel 37.38,
39. Joel 3.1, 2. Zach. 12. and 14.1, 2.) will attend that people in their
beginning to seek the Lord, and David their King, shall they be delivered from
by the standing of Michael their Prince, as verse. 1. Which because till that
day their deliverance (though began before) shall not be completed, therefore
is the blessing annexed not to the first, but to the latter time. Blessed is he
that waits and comes to the 1335 days.

The great knot here is (for the untying of which more light would be welcome)
When the taking away of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up the abomination
that makes desolate (which is to be the head of our account) had its
accomplishment, and here the variety of men's judgments has brought forth
various conjectures, which not in this place to scan, I shall pitch on that
which seems to carry greatest probability of truth with it, which is the
opinion of those that bring it down to Julians time, fixing upon (as the mark
they begin their account at) that particular act of his of endeavoring (by
setting the Jews thereabouts) the re-edifying the Temple at Jerusalem, and so
thereby in malice and opposition to Christ and Christian-Worship, to restore
Judaism, and Jewish Worship, at which time a fearful Earthquake in the night
did overturn all they had built in the day, yea, threw the very foundation
stones of the Temple out of their places, which before had never been removed.

Now the reasons why a fixation here is rather to be chosen, than any where
else, are,

1 Because if we make any other act since Christ before this, the Head of our
account, the time is already expired, and yet the Jews not delivered.

2 Because, No act whatsoever could more patly agree to the words themselves,
than this of Julians, which was an abomination of the highest to endeaver the
setting up of the Jewish worship, when God had thrown it down, and that out of
a design to throw down Christian worship, which God had set up: and such an
abomination as brought a desolation, and an utter removal of the daily
sacrifice, the Temple-ground, the only place of sacrifice, being at this time
lost. For although the daily sacrifice did cease before from Titus time, by
whom the Temple was ruined, as it also did all the time that Israel was in
Babylon, whilst the first Temple lay waste, yet properly could it not either
then or now, nor no more now than then, be said to be taken away, because the
Temple-ground, to which (as the only holy place) the Jewish worship was tied,
whereon a new Temple might be built, was still remaining. But at this time, not
only the foundation stones being thrown up, but the very Temple-ground being
lost in the Earthquake, it is not improper to say, the daily sacrifice was
taken away.

3 This likewise seems best to agree to the words of Christ himself, concerning
the destruction of the Temple, Mat. 24.2. There shall not be left one stone
upon another that shall not be thrown down. For although the Temple was
demolished by Titus, yet the foundation stones did still lie one upon the
other; but now this act of Julians brought such a desolation, that as the
building was ruined formerly, so the very foundation now had not a stone left
upon a stone, which punctually agrees to Christ's own words.

And it is observable that Christ himself makes this setting up of the
abomination of desolation, foretold by Daniel, the immediate fore runner
hereof, ver. 3. compared with 15. which according to what has been said, was
both immediate forerunner and cause also.

Now for the precise time of this Hellish exploit, there are among Historians
four (how many more I know not) different accounts of the particular year in
which the same was acted, though all I have hitherto seen or heard of, conclude
it to be within the year of our Lord, 360. or 367. yet whether or no through
some mistake of Chronology, the difference may not be somewhat wider, I cannot
determine, though judge it very unlikely that it can or should be much.

Accounting therefore (that we may draw to a head) from the year 366. (and the
rather, because the very year Daniels first number of days, will from thence
fall in with, is already made famous by general expectations of some remarkable
thing to be done therein) and the beginning of the Jews delivery, is likely to
be, either in the year it self, or thereabouts of our Lord, 1656. for adding
366. (the supposed year of Christ, wherein Julian did this) to Daniels, 1290.
and there is made up the full sum (neither over nor under) of 1656. which if
when that time shall come we see accomplished, we need not then make it a
question, whether forty five years after their deliverance shall be completed,
or not, Daniel having foretold, that in his last number of 1335. which he that
shall take but ten from the 300 and add the same to the 35. will find that made
up 45. and the foregoing number of 1290. to remain.

And because this reckoning is but of latter times, it is not therefore to be
rejected, but rather to be received; because Daniel himself tells us, that the
truth of this Prophecy was to be sealed up till the time of the end, as verse.
4.9. which is also a manifest argument, that this cannot relate (unless in a
typical way) to the times and story of Antiochus Epiphanes, as some godly and
learned men would carry it.

If any by calling in doubt the thing it self, viz. Whether ever such a thing
as the Jews conversion shall be; question the whole. My answer to such is, That
could I with that clearness demonstrate the time of it, as (through the Lords
assistance) it is easy to do, the thing it self (were this the place for the
doing thereof) I should have suspected my self to have injured truth, had I
dropped doubtful words concerning the same.

Yet because this Answer is none at all, and I would not have any take bare
words for Arguments, and yet am loath here, neither is it proper to start the
question; therefore setting aside the joint and concurrent testimony of every
of the Prophets of the Old Testament ( Jonah only excepted, which is rather a
History than a Prophecy) in this thing, the truth whereof is not much more
difficult to prove, than to affirm: I shall only commend to such, that of
Paul, Romans 11. who speaks expressly not of spiritual, but of natural Jews, whom
therefore he all along opposes to the Gentiles, calling them also branches
broken off, which cannot be spiritual branches but natural, v. 21. and the same
broken off, shall be grafted in again, v. 24. And this not done only one by one
in continuance of time, but (according to that of Isa. 66.8.) in a manner all
at once, ver. 25, 26. And so all Israel shall be saved -- which as yet we have
never seen, and yet because Scripture speaks it, are to believe it.

Thus according to present light (both of what I have received from others, and
have been able to add of my own) a discovery of the age we live in has been
made, and found to be that in which the great work of Isreal's redemption is
most likely to be effected.

2 Our next thing is (that we may walk in the path before laid down) to observe
what those glorious and remarkable things are, the accomplishment whereof God
has foretold and promised in and about these times.

And here give me leave to say, that when I take a view of what holy Scripture
has recorded, of that time in which Israel shall return to their own Land, and
also to the Lord, and David their King, that I do find this age (none more)
full of wonders; to all which, Gods glorious work of redeeming Sion, literal
Sion, or the Jews from their long captivity; and spiritual Sion, or the Gentile
Churches, from Antichristian bondage (as it were) the Axis upon which they turn.

Now to enumerate each particular of those transactions that Scripture tells us
shall fall out in this age, is not my intent, but only to take notice of some
of the chief, (and such as are most free from exception) for the directing of
us to that which is our special work in this Generation. Which are,

1 Isreal's Redemption; Which although by mentioning here again, I may seem to
tautologize, yet must I do it, this being the first and great thing promised,
which therefore we have before proved, and make use of as a mark to descry the
rest by.

2 A large and plentiful conversion of Gentles to the Lord. as Isa. 2.3, Many
people shall say, Come ye, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord -- Which
that it relates to the time in and about which the Jews shall be converted, is
clear, verse. 5. O house of Jacob ( i.e. ye Jews, as distinguished from the
Nations before spoken of) Come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And
yet more clear, Mica 4.2. ver. 6.7. So Isa, 60.3, 4, 5. Lift up thine eyes
round about and see, all they gather themselves together, they come to thee --
the abundance of the Sea (or Nations shall be converted unto thee, the forces
of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. Which that it is spoken of the Jews is
clear, because they are distinguished from the Gentiles; and that the time of
their redemption is here spoken of, appears, if you look back to Chap. 59.20.
compared with Romans 11.26. So Zach. 2.11. Many Nations shall be joined to the
Lord in that day -- What day is that? See verse. 12. When the Lord shall inherit
Judah his portion in the holy Land, and shall choose Jerusalem again. So Zach.
8.20.21, 22, 23. To all which add Romans 11.25, 26. where the Apostle speaking of
the conversion of the Jews, mentions also a fullness of the Gentiles about that
time coming in.

3 Uniting Saints that differ, Zach. 14.9. In that day shall there be one Lord,
and his Name one? And when shall this be? why, then, when all Nations shall be
gathered together against Jerusalem to battle as verse. 2. So Zeph. 3.9. I will
turn to the people a pure language that they may all call upon the Name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent. Division of languages made a division of
men, but when Gods people shall come to have a pure, unbroken language, all to
speak one and the same thing, division amongst Saints shall cease, and there
shall be union: But when shall this be? See verse. 20. At that time will I bring
you again, even in the time that I will gather you, for I will make you ( i.e.
Israel distinguished from other people) a name, and a praise among all people
of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the Lord.
So Isa. 11.13. The envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah
be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
When shall this be? the foregoing verse tells us -- He shall assemble the
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four
corners of the earth. So Chapter 54.13. all thy children shall be taught of the
Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy Children (which may as well be
understo^d of outward, as inward peace, for all being taught of God, they shall
not jar amongst themselves.) But when shall this be? why, then, when as the
Jews which now are barren as a widow, and a wife of youth refused, as verse.
1.4.6. shall be received into favor again.

4 Pulling down of high and lofty things, under which as principal, or head, we
are to comprehend the man of Sin, or Romish Antichrist, Is. 2.11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men
shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the
day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan. And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted
up. And upon every high Tower, and upon every fenced wall, and upon all the
sh^ps of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. And the loftiness of man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low; and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day.

The meaning of all these metaphorical expressions is only this, That at this
time the day of the Lord, the day of the Lord shall be upon all the strength
and glory of the Creature, upon all high and lofty things and persons, that
exait themselves above the Lord Christ, to the pulling of them down. But when
shall this be? Then, when the Mountain of the Lords house shall be exalted
above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, verse. 2. the time (as even
now was proved) of the Jews conversion. So Isa. 24.21. And it shall come to
pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are
on high, and the Kings of the earth, upon the earth. When shall this be? See
verse. 23. When the Lord of Host shall reign in Mount Sion, and in Jer^salem,
and before his Ancients (the people of ancient times chosen, and in Covenant
with him) gloriously. So Chap. 30. last. Tophet (the pit of destruction) is
ordained of old, yea for the King it is prepared. The meaning is, not only an
eternal (as some carry it) but temporal ruin shall attend great ones. But when
shall this be? To that I answer, Although in the type it was fulfilled upon
Senacherib King of Assyria, and his Armies, yet the whole Chapter, especially
from verse. 18. has relation to another time, which is that we are speaking of,
of the Jews conversion, as is evident, verse. 19. For the people shall dwell in
Sion at Jerusalem; thou shall weep no more. But more clear, verse. 26. The light
of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun -- In the day that the Lord
binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound.

5 The establishment of Justice and Righteousness in the world, as Isa. 1.26,
27. And I will restore thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the
faithful City. Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her Converts with
righteousness, Chap. 54.14. In righteousness shall thou be established; thou
shall be far from oppression. So Chap. 60 18. I will make thine Officers peace,
and thine Exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land,
wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls
Salvation, and thy gates Praise. These places (as already has been shown)
looking all to the time of the Jews redemption.

6 The pouring out of more abundance of the Spirit, Joel 2.28. And it shall
come to pass afterward that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh --
When shall this be? Even then, when in Mount Sion, and Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as verse. 32. or more clearly, then, when God shall bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, as Chap. 3.1. For although Peter (Acts 2.)
speaks of these words as fulfilled in his time, yet was that only in the
beginning, the pouring down of the Spirit, then being not so general as that
here promised, and that which shall be upon the coming in of the Jews. So Zach.
12.10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplication. So Isa 32.15. Until the Spirit
be poured upon us from on high -- It is observable, that the giving forth of
the Spirit at this time is set forth by this word of pouring, noting abundance
that shall then be given forth, more than in former ages.

7 As an effect of the former, Increase of light and grace, as Isa. 30.26.
Moreover, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the
Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their
wound, Chap. 52.8. They shall see eye to eye (i.e. clearly) when the Lord shall
bring again Sion. See both, Zach. 12.8. -- He that is fecble in that day shall
be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them. Which that it relates to the time of the Jews call, the whole
Chap. is proof.

8 The exaltation of the Lord Christ alone as King, Isa. 2 11. -- The Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day, Chap. 24.23. The Lord of Hosts shall reign
in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously. Chap. 2,
3, 4. -- Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and he shall judge among the Nations, Zach. 14.9. The Lord shall be
King over all the Earth -- All which places I have already proved to speak this
time. So Isa. 33.22. -- The Lord is our King, he will save us. When is this?
Ans^ then when Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, verse. 20^ Look unto Sion,
the City of your solemnities: Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation
-- Ezekiel. 37.24. And David my Servant (Christ of whom David was a type) shall be
King over them -- And to what time does this look? to that time in which Israel
and Judah shall be gathered together, and brought to their own Land, and be
made again one Nation upon the mountains of Israel, as verse. 21, 22.

Thus have I done with the second thing, viz. the things foretold to be done in
this age.

3 The third is to observe the visible dispensations of God toward the age we
live in: and in case upon inquiry these be found to answer to what God has
foretold, they shall be in that age in which the Jews shall be converted, then
this will not only serve for discovery of the thing in hand, wherein the work
of this Generation lies; but also add a beam of light unto the former, viz.
That we are fallen into that age in which the Jews shall be converted.

Only here I would carry this along with me, that in regard as yet things are
but coming on, therefore many things before this Generation is over, may be
transacted, which yet we see little of. But in case it appear that transactions
begin already to agree with the things foretold and promised, have we not
ground then to hope (things coming on apace every day) that before this
Generation expires, we shall see most, if not all fully accomplished?

Let us then compare what God has promised to the age we speak of with present
dispensations, and see what way Gods dispensations are making, or have already
made toward the performance of them.

1 For the bringing in of the Jews, is not a fair way made to that already? by
that general expectation they have of their Messiah's coming in this age, as
Manasseth Ben. Israel (before quoted) is witness, sect. 29.35. as also by that
light that at present is amongst them (which the aforesaid Author in several of
his Sections declares) into many of those Prophecies of the Old Testament which
directly point at their call.

2 For the Conversion of the Gentiles. Not to speak of the great conversions of
late near home in poor Wales, and some parts of Ireland; and the hopeful way we
are in, by the going out daily of poor despised Laborers into the Lords
Vineyard, of a large Harvest: is it not admirable that in this age, and that
within a few years each of other, the West and East Indies both, should be
enlightened with the Gospel, which never heard it before; verifying that, Mal.
1.11. For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my
Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered unto my Name, and a pure offering, for my Name shall be great among the
heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.

3 As for the uniting of Saints that differ, although here with grief we must
confess the breach is yet too wide, yet with joy and comfort we may also truly
say, it is not so wide as lately it was, many closing, and loving one another
in most parts of the Nation, who five, nay two years ago could not do it: and
if so little time have made such a blessed beginning, what may we expect from
more?

4 And as for the pulling down of high and lofty things, if our age bear not
witness of this, it does of nothing; for does not the whole world ring again
with the noise that has been made through the late fall of Regal and Episcoral
powers in England?

5 For the establishment of Justice and righteousness, tho we want in respect
of what we would have, yet all unprejudiced persons must nakedly confess a good
foundation to be already laid in order to the same, and as some hopeful
beginnings thereupon, so our selves to be in a fairer way by far, for more,
than we were sixteen or twenty years ago: which a little time we hope will
ripen to perfection.

6 And for the pouring out of the Spirit, though it ought to be our grief we
have so little of it, yet cannot Gods people in this age, without great
ingratitude to the Father of mercies, but acknowledge that he has herein also
been more bountiful unto them, than unto others of his dear Children, and their
fellow servants in the foregoing age; thought these then with that little they
had, better, and more obedient to their Father, than we now: and as we have
ground for hope, so is it our duty to believe for yet more.

7 And as for increase of light (without transgressing the rules of modesty, or
exalting our selves in this present age, in testification of our thankfulness
to him from whom our light is) we may truly, and humbly say, that this present
age has brought forth some truths, especially those which concern Christ's
Kingdom, which till now have not with that clearness been revealed in any since
the Apostles times.

8 And lastly, For the exaltation of Christ as King, when ever was there a time
(since the Apostles) that could show half so many Churches as at this day are
to be seen in England, and elsewhere? yea, when since the beginning was Christ
ever in so fair a way to be King over the world? and when so much worldly power
in the hands of godly men as at this day?

So that in Gods dispensations to this age, we may already begin to read those
very things he has foretold shall be in that age in which the Jews shall be
converted, which (as has been before proved) is this age we live in.

And the more is this to be considered, because dispensation being that which
gives call to the work of the Generation, it is enough (supposing we had no
other proof) in case we behold present dispensations, pointing to such and such
things, to know there lies the work of this age: Yet in regard light burdens no
man, and the lovers of truth are never offended with truth for its clearness,
therefore this Rule (which alone gives so much light into the work, as that it
will be (as has been before cleared) sin in that man, who wilfully shutting
his eyes to the same, neglects the work) is here brought in, hand in hand with
others, of no less evidence and demonstration than it self.

4 Our fourth Rule formerly laid down, is to observe what work that is which is
most raged against by the Devil and wicked men, for ordinarily there (as was
then proved) does lie the work of the Generation. Now here consider what are
those things the Devil rages against, and the World would fain hinder in this
age.

To omit the first, because the work not appearing as yet (though we hope God
is making a way thereto) the Devil does not as yet appear openly (in this age
more than formerly) for to oppose the same. But to come to the next.

Is not the Conversion of Sinners one thing raged against? witness the many
obstructions in the way of propagating the Gospel; The opposition to the
Doctrine of glad tidings to Sinners therein revealed, and also to godly men
because Mechanics, whom God in many places with happy success is pleased in
this day to make use of, for declaring of them.

Is not the prevention of union among Saints another? by fomenting divisions
through Jesuitical practices, and thereby drawing them into parties, and then
setting one party against the other.

And is not this another, the pulling down of high and lofty ones? does not the
world generally storm to see Kings and Bishops plucked from their seats? As one
of their party says, Had he had a hand in the pulling down of Regal or
Episcopal Power, he should think himself to have committed the sin against the
Holy Ghost.

And who knows not the opposition that the establishment of Justice and
Righteousness meets with at this day in the world?

Yea farther, is not the Spirit a thing mocked at, you have the Spirit; these
are men of the Spirit, etc. And the very term of new Light is not only
distasteful but reproachful.

To conclude, What ways have been of late years to prevent and root out, if
possible, Christ's Kingly Government in his Churches? and are at this day to
obstruct the same, which is hoped to be now rising over the world, is apparent
to all men.

Thus we see that the very things Satan rages against, are the same that the
Prophecies of old have foretold, and the dispensations of God call for in this
age.

5 We have but one Rule of discovery more (prayer excepted, which is
Closet-work) and that is, to observe what spiritual enlightened Saints have upon
their hearts, as the work of their Generation. And although here I cannot enter
into men's hearts, yet this I may say, so far as my own acquaintance leads me, I
have ever observed the pulses of the most spiritual enlightened Saints beating
this way: And the public desires of many for things of this nature, shows how
others stand inclined toward the doing of them.

Thus you may easily perceive whitherto all these Rules tend, each of which
standing upon firm ground, as has been before declared.

The conclusion then (putting all together) is this; That the work of the
present Generation, which Saints are bound to attend unto, and to be active in,
lies principally in these things. The conversion of the Jews, propagation of
the Gospel, in order to a greater Harvest of Gentiles, Joynting Saints (Christ
mystical body) into one. Pulling down of all high and lofty things, and
persons, that oppose Christ. The establishment of Justice and Righteousness in
the world, Striving with God in a more especial manner for a greater degree of
his Spirit, more light and grace than Saints in former Generations have had;
together with the exaltation of Christ as King, both in his Churches and also
over the world. Which last, considering how that all the rest are in a way of
subserviency thereunto, and do, as it were, center therein, for therefore are
Jews and Gentiles at this time to meet together, as Subjects under one Prince,
that this Kingdom of his might be great, and full of Subjects; therefore shall
divisions amongst his people cease, that his Kingdom might be quiet and
peaceable; therefore shall high and lofty ones be pulled down, that Christ
might have no Competitor or Check mate (as I may say) in this his Kingdom;
therefore shall Justice and Righteousness be established, that so the glory of
his Kingdom in this respect might surpass the glory of all Kingdoms before it;
therefore shall there be more of the Spirit, more light and grace given forth
to the Saints, that so they might yield obedience to their King, not so much
from a Law without, as a principle of light and love within, I say all
centering in this last, my utmost conclusion is, that the masterpiece of work
in this Generation is, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

5 But how may I come to know or find out that particular part, or parcel of
work, which is more properly to be my work in my Generation, and which God
requires me to be active in? seeing it cannot be supposed that any one man can
be active in the whole work; neither undoubtedly is it required of him.

In answer to this, I shall in general lay down this seeming, contrary
Proposition, viz. That there is no part or piece of Generation-work, but every
Christian man or woman may in some way be helpful thereunto, so far as he is
called to act, and consequently becomes guilty of neglect of Generation-work in
not acting, As,

1 By prayer to God for the prospering and carrying on of the work. Those who
can do nothing else, are commanded to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm.
122.6. yea all that make mention of the Lord in the day of Gods building Sion,
are bound not to keep silence, nor give God rest till he establish, and till he
make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Is. 62.6, 7.

2 By humbling our selves before God for that, whatsoever it be, whether found
in the people of God, or instruments employed in the work, or any other that
proves obstructive, and a hindrance to the work. When the sin of Achan became
an obstruction to the work of Joshua's age, Joshuah and the Elders of Israel
rent their clothes, fell to the earth on their faces, put dust on their heads,
humbling themselves before God for it, Josh. 7.6.

Now although acting in this manner (in case we can do nothing else) may seem
little in our eyes, yet in the eyes of God, it does not so, who takes it
exceeding well at the hands of his people, when they can serve their Generation
no other way, that they do in this.

When Israel had so provoked God, that God was upon the point of destroying of
them, as Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14. Moses then falls down before God forty days, and
forty nights, and by prayer and fasting prevails with God, not only to spare
them, but also by the manifestation of his presence and glorious power still to
go along with them, as Exodus 33.14, 15. And how pleasing Moses prayer to God in
this business, was, appears, in that the glorious discovery of Gods back-parts
to Moses, and proclamation of his Name before him (such a discovery as never
Moses himself at any other time, nor any man besides him ever had) comes in as
the fruit of this his interceding for the people, and in behalf of the cause of
God, as Exodus 33.19. compared with Chap. 34.5, 6, 7. Moses did many glorious
works in his Generation, which others could not follow, yet God chooses to
make his glory pass before him, not in doing them, but that which every Saint
may imitate him in.

Daniel in like manner, when as yet there was no visible way for public
actings in that which now began to be the business of the Generation, makes it
his private work to strive with God by humiliation and prayer for the same, as
Chap. 9. and how well God did like hereof, you have heard before, and the
success of Daniels prayer (verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.) is sufficient testimony.

So also Nehemiah, when the work of his Age lay out of his power to act any
thing therein, save only in this way of prayer and humiliation, he as the other
(this being the common way of Gods people in such cases) betakes himself unto
this work of praying and mourning before God in reference to the same, Nehem.
1.4, 5, etc. And how wonderfully God was pleased herewith, the sequel of the
story shows, for within four months after (his praying and mourning being in
the month Chisleu, verse. 1.) the ninth month according to the Jewish account,
as Zach. 7.1. in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, and the return thereof in
the month Nisan, Chap. 6.1. the first month after their account, as Ester 3.7.
and all in one year, (as by comparing Chap. 1.1. with Chap. 2.1. is evident)
God in an extraordinary way does so bring things about, that this Nehemiah, the
praying and mourning man for Jerusalems desolations, is furnished with
commission and authority from the King to go to Jerusalem, and there to
re-edifie the City, and build up the wall thereof, the very work of that
Generation.

In case therefore Generation-work lie at such a plunge as thou can act no
other way in it, or in case thou be one who want both opportunity and
employment wherein thou may be helpful in any particular way unto thy
Generation, then serve the same in this general way, which service from the
hands of such a one is accepted of God, and the party doing the same, in Gods
account, faithful in his Generation.

Yet because many there be, who besides the general way of acting (which is a
duty common to all) may in other more special ways be serviceable to their
Generation, who (yet neither their call, nor opportunity reaching to the whole
work, but some part of it) will be further inquisitive how they shall know that
particular part of Generation-work, which is more properly theirs. To the end
that such may receive satisfaction in this thing, I shall desire them to go
along with me through these following Rules.

1 Observe what part of Generation-work that is that thou art in a capacity to
do. Every man is not in a capacity to do the same piece of Generation-work, but
one man is in a capacity to do one piece of the work, another, another; and
although the more public and general any man's employment is, the more he is in
a capacity to do; yet is there no man, unless we could suppose some universal
Officer over Nations and Churches, which might lawfully act in every mars
sphere, which is in a capacity to do the whole work; Observe therefore what
work thou art in a capacity to do.

And here it will not be unnecessary to take into our mature consideration, the
place and station God has set a man in, the special gift a man may have, the
light revealed to him, together with the opportunities that lie before him,
either of which may put some men into a capacity beyond others, to act in some
one business of their Generation, rather then another.

Now what work soever any of these, or a^l of them joined together, do put a
man into a capacity of acting, the dispensations of that age calling to the
performance of such things (for in Generation-work (as has been proved)
dispensation gives the Call) a man may safely conclude that to be his work in
his Generation, which as Gods dispensations call him to, so God himself will
either here, or hereafter strictly require an account of him, how he has done
the same.

2 Observe what work that is amongst those things thou art in a capacity to do
in thy Generation; which the dispensations of God without, and the bent or
inclination of the Spirit within, at such time as the same is most spiritual,
or thou have most intimate communion with God calls for the present doing
thereof. For it is most certain, that every thing that a man is in a capacity
to do, he is not called alike to the doing of. I may be in a capacity to do
many things in my Generation, and my Call to some of these things may be
greater, to others less: my Call may be to some for the present, to others for
the future. Now to find out which of these my Call lies first unto, it is most
necessary to observe which Gods dispensations call loudest for, as that which
is (as it were) the hinge upon which the rest of the work does turn, and which
if neglected, nothing else can, or is ever likely (as it should be) to be done;
to which, although the essence of the Call lies here; yet if also here be added
(rather as matter of inducement, than a bottom for a Call) this other
observation, How my spirit stands at such times when I am most spiritual, most
dis-ingaged from private interests, and most intimately familiar with God, and
most resolved to follow him (which are the ordinary times of the holy Spirits
speaking) to the attempting of these things, and if then I find the impulse of
my soul strongly bending and inclining that way, that the dispensations of God
would lead me; I may then conclude the dispensations of God without, and the
Spirit of God within, as in themselves they ever agree, so also now in
witnessing the self-same thing to me, that here does lie that special piece of
work, which amongst the things I am in a capacity to do, God calls aloud for
the present doing of.

The call of a Dispensation without ( viz. Gods being risen to deliver his
people) and an impulse of spirit within, putting man-like courage into a woman,
was the only thing moved Jael to attempt that dangerous, yet memorable act of
slaying Sisera, Judge. 5.24, 25.

Yea what other Call the Judges of Israel -- who ( Deborah the Prophetess
excepted) were not Prophets, for the holy Ghost calls them Judges, and that in
a way of distinction from Prophets, He gave them Judges about the space of 450
years until Samuel the Prophet, Act. 13.20. Yea after Moses, Samuel (of a man)
is the first Prophet extraordinarily gifted read of, as Act. 3.24. Yea all the
Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after: I saw what Call, these
Judges had (only Gideon, Sampson, and Deborah that we read of, having
extraordinary Calls, except the Call of a dispensation, the bondage Gods people
were in, and a secret impulse of Spirit wrought in them by the Lord, stirring
them up to endeavor their deliverance: I cannot my self determine, and
therefore leave the doing thereof to others.

3 Observe what piece of Generation work that is, which when thou have ventured
on it, thou have found God most eminently appearing to thee for thy
encouragement, and also with thee for assistance in doing of it; and know that
the prosecution of that is properly thy work in thy generation. Joshuah's
special and principal work in his Generation, was, the rooting out the
Canaanites, and it was in this work that God did most eminently appear to
Ioshuah, both for encouragement in the beginning of the enterprise, as Chap.
1.5, 6. and with his assistance carrying of it on, until the same was
perfected, as the story shows us.

4 Observe what piece of Generation-work that is, which thou being in a
capacity to do, in doing of, art like to meet with greatest opposition, and
that from all hands, and stick to that as thy work in thy Generation. Christ
when he was here on earth, had two great works, the one relating to his
Prophetical Office, which was to publish the glad tidings of salvation; the
other to his Priestly, which was to dye for poor sinners. In the first of these
he is opposed both by the Devil, the world, and a professing party; and in the
last, by one from whom one would least expect it, even his beloved Disciple
Peter, acted by Satan to oppose him in this work.

5 Observe what piece of Generation-work that is, which when thou have had a
call, an opportunity, and an inclination to do it, and have not set about the
same, God has presently withdrawn himself.

Gods usual way is to check his peoples neglects, especially in Generation-work
by withdrawing himself, as has been fully cleared in the foregoing Discourse
under that branch, discovering the danger of neglecting Generation-work in
respect of our loss of communion with God thereby. If therefore such a
withdrawing thou art, or have been sensible of, and these to grow upon such
neglects (lest there come a greater after-clap, this being but Gods
warning-peece) mind better than yet thou have done, that work, upon neglect
whereof thou have sensibly found these withdrawings, and know, the same is
properly thy work in thy Generation.

6 Observe what piece of Generation-work that is, which, put the case thou were
to dye, would make most for thy comfort, if done, and most for thy discomfort,
if neglected. Some work there is which men have to do for God in their
Generations, which if the messenger of Death should come, and the same not
done, the heart would cry, O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength,
to do this and the other work not yet done by me, as it should, before I go
hence, and be no more seen. Now know this for certain, that that work which if
I were now to die would afflict me, because not done, is my present work
without delay to do; For that which I find will further my joy in death, I may
conclude, is my duty in my life, and if a duty in my life, and only life's
present time is certain to me, then may I assure my self it is my present work;
the neglect whereof, as no pretense, how specious soever can excuse it, so the
doing thereof will admit of no delays, though there may seem never so great
cause in reason for the same. O have not then that work to do at death, the
neglect whereof, though thou may go to Heaven, will lessen thy joy in thy
journey.

6 And lastly. But how may Generation-work be carried on, so as that God may be
served in the Generation?

In answer hereunto I shall lay done some Rules for direction, and so conclude.

1 Labor to find out what the work of thy Generation is, and in what things
chiefly it consists. A right Principle and a rectified Judgment must ever go
before practice, or otherwise practice would be irregular.

Now for our help herein, some light already has been given in discussing the
two former Questions; which by observing times and dispensations, searching the
Scriptures, converse with Saints, and seeking God, that Christian who desires
to be found in this work, may for his own satisfaction add unto; which work as
very needful in this point, to the end he may go by his own eyes, and not by
others, I here commend to him, and leave him to.

2 Be humbled for it in case thou have failed in the work of the former
Generation. It is (as has been observed Gods way to punish the errors of men
in one Generation, by blinding them to, and laying them by in the work of
another Generation; which punishment in it self most sad, has yet a particular
dispensation going along with it, exempting all such from the penalty; who for
their failings in the former Generation, have taken shame to themselves,
publishing their former errors, and humbling themselves for it in the next
Generation, which you may read, Ezekiel 43.10, 11. Son of man show the house of
Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the
pattern. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form
of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the
comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof,
and all the laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the
whole form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them.

The Law of Reprieval exempting the offender from this heavy penalty of being
blinded to, and cast out of the present work of God in the Generation he lives
in, ^is conditional, if they be ashamed, then show them -- but in case they be
not ashamed, but still justify themselves in, and own their former errors,
then of necessity the contrary follows, show them not the present work, but
rather let them be blinded to it, hide from them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and
the Ordinances thereof, and the Laws thereof: Let all be hidden from them, and
they laid by as to the whole, and every part of it, in case they be not ashamed.

3 Convert private cares, which only concern thine own particular condition,
into cares for the public, and the Cause of Christ on foot. Most of Gods
people spend their time wholly in caring about their condition, whether it
shall go well or ill with them as to their particulars; making it no part (or
at most but a little part) of their care, how it fares with the cause of God in
the world. Now as this care is too low for a Saint to be ever poring about, so
is it one main reason why after many years of care, a dissatisfaction still
remains in their spirits about the thing; because they have not learnt to leave
this care with God, and to care more for the work of God, and the glory of God.

Thus did Moses, Number. 14. The people are in a hurly-burly, and talk of a new
Captain, verse. 4. and stoning such as would dissuade them, verse. 10. Moses now
in this tumult lays aside the care of his own particular safety, and makes it
his utmost care to divert the wrath of God, that he now saw coming upon the
people, as verse. 13, 14, etc.

And has not Christ himself left us a sweet example of this, who when he was
entering upon his great work of dying, seems to neglect his own particular, and
makes it his great business to fortify his Disciples against the storm
approaching, by giving them a seal of his love in his last Supper, preaching a
Sermon of Soul-consolation to them, and also praying to his Father, with much
faith and fervency in their behalf; and which is observable in his Sermon and
Prayer both, for one word spoken to himself, and in his own behalf, he speaks
hundreds to them, and to his Father in theirs.

Admirable is that of Paul, 2 Timothy 1.11. who seems to forget his own salvation,
that he might mind his work whereunto he was appointed, for he takes no more
thought about that but only to leave it with God -- I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him, against that day: As to say, I have trusted God with that,
i will venture that upon his care; but in his work, and for the cause of Christ,
he suffers all things, and runs all hazzards that he might be found faithful
thereunto. -- I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the
Gentiles. For the which cause, I also suffer these things --.

4 Stand loose and dis-engaged from private interests. Private interest of
honor, profit, friends, etc. has often times been a snare to men, and slurred
them in, yea, sometimes drawn them to oppose the work of their Generation. A
private interest of profit (though colored over with a pretense of sacrifice)
led Saul to the sparing of Agag, and the best of the flock, contrary to the
work of his Generation, which was to have destroyed all, as 1 Samuel 15.2, 3.
This proved a snare to him, and for this (as before) he is cashiered by God.

It was a private interest of honor that made the Pharisees oppose Christ,
because the multitude which before adored them as Gods, did now withdraw from
them, and follow him, and so miscarry in the work of their Generation.

It was a private interest of relations that made Solomon faulter so foulely in
the work of God in his days, his wives drawing him to idolatry.

It was a private interest of friendship with wicked men, because great men; (
viz. joining with Ahab and Ahaziah) that brought the greatest blur, and scourge
too (that we read of) upon good Jehosaphat in his days.

What shall I say more? It was private interest made the Gadarens send Christ
away, because they were loath to lose their swine. Private interest of gain was
the root of that great opposition made against the Gospel in Thratira, Act
16.19, 20. and after that at Ephesus, Act. 19.23, 24, 25, etc. And private
interest of honor and preeminence set Diotrephes on work to oppose John, and
the work of Christ in his Churches, Epist. 3. verse. 9.10. Private interest is
an enemy to the work of the Generation, and every work of God about it.

5 Favor and own the Saints of the Generation: and here by Saints I do not
mean this or that party of men, but such men (of whatsoever party they may be)
as have the image of God upon them, Christ, and the Spirit of Christ in them.
To disown any such one, though men call it disowning a Presbyter, disowning an
Independent, disowning an Anabaptist etc. yet Christ accounts it disowning his
little ones.

In Zech. 12.5. We have a glorious Prophecy relating, unto the last ages of
the-world, but more particularly to that age in which the Jews shall be
converted, and it chiefly concerns great ones, Statesmen, the Governors of
Judah, who in this day looking upon, and beholding Gods wonderful appearances
in behalf of his Saints under their Government, owning of them, shattering all
that do but lif^ up a hand against them, to pieces, bringing all Plots and
Counsels against them to nothing, they shall from hence be so powerfully
convinced, that they shall say in their hearts, The Inhabitants of Jerusalem my
strength, (or is our strength) in the Lord of Hosts their God, And observe it,
no sooner do they say thus, Surely these are Gods people, here lies our
strength, we will stick to these, but presently the work in their hands go on in
despite of the most powerful opposition, God making of them the terror of all
the Nations round about them, yea, of the whole world, which shall be but as
stubble to the fire before them, as verse. 6. In that day ( viz. the day in
which the Governors of Judah shall thus speak) will I make the Governors of
Judah like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a
sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand,
and on the left.

A sad example of the contrary we have in David, who (though he were a man
after Gods own heart, and one that had faithfully served God for many years in
his Generation, yet) by one injury offered to godly Uriah, his hands were so
weakened, that (as I have formerly said) comparing after acts with what he did
before, we hardly find any remarkable thing performed by him in his Generation
afterward. As nothing does more strengthen a man's hand in Generation-work,
then countenancing the Saints: so contrariwise nothing does more enfeeble them,
than to injure these.

6 Keep Justice alive against wilful offenders in the work. Achan put a stop to
the work of the Generation in his time; but Justice having free passage upon
Achan, presently the work of the Generation goes on.

7 Commit the managing of public Affairs into the hands of faithful and holy
men. It is observable, and (but that I spare to run over again the list of
Generations) I could for proof thereof produce many instances, that
Generation-work has never thriven, but have bin always done by halves or
peece-meal, when it has bin in the hands of such men, who not being faithful
to God, have more pursued their own particular interests of honor, profit, and
the advancement of relations and alliances, than the good and welfare of the
cause, and the furtherance of the work of the Generation. But that which is
enough for our present purpose, is, how that in the last days, particularly in
that age, in which Christ will pitch a field with those Kings of the Earth,
which stand in the way of his Kingdom, he will pick and cull out as the only
instruments that under him shall carry on this work, such as are called, and
chosen, and faithful; as Rev. 17.14. These shall make wa^ with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall overcome them: For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and
they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithful. And also in that
fatal blow which suddenly after shall be given to the Romish power, and the
powers of the world conjoined, his followers shall not be such as either roll
in the pollutions of the world, or have stained their garments with the
Idolatries and Superstitions of Antichrist, but only such as shall be clothed
in fine linen, clean and white, as Rev. 19.8. And to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean, and white: For the fine linen is the
righteousness of the Saints. And verse. 14. The Armies which were in Heaven
followed him upon white Horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
Though men may employ others, yet Christ will by degrees lay them by in the
doing of this work, before the same shall be perfected.

8 Take heed of diverse things, which if not prudently foreseen and shunned, may
any one of them slugg even a good man in the work of his Generation, as

1 Take heed of being offended. Christ's Countrymen could not receive him for
the Messiah, because they were offended at his meanness and poverty, Matthew.
13.57. Many a man stumbles at the work of his Generation by an aptness to be
offended at this and the other thing, as,

First, At the n^w light of the Generation. As in the times before Christ's
coming, and immediately after, so long as God was opening his will to his
people by a written word, every generation almost did beam forth new light, in
regard of being, Abraham's Generation producing somewhat, that was not revealed
in Adams, nor to the old World; Mosesses somewhat, which was not revealed in
Abraham's; David's somewhat, which was not revealed in Mosesses; Isaiahs
somewhat, which was not revealed in David's; Daniels somewhat, which was not
revealed in Isays; John Baptists somewhat, which was not revealed in in
Daniels; and Peter and Paul's somewhat, which was not revealed in John Baptists
time: So in the Generations since, God has closed up his word, (truth having
brought forth its last in regard of being) and especially since the man of Sin,
(who creeping in, in the first ages, corrupted and darkened the light of those
times for many Generations together) has been going off the Stage, every
Generation almost has afforded its new light, in regard of discovery, of that
light which in the word had being before, but obscured by the fogs of
Antichristianism. So Wickleff and John Hus in their ages made discovery of some
light; Luther in his Generation of more; Calvin in his of more, in respect of
some things wherein Luther was in the dark; and the ages since of more, in
respect of some things wherein all the foregoing Worthies were in the dark. And
this to say is no disparagement to them, who did worthily in their Generations,
nor matter of exaltation to our selves, who have nothing but free Grace to
boast of, nor any other reason to give, why it should thus be, but this only,
so it pleased him.

Yet as then when truth came forth in being, the new light of the Generation
did oftentimes offend persons living in those Generations, so as they could not
see the work, of the Cerations; as the persecutions that many of the Prophets
of the Old Testament, and the Apostles of the New, did suffer from the men of
those Generations for the same, does witness; So now when truth is coming forth
in regard of discovery, the new discoveries of truth have been and are a
continual offense to the men of these last Generations, even to the opposing
the very work of the Generation they have lived in; as the sufferings of those
Witnesses of Jesus, who stood up for the Priestly Office of Christ about
Luthers days by the Papacy; and the persecutions of those Worthies since who
have maintained the Kingly Office of Christ by the Prelacy, and the several
Nicknames of truth in this our age, and new light, the common byword of the
Country does clearly and fully evidence.

Secondly, At those stumbling blocks which usually are laid in the work of the
Generation. It is a thing to be noted, that almost in every age God has laid
some eminent stumbling blocks in the work of that age, both for the trial of
the faith of his own people in getting over them, and for his Enemies to
stumble and fall upon; which stumbling blocks as they have exercised the faith
of the one, so have they been continual Rocks of offense unto the other.

In Noah's time, when the work of that age was to expect and prepare for a
universal deluge, what a stumbling block (in reason may we think) was it to the
Old World to hear of such a thing one hundred and twenty years before it comes,
to look for it year after year, one hundred and twenty years together, and yet
no appearance of such a thing; might they not well conclude before half that
time was expired, that Noah's preaching was a fable, and his building the Ark a
fancy, for no such thing as he expected would ever be?

When Moses was sent of God into Egypt to deliver Gods people thence, which was
the work of that age what a palpable stumbling block was it to Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians to behold the very same miracles which were wrought by Moses, to
evidence his being sent of God, done by their Magicians: might they not well
say, is this man sent of God? then are our Magicians, for they do the same
things as he.

Afterward in the wilderness did not this lie as an apparent stumbling block
before that Generation? that Israel should there wander to and fro forty years,
till the whole Generation of men that came out of Egypt were consumed, before
they must enter that Land they were brought out to possess?

At the time of the building the second Temple, upon Isreal's coming out of
Babylon (which being in the latter times of the Jewish State, (was I take it)
the Type of Christ's building his Church in the last days, upon the coming out
of Antichristian Babylon) what a stumbling block was it, that the great work of
that time, the which they were come from Babylon about, should receive such a
nip at the very beginning, as to be at a stand forty years together before it
could go on? might not Gods people fear, and Enemies conclude, this work would
now surely come to nothing? who will wonder that Temple-building has been at a
stand for many years, since the coming out of Babylon mystical, that considers
thus it was upon the coming out of literal Babylon, and their Temple was the
type of ours.

Christ's coming into the world was accompanied with two notable
stumbling blocks.

First, He was born of mean Parentage, when as he was looked for amongst the
Royal or Priestly seed. Secondly, He first appears out of Galilee, and (by
vulgar esteem) is a Nazarene, whereas all knew the Messiah was to come out of
Bethlehem. These two so visible rocks of offense, as they drew the generality
to oppose him, pleading against him, and for themselves, Shall Christ come out
of Galilee? Has not the Scripture said, That Christ comes of the seed of
David, and out of the Town of Bethlehem where David was? Joh. 7.41, 42. So were
they sore trials to the faith of the godly, who not strictly inquiring into
Christ's descent, and the place of his birth, but taking things upon trust, from
report of the vulgar (a weakness too incident to many true meaning souls) made
that their stumbling block, which rightly understood, would have been a
confirmation of their faith, as appears in that good plain-hearted Nathaniel,
who was without guile, could not tell how a while to get over this, Joh. 1.46.
Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?

And to say no more, When Christ sent forth Apostles into the world about the
great work of that Generation, did not this lie as a sore stumbling block
before many, to see the learned ones, the Doctors and Rabbis of the times set
by, and in this glorious work, a company of poor illiterate Fishermen employed?

And as it is most evident, that in Generations formerly, God for wise ends
has ever laid stumbling blocks in the work of the Generations: So he that
shall but narrowly observe Gods dispensations toward his people of late in
these our times, shall find this verified, nothing more, there having hardly
been any great Victory obtained, or any thing remarkable performed, which has
not had his stumbling going along with it, and happy is he, whosoever is not
offended thereby.

3 At the declared dissents, or the private discontents or murmurings of a
religious party against the work of the Generation.

God in his secret providence, and unsearchable wisdom has so thought it good,
that Generation-work should meet with its affronts, not only from the
tumultuous confused rabble of the world, but also from a religious party, who
should either repine at, dissent from, or make opposition against the same. It
was a religious party (the whole Congregation of Israel being a professing
people, amongst which, undoubtedly very many that came out of Egypt, were truly
godly, who yet sinned with the Congregation, and fell in the wilderness) that
in the days of Moses did so heap up their murmurings, murmuring upon murmuring
against the visible dispensations of that age.

It was a religious party, yea, and that too upon a religious ground (as well
as a politic) Joh. 11.49, 50, 51, 52. that gave wicked counfel for the putting
of Christ to death.

It was a religious party, the Jews and the devoute women that raised
persecution at Antioch against the work of the Gospel, expelling Paul and
Barnabas, the faithful Preachers thereof out of their coasts, Act. 13.50. A
religious party have always had a finger in opposing Generation-work; And
observe, when a religious party has opposed, this their opposition has been
so great an offense, that not only the common multitude, but right honest
hearts have from hence stood a loof from, and been shy of the work of their
Generation. Christ could not be received of the Jews for their Messiah, because
the religious party of the Priests and Pharisee did oppose him: And how great
an offense was this to the poor simple meaning people, who but a little before
seeing his works, cried out Hosanna; being now by these men of credit possessed
that he was a Deluder, they change their note, and cry crucify him, crucify
him, as the story tells us.

4 At the after-miscarriages and errors of those who have been the only active
instruments and lights at first, in the work of the Generation. It Is matter of
offense, to not a few, to see men active at first in the work of their
Generation, prove, afterward retarders of the work, and darkness thence to
spring whence the first light of the Generation did arise: Hence most are apt
to call in question the righteousness of that cause, and purity of that light
which the first owners by future miscarriages have cast a blemish upon. Now
though there seems in it to be just matter of jealousy, yet if seriously
weighed and compared with foregoing Presidents it is not so: for who knows not
that Solomon was the first King of Israel that ever built a house for the true
worship of God, and yet the first that ever built High places for Idolatry.
Peter was the first Disciple that publicly confessed Christ, and yet the first
that openly denied him. Judea was the first place where Gospel Light did shine,
and from whence the world was enlightened, and yet the first place where error
sprung up, and the light of the Gospel darkened, Act. 15.1. Certain men came
down from Judea and taught the brethren, except ye be circumcised after the
manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.

5 At the ghastly look and untrodden footsteps of some particular dispensations
and actings attending the work of the Generation. In all Generations almost
there have been in managing the work of the Generation some particular actings
which outwardly have had so foul an aspect, that if not be held with an eye,
seeing God, his will, and design therein, might justly breed offense and
dislike in the beholders. With how offensive a eye did that act look, and how
may we think in reason, might it tend to the hardening the Egyptians, that
Israel going out of Egypt, pretending to worship God, should by a cheat, (as
setting Gods will aside, man's reason would account it) plunder the Egyptians of
all their Jewels and riches, a thing which if done without Gods special
command, had been contrary to morality.

And whether or no, had not Gods command authorized Joshua thereunto, could
that act of his in entering Canaan, and not only taking their Land from them,
but also putting all the Inhabitants both young and old to the sword, been
termed any other than an act of inhumane and barbarous cruelty?

Yea further, let reason be judge of that act of Jaels in murdering Sisera at a
time when his Master was in league with her Husband, and when as he too (as a
man flying for life) committed himself to her for shelter, and what will it
call the same but treacherous dealing, an act of perfidiousness and highest
injustice?

What need I multiply? let reason, not seeing Gods will, be judge of Jehues
action, in putting the King his Master to death, and extirpating the Royal
Family, and will it not brand the same with the odious names of Disloyalty,
Usurpation, and Treachery to his Prince? which yet was an act commanded by God,
God having so ordered it, that in all ages there should stand in the work of
the Generation, some such facing and staring actions as should not only amuse
men, but also offend the eyes of the obstinate, weak, or ignorant beholders.

2 Take heed of being discouraged. As offenses on one hand has put many a man
by the work of his Generation, so have discouragements on the other hand put
some by, and weakened the hands of others in the work. Now there are several
things at the which men are discouraged, whereof I shall particularize a few, As

1 At the littleness and lowness of beginnings. It is Gods way in the carrying
on of his great and glorious works of wonder, ever to begin very low, and rise
high by degrees. I shall instance only in two things, both appertaining to
Christ's Kingdom, and the rather because (as has been showed) that it is the
great work of this age.

1 The Kingdom of Christ in his Churches, it is a most glorious work, yet low
in the beginning. The building of the second Temple, which (as has been said)
was the type of this, had first a day of small things, which lookers on were
ready to despise. Zach. 4.10. Who has despised the day of small things? before
a day of great things. First, a foundation stone is laid, and then Zerubbabel
the builder has his hands holden forty years, before he can lay a top-stone,
or bring the work to perfection. The planting of Churches in the Primitive
times, what a low beginning had it; one Paul, and a few poor Fishermen acting
in this work, and that against all the world.

This is lively set forth in that Parable, Matthew. 13.31. The Kingdom of heaven
is like unto a grain of mustard seed -- It begins as a grain of mustard seed,
which is the least of all seeds, and of this but one grain, not many; yet in
the end it grows a Tree that the Fowls of the Heaven come to lodge in the
branches of it.

2 The Kingdom of Christ over the world, the glory of this work is such, that
when it shall be, the whole earth shall be full of the glory of it; yet how
little and low shall this work be in the beginning. It is at first a stone cut
out of the mountains without hands, little and weak, yet after, a great
mountain filling the whole earth, Dan. 2.34, 35. It is first a little one,
after that a thousand, Isa. 60. ult. A little one shall become a thousand -- It
first begins in Sion, i.e. in the Churches, amongst a company of poor despised
worshippers of Christ (whereof Sion was a type) Psa. 2.6. Yet have I set my
King upon my holy hill of Sion. Afterward it spread it self over all the
world, Verse. 8, 9. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shall
rule them with a rod of iron, thou shall break them in pieces like a potters
vessel.

David's Kingdom (the most lively type of Christ's Kingdom over the world) how
low and seemingly unlikely ever to rise, was it in the beginning? One David, a
poor man's Son, a keeper of sheep, to be a King, and yet his Kingdom at present
in the hands of another, a powerful King Saul, one chosen and anointed by God,
to whom the whole Nation had subjected themselves, and under whom they had
obtained glorious Victories. Who would ever have thought this Kingdom could
have risen, and yet it did?

Christ's riding into Jerusalem as King (which, I take it, did shadow out both
these) it was upon an Ass, one of the most despicable of all the creatures; and
yet, not upon a grown Ass neither, an Ass in his full strength, but upon a
Colt, the Foal of an Ass, the weakest and most despicable, of the most
despicable, Matthew. 21.5.

Thus it is Gods way in great works (especially in Generation-work) to begin
low, and rise by steps. Now we shall find that low beginnings in the work of
the Generation, have sometimes been a discouragement to persons acting therein.
So in Ezra's time, when the foundation of the second Temple was laid, the low
and little beginnings did so discourage the ancient men who had seen the glory
of the former house, that it is said they wept with a loud voice. chap. 3.12.

2 At the powerfulness and succesfulness of opposition against the work. As
Generation-work has never wanted powerful opposition; so sometimes opposition
for a while has been successful against the same. What powerful opposition
shall be made against the work of God in the last times? viz. The ^etting up
Christ as King in Sion, or his Churches you have foretold, Psalm 2. where we
have opposers of a higher note, Kings, Rulers; Opposers of a lower rank,
Heathen people: Yet all, Prince, and Beggar can join hand in hand to oppose
Christ's Kingdom.

And how successful that opposition made by the adversaries of Judah was to the
work of the Generation in the days of Ezra, whereby a stop was put to the work
for many years together, is there recorded. And which is to be noted, the very
opposition made by Judah's Enemies to the work; was, that which did exceedingly
discourage and weaken the hands of them that wrought therein, Ezra 4.4. Then
the people of the Land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled
them in the building.

3 At Great ones holding off, and withdrawing their hands from the work.
Generation-work has seldom found the friendship of great ones; Have any of the
chief Rulers or Pharisees believed in him?

In Nehemiah's time, the only men that would not put their necks to the work
of that age, were the Noble men, chapter 3.5. Their Nobles put not their necks to
the work of their Lord. Now what a discouragement it is to the meaner sort to
see the great ones stand off, or withdraw, who knows not?

It is observable, which I would not here pass over, that in that age in which
the Jews shall be brought in, Gods first glorious appearing shall be amongst a
middle sort of people, Zech. 12.7. The Lord shall save the Tents of Judah first
-- i.e. God shall first begin to discover his glorious power, and make bare his
arm of Salvation, not amongst the poorest of all, who have no Tents, no place
of habitation, but are Vagrant and Beggars; nor the richest, who have their
sumptuous Palaces, and royal Houses; but a middle sort of people, living in a
plain, but an honorable and comely way, such as the way of living in Tents of
old was; and the reason hereof is given, that the glory of the house of David,
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify themselves against Judah,
i.e. that men of Princely and noble blood, dwelling in Courts, or sumptuous
Palaces, or depending upon such places, may not (as has been the manner from
the beginning) magnify themselves against others, because in a rank or ranks
below them. If this shall be the way of Gods dispensations toward that age, be
not discouraged, in case we now who are fallen into the same, see many great
ones withdrawing their hands from the work.

4 At the perfidious and treacherous dealing of some particular persons
employed in the work. It is no new thing in Generation-work, as to meet with
opposition abroad, so treachery nearer home. David in his work had a
treacherous son Absalom, a treacherous Counselor Ach^tophel. Nehemiah in the
carrying on of his work had a treacherous Shemaiah, yea treacherous Nobles
acting with him as chap, 6.10, 17. Christ in his work had a treacherous Judas
for one of his followers.

And what a discouragement treachery in some, is to others, that one instance
of Absoloms treachery is proof enough, which did so sink the heart of David
himself, and the hearts of all his mighty men of valor, yea of the whole
Country, that they fled weeping with a loud voice from Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.23.30.

5 At the meeting with disappointments. Disappointments of expectations prove
often times discouragements, at best disquietments to those that meet with them
in their work. A disappointment did so dis-hearten bold spirited Jeremy, that
he took up a hasty resolution to quit his hands of Gods work, chap. 20.7, 8, 9.
Yea Paul himself (though a man so watchful, active, and having such command
over his Spirit, as none more) was so disquieted by a disappointment (and one
would think it a small one too, only missing of Titus) that he lost a very fair
opportunity of doing Christ service at Troas, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13.

6 At unkindnesses received from those whose good and welfare we have ever
closely pursued in the work. It is a remarkable example, and pertinent to the
thing in hand, that of Moses, Exo. 17. who having (as an instrument under God)
brought Israel out of Egypt, carried them through the Red Sea; yea made it his
business from first to last, above any thing of his own, to seek their good and
welfare, meeting with so unkind a return, (for all his tender care of them) as
that no sooner did they want a little water, but presently they fall to chide
with, and upbraid him, as men ready to stone him, verse. 2, 3, 4. He is so
discouraged hereby, as that this very discouragement pusheth him into that sin
against the work of his Generation, for which, and no other, he is shut out of
Canaan, as compare verse. 7. with Number. 20.12, 13.

7 At multiplied sentences of death put upon the work; This though it will take
in some of the foregoing discouragements, which are but as so many sentences of
death put upon the work: Yet because it may be extended farther, I shall here
allow it a particular place by it self.

The more grace and mercy is wrapped up in any of Gods dispensations toward
his people, the more and greater sentences of death are usually put upon that
work which those dispensations call for, and by which, this mercy is to be
ushered in. The dispensation of God toward Israel, in bringing them out of
Egypt, was a dispensation full of mercy, and nothing more verified in the
story of it then this, that multiplied sentences of death did attend the work.
Before deliverance comes, they are in hard bondage; when deliverance was near,
their bondage grows higher, and their tale of bricks is doubled. No sooner are
they come out of Egypt, but they are instantly at deaths door, being
surrounded (as it were) with destruction; a Sea before them, Ro^ks impassable
of either side, an host of armed men behind them, coming purposely to destroy
them, No sooner is this danger over, but wanting bread, the whole Congregation
is ready to famish with hunger; and this no sooner past, but they want water,
and are all at the point of perishing for thirst; and by that time this was
over, Amalek, a warlike Nation, engages them (who had never seen War) in the
open wilderness. God had great mercy, mercy upon mercy for Israel, and here
were great sentences of death, sentence of death upon sentence of death
attending them, as they were in the way to it.

Now that which was the misery, and indeed the very undoing of this people,
was, that instead of believing, when a sentence of death was over them, they
were discouraged thereby, and straight way began to murmr, which murmuring of
theirs in the end cost them dear, as the story will tell us.

But the principal thing in my aim is this, which is worth our observation,
viz. That it was a mear discouragement occasioned by a sentence of death, put
upon the work of the Generation, through the evil report brought home by those
spies sent to view the land of Canaan, which was the fatal Rock whereupon the
whole Nation of six hundred thousand men, and upwards (Caleb and Joshuah
excepted) did suffer shipwreck, as will appear by comparing Number. 13.32. with
Chap. 14.1, 2, 28, 29, 30. A lesson for those to think of, who giving way to
their discouragements, when a sentence of death is upon Christ's cause, do
flinch from the work of Christ in these days.

3 Take heed of envy against such whom God imploys in the work of the
Generation. Envy against instruments employed by God in Generation-work was a
part of Isreal's sin, for which they fell in the wilderness, as Psalm. 106.16.
They envied Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of God. Mere envy against
Christ drew the Priests and people in Christ's time to reject him, and sin
against the work of the Generation, Matthew. 27.18. Mark 15.10.

Envy of persons employed in the work has oft-times raised opposition to the
work it self of the Generation: That work, which if done by some should have
found approbation, is therefore displeasing, because done by others. As said a
Popish Cardinal in Luthers time: A reformation indeed is needful, and to the
wished, but that Luther a rascal Friar should be the man should do it, this is
intolerable.

4 Take heed of procrastinating that work which is the business of the present
Generation, under a pretense that the time of doing of it is not yet come,
neither are things ripe for it. This was the fault of those in Haggai's time
(for which they are sharply reproved for it) who did put off the work of the
building of Gods house, under pretense the time was not come, Hag. 1.2. This
people say the time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built.

5 Take heed of limiting God to Ordinaries. My meaning is, in case ordinary
means for the carrying on of the work be wanting, and cannot be had, take heed
you do not so bind up God to these, as thereupon to desert the work. In
Generation-work God in all ages has allowed himself a latitude in working, not
tying himself to Ordinaries. Now when God walks in a way of Extraordinaries, it
is not only lawful, but a duty in case Ordinaries fail, to believe for
Extraordinaries.

It was an extraordinary thing to believe that the bare striking of a Rock
should fetch out water thence, enough to supply a million of people ready to
dye for thirst; Yet because Moses and Aaron in an age wherein God walked in a
way of Extraordinaries, did not believe, for this their unbeleef, is severely
punished, Number. 20.10, 11, 12.

6 Take heed of neglecting the nick of opportunity that God puts into thy hands
to do the work of thy Generation in. There is a day, and a nick of opportunity
which God lets some persons have to serve their Generations in; which if let
slip, they are gone (as to Gods using of them any more) and that past recovery.

Ester had a nick of opportunity, which had she slipped, though deliverance
should have arisen to Gods people another way, yet she and her Fathers house
had been destroyed. There was a nick of opportunity that Israel had to enter
Canaan upon the return of the Spies, which had they embraced, the door stood
open for them, but they neglecting it (though it were in a hasty fit, and a
thing which presently too they recanted, wishing they had never done it) the
door is shut, and now it is too late to repent it, for their carkases must fall
in the wilderness. Take heed of loosing the nick of opportunity wherein thou
may act for God, lest afterward when perhaps act thou would, God will not
own thee in his work.

7 Take heed of forecasting events, but do thy work, and leave events to God.
Jonas by forecasting events, that God was gracious, and would therefore spare
Nineveh, and then he should be esteemed a false Prophet, runs from the work of
his Generation, Jon. 4.2.

8 Take heed of settling thy self upon seeming godly and righteous principles,
when these clash with the work of the Generation. Many men look no farther then
this, in case they have a principle which seems just and pious, they think that
will bear them out what ever they do. But had not Caiapha^ so, when he was Lord
chief Justice in counselling and contriving the most notorious bloody design
that ever saw light? What more righteous, and seemingly godly principle then
this, that one man should dy^ to save the lives of a whole Nation? yet this
principl^ so just, so pious to an eye of reason was the Foster-father of that
most cursed nefarious act (I mean as acted by them) of putting Christ to death.

And here to add an instance or two more, borrowed of a worthy servant of
Christ in these our days, Mr. Owens Sermon preached before the Parliament,
October. 24. 1651. being the Public Thanksgiving for our Worcester Deliverance.
because fitly applicable to the thing in hand. What more righteous principle
than this, that it belongs to the chief Ruler of a Nation, to see to the profit
and glory of that Nation? Yet Pharaoh settling himself upon this righteous
principle, only evil as it did cross the work of that Generation, to the end
his Realm might receive no detriment by letting Israel go, whose continuance in
that bondage was so much for their advantage, he, and his perish in their
principles, being led by these to act against the work of their Generation. So
what more prudent and just principle than this, that it is not meet to let a
Potent Enemy into the bowels of a Nation? yet Sihon King of the Amorites upon
this principle opposing Israel, at the time in which God was leading them into
Canaan, he and and all his people perish by it. Take heed of doing all that
thou conceits thou have a principle, will bear thee out in doing.

9 Take heed of lending an ear unto such friendly respectful offers, which
carry in the bowels of them (though gilded over with outward respect and
friendship) a crafty design against the work of the Generation. As
Generation-work has never wanted a party who have by open force opposed the
same; So likewise there has mostly been a party attending of it, who by secret
fraud and pretenses of Friendship have sought to undermine it, which latter
have oft-times prospered in their designs (through the overmuch credulity of
persons employed in Generation-work) when and where the first have failed.

Was it not a very fair offer of Moab, (when otherwise they could not have
their wills upon Israel, then) to come, and in a friendly way to call and
invite the people to their houses, and to grant to them (though strangers, and
men of different principles) liberty to worship with them? What a large show of
respect and courtesy was here? And yet no other but a mere crafty design to
draw Isracl to sin, by which (when no other way they could do it) they drew the
wrath of God upon Israel, Numb. 25.

So was it not a very fair Petition of Adonijah, 1 Kings 2.16, 17. to ask
Abishag the Shunamite to wife? a thing one would think to man could have
blamed; yet Solomon spies out a crafty design, laid in this smooth Petition,
which was to get the Kingdom, and consequently to put by the great work of
that Generation, viz. the building of the Temple, which Solomon was appointed
unto.

So likewise what a friendly motion, and seemingly full of dutiful respect and
obedience, was that of Shemajah to Nehemiah? Chap. 6.10. wherein no other thing
is pretended but the discovery of a dangerous plot in the hatching, and tender
respect to the safeguard of his person, and yet this no other but a crafty
design, to draw Nehemiah to sin, and to bring a slurre upon him, in managing
the work of his Generation, verse. 13.

To say no more, What could be in outward appearance a more friendly offer then
that of Judahs Adversaries, Ezra 4.2. to come, and freely proffer their help,
and to join with Judah in the carrying on that great work of Temple-building,
which was the work of that Age? Yea, and to do this at such a time when the
work was despised, and had lien dead many years, the instruments employed in it
few and weak, so that laying all things together, one would judge that there
could be nothing in their hearts more than good will to the work, and desire
the same should prosper; when as yet there was no thing in all this fair show
but a crafty design lying at the bottom of it to obstruct this work of God, as
verse. 4, 5, 6.

10 Take heed of making reason of State the rule of public actings. Jeroboams
reason of State made Johu perform by halves the work of his Generation,
destroying the house and image of Baal, but winking at the Calves in Dan and
Bethel. This reason of State was that which led a grave wise Counsel into a
most cursed practice, viz. the voting the Son of God to death, John 11.47. to
the 54. The results of pure reason of State, are oft-times dangerous, most
times contrary to the work of the Generation.

11 Take heed of setting up humane Laws above the work of the Generation. My
meaning is, in case these two come in competition rather to choose neglect in
the work of the Generation, than in any way to be offensive to humane Laws.

If the Commands of God himself, and the special acts of his worship are to
give place (as has been before proved) to the work of the Generation, then
surely without any want of that due respect, that is, and ought to be given to
man's Law, it may be said, and also without offense, that humane Laws are much
more to stoop, and fall down to it; the Authority of God being above that of
man.

In Esters time there was a Law in the Kingdom of Ahasuerus, and the
foundation of it was no other but the privilege and honor of the supreme
Magistrate, that whosoever, man or woman, should come in unto the King in the
inner Court, except such to whom the King should hold out the golden Scepter,
he should be put to death, Chap. 4.11. Which Law in it self was not evil, as
it was merely Politic, respecting only the Honor, State, and Privilege of
the King: Yet when the Cause and People of God lay at such a plunge, that
without intrenching upon this Law, Gods Cause in that Age must have fell to the
ground; Esther, though uncalled by the King, yea more, having no other Command
from God (as formerly has been showed) but only the visible Call of a
Dispensation, pusheth upon the Pikes of the Law, and runs the hazard of the
peril of death, and how wonderfully God did stand by her, and preserve her in
so doing, the issue of this her dangerous attempt recorded in the History may
sufficiently inform us.

12 And lastly, Take heed of conjunction with such who are not real hearted to
the Cause of God, and the work of the Generation. When Israel went up out of
Egypt a mixed multitude of Egyptians, and others that were not Israelites, went
up with them, Exodus 12.38. Which mixed multitude did afterward prove a snare
to them, even in the very work of the Generation, by drawing the Congregation
to murmr against the Lord, Numb. 11.4. And the mixed multitude that was
amongst them fell a lusting, and the Children of Israel also wept again, and
said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?

What need I relate that which every one knows? how godly Asa lost himself by
his League with Benhadad King of Syria, and good Jehoshaphat by his compliance
with Ahab, and Ahaziah. And although it be true that the examples of the Kings
of Judah are not in all things patterns for States and Kingdoms in
Gospel-dayes to walk by; yet the reason upon which the Seer reproves Asa
because he relied upon the King of Assyria, and not on the Lord, falls as
strongly upon professing States under the Gospel, as it did on him: who shall,
I hope, be kept both from his sin, and so from his reproof: Which he shall
continue to pray for, who is a friend to Sions prosperity, and also Englands
welfare and interest, which is, and will be found solely depending on it. They
shall prosper that love thee, Psalm. 122.6. Amen.

FINIS.
Generation-work: The Second Part.

Wherein is showed, what the Designs of God abroad in the World, may in all
likelihood be, at this present day, and in the days approaching.

Being an Exposition of the Seven VIALS, Rev. 16.

And other Apocalyptical Mysteries.

By John Tillinghast, the meanest and unworthiest of Christ's Laborers.

Rev. 14.7. Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is
come.

Chap. 12.12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; Woe to the
Inhabiters of the Earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.

Chap. 11.18. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time
of the dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward
unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley, 1655.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To all those who love. and patiently wait for the Appearing and Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Dearly beloved in our Lord,
IT is reported of the Primitive Saints, that these words, the KINGDOM OF
CHRIST, the KINGDOM OF CHRIST, were so frequent in their mouths, that their
malicious Adversaries (willing to mistake the simplicity of their meaning and
intention) did make the words matter of Fact, charging them hereupon with
Treason, as if they had driven on some design to get for themselves the Kingdom.

Whether the simplicity of the Saints in the age we live in, who being come to
the very dawning of the day, and beholding the Lord going up to his Kingdom,
cannot hold their peace, but must cry out HOSANNA TO THE SON OF DAVID, HOSANNA
IN THE HIGHEST, may through the subtlety of the old Serpent have any such abuse
put upon it, or no, I wave at present. But this I am sure of, the first ages
had not the Kingdom of Christ so much in their mouths, but after ages had it as
little; their hearts were not so warm to it, but the generations since have
been as cold. And indeed it was necessary it should so be; for the Beast
Antichrist being to rise in the world, who after his rise must continue to
reign two and forty months, Rev. 13.5. it was needful therefore, to the end he
might be revealed, that there should be (as the Apostle tells us 2 These. 2.3.) a
falling away, which falling away above all things was necessary, that it should
be in the Truths of Christ's Kingdom, no Truths being so diametrically opposite
to Antichrist as these; others shake off his leaves, these pluck him up by the
roots. If therefore the policy of the Dragon had not found out a way to brand
these Truths, and by making them odious, to hold them down, his Kingdom must
have fallen many ages since, for he should have had no Beast to resign his
Power, Seat, and great Authority to. It stood him greatly in hand therefore by
some means to cloud these, which by continuing to shine, would have nipped
Antichrist in the bud; and this the wisdom of God permitting, to accomplish
thereby in the end a more glorious design, which he effectually did.

Hence within the fourth Century (at the end of which the Beast arose) the
Truths of Christ's Kingdom (before generally received) began to be condemned,
and to go under the odious name of Heresy.

Hence also we find not in the Revelations any mention made of Christ's
Kingdom, nor any noise of such a thing in the world all the time of the Beasts
reign; but the great cry of the dwellers on the Earth is, The Beast, the Beast,
who is like unto the Beast? yea the whole world wondereth after the Beast, Rev.
13.3, 4.

But now in the latter days, as the Beast begins to go down, so do the precious
Truths of Christ's Kingdom again begin to revive, and have a resurrection.

Hence we find that as the world by degrees gets rid of the Beast, so is the
cry in it still louder and louder of Christ's Kingdom.

First, Amongst the Saints in the world, who no sooner have got so much footing
as to stand and face the Beast, which before trod them down, and trampled upon
them, but presently they make the world ring again, with the noise of Christ's
Kingdom. Rev. 15.2, 3, 4. And I saw them that had gotten the victory over the
Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name,
stand on the Sea of glass having the Harps of God, And they sing the Song of
Moses the servant of the Lord, and the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou
King of Saints; Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name, for
thou only art holy? for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for
thy judgments are made manifest.

Secondly, After this the Beast having received a more fatal blow, the cry of
Christ's Kingdom, that was before among some Saints only, is now more general,
and runs among the multitudes, yea, the great ones too (of whom till this day
we hear little) as Rev. 19.6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
Thunderings, saying, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

Thirdly and lastly, Yet after this, upon the sounding of the seventh Angel
(when Christ comes to take his Kingdom) it is then openly proclaimed with a
great voice, Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are be^ome the Kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ, and ^e shall reign for ever. And as an echo to
this voice, ^he hearts of Gods faithful ones reply, v. 17. We give thee ^hanks,
O Lord God Almighty, which art, and were, and ^rt to come, because thou have
taken to thee this great ^ower, and have reigned.

Thus the noise and cry in the world toward the latter end of Antichrists
reign, is very different to that which was in the time of his reign, then the
cry was, The Beast, The Beast: now the old cry is up again, The Kingdom of
Christ, The Kingdom of Christ.

Yet, notwithstanding the cry of Christ's Kingdom shall at this day be so loud,
shall not the ears of all, no not of the Saints themselves, be open to hear it;
but some of them (as well as others) shall be so deeply wedded to the sweetness
of Antichristian wordly interests that (to maintain these) they shall rather
choose to sit by the waters of Babylon, than with the loss of them to stand
with the Lamb upon Mount Sion; else what need would there be of any such
Proclamation to be made, as we read, is immediately before Romes ruin? Rev.
18.4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues.

And these who thus shall do, are not to be reckoned among those who in this
great business followed not the Lamb at all, but among those who followed the
Lamb some part of the way toward Mount Sion, but upon some turn, or falling in
with some worldly pleasing interest, by the way did quit his company, before
they came thither.

For this cause the hundred forty and four thousand, which stand with the Lamb
upon Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. are differenced from others, not in this,
that they were Saints, and others not; nor in this, that they followed the
Lamb, which others did not; but the difference is made to lie in these two
things:

1 They were Virgin-Saints, which had not defiled themselves with women, i.e.
were not espoused to any worldly interest, the desire of which is as natural to
the hearts of men, as the desire of women; and particularly, they had never any
thing to do with the interest of that Whorish woman, spoken of Chap. 17. And
this to be the meaning of the phrase the foregoing words do give it, which by a
parallel phrase, setting forth the same thing, calls them the Redeemed from the
earth, i. e. from earthly interests, as outward glory, honor, riches, etc.

2 They were such who follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes, Verse. 4. If the
Lamb will go in strange untrodden paths, making his way over the necks of the
Kings, and Princes of this world, they will follow him there. If in unpleasing
paths, turning about in a manner upon themselves, and treading under feet their
beloved interests, dear, and near Relations, taking from them their outward
glory and ornaments, yet they will make a turn with him, and follow him there:
for they are such as will follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes. Now although
there may be many besides these at this day, who may come under the more
general Character of Saint-ship, and followers of the Lamb, i.e. for some time,
yet shall they be found short of these particular Characters, viz. of being
Virgin-Saints, un-espoused to worldly interests, and followers of the Lamb not
only here, and there, but whithersoever he goes.

Hence we have it specially noted of these, that they sing as it were a new
Song, before the Throne, which no man could learn, but only the one hundred
forty four thousand which were redeemed from the earth, verse. 3. Why does the
Holy Ghost say, As it were a new Song, and not rather a new Song? The reason I
take to be this, because the Song for the matter of it in general, is the old
Song, i.e. the same Song still, that all the children of Sion sung together
upon their first coming out of Babylon. But now the Lamb their Leader, having
upon his march toward Mount Sion, taken some strange, rough, untroden,
unexpected paths, which they upon their coming out did not so much as dream of,
many of those who upon his first march set forth with him, with as loud a cry
as the rest: begin now some to draw backwards again to Babylon, some to lag
behind their Colors; and now they can sing with the rest no longer, i.e. they
cannot now any longer own his Appearances and workings, praise him or magnify
his name for them; yet for all this, even at this time when many fall off
offended, the One hundred forty four thousand redeemed from the Earth, they
march on with the Lamb, singing still, owning, approving his works, resolving
to keep him company whethersoever he goes. Now in this respect the Holy Ghost
does not term it a new Song, but as it were a new Song, because it puzzles most
of the old Singers, seeming akogether new, and another to them, though yet
indeed it is the same, the change being more in them, than in the Song, and the
One hundred forty four thousand can sing it still.

Hence likewise this One hundred forty four thousand are spoken of as being a
select and picked party called therefore, verse. 4. The redeemed from among men,
being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, i. e. they are (if I may so
say) for the choyceness of their spirits above others in adhering to the Lamb
their Leader, the very cream of men, such as the Lamb accounts his first
fruits, i.e. makes more store of than of others, who yet may be of his Corn,
and a part of his Harvest too.

And as that which is not here impertinent, we may observe, that as the coming
out of Egypt was in Old Testament times one eminent type of the Saints
deliverance from Spiritual Antichristian bondage, for which cause the
Antichristian State is spiritually called Egypt, Revel. 11.8. and the coming
out of Babylon afterward, another; for which cause Rome in the Apocalypse takes
denomination from Babylon: So is it a thing worthy to be noted, as touching
both these Types, that that Generation which by stirring set the work first on
foot, did afterward prove the greatest (I may say the only) retarders of it.
For as touching the first, WHO hankered after the Flesh pots of Egypt, but that
Generation? WHO though come out, yet had been brought up there: WHO moved the
returning back again? but that Generation that came thence: WHO made light of
the great things God did in the Wilderness? but that very Generation, who from
the first had seen his mighty Wonders in Egypt.

As touching the Second, WHO are they that cry out, The time is not come, the
time that the Lords house should be built? Hag. 1.2. But that very Generation
who came out of Babylon with great hearts at first to do the work; but were
afterward engaged in particular concernments, and private interests, building
seiled houses for themselves, verse. 4. hereby letting the work of their
Generation lie waste.

And truly it is that which I have verily thought with my self, and that some
time, namely, That it would befall us in this Age, coming out of Antichristian
Babylon, even as it did them coming out of Egypt and Babylon of old, i.e. we
should see those very persons who leading us out of Babylon at first, did cry,
Christ's Kingdom, Christ's Kingdom, either by hankering after the Egyptian
Fleshpots of Honor, Profit, etc. (which once having tasted they cannot lose
the relish of) wholly to quit their first principles and affections, and so
set their faces back again to return into Egypt; or if not so, yet at leastwise
(as the comers out of Babylon did, who were somewhat the better of the two)
finding difficulty in going on, make a stand on the way, there building seiled
houses for themselves, i.e. advancing their own particular interests instead of
helping forward the work of Christ's Kingdom.

What shall I any further enlarge upon this uncouth Theme, harp any longer upon
this unpleasing string? It was without doubt an ill Omen to Barnabas when he
chose Mark to go with him to the work, who had before deserted it, that he
should do but little in it. And indeed the Event proved it; for as by that act
he lost the hearts of the Church, who recommended Paul and Silas to the Grace
of God, but take no notice of Barnabas and Mark; So also is it observable, that
from that very day, he who was so active before, we hear no more of him. True,
he had this to plead, Mark was a good man, but Paul whose eyes were more open,
saw, that notwithstanding his goodness, yet having once at a pinch deserted
Christ's Cause, he was not a man likely afterward to thrive with, in carrying
it on; and therefore wife, wary Paul, if there be no other way to clear his
hands of him, for the works sake, rather than he will run the hazard, he will
bid farewell, even to his old beloved preaching, suffering Companion, Barnabas
himself.

And now as for you (dearly Beloved) to whom I dedicate these Lines; I only
say, The Book it self is yours, and whatsoever of the mind of Christ is
discovered in it is yours. I shall therefore close up this my Epistle with the
words of the Holy Ghost, Isa. 2.12, 13 etc. For the day of the Lord of Hosts
shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is
lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon,
that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan. And upon all the
high Mountains, and upon all the Hills that are lifted up. And upon every high
Tower, and upon every fenced Wall. And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon
all pleasant Pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
herghtiness of men shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day. And the Idols he shall utterly abolish, Ezekiel. 17.24. Then all the
Trees of the field shall know that it is the Lord that has brought down the
high Tree, and has exalted the low Tree, has dried up the green Tree, and
made the dry Tree to flourish. Isa. 9.3. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this.

So believes he, who is, A poor unprofitable Servant in his Masters Work, JOHN
TILLINGHAST.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT was not in my thoughts when I put forth my former piece, which I was moved
to do, partly for the encouragement of some, who had ventured far in the work
of their Generation, and partly for the provocation of others, that I should
have appeared again upon the public Stage, whence few that climb up, come down
any better than losers, if not from men, yet through that corruption that
lodges in their own hearts: But being by more than one or two, upon the coming
forth thereof, desired to speak my thoughts more clearly and particularly as
touching the Design or Designs of God in the Age we live in: And to that end,
some proposing this Prophecy of the Vials, as a subject most suitable for such
a discovery, which opened, they conceived would further unfold the Werk of this
Generation; and being added as an Appendix to the other, might be of use:
Although considering how great the Task was, how mystical that Prophecy in
particular, upon which the thoughts of good men were so various, and how
unskilful I my self was in the general knowledge of the Prophets, which was a
thing most necessary to such an undertaking, I did for a while lay aside wholly
the thoughts of satisfying their desires; yet finding desires renewed, after I
had given them over, I knew not but that it might be some call unto me, seeing
nothing but my own discouragements lying in the way to hinder: Whereupon I
resolved to make a trial, and as the Lord should come in with light, so to
proceed, or give over; being encouraged hereto from that of Daniel, Chap. 12.4.
That the Book was to be sealed up but to the time of the end, when by the
running too and fro of many (which implies a kind of duty) knowledge shall be
increased; And also considering that a special blessing (surely to quicken our
dull hearts to this Work) is annexed to the Book of the Revelations, both at
the beginning and ending, whereas no Book besides it in Scripture has the
like, Chap. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of
this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, Chap. 22.7.
Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. These
things were at first some encouragement to me, and are still refreshment to my
spirit, as touching what I have done; for though I will not say, I have in all
things found the truth, (which yet I persuade my self is through Grace in some
things here done) yet do I judge a liberty left for me, as well as others, to
crowd into the number of that many, who run too and fro to find it; and also
do believe it is a thing may be done without prejudice to a man's grace,
comfort, or communion with God, yea, as a help to all these, seeing that a
special blessing from Heaven is pronounced to such as read, hear, and keep
these things.

And as to the Treatise it self, I may give this account of it, That when I
began, my thoughts were not upon a second Part, but only to have added this,
as a brief Appendix to my first. But after I had taken a serious view of the
Prophets and the Revelations, comparing one with the other. I saw so many
precious ears of Corn lie scattered every where, that an eager desire of
gleaning, made me forget my first resolutions, and this little Piece (which I
had in my thoughts, laid out but for two or three sheets at most) upon the
sudden to swell into a second Part, more large than the former. And truly in
doing of it, I have been so far from moulding things according to any
pre-conceived opinion (which I find a thing most apt to deceive) as that
(setting aside some general persuasions, which I had before as touching Christ's
coming) I have upon deliberate consideration, seen real cause to forsake some
things formerly taken up by me; and to alter those general conceptions which
before I had of the Vials, almost in every thing.

And notwithstanding I had some thoughts at first positively to lay down my own
opinion in things referring to the Vials, without mentioning the opinion of
others, yet did I afterward judge it convenient for the satisfaction of such
who delight to turn over Expositors, not only to lay down my own, but also
briefly to insert those reasons, which pondered in my thoughts, made me see a
necessity to forsake the old beaten paths, and seek a new; wherein I can speak
it truly, I have not desired to besingular (though often necessitated so to be)
nor forsaken any man, so far as by right reason I have been able in my most
serious thoughts, to bring his opinion, and the truth together; and where I
could not, though I highly reverence the men, as inestimable of more worth for
grace and abilities both, then a hundred such as my self, yet have I not durst
to follow them, because I have taken it up as my resolution in this day (which
through the grace of God assisting, I shall hold unto) not to follow any man,
or men living, though I honor their holiness, and love their parts, any farther
then I can see the truth, and them to follow that, nor for any respect
whatsoever to forsake any man, so far as he appears to me to go with that; And
in this resolution (as to the present work) I am confirmed, by considering that
the knowledge of those Prophecies which relate to the last times, is to be
attained, not so much by settling upon old received Principles, as by running
to and fro to seek new Light and further Discoveries.

If any inquire of me as touching the reasons, why I have forborne to mention
the names of such Authors, as I have had occasion in this Discourse to deal
with; my answer is, because I would not appear as an opposer of men, though for
the love of truth I am an opposer of false Principles, which may be in the best
man; and also because I would not give just cause, by bringing the names of
good men upon the stage, to any who yet are living, or the friends or lovers of
such as are deceased to be offended. I might add another reason (with wishes
it were otherwise) because many Professors in our days, are grown so wanten,
that the very naming a good man, and showing him to be in a mistake, is enough
to make his name of little esteem, if not odious with some of them. And yet
although I have suppressed names, have I always laid the weight of their
Reasons in the balance; not willingly concealing, nor extenuating by my laying
it down, the strength of any one Argument, that whilst I was composing this
Discourse, I could meet with making against me; which for any to do, I have
always judged a manifest sign of one, who rather seeks to make others think
him a Victor, than to find the truth.

Having given thee (Christian Reader) this brief account of the rise of this
enterprise, and my progress in it, I have only two or three things to add.

First, In case thou art one who art a young beginner, whose face is but newly
set toward Truth, to seek it, let me commend to thee this one rule amongst
many (which those who wait for the Spirit shall learn) it being that which the
Author (being such a one as thy self) finding himself wearied, and quite tired
out in seeking after truth, whilst he has addicted himself to follow now the
opinion of this man, now of that; being able all this while to settle upon
nothing, has in the end been forced (as in other things, so in this) to have
recourse unto; which is, to take the naked Scripture, and read it over, and by
some distinguishing mark made in the Bible to sever those Scriptures, which in
the Prophets and elsewhere treat of the last times, from other Scriptures whose
subjects are different; which done, thou shall then be able, by the help of thy
mark to turn thy Bible over, and in a few hours to consider all that from one
end of the Scripture to another, has special relation to the last times (or by
making a different mark to any subject into which thou desire light) whence
having first by comparing the whole together founded thy self upon such
Principles as are contradictory to no part, thou shall then be able to pass a
right judgment upon the different minds and sayings of Writers, knowing when
and where to choose and refuse, as they agree with, or differ from the substance
of that truth which in Scripture has special relation, either to such a Time,
or such a Subject, and as where this is carefully and understandingly done,
there will be little need of the multitude of Authors; so where it is omitted,
there will be little else save confusion to him that shall turn them over. And
this let me say further, in doing of it, thou may promise thy self (through
the help of the good Spirit) more full sat is faction then I will promise thee,
from what I have written, or from any Book extant that ever I met with besides
the Bible, and willingly I would have been here at the pains to have pointed
out to thee those Scriptures whose subject is the last times, but that I judge
that to read over thy Bible diligently thy self, and mark them out, will do
thee much more good.

Secondly, In case thou art one whose delight and study runs this way, to pry
into the mysteries of the last times, if he might teach, who indeed has more
need to learn, I would say, make stops sometimes, and look round about thee,
lest while thou art running on, supposing thou see thy way before thee, thou
do unawares out run thy Leader, which if thou do, thou will streightway be
woodded, and wildred, and go to work with thy reason only, (which will never
make good work) to hew the way thou should go in; And further, never fear to
make a turn out of the common road (though standers by cry, you are out of the
way) if so be thou perceivest truth to have taken that path before thee.

Thirdly, If thou art one who art offended at the visible dispensations of this
age, and upon that account no friend to studies of this nature, I only say,
perhaps thy readiness, to be offended at what is done, and doing at this day in
the world, arises hence from a not observing the signs of the times; study
therefore these things a little; and more, take a wise man's counsel, Act. 5.36.
Refrain from censuring and opposing, for if the work now doing in the world be
of men, it will assuredly come to naught; but if of God, happily whilst ye
oppose, ye shall be found to fight against God.

Fourthly, and lastly, Whatsoever thou art, receive not what is written without
trial, nor throw it away (upon a loose trial) with a Tush; the one is an
enemy to thy comfort, for he that swallows meat whole, tastes not the sweetness
of it; the other may be to thy light, for he that is resolved to open his eyes
but half way, must expect to see men like trees. And as things are not written
with a spirit of infallibility, so as that all must be received; so neither (I
hope) is any thing put in with so much levity as deserves to be cast out with a
Tush; but rather lay Scriptures together, w^igh things well, and then judge;
Thus the Bereans did, and are called noble for so doing; whereas those who take
things upon mere trust, and those who throw them away without any trial, are
neither of them noble.

Only in case of trial, do not for one single Scripture, which may seem to thee
to contradict any part, reject the whole, but rather lay Scripture to
Scripture, till the whole of Scriptures is brought to some harmony, by which
time possibly thou may see reason to be of my mind; if not, a better harmony
being found, I shall (I so hope at least) with thanks for light, willingly
relinquish my own, and come to thine.

And further, In case some things upon diligent fearch do evidently appear to
be mistakes, do not therefore because of some weeds, throw away all the corn;
he that will eat no corn, but what grew up without weeds must eat none at all;
he that thinks to have truth from such imperfect creatures as we are, without
error, erres himself whilst he so thinks.

And lastly, In case thou seeing reason for it, do receive things, receive
them not as bare notions, which will be little benefit to thee, or comfort to
me, that I have labored only to fill men's heads; but now and then suck upon
them in thy Meditations, perhaps thou may find some sweetness in them, they
have not been all dry bones to the Author in composing; who there fore in his
composure has studied plaineness and brevity (so far as will stand with weak
capacities) that things might be fitted the more (without being tiresome or
tedious) for thy meditations.

Let none wonder I have written out so many Scriptures at large, they were sent
to me in writing, I thought they might be so to thee in reading, and it has
been sometimes a question with me, whether a defect in this, and a bare
quotation of Chapter and Verse, has not made the Writings of some more dry to
the Reader, then otherwise they would have been?

I have no more (Christian Reader) save to beg thy prayers for me, in doing
which, let me obtain thus much; That in case the Lord make any thing either in
this, or my former part useful to thee, and affecting to thy heart, that in the
midst of thy joys, thou would not forget to send a groan or two to Heaven
in the behalf of the poor unworthy Author (who would not, had he not much need
thereof, so publicly make this request, and having need, is glad he can do it)
that the Lord would make, and keep him very humble, that the improvement of a
talent of gifts, may not at all be prejudicial unto grace; Withal, that he may
not at last, having pressed others to the work of their Generation, be himself
found negligent, and as an unprofit able instrument be laid by therein, which
he can never look down into his own heart, but he sees real cause to fear,
from which yet he hops (Saints helping together with prayers for him) he
shall be kept, who is,

One that esteems it a most glorious Privilege to be of the number of those
who follow the Lamb withersoever he goes. J. T.

GENERATION-VVORK; The Second Part.
Wherein is showed what the Designs of God abroad in the World may in all
likelihood be, at this present day, and in the days approaching. Being an
Exposition of the Seven Vials, Revelations 16.
The Introduction.
AS the Holy Ghost in the precedent Chapter, and the first verse of this, has
laid down several things as preparatory to the following Vision of Pouring
forth the Vials: So do I judge it a thing most meet and safe in this our
Exposition to walk by the same Rule; and first of all, as an Introduction to
the whole, to commend to the consideration of the Reader, these few
Propositions.

I. PROPOSITION. That the time of pouring forth the Vials, is then to begin
when Antichrist is going off the Stage, and true Reformation has gotten some
footing, and the Church of Christ which before lay hidden, and invisible begins
to appear.

This is clear Chap. 15.2, 5. where as Antecedent to the pouring forth of the
Vials, we have,

1 Victory gotten over the Beast, and over his Image -- verse. 2, which is not
in such a sense to be understood, as though the Beast, his Image, Mark, should
hereby be abolished or destroyed: For then what need would there be of any
Vials to be poured forth upon the Beast afterward, the work being done, and he
destroyed already; or why should his Mark, and Image, be mentioned again in the
first Vial? But the meaning is (as I conceive) that Saints immediately before
the Vials begin to be poured forth, shall so far have gotten the victory over
the Beast, as concerns either the safety of their own persons, or the doing of
the work; yet Antichrist shall not have power over them to make them subject
themselves to him, allow of his Image, Mark, the number of his Name; or else to
persecute them, kill them with the sword, as in former times he has done; nor
shall he have such a power as to hinder them in the work they are going about,
of pouring out the Vials.

2 The Saints who have obtained this Victory, stand on a Sea of glass mingled
with fire, verse. 2. noting, that the Saints at this time, shall have attained
to some degrees of purity in Doctrine and Worship, so far at least, as to
discern and renounce the gross Idolatries of Antichrist, which are set forth by
his Image, Mark, the number of his Name; though yet they shall not have
attained to that purity the Church of Christ enjoyed before the corruptions of
Antichrist crept into it; For then there was a Sea of glass, clear as crystal,
Rev. 4.6. here is a Sea of glass, but not yet so clear as Crystal. Though this
Reformation shallbe pure, in respect of the impure and filthy puddle of
Antichristianism, yet shall it have some mud in it, in respect of the purity of
the Primitive streams. And whereas this Sea of glass is said to be mingled with
fire, it denotes, that the Saints in struggling with the Beast shall not be
without some sufferings on their part, though the victory falls to them, yet a
mixture of suffering shall go with the victory: And also (as the wisdom of God
is manifold) it may denote, that the contenders against the Beast, shall not as
yet be so one amongst themselves, but that there shall remain hot jars and
contentions amongst them, one party against another.

3 The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is opened, verse. 5.
That is, The true worship of God in his Church, which before was hidden and
private; Saints worshipping God by stealth in corners, shall now begin to be
public and visible; though as yet this worship shall not be in so perfect and
fixed a way as afterward, therefore set forth by the Temple of the Tabernacle;
for although the true worship of God was in the Tabernacle Moses built upon the
first coming out of Egypt, yet was the Tabernacle moveable, and the Worship
therein not in all things so complete, as in Solomon's Temple afterward.

Now find out the time to which these three Characters do most exactly agree,
and then we have found the time where we are to begin the Vials; which not here
to hint, I shall hence only observe, That all those Expositors which begin the
Vials with the Primitive times of the Church, or those who coming lower, do yet
begin whilst the Man of Sin was in his greatest state and strength, are not to
be followed as guides in this thing; To all which Expositions, though nothing
else were to be opposed, yet it is sufficient that the Vials are called the
seven last plagues, Chap. 15.1.

II. PROPOSITION. That the Vials are to be poured forth by Angels only coming
out of the Temple, clothed in pure and white linen, having their breasts
girded with golden girdles, Ver. 6.

The meaning is, That the Instruments God will employ in doing of the work (at
leastwise for the swaying and ruling party amongst them) shall be such as have
renounced the false Idolatrous worship of Antichrist, and embraced so far as
their light goes, the true worship of Christ, in which respect they are said to
come out of the Temple; whose conversations shall be pure and unspotted,
therefore clothed in pure and white linen, and their designs and actings for
God in managing this great business (how ever judged or scandalized by others)
shall yet be carried on with much sincerity, uprightness, and integrity, which
as a golden Girdle shall be upon their Breast.

Hence not the Turk, nor the Jews, nor any of the Antichristian Princes or
party, nor any other who are unconverted Idolaters, false Worshippers without
the Temple, can be looked upon, or interpreted, to be the Angels of any of the
Vials.

III. PROPOSITION. That Gods call to the Angels of the Vials to pour out their
Vials, is to be principally looked for out of the Temple.

The matter of their work is to be looked for in the word, that what they do be
agreeable to that Rule; but the Call to go about the work, that is, without
delay to pour out this, or that Vial, is mainly to be looked for out of the
Temple. Chap. 16.1. I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the
seven Angels, Go your ways; and pour out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth. The meaning of the word, is not as if by one general command from the
Temple, all the Angels were authorized at once to pour out their Vials; no, but
as the Angels were distinct, so they had distinct calls; yet the Call of each
came as a great voice; that is, with much power out of the Temple; God first
setting it strongly upon the hearts of his people in his Temple, that such a
work is to be done ( I Jesus have sent my Angel to testify these things in the
Churches, Chap. 22 16.) who thereupon with a great voice cry mightily to each
Angel ( i.e. such instruments as they see God has raised up, and empowered) to
do that work.

Yet understand this, I am now speaking not so much of the general Call, as a
more particular and special Call, peculiar to this time of the Vials. The
general Call to Generation-Work is (as has been proved in my first part)
dispensation, but now at this time, besides the Call of Gods dispensations, the
instruments God shall raise up to ruin the Whore, shall have a more particular
Call to this work, to the end they may neither flag nor draw back, namely the
loud and uncessant cry of the Temple.

First, Hence the general voice or cry of Gods people out of the Temple, is
much to be heeded in that age, in which the Vials are pouring forth.

Hence secondly, Extraordinary actings, or actings in a strange and
extraordinary way, are to be looked for, whilst the Vials are pouring forth;
for is it not a wonderful and an extraordinary thing to attempt things new, and
in former ages unheard of, and that upon this account chiefly, that it is the
general voice, and cry of Saints, that they have it upon their hearts, this
work must be done.

IV. PROPOSITION. That the subject of each Vial, or the things or person^ each
Vial falls upon, are such only as God hates, accounts his eneies, and chiefly
things pertaining to Antichrist. This is clear, for,

1 The matter of each Vial is pure wrath, yea fu^ wrath, as Chap. 15.1.7. Chap.
16.1. and pure and fu^ wrath is proper only to such.

2 Each Vial is poured out upon the Earth, Chap. 16.1. i.e. things carnal and
earthly, persons out of Church and aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel; Earth
her being opposed to Heaven, the true Church of God, or Spouse of Christ.

3 The Vials in particular will evidence this; For the first Vial falls upon
such as had the Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image, Chap. 16.2. The
third upon such as had shed the blood of Saints, and in requital had blood
given them to drink, verse. 6. the fourth, fifth, and seventh, upon such as
blasphemed God under these plagues, yet repented not to give him glory, verse.
9, 11, 21. And for the other two, that they likewise fall upon such, will
better appear hereafter, when I shall come to open the subject of each Vial.

Hence, not Christ himself, not the Scriptures, not the Church or people of
Christ, nor any such like thing, nor the inanimate creatures, as the Sun or
Elements, may be accounted the subject of any of the Vials,

V. PROPOSITION. That the effects of one Vial, do often times run into another
Vial.

My meaning is, the immediate following Vial, or the Vial following that may
sometimes be poured out before the Effects of the foregoing Vial are wholly
ceased; For although an order is so to be observed (the Holy Ghost having laid
it down) as that we must not conceive all are to be poured out at once; yet it
is unbecoming the Majesty of God, to tie him up so strictly to order, as to
conceive the punctum of time ending one Vial, to be the beginning of the next.
If man in his employments be not so to be tied up, much less God.

Hence we are not to straiten the work of the Generation to one Vial only,
that which for present we are under, because such may the case be, that before
the Effects of one Vial are over, God may call upon his Servants (his
Providence opening a door thereunto) to pour out anoher.

VI. And last PROPOSITION. That the Terms and Phrases relating to the Vials,
are not to be understood in a litteral, (unless where either the Text it self,
or consent of other Scriptures enforce it) but in a metaphorical sense.

For if we take the Earth, Sea, Rivers, and Fountains of waters, Sun, Air, etc.
in a litteral sense, how should a Vial of wrath poured out on these, be any
whit more prejudicial (without a miracle) to Gods enemies, than his friends,
who partake of the benefit of these in common with the other? Yea, how contrary
to reason would it be, so to interpret the third Vial? for (as one says) did
ever Rivers and Fountains of waters literally shed the blood of Saints? or did
God ever (in way of revenge) give them blood to drink?

Hence, Those of the Popish party, and such of our own as would put a litteral
interpretation upon the things here spoken of, are mistaken.

These few things (from which in the general some light already has been
afforded us, and of which more particular use will be found hereafter) being
premised; I now come to treat of the Vials themselves, and of each in their
order.

VIAL I.
1. The SUBJECT of it,
The EARTH.
Verse. 2. AND the first went and poured out his Vial upon the Earth.

Of the whole Universe, Earth is the most gross part; Air is of a subtle
nature; Water of a more gross; Earth the grossest of all, as being the dregs
and settlements of the whole. By Earth then, we are not here to understand,
Earth as opposed to Heaven, i.e. the true Church, as verse. 1. but the Popish
Earth, viz. the grosser part of Popery, or the Lees and Dregs of that Religion,
opposed to the finer parts of it. Now these Lees and Dregs are no other but
that damnable Doctrine of the Papists (by which Christ's Mediation and Priestly
Office, and so consequently the very foundation of Faith and Salvation is
destroyed) which maintains Justification by works, upon which poisonous deadly
root do grow the filthy abominations of their Mass, their Crosses, Indulgences,
Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Penance, Pilgrimages, Monkish-life, etc. which
in respect of their Discipline, though that be impure, may yet well be called
the Dregs, as being far more impure.

Upon these filthy Dregs of Romish Doctrine, began the first Vial to be poured
forth by Luther, and other Worthies of those times, who by the light of truth
made such a discovery of the unsoundness, yea, perniciousness thereof, as that
now the same began to be odious in the eyes of all. And that here (and no where
else, either sooner or later) we are to begin the Vials, is clear, because no
time does so exactly agree to what we have said concerning the time in our
first Proposition, as this does.

That discovery of the filthiness of these things, which was more ancient, in
the times of Wickliff, Hus, the Waldeneses, and Albigenses, could not be any
part of this Vial, for the grounds of our first Proposition; and also because
that discovery served only to deliver the faithful ones of those times, from
the poison of these abominable Errors, not having any such effect as to destroy
them in others, for they remained still in credit with the generality.

2. The EFFECT.
A noysom and grievous Sore. And there fell a noysom and greievous Sore upon
the men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his
Image.

Our Expositors do generally understand this Sore to be that inward vexation,
envy, wrath, fury, madness (which as an inward Sore torments those in whom it
is) that befell the Priests, Monks, Canonists, with all that Rabble, who had
the Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image, upon the pouring out of this
first Vial. But according to this Interpretation, the Effect of the Vial should
be no other, but a tormenting of the men who were the upholders of the evil,
and not a destruction of the evil it self; whereas indeed the proper and
natural Effect of every Vial, is a destruction of the thing it falls upon. It
is not amiss therefore to seek yet some other interpretation of these words.
And what if we say thus? That look as it is with a man, or men, that have
noysom grievous Sores upon them, others loath them, withdraw from them, cannot
bear their presence or company; So did it now befall the men who were the
Authors and Assertors of these abominable Idolatries.

The generality of the people who before adored them as Gods, not once calling
their principles or practices into question, did now by the pouring forth of
this Vial, come so palpably to discern the gross and horrible Idolatry of these
their Forgeries, as that they began to loath and abhor, not only the things
themselves, but the very Assertors of them, and to withdraw from them as
infectious persons, full of grievous and noisome Sores; so that now they can no
longer delude the people, and draw them to a loving and liking of these things,
as formerly they had done; no, but themselves with their principles and
invention are become odious, and a filthy stinking Sore in the eyes and
nostrils of the Commonalty. Which Effect, how evidently it did show it self in
Germany, and here with us in England, and also in other Nations, about this
time, upon the preaching and writing of the forenamed Worthies, with others
their fellow-helpers, is by many sufficiently recorded.

Thus much as touching the first VIAL.

VIAL II.
1 The SVBJECT,
The SEA.
Verse. 3. AND the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea.

By Sea here, we may not (as some) understand Nations, because they are a part
of the Subject of the next Vial.

Nor yet (as others) the corrupt Doctrines of Antichrist, concluded upon in the
Council of Trent, which (say they) the learned Chemnitius poured out this Vial
upon, in his Book called, Examen Concilii Tridentini, because (as has been
said) the former Vial fell on these, to which (the Subject being still the
same) it is more proper to refer the labors of those godly men, who after
Luther, still continued to lay open these things in their colors, than to
account the same, the pouring forth of another Vial.

Nor yet as a later Writer, the Political state of the Roman Empire, which did
suffer detriment by the late German War. 1 Because the Effect of that War fell
as heavy upon Gods people there as his enemies; whereas the Vials are upon
enemies only, as our fourth Proposition proves.

2 Because notwithstanding those shakings, the Empire is yet standing, whereas
the shaking of the Vials is such a shaking, as destroys and removes the thing
shaken.

3 Because the German Empire is (as in its place shall appear) the Subject of
another Vial.

But by Sea we are to understand the Discipline of Rome, as under the former
their Doctrine; or to speak better, the Romish Hierarchy, in whose hands the
power of Discipline lies, made up of a Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
together with the inferior Clergy, who receive their power and standing from
these, which is by themselves called, and to us known, by the name of the Sea
of Rome, the Popes Sea, the Cardinals Sea, the Bishops Sea, etc.

And truly this monstrous Beast, though his Rise is out of the Earth: Rev.
13.11. yet does he exercise all the power of the first Beast (verse. 12.) whose
Rise was from the Sea, verse. 1. and therefore is not amiss called in this
second Vial, where the downfall of his power is spoken of, by the name of the
Sea, whence his power is primarily derived.

And indeed, look what near affinity there is betwixt the Sea and the Earth,
they bordering one upon another, the same is betwixt Discipline and Doctrine.
And as the Sea girts in the Earth on every side, so that which is as it were
the Girdle, holding together all the gross, earthly superstitions, and
inventions of Antichrist, is an absolute tyrannical power of Discipline,
imposing principles, ways, and forms upon the consciences of men wheresover
the same is set up.

If you ask me, When was this Vial poured forth? I answer, In the year of our
Lord, 1641. it had its beginning, (though the Effects of it are not wholly over
as yet) when the Parliament of England did vote down Archbishops, Bishops,
with all that crew, root and branch, declaring their office and standing to be
Antichristian; for although some sprinklings of this Vial fell on them before,
yet the pouring of it forth, which gave them their fatal and deadly blow,
cannot more fitly be applied to any time than to this, when by the Law of a
Land, yea that Land too, which is by some reckoned the first of the Horns of
the Beast, the just judgment and indignation of the most High was poured out
upon them, in such manner, as that not only they, but all other ever since, who
have gone about to assume to themselves a Lordly power over Christ's little
flock, have fallen through the powerful Effects of it.

And that which will not weaken this Interpretation in case it be considered,
is, that as the two great things of Jesus Christ that Antichrist had invaded,
were his Priestly office, and Kingly; The first by his pernicious Doctrine; The
second by his absolute tyrannical Discipline: So the first remarkable blow that
Antichrist ever suffered, was in detecting and destroying his cursed Doctrine,
and gross Idolatries by it maintained, with which he had made an invasion upon
the mediation and Priesthood of Christ; which being done, because yet Christ's
Kingly office was invaded by an Antichristian Lording Discipline, Christ
therefore (that he might fully recover his own, before he invades his enemy)
makes it his next attempt to regain into his own hands his Kingly Power and
Authority, which to do, the very next remarkable blow that befalls the Man of
Sin (after the hot controversies about Christ's Mediatorship, and our
justification by Christ alone began to cease, the Saints in this having
obtained a complete victory, and given their Adversaries both the rout and
ruin) is in his Lordly Tyrannical Discipline, which straitwayes now begins to
be questioned; yea not only questioned, but finally is shaken, yea thrown down
as Antichristian, and that by Law.

If it be said, That Archbishops, Bishops, etc. are but an inferior and an
inconsiderable part of the Romish Hierarchy, and therefore the downfall of
these, seems to have too much put upon it, whilst the same is made a principal
Effect of that Vial, which is poured out upon the Hierarchy it self.

To that I answer, though inconsiderable and inferior, yet are they a part of
the Hierarchy, whose standing is by the same power, and upon the same bottom
with the rest: And had it not been for a Vial of wrath poured upon the
Hierarchy it self, these as parts of it could not have fallen: Neither is it
necessary that the pouring out of the Vial, should sweep away the whole at
once, for that were to destroy Antichrist with one Vial, and not with Seven.

If it be further objected, that this has been done but in our Isle of Great
Britain, the Hierarchy even at this day in most of the Kingdoms subjected to
the Beast being in as full and absolute power as ever.

My answer is, That so long as the Isle of Britain is reckoned amongst the
Horns of the Beast, it is sufficient, though but in one Horn this be done; for
neither did the former Vial extend it self to all the parts of the Papal
Kingdom (for the greater part lie rolling in the very Lees and Dregs of Popery
unto this day) nor indeed shall any of the Vials, the last excepted, be poured
out upon the Kingdom of the Beast in general, but some fall upon one part of
it, some another.

2 The EFFECTS.
1 EFFECT.
The Sea becomes as the blood of a dead man.

And it became as the blood of a dead man.

That is, That Hierarchy which before went for pure and Apostolical, did now
appear through the pouring out of this Vial upon it, to be a Sea of blood, i.e.
a wretched Seat of cruelty; yea blood of a dead man, i.e. corrupt, filthy,
stinking.

2 EFFECT.
Every living soul in the Sea dies.

And every living soul dyed in the Sea.

That is, All those who stand by the power of, have their dependence upon, or
livelihood from this Hierarchy, are by the Effects of this Vial, despoyled of
this their Antichristian standing, power, and livelihood, and so dye a civil
death.

How visible these Effects, for a great measure, have already been with us in
England, and will be more as yet, before the after-drops of this Vial are over
(which if I mistake not, the present National Ministry in England, being but as
twigs growing upon the former stock, both must, and shall feel) it is in a
manner superfluous here to add. And although I conceive the Providence of God
has brought us at this day under the next Vial, yet is there still a relic
of this behind; the Effects of one Vial ordinarily running into another (as in
our fifth Proposition) and a generation of men that have long deserved it, yet
for the greater part of them hitherto escaped the blow, shall feel it.

Thus much as touching the second VIAL.

VIAL III.
1 The SUBJECT
The Rivers and Fountains of waters.
Verse. 4. AND the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains
of waters.

By Rivers and Fountains of waters, we are not here (as most) to understand the
Bishops and Doctors of the Romish Synagogue, because (as has been proved) the
foregoing Vial fell upon them.

And also secondly, because though they have been causers and promoters of
shedding the blood of Saints, yet the act of bloodshedding has ever been by
another power, to whom being condemned, they were turned over to be executed;
and as the blood of Christ, though caused by the Priests, is yet said to be
shed by Pontius Pilate, because by his power the thing was acted; So the
continual bloodshed of Saints in the Kingdom of Antichrist, though caused by
the Bishops, may yet be said to have been done by the Civil power, because by
that power the thing has been acted.

That by Rivers and Fountains of waters, the Jesuits should be here meant (as a
late godly Writer judges) seems not probable to me; 1 Because they are no
where in all this Book set forth by any such name. 2 Because had this Vial been
poured out, and that (as is judged) some years past upon these, most surely
this generation of men had not been so rise and active, and that in all places,
as at this day they are. 3 The Jesuits (setting aside what they have done in a
secret way by Treachery, and that of some few only) have not been actors any
whit more in shedding the blood of the Saints, than their Fellow-companions the
Bishops and Doctors of the Romish Synagogue. 4 And lastly, The time assigned
for the doing of this, was many years before the second Vial was poured forth,
and therefore a thing most unlikely that this should be the meaning.

A late worthy Writer upon the Vials, in this (as in many things else) varies
from the common-road of Expositors, understanding by Rivers, States, and
Kingdoms, by Fountains of waters, the Heads of these, namely, Kings,
Parliaments, Statsmen, etc. upon whom this Vial is poured forth.

To this I do the more readily assent.

1 Because the former Expositions cannot stand, for the reasons aforenamed.

2 Because the ordinary use of the words give this to be the meaning; For
Rivers and Waters in Scripture Phrase signify People and Nations, Ezekiel. 32.2.
Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh King of Egypt, and say unto him,
Thou art like a young Lion of the Nations, thou came forth with thy Rivers,
and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their Rivers. Isa. 8.7.
Now therefore behold, the Lord brings upon them the waters of the River
strong and many, even the King of Assyria. Rev. 17.15. The waters which thou
saw, where the Whore sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and Nations, and
Tongues. The Fountain in common language is as much as the Head of a River,
whence it arises, and by which it is nourished.

3 Because the reason of the Vial, verse. 6. For they have shed the blood of thy
Saints, does (as but now was showed) more fitly agree to those who have
hitherto been the Actors in shedding the blood of Saints, than to any other.

4 Because this Interpretation does make a glorious concurrence and harmony,
betwixt the order of Gods workings hitherto (since the Vials began to be poured
out) and the order of the Vials: For the first remarkable thing wherein the
hand of God appeared against the Beast, was in the detection of, and destroying
his damnable doctrine, and abominable Idolatries. Next pouring contempt upon,
and pulling down the Antichristian Hierarchy. And the very next thing
remarkable since that, has been the shaking of some Nations, and removing from
their seats their Kings and great ones, who were secret friends unto, and
supporters of this Throne of iniquity; accordingly, the first came under the
first Vial, the next the second; And why may not the third, being a thing
remarkable, and distinct from the other, come under this third Vial, we are now
speaking of?

2 The EFFECT.
The Rivers and Fountains of Waters become blood.
And they became blood. That is, Wars do arise in those Nations subject to this
third Vial, to the involving the people in blood, yea causing the blood of
chief Heads and great ones to be poured forth. How within these few years past,
our Rivers in England, and the places subjected to it, have run blood, yea the
Fountain head has sprouted blood, is sufficiently known to all men. Now the
reason why I interpret blood here according to the Letter, is, because a
necessity so to do lies upon me, and that from the very words, for such blood
as has been shed by the Rivers and Fountains of waters, such blood by way of
retaliation is given them to drink, verse. 6. but blood has been shed by them
in a litteral sense, therefore God in their own kind, repays them again, and
they become blood.

3 An ADJUNCT.
(Which I so call, rather than an Effect, because properly it is not an Effect)
and that is, A Justification of God in these terrible executions of his wrath
upon them.

1 By the Angel of the Waters.
Verse. 5, 6. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O
Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou host judged thus:

For they have shed the blood of Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy.

The Angel of the Waters, is that Angel who shall be used to pour out the Vial
of Gods wrath upon the Rivers and Fountains of waters, called Angel of the
waters, because he has a power over the Waters, to pour out Gods wrath upon
them; Which Angel shall at this day acknowledge, that notwithstanding the
things themselves done by this Vial, are strange, and to be wondered at, things
unthought of, unheard of; yet being done, that the hand of God in them is
marvellously just, and to be magnified of all his people, being the just
recompense of the injuries offered to, and the blood of Saints. How in the
midst of those great and wonderful changes, and revolutions that of late years
have been in England, the hearts of all those who have gone along with God in
these his glorious dispensations and mighty works of wonder, have been
(notwithstanding the continual offense of others, and of the greater part)
carried out to justify God, and say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, etc. cannot
by them be forgotten.

2 By another out of the Altar.
Verse. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, O Lord God
Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

The Altar was the place upon which Sacrifices being slain, were laid to be
consumed. It signifies a suffering condition, and so is used Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.
I saw under the Altar the souls of them which were slain for the word of God,
and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with a loud voice saying,
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? Only with this difference, the sufferings there
spoken of were unto death, and martyrdom, and therefore they are said to be
under the Altar; but here, though their sufferings are great, yet not to death,
and therefore they cry out of the Altar, though they are upon the Altar, yet
not so, but that they can still give testimony to Gods work in the world. The
second Testimony therefore coming out of the Altar, or from the Altar, denotes
the persons bearing this testimony to be such as lie under great sufferings,
who out of the Altar, i.e. in the midst of all their persecutions, do yet give
testimony that the strange astonishing and unwonted Effects of this Vial, are
no other but the true and righteous judgments of God, inflicted upon those,
upon whom this Vial is poured out.

How suitable hereunto is that Testimony not long since sent over, by some
exiled Bohemians from Lissa in Poland, to us in England, written by one of the
banished in a little Book, entitled Clavis Apocalyptica, who in pages 1^3,
104. speaking of the great Revolutions in the Isle of great britain, and
particularly mentioning that of the Fountain Head becoming blood, he (though
yet as one amazed at the thing) says thus; We must by virtue of that clear
Text, say with the Angel, Lord, thou are righteous, because thou have judged
thus.

Two things from what I have said, are worthy observation.
First, That this Vial has a do^ble attestation going along with it, (which is
not found in any other Vial) of the Righteousness, Justice, and Equity of the
things effected by it; Why so? I take the reason to be this, because the things
done under this vial, shall be so strange and amazing; so besides the ordinary
path and course of Providence, and without former President, as that the
legality and justice of them shall be called in question by most; and therefore
we have a double Testimony (that out of the mouth of two Witnesses, or two so
is of Witnesses, the righteousness of Gods wonderful works might be made
manifest) confessing Gods hand herein, and the same to be most righteous in the
doing of them.

2 The persons bearing this testimony are;
1 The Angel of the waters; that is, the instruments themselves, that God will
use to do these great things by, who shall in their consciences be abundantly
satisfied, and bear public testimony that the things are righteous. 2 Another
out of the Altar, i. e. Saints in a suffering condition from some more remote
place, who hearing these things shall also cry, Lord thou art righteous. Why do
these two bear witness only, and no other? The Reason may be this, To teach us
that the effects of this Vial shall be such, that hardly any but those who are
either deeply engaged in pouring of it out, their hands, hearts, or prayers
going with the work, or such who are under great persecutions for Christ, and
thereby dis-ingaged from all worldly interests, shall be able to say concerning
the things done, Lord thou art righteous, in the doing of them.

Object. If it be said, That there are Saints in Scotland and Holland, who in
the time this Vial is pouring forth do suffer much why do not they with these
other, come ^n, and cry, Lord. True, and righteous are thy judgments? I Answer,

1 Because, though they suffer, yet are not they upon the Altar, under
suffering for the cause of Christ, but rather upon the Stage of this world,
suffering for love to a worldly interest which fain they would uphold, when God
is throwing it down. 2 Because they are mixed in the crowd with those men, and
have shaken hands with that interest upon which this Vial falls, and therefore
it is no wonder that the righteousness and justice of it should be hidden from
their eyes.

Quest. If any now shall ask me, What Nations I judge those are, that are more
immediately subject to the Vial?

I answer, England, with its Territories, the Low Countries and France; And my
reason is, because where the b^ood of Saints has been in a more eminent manner
poured out, there in all likelihood is this vial to fall, this being the reason
of pouring it forth, they have shed the blood of thy Saints, verse. 6. but
setting Germany and Italy aside (which come under the two next Vials, and
therefore not to be brought in here) it is in England, the Low Countr^es and
France, that the blood of Saints has been most eminentl^ shed, Witness the
blood of Saints spilt in England in the days of King Henry 8. Queen Mary: I
need not say King Chartes his ^e^gn too. In the Low Countries in the days of
Duke d^ Alva, who made it his boast, that he had there put to death 36000
Protestants besides many that suffered there likewise under other Princes. In
France, the cruel barbarous slaughter (which continued for many years) of the
Waldenses, Albingenses, the late horrid massacre at Paris, and in many other
parts of that Kingdom; therefore though possibly the droppings of this Vial
may afflict some other Nations, so far as the blood of Saints has been spilt
in them, and by them, yet more immediately, and directly (in such manner as to
break their whole frame, and alter their Civil constitution) this Vial falls
upon England with its present Territories, the Low Countries, and France,
whereof the first has already felt it; the second now feels it, and he who is
coming to render recompenses for the blood of Saints shed in the other, stands
at the door.

Object. If it be said, But since the time that blood has been shed in these
lands, there have been (especially in England, and the Low Countries) very
great Alterations, the ruling powers who then were Papists being now
Protestants; yea the generation of persecutors is now extinct, and in their
graves: How then can it be just with God to pour out the Vials of his wrath
upon these Nations, and their present Heads, for what was done formerly, seeing
these powers cannot help what their forefathers did yea are reformed, and do
disclaim whatsoever in this way was done by them?

To that I answer, out of the words of Christ to the hypocritical Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 23. who out of respect to the Prophets and righteous men that
suffered by their forefathers did build the Tombs, and garnish the Sepulchers
of the Martyrs, verse. 29. saying, If we had been in the days of our Fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, verse.
30. And not only so, but also they were a mighty reformed generation, in
respect of those Idolatrous ways their Forefathers walked in; yet because they
did still retain that hatred to Christ, and true holiness, in their hearts,
which was in their Forefathers, and the reformation they gloried in, was only
outward and hypocritical; therefore, says Christ, (verse. 35, 36.) upon them,
and that generation should come all the righteous bloodshed upon the earth. So
may I say, though England of late years, reformed to what it was in Queen
Mary's days; and Holland at present is, to what it was in times of Popery; Yet
because the late Head and Heads of England had, and the present Rulers in
Holland have the same malice and hatred in their hearts against the Truths and
People of Christ, that was in the hearts of their Forefathers, and the
Reformation that was in the one, and is in the other, only outward, and
hypocritical; therefore it is just, exceeding just with God to recompense the
blood of the Saints shed in the times of their Forefathers, or former Rulers,
upon the Heads of the Rulers and People of this Generation Yea God will the
rather do it, because it^s his way (as our instance proves) to punish the sins
of a profane and Idolatrous Generation, upon a formal and lukewarm Generation,
who have a show of holiness, but are enemies to the power.

Thus much as touching the third VIAL.

Hitherto the Vials foretell things past, and events answerable to the things
foretold we have seen, save only that part of the third Vial, which does more
especially relate to the Low Countries and France, which is yet behind. The
events whereof begin already to show themselves but will in due time more fully
appear. As for England it having drunk of this cup in the first place, and that
so deeply, as that its old constitution is thereby destroyed, and withal the
same being passed from us, it gives me some ground to ^ope (though not for our
worthiness) that the day of Gods w^ath upon England is over; though yet for
ought I know, some refining fire (being as the after-drops) to purge out the
remaining dross (if otherwise it be not done) may notwithstanding be kindled
amongst us.

The following Vials speak of things yet to come, and the events of them are
Prophetical and therefore as we have great reason to be very jealous lest
through any contrived mould of Gods workings beforehand, suitable to somewhat,
which either our natural, or corrupt desires, or our conceived fancies incline
us to, or lest through a pinning our faith too much upon the authority of
others; or on the contrary, a desire to be singular from all; or through
pr^ingagements to this or that particular party or interest; or straining some
notion which has a truth in it too far; or any other such like way or end, by
which Saints lose their guide, we should unawares be drawn into mistakes: So on
the other side, to be very humble and sober, much in waiting upon the Father of
lights for light; as also, circumspect in observing, wary in judging those
several hints which may be offered, or may offer themselves for truth; to the
end, if possible, and so fat as is the good pleasure of the Father, that truth
shall be made known, mistakes may be avoided. Which that my self may not swerve
from in the following work, let the merciful Lord be the light and strength of
his poor servant.

VIAL IV.
1 The Subject of it.
The SUN.
Verse. 8. AND the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun.

By Sun here cannot be meant (as some) Christ the Son of Righteousness; nor (as
others) the Scripture revealing Christ; for the manifest truth of our fourth
Proposition, as also because according to either of these opinions) the Subject
of this Vial, is made singular from all the rest, for the Subjects of every of
the other Vials are things evil, and pieces of Antichrists and Satan's
Kingdom, and confessed so to be; but according to these interpretations, the
Subject of this Vial should be good; either Christ himself, or one of the
principal things, and of greatest value pertaining to his Kingdom.

A late worthy Writer, who interprets this Sun to be some high, eminent Head of
State, who like a Sun in the Popish world upholds all; and by his splendour and
government gives strength and luster to all; Like as the Sun in the created
world, by its light and motion, guides and moves the forces of nature; he that
hit the mark in genearl, but not having pointed who, or what this Head is, has
yet left room for a more particular inquiry.

By Sun therefore (as some others more fitly and rightly judge) we are in this
place to understand the German Empire, or House of Austria; but these also in
the application fall under a mistake, whilst looking upon the late German War
to be the Effect of this Vial, they bring us down to the fifth or sixth Vials;
which opinion for our two first reasons laid down to disprove the very same
opinion (urged by another Author, and to another end) in opening the Subject of
the second Vial, cannot stand with truth.

And here, by the way, I cannot but give the Reader a hint, how easy a thing
it is to be deceived by likelihoods; The German War having in it the likelihood
of a Vial, has given occasion to some to bring it under the second, to others
under the fourth, whereas indeed it properly belongs to none. Spiritual
prudence and direction from above, is wanting in nothing more than this, to
judge aright of likelihoods.

Yet although in respect of the time they step aside, that yet they have judged
aright concerning the Subject, is clear; because the Sun here being to be
understood of no other Sun than that which shines in the Antichristian world,
or Popish Horizon (for it is upon that world, and that alone) all the Vials
(the two last excepted) are to be poured forth) it cannot to any be so properly
and parley applied, as to the German Empire, or the House of Austria; which
although for present, through the late War, it has suffered an eclipse in
respect of its former luster and beauty; yet was it when Antichrists Kingdom
was in its highest altitude, and the top of its glory, the very Sun, and glory
of that Kingdom.

And that which does yet more strongly confirm me in this conjecture, is, the
consideration how exactly the same, according to this interpretation does agree
both to the time and place of the Witnesses killing, and rising; for that they
about this time lie dead in that street of the Great City, (the very, and only
place they are to be slain in) and shall shortly there arise; some weighty
grounds for proof hereof, are laid down by the worthy Author of Clavis
Apocalyptica, of whom mention was made in the foregoing Vial, to which it were
not impossible to add some farther proof, though here to do it would be to
make this word by the by, swell into a Tract of it self, and therefore I
forbear, not without some hopes and expectations, that instead of verbal, the
thing by real Arguments may prove it self ere long. Only adding, that it may
more concern the higher powers of this Nation, than possibly many are aware of,
to cast an eye that way: And what the design of God may be, or whether or no
tending to any such thing in the present War with Holland, we shall know
hereafter.

2 The ADJUNCT. A power given to the Angel to scorch with fire.
And power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. The Relative (...), to
him, may be referred either to the Angel pouring out this Vial, or to the Sun,
upon which the same i^ poured out; and I take it, it is to be referred to the
first, viz. the Angel, for this Reason, because it it said to be a power given,
to wit, by special dispensation of God to scorch men with fire; Now God does
not in this manner give a power to Antichrist to destroy himself, which must
necessarily follow, in case the (...), to him, be referred to the latter, viz.
the Sun. Neither may it be said, that by the pouring out of this Vial, the
chief Head or Heads of the Austrian Family shall be converted, which done, that
house shall destroy the Roman Whote; for how can a Vial of pure and full wrath
poured on for destruction, prove the convertion of that thing it should destroy?

The meaning therefore is (referring it to the Angel) That th^s Ange^ who pours
out his Vial upon the Sun, shall do somewhat over and above the bare pouring
out of his Vial, by which the hearts of the Antichristian faction shall be
extremely moved, and they filled with wrath, envy, vexation, the which as fire,
and great heat shall inwardly scorch and torment them; and this being added to
the pouring forth of his Vial, shows it is a thing peculiar to this Angel, all
the rest do only pour out their Vials, this does that, and besides (as a thing
over and above) has a power given unto him to scorch men with fire.

Ob^. You will ask me, But what is that which by special dispensation is given
to this Angel to do besides the pouring out of his Vial, which shall so scorch
the Popish party?

To that I answer, I do humbly conceive it may be this; This Angel having
poured out his Vial upon the House of Austria (or rather as he is doing of it)
he shall give a powerful call to the Witnesses, that by the power of that House
at this instant time shall he dead, which is the voice from Heaven (whence all
the Angels of the Vials comes, Chap. 15.5.6.) saying to them, Come up hither,
Rev. 11.12. which voice, no sooner shall they hear, but in the view and faces
of their enemies, they shall straightway in a Cloud ( i.e. under the wings and
protection of this Angel, who by his power shall be unto them as a Cloud by day
to shelter them from the burning heat of the now inslamed Sun. i.e. the rage of
this incensed House) ascend to Heaven; They ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud,
and their enemies beheld them.

Object. If it be said, But there is somewhat here which seems directly to
oppose such a thing as th^s, viz. That the Witnesses rising can be aimed at in
this place, because in the following words it is expressly said. They blasphemed
the God of Heaven, and repented not to give him glory; but at the rifing of the
Witnesses we have the contra^y, chap. 11.13. The remnant were affrighted, and
gave glory to the God of Heaven.

I Answer, That the 16. Chapter speaks of those only upon whom the Vial did
directly fall, who being no other than incorrigible enemies devoted to
destruction (as our fourth Proposition proves,) they are by them still more and
more hardened to their fatal ruin; But that Remnant spoken of chap. 11. are such
upon whom God does not pour out the Vial, I mean, the wrath of it, (although
as to common and outward calamities they may feel it with the rest, but rather
such, who though through ignorance they stand in the crowd amongst those the
Vial falls upon) yet has God special grace and mercy in store for, which by
pouring out this Vial upon the rest, they come to partake of, having their eyes
hereby opened to see Gods hand, and their hearts in truth turned to acknowledge
the same, and give him glory; or at leastwise such they are, who seeing Gods
hand, do so far acknowledge the same, as wholly to relinquish, and have nothing
to do with that Antichristian party they formerly sided with.

The EFFECTS.
1. EFFECT.
Scorching with great heat.
Verse. 9. And men were scorched with great heat. The Antichristian faction
seeing this that the Witnesses whom they reckoned they had killed and made sure
of, are now in the very faces of them got upon their feet to torment them, and
that under such Protection, as that, though stand and look upon them they can,
yet hurt them they are not able, they shall hereat be so enraged, as that they
shall scorch themselves even with the fire of their own rage; for indeed
nothing torments a man inwardly like this, to see his deadly enemy rising to
rule over him, and he no way able to hinder or prevent it.

2 EFFECT.
A blaspheming the God of Heaven, who had power over these plagues, instead of
repenting to give him glory.

And blasphemed the God of Heaven, who had power over these plagues, and
repented not to give him glory.

The Papals ( i.e. that incorrigible Crew, upon whom this Vial falls) shall now
themselves begin to see that the hand of the God of Heaven is manifestly
against them in these Plagues, by whose power and command alone they are
ordered to fall upon them; yet shall not this conviction bring them to repent,
and give him the glory of, but rather they shall blaspheme that hand they now
behold lift up against them; and as it was with Pharaoh when God plagued him,
he hardened himself; so shall they by these Plagues become the more obdurate,
and hardened to a wilful persisting in their iniquity.

Thus much as touching the fourth VIAL.
VIAL. V.
1 The Subject of it.
The Seat of the Beast.
AND the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the Beast.

That by Seat of the Beast should here be meant Antichrists Kingdom in general
(as some conceive) seems inconsistent with the very words themselves, which
speak not of destroying the whole, but rather a darkning of the whole, by
ruining some eminent part, yea, according to this interpretation, no need would
be (unless we suppose this Vial alone too weak) of any more Vials to be poured
forth upon the Kingdom of the Beast, which yet notwithstanding after this has
a greater storm falling upon it, and that to its final ruin, than ever any
before.

Those who by Seat of the Beast understand the Popes Supremacy; The Angel
pouring forth this Vial, to be King James in that Paraphrase of his upon this
Book, but chiefly his premonition, To all most Mighty Monarchs, Kings.
Free-Princes, and States of Christendom, James, by the Grace of God, etc. are
certainly mistaken, as appears by our second Proposition.

A man whom Gods people in this age are much beholding to, does by Seat of the
Beast understand Episcopacy, his principal reason is, because (...) is
sometimes in Scripture put for that form of Government and Authority, which a
person of State sitting upon the Throne may administer; the pouring out this
Vial to be about the year, 1639. when the Scots entered into Covenant to
withstand and abolish Episcopacy; but though I highly honor the memory of the
pious and grave Author of this opinion, yet canl not receive it.

1 Because this Vial speaks wholly of things to come, not past, as this is.

2 Because we have already seen the downfall of Episcopacy under another Vial.

3 Because although the downfall of Bishops in our Isle was a blow to be noted,
yet not such a blow as filled the Kingdom of the Beast with darkness, making
the Papals to gnaw their tongues for pain, as this does.

4 Because not this but another thing is, yea must be the subject of this Vial,
namely.

The City Rome.
The very thing here intended, a is evident.

1 Because the original word (...), Seat, is but once more used in all the
Revelations, where the same is applied to the Beast, chap. 13.2. The Dragon
gave him his Power and his Seat, and great Authority, and that there it cannot
in the former sense, but must in this latter be understood, is manifest;
because Seat is distinguished from Power and Authority, as being a thing
distinct from them; therefore the Beasts form of Government, or Authority
cannot be the thing intended thereby, but it must be interpreted of his place
of residence, namely, the City Rome.

2 Because the order that the Holy Ghost observes afterward in declaring more
fully what under the Vials is but briefly hinted at, agrees most exactly to
this sense, but by the other is broken to pecces; for Chap. 18. relates to
Romes ruin, and Chap 19. concludes with the battle of Armageedon, accordingly
the City Rome is the Subject of this Vial, and suddenly after Ver. 16. comes in
the battle of Armageddon, whereas if the ruin of the City Rome (as judges the
worthy Author) were not to be till the seventh Vial, the order of the Holy
Ghost in Chapters the 18, 19. which relates the ruin of the City Rome before,
yet preparation is made to that battle, would be manifestly broken.

3 Because no interpretation can better-sute the words themselves; for what may
more properly be called Antichrists Soat, then Rome the place where the Chair
he sits in stands? or what thing can befall the Beast, which is more likely to
fill his whole Kingdom with darkness, yea, make the Papals gnaw their tongues
for pain, than the destruction of Rome, the Metropolis of that Kingdom?

4 To these I may add a fourth Argument, urged by a learned Writer to our
purpose. Where the purpled Woman sits, there is Antichrists Seat, because she
sits on the Beast, that is, Antichrist the purpled Woman sits at Rome, because
she sits on the seven Head; of the Beast. which are the seven Mountains of
Rome, Chap. 17.9 The seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman
sits. Rome, therefore is, yea, must be the Seat of Antichrist.

Now as to the Objection, That this City Rome comes under the seventh Vial,
where mention is made of Great Babylon coming into remembrance before God, and
that therefore it cannot be the Subject of this. I shall to that say nothing
here, only refer the Reader to our opening of that place for his answer.

Neither let any say (as some object) that this interpretation is literal,
contrary to the scope of the Vials, which carry things in a mystery; for it is
easy to reply, That did we by Seat, understand the Seat or Chair it self that
Antichrist fits in, it would so be; but whilst, (as here) Seat is put for the
place in which his Seat or Chair does stand; it is manifest enough, that there
is a figure, and a mystery in the words.

2. The EFFECTS.
1 EFFECT.
The Kingdom of the Beast is full of Darkness.
And his Kingdom was full of Darkness. By the fall of Rome, the head City, the
whole Papal Kingdom shall suffer a great eclipse of its former esteem and
glory, for now shall the Kings of the Earth, who have been formerly supports to
this Kingdom, and those Merchants of the Earth who have formerly traded with
the Beast, stand afar off, as men afraid either to own, or traffic with the
Beast any longer for fear of her torment, as is more fully set forth in the
description of Romes ruin, which we have at large, Chap. 18. v. 9. to 20.

2 EFFECT.
Gnawing their tongues for pain.
And they gnawed their tongues for pain. Noting the extremity of rage the
Papals shall be in, when they shall behold Rome, the glory of their Kingdom
made a ruinous heap, and they no way able to revenge their own quarrel, they
shall act the parts of mad men, who gnash their teeth, bite their lips, gnaw
their tongues, etc. which also in suitable and emphatical expressions we have,
chapter 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

3 EFFECT.
Blaspheming the God of Heaven, because of their pains, and sores.
Verse. 11. And blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their pains, and their
sores, and repented not of their deeds. The marked sons of the Beast shall now
yet more evidently see, that their pain, viz. their inward torments, and
vexation of mind, by which they are in a manner distracted; and their sores,
viz. the eclipse of their outward glory, causing their friends and adherents
to desert their cause and interest, proceed only, and alone from the hand of
the God of Heaven, who now is remembering their in quities, and judging of them,
yet (as before) they shall now again harden themselves, and blaspheme the God
of Heaven to their own destruction, instead of repenting of their deeds to give
him glory.

Concerning the time when this Vial shall be poured forth, my thoughts are
these:

That the Jews delivery being to begin (as in my first part has been proved)
in, or about the year 56, and that being the Effect of the sixth, or following
Vial; it therefore necessarily follows, that the Vials upon the Sun, and the
Seat of the Beast, must be poured forth sometime in the interim betwixt this,
and the year of our Lord, 1656. or thereabouts, and therefore although for so
much as concerns the particular time, I shall wave it, yet may I safely
conclude thus much in the general, that the time is at hand.

Now the Reasons why so little time is allowed to these two Vials, when as
every of the former has taken up much more, are as I conceive:

1 Because God is slow in beginning to pour out his wrath upon sinners, waiting
their repentance; but when wrath has been poured out upon them, and they by
the same grow hardened, then his proceedings are more quick, Hence in the first
Vial, a long breathing time to consider their ways, is allowed to these
enemies of God, which they not regarding, but being more hardened under it, God
in pouring out the second, cuts the time much shorter; yet because under that
they are hardened also, therefore in the third, time is cut shorter yet; and
because after God had smitten them three times they still are hardened, and
persist to oppose the Lord Jesus; instead of submitting to give him glory,
therefore in the fourth and fifth Vials, time is brought to a little scantling,
God doing that in a few days, which before took up many years.

2 Because with the pouring forth of this Vial, the suffering of the
Gentile-Churches (as I conceive) draws to an end (though after this the Jews in
that interval of time betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials are to have a day of
suffering.) Now the nearer the end comes, the faster will Christ go, the
finishing of the work shall be cut short in righteousness. And therefore
observable it is concerning both these Vials, that the Scripture has set a
mark upon each, to show that their continuance is not to be long. The fourth
Vial under which the Witnesses rise, has this to note the suddenness of it;
The same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City
fell, Chap. 11.13. it is done in an hour, i.e. in a very short time; and of the
fifth Vial poured out upon the City Rome, it is said, Her plagues shall come
upon her in one day, Chap. 18.8. and in one hour is her judgment come, verse.
10. in one hour so great riches is come to naught, verse. 17. in one hour she is
made desolate, verse. 19. The often repetition of so short a time, plainly
teaching thus much, That the work shall be done in an instant, ere the Papals
themselves, or, it may be, the instruments God will employ in doing it, are
aware.

Thus much as touching the fifth VIAL.
VIAL VI.
1 The SUBJECT of it,
The great River Euphrates.
AND the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates.

Those who understand the drying up of Euphrates in a litteral sense, to make
way hereby for the Jews more speedy return out of the Eastern Countries to
Jerusalem, their native Country, mistake, for the grounds of our last
Proposition, and also because (as says a godly man in answer to this opinion)
the sixth Vial according to this should have no plague at all, for (says he)
either in these words of drying up Euphrates the plague is pointed at, or in
none; for the following words mention no plague, but only the endeavor of Gods
enemies to defend themselves against it.

By the River Euphrates some others understand the Riches and Revenues of
Antichristian Babylon, which Riches and Revenues of theirs, are the strength of
Babylon mystical, as Euphrates of old was of litteral Babylon; the drying up of
Euphrates, the taking of these their Revenues from them, which Rents and holy
Tribute of theirs being denied, their Chests and Coffers will by degrees grow
empty.

Now although the Patrons of this opinion are men of worth, and to be esteemed,
yet cannot I herein subseribe unto them.

1 Because (as is by some of them confessed) the drying up of Euphrates in this
sense, has been begun this hundred years, nay, some say three hundred, whereas
the pouring forth of this Vial, is a thing yet to come.

2 Because every of the Vials hitherto has done this by degrees already, and
the Vials yet to come will more; for observe it throughout all the Vials,
whatsoever it is that Antichrist loses by any Vial, he, together with the loss
of that, loses a considerable part of his Revenues coming in thereby; and
therefore every Vial clipping his Tribute, and cutting him short here, there
needs not a particular Vial to be poured out upon that which every of the
Vials, till the same is wholly destroyed, will have an influence upon.

Neither thirdly, Can I see how this will further (at most but very little) the
Jews return, which is that great thing, to prepare a way for the doing whereof
this Vial is poured forth.

An eminent late Writer interprets this River Euphrates to be the streams of
Popish corruption, namely, their Idolatries, by their Mass, Invocation of
Saints, etc. their murders of the souls of men, as well as the bodies of
Christ's servants; their Sorceries, of which many of the Popes themselves were
guilty; their Whoredoms, namely, in their Stews; their Thefts, by their
Indulgences and Pardons for money, etc.

But these things are no other but that Popish Earth, the first Vial fell upon,
by the fall whereof these (though not throughout Antichrists Kingdom, yet in
some parts (which is enough to evidence a Vial to have been already poured out
upon them) were destroyed. And it is well known, that Luther who began to pour
out the first Vial, was the very hammer of the Papists, as to the beating down,
and knocking in pieces these things.

And although the Popish party are severely punished for these things, upon the
sounding of the sixth Trumpet, Chap. 9.18, 19, 20, 21. Yet as these gross
enormities came not then in, upon the sounding of that Trumpet, but were in
before, though then they are punished for them; so (each Vial casting out (as
the same Author has observed) that very corruption which the same Trumpet
brought in) it follows, the bringing of these things in being before, so must
their casting out also, and therefore it is more agreeable to the Authors own
Position, to place the casting of these things out under the first Vial (as I
have done) they co^ing in, in all likelihood, under the first Trumpet) than
that their casting out should not be until this Sixth.

But more rightly (as some others) we are to understand the Ottoman Family, or
Turkish Empire, called the Great River, because of the multitude of People and
Nations therein, Rivers signifying People and Nations, as I have proved under
the third Vial; and the Great River Euphrates, either to signify (as some
think) that people to be here meant who inhabit about Euphrates, which are the
Turks; or (as I conceive) to give us to understand that that very people are
here intended, who shall about this time be looked upon, and accounted the
greatest people of all others; for of all Rivers that we read of in the Old
Testament, Euphrates is called the Great River, Genesis 15.18. Deuteronomy. 1.7. Josh.
1.4. or the River, by way of emphasis, Deuteronomy. 11.24. Now the people who at this
present time are of all others accounted the greatest, are the Turks, who
therefore, and no other, are here to be understood.

And which serves us for a strong confirmation hereof, the River Euphrates is
but once more in all the Revelation mentioned, Chap. 9.14. and there, by the
general consent of Expositors, it has reference to the Turkish power.

To which let me further add, that it being a thing also granted, that in the
last war (to which preparation is made under this Vial) as well the Turkish
Power shall be engaged against the Saints, as the Power of the Beast, it
therefore seems a thing very probable, that the Turk shall by the pouring out
of this Vial, have some great provocation which shall induce him to join hands
with the Beast in his so desperate a quarrel.

2 EFFECT.
Drying up of the waters of Euphrates.
And the waters thereof were dried up. The Turks power, and multitude, through
the pouring out of this Vial shall be wasted and destroyed: for waters set
forth multitudes of people, (as before) the drying up of the waters, imports a
wasting and consuming of these multitude^.

3 The moving Cause.
Preparing a way for the Kings of the East.
That the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. These words render a
reason of the drying up of Euphrates, which is to prepare a way for the Kings
of the East.

By Kings of the East, We are here to understand, the Jews, who upon the
pouring forth of this Vial, shall return to their own Land, and be converted to
Christ: And I take it that the pouring out of this Vial, prepares a way for
both, viz. Their possession of their own land again, and their conversion to
the Faith of the Gospel; For as the latter shall not go without the former, I
mean conversion to Christ, without possession of their land (The Scripture
being full and clear in this, that when that Nation shall be converted, they
shall be in possession of their Land again, Isa. 61.7. Jer. 31.17. and 32.41.
Ezekiel. 37.21, 22, 25. Amos 9.14, 15. Zech. 2 12.) so the former alone without
the latter, would be a thing indeed too low and carnal to be accounted the sole
moving cause of pouring out this Vial, which this preparing a way for the Kings
of the East, is.

Now the Jews are here called Kings, either for that abundance of riches they
shall bring along with them at their return, Isa. 60.9. -- To bring thy Sons
from far, their silver and their gold with them. Or rather for that great
honor and dignity that God will put upon his people, (setting them uppermost
in his Kingdom) upon it, Mich. 4.8. And thou O Tower of the flock, the strong
hold of the Daughters of Sion, unto thee shall it come, even the first
Dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, Isa. 61.9. Their
seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people,
all that see them, shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the
Lord has blessed, Zech. 8.23. In those days ten men shall take hold out of
all the languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that
is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

And they are called, Kings of the East (the Greek reads it, from the rising of
the Sun) because (as some think) their coming shall be from the Eastern
Countries, which though I do not altogether deny, yet cannot I here subscribe
to it, as the reason why they are so called, because, as this interpretation
adheres too much to the letter, so it is evident, that the Scriptures which
speak of their return, do as well mention their coming from other quarters, as
from the East, and not one Scripture speaks of their coming from the East
alone, Isa. 43:5. I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather them from the
West: I will say to the North give up, and to the South keep not back, bring my
Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth, Chap. 49.12.
Behold, these shall come from far, and lo these from the North, and from the
West, and these from the Land of Sinim. Jer. 31.8. Behold I will bring them
from the North Country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, -- Zech.
8.7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, behold I will save my people from the East
Country, and from the West Country, and I will bring them, and they shall dwell
in the midst of Jerusalem. But rather following the Greek, Kings from the
rising of the Sun. I take it they may be so called, because then they shall
come to this great preferment, honor, and dignity, when Christ the Sun of
righteousness shall arise, whose rising, that it shall be upon the pouring
forth of this Vial (before the last is poured forth) shall appear hereafter.

Now God in his wonderful and unsearchable Providence will so order it, as that
at the appointed time of the Jews return, the power and multitude of the Grand
Signeur (who is now the greatest Monarch in the world, and holds their Land in
possession) shall be much wasted and consumed, and that in such a way, by such
means and instruments, that as the one, viz. The wasting of the Great Turks
Power, shall set open a door for the Jews to possess their own Land, so the
other, viz. the way, means or instruments by which this shall be done, shall be
a special help and furtherance to their receiving of the Gospel, and Christ for
their true Messiah; and so indeed the pouring out of this Vial upon the Great
River Euphrates shall prepare a way (as has been said) both for their
possession of their own Land, and their conversion to Christ, both which to
take in here is much better (I conceive) and more agreeable to the mind of the
Holy Ghost, than to limit and straiten the same to any one only.

Now that the Jews are spoken of under this Vial, whose conversion we are to
expect before the pouring out of the seventh, is clear.

1 Because the Jews conversion being a thing so remarkable as nothing more, and
this to be in the very last ages of the world, it cannot be thought that in the
Vials, (which is a Prophetical History in short, of things to be transacted in
the last times) the same should be wholly omitted, which yet in case it be not
here spoken of, is,

2 Because in Rev. 19. (which Chapter is but a Commentary upon the two last
Vials) the Marriage of the Lamb to his Bride (which Bride can be no other than
the General Assembly of the faithful ones, both of Jews and Gentiles converted
to Christ, among which the Jews (as elder Sister) are chief, and therefore
particularly spoken of, Isa. 62.4 5. and 54.4.5, 6. Hos. 2.19, 20.) is made an
immediate forerunner of the battle of Armageddon, as compare ver. 7, 8, 9. with
19.20.21. with which battle the seventh Vial beginning, (for what is done
before the pouring out of the seventh, is only a preparation to it) the
Conversion of the Jews, or the Marriage of the Bride must necessarily be before
the seventh Vial is poured forth. He who desires further light as to this
Argument, may at his leisure read over the 37 38, 39, Chapters of Ezekiel, the
third of Joel, and the 12, 13, 14, th. Chapters of Zachary, and by comparing
Chapter with Chapter, and the whole with this Prophecy, may find it.

3 Because upon the pouring out of the seventh Vial, a great voice comes out of
the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying It is done. What is the meaning
hereof? Why the phrase is but once more used in all the Revelations, and that
is chap 21.5, 6. He that sat upon the Throne said, Behold I make all things
new. And he said unto me, it is done; here it is applied to the setting up of
the New Jerusalem, noting the meaning of the phrase to be this, Now is the New
Jerusalem established, and how should this be, in case the Jews the primary and
principal Inhabitants of this new City, were yet to be converted?

Object. If it be said, the words speak not of their Conversion, but only
preparing a way thereto.

I grant it, the pouring out of this Vial, does only prepare the way as to
their Conversion to Christ, which Conversion of theirs is to be (for the
forementioned reasons) in the Interval of time betwixt the sixth and seventh
Vials.

Object. Whereas it is further objected, That the Conversion of the Jews cannot
be until such time as the seventh Vial is poured forth, because Chap 15.8. it
is expressly said, No man could enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of
the seven Angels were fulfilled.

To that I answer, That this does as well exclude the Conversion of Gentiles
and Pagans, all the time the Vials are pouring forth, as Jews, and who will
affirm that? so long as daily experience has, and (blessed be the Lord) does
prove the contrary.

Some other interpretation must therefore be given of this Scripture, to free
it from such an assertion and whether does not this suite the place well, which
also serves to forward the work of pouring out the Vials, by putting life and
courage into the Angels which are to do it? to wit, That the glorious and
powerful presence of God in his Temple, all the time the Vials should be in
pouring forth (which is here set forth by smoke, alluding to that cloud
covering the Tabernacle of old, Exodus 40.34. and filling Solomon's Temple, 1
King. 8.10. which was a sign of Gods special presence then) should be such,
that [no man] that is, none of the Antichristian party, no nor any other (for
he speaks not here of men as worshippers, as 1 King. 8.11. but of men as
enemies to the Temple, and Gods work in it) [should be able] i.e. by force or
power [to enter into the Temple] i. e. to destroy the Templers, and thereby put
a stop to the work, Gods power and presence being in the Temple, to assist the
Angels in carrying it on [until the seven Plagues of the seven Angels should be
fulfilled] i.e. never, for if they cannot hinder the work till it is wholly
effected, they shall never do it.

Object. Whereas it is further objected, that the whole 21, and 22 Chapters of
this Book, which are the events of the seventh Vial, do hold forth this of the
Jews conversion, which therefore seems rather to be an Effect of the seventh
Vial, than to go before it.

To that I answer, That the main thing spoken of in those Chapters, is their
glory, not their conversion. Now that I readily grant, that their glory (which
is a fruit and consequent of their Conversion) shall have a cloud upon it, and
not be conspicuous till the battle of Armageddon be over, and the seventh Vial
poured out; but their Conversion shall be before, for Chap. 19.8. tells us that
the Bride is in her fine linen, whilst yet preparation is but making to this
battle, and the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

To conclude, The very Argument used by the Reverend Author of these objections
(in opening verse. 16. of this Chapter) to prove the Jews conversion from the
finging Hallelujahs Chap. 19. which being an Hebrew word seems to imply the
Conversion of the Jews at this time (who together (says our Author) with the
Gentile-Churches praise God for Romes destruction) makes directly against his
own opinion, viz. That the Jews shall not be called till all the Vials are
poured out; for the singing Hallelujahs, Chap. 19. is before, yet preparation
is made to the battle of Armageddon, as from the sequel of the Chapter is
clear; and this precedence is not only in words, but a precedence in time, for
the singing Hallelujahs is instantly upon Romes ruin, whereas the battle of
Armageddon (which yet is included within the Vials) is not to be till some
years after.

4 The Angel of this Vial,
The Gentile-Churches.
One great Question yet remains, which if not resolved, we are still in the
dark, notwithstanding all that has been hitherto said; which is, Seeing that
this Vial shall fall upon the Great Turk, who shall be the Angel that must pour
it out?

To say the Jews themselves shall do it, the Text it self will not allow,
because a way is prepared for them by doing of it.

I could incline to think, because it seems well to agree to the metaphor of
drying up, that the power and multitude of the Great Turk should by little and
little, through Intestive broyls, and Civil commotions, be wasted and consumed;
but that my thoughts are recalled, when I consider that all the Vials are to be
poured forth by such Angels only as come out of the Temple.

To say as does a godly man) that the Turk shall draw all his forces out of
Asia, and Africa into Italy, and this to be the drying up of the River
Euphrates, would please me very well, were it not but that according to this
interpretation, there should be no plague at all attending this Vial, seeing
(as has been said) the plague is expressed in these words of drying up
Euphrates, or in none, unless barely a plague in his will carrying him, or his
counsel advising to such a journey, and plagues of this sort are more
immediately from God, not mediately by Angels or instruments, as is the pouring
forth of this Vial.

Yea (which makes me more averse hereto) I yet can see no other, but that the
very and only reason of this persuasion is grounded upon a mistake, whilst the
troublesome tidings out of the East and North, Dan. 11.44. (supposed to be an
insurrection of the Jews in the Turks absence) is applied to the King of the
South (that is, says our Author, the Turks at this time invading Italy, and
pushing against the Pope) whereas it is clear to him that seriously peruseth
verse 40, 41, 42 43.44. that the same is to be applied to the King of the North.

If it should enter into the thoughts of any to conceive the Angel here to be
Christ himself, who either by some immediate hand from Heaven should dry up the
Turkish power, or by some secret judgment should cause a division amongst his
subjects, or (as before) a diversion of his force some other way, thereby
opening a door to the Jews to recover their own Land, I should to such reply,
that this were to make the Angel of this Vial different from all the rest, for
every of the other Vials have some visible Angel pouring of them out, but
according hereunto the Angel of this Vial should be invisible only.

What therefore shall we say? seeing neither of these can stand, who may we
next conceive unless some Christian power to be this Angel, which power must be
such only as comes out of the Temple, no other being here to be admitted.

With this last my thoughts accord, because upon diligent search, I can find no
opinion else that will either agree with the Text, or with it self.

Give me leave therefore to express my own conjecture (for so I call it) and
let others judge thereof, thus,

That the Saints having run through Germany, invaded Italy, destroyed Rome, and
being now with all their forces in Italy; the appointed time of the Jews
delivery being come, the Jews in Italy, and thereabouts, together with those in
these parts, and the outcasts also in the more remote corners of this world,
shall now (through some strong impressions upon the hearts of some amongst
them, that this is the very time of their deliverance) begin to stir, and to
make toward their own land, whom the great Turk (having intelligence of their
design) shall gather together all his forces to resist.

Now the work in Italy being done, and the instruments doing it there, waiting
upon God to see what further work he has for them, and also being by this time
brought into such a frame by beholding Gods glorious Appearances with them
against the Beast, as that there is now nothing so much in their hearts as a
desire to do Gods work, and serve his will, being resolved (setting all carnal
respects, and outward interests aside) to follow him whithersoever his
providence shall lead them; and also being above measure taken and ravished
(seeing herein the glorious accomplishment of all the Prophecies of old) with
this great News, now ringing in those parts, and over all the world, that the
Jews are stirring, as knowing how great an advance their coming in, will be to
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, by which the whole world shall be filled with
the glory of the Lord; and also being loath, having gone thus far with Christ,
now to sit still, whilst he has any work to do, which they may be helpful in,
yea counting it their high honor, and glorious privilege, in case they may but
any way become serviceable in this matchless work and design of God; they shall
hereupon make tender of their assistance to the rising Jews in those parts
against the Turk, whereupon with this handful of Jews (being as yet but the
first fruits of those who from all parts are coming up) they out of some parts
of Italy, shall invade the great Turks Dominions, by whose power his waters
shall be dried, and his people become a spoil unto them, which may be intimated
in those words, Isa. 11.14. (which as they speak of the time, so also set forth
the manner of the Jews coming up to their Land) They shall fly upon the
shoulders of the Philistims toward the West, they shall spoil them of the East
together; The meaning may be this, Some Potent people toward the West of the
Turks Dominions (as Italy is North-west of his principal Dominions shall take
up the cause and quarrel of the Jews, and march swiftly with them into his
Dominions, by whom those of the East (an Argument their march shall be
Eastward, from toward the West quarter, to the East) that is, the Turks shall
be spoiled, and the Jews re-possessed of their own Land. To this agrees, Isa.
49.22. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles,
and set up my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy Sons in their
arms, and thy Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

And not besides our purpose is Zacharies Vision of the four Horns, and the
four Carpenters, Chap. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. which Vision, that it relates to the
last times (and not those times wherein Zachary lived) is clear by comparing
the first and second Chapters together, which both speak of the same time, as
appears, because the measuring line, Chap. 1.16. is mentioned again, Chap. 2.1,
2. and it is evident though that the Prophecy of the Jews return, Chap. 2.
could not have its complete fulfilling (though something then was done in the
Type) in their return from the Babylonish Captivity, but must have respect to
their last Restoration, when many Nations (together with the Jews) shall be
joined to the Lord, as verse. 11. And many Nations shall be joined to the Lord
in that day, agreeing to that (which more fully explains it) Chap. 8.20. Thus
says the Lord, It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and
the Inhabitants of many Cities. 21. And the Inhabitants of o^e City shall go to
another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts; I will go also. 22. Yea many people and strong Nations shall
come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. 23.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, in those days ten men shall take hold out of all
the languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is
a Jew, saying, We will go with you (intimating the willingness of the Gentiles
to march with them, and carry them up to their land at this day) for we have
heard that God is with you, agreeing also to that (expressly spoken of the last
days) Mic 4.1.2, But in the last days, it shall come to pass, that the
Mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the Hills, and the people shall flow unto it. 2. And
many Nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord; which has reference to the time of the Jews return, as is clear from
verse. 6, 7, 8. In that day, says the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth,
and will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted.

The words therefore (as is clear) relating to the last times; by the four
Horns scattering Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, Chap. 1.19. we are to understand
the four Monarchies, Dan. 2.37, 38, 39, 40. under which, Israel, (or the ten
Tribes) were scattered, after that, Judah (or the two Tribes) and lastly,
Jerusalem it self totally ruined, and the place possessed by strangers; the two
first by the Assyrian or Babylonian Monarchy, the last by the Roman, since
Christ's time. By the four Carpenters which come to fray these Horns, and cast
them out, that the scattered might be gathered again, understand the stone cut
out of the mountains without hands; by which the Image (representing all the
four Monarchies) being smitten upon his feet ( i.e. in the fourth or last
Monarchy) the whole Image ( i.e. all the four Monarchies) are broken in pieces
together, and like chaff with the wind carried away, their place is no more
found, Dan. 2.34, 35.44, 45.

Now compare Zacharies Vision, and Nebuchadnezzars Dream together, and we may
out of both, make this conclusion viz. That the four Carpenters whih fray the
Horns lift up over the land of Judah to scatter it, being the same with the
stone smiting the great Image upon the feet, which stone being no other than
the Gentile-Churches, who shall strike first at the Roman Monarchy, and at the
fect of it, which are said to be part of iron, and part of clay; (that is, at
the same as it now is under the Beast, having a Civil and Spiritual power mixed
together) it will necessarily follow that the four Carpenters, which are to
fray the Horns of the Gentiles, and cast them out, that Israel may be gathered
again, are the Gentile-Churches. Now because the power of the Turk especially,
is that Horn which at present is lift up over the land of Judah, and also a
part of the old Roman Monarchy, as he possesses those Countries, which did
anciently belong to that Monarchy, therefore the Gentile Churches shall fray
his Horns also, i.e. dry up his power at the time when Israel is to be gathered.

And the Reason why they are called a Stone, Dan. 2. but four Carpenters, Zech.
1. is, because Daniel speaks of this power in the first rise of it, which as it
shall be in an extraordinary way, by an immediate finger of God, who shall take
a handful of his people out of some of the Mountains of this world, and by his
own power and providence without the help or assistance (yea, against the
stream of wordly Rulers hearts, could they help it) form them together as a
stone, to break the powers of the world by; so shall the instruments at first
be but little, low, weak, unskilful, most despised, and altogether unlikely to
break in pieces the great Image: but now by the time that they come to fray the
Horns lift up over the land of Judah, ( i.e. to deal with the great Turk) they
are four Carpenters, that is, they shall by this time become very for midable,
having by waging war with the Beast, and fraying his Horns, got not only power
into their hands, now, to cope and grapple with the greatest, but also the very
Art of hacking, and hewing down Gods enemies, they shall be no longer young
beginners, to whom time must be allowed to rid work off hands: but they shall
now become perfect Artists, men that have driven a Trade a great while, of
fraying of Horns, pulling down worldly powers, and therefore be skilled in the
way, and know how to rid such work off hands apace; and hence (in the
forequoted place Isa. 11.14.) its said, they shall fly, to note, the quick
dispatch they shall make of their work.

Now the Gentile Churches by invading the Turks Dominions with such of the Jews
as are nearest (for being zealous in Gods cause, and expert in their way, they
will lose no time) and by fraying his Horns, they shall thereby prepare a way,
or make a high way for the rest of the Jews, who come from more remote parts,
and chiefly the ten Tr^^es who were carried captive by the King of Assyria (who
therefore are called the remnant of his people from Assyria) to come up to
their land and join with the rest, as verse. 16. And there shall be a high way
for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria ( i.e. yet
remaining of those the Assyrians carried captive) like as it was to Israel, in
the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

Yet because some Jews there shall be, who shall be in such corners of the
world, that they cannot any other way than by shipping come at their Land;
therefore those Gentile Christians who shall have set their Breth^en in
possession of their Land (making it now their bus^ress to serve God in this
work) shall go forth with the multitude of their ships, to fetch up the Jews
from the more remote parts, and Creeks, and corners of the world, unto their
own land, which is spoken of Isa. 60.9. Surely, the Isles shall wait for me,
and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy Sons from far, their Silver and
their Gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the holy one of
Israel, because he has glorified thee. And although at this day, the Gentiles
shall be in a manner Servants to the Jews, yet shall their hearts be so
spiritual, that considering it to be their Fathers work and will, they shall be
so far from being offended to see these new-coming-in-Guestsso entertained, and
welcomed, as that they must wait upon them, that they shall exceedingly
delight in the thing; As Angels of glory delight to see Saints dandled, and to
serve them.

Now as the Gentile Christians by drying up the waters of Euphrates shall set
open a door for the Jews from all quarters to come up to their own Land: So
shall this kindness of theirs showed toward the Jews in undertaking freely so
great a work for their sakes, have a strong influence upon the hearts of that
People, to bring them by little and little to a love and liking of
Christianity, and so (as I said at first) the pouring out of this Vial prepares
a way both for their regaining their own Land, and their conversion to Christ.

Qu. If any further desirous to know who amongst the Gentile Christians are
most likely to be the Instruments in doing of this work. My thoughts concerning
it are, (of which I may truly say, that not a private affection to any people
above others, has been the rise of them, but a diligent search of the
Scripture, to find satisfaction concerning the Angel of this Vial has brought
forth unawares both the questior, with my thoughts thereupon) which in the
general (so far only as I have ground for conjecture) I shall here lay down,
and let the understanding and unprejudiced Reader judge.

1 It is most likely, That the same Angel, or those very Instruments which
shall ruin Rome, shall also pour out this Vial upon the great River Euphrates,
because the stone that smites the feet of the Image ( i.e. Antichrist) is the
same with the four Carpenters, who are to fray the Horns ( i.e. the Turkish
Power) lift up over the Land of Judah.

Now because it will be said, That it is as hard a thing for us, as yet, to
find who this Angel shall be, as the other; for till we see Rome destroyed, who
knows who shall do the thing? I answer, would you know the Instruments before
you see them at Romes Gates, observe then the rolling stone, and look for them
there where you see that: For this is most certain, that as the great Image is
to be broken in pieces by no other force or power, but only that of the stone,
so there where the stone is first taken out of the mountains, and formed
together by God, and begins to roll and smite, out of that quarter, may we
conclude the Tempest (though yet it be a great way off) which is to fall upon
Rome shall most certainly come; for observe it, though the stone by rolling
grows greater and greater, yet is it that stone still, and not another, which
was formed together at first; whereas if the same matter which formed together
did make the stone at first, were wholly to be laid aside, though matter of the
same kind should still be used, yet would it be a new stone, a stone new
formed; but the same stone that smites at first, and not another, is that which
breaks in pieces the great Image, though this stone, whilst it is in doing of
it, is still in a growing posture; by means whereof as it rolls further and
further, so may it have much more matter added daily to it, yet is it the same
stone still, and the outward strength of the stone lies principally in that
matter, which was formed together at first, that being the Basis or foundation
of the rest.

And this confirms our first and main Proposition, viz. That the Gentile
Christians shall pour out this Vial upon the Turk, because the very same stone,
which begins to smite the Image on his feet, is to break the whole Image, i.e.
all worldly Powers.

This likewise confirms, what but even now I said, viz. That the stone, Dan. 2.
and the four Carpenters, Zich. 1. are one and the same; for the four Carpenters
are they which fray the Horns lift up in the last days over the Land of Judah.
Now that which breaks all worldly Powers in the last days standing in the way
of Christ's Kingdom, is no other but the stone, which Daniel ^peaks of.

2 In answer yet further to the former Question, I find in the fore-quoted
places, Isa. 60 9. and 11.14. four marks or characters to know that people by,
who among the Gentile Christians, shall be the principal Instruments of making
way for, and bringing the Jews unto their own Land.

First, They shall be a people inhabiting in some Isles.

Secondly, They shall have great hearts to the work, and a longing desire to
see the day of Isreal's redemption, which therefore they shall wait upon God
for: Both these are expressed, Isa. 60.9. Surely the Isles shall wait for me.

Thirdly, They shall be such who shall be very considerable, and strong in
shipping, having multitudes of ships at their command, as this in the following
words, and the ships of Tarshish first. Tarshish was a place very considerable
for Navigation and Shipping in time of old, for which reason the Scripture
never speaks of great ships, strong ships, or multitude of ships, but they are
called by the name of the Ships of Tarshish, 2 Chronicles. 9.21. Psalm. 48.7. Isa.
2.16. Ezekiel. 27.25. Now this people dwelling in the Isles, and so strong in
shipping, shall be the first that shall put their hands to this work, The Isles
shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy Sons from far,
and thy Daughters from the ends of the earth.

Fourthly, What if I say, they shall be a people under a State Government, for
such a kind of Government of old had the Philistims, the power of Government
among them residing not in one man, but in many, which in Scripture are called
the Lords of the Philistims. Now this people who shall assist the Jews at this
day, are Isa. 11.14. likened to the Philistims of old (they shall fly upon the
shoulders of the Philistims) how? not in qualities or conditions, for the
Philistims were ever enemies to Israel, and these are friends, but rather in
the form of their Government; the Philistims were governed by a State; so shall
these. These are the characters, let the Reader refuse, or apply them as he
pleases.

Now because the thing aimed at in pouring forth this Vial, concerns the Jews
more especially, and their Restoration (as has appeared in our Discourse
hitherto) and because the thoughts of good men are various, and their notions
and conceptions very different in the point of the Jews first stirring, some
conceiving the same to be upon a Civil account only, to recover their Country,
and their conversion to be some years after: Others judging that they shall at
the first be converted to the faith of the Gospel, and their stirring to arise
from that; the right understanding of which mystery, is a thing of such
importance (either opinion having seemingly much footing in the Prophecies of
the Old Testament) as that without some further light, then as yet I have seen,
the Prophecies relating to this people, and the time of their return, cannot be
brought to a joint concurrence and harmony one with another; I shall therefore
(not boasting of any light that I have above others, having reason enough to be
otherwise minded; but as one willing, with others, to seek after, and if it may
be, to find the truth) offer here (in the close of this Discourse) and that in
as few words as I can, my own present thoughts concerning the thing, which are,

That the first stirring or moving of this people shall be (as I conceive) from
some notable work of God upon the hearts of some, who shall at this day be
Principal ones, or Leaders amongst them, working in them a sincere, earnest,
and longing desire to find the Lord their God: Hereupon arising themselves, and
stirring up others to arise with them, now to go unto Sion, unto the Lord their
God, which we have, Jer. 31.6. For there shall be a day, that the Watchmen upon
the Mount of Ephraim (who was head of the ten Tribes, for which reason the
Restoration here spoken of, must be their last, which is yet to come) shall
say, Arise ye, and let us go up to Sion, unto the Lord our God, and verse. 9.
we have the manner of their coming, They shall come with weeping, and with
supplication will I lead them: Qualifications not proper to such persons who
move only upon a Civil account, and for worldly ends. So Chap. 50.4, 5.
(speaking of the frame they shall be in, whilst as yet they are but upon the
way) In those days and at that time, says the Lord, if the children of Israel
shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping; They
shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Sion, with
their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Which Text was not
fulfilled in the return from Babylon, when Judah only, not Israel and Judah
together, did return, but manifestly looks to their last Restoration, so Isa.
51.11. we have a contrary affection, arguing the inward joy and delight they
shall have in this journey, from considering whither, and about what they are
going, viz. to Sion to seek their Lord, The redeemed of the Lord shall return,
and come with singing unto Sion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads.
So Hos. 3.5. (they go seeking the Lord) Afterward shall the children of Israel
return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and they shall fear
the Lord, and his goodness (When?) in the latter days. Chap. 1.10, 11. at
their beginning to stir, before yet they are come forth the place of their
captivity, shall be called the children of the living God. It shall come to
pass that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my people, there
shall it be said unto them, ye are the Sons of the living God. Then shall the
children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint
themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land; for great shall be
the day of Jezreel.

Now those amongst them who from such an inward desire and principle, shall
move themselves, and put others upon it shall be (as I conceive) persons under
a state of true conversion to God, being now delivered from the curse before
they lay under, and that hardness which before was upon them, though the
particular Revelation of Christ, as come in the fiesh shall not as yet be
manifested to them; but with a strong breathing after the Lord; and a general
faith in the Messiah, whom they shall truly believe in, look for, but as to
come, they shall now go seeking after the Lord, and David (or Christ) their
King; and this faith of theirs though for want of New Testament light, it be
not a New Testament faith ( i.e. a faith in Christ as come already) yet shall
the same be true faith, though running in the Old Testament way, (they having
yet no higher light) for such was the faith of Gods people of old, before
Christ came, a looking to the Messiah which was to come, acknowledging their
salvation to be only from him, and earnestly breathing and longing after the
day of his appearance.

And these persons who shall have already this true saving work begun in them
shall by converse with, and beholding the holiness, grace, and love, of those
Gentile Christians, who shall be instruments to help them in their land, have a
farther work wrought in them, and upon them (and that before Christ's appearance
to them) namely, they shall be convinced that the Messiah is come, being that
Jesus which was Crucified by their Nation, which shall so affect them, as that
they shall begin to own the crucified Jesus for Lord and Christ; and this I
think the rather, because I find the Apostle Paul seeming to intimate, Romans
11.11. that the Jews shall be provoked ( i.e. with a holy provocation) by the
Gentiles; Yea verse. 30, 31. (having before spoken of their Call, verse. 26. And
so all Israel shall be saved) he tells us plainly, that as the Jews by
rejecting the Gospel at first, did make way for the same to be brought to, and
preached among the Gentiles; so the Gentiles by having the mercy of the Gospel
amongst them, shall (when the appointed time of Isreal's conversion to Christ is
come) be a means of the Jews obtaining this mercy again, For as ye in times
past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbeleef;
even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy, they also
may obtain mercy; And which strengthens this persuasion, I find Rev. 19. (as
has been before observed) the Bride to be in her fine linen made ready to
receive, and meet her Bridegroom, and that before his appearance, or coming
forth to battle upon the white Horse.

But now though there shall be many amongst them, who shall from such ends and
principles move, as have been before declared, yet shall there also with these
march a great multitude, who moved from no work upon their heart, shall yet go
with the rest, either led to it by persuasion, example, or some carnal ends, or
hopes of their own; as it was with Israel of old, at their coming out of Egypt
first, and Babylon afterward (both which were eminent Types of this
deliverance) these being still in their hardness, their former state of sin and
bondage, shall not be able to bear the glorious Gospel Revelation of Christ
crucified to be their Messiah, but shall stumble at it, kick against it, and
against such of their brethren who receive it.

This we have Isa. 8.14. He shall be for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock
of offense to both the Houses of Israel, for a gin, and for a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; which, that it speaks of this time is clear, not only
for the reason, that it is about the time in which the Assyrian ( i.e. as shall
appear hereafter, the great Turk, who now possesses what did anciently belong
to the Assyrian Monarchy) is to overflow the land of Judah, yea and then too,
when the same shall be Immanuels land, that is, when Christ shall begin of the
Jews to be known and worshipped there, as verse. 7.8. but also because it is
said in the words, He shall be a stone of stumbling to both the Houses of
Israel, i.e. to some of the ten Tribes, and some of the two both, who shall at
this day be reunited, which never yet has been. And these are the Rebels
spoken of Ezekiel. 20.38. which shall be amongst Gods people at this day, when
they are to be gathered out of all Countries, as were Korah, Dathan and Abiram,
in the days of old, upon the coming out of Egypt.

Yea these shall be they who immediately before the time of Christ's appearance
shall hate their Brethren ( i.e. such among them who tremble at the word of the
Gospel, which by the Gentile-Saints, they shall have had some light into, and
cast them out for Christ's name sake, whom now they own) who shall at the coming
of Christ be ashamed, when he shall appear to the others joy, as Isaiah
(speaking of the time of the Jews Call, Christ's coming, and the setting up of
the New Jerusalem) tells us, Chap. 66.5. Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye that
tremble at his word, your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified, but he shall appear to your joy,
and they shall be ashamed.

Yea these are they who in the last and great day of the battle of Armageddon,
which Zechary speaks of, Chap. 14. shall some of them even join hands, (they
shall be so horridly vile) against the rest of their Fellow-brethren, and that
with those who from all parts of the World shall be gathered together against
Jerusalem, as verse. 14. And Judah also shall fight at, (or against) Jerusalem,
as did part of those who in Nehemiahs time came out of Babylon, conspire with
Sanballat, Tobiah, and the rest of the enemies of Jerusalem against godly
Nehemiah, and their Fellowbrethren.

This mixture which shall be at this Day, some being Israelites indeed, some in
name only I take it was typed by the mixed multitude marching up with Israel
out of Egypt; the Congregation of Israel then, or those who (in that day whilst
things were outward and typical) were the natural seed of Abraham typing out
those who shall at this day be the Spiritual Seed, or true Sons of God; the
multitude of Egyptians, and others, who were not Israelites by birth (though
yet they went with the Congregation) typing out those, who at this Day
(although they shall be the Seed according to the flesh, and march with the
rest) are yet notwithstanding not accounted the Spiritual or Holy Seed, which
Holy Seed, though but a Tenth (that is, a sew in comparison of the rest) are
yet called the substance, Isaiah 6.13. i.e. the substance of this people that
God looks at, or will reckon for the Seed at this day.

And in regard of this mixed multitude which shall be amongst them when they
stir, Daniel setting forth this their stirring by a Resutrection, Chap. 12.2.
(which is the same with the Resurrection of the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. applied
there to the Jews stirring) he says, some shall arise to everlasting life,
some to shame and everlasting contempt; Which last words are an Argument, that
the Resurrection Daniel speaks of, cannot be the same with that first
Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. because none have part in that but such as are
blessed, and holy, and on whom the second death has no power.

Now because (as I have said) amongst those who come up to their Land, the
greater part shall be found not truly seeking the Lord, but their own things;
therefore by that time they are settled in their Land, (and probably, the
Gentile-Christian removed from them, or returned home) shall a fearful storm,
such a day as never was from the foundation of the world, fall upon them (which
Daniel mentions, Chap. 12.1. and Zech. Chap. 14.1.) by which as the better part
shall be brought through the fire and purified, and their faith tried; so
shall the other fall off, (as before) to the Enemy, or be cut off by this day
of trouble, so that a remnant only shall be left, which remnant shall be the
Holy Seed, which we have, Zecha. 13.8, 9. And it shall come to pass that in
all the Land, says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off, and dye, but
the third shall be left therein. And I will bring the third part through the
fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is
tried, they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say, It is my
people, and they shall say, The Lord is my God, Isa. 10.20, 21, 22. It shall
come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped
of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them, but
shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel in truth. The Remnant shall
return, even the Remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God. For though thy people
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a Remnant of them shall return, the
consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness, Chap. 4.2.3.4. In that
day shall the Branch of the lord be beautiful and glorious -- for them that are
escaped of Israel. And he that is left in Sion, and he that remains in
Jerusalem shall be called Holy, even every one that is written among the living
in Jerusalem. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughter of
Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by
the Spirit of Judgment, and by the Spirit of Burning, Zepha. 3.12, 13. I will
also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall
trust in the Name of the Lord. This is the day of purging out the Rebels: Ezekiel.
20.38. And I will purge out from among you the Rebels, and them that
transgress against me. Of judging between Cattle and Cattle, Chap. 34.17.
Thus says the Lord God, Behold I judge between Cattle and Ca^tel, between the
Rams and the He Goats. All which places, as will be evident to him that shall
but understandingly peruse them, and compare them with other Scriptures, speak
of the last times, when the Jews are to come in.

To this Remnant shall Christ at the great day of the battle of Armageddon
(which shall put an end to this day of trouble) appear, who shall from that day
be advanced to reign with him in his Kingdom. But of this more hereafter.

Thus much as touching the sixth VIAL.
The Interval of time betwixt the pouring out of the Sixth and Seventh VIALS.
Verse 13. AND I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet.

Verse. 14. For they are the spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth
unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty.

These words to verse. 17. do not properly belong either to the Sixth or Seventh
Vials, but contain an Interval of time betwixt both, in which some remarkable
things in order to the pouring forth the seventh and last Vial, are to be
transacted, which are,

1 The sending forth of Ambassadors or Agents from the Dragon, Beast, and false
Prophet, to the Kings of the Earth.

By Dragon,
We are to understand, that Old Serpent the Devil and Satan (yet principally as
acting in the Roman Monarchy; the seven Heads, and ten Horus of the Dragon,
chap. 12.3. being the Arms of Rome) for so the Holy Ghost interprets it, chap.
12 9. And the Dragon was cast out, that Old Serpent, called the Devil and
Satan, chap. 20.2. And he laid hold on the Dragon that Old Serpent, which is
the Devil and Satan. Now where the Holy Ghost has given a manifest
interpretation, it is certainly curiosity to seek another.

As for the other two, the Beast and the false Prophet (the two Companions of
the Dragon or Devil) we shall the better discern these two Monsters, if we
consider how that,

Beast in the Revelation is sometimes spoken of without any distinction made,
as being but one. Sometimes with distinction, as though he were two, as Beast
and Beast, Chap 13. Beast and Woman, Chap. 17. Beast and false Prophet, as here.

When Beast is spoken of without distinction, it denotes the Political and
Ecclesiastical State both of the Roman Empire, as the same now is Antichristian.

As in Vial 2. Beast there used alone, denotes both States, as is clear,
because the Image of the Beast, was of the first Beast, Rev 13.14 compared with
ver. 3. The mark of the Beast was of the second Beast, spoken of chap. 13. the
first Beast having no mark, and the two Beasts, Chap. 13. (which both are
comprehended in the word Beast, Vial 2.) are (as shall appear anon) the Civil
and the Ecclesiastical State of the Roman Empire, as the same now is under
Antichrist.

So in Vial 5. Rome is called the Seat of the Beast; that is, the Seat of the
Political State, for the Seat of the Roman Empire, as the same was Pagan,
(which State was Political only) is given to the first Beast, Rev. 13.2. that
is, the Civil, or Political State of Antichrist. And also the Seat of the
Ecclesiastical; for it is upon the seven Mountains of Rome, the Woman sits,
Rev. 17 9. i.e. the Ecclesiastical State. So that Rome is the Seat both of the
Political and Ecclesiastical State; and therefore the Beast Vial 2. whose Seat
is in Rome, must be understood of both States, Civil and Ecclesiastical, both
which make up but one Beast, or Antichrist.

So Rev. 14.9 11. Chap. 15.2. Chap. 20.4. in all which places we have but one
Beast spoken of, but the same as having a Mark, and an Image, which for what I
said but now must be interpreted of both States, the Civil and Ecclesiastical.

The like we have Chap. 11.7. The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless
pit shall make war against them, i.e. against the two Witnesses. Now this Beast
ascending out of the bottomless pit is meant of both States, not only for this
reason, that both join in slaying the Witnesses, but because Chap. 17.8. we
have it so interpreted; for John being shown first either State distinct verse.
3, 4. 5, 6. the one represented by a Beast, the other by a Woman riding upon
this Beast, in verse. 7, 8. has the mystery of both together showed him and
both together are the Beast ascending out of the bottomless Pit, which Beast
there spoken of in such various and seeming contrary phrases, was, is not, yet
is, shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit, can be understood of no other but
Antichrist in all, because it is said, The dwellers on the Earth shall wonder
when they behold the Beast that was, is not, and yet is; noting thus much, that
the dwellers on Earth, as yet saw not this Beast, for indeed his rise was not
yet, John seeing the rise of this Beast, Chap. 13.1.11. as a thing to be after
his time. Yet is he called the Beast [ that was] because in respect of that
Civil Power this Beast should exercise, and the Seat he should upon his rise
sit in, he should not differ from the Roman Empire that then was, and had its
beginning long before John wrote [is not] in respect of a power Ecclesiastical,
as well as Civil, which Antichrist was to have; so he was not, the present
Government when John wrote, neither knowing, nor allowing any such power; for
which cause though Antichrists Seat and Civil Power; was in the Roman Empire as
Pagan, yet was not the Empire or Government then the Beast here spoken of, or
Antichrist. [Yet is] in respect of will and desire, and a secret aspiring which
then was after such a thing or power, which once obtained, would Midwife this
man of sin into the world, 2 These. 2.7. The mystery of iniquity does already
work, 1 John 2.18. Even now there are many Antichrists [shall ascend out of the
bottomless Pit] because the rise of this Beast (which must, as I have said, be
one and the same in all the several expressions) was to be afterward, when the
Civil power that now was in the hands of Pagan Emperors should fall into the
hands of the Beast, and withal an Ecclesiastical power set up with it, both
going together hand in hand, which should be a Government so abominable, that
it is said to ascend out of the bottomless Pit, i.e. the rise of it should be
as from Hell it self.

And therefore of this very Beast that was and is not, it is said, he is the
eight, verse. 11. that is the eighth kind of Government which should be in the
Roman Empire (a clear Argument that not the Empire in general, but the same as
under Antichristian only, is the Beast that was and is not: for all the
several Governments are comprehended under the Empire in general, but the Beast
that was and is not, is spoken of particularly, as but one, and that too the
eight and last, which can agree to none but Antichrist) for five distinct kinds
of Government had been before John's time. First, Kings. Secondly, Consuls.
Thirdly, Dictators. Fourthly, Decem-viri. Fifthly, Tribunes, which all were
fallen, therefore says he verse. 10. five are fallen. One, that is the sixth,
then was, which was a Government by Cesars, who ruled the Empire in John's time;
therefore one is, another, the seventh, was yet to come, that is, by Christian
Emperors; therefore says he, the other is yet to come; and of this seventh, he
says, when he comes he must continue a short space; for indeed this
continued but a little while, but the Empire growing corrupt, the Beast that
was and is not, i.e. Antichrist creeps in; who is called the eight, And the
Beast that was and is not, even he is the eight -- verse. 11. because he sets up
a new form of Government distinct from all the former, viz. an Ecclesiastical,
and Civil State mixed together, which none of the former Governments had; and
may therefore well then be called the eight, or another Government. And yet he
is of the seven, and is of the seven -- i.e. besides the new Ecclesiastical
Power erected by this Beast, this Beast does also exercise that Civil Power
which the seven, or the several Governments, before him had, or did exercise.
And for this reason the seven Heads of the Beast, ver. 9. are interpreted of
the seven kinds of Government, ver. 10. Not to show that by Beast is understood
(as is generally conceived) the Empire at large, including all the several
Governments that were to be in it: But to show that the power of all the seven
former Governments should center in this Beast, whatsoever Civil power they
had, he should have it all, who yet over and above should erect a new power,
which none of the former had, in which sense he should be the eighth. And of
this Beast it is said, he goes into perdition, either because destruction will
be his end, as chap. 19.20. or because under this Beast the Fourth Monarchy is
to be utterly destroyed.

So that the Beast here ascending out of the bottomless pit, (which is the same
Beast with that which kills the Witnesses, Revel. 11.1.) is to be understood of
the Political and Ecclesiastical State both, of the Roman Empire as now it is:
though of the seven in respect of the Political State, and yet the eight in
respect of the Ecclesiastical added to the other, yet but one and the same
Beast, for the same Beast is the eight, and of the seven. I therefore conclude,
that Beast, when spoken of without distinction, denotes Antichrists Civil and
Ecclesiastical power both.

When Beast is spoken of with distinction, as Beast and Beast; Beast, and
Woman; Beast, and false Prophet: We are then by one to understand the Roman
Civil State only, by the other, the Ecclesiastical.

This is manifest Rev. 13. where we have two Beasts spoken of, the one arising
out of the Sea, ver. 2. the other out of the Earth, verse. 11. By the first, we
are to understand the Civil State only, for verse. 2. The Dragon gives to this
first Beast his power, Seat, and great Authority, i.e. the Devil, who all the
time the Roman Empire was Pagan, did rule in it, and was openly worshipped
there, seeing himself by Christian Emperors, now come to the Imperial Dignity,
dethroned, so as that he cannot under that form procure any more as he had
done, to be openly worshipped, and to persecute the Saints; he therefore
resigns his Power, Seat, and great Authority, (i.e. Rome the Seat of the
Empire, and the Power and Authority of the former Emperors, which was Civil
only) to this first Beast, for which reason the seven heads of the
Antichristian Beast, Chap. 17.9.10. are by the Holy Ghost interpreted first. Of
the seven Mountains of Rome, the Seat of the Beast; And secondly, of the seven
distinct kinds of Government, namely, the Power and Authority of the Beast,
because both these, viz. the Seat and Civil power of the former Empire, are
given into the hands of this first Beast, (the principal limb of Antichrist) so
that by first Beast, the Civil State only is to be understood, for the first
Beast has only what the Dragon resigns, and the Dragon could resign no more;
the power of the former Empire, in which the Dragon ruled, being Civil only.

But so subtle is this Dragon, the Devil, that by resigning to the first Beast,
a second Beast does arise, verse. 11. by which Beast the Devil obtains to be
worshipped again, though under a more specious form and devout way of Idolatry,
devised by the second Beast; and so what the Devil was before forced to let go,
in one kind, he now by policy gets again in another. Now this second Beast is
the Ecclesiastical State of the Roman Empire, the Pope his Hierarchy and
Clergy, as appears:

1 Because his rise is out of the Earth, verse. 11. that is, his beginning is
base, mean, and low, as the Popes at first, (when the Beast first began to
rise) were poor Bishops, who in time by the favor of Princes got up to be
Popes, and most of their exalted Clergymen rise out of the dung.

2 He looks like a Lamb, as the Pope calls himself Christ's Vicar, the Servant
of the Servants of Christ, and his retinue pretend humility, and their power to
be from, and for Christ, and hold their station successively from the Apostles,
as he does his from Peter.

3 He speaks like a Dragon. The Pope, and all they who derive their power from
him, though he and they look ever so like Saints, yet the absoluteness of their
Decrees, Injunctions and Impositions, enforcing and compelling the Consciences
of all, declare them to be the Dragon, that is, the persecutor of the Woman, or
Christ's flock, as the Dragon is, Rev. 12.

4 He exercises all the power of the first Beast, Verse. 12. As the Pope has a
double sword, a temporal and a spiritual; and his inferior Clergy make use of a
Civil Power to uphold their own cause, as well as a spiritual.

Now whereas some conceive the first Beast here to be the whole body of the
Roman Empire, as the same is the fourth Monarchy, whereof the Antichrist is but
a part; and the second Beast to be the Antichrist, and his Kingdom alone, it
cannot so be; partly for the Reasons before given, and further, because
according to this, the Beast should continue to make war against the Saints,
and to kill them above two and forty months, for reckoning the time of the ten
Persecutions, and all the time since, in which war has been made upon the
Saints, and they killed, it amounts to much more than two and forty months,
which yet is the limited time of this Beasts persecution. Verse. 5. And power
was given unto him to continue two and forty months. Yea, then how comes it to
pass that this first Beast differs from the Dragon, who yet did represent the
former Empire, for whereas the Dragon (as one well observes) has but seven
Crowns, and those seven upon his Head, Chap. 12.3. this Beast has ten Crowns,
and those upon his Horns, verse. 1. which difference according to this Principle
should not be, for they should be one and the same: Therefore the first Beast
is the Empire only as under Antichrist, and of that (as I have said) the Civil
state only, as the second the Eccelesiastical.

Furthermore as concerning these two Beasts, we are not to conceive, as though
they sprung up at a distance, one a good while after the other, for the
continuance of the first Beast (I have said already) is to be but two and forty
months, and so much time is allowed to both the Beasts, Chap. 11.12. the holy
City shall they ( i e. both the Beasts) tread underfoot two and forty months.
And indeed the treading the Holy City underfoot two and forty months can be no
other act, but the act of the Beast, it agreeing so punctually to be the
precise time of his Reign. And of what Beast?

I answer, That very Beast mentioned, verse. 7. which arises out of the
bottomless Pit, and toward the end of this time kills the Witnesses; which
Beast I have already showed to be spoken of both the Beasts, viz. the Civil and
Ecclesiastical state, whose rise therefore must be together, the time of
eithers Reign being two and forty months. For indeed so soon as the Roman
Empire, which before was Pagan, but now Christian, began to be so corrupt as to
be the first Beast, i. e. of Christian an Antichristian state, persecuting the
true members of Christ, instantly with this corrupted state did the second
Beast arise; that is, the sword and power of the Civil Magistrate which before
was used by none but himself, came now to be in the hands, or at the will and
disposal of Ecclesiastical persons, Churchmen (as they are called) that these
thereby might become fit instruments to set up, and establish their own
Idolatries, and persecute the Saints; And by this arose a second Beast,
exercising by permission all the Power of the first, and is therefore said to
exercise it before him, verse. 12. in his sight, verse. 14. i.e. by leave or
permission of the first Beast; for which cause, the making war with the Saints,
verse. 7. the compelling all Nations that dwell upon the earth to worship the
Beast, verse. 8. is appropriated to the first Beast, as though it were his act,
whereas indeed it is properly the second Beast does this, as is clear, verse. 15
16, 17. but he does it by exercising the power of the first, without which he
could not do it; and therefore the same thing is recorded in describing either
Beast, because in this business the second Beast is the first mover, but the
effecting of it, is done by the power of the first.

And indeed the second Beast may well be called another Beast, distinct from
the first, notwithstanding the power he exercises by the power of the first,
because the hands this power is now put into, or is at the disposal of, are
such as not only are without right to this power, but also never had until this
day any such power entrusted in them, or at their disposal.

Yet that these Beasts, though two, are indeed one, and make up but one
Antichrist is clear, because both the Beasts rise together, as before; both are
alike in nature, actions, and conditions, for both are filthy Beasts, and cruel
Tyrants, both Patrons of Idolatry, both bloody Persecutors of the Saints, both
are helpful one to another; the first Beast communicates of his power to the
second Beast, verse. 12. the second Beast gives life to the image of the first
Beast; verse. 15. yea verse. 18. one and the same number is assigned to both the
Beasts, and the number of b^th the Beasts in conclusion of the Vision, is but
the number of the Beast, i.e. of one Beast. Here is wisdom, let him that has
understanding count the number of the Beast; Which also adds a beam of further
light for the clearing of what I have said before; that Beast, when spoken of
without distinction, is to be understood of the Civil and Ecclesiastical state
both. So that in fine the result is, They are two Beasts, as a Political, and
an Ecclesiastical state, and yet but one Beast, as Antichrist.

What I have said of these two Beasts, I may say the same of the Beast, and the
Woman, Chap. 17. The Beast the Woman rides upon, is the Civil state, the Woman
riding upon this Beast is the Ecclesiastical, only with this difference, the
second Beast, Chap. 13. who upon his first rise was a Beast, aspiring to no
higher degree; and exercising the power of the first Beast, i. e. of the Civil
state, by leave as it were, through permission of the first Beast, is now
through a long standing risen from a Beast to a Woman, as disdaining to be in
so low a degree as a Beast any longer. Yea, such a Woman as like a notorious
Strumpet knows how to make the Kings of the Earth, yea the whole world follow
her dance, and crouch to her, by which she is grown rich and gallant, having by
whoring and juggling, got the riches, the gold, the precious stones, and pearls
of the first Beast to her self, and to show what an aspiring spirit she is of,
instead now of exercising the power of the first Beast, i. e. of the Civil
State, by leave any longer, she is now like Lord and King got upon the back of
the first Beast, who dares not cross her humor, for she rides him and rules him
at pleasure.

And indeed the first Beast is justly recompensed for setting up and
countenancing such a Beast at first, who (according to the Proverb) give an
inch of power, he will take an ell; for whilst the first Beast remains a Beast
still, this second Beast is from a Beast advanced to be a Woman, which not
only had robbed and plundered the coffers of the Beast, and got all his riches
from him, but also knows how to ride the Beast, master him, and rule him as she
list.

And certainly had not the first Beast been a very Beast, I mean, had not the
Civil State at first so far degenerated, as instead of acting rationally as a
man, to act sensually and bruitishly as a Beast, this great inconvenience would
have been foreseen in the beginning, at least remedied in time, before the
second Beast was grown to such a height, that he was now past taming, and able
to ride and master the first Beast that set him up.

Now whereas the Woman, verse last, is said to be the Great City, it is (as I
suppose) rather lain down as a Mark, or character to know the Woman by, and
that from the place she was to sit in, then a description of the Woman, which
verse 9. confirms me in, by giving us to understand that the woman sits upon
the seven Mountains ( i.e. the City Rome anciently built upon seven Mountains)
therefore the seven Mountains, i. e. the City Rome, is not, to speak properly,
the Woman, but the Seat of the Woman.

What I have said of the two Beasts, the Beast and the Woman, I may also say of
the Beast and the false Prophet, spoken of in the words I am opening. The Beast
here is the Civil State, or the first Beast that arises out of the Sea; the
false Prophet, the Ecclesiastical or second Beast, whose rise is from the
Earth. And indeed he that shall but parallel the second Beast spoken of chap.
13. with what is spoken of the false Prophet, chap. 19. will find them to be
one and the same; The false Prophet is a worker of Miracles, chap. 19.20. so is
the second Beast, chap. 13.17. The false Prophet by his miracles deceives the
Beasts followers, chap. 19.20. so does the second Beast, chap. 13.14. The Beast
and the false Prophet are helpful the one to the other, for the Beast defends
the false Prophet by his strength (for chap. 19.19. no force at all is
mentioned that this false Prophet had at that great Randezvouze, who yet was
presonally present with the Beast, for he is taken prisoner, verse. 20.
therefore the Beast defends him) and the false Prophet by working miracles
encourages the Beast and his multitude, with hope of good success, God is of
their side. In like manner the two Beasts, chap. 13. are (as before has been
showed) helpful to each other.

The conclusion is, that by false Prophet we are to understand the second Beast
spoken of chap. 13. and by Beast and false Prophet to understand the same here,
as of the two Beasts there, viz. the Civil and Ecclesiastical State; only with
this difference, that Beast, which in his first rise, was but a Beast;
afterward (when more grown) a Woman, riding upon, and over-topping the Civil
power, or first Beast, which gave him his rise, is now in his declining
condition a false Prophet.

For the loss of Rome, where was his Magazine of Treasure, together with the
seizing and intercepting his Rents and Tributes by the Conqueror, has so
pulled down the Beast, so plucked the plumes of the Romish Ecclesiastical
State, i.e. brought the Pope and his Clergy to so low an ebb, that it is now
but little that they can contribute either to the assistance of the first
Beast, the Romish Civil power, or toward the upholding of their own sinking
Kingdom; yet because having been a proud Whore, this Beast is loath to be of
little repute, and to come back again to his first original of a poor earthly
Beast yea would fain have the first Beast, the Civil power still to dote upon
him, and reckon him a considerable party, he will therefore seem now to make up
by his fained piety and devotion what is wanting in his former outward strength
and glory; and now he can be nothing else, he will needs be a Prophet to
foretell good to his cause and Kingdom, though none he can do it; But observe,
as when he was a Beast, he was an earthly Beast; as when a Woman, a Whore; so
now, when a Prophet, a false Prophet. Though Antichrist may change shapes and
forms, he can never make himself better than he is, but Antichrist he will be,
an Enemy to Christ, an Imposter, a Deceiver, a Liar still.

Having thus seen the meaning of the words and names (which I have purposely
insisted the larger upon, because the right understanding hereof, does (if I
mistake not) open the door into the very mystery of this Book) I come to apply
them to the business in hand, thus,

The Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, who from the beginning were Partners,
going hand in hand and venturing States together, seeing by the fall of the
City Rome such a terrible shaking blow giving to their Kingdom, as that the
next blow, if not prevented, is like unavoidably to be fatal, and to prove
their utter ruin; they therefore now all of them convene in some General
Council, where they lay their heads together what thing is best for them to do
to prevent another blow, or, if possible, to recover their own again. And upon
debate two things being laid before them, as matter of deep and serious
consultation, viz. The late loss they have received by the fall of Rome, and
that by causing some of the Kings of the Earth, who were friends to their cause
before, now for fear of her torment, lest the like should befall themselves, to
withdraw, and stand a loof off.

2 The great provocation since given to the Turk, by those very Instruments
their Enemies, which is like to make him join in with the utmost strength he
can make (out of desire to revenge himself, and recover his own again) to ruin
(if it may be) this growing party.

The vote or result of the meeting from the foregoing premises is, that (as the
thing which does most conduce to the upholding of their cause) Agents and
Ambassadors, of the fittest they can find for such employment, be speeded away
to such Kings of the earth, as for the present seem backward in the cause, to
put life into them; and also to the Great Turk, to encourage and heart him on
to engage with them, in a quarrel that is his, as well as theirs; together with
all others, of whom they have either hope that they will, or may be drawn to
join with them; that by one general Randezvouze of all their force together,
they may venture the whole, sink, or swim, upon the event of one battle: Which
battle is here called (for the remarkableness of it, both in regard of the
multitude of enemies, and the glorious appearance of Christ with his Saints,
who will fight this battle for them, in such a way as never before) the battle
of that great day of God Almighty: which is (I conceive) the same battle with
what is spoken, Psalm. 110. Isa. 63.1, to 7: chap. 6.15. to the end, Ezekiel.
38.39. Dan. 12.1. Joel 3. Zech. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mal. 4.1, 2, 3. Of which
terrible, yet glorious day, to mention all that in the foregoing Texts, and
elsewhere is recorded of it, would call for a Treatise of it self; and
therefore I think it meet rather to leave the same to the sober and pious
meditations of the Reader, than here to add any thing further upon so large a
Subject.

Concerning the Agents and Ambassadors of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet
(who are said to be three (though possibly they may be multitudes) because a
threefold number denotes perfection; and said to come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet; not as if one came out of the mouth of the one, another out of the
mouth of the other, and another out of the mouth of the third; but because
their sending is by the common consent of the aforesaid three parties) who, or
what they shall be, I look upon it as a part of curiosity to enquire any
further into, then what is here by the Holy Ghost determined of them.

1 That they shall be Spirits, viz. for their subtilty, nimbleness, and
activity.

2 Unclean Spirits, for the filthiness and impurity of their principles and
conversation.

3 Like Frogs, for their bold impudency, and continual croaking in the ears of
those they are sent to, giving them no rest till they have drawn them forth to
battle, withal creeping into every hole and corner of the world, to carry on
their design.

4 Spirits of Devils, for their dissembling, lying, and cunning craft in
deceiving, above all that ever were employed before them.

5 Working Miracles, and that (as it were) in way of imitation of the great and
wonderful things God either has done, or is then doing for his people; by this
not only to gain credit to their Embassage, making the Kings of the Earth the
more ready to receive it; but also to blind the eyes of those they are sent
unto, and harden their hearts against the apparent works of God at this day,
when they shall see things somewhat like to what God is doing in the world,
done by these: as the Magicians of Egypt did blind Pharoah's eyes, harden his
heart, by doing like things before him by Diabolical art, as Moses did by the
finger of God.

And here I cannot but in the way take notice of that which is the spiritual
Engine of the old Serpent, and one of his most politic Stratagems and Devises,
to blind others to the truths and dispensations of God in the world, making
them very odious and to be loathed of many, which is, when he perceives that
God has any great Truth to make known, or any great Design to drive on in the
World, which he cannot hinder, he will now become an Angel of light, and be of
the foremost (by setting his own instruments about it) either in discovering
this truth, or putting forward this design; that so, from a just cause of
suspicion being laid, a prejudice being begotten in peoples hearts against
these things, the things though discovered ever so clearly might find no
acceptance, but rather a general dislike from those that should receive them;
as at the time of Christ's coming, he raised up false Christ's as a blind, that
the true might not be received. At the first preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles, he vaised up false Apostles. that the true might not be believed;
which is a thing has been worthily observed by a godly man of late, and I here
mention it only by way of remembrance, that none of us may be taken in this
crafty and hidden snare.

Thus much of the first thing preparative to the pouring forth of the seventh
VIAL.

2 The Personal coming and appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Verse 15. BEhold I come as a Thief. That Christ shall personally appear before
the last and General Judgment, is a thing that seems to me to have much
footing both throughout the Old and New Testament; without granting of which, I
my self cannot as yet (possibly others may) reconcile one Scripture with
another.

And truly, to take notice of this Opinion here, I am necessarily put upon it,
unless I should either wholly pass over these words, or be false to my own
persuasions, and that which as yet I cannot think otherwise, is the main thing
intended by the Holy Ghost in them.

Though yet as the Argument it self in this place does more concern the time of
his coming (viz. that his coming shall be betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials)
than the coming it self. So that I may keep to the Argument. I must here let
go several Reasons I might make use of to prove this personal coming, and
confine my self to such only as will clear up this; viz. That the time of his
personal coming is here spoken of, to be between the sixth and seventh Vials.

Now that Christ's Personal coming, and not a coming by his Power and Spirit
only, is the thing here intended (which will fall out in this Interval or
space of time betwixt these two Vials, though yet at the end of it, so as that
it may indifferently be referred, either to the conclusion of this time, or the
beginning of the seventh Vial) is clear to me, for these Reasons.

1 ARGUMENT, Christ shall personally appear at the time in which the remarkable
battle of Armageddon shall be fought. But that shall be about this time.

That the battle of Armageddon shall be about this time, is clear in the words,
That Christ shall then appear, I prove.

Isa. 66.16. For by fire, and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh,
and the slain of the Lord shall be many. That this is the same with the battle
of Armageddon hinted in the Text, and more fully described, Rev. 19. verse. 17.
to the end of the Chapter, appears,

1 Because the battle of Armageddon shall be about the time of the Jews coming
in; This our Discourse at large under the sixth Vial proves; So shall this; For
verse. 7.8. we have their conversion spoken of, Before she traveled, she
brought forth, before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child; who
has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth be made to
bring forth in one day, or shall a Nation be born at once? for as soon as Sion
traveled she brought forth her children; And then presently, verse. 16. we
have this battle.

2 Upon the battle of Armageddon, we have a new Heaven, and a new Earth, as
the consequent of it. Rev. 21.1. I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, for the
first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away. So this verse. 22. For as the
new Heavens, and new Earth, which I will make shall remain before me.

3 We read of a Lake of fire, after the battle of Armageddon, Rev. 19.20. So
here, verse last.

Object. But have we a coming here?

Answ. Yea verse. 15. For behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his
Chariots like a whirlewind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with
flames of fire; Which coming that it must be Personal, I shall show anon out of
Rev. 19. which speaks of the same coming, as the battle there and here spoken
of, are one and the same.

The Prophet Daniel in his seventh Chapter does excellently set this forth,
where having had the four Monarchies, which Chap. 2. were represented to him in
the form of a great Image, and Antichrists Kingdom, a part of the fourth or
last Monarchy by the feet of that Image, part of Iron, and part of Clay; now
represented under another form of four Beasts; and Antichrist^s Kingdom by a
little horn, arising amongst the horns of the 4th. Beast, or Roman Monarchy, he
says, ver. 11. That he beheld because of the great words the Horn spoke ( i.e.
because of the blasphemies of Antichrist) the Beast (that is, the fourth
Monarchy now governed by Antichrist, the little Horn) slain, his body
destroyed, and given to the burning flame, agreeing punctually to what is
recorded, Rev. 19.19 20. of casting the Beast into the Lake of fire burning
with brimstone, which comes in there as an effect of the battle of Armageddon:
And indeed that these two Texts must agree in time, and be one and the same, is
clear to me, because the main thing held forth in either, is the final
destruction of the Roman Monarchy, and that as the same is under Antichrist.
Neither may it be doubted that by the little Horn the Kingdom of Antichrist
should be meant, seeing what is here spoken of the little Horn, agrees so
exactly to what in the Revel^tion is spoken of Antichrist, yea (which makes the
thing most evident) the little Horn, and the Beast, or fourth Monarchy, are
verse. 11. made one, and the same.

Bu^ you will say, Where have we a coming here?

Ans. Look verse. 13, 14. I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the
Son of Man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancien of days, and
they brought him near before him. And there was given him Dominion, and Glory,
and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him; his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion that shall not pass away, and his Kingdom
which shall not be destroyed.

Object. But how appears this coming to be Personal?

Ans. From the Text; for observe first, God as the Ancient of days by the
manifestation of his presence and power, with and amongst his people, (which (I
take it) answers to the smoke wherewith the Temple is filled, Rev. 15. last)
first begins to judge the little Horn, or fourth Beast, casting down his
Thrones (the work at this day in hand.) Now whilst the Ancient of days is
amongst his people sitting and judging the Beast, one comes to him like the Son
of man with the clouds of Heaven to whom is given a Dominion, Glory, and
Kingdom. Observe, first, He comes not to receive a Kingdom in a spiritual way
as God, but as the Son of man. Secondly, He comes with the clouds of Heaven,
the very phrase used to set forth his personal coming, Mat. 24.30. They shall
see the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory,
Chap. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man coming in the clouds of
Heaven, Rev. 1.7. behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him.

Thirdly, He comes to the Ancient of days (who according to his Godhead is
the Ancient of days) that is, the Father, who now had set up his Throne on
earth, and (as the Great Judge) was in the midst of his people, manifesting his
Almighty power amongst them in judging the Beast, and there receives his
Kingdom, where the Ancient of days had now set up his Throne, was sitting and
judging. And this is a manifest Argument, that although his coming is mentioned
after the casting of the Beast into the burning flame, yet that indeed the same
must be before, because he comes to the Ancient of days, i.e. the Father,
whilst he was sitting upon the Throne in the midst of his people, and passing
sentence against the Beast, before the Beast is slain, his body destroyed, and
given to the burning flame, which is the concluding act, and the breaking up of
the judgment, after which the Ancient of days sits no longer: Therefore, I
say, his coming must of necessity be before the utter everthrow of the Beast or
fourth Monarchy, and within the time that the Father by his presence and power
amongst his people is judging of the Beast.

And indeed, if we do but compare this seventh of Daniel, with the 110. Psalm.
(which is also a Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom) we shall find them most
excellently answering one to another, and the one helping to open the other. In
verse. 1. the Father says to the Son, Sit thou at my right hand till I make
thine enemies thy footstool. What then? Why, the Father as the Ancient of
days, having judged Christ's enemies, and brought them well under, we have
streightway, verse. 2 Christ's coming. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy
strength out of Sion. And what does Christ do at his coming? Why, as upon his
appearing, he finds the Beast, Antichrist, here called the Head over many
Countries (because this Whore sits upon many waters) and the Kings of the earth
with their Armies gathered together to oppose him; so presently he in his fury
falls upon them, and destroys them. Verse. 5. The Lord at thy right hand shall
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. The battle of Armageddon is
called, That great day of God Almighty, Rev. 16.14. upon the founding of the
seyenth Angel, the time of wrath, Rev. 11.18. Thy wrath is come; here the day
of wrath. Verse. 6. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places
with the dead bodies, he shall wound the Head over many Countries; agreeing to
that of Daniel, of slaying the Beast, destroying his body, casting it into the
burning flame; and that Rev. 19. (where the battle of Armageddon is described)
of destroying Kings and Captains, Verse. 18. casting the Beast into the lake of
fire slaying the remnant, Verse. 20, 21.

This appears yet farther, Dan. 12.1. There shall be a time of trouble, such
as never was since there was a Nation even to that same time, and at that time
shall thy people be delivered. The concurrence of this day of trouble, and the
battle of Armageddon, both with the time of the delivery of Daniels people (or
the Jews) proves them to be one and the same. Now that a coming there is here,
is clear, At that time shall Michael stand up, which that it is Personal, will
appear, by comparing with Matthew. 24. where all acknowledge his Personal coming
is spoken of, which yet is the same with this: for Christ speaking of the time
of it, quotes this of Daniel, verse. 21, 22. Then shall b^e great tribulation,
such as never was from the beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever
shall ^e.

Another evidence of this we have Joel 3. which Chapter agrees exactly to the
battle of Armageddon; 1 In that, the Kings of the earth, and the whole world
gather together, Rev. 16.14. here all Nations verse. 2. multitudes, multitudes,
verse. 14. 2 That, is about the time of the Jews return; for when the Kings of
the East are upon coming in, the Kings of the Earth gather together So this,
verse. 1, 2. For behold in those days, when I shall bring again the captivity
of Judah and Jerusalem, I will gather all Nations. 3 That is the great day of
God Almighty, Rev. 16.14. the Supper of the great God, Chap. 19.17. this, the
day of the Lord, spoken of by way of emphasis, verse. 14. The Day of the Lord is
near. 4 That, shall be in a place called Armageddon, Rev. 16.16. signifying a
place of destruction his, in the valley of decision, verse. 14. i.e. the place
of cutting off, where God will cut off his enemies. 5 That, is the treading of
the Winepress, Rev. 19.15. So this, verse. 13. the press is full, the fats
overflow. But is here a Personal coming? yea, verse. 16. The Lord shall roar out
of Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall
shake, agreeing to tha^ Hag. 2.6, 7. (of which presently) v. 17. So shall ye
know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion my holy Mountain; agreeing
to that, Rev. 21.3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them.

So Hag 2.6, 7. I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the Sea, and the
dry land. And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall
come. This being the same with the other of Joel, can relate to no other time,
than the battle of Armageddon. Now the coming here spoken of is not spiritual,
for the Prophets of the Old Testament having an eye upon Christ as yet to come,
do mostly, if not ever when they speak of his coming, intend such a coming of
the Messiah, as they expected and waited for, which was Personal. Neither can
this coming be his first coming, which was in a time of great peace, not of
shaking Heaven, Earth, all Nations, as this is; then was Christ the desire of
the Jews only, because known only to them; but at this coming he is the desire
of all Nations, to which let me add, the Apostle speaks of this as a thing to
be fulfilled, Heb. 12.26, 27. Nor can the words look to the last and General
Judgment, as if this coming were not till then, because after this coming Gods
House here below is to be built, and God will give peace in this place, i.e.
either largely taken for the Earth, or strictly, for Jerusalem; and hard it
will be to prove either of these things, at, or after the General Judgment.

This coming therefore must be that in the Text, I come as a Thief, both
agreeing in time; and this being personal, that must also, The like to this we
have with much clearness, verse. 21, 22, 23.

Yet further, this is clear, Zech. 14.3 4, 5. which place by all circumstances,
the combination being general of all Nations, ver. 2. the time, about the time
of the Jews discovery, etc. must needs be the same with the battle of
Armageddon. Now would you see a coming here, read ver. 3. Then shall the Lord
go forth and fight against those Nations. Verse. 4. And his feet shall stand in
that day on the mount of Olives. Mount Olives was the place whence Christ rode
as King into Jerusalem, Mat. 21.1, 2, 3. The place where Christ preached the
most remarkable Sermon of his coming, Mat. 24.3. the place whence Christ
ascended, Act. 1.9.10.11, 12. and probably at his descending shall come thither
again. But perhaps this coming is not personal. Yes, ver. 5, The Lord my God
shall come, and all the Saints with thee, agreeing to that, 1 These. 3.13. At
the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints, which coming none deny
to be his personal coming.

One place more, and I conclude this Argument, and that is, Rev. 19.19 20, 21.
which that it is the same with the battle of Armageddon appears,

1 In that the parties are the same, the Beast, the false Prophet, and the
Kings of the Earth being parties in both.

2 The time is the same, for this in the Vials has two notable things going
before it, 1 The ruin of the City Rome, under the fifth Vial. 2. The coming in
of the Jews, who are spoken of in the sixth Vial; Accordingly that in chap. 19,
has preceding, First, Romes ruin, chap. 18. Secondly, The Marriage of the Lamb
to his Bride, including in it the Jews conversion, chap. 19.7, 8.

3 The Expressions argue them to be the same, for one is called, That great day
of God Almighty, verse. 14. the other, The Supper of the Great God, chap. 19.17.
In the one they are gathered to Armageddon, a place of destruction, verse. 16.
In the other the rout gathered together are slain with the sword of him that
sits upon the horse, that is, Christ.

Object. But how does it appear that here is a Personal coming spoken of?

Answ. 1. Christ comes as a Bridegroom, verse. 7, 8 9. Now Christ's coming as a
Bridegroom is his Personal coming, Mat. 25.6, 10. Behold the Bridegroom comes,
go ye forth to meet him.

2 He is called the Word of God, verse. 13. The most glorious Title of all, by
which the person of Christ is expressed, John 1.1. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; yea, the person of
Christ, as considered in both Natures, goes under this title, ver. 14. The Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us, 1 John 1.1. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life. It is Christ as
personally present, that is the object of the outward Senses, Hearing, Seeing,
Handling, yet Christ as the Word was seen, heard, touched by John.

3 He is clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, v. 13. he treads the
Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, ver. 15. the same with
that Isa 63.2, 3. (of which anon.) By these, the other expressions of fitting
upon a white horse, judging and making War, verse. 11. having eyes as a flame of
fire, many Crowns on his head, ver. 12. (answering to that chap. 11.15. The
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord --) the Armies of
Heaven following him, ver. 14. ^uling the Nations with a rod of iron (answering
to Psalm. 2.9.) the sharp sword going out of his mouth, verse. 15. the name on
his Vesture and Thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, ver. 16. Which of
themselves look this way, will more clearly appear to be spoken of Christ, as
personally coming; yet because Christ's personal coming at this time would
hardly be received for a truth, it is (as I conceive) therefore added ver. 9
These are the true sayings of God.

The conclusion then of all is this, Christ shall personally appear at the
battle of Armageddon. That battle for time exactly agrees with the Text,
therefore the coming here spoken of, Behold I come as a Thief, is a personal
coming,

2 ARGUMENT, Christ shall personally appear at the time of the Kingdoms
restoring to Israel. But that shall be about this time. The minor Proposition I
have proved before, in showing that the coming in of the Jews must of necessity
be betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials. The major, That Christ at this time
shall appear, I prove,

1 From that of Paul, Romans 11.26, 27. where the Apostle speaking of the Jews
conversion, mentions a coming of Christ, The deliverer shalcome out of Sion.
Which words are to be taken in a litteral and spiritual sense both, (as are
many Scriptures else) as appears from Isa. 59.20. whence they are quoted, where
to evidence the spiritual sense of them, the Prophet says expressly in the next
verse, My Spirit that is upon thee shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor but
of the mouth of thy seed, etc. noting, that as their sins shall be pardoned, so
also more of the Spirit shall be given forth upon the Jews conversion than ever
formerly (which more fully we have, Joel 2.28, 29. Zech. 12.10.) and this is
the coming of the Deliverer to them in the spiritual sense. Yet that besides
this there is a litteral coming in these words, appears, if you compare the
foregoing verses 16, 17, 18. (upon which these have a dependence) with the very
same expressions almost, only a little more full, chap. 63.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
where also (as here) mention is made of a coming. Ver. 1. Who is this that
comes from Edom? which cannot be a spiritual coming, i.e. a destroying of his
Enemies by a glorious manifestation of himself, and his power, with, and
amongst his people, because then the doing of the work should be by
instruments; whereas Christ's arm alone, without any instrument does this work,
as verse 3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was
none with me. Verse. 5. I looked, and there was none to help, and I wondered
that there was none to uphold; therefore my own Arm brought salvation to me,
and my fury it upheld me. Neither could the litteral meaning of the words have
their fulfilling in his first coming, in which he was not glorious in his
apparel, but without form and comeliness, Chap. 53.2. neither was that a day
of vengeance to tread down the people in anger, as this is Verse. 4, 6. This
coming therefore must be some other, and is indeed that we spoke of but now,
Rev. 19. where we have Christ coming forth upon a white horse, as will appear
by comparing Verse. 3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people
there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them
in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments, and I will
stain all my raiment; and that with Rev. 19.13. He was clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood. Verse. 15. And he treads the Wine Press of the fierceness and
wrath of Almighty God. And this coming I proved but now by the circumstances of
the Text, is, and must be the same with that I am opening, Behold I come as a
Thief.

2 This appears Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. where speaking of the Jews restoration, and
the Kingdom they shall have thereupon, and this too with a principal relation
to the last days, (for the Chapter speaks of that time in which the sticks of
Judah and Ephraim shall be one stick, Verse. 19. ( i.e. The two Tribes, and ten
Tribes, one people) shall have one King, and that too in their own Land, upon
the Mountains of Israel, which never yet has been since the rent in the days
of Rehoboam) it is said Verse. 24. My servant David shall be King over them. Now
David was not a Type of Christ, as King, in a spiritual sense, so much as in a
visible way, sitting upon an outward and visible Throne; if therefore a
spiritual reign only were here intended, the Antitype should not answer the
Type, Verse. 27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, which is expounded, Rev. 21.3. Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God; showing, that
these words have a special relation to the time of the New Jerusalem, when
Christ (as he has already his Prophetical and Priestly Offices) shall visibly
and Personally execute his Kingly Office.

3 This appears farther Act. 1.6. from the Question propounded to Christ by his
Disciples, Will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? In which
Question three things are taken for granted by the Querists; As, 1. That the
Nation of the Jews should one day be restored, and have a Kingdom. 2 That this
Restoration should be wrought by Christ. Will thou? 3 That it should be
wrought by him in an outward visible way; for such a way is by them supposed as
Christ did at that time appear to them in, which was an outward way, with his
bodily presence. These three things by them believed, are ground for a fourth,
which is the thing they question, namely, the time when this should be, Will thou at this time? Now observe it, the grounds of this question, which includes
the substance of what is pleaded for, viz. That the Kingdom should be restored
to Israel, and that by Christ's personal appearance, are neither of them denied
by Christ, who undoubtedly had their question been grounded upon a mistake,
would, yea, it had behoved him to have shown them their error, only their
greediness of a Kingdom at present, whilst he had other work for them to do
first, is the thing reproved. Nay let me say, Christ does in a manner affirm,
all their suppositions, in saying, It is not for you to know the times and
seasons, as to say, true, Israel shall have a Kingdom restored, I am to do it,
and that as you now conceive personally appearing; only it is not for you at
present to know the time.

And this will more clearly appear if we carry these words to Act. 3.21. where
we have that set forth by the word Restitution, which here is called a
Restoring. Whom the Heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the
world began; yet with this difference, Act. 1. speaks of the Kingdom in
reference to Israel only, who shall be chief in it, Mich. 4.8. Thou, O Tower
of the Flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Sion, unto thee shall it come,
even the first Dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem,
but Acts 3. in reference to the whole Creation, which in the day the Kingdom
shall be restored to Israel, shall also have a Restitution, which is expressed,
Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22.

Now in these words we have a coming clearly discovered, he shall send Jesus
which before was preached unto you, whom the Heavens must receive; Which that
it is Personal, and not Spiritual only, is clear, because such as the
receiving of Christ in the Heavens at the time when these things were spokrn,
was, and has been since, such shall his coming at this day be; but the
receiving of Christ in the Heavens then, and since, cannot be understood in a
spiritual way, because in that sense he had said before, Lo I am with you to
the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. but must be in respect of his Personal and
Corporal presence; therefore such shall his presence (Verse 19.) be with his
people at this time, viz Personal and Corporal.

Now that this time of the restitution of all things should be the Day of the
General Judgment (which has been the common opinion) I cannot incline to, for
these Reasons.

1 Because I find not the General Judgment spoken of in the plural number, as
times, days, as this is; the times of refreshing, verse. 19. times of
restitution, verse. 21. these days, verse. 24.

2 Because this is such a time as all the Prophets have spoken of, Which God
has spoken of by the mouth of all bis holy Prophets. Now not all; Nay, hardly
any have spoken expressly of the General Judgment; but of the time of Christ's
Kingdom, all have spoken, as will appear to him that shall but take a view of
the Prophets severally; in doing which, though we might begin with Enoch, the
seventh from Adam, who according to Jude, Verse. 14. prophesied of Christ's
coming and Kingdom; and after him Jacob in his blessing of Judah, Genesis 49.9,
10. and Balaam afterward (though a wicked man, yet a Prophet) Numb. 24.17, 18,
19. Yet I rather choose to begin after Samuels days, for there the Holy Ghost
seems to point out our beginning, Verse. 24. yea, and all the Prophets from
Samuel, have likewise foretold of these days. Now beginning from Samuel
(setting Jonah aside, which is but a History) not one but have spoken of these
times; as to give instance,

David did it, Psalm. 62. The whole Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, and
not Solomon's any otherwise than in the Type, as is clear, 1. From the
continuance of this Kingdom, verse. 7. as long as the Moon indureth. 2. The
extent of it, verse. 8. From Sea to Sea, from the Rivers to the ends of the
Earth. 3. The Subjects of it, all Kings, and all Nations, verse. 11. neither of
which either did, or could agree to Solomon's Kingdom, Psalm. 102.16. When the
Lord shall build up Sion, he (i.e. Christ) shall appear in his glory. And that
the fulfilling of this relates to the last times is evident, Verse. 18. This
shall be written for the Generation to come, when (as verse 22.) the people are
gathered together, and the Kingdoms to serve the Lord.

Isaiah likewise Chap. 2.2, 3, 4. It shall come to pass in the last days, the
mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And
he ( i.e. Christ) shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke many people. Chap.
9.7. Of the increase of his Government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom (whose Throne and Kingdom was
outward) to order it, and establish it with Judgment and Justice. Chap. 32.1,
2. Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
Judgment. (Christ and his Saints reigning together) And a man (noting a
corporal presence as well as spiritual at this day) shall be a hiding place
from the wind, and a covert from the tempest. Chap. 35.4. Your God will come
with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you. The
whole Chapter speaks of Christ's Kingdom, and the coming here agrees to that,
chap. 63.1, 2. etc. which I have proved to be Personal.

Jeremiah also, who throughout chap. 30, 31, 32, 33. treats of Christ's Kingdom,
and that too in the last days (when Ephraim, Head of the Ten Tribes, never
gathered as yet since their Captivity) shall come in.

Ezekiel Chap. 34 11. to the end. Chap. 37. throughout.

So Daniel, Chap. 2 44.45. In the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not
be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. This Kingdom must be outward, because
it breaks in pieces the four Monarchies, which were outward, and takes the
place of them, and it is improper to say a mere Spiritual Kingdom can take
place of an outward, and why as the four former Monarchies, had always some
visible Head, the same should not be in this fifth, I see no reason, Chap.
7.27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and
obey him, i.e. Christ, who in this Kingdom shall rule as Head, and the Saints
under him. And this Kingdom must be outward, for the Kingdom of the little
Horn, which was an outward Kingdom, is the Kingdom here given to the Saints,
that Christ and his Saints rule in.

So Hosea, Chap. 1.10, 11. Chap. 3, 4, 5. both places agreeing punctually to
that of Ezekiel. 37. which I have opened. Joel, Chap. 2.28. to the end, Chap. 3.
opened also before. Amos Chap. 9.11. to the end. Obadiah verse. 21. And Saviors
shall come upon mount Sion, and shall judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdom
shall be the Lords.

Micha, Chap. 4.6, 7. In that day will I assemble her that halteth, and I will
gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted. And I will make
her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast off a strong Nation, and the
Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion, from henceforth even for ever. Chap.
5.4. And he ( i.e. Christ, as verse. 2.) shall stand and feed in the strength of
the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide,
for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth, verse. 5. And this man
shall be the peace (it is proper to Christ alone to be called the Peace) when
the Assyrian shall come into our land, and shall tread in his Palaces. Nahum,
Chap. 1.15. Behold upon the Mountain the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace. O Judah keep thy solemn Feast, perform thy
vows; for the wicked shall no more pass through thee, he is utterly cut off,
explained, Zech. 14.4. His feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of
Olives, verse. 21. And in that day there shall be no more Canaanite, i.e. the
house of the Lord of Hosts. Habakkuk, Chap. 2.14. For the Earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. To
what time this relates, see by comparing with Isa. 11.9. where we have the
same words. Zephaniah, Chap. 3.8. to the end. Haggai, Chap. 2.6, 7, 21, 22, 23.
before opened. Zechariah, Chap. 6.12.13. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts,
saying, Behold the Man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, Even he shall build the
Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit, and rule upon
his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne. This Prophecy relates to
Christ, who is the Branch, who is to bear the glory, and not any creature, yea,
who, and no other is King and Priest both, upon his Throne. Chap. 9.9. Rejoice
greatly, O Daughter of Sion, shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem; Behold thy King
comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding upon an
Ass, and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass. And I will cut off the Chariot from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off, and
he shall speak peace unto the heathen, and his Dominion shall be from Sea even
to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth. Which latter words are an
evidence the Prophecy is yet to be fulfilled; and this coming of Christ as a
King, is the same, which (as under a type) was represented by Christ's riding
into Jerusalem, Mat. 21.4, 5. and that was in a Personal way.

There is but one Prophet more, and that is Malachy, who also speaks of this,
Chap. 3.2. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap, Chap. 4.1, 2
3. Behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea and
all that do wickedly shall be as stuble; and the day that comes shall burn
them up, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that
fear my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise.

Thus I have lead you through all the Prophets, naming but a few Texts out of
each (more especially the Psalms, Isaiah, and Zechary, which every where are
full of this) instead of many that might be, showing you what a harmony there
is amongst them all, as to the time of Christ's Kingdom; which if any one can
show so full a harmony as to that of the General Judgment, I shall for time to
come lay by this Scripture, as not of weight to prove the thing in hand; but
till this is done, I shall hold my own conclusion, viz. That the time of the
Restitution of all things, when Christ is Personally to appear, being that
which all the Prophets have spoken of, is not the General Judgment, (which few
or none have spoken of) but the time of restoring the Kingdom of Israel, that
being the thing that all the Prophets are full of, having treated of no one
Subject more, nay not half so much.

And indeed the 20. verse suits this Interpretation well, And he shall send
Jesus which before was preached unto you; the latter words unto you, having
reference as well to sending as preaching, and the meaning is, That Christ
shall at this time as verily be sent of the Father to the Jews, as then he was
preached to them by Peter, and therefore Tremelius in his Translation out of
the Syriack, reads the (Vobis) to you, twice, after either Verb.

The Argument then lies thus, If that Christ shall personally appear at the
time of the Kingdoms restoring to Israel (as has been at large proved) and if
this shall be in the Interval of time betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials, (as
also has been formerly proved) then does it follow, that Christ's personal
appearance or coming shall be betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials; and so is
the very coming here spoken of: Behold I come as a Thief.

Two Arguments more to prove our Position, are in the words themselves, which
are,

3 ARGUMENT. The phrase of coming as a Thief, is most frequently used in
Scripture to express Christ's personal coming, which therefore is the coming
here intended, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the
Lord so comes as a Thief in the night. 2 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord
will come as a Thief in the night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a
great noise. So Mat. 24.42, 43, 44. Luke 12 39, 40.

4 ARGUMENT. The duty here spoken of, to which a special blessing is annexed,
is that very duty which believers are with much earnestness exhorted unto,
whenever Christ's personal coming is spoken of, Mat. 24.42. Watch therefore,
for ye know not what hour your Lord does come, Chap. 25.13. So Mark. 13.32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. compared with 6. all which places speak of no
other coming but his Personal.

Yea the blessing annexed to this duty of watchfulness we do not read of but
thrice more in all the Scripture, and that is ever in such places where mention
is made of his personal coming, Luke 12.37, 38. we have the blessing twice
pronounced, Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall
find watching. And if he come in the second watch, or in the third watch, and
find them so, blessed are those servants, Mat. 14.46. Blessed is that servant
whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing; what doing? why, watching,
and being ready against his coming, as verse. 42.44.

These two last Arguments taken from the words, I must confess, do not of
themselves conclude the thing, because the same expression of coming as a
Thief, with the duty of watching annexed thereto, I find once used in a
spiritual sense, and that in Christ's admonition to the Church of Sardis, Chap.
3.2, 3. Yet considering that is but once, and the other sense frequent, there
is hardly room left (could nothing else be said) for an indifferency in the the
thing, whether the coming here be spiritual or personal, so as that we may take
or leave; but now, when together with these the weight of the foregoing
Arguments and Scriptures shall be put in the balance, it will then appear that
there is not only a probability, but a concluding strength in these also.

Before I leave the thing, I shall add yet further two Arguments more, tending
not so much to prove the Personal ceming of Christ to be here meant, as in the
general that the same is very near, and therefore most likely to be the coming
here spoken of.

1 Because the Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2.8. That the man of sin is to be
consumed with the breath of his mouth, and destroyed with the brightness of his
coming, which coming, can be no other than his Personal coming; because it was
that coming the Apostle had been speaking of Verse. 1, 2. about which the
Thessalonians were shaken in mind, and troubled, as conceiving it to be at hand
(possibly from what the Apostle had written in his first Epistle, chap. 4.15,
16, 17. (whence it might be inferred, as if that present Generation should live
to see that day) and therefore he says, Not by word, nor letter as from us,
Verse 1.) which trouble the Apostle endeavors to remove, by telling them that
the man of Sin who was to be destroyed with the brightness of this coming was
not as yet revealed, and that therefore this coming, which they were in doubt
about, could not be sudden.

Now observe, do we already see the first, viz. The Man of Sin in a
consumption, by the breath of Christ's mouth, i. e. the preaching of the Gospel?
then may we conclude the second, viz. his final destruction, which shall be by
the brightness of Christ's coming, or appearing, cannot be far off; and
therefore it is more consonant to the Apostles meaning, to look for, and expect
this coming here, betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials, (where a Personal coming
is hinted) which time is near to us, than not to expect the same till the
General Judgment, which (as shall appear hereafter) is from us a thousand
years at least, how much more I know not; and surely, Antichrists continuance
shall not be so long.

2 Because Peter tells us expressly, that Christ's Personal coming shall be
before the New Heavens, and Earth, 2 Epist. 3.10, 11, 12. But the day of the
Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. None that ever I
mes with denies this to be his Personal coming; yet afterward, and that too as
a fruit of this coming, which therefore Peter brings in with a nevertheless, as
having reference to the Heavens and Earth before dissolved, comes in the
promise of the New Heavens and Earth, verse 13. Nevertheless, we according to
his promise (seeming to have his eye upon those very New Heavens and Earth
promised, Isa. 65.66.) look for New Heavens and a New Earth wherein dwells
righteousness. Now that these New Heavens and New Earth, must be, and therefore
this coming which is to precede them, before the last and General Judgment, is
clear, because at the General Judgment, the Earth and the Heavens fly away,
and their place is no more found, Rev. 20.11. therefore no New Heavens or Earth
after that; yea, the places in Isaiah which Peter has his eye upon, cannot be
applied to the General Judgment, or any time after it, therefore the New
Heavens, and New Earth (which this Personal coming is a forerunner of) must be
before that day.

Obj. But when then are they? or where are we to place them?

To that I Answer, immediately after the battle of Armageddon, or instantly
upon the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, when the voice comes from the
Throne, It is d^ne, Rev. 16.17. that is, as appears, Chap. 21.5, 6. All things
are made new. He that sat upon the Throne said, Behold I make all things new;
and then verse 6. He ( i.e. He that sat upon the Throne still) said unto me,
It is done, one Phrase expounding the other. If therefore Christ's Personal
coming, according to Peter, must be before these New Heavens and Earth, and if
these New Heavens and Earth are the effect of the seventh Vial, then is it most
agreeable to Peter's sense, as well as Paul's in our last words, and the Prophets
of the Old Testament, yea, our Savior himself in our former Arguments, to
place the Personal coming of Christ here, betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials,
where it is said, I come as a Thief; and indeed as Peter does here mention a
Personal coming, a little before the New Heavens and the New Earth; so does
Isa. 66.15, 16. with verse 22. and John likewise, chap. 19.11. with chap. 21.1.
(both which comings I have proved to be personal) so that in this there is a
glorious Harmony betwixt them, and therefore it is safest to make the coming
and time thereof, one and the same in all.

And truly to me it is a Riddle how any of those worthy men (which are not a
few) who yet strongly affirm the pouring out of the seventh Vial to be the last
and General Judgment, can from their own Principle conclude any other, than
that the coming of our Text (which is the immediate antecedent of the seventh
Vial) is, yea, must of necessity be a Personal coming,

Having hitherto been proving Christ's personal coming, to be the coming
intended in these words, I shall now nakedly discover my own thoughts about it,
which possibly may prevent the rise of some Objections in the breasts of
others, and withal be no weakening to my former Arguments, which are,

That I do not conceive this coming to be any other than that second coming,
which is an Article of our Christian Faith, and we all look for, though not to
be at this time (and indeed what I said last out of Peter, though I should add
nothing else, does give it so to be) for I can find in Scripture but two
personal comings of Christ; one in which he bare our sins, and the other in
which he shall appear without sin to salvation, Heb. 9.28. Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he
appear the second time without sin to salvation; and as all the Scriptures
which speak of his Humiliation, Death, and Sufferings, have relation to the
first; so those Scriptures which speak of his coming, Kingdom, and glory, to
the second. And indeed that coming which good men look upon to be at the
General Judgment, does most exactly agree to what is recorded of this coming,
for,

1 That coming shall be a Coming as a Bridegroom, Matthew. 24.6. Behold the
Bridegroom comes; intimating, it shall be comfortable and glorious to the
Saints; such shall this be, Rev. 19.7, 8, 9.

2 That coming shall be a black dreadful and terrible day to the Enemies of
Christ, to whom therefore he is said to come in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance, 2 These. 1.8. to descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and the Trump of God. 1 These. 4.16. such a coming as shall make
all the Tribes of the Earth to mourn, Matthew. 24.30. Then shall al^ the Tribes
of the Earth mourn, and men's fiearts fail for fear, Luke 21.26. Men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on
the Earth, for the powers of Heaven shall be shaken, in which the Heavens being
on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, 2
Pet. 3.12. such also shall this be, as in many of the fore-quoted Scriptures
appear, Isa 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from
Bozrah? Verse. 4. The day of vengeance is in mine heart. Verse 6. I will tread
down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury. Chap. 65.15. For
behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots like a whirlwind, to
render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. Verse 16. For
by fire and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of
the Lord shall be many. Joel 3.16. The Lord also shall roar out of Sion. and
utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake. Mal.
3.2. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap. Chap. 4.1.
For behold the day comes that shall burn as an ov^n, and all the proud, yea
and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day that comes shall
burn them up, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. These
Scriptures (as has been before showed) relate to this coming.

3 That coming shall be upon men unawares, Luke 21.34, 35. Take heed lest at
any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it
come on all men that dwell upon the face of the earth. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. Your
selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes as a Thief in the night.
So shall this; Behold I come as a Thief.

4 That coming shall be at a time of great tribulation, such tribulation as
makes Christ, out of love to his Elect, that they might not be swallowed up
with it, to shorten the days of his coming, Matthew. 24.21. For then shall be
great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this
time, no, nor ever shall be. Verse 22. And except those days should be
shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for the Elects sake those days
shall be shortened. So shall this, Dan. 12.1. At that time shall Michael stand
up, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
Nation, even to the same time. Zech. 14.2. I will gather all Nations against
Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and
the women ravished; and half of the City shall go forth into Captivity, and the
residue of the people shall not be cut off from the City. Verse 3. Then shall
the Lord go forth, and fight against those Nations. 4. And his feet shall stand
in that day upon the Mount of Olives. Verse 5. And the Lord my God shall come,
and all the Saints with thee.

5 That coming shall be about the time of the Beasts final overthrow. This has
been the opinion of all good men, till of late, that Christ's second coming
should give the final overthrow to Antichrist; and this they have founded upon
that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. (which I made use of but even now) Whom the
Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth ( i.e. by the preaching of the
Gospel, the Man of Sin shall first grow into a consumption, which consumption
he has been in these many years) and shall destroy ( viz. his final
destruction) with the brightness of his coming; and this Text some call an
undeniable Oracle to prove this truth, accordingly the coming I am speaking of,
agrees exactly to this, for the effect of the battle of Armageddon, which
battle is instantly upon this coming, is the utter destruction of Antichrist,
giving the body of the Beast to the burning flame, Dan. 7.11. casting the Beast
and false Prophet both, into the lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev.
19.20. but in case Christ's second coming should not be till the last Judgment,
which cannot be less (as I shall show anon) than a thousand years after this
battle, then could not the final destruction of Antichrist be at the time of
Christ's second coming; for (according to this principle) his destruction should
be a thousand years before it.

6 That coming (called by good men, Christ's coming to Judgment) shall be a
coming with all the Saints, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with all his Saints. So shall this, Zech. 14.5. The Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee.

And indeed that Christ shall at this day bring all his Saints with him, and
not those only who have been Martyrs or Sufferers (as some suppose) is a thing
that necessarily follows, upon what has been said before; for if this shall be
that very coming of Christ which is by all looked upon as his last; after which
Christ will return no more to Heaven, to come (in such manner) thence again,
then most certainly, not Martyrs only, but all his shall come with him. And
this, Scripture does plentifully bear witness to, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if we
believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus
(as all Saints do) will God bring with him, verse. 16. The dead in Christ (not
some of them only, but all that are dead in Christ) shall rise first, i. e.
shall have part in that first Resurrection, Rev. 20.5, 6.

1 Cor. 15.23. Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's (not
some, but all that Christ has a right unto, and is interest in) at his coming,
and it is of the first Resurrection only (I take it) that this whole Chapter
speaks; for the following verses, from verse. 35. to the end, speak of the
Resurrection of such only, as shall have glory put upon them in the
Resurrection, Though sown in dishonor, yet raised in glory; Though sown in
weakness, yet raised in power, verse. 42.43. Yea, such in whom death upon their
Resurrection shall be swallowed up in victory, verse. 54. which are things, not
appliable to the resurrection of any but Saints.

Matthew. 24.31. He shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather together
his Elect from the four winds of heaven; that is, all that are his Elect, from
all parts and quarters of the World; and we read not of two gatherings together
the Elect, but of one only; to which agrees 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. I beseech you by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together to him.

2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to
all them that love his appearing. A Crown of righteousness is to be given, in
that very day that suffering Paul should receive his Crown, to all that love
Christ's appearing, which is a qualification common to Saints, not peculiar to
Martyrs, or sufferers only.

In Rev. Chap. 2.3. The Promises made to the several Churches (which for their
accomplishment have reference to the time of the New Jerusalem) run to
overcommers, He that overcommeth to him will I give power over the Nations: And
he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, as the vessels of a Potter shall they be
broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father, Chap. 2.26, 27. Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the
City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my
God; and I will write upon him my new name, Chap 3.12. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne, verse. 21. which Texts, as they clearly
prove, that not Martyrs alone, but all Saints shall have their share of glory
in the New Jerusalem, because a man may be an overcomer, who notwithstanding
may not be a Martyr, or an actual sufferer; so also do they as strongly prove
that the Saints now dead shall certainly rise again, and be inhabitants in this
New Jerusalem, because otherwise these Promises (made to that time) had been of
no use, nor could have administered any comfort to the Saints in those Churches
to whom these were firstly made, they being dead many hundreds of years ago, if
so be they were not riss at the beginning of the thousand years, Rev. 20. when
the New Jerusalem is to be set up.

Object. Whereas it is said. Rev. 20.4, 5. that the souls of those who had been
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not
worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands, they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years; But as for the rest of the dead ( i.e. say some, such as were
not Martyrs) they lived not again, until the thousand years were finished.

I answer, If [rest of the dead] exclude any of the Saints from the first
Resurrection, then does it include them in the second Death, for the promise of
being freed from the second Death runs to those only who have part in the first
Resurrection, verse. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second Death has no power; therefore (I take it)
that the Dead here opposed to the Living, are the wicked dead to the godly
living, whose Resurrection is not to be till the General Judgment, verse. 13.
who as they shall then arise to be judged, so being judged they are streightway
sent to Hell; for as Death and Hell deliver up their dead, verse. 13. so Death
and Hell ( i.e. the persons of those Death and Hell delivers up) are cast into
the lake of fire, verse. 14. and as the first Resurrection has this golden Note
set upon it, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection,
on such the socond Death shall have no power; So the second this black mark,
This is the second Death, verse. 14.

Now the reason why suffering Saints are principally mentioned in the first, I
take to be this, because this Book of the Revelations being a doleful Tragedy,
in the greatest part of which we have little acted, but the sufferings of the
Saints; Christ therefore to sweeten this bitter cup at the bottom, and
conclude this Tragedy (as I may so say) with a glorious Comedy, speaks of those
chiefly now (though not excluding others) as reigning with him, who throughout
the book before, had been spoken of as suffering for him.

As to those Texts, Mat. 19.29. 2 Timothy 2.12. with other such like, which may
seem to favor this opinion, I only say, that heither those, nor any other
that hitherto I have met with, do positively exclude any Saints from that glory
the Martyrs shall have in Christ's Kingdom, though true it is, some Texts
(where the Argument insisted upon is suffering) specify (not to exclude
others, but for the comfort of the Sufferers) Martyrs or Sufferers only.

Yet if the Question be stated thus, whether Martyrs or Sufferers, shall not
have a greater degree of glory in this Kingdom, than many others; I shall not
oppose it: For as I conceive the degrees of glory intimated, 1 Cor. 15.40, 41.
(which place (as I have showed) speaks of the first Resurrection) are more
proper to be referred to this time than to heaven hereafter, when God shall be
all in all: So do I conceive that the more any man here has laid out himself,
either in a way of doing, or suffering for Christ, the greater glory and honor
shall be put upon him at this day; which as it is encouragement now to do for
Christ, so does it give yet a farther answer, and that which I conceive may
reconcile the difference) to such Scriptures, as seem to entitle Martyrs only
to the glory of this day.

Now taking this coming of Christ (as has been laid down) for that second
coming we all wait for, I see as yet no inconvenience following upon it, in
case we say, that Christ's second coming shall be at this time, betwixt the
pouring out of the sixth and seventh Vials; and what things are to be done in
the world afterward, are such things only as Christ will dispatch betwixt his
coming, and the time of the end. And thus to conceive of Christ's second coming,
as it no ways tends to looseness, but rather the neerness of this day calls
aloud upon all to watch; yea may cause all those who have hope in a day of
Redemption to lift up their heads with joy, because their Redemption draws
nigh; so does it seem more agreeable to the current of Scriptures, and also to
that which but a few years ago, was the faith of Gods people in general, to
wit, that Christ's second coming could not be far off, than the contrary
opinion does, which makes this coming, not to be till the General Judgment,
which cannot be so little as a thousand years off.

And truly when I consider how godly Ministers and people not many years past,
did provoke one another from Christ's second coming, and harp upon it as near;
and how at present few speak of that, but look at comings of another kind,
setting the second coming a great way off; It is so far from bringing me into a
belief with them, as that contrariwise it nourishes within me a persuasion
more strongly, that his second coming is at hand, and he will be upon us
unawares, because the Scripture tells us this day shall come as a snare upon
all, Luke 21.35. And the Son of man at his coming shall hardly find faith (to
believe his coming is so near) on the earth, Luke 18.8. Yea he comes at
midnight, Matthew. 25.6. an hour when but few are looking for their friend, and
the calling upon believers so frequently to watch whenever Christ's second
coming is spoken of, lest that day come upon them unawares, and overtaken them
as a Thief in the night, implies no less to me, than that which experience
within these few years teaches, that they (as well as others) will be apt to
put the day of Christ's coming far from them. And by how much I read over these
Scriptures the oftener, by so much have I the less hope (knowing that not one
jot or tittle of the word shall fall to the ground) of seeing many of those
(some I have hopes we may) who have deeply drunk in the persuasion of a
spiritual coming and Kingdom only, to change their minds, and be of another
persuasion.

Only with such I leave to ponder upon, this caution, Take heed, lest as the
Jews by expecting a glorious outward coming at first, when Christ was to come
in a low and despised way, did then mistake his first coming; So you, by
cleaving to a Spiritual coming only, with a denial of a Personal, should now
mistake his second.

I will only add, That the Security the Scripture holds forth, which will be,
not upon the world only, but many of Gods people also, as touching the coming
of Christ, about that time when he is to come, is to me an Argument that
Christ's coming (I mean the coming commonly called the coming to Judgment) is
to be at the beginning of the Thousand Years, Rev. 20. and not (as most who
acknowledge the Thousand years to be yet to come) at the end of them; because
were the coming at the end, how could there be a security, especially upon
Believers, who now could expect nothing else every day but his coming, who
would not say when they should see God and Magog again gathering together, now
is the Lord coming? how then would this day come unawares as a Thief upon them,
when they could now neither look for, nor expect any thing else? but at the
beginning of the Thousand years, when as their thoughts and expectations shall
be high, and all running upon another coming, viz. a glorious spiritual
appearance, but no thoughts of a Personal, then Christ comes upon them, and
takes them unawares, whilst they dreamed not of such a coming, but were gazing
after another.

What I have hitherto said as touching the Coming of Christ varies nothing from
that common received Principle among good men, which holds and maintains a
second coming of Christ to Judgment, but only in this.

The common Principle is, that the General Judgment shall begin immediately
upon Christ's coming. On the contrary, I conceive the thousand years mentioned,
Rev. 20. are to succeed first upon his coming, and after that the General
Judgment, which is clear, because as the coming of Christ must for the Reasons
aforementioned precede the battle of Armageddon; so is it as evident that the
thousand years must follow it (taking their beginning from that battle) as an
intervening time betwixt that, and the General Judgment.

Now that the Thousand years (six times repeated in chap. 20.) is in all to be
understood of one and the same period of time, and not (as some) of two
distinct periods of time, each containing a thousand years, is clear,

1 Because such as reckon two periods of time, account the first thousand years
to be wholly passed already; and 300 years and upwards of the second thousand
years; whereas it is manifest (as presently shall be made appear) that the
whole Prophecy of Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning, is yet to come.

2 Because (as one, though no friend to the Millenary point, has yet well
observed in answer to this opinion) we have the thousand years twice used
without any Areicle, (...), a thousand years, but four times with an Article,
(...), these thousand years, clearly proving that the Holy Ghost speaks still
of one and the same thousand years, which is also a manifest Argument that the
thousand years here spoken of, cannot be meant of an indefinite time, i. e. a
thousand years put for a long time, though not precisely so many, for they may
be more or less, but must be interpreted of a certain definite determinate
time. As the time of the Beasts reign, the treading under foot of the Holy
City, the Woman's flight into the wilderness, the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth, is a determined time, One thousand two hundred and sixty days, or
years; So the time of Satan's binding, the exaltation of the Church, and the
Saints reigning with Christ, is also a determined time, namely a thousand
years, though of the first we have so many years set forth by so many days,
which is a Prophetical and mysterious way of speaking, because all the time of
the One thousand two hundred and sixty days the mystery of God was not clearly
and fulled revealed, therefore things are kept under a veil still; but in the
latter, we have a year put for a year, which is plain without any mystery,
because now the mystery of God being fulfilled, veils are taken off, things are
nakedly to be beheld.

Now as to the main thing, that the thousand years are yet to come, and indeed
to take their beginning from the battle of Armageddon, appears, not only from
the order of the Vision being placed after the battle of Armageddon, as the
next remarkable thing; But also,

Because at the end of the thousand years the Devil is cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, where it is said the Beast and false Prophet are, i.e. had
been before him all the time of the thousand years, Verse 10. And the Devil
that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the
Beast, and the false Prophet are; which words have a special respect to those
chap. 19.20. of casting the Beast, and the false Prophet, into the lake of
fire, and showing that this Vision of the Devils being bound, and the Saints
reigning a thousand years, is to take place successively from, or after the
battle of Armageddon, when the Beast and false Prophet were cast into the lake
of fire.

2 Because Dan. 7. (which Chapter does contemporise with this Prophecy of the
Beasts final ruin, and the Saints reign a thousand years afterward) tells us,
that the Son of man being come, and having received of the Ancient of days his
Kingdom, Verse. 13, 14. and the Beast being slain, his body destroyed, and given
to the burning flame, Verse 11. (the same (as I have showed) with casting the
Beast and false Prophets into the lake of fire, Rev. 19.20.) instantly upon
this judging of the Beast ( i.e. Antichrist the little Horn) and taking his
Dominion from him, to consume and destroy it to the end noting thereby his
final destruction, the Kingdom and Dominion (and that as a fruit and consequent
of the other) is given to the Saints, Verse. 26, 27. But the judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the
end. And the Kingdom and Domini^n, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High;
agreeing punctually to this in the Revelation, where first John sees the final
destruction of the Beast, after that, Thrones set, and the Saints sitting upon
them, and reigning with Christ; and as in the one, things are spoken of
successively, the one following after the other; so likewise in the other.

3 Because no time already past can upon the most strict inquiry be found, in
which Satan has been bound and shut up at all; much less for so long a space
as a thousand years. Two accounts there are of those who conceive the thousand
years to be past. Some reckon from the year of Christ 69. when Jerusalem was
overthrown by Titus, making up their Epoch of a thousand years, in the year
1069. others reckon from the year of Christ 300. concluding the time in the
year 1300. The first accoune takes in all the time of the ten most bloody
Primitive persecutions under the Heathen Emperors, the most cruel and barbarous
Arian Persecution, which followed the other, together with a great part of the
reign of Antichrist, and several persecutions within this time under him. The
Second (leaving out the Primitive Persecutions) comprehends within it the whole
Arian Persecution, together with the greatest part of Antichrists reign, under
whom, and all within this time, was the horrible slaughter of the poor
Waldenses, beginning in the Year 1160. between which, and the Year 1300. was
made a most miserable havoc of these poor Saints, besides a cruel persecution
which began ( An D. 894.) in Bohemia, raging throughout all this time; so that
indeed if within any of these accounts the Devil were bound, we may certainly
conclude, he was never loose in the world.

4 Because the very Basis, or Foundation of all those Expositions which
conclude the thousand years to be past, stands upon three palpable mistakes.

1 MISTAKE, That the living and reigning with Christ, spoken of Ver. 4. is no
other but a spiritual reign of the souls of those who were slain for the
witness of Jesus, and that with Christ in Heaven.

To this I answer, If the Reign here be meant of a Reign in Heaven only, then
how can the time of the thousand years (which yet the Author of this
interpretation acknowledges) be a definite time, seeing (if this may be called
a reigning) they have some already reigned above a thousand years; yea, all the
Saints in this sent shall reign for ever.

2 I ask, how Saints reign in Heaven? or who do they reign over? Reigning
imp^^es Subjects to be reigned over, who are their Subjects there?

3 How then comes it about, the Devil at the end of the thousand years is let
loose, and gathers the Nations together, and with them encompasseth about the
Camp of the Reigners, as Verse 7, 8, 9. They compassed the Camp of the Saints
about; and what Saints had been spoken of before, but only the reigning
Saints, who lived and reigned with Christ this thousand years? shall then the
Devil assemble Gog and Magog, and with them go and compass about the Saints now
re^going in Heaven? who can believe that?

Object. If to help it any should say, the reign here spoken of is a Spiritual
reign, but not in Heaven, but here on Earth; all the time of the Beasts
persecution, the persecuted Saints did yet reign over sin, over the Devil, etc.

I answer, This reign is no other but what is common to the Saints in all ages;
but the reign here spoken of, is a reign peculiar to the time of the thousand
years.

2 The Text is against it, for the Text speaks of the reign of such, as were
beheaded, an Argument their beheading or martyrdom went before their reigning;
but this should be a reign of such as were to be beheaded, noting their
reigning to be first, and their beheading after that, directly contrary to the
Text.

2 MISTAKE, That the binding of the Devil this thousand years, is to be
understood no otherwise, but as a laying a restraint upon him, that he should
not deceive the Nations by causing them to oppose the faith of Christ, hinder
the propagation of the Gospel amongst them, draw them to Paganism and Idolatry,
as formerly he had done, which accordingly, say the Authors of this opinion,
all the time of the thousand years was made good, the Gospel being within this
time more freely propagated and received, the growth of Pa^anism hindered more
than ever before. This is the general Vote of Expositors (who look upon the
thousand years as past) all with one mouth crying up this; having indeed
without it not so much as the least varnish, or show of reason to color over
their opinion.

I say not, that I marvel, when I read and observe so many worthy, able, quick,
and deep-sighted men in other things, to build their interpretation of so
difficult and knocy a Scripture, as is this 20 Chapter of the Revelation, upon
such easy ground, and such a sandy, chaffie foundation as this is, which
certainly, had not the ugly Dress of the Millenary point set forth by its
Adversaries, and helped by the obscurity, and some raw indigested Assertions of
such as were its friends, made them shie of it to avoid it as a Bugbear,
choosing rather to leap any where, than into it, they could hardly have
satisfied themselves to have built any thing, till first they had got better
ground, and more sure footing for a foundation; for,

1 Take either of these reckonings, and, were not (within the time of the
thousand years) the Nations deceived, is it not expressly said of the second
Beast, Rev. 13.14. (who is the very same, as I have formerly proved) with that
impudent Whore, chap. 17 which si^s upon many waters, Verse 1. that is,
Peoples, and Multitudis and Nations, and Tongues, V 15.) that he deceives them
that dwell on the Earth? Nay, is it not expressly said of the followers of the
Beast, Rev. 13.4. They worshipped the Dragon that gave power to the Beast, and
they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to
make War with him? And if to worship the Devil be not Paganism, and to worship
Antichrist Idolatry, what is? and yet all this within the time of the thousand
years, according to either reckoning: Nay, the Beasts followers (who were the
Nations) worshipping the Dragon within this time, is a manifest Argument he was
not then bound, and shut up in the bottomless Pit, but inde^d among them
(though in such a garb, as he seems rather a Saint than a Devil) deceiving of
them.

2 As if the Lord has suffered it on purpose to banish from us all such
thoughts; it is a thing most observable, that the Paganish Mahumetan Religion
(the like to which was hardly ever known in the world, of a Religion springing
from so inconsiderable a man, and upon the sudden overspreading so many
Countries) had both its rise, and a considerable part of its growth, within
this thousand years, follow which account ye will; Mahomet the first founder of
that Religion, living about the year of Christ, 600.

3 Let it be shown since the expiring of this thousand years (whether we make
them to expire according to the first account A.D. 1069. or according to the
second 1300.) whether the Gospel have flourished less, and the Nations been
deceived more, than they were in the time of the thousand years, both which
according to the former interpretation should be, for all the thousand years
the Devil was bound, that he could not deceive the Nations, nor hinder the
Propagation of the Gospel; but now according to the last account of the
thousand years he is loose, and has been three hundred years and upwards, and
therefore may do it, and upon inquiry will it not appear, that Antichrist has
more gone to ruin? the Gospel has shined more bright, and flourished more?
the Nations have more freely (not those called Christians only, but of late
some Pagans also) given entertainment to it, yea stood up for it, than ever
before all the time of the thousand years? If so, then certainly the Devil was
not bound then, unless we shall say, that it is a better day, when the Devil is
loose, than when he is bound; and the way to destroy Antichristianism, Paganism
convert the Nations to Christ (which things have more appeared since the time
according to the common opinion the Devil has been let loose, than ever they
did whilst he was bound) is to let the Devil loose, suffer him to deceive the
Nations, and do what he^l^sts in the world.

3 MISTAKE (which some who run upon the latter Account seem to hint at) That
the Dragons resigning up his Kingdom to the Beast (which we read of Chap.
13.2.) was for this reason, because he could keep it no longer, but was out of
hand to be bound.

I answer, not so, The Dragon did not resign, because he saw he must be bound a
thousand years, but rather out of subtilty, seeing by Christian Emperors his
Heathenish Idolatry thrown down, and himself for a little time cast out of his
Throne, that now he might in another way, and under another form of Idolatry
(as formerly I have said) creep in again, therefore he resigns to Antichrist;
and indeed his Policy does not fail him, for by means of this Beast he gets in
again; yet now so subtle is he, that all the time of the Beasts Kingdom, till
just toward the end, when the Beast and his party, are grown so desperate, as
that now they will join with the Devil, or any to uphold their cause, he will
not show himself what he is, and therefore appears but very rarely as the
Dragon, from that day, till the time of the last battle, but rather still as a
Saint, with Antichrists mask on, lest being discovered, his subjects should
flinch from him, and he be cast out again.

Here is all the ground that ever I have met with for that opinion, which makes
the thousand years of Satan's binding, and the Saints reign, to be already past,
which being nothing else but a very lump of Mistakes, I do therefore for the
foregoing Reasons conclude the thousand years to be yet to come, and to follow
successively (as they are in this Prophecy laid down) after the battle of
Armageddon; and indeed to be the very same (only first here hinted in brief,
afterward more largely handled, which is the way and manner of laying down
things in this Book) with that New Jerusalem, a description whereof we have
Chap. 21. Chap 22.1. to the 6, which that it cannot be meant of Heavenly glory
as most have supposed, but must set forth a glorious state of the Church here
on earth, shall appear in our following Discourse.

I have not hitherto said (which yet may be worth the weighing, to see what may
follow upon it) That those who make the thousand years to be past, do also make
the one thousand two hundred and sixty years of the Beasts reign the treading
underfoot the Holy City, and the Woman's being in the Wilderness, and the
Witnesses prophesying in sackcloath, the same in respect of time, with the
Devils binding, and the Saints reigning, which two contraries how they will be
made to agree, is a thing that lies out of the reach of my apprehension.

From what has been said, I suppose it will sufficiently appear, that the
first Scene that is like to be acted in the world upon the coming of Christ,
will not be the last and General Judgment, but something else.

Yet do I not deny, but that in a large sense the whole time from Christ's
coming, to the end of all things, may be called a Day of Judgment (which
therefore (according to some) is looked upon as one great day, consisting of
two parts, as does the natural day; First, the Evening, or thousand years; And
secondly, the Morning, or General Judgment, admitting only these two
differences betwixt the judgment of the last day, and that which shall be in
the time of the thousand years.

1 The judgment passed at the last day, shall be the act of Christ alone;
there being then but one Great white Throne, and one sitting upon it, Rev.
20.12. I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat upon it, which agrees to
Matthew. 21.31. He shall sit upon the Throne of his glory. Yea the whole business
of the day is transacted by Christ himself, the King alone acts; he shall say
to them on his right hand, Come, verse. 34. to them on his left hand, Depart,
verse. 41. And when the righteous, to exalt his grace the more, profess their
own unworthiness, the King only replies in way of justification of them, verse
40. and contrariwise, when the wicked justify themselves, the King only
replies, showing the equity of the sentence passed upon them, verse. 44, 45.

But now the judgment of sinners upon Christ's second coming in the time of the
thousand years until the last day, shall be by Christ and his Saints together,
and therefore of this time it is said, Rev. 20.4. I saw Thrones, (in the plural
number) and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them, Isa. 31.1.
A King shall rule in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment; and we
may read, Luke 19.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. that at the time when Christ receives his
Kingdom, the faithful servant who has improved his ten Talents well, is then
made ruler over ten Cities; he that well improved five, over five Cities,
expounding that, 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the
world?

2 The sentence passed at the last day, shall concern eternal life, or death,
Mat. 25.46. the result of the General Judgment is, the wicked go into
everlasting punishment, the righteous into life eternal; but now the judgment
in the time of the one thousand years shall be a judging of the world; that is,
those wicked ones that shall be suffered to live in this day, as to outward
punishments and servility, in way of requital of what Christ's people in all
Ages have suffered from the world, which is expressed, Psalm. 140.6. Let the
high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands,
verse. 7. To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the
people, verse. 8. To bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters
of Iron, verse. 9. To execute upon them the judgment written, This honor have
all his Saints, Halelujah. So Isa. 61.5, 6. And strangers shall stand and feed
your flocks, and the sons of the Alien shall be your Plow-men, and your
Vine-dressers (expressions which note a servility) But ye shall be named the
Priests of the Lord, men shall call you, the Ministers of our God, Chap. 14.2.
They shall take them captive, whose captives they were, and they shall rule
over their oppressors; All which places, as is most clear to him that views the
context, and compares them with other Scriptures, have respect to the glory of
the last times, as the day where in they are to have their accomplishment; and
a type of this (I conceive) the Gibeonites might be, who as a remnant of those
Canaanites destined to destruction, were yet spared by Joshna (who in entering
Canaan was a notable type of Christ, taking possession of his Kingdom) to be
hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of God, and this is (as I
also conceive) one reason of it, why Daniel, Chap. 7. after the destruction of
the fourth Beast ( i. e. the Roman Monarchy, as under Antichrist) and casting
him into the burning flame, verse. 11. yet adds (verse. 12.) that the rest of
the Beasts, ( i.e. those powers of the world, whose dependence was not upon
Antichrist) had their Dominion taken away, but their lives were prolonged for a
season, and time. Why so? namely, That Saints to whom now the Kingdom was to
be given (verse. 27.) might rule over them. And here (as I judge) are to be
brought in those Scriptures which speak of the Saints Ruling and Reigning, Rev.
5.10. And have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth, Chap. 20.6. they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years, agreeing exactly to that of Isa. Chap. 61.5,
6. (which was named but now) strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, but ye
shall be named Priests of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer with him we shall
also reign with him, which cannot be meant of a Spiritual Reigning on earth,
because in that fense Timothy, and other Saints Reigned then, but this is a
promise of a thing for future; nor can it be a Reigning with Christ in Heaven,
because where is no Rule nor Authority, there can be no Reigning; but the
Apostle tells us plainly, speaking of heavenly glory, 1 Cor. 15.24. that there
all Rule and Authority, and Power shall be put down, it must be therefore at
some other time, which is this I am speaking of.

And what dangerous consequences will follow hereupon, in case we say, that as
Christ himself after his resurrection continued some time on earth, doing his
fathers work, before he entered into his rest; so the Saints (that herein also
they might be like him) shall after their resurrection continue here on earth,
doing the work of their Redeemer, (and that some time) before they enter into
their rest, does not as yet appear to me.

Object. In case it be said, How can these things be? seeing upon Christ's
second coming the world that now is shall perish by fire, as did the old by
water; that yet, after this a seed of wicked men should remain for Saints to
rule over.

Ans. True, the Scriptures which speak of this coming, mention a coming with
fire, Isa. 66.15. The Lord shall come with fire, to render his rebuke with
flames of fire. Mal. 4.1. The day comes that shall burn as an Oven. 2 These.
1.8. In flaming fire rendering vengeance -- and Rev. 19.20. (immediately upon
the battle of Armageddon, before the thousand years begin) we read of a Lake of
fire, into which the Beast and false Prophet are cast; which fire, that it
shall be material fire, Peter implys plainly, 2 Epist. 3. in saying, that as
the old world was drowned with water, viz. material water, so is this reserved
to fire against the day of Christ's coming; Yet that this fire (which whether it
shall be general in all places at once, or only in that place where Christ
shall appear, and his enemies be gathered together, whither the dross of the
world shall be gathered as into one Lake, is a question too nice to dispute)
shall not destroy the being of the World, is clear,

First, Because it is a fire for another end, viz. refining, not destroying,
Mal. 3.2. Who may abide the day of his coming? for he shall he as are finers
fire.

Secondly, The New Heavens and New Earth, that Isay and John speak of, wherein
shall dwell Righteousness, and in which the Saints shall regin with Christ,
Peter makes mention of as a thing to be after this fire, which (as I have said)
he therefore brings in with a nevertheless, 2 Pet. 3.13. Now what if we should
say, that as when the old world was destroyed by water, not only righteous
Noah, and godly Shem and Japhet, but also cursed Cham, yea, the kinds of all
the creatures were spared from that deluge to replenish the new world; so at
this day, not only the Saints in the world shall be preserved, but even some
of the wicked, yea of all the creatures, to serve the glorious ends and designs
of God, and that in the new Heavens and Earth? which seems not without all
ground, because the Apostle Paul tells us plainly, Romans 8.20, 21, 22. That the
creatures earnest expectation waits for that day, in which the Sons of God
shall be manifest; when the creature (Devils and wicked men, on whom the curse
shall still remain, excepted) shall be delivered from that bondage of
corruption that now it groans under, and that not by a total dissolution, or
annihilation of it, but by a glorious restoration, bringing it into the
liberty of the Sons of God. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits
for the manifestation of the Sons of God; because the creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God. And also because in those very new Heavens and Earth that
Isay speaks of, and Peter quotes from him, the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together; that is, good and bad shall be in the world together.

Neither let it be said that this will be any hinderance to the Saints glory
and spirituality, to bring them from Heaven, the place of glory, and that about
a work so mean, and low, to rule over men upon earth; for as Angels lose not
their glory by attending upon the work of God here on earth, nor their
spirituliaty, because the works they attend upon, of ministering to the Saints,
destroying the Enemies of God, etc. are in themselves mean and low, yea, in a
manner servile for so glorious Creatures as Angels to attend upon; so shall not
Saints at this day, by being occupied in the Affairs of this Fifth Monarchy
(which shall be their work for Christ, to act as Officers under him in his
Kingdom) lose any thing of their glory, especially considering Christ himself
(whose presence is their glory) shall be with them all this time; nor of their
Spirituality, which never suffers decay in any, through a being occupied in the
will and work of the Lord. And what if the Lord, who in the Legal
Administration thought it good to have his peoples work a burden, in the Gospel
Administration, work, but no burden; will in this administration have work and
glory go together, who will, or has cause to find fault with it? Nay, let me
say (what sometimes has been in my thought with refreshing) that the
spirituality of Saints at this day shall be such, as that from thence an awe
shall be upon the surviving Sinners of the world, who shall tremblingly come,
and how themselves down at the soles of their feet, Isa. 60.14. and subject
themselves to them, for this day, (as the Apostle says) Romans 8.20. shall be
the day of the manifestation of the Sons of God. Gods people are Sons now,
therefore says John, 1 Epist. 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, but
(says he) though true, we are so, yet the world knows us not, i.e. the
transcendent glory and excellency of our state, is now a thing veiled from the
world; but the day I am speaking of shall be the manifestation of the Sons of
God, wherein that noble and super-excellent Spirit, that now (under a veil) it
in the Sons of God, shall be manifested before all men; when all in general
shall come to see the difference that is betwixt the spiritual man, and the man
that is merely rational to be as vast. yea far more vast than that which now is
betwixt the rational creature and sensitive: And as the sensitive creature now
does tremble before the rational, from beholding (through a secret instinct of
nature) a kind of Majesty, and a more noble spirit in the rational creature
than is in himself; so shall at this day, the mere rational man tremble before
the spiritual, when the manifestation of that super-excellent Spirit, that is
in the one above the other shall be open, and naked before all, and therefore,
Cant. 6.10. we have several degrees of the Churches light and glory; 1 Looking
forth as the morning, with a little light; so in the legal administration. 2
Fair as the Moon, more light: So in the Gospel. 3 Clear as the Sun, that is
come up to a high degree of spiritual light and life both, (for both are from
the Sun, which is giver of the one, maintainer of the other) so in the
administration at this day: And what then? why, terrible as an Army with
banners; the Saints and people of God through this high advance in
spirituality, grow terrible to the mean men of the world, who now tremble
before them.

By what has been before said, it may appear, that notwithstanding the
thousand years is a distinct time from the Day of Judgment, being that time,
to speak properly, in which Saints shall judge the world, and reign on the
earth; yet in a large sense the time of the thousand years, and the General
Judgment both, may be called one great Day of Judgment.

And indeed that Saints shall one day judge the world, is a thing so clear in
Scripture, that good men not making a distinction betwixt the judging in the
time of the thousand years, and the General Judgment, do bring the Saints at
the last day, instead of standing upon Christ's right hand, even to fit with him
upon the Bench, and then, and there to judge the world, which opinion is not
only repugnant to those other Scriptures wherein we have the manner of Saints
reigning over, and judging the world, set forth, which without a manifest
forcing of them cannot be applied to this time; but also has not the least
countenance for it self from any one Scripture (that I know of) where express
mention is made of the last and General Judgment, but the contrary rather, as
from that I have said before, may be gathered) which is enough to put us upon
a further search, and not to receive this principle upon trust any longer.

And truly to me it appears, that the Apostle himself, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25.
makes a manifest difference betwixt these two times of judging, calling one the
time of Christ's Reign, to put his enemies under his feet; the other the time of
the end, and both these after his coming; Christ the first fruits, afterward
they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end (plainly intimating a
distance of time betwixt his coming, and the end) when he shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule
and Authority, and Bower: For he, must Reign (showing what his work shall be
betwixt the time of his coming, and the end) till he has put all enemies under
his feet.

Why both these different judgings may not be expressed in that of the Apostle,
2 Timothy 4.1. Shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
Kingdom; the quick first in such manner as has been showed, and then the dead
at the last and General Judgment (which both are called his Appearing and
Kingdom, because he is but once to appear to do both, and both taken together,
do but make up this Kingdom of Christ, in which as King of Kings, Christ will
glorify himself in the eyes of all creatures) I see no convincing reason to
the contrary.

Having thus spoken of the coming of our Lord, according to that light I have
received from the word; I only now desire, that none of Gods people who shall
read this, may be of the number of those who are troubled in mind, and shaken
that the day of the Lord is at hand; but rather of those who patiently wait for
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and love his appearing, whose hearts till
the rise of this bright and morning star will not cease, but with the Spirit
and Bride, send forth their continual groans and eryes, Come, O come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

I shall now conclude ^ll with a Rule or two, which may be some help to the
Reader for the understanding such Scripture, that speak of this coming, namely,

1 RULE, That the diverse expressions in Scripture concerning the coming of
Christ, which set him forth as coming in various Dresses, sometime as a
Bridgroom, sometime in fire, sometimes as a Warrior, as a Judge, are not to be
understood of diverse comings, but one and the same coming in diverse respects;
as when his coming is spoken of in respect of his Saints, he comes as a
Bridegroom; when in respect of the wicked, in flaming fire; when in respect of
the destruction he will make of those enemies he finds gathered together at his
coming, he appears as a Warrior, with a Sword, Armies following him, Garments
rolled in blood; when in respect of that distinction, he will make at this day
betwixt the clean and unclean, Saints and Hypocrites, true worshippers, and
false, or the purification he would make even of his own people, he comes then
as a Refiners fire, to refine and separate the true gold from the dross; when
in respect of the principal work he comes about, namely to execute judgment,
he comes then as a Judge: Thus ever appearing in various Dresses, either as the
persons he comes to, or the works he is to perform upon his coming, are
different.

2 RULE, As there is a Spiritual coming of Christ, as well as a Personal; so in
some places which speak of this coming, both these are included, as before I
have showed in opening Isa. 59.20.

3 RULE, As the Personal coming of Christ is twofold, First, a coming to bear
our sins; Secondly, a coming without sin to salvation: So in some places which
speaks of Christ's coming, both these are couched together, or at least wise
joined so near one to another as that they seem to be one and the same. So Gen
49.10. Until Shiloh (i.e. Christ the Messiah) come, which in respect of the
former words, The Scepter departing from Judah, has reference to his first
coming; but in respect of the latter, the gathering of the people to him, Unto
him shall the gathering of the people be (i.e. Jew and Gentile shall be
gathered together under him as Head or King over them) so it refers to his
second coming. So Mal. 3.1.2. the coming verse. 1. is his first coming, when
John Baptist as a Harbinger comes before him; but verse. 2. (that we may take
notice what mystery is in Scripture) the Holy Ghost glides from his first
coming, to his second, which in so terrible, as that who now may abide the day
of his coming? or stand when he appears? So Zach. Chap. 13.7. speaks of his
first coming, Awake, O Sword, against the man that is my fellow, smite the
Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; but presently, Chap. 14.3 4, 5. we
have his second. So Mic. 5 1. we have his first coming, in which the Judge of
Israel is smitten upon the cheek; and the Jews thereupon being for this given
up, and rejected for a time, as verse. 3. we have presently his second coming
spoken of, verse 4.5. both comings being brought in almost in one breath.

Thus much of the second thing, The Personal coming, and appearing of Christ.

3 Christ's Watchword to his people, to be in a readiness to meet him.
Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked, and
they see his shame.
WAtchfulness, and Christ's coming usually go together, where Coming is the
Doctrine, Watching is the Use; reaching us, that although watching is a duty
Saints are always to be found in, yet more especially will it lie upon them
(as a principal work of that Age) who live in, or near upon the time of Christ's
coming, to be watchful; and as before I have spoken of the one, to wit, Christ's
coming, so may I not here leap over the other, viz. The duty of watching, The
Holy Ghost having joined them together.

Yet for so much as concerns the practical part of this duty, that being a
thing more commonly known (though not practiced as known) and also not so
proper to the business I am now upon, being only exposition, I shall wave it,
choosing to insist upon (as a thing more proper to our work, and which also may
be of use to stir up those who already know the duty, to stand SHALL I? SHALL
I? no longer, but in good earnest to apply themselves to it) the reasons why
the Holy Ghost has so conjoined watching, and Christ's coming, as that it is a
thing rare to read of the one, and not also to hear of the other.

Now in the 24. and 25. Chapters of Matthew (the most full, and pathetical
Sermon that ever our Lord preached of his coming) we have several things
foretold by Christ himself, the which too evidently would appear about the time
of his coming, which are the principal reasons why Christ so calls upon his
Disciples, and in them all Believers, as Mark. 13.37. What I say unto you, I
say unto all, Watch; And therefore those more especially which should live in,
or about the time wherein these things were to have their accomplishment, to
be watchful, Chap. 24.42. Chap. 25.13. which things by how much we see them
more appearing, by so much may we conclude the second coming of Christ is
nearer, and still have strength added to our foregoing Position, that it is
that coming, and no other, spoken of in the words, I come as a Thief.

Now these are,

1 A strange sleep upon many Professors. This is held forth in the Parable of
the Virgins, Mat. 25. verse. 1. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened
unto ten Virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom. 2. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. Verse. 5.
While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept. Which sleep is not
(as I conceive) a sleep in respect of outward Profession, for the sleepers
shall have a kind of Profession upon their backs still, as is intimated in that
of the foolish Virgins to the wise, just upon the Bridegrooms approach, Our
lamps are gone out, verse. 8. arguing, that the Lamps, that is, the outward
Profession of wise and foolish, was held up, did not cease burning, till the
very moment of the Bridegrooms coming, though yet at the time he tarried, they
are said to be asleep, verse. 5. But it is a sleep in respect of the practice,
and exercise of holiness, which many at this day, who had formerly been as well
Practitioners as Professors, should now lay aside, as a needless and
superfluous thing, and so become mere Professors; vanishing altogether into
aerie notions and opinions, with a kind of disdain and contempt of Christian
fife and conversation. Men that have been formerly much for Prayer, much for
reading, hearing, Christian society, strict, and holy walking, shall now look
upon all these as low and childish things, speaking after this manner, We are
now expecting the Bridegroom, looking for the glorious appearance of the
Morning Star, the Sun of Righteousness, great and high discoveries of God, and
therefore away with these low camal duties, and Ordinances, what shall we, who
expect such glorious appearances, exercise our selves in these mean and
childish things? which indeed were fit for those who lived under former
dispensations, and more dark administrations, but do not become us upon whom
the morning star is tisen.

And here (if I may so say, though with submission to others) I conceive the
thing I am speaking of to be the very sleep before mentioned of the Ten
Virgins, for (as by the scope of the Parable appears) these were in the
Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. Members of the visible Church. Now the coming of the
Bridegroom being a thing expected and looked for (though some look for it in
one way, some in another) in the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. by the Members of
the visible Church, as near at hand; these Virgins will needs hereupon
presently in all haste be going forth, before the set time, to meet him, They
went forth to meet the Bridegroom, verse. 1. that is, (as I conceive) they
reject all communion, holy duties, and Ordinances, etc. (things once they did
exercise in) as things now no longer in use, but out of date, and bidding
farewell to these, go forth with high expectations of great and glorious things,
at the appearance of the Bridegroom now at hand, as if they should say, The
Bridegroom is coming, he is coming, whose appearance puts an end to all these
things, and therefore why shall we any longer exercise our selves in them? away
therefore with these Duties and Ordinances, it behooves us to go forth and meet
the Bridegroom; we will walk no longer in this way, but come, let us go forth
to that higher, and more glorious administration, that the Bridegroom brings
with him.

Now they going thus before the time, I say, and mark it well before the time,
for afterward, verse. 6. we read of a command given at the Bridegrooms coming,
to go forth and meet him; till which command had come had they stayed, and
continued in that station the Bridegroom left them in upon his departure,
yielding cheerful obedience to all those his ways and commands, which he bid
them to mind, and be conversant in till his coming, they had done well; but
going out before the time, leaving the Laws of Christ, before Christ the great
Lawgiver had abolished them, casting off their former practice, and the
Bridegroom not coming so soon as they expected, to direct them into a new, they
slumber and sleep, i.e. do even nothing at all; as a sleepy man stirs not, acts
not in any way or duty for Gods glory, or his Neighbors good; so it now fares
with them, which so sad an effect of their going forth to meet the Bridegroom
has made me to think, that although the thing it self were very good, had they
but waited till the coming forth of the Royal Edict, for the abrogation of the
old Law, and the establishment of a new; yet for them to go forth to meet the
Bridegroom before the time, to run before they were called, to abrogate Christ's
Laws, before himself had done it, was sinful, and very evil, and that for which
God, by way of correction of so great arrogance and presumption, gives them up
to this spiritual slumber and sleep here spoken of.

Now whereas I said at first this sleep should be of many, I spoke it to this
end, that none might imagine this sleep to be general upon all the V^rgins in
the world at this time; for though it is said, v. 5. Whilst the Bridegroom
tarried they all slumbered and slept; yet is not the ALL so to be understood,
as if so be all the Virgins and Professors in the world should at this time be
asleep; for though I conceive all here is to be taken universally, i.e. all,
excepting none; yet the universality of the word does not reach all Virgins and
Professors but those only who went forth to meet the Bridegroom, for to them
alone the scope of the Parable runs; the meaning then is this, That all those
who casting off Duties and Ordinances did go forth before the time, to meet the
Bridegroom, did slumber and sleep, not one of them was so happy as to keep his
eyes open; but that all Virgins cannot be here meant is clear from the
following Parable (which seems to be as it were an exception from this former)
where mention is made of some Servants improving their Talents, therefore not
all sleeping; and likewise, from verse. 46. of the precedent Chapter, which
tells us; that some at Christ's coming should be found doing their Masters work;
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing,
therefore not all asleep; Yet (I say) all takes in every of those Virgins who
went forth before the time to meet the Bridegroom, the number of which shall
not be a few; for they are not set forth by a smaller number, as two, but by a
greater, as ten.

Two things here are very observable, which I cannot omit, seeming to intimate
the way or manner how this sleep shall creep on upon the Virgins at this day.

1 From a false Principle commonly received among the Virgins, as touching the
coming of Christ, namely, that the same shall be spiritual only, and not
personal; this to me appears from the attempt they make, and that before his
coming, to go forth and meet him; for taking this for granted (which is indeed
a certain truth) that the Administration that now is, is to be in force but
till his coming, and they conceiving this coming of Christ to be no other, but
a more glorious man festation of himself in a spiritual way to the souls of his
people, judging withal, some beginnings of this to be already both in
themselves and others; they hence conclude the time now to be come in which
these things are to cease, the Day Star (which will suddenly inlighten the
whole world) beg^nning already to glimmer in their hearts. Hereupon they pluck
up stakes, quit their old station, sound a march, with a mighty cry, The
Bridegroom is coming, the Bridegroom is coming, let us speedily go forth to
meet him; whereas had they in their judgment, as well as believed the coming
to be near, so retained in the love of it, that good old Principle, that it is
only Christ's Personal coming which puts an end to these things, they would
have had certain ground to have stood upon, and have known the time when these
things were to cease, and not before the time headily run forth, but rather
patiently waited for that day, submitting themselves in the mean time to the
Laws, and commands of their Lord and Master Christ.

2 From a looseness in practice, in comparison of what they were formerly, for
observe,

1 They slumber, i.e. give a little way to pride, remisness in duty, examining,
and watching over their hearts, etc. allow themselves to be a little more
worldly, stretch Conscience a little for gain, and reach after places, honors,
preferments, the love of great men (though gained by unfaithfulness to God, and
them too) more then, a time was, they durst do; and thus having first by a
slumber benumbed their Consciences, which now are not so tender, and apt to be
pricked with the least thorn, as in times past they were; the next degree is a
fast sleep, ( they all slumbered and slept, verse. 5.) i. e. what before they
neglected through carelessness, now they throw off from a principle, that they
need not do any such things, whereupon they lay themselves down, and as a man
asleep, stir not, act not in any Duty, or Ordinance, or work of their Lord and
Master Christ. I wish from my heart (were it the Lords will) that all those who
at this day amongst us are asleep, might from this word have such a jog as
might cause them to rub up a little, and to bethink themselves how they fell
asleep.

2 An extraordinary deluge, and over-spreading of errors, Christ's second coming
herein agreeing to his first, for never was the Church and Commonwealth of the
Jews so infested with errors as about the time of his first coming. And this we
have plainly chap. 24. where Christ tells us;

First, That there shall be many Seducers, verse. 5. Many shall come in my name,
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Verse. 11. And many false Prophets
shall arise and shall deceive many. Verse. 24 There shall arise false Christ's,
and false Prophets.

Secondly, These Seducers shall pretend Commission from Christ, therefore said
ver 5. to come in his name, i.e. pleading his Commission.

Thirdly, They shall profess themselves to be extraordinarily gifted; persons
inspired by Christ, endued with the gift of Prophecy, called therefore
Prophets, Verse. 11 24.

Fourthly, They shall do strange and wonderful things, things not common, or of
ordinary observation, Verse. 24. There shall arise false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders.

Fifthly, They shall have many followers and Disciples, ver. 5. Shall deceive
many; yea ver 24. so cunning shall these be in deceiving, that if it were
possible they should deceive the very Elect.

3 A sad and searfull Apostasy of diverse who formerly were eminent and glorious
Lights in the Church, Verse. 12. The love of many shall wax cold; which words
are to be understood of a final Apostasy, because in the next verse
perseverance to the end is set in opposition to their Apostasy; but he that
shall endure to the end the same shall be saved. Ver. 29. The stars shall fall
from Heaven; By HEAVEN we are to understand the visible Church, so called in
Scripture, I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven, saying, Haleluyah,
Revel. 191. that is, in the visible Church. By STARS eminent men in the Church,
Revel. 1.20. The seven Stars are the Angels (or Officers) of the seven
Churches; The meaning is. eminent men, men that were formerly of no small note
in the Church, for their seeming zeal and piety, shall now show themselves what
they are, and become Apostates.

4 An aptness to be offended at the things that shall be done in the world in
these times, Verse. 10. Then shall many be offended. They shall not be able to
brook what God in an active way will do, in a permissive way will suffer; but
every thing they shall at this day cast their eyes upon will stumble them, and
offend them, make them kick and sling; so that the very world will be a torment
to them, and they to themselves.

5 A hating of fellow-brethren, with a notable persecuting spirit lying at the
bottom, Verse. 10. shall betray one another, and shall hate one another, Verse
48. If that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming,
Verse. 49. And shall begin to smite his fellow-scrvants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken. What is the meaning hereof? Why, eating and drinking denote
friendship, and civil society; the meaning then is this, many men in these
times, who shall yet go under the name of Christ's servants, shall so far
degenerate, as that they shall not only dis-own those that were formerly their
fellow servants but shall smite them with reproaches, yea, with the Civil
sword, if the Lord prevent not; and instead of making their fellow servants
their Companions and Associates any longer, they shall choose the Drunken, i.e.
such as their very walking does declare them to all men to be persons void of
grace, and strangers to Jesus Christ, and yet these now shall be their
familiars, and intimates, rather than the other.

These things our Lord Jesus Christ has foretold to be in the world a little
before his coming, to escape which, as he there calls upon his Disciples to
Watch, watch, watch; so do I conceive for the very same reasons, in the words I
am upon, are we exhorted to this duty, because, as by all these, sanctification
grows into decay, and they are made naked in the eyes of others to their shame,
(as Aaron made Israel by that sin of the Calf, and that amongst their enemies,
Exodus 32.25.) so the very motive to this duty of watching, in the words, is the
keeping their Garments, that is, of Sanctification (the Garment of
Justification being but one Garment, resembled by the Robe Christ wore in the
days of his flesh, which was one entire piece, without seam throughout, and
that rather Christ's put upon us, than ours, and not at all trusted in our hands
to keep, but kept in Christ's for us, and therefore not that here spoken of)
lest by losing of them they become naked, and are in the eyes of others, yea,
their enemies (who can see these Garments, though a Saints Justification is a
thing hidden from them) exposed to shame, which in a few words comprehends all
those reasons Christ had laid down and pressed, Mat. 24. and 25. why believers
living in times immediately preceding his coming, should be watchful.

And let not any, in case what I have said sit too close, be for that offended
at the Author (who is a friend to all that love the Lord Jesus) or slight the
things themselves, but rather considering what Christ has plainly foretold
shall be a little before his coming, let them learn this, to consider their own
ways, and lay seriously their practices to heart, lest otherwise he come upon
them as a Thief, before they shall have time to get oil into their Lamps, or to
put on again their Garments, which now they have put off.

Thus much of the third thing, Christ's Watchword to his people.

4 Christ's wonderful providential disposing hand in causing his Enemies to
randezvouze in the place of their own destruction.
Verse 16. ANd he ( i.e. Christ) gathered them together into a place called in
the Hebrew Tongue, Armageddon.

These words have relation to the 14. Verse, where we have the Kings of the
Earth, and the whole world gathering together to the battle of the great day of
God Almighty; only because whilst they are gathering together from all parts,
and now in a manner their whole body united and ready to swallow up his people,
Christ appears, and interposeth himself betwixt his people, and their bloody
raging enemies, therefore we have the coming of Christ, Verse 15. brought in
between their gathering together, and their full and complete Randezvouze; and
so these words come to be dis-joyned from the former.

As touching the place here called Armageddon, the opinions of Writers are
various, which (being not a thing so material) I shall not recite; my own
thoughts incline to their opinion, who read it the place of destruction of an
Army; And possibly there may be an allusion in the name, to that great
destruction of the Canaanites, at the waters of Megiddo, Judge. 5.19. when
Sisera the chief Captain of Jabin, with all his Host, fell by the hand of
Deborah and Barak, where was made such a total destruction, that it is said,
Judge. 4.16. And the Host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, and there
was not a man left. And indeed, I the rather incline to this interpretation,
for the agreeableness of it, to those other Scriptures, where (as before I have
showed) this battle is spoken of, Isa. 63.6. I will tread down the people in
mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, Chap. 66.16. The slain of the Lord
shall be many, Joel chap. 3.14. calls it the valley of Decision, or cutting
off; and Rev. 19.21. The remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat on
the Horse. All implying a great and mavelous destruction of enemies.

The meaning of the whole is, That Christ himself, as well as the spirits
before mentioned, Verse 13, 14. has a special hand in the gathering together
this cursed Troop; they to destroy the Saints and people of Christ, but he to
manifest his love to his children, and his own glory the more upon his
appearing, and to revenge upon them with his own hand the blood of his people;
and although their coming up, and gathering to a head is through their
instigation, yet the disposing of their Quarters and place of Randezvouze is
his, who gathers them together into the appointed place of their destruction,
where for his peoples sake, he intends to render upon them his anger with fury,
and his rebukes with flames of fire, as Isaiah expresses it.

And methinks, when my thoughts are fixed upon this day, I cannot but sometimes
stand and admire, not so much at the ruin of the enemies, as at that matchless
love of Christ toward his, which will appear in doing of it, who seems at this
day to act the holy passions of a provoked Father and Husband, who having seen
his children often murdered before his face, and his beloved Spouse now in the
hands of the Murderers, can no longer forbear, but in the heat and vehemence of
affection, with unexpressible indignation, he himself with his drawn sword
rusheth forth upon the Murderers, (as not contented to have their blood, if his
own hands be not dipped in it) fighting with fury through and through, and from
the rage of his mightily provoked spirit, being become deaf to all cries, kills
and slays without pity or mercy; and is so far from sadly resenting what he
has done afterward, as that he is marvellously delighted, yea glories in it,
that for the sake of his Children and Spouse (whose quarrel he has been now
revenging) he has engaged so far, as to come off the field with Garments dyed
red in the blood of their enemies, which excellently we have set forth, Isa.
63. where we have Christ after this wonderful slaughter made of his peoples
enemies, and that with his own hand (who therefore is said to come from Edom,
Edom being ever a cruel enemy to Israel) turning himself, and in a way of
triumph presenting himself to his Spouse, who seeing one coming, glorious in
his apparel ( i.e. most delightful to behold) and yet withal having Garments
dyed in blood, and traveling as a mighty Giant in the greatness of his
strength, she is astonished, and (as in an ex asie, through wonderment, fear,
and joy) she cries out, Who? Who is this that comes from Edom in such a
manner, with dyed Garments? yet glorious in his apparel, traveling in the
greatness of his strength: To whom Christ presently replies, It is I, O my
Spouse, It is I, who am mighty to save thee, who for thy sake have been
treading the Winepress alone, trampling the people in mine anger, making them
drunk in my fury, bringing down their strength to the Earth; and it is so far
from repenting me of any thing that for thee I have done, that were there, or
shall there be any more to gather together against thee, I can yet do no less
(for my heart is filled with vengeance) than tread them in mine anger, yea
trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments,
and I will slain all my Raiment.

Wonderful unspeakable love! a^ming a most dear and blessed Savior with
burning affections and fury, cladding him with zeal, and vengeance as a cloak,
that he might plead their cause, and avenge their quarrel, pour abroad the
blood of their enemies, who by their sins have thrust a spear in his side, and
wickedly poured out his. What heart without melting into tears can consider of
this?

Thus much as touching the fourth and last thing, namely, Christ's wonderful
disposing of his enemies to their own ruin; with which concludes the Interval,
or space of time betwixt the sixth and seventh VIALS.

VIAL VII.
1 The Angel pouring it out.
Verse. 17. AND the seventh Angel poured out his Vial. The Angel of this Vial is
doubtless Christ himself, whose coming we spoke of but now, and who instantly
upon his coming pours out this Vial, called the Archangel, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. who
is there said to come with a shout, or voice, The Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel. And accordingly
as an Adjunct accompanying this Vial we have a great voice. The seventh Angel
poured out his Vial, and there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven;
which voice is no other but the voice of Christ himself, as I shall show anon.

2 The Subject of it,
The Air.
Into the Air: No subject can be more general than the Air, which contains
all things, fills all places, in which all Creatures breath. The universality
of the subject notes the pouring out of this Vial to be universal, the
foregoing Vials have fallen upon particular subjects, The first, upon the
grosser parts of Popery; The second, upon the Antichristian Hierarchy; The
third, upon some particular States and Kingdoms, with their Heads and Rulers;
The fourth, upon the German Empire, or House of Austria; The fifth, upon the
City Rome; The sixth, upon the Turk, or Ottoman Family. But this seventh and
last is general, reaching all things whatsoever that stand in the way of
Christ's Kingdom.

And this the change of speech used in this Vial, different from all the other,
notes also, as it seems to me; for whereas the other Vials are poured out upon
such and such things, the first upon the Earth, the second upon the Sea, the
third upon the Rivers and Fountains of waters, etc. This seventh and last is
said to be poured out into the Air, noting hereby the spreading and dilating of
it self, as far as the Air spreads, in such manner, as that thereby all, and
every part is filled with the effects of it. Now a Vial might be poured out
upon the Air, yet not d^late it self into every part to fill the whole with it,
as the first Vial poured out upon the earth, did not so dilate it self as to
destroy those earthly dregs of Popery in every part of the Papal Kingdom;
neither did the second upon the Sea, destroy the Antichristian Hierarchy, but
in some Kingdoms only; the third upon the Rivers and Fountains of waters, not
the ten Horns in general, but some of them only did, as to the overturning of
their present Government and Constitution, feel it; yet each of these Vials are
truly said to be poured out upon these subjects, because they had effects to
destroy some part, that which they fell upon, though they did not dilate
themselves into every part; but now this seventh is poured out INTO THE AIR,
noting a dilating and diffusing of it self as far as the Air goes, which (I
have said before) is general, filling all things and places; accordingly this
Vial reaches,

1 The whole Kingdom of the Dragon, or Devil, who is called the Prince of the
power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. who, upon the pouring out of this Vial, with all
his Host, shall be bound, and shut up in the bottomless pit for a thousand
years, as Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. And here indeed it had been more orderly to have
placed our foregoing Discourse of the thousand years, but because truth is to
be preferred before order (which when it tends to the obscuring of the truth,
is but curiosity, and to be shunned) I have therefore, because in my judgment
it stands more for the advantage of truth where it is, than it would do here,
chosen to be a trespasser in points of nicety.

2 The whole Kingdom of Antichrist, or the Papacy.

3 The remaining Powers of the Great Turk, which were not destroyed by the
sixth Vial.

4 The Kingdoms of this world, i.e. such as neither have dependence upon the
Papacy, nor the Great Turk, all shall come under this Vial, and be utterly
ruined, and broken in pieces by it.

3 The Adjunct,
A great Voice.
And there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne,
saying, It is done.

This Voice is Christ's, Rev. 21.5, 6. He (that is, Christ) that sat upon the
Throne, said unto me, It is done.

The meaning of the words, It is done, I have formerly showed to be only this,
NOW is the New Jerusalem established, now is my Kingdom set up, the work now
is done and completed; for this work had its beginning before under the former
Vials, and that from the first day that the little stone began to smite the
great Image, and therefore Daniel, Chap. 2.44. speaking of this Kingdom of
Christ, says, In the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom, i.e. Christ's Kingdom shall have its beginning, as the same is a
stone, in the days of the Fourth Monarchy, before yet the same is destroyed;
and it shall grow up by little and little, smiting the great Image, and still
as it smites be increasing in strength and greatness; but yet the same is not a
Mountain filling the whole Earth, till it has broken in pieces the Great
Image, in such sort as that the place thereof is no more found, verse. 34, 35.
i.e. this Kingdom of Christ shall not be completely set up, it shall not be
the Fifth Monarchy (though yet it shall be in a rising way) until the seventh
Vial be poured out, which breaks in pieces, and wholly removes the Fourth
Monarchy and all worldly powers.

And this is clear, Dan. 7.12. who there tells us, that the rest of the Beasts
had not their Dominion taken away, ( i.e. the Kingdoms of this world, are not
completely the Lords, and his Christ's, as Rev. 11.15.) until such time as the
Thrones of the Fourth Beast ( i.e. the Roman Monarchy as under Antichrist) are
cast down, verse. 9. the Beast himself slain, his body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame, verse. 11. Then shall it be said, (as here) with a great
voice, It is done; Then shall be verified what is said, Rev. 10.7. The mystery
of God is finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets, that is,
now all things spoken of by the Prophets, as touching my Kingdom, and the
setting of it up, are finished, for it is done, the New Jerusalem is
established.

And truly here let me add, that although some godly men (whose thoughts I
have an esteem of) look every day for the setting up of this Fifth Monarchy,
and that by having the Powers of the world laid down, and let fall out of the
present hands they are in, who hold them (as they judge, by right of the Fourth
Monarchy, and left free for Saints to come, take up and execute; yet must I
needs say, (being convinced of the contrary) in this I am not of their mind,
conceiving their mistake to lie in this, viz. a not considering (which too
comes from a non-acknowledgement of Christ's Personal coming before it) by whom,
how, and when this Fifth Monarchy is to be set up. And for my own part, as I
greatly rejoice to see so much power in Saints hands already, and believe more
will be every day, as the Stone by rolling grows greater; so do I also wait for
that (which some presently expect) till that day wherein our Lord shall appear,
who himself will do this work, viz. Destroy the Beast, cast him into the
burning flame, and then give the Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole heaven, unto the people of the Saints of the most
High: When that which but now is rising, and shall rise every day, growing
still greater and greater, as an augmenting stone, shall become a huge and
great Mountain, filling the whole Earth.

And of this Kingdom as to the first rise of it, which is little, in an
unlikely way, in the midst of many difficulties, I take it, David's Kingdom was
a Type: But as to the glory of it, when the same shall be a Mountain filling
the earth, the Kingdom of Solomon was rather a Type; for which reason, Psalm.
62. (which is a clear Prophecy of the glory, riches, duration, vast extent of
this Kingdom, agreeing in many things with that glorious Prophecy, Isa. 60.)
is entitled, A Psalm for Solomon; yet in respect of Christ, the King, or
Monarch, in this Kingdom, David in Scripture is ever the Type, and not
Solomon, because Solomon after he was sat upon the Throne, did foulely
back-slide to Idolatry, but David did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord.

This voice coming from the Throne, intimates (what I have been speaking) that
now Christ's Throne shall be set up, and himself sit upon it, as Chap. 21.5.
which also we have, Chap. 3.21. To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
in his Throne. The Throne Christ here speaks of, is a distinct Throne from his
Fathers Throne, such a Throne as he was not to sit on, till he should come from
his Fathers Throne; for (says he) the Throne I am upon at present is my
Fathers Throne, which I, overcoming, am privileged to sit upon; but I have a
Throne of my own, which I shall one day sit upon, when he that overcomes shall
sit down with me on this my Throne, as I now by overcoming am set down with my
Father on his Throne; which as it proves Christ shall have a Throne distinct
from that on which he now sits, so also, it confirms what I said even now, that
the Dominion, or the Throne, is not to be given to the Saints, until such time
as Christ himself comes and sits him down upon his Throne, according to that
Matthew. 19.28. Verily, I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also
shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; and it is
for this reason, because the Apostles shall be advanced as chief in this New
Jerusalem, that Chap. 21.14. tells us that the foundations of this City shall
have in it, the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

And this Throne, because not only Christ himself sits upon it, but also his
Saints with him, is therefore called Thrones in the plural number, Rev. 20.4.
And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them;
which words exactly agree for time (as before I have showed) with this of the
seventh Vial.

Now whereas this Throne upon which Christ sits and utters his voice, is said
to be in the Temple of Heaven, it clearly denotes (Heaven in the Revelation
being always understood of the Church on Earth) the erecting of this Throne
here below.

And indeed if we compare with Chap. 21. where we have the same Throne spoken
of, together with the voice from it, It is done, Verse 5, 6. it will evidently
appear that the New Jerusalem there described, is to be understood of a
glorious state of the Church here on earth, and not (as some) of Heaven
hereafter.

First, Because John sees a New Earth as well as a New Heaven.

Secondly, Because the New Jerusalem is said to come down from God out of
Heaven, Verse 2. therefore not a description of the Church in Heaven, which
coming down out of Heaven, left we should imagine it (as some) to be Visional
only; namely, that John in way of Vision saw it come down, but really it is
above; we have therefore (to free us from such a mistake) a great voice added,
Verse 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, i.e. on earth, the place of
men's habitation, whereas were the New Jerusalem to be understood of Heavenly
glory, the contrary should be, viz. The Tabernacle of men with God.

Thirdly, Because the glory of the Kings of the Earth (which glory is outward)
and of the Nations, shall be brought into it, Verse 24. The Kings of the earth
do bring their glory and honor into it, Verse 26. And they shall bring the
glory and honor of the Nations, into it, Neither of which can agree to Heaven
hereafter, but do most excellently agree to what is spoken at large in the
Prophets of the glorious state of the Church on Earth in the last days. To say
(as is commonly) such of the Kings of the Earth, and those of the Nations who
shall be converted here, shall be there glorified; and this to be the bringing
of the glory of the Kings and Nations thither.

To that I answer, 1. How can this be said to be their glory, which is rather
Gods put upon them, than theirs?

2 How is this brought thither? is the glory of Heaven fetched thither from
Earth?

3 How can they be said to bring it thither, who never receive this glory till
they come there?

Fourthly, Because it is evident from the 12. and 14. Verses, that the twelve
Tribes of the Children of Israel, and the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, shall be
first or chief in this New Jerusalem; but let it be proved from any other
Scripture, that they shall be so in Heaven hereafter.

Fifthly, Because Chap. 22. (which to Verse 6. is a continued description of
the New Jerusalem) tells us, ver. 2. of a Tree in this New Jerusalem, whose
leaves are for the healing of the Nations. Now let it be shown how the Nations
shall be healed in Heaven hereafter.

Sixthly, Because in this New Jerusalem we have express mention made, as of the
Throne of God, so also of the Lamb, Chap. 22.1. proceeding out of the Throne of
God, and of the Lamb, Verse 3. There shall be no more curse, but the Throne of
God, and of the Lamb shall be in it. But now in Heaven hereafter, though Christ
as God coequal and coeternal with the Father shall reign for ever, yet not as
the Lamb, which is clear, 1 Cor. 15.28. And when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all, i.e. the humane nature of Christ
which dyed for our sins, rose again (as the Apostle in the foregoing verses
speaks) was (...) above all the Creatures, all the time of the thousand
years, and the General Judgment (according to which nature, Christ is said to
be the Lamb slain) shall now be subjected, after the end, to the Godhead, or
Divine nature, which in Heaven shall be all in all; so that Christ as the Lamb
shall not have a Throne there. And this Interpretation is not so much mine, as
Augustines long ago, and Calvin's since, who both speak the same thing,
confessing a subjection of the humanity of Christ to be here intimated, whom I
think good here to name, not that their Authority, nor my saying so, proves the
thing to be truth; but that I might hereby stop the mouths of such, who
otherwise possibly, would be ready to condemn the truth it self for error.

Yet let none hence conclude (as some now adays fancy) a cessation of the
Humane Nature, by being turned into the Divinity, so as that Christ shall be
Godman no longer; for the Apostle in saying the Humane Nature shall be subject,
denotes plainly, that the same shall even in Heaven hereafter have a being; for
how can that be subject, which has no being?

And as the Lambs having a Throne in the New Jerusalem proves clearly that it
cannot be meant of Heavenly glory after the day of Judgment; so does it as
strongly prove (what before I have laid down) that not a Spiritual only, buth
a Personal presence of Christ shall be with his people in the New Jerusalem,
all the time of the thousand years; for Christ as the Lamb has his Throne in
it; but Christ Spiritually only, is not the Lamb, nor was he sacrifised in
that sense.

Seventhly, and lastly, Because Isa. 60. (which Chapter, as is most evident,
speaks not of heavenly glory, but of a glorious state of the Church here on
Earth) is for time one and the same with this, as plainly will appear by
comparing one with the other.

Isa. Rev. 60.11. the Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut
day nor night.

21.25. And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day.

Verse 3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising.

Verse 24. The Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

Verse 10. Their Kings shall minister unto thee.

Verse 11. That men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that
their Kings may be brought.

Verse 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations into it.

Verse 1. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land.

Verse 20. The days of thy mourning shall be ended

Verse 4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor cry^^^, neither shall there be any more pain.

Verse 19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

Verse 23. And the City had no need neither of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine
in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb was the light thereof.

Verse 21. Thy people also shall be all righteous.

Verse 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are
written in the Lambs Book of life.

Yet because it would be a thing hard to be believed, that the New Jerusalems
glory should be here on Earth; therefore it is said, chap. 21.5. These words
are true and faithful; and again, chap. 22.6. These sayings are faithful and
true.

One thing here is of special concernment to be opened, to the end the words of
the seventh Vial may be brought to a reconciliation with the description of the
New Jerusalem, chap. 21. (both as I have showed being to be referred to one and
the same time) which is this, Seeing John in describing the New Jerusalem,
says, I saw no Temple therein, Chap. 21.22. and the contrary is here
intimated, There came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven; how can these
things agree? or the one be made Expository of the other, when they speak
things contradictory.

I answer, John saw no material Temple, such as was in Jerusalem of old, to
which here new Jerusalem is opposed.

Or secondly, (which I rather incline to) John saw no such Temple as was the
former Temple, or Church State under the Gospel. But that a Temple there shall
be, is manifest; for, says he, in the next words (which are given as a reason
why no such Temple as formerly had been, should be in this New state, because
indeed they should now have a better Temple) The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb
is the Temple of it.

So that a Temple there is, but this shall not be such a Temple in which Christ
through outward Ordinances as a medium is conveyed to his, and they by faith
enjoy him, as now; for what need of these things when Christ is with his
people, and to be enjoyed in another way of Vision^ yea, the duration of these
things is but until his coming, 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this bread
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. And the Apostle is
clear in this, that all enjoyments of God by faith cease, when sight takes
place, 2 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 13.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And indeed what use will
there be of 2 Glass to see Christ in, when he shall present himself face to
face, which he will do at the day of his appearing, 1 John. 3.2. It does not
yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is; yea, to behold the Lamb thus, shall be
a principal part of the New Jerusalems glory, Rev. 22.3, 4. They shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. So that this Temple, shall not
be a worshipping of Christ, and an enjoyment of him through outward ordinances,
but rather a more immediate worshipping, and enjoyment of him in himself, who
therefore in this New Jerusalem, is not only the person worshipped, but the
very Temple we worship in.

And this which now I am speaking of, is (I ta^^, (...)) clearly held forth in
those words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.26. Yet once more I shake not the earth
only, but also Heaven; which place he quotes from Haggai, chap. 2.6, 7. which
before I have proved relates to this time. Now as Christ at his first coming
shook the legal worship, which the Apostle tells us; stood in meats and drinks
and carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of Reformations, Heb.
9.10. for which reason the shaking hereof is called ashaking of the earth, and
did at his resurrection establish another way of worship, far more spiritual
than the former, ye having also some outward Ordinances and Institutions, as
the former had, which in Scripture is frequently called (as opposed to the
other) Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven; so at his second coming will he shake
this worship, cast this Temple (though more spiritual than the former) to the
ground also; for (says he) yet once more, I shake not earth only, but Heaven
also; i.e. all the worship that now is (I mean outward) is upon Christ's second
coming to be removed, and such a Kingdom and Worship, instead thereof, is to be
set up, as can never be shaken, i.e. shall never be broken in pieces any more,
as the former worships have been, but shall be the same for kind (being as I
have said, a more immediate worship) with that which shall be in Heaven
hereafter.

And not darkly is this hinted, Isa. 60.19, 20. The Sun (that is those outward
things which before were as a Sun, under which are comprehended outward
Ordinances) shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the
Moon give light unto thee; and verse 21. Thy Sun ( i. e. the Lord Christ, who
is the light of this New Jerusalem) shall no more go down, neither shall thy
Moon (thy outward glory and felicity) withdraw it self, making a clear
distinction betwixt the Sun that before was, which is called the Sun, and the
Sun that at this time shall be, which is called thy Sun, as being another Sun
peculiar to these times, and not the same Sun as was in former times; and this
Sun that we may not be mistaken in it, is interpreted twice over to be the
Lord, Verse 19. The Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, Verse. 19. as
opposed to the former Sun. And again, For the Lord shall be thine everlasting
light, verse. 20. being there added as a reason why this Sun should never go
down, no not in Heaven hereafter, because the Lord should be this Sun; And who
is this Lord? why Jesus Christ the Lamb, who is said to be the Temple and Light
of this New Jerusalem, and that in opposition to the Temple, Sun, Moon, i. e.
all outward Lights and Ordinances that before had been, Rev. 21.22, 23. And I
saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple
of it. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it,
for the Lord God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

And to this day (as I conceive) have those Scriptures reference, Jerem. 31.34.
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brether, saying, Know the Lord, for the shall all know me, from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, Isa. 54.31. And all thy children shall be
taught of the Lord, arguing an immediate feeding and teaching, not so much by
instruments means, and Ordinances, as the Lord himself.

And though it is not denied these Scriptures had a fulfilling in the
beginnings, when the Spirit was poured down, teaching then (Christ promising,
and sending his Spirit for that end) being more abundant and spiritual than in
former times, for which cause they are by Christ himself, and Paul after him,
interpreted as then fulfilled; yet it is evident from the scope of those places
whence these Texts are quoted, that the Prophets had in their eye another time,
namely, the time of the Jews delivery, when not Judah only, but Ephraim, Head
of the ten Tribes also, spoken of expressly by Jeremy, should return; yea the
very time of the New Jerusalem, whose stones are therefore by Isaiah said to be
laid with fair colors, her foundations with Saphires, her windows of Agates,
her gates with Carbuncles, and all her borders with pleasant stones; not unlike
that description of the New Jerusalem John gives us (but more full) Rev. 21. of
that, although in part these Scriptures had a fulfilling before (in which sense
Christ and Paul mention them) yet the fullness, or the complete fulfilling of
them, respects the time we are speaking of.

And does not the phrase of New Heavens, and New Earth, spoken of by Isaiah,
Peter, John, and ever with reference to this time, imply as much? for the very
phrase of making a new, implies the abolishing of the old; which new made, that
it cannot consist of any such outward things as did the old, is clear, because
upon the abolishing of the old, such things, only are left standing in this
new, as can never be shaken, or removed, which all outward things are subject
to.

Thus although in the New Jerusalem, a Temple there shall be, yet not such a
Temple as was the Temple of Jerusalem of old, or is the Temple of Jerusalem
that now is; but as the whole state of things shall be new, so shall the Temple
be new. In the new Heaven the L^mb who sits upon the Throne shall be the
Temple, and the great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, is the
Voice of Christ himself (who at this day will sit upon his own Throne in the
midst of his Church and People) which is clear (as before I have said) Chap.
21.5, 6.

And what I have formerly hinted, I shall here remember again, that the very
reason (as I conceive) why many in these days cast off the holy Ordinances,
and Institutions of the Lord Jesus, is this; They find it clear in Scripture
that the continuance of these things are but until his coming, which coming
(puts an end to Ordinances) they judging to be Spiritual only, and not
Personal, and persuading themselves withal that in this sense Christ is come
to them already, they conceive it high time for them to quit and shake off all
outward forms.

Object. If against what I have said it be objected, that Zechary, Chap. 14.16.
speaking of this time, tells us, They shall go up from year to year to worship
the Lord, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles; therefore Ordinances shall be
at this day.

I answer; If by worshipping the Lord, and keeping the Feast of Tabernacles we
understand a walking in Ordinances, then shall the Ordinances at this day be
common to all, even the worst of sinners, for that such at this day shall be in
the world, has been before proved; and observe, the command to come up to
Jerusalem to worship the Lord, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles is general,
upon all that are left of those who came up against Jerusalem, verse. 16. All
the Families of the earth, verse. 17. yea the very Heathen, verse. 18. and if
Ordinances shall be so common at this day, then will the purity of worship in
respect of the Worshippers be less then, than now it is; and if so, where then
will be the holiness of this day, which in this respect is to excel all days
before it?

The meaning therefore (I conceive) is this, That all people in remembrance of
the terrible destruction Christ made of his enemies, gathered together at
Jerusalem, upon his appearing, shall from that day, year after year, i.e. often
come and worship before the Lord, i. e. fall down before this Christ sitting on
the Throne, acknowledging him to be the great King of the world, and Jesus
Christ the Lord, to the glory of God the Father, fulfilling that of Isa. Chap.
45.23. Unto me every knee shall bow; And that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.20. At
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow.

And this, the phrase used by the Holy Ghost, of keeping the Feast of
Tabernacles does notably set forth, for in Levit. 23.34. where we have the
institution of this Feast, we have verse, 43. this added as the reason of the
Institution, namely, the memorial of Gods strange and wonderful Providence
toward, and in preservation of Israel when they came out of Egypt; which
Deliverance as it was but a Type of this, so the Memorial thereof, by keeping
the Feast of Tabernacles, was a Type of the Memorial that should be kept, by
all Nations coming up to Jerusalem, to fall down and worship before the Lord,
of Christ's wonderful Deliverance of his people, and terrible destruction of his
enemies at this day: And indeed that the main thing intended in this Feast, was
the Memorial of Gods delivering mercy, appears to me from hence, that this
Feast, which from Joshua's time until Nehemiahs had not been observed, was
again kept upon their coming out of Babylon, Nehem: 8.17. This also may be an
answer to such other places in the Prophets, where mention is made of worship
at this day.

Having thus brought the words I am opening, to a reconciliation with those,
Chap. 21. verse. 22. It would neither be amiss, unprofitable, nor improper to
the subject we are upon, to have given here a description of the New Jerusalems
glory, which is the very thing briefly hinted in these words more fully
explicated, Chap. 21. throughout, Chap. 22. verse. 1. to 6. and in many places
in the Prophets of the Old Testament; but that I have restraint laid upon my
spirits as to this inquiry, supposing the time of full discovery hereof not yet
come, for I find that the destruction of the great Whore, together with a
general view of the Bride; the Lambs wife, and the time of her Reign with
Christ, is discovered to John in the wilderness, that is, whilst the Church as
yet remains in her warfare, contesting and struggling with her enemies, Chap.
17.1. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven
Vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee
the judgment of the great Whore, that si^eth upon many waters, verse. 3. so he
carried me away in the spirit into the Wilderness: John is now in the
Wilderness, and we read not a word of his removing his station, till we come to
Chap. 21.9, 10. therefore I conclude the whole of the Prophecy from Chap.
17.1. to Chap. 21.9. (which discovers the great Whore, and her ruin, Chap.
17.18. gives us a general view of the Bride, the Lambs wife, and her attire,
and Christ her Husbands coming, and appearing to destroy her enemies, and marry
his Spouse to himself, Chap. 19. makes discovery, that before the General
Judgment shall be a thousand years, in which Satan shall be bound, and the
Saints shall reign with Christ, Cha. 20. gives us also a general hint of the
glory of this thousand years, Chapter 21. v. 1. to 9.) was all of it revealed to
John in the Wilderness, teaching us hereby, that before yet the Woman is got
clear out of the Wilderness there shall be a full discovery of these things.
But now the full and particular glory of the New Jerusalem, the discovery of
the Bride in all her glory, John that he might see that, has his station
removed from the Wilderness to a great and high Mountain, Chap. 21.9, 10. And
there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials, full of
the seven last Plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will show
thee the Bride, the Lambs wife; and he carried me away in the Spirit to a great
and high Mountain, and showed me that great City the holy Jerusalem, descending
out of Heaven from God, verse. 11. Having the glory of God, etc. intimating thus
much to me, that the time of discovery of this glory in the brightness of it,
is not to be expected, till the Church is gotten out of the Wilderness, and
become a great Mountain in the world. And sometimes I have thought, that as the
Lord does, and will more and more every day, make discovery of those things
John had revealed to him in the Wilderness (the Gentile Churches being the
Woman in the Wilderness) so that which John had revealed to him in the great
and high mountain, he may have reserved in store for the Jews upon their coming
in, who converted shall become a Great Mountain in the world.

These considerations have laid a restraint upon me as to this inquiry; yet
this I shall do; leave with the Reader a Rule or two, which may be a help to
him so far as to prevent many mistakes that otherwise will be very apt to
arise, whilst he reads what very frequently is spoken in the Prophets, with a
relation to this time.

1 RVLE, That the Prophets of the Old Testament, prophesying to a people that
lived under a dark Legal Administration, in which, things were veiled that
stood under an outward temporal Covenant, I mean a Covenant for temporal
things, as riches, long life, etc. as well as for spiritual, that were as yet
children under age, trained up under a Schoolmaster, Tutor, Governor, who
though they were in a way of learning (looking at a time to come wherein they
should be more perfect Scholars) had as yet (for the bulk of them) attained
but very little spiritual understanding in any thing; their senses being as yet
exercised only about the first rudements of Religion, and the first Principles
of the Oracles of God; I say, The Prophets speaking to such a people, are in
their expressions to be looked upon, as rather accommodating themselves to the
state of Gods people under the Administration and Covenant that then was, then
speaking of things as they are in themselves, or were to be in the
accomplishment.

This speaking, by way of allusion, is clear, Zach. 14. (before quoted) They
shall go up from year to year, verse 16. alluding to the going up of the twelve
Tribes once every year to worship at Jerusalem, to keep the Feast of
Tabernacles, alluding to that Feast in time of old. So verse 20. we read of the
Pots in the Lords house, the Bowls before the Altar. verse 21. of sacrificing
and seething, the expressions clearly alluding to the way and manner of worship
that then was.

So likewise Ezekiel in the last eight Chapters of his Prophecy speaks
altogether by way of allusion to the state of things in Israel, and the way of
their worship under the Old Testament.

That the main thing intended in those eight Chapters, is the description of
the New Jerusalem, appears,

1 From the order observed by the Holy Ghost, in laying it down, the things
spoken concerning it, being brought in as an immediate consequent of the Jews
conversion, and the battle of Armageddon, both which things had been fully
treat of in the three foregoing Chapters, Chap. 37, 38, 39.

2 By comparing with the description we have of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.22.

Ezekiel. Revelation. Chap 40 2. In the visions of God brought he me into the
Land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame
of a City on the South.

Chap. 21.10. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high
mountain, and showed me that great City, the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of
Heaven from God.

Chap. 47.1, 2, 3, etc. Behold waters issued out from under the threshold of
the house.

Chap. 22.1. And he showed me a pure River of water of life, proceeding out of
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb,

Verse 12. And by the River upon the bank thereof, on this side, and on that
side, shall grow all Trees for meat whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall
the fruit thereof be consumed; it shall bring forth new fruit according to his
months, because their waters they issued out of the Sanctuary, and the fruit
thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.

Verse 2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River,
was there the Tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month; and the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations.

Chap. 48.35. The name of the City from that day shall be, the Lord is there.

Verse 3. And there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it.

Now Ezekiel in describing the New Jerusalem, does all along sure his
expressions to that Administration, and the capacities of Gods people in those
times, not speaking of things as they are in themselves, or were to be in the
accomplishment, of which the whole of his Discourse is an instance. But to
instance more especially in one thing, we have Chap. 41. a large description of
a Temple, which he that reads, will hardly imagine to be the same Temple John
speaks of, Rev. 21. verse. 22. The Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb is the Temple
of it; and yet it is the very same, and no other, for Ezekiel Chap. 47. tells
us of waters coming out of this house, verse 1. causing a River, verse 5. which
River had on each side of it, Trees for meat, bearing fruit according to the
Months, whose leaf was for medicine, verse 12. which very River is said, Rev.
22.1, 2. to proceed from the Throne of God and the Lamb, interpreting clearly
what we are to understand by Ezekiels Temple, notwithstanding all the
measuring, the height, length, breadth, Chambers, Ornaments, etc. that we there
read of (things suting their capacities to whom the Prophet spoke) yet the
Temple is indeed no other but the presence of the Lamb, the Throne of God and
the Lamb, which is the very Temple of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.22.

And as in these, so in many other places, where the New Jerusalems glory is
described by the Prophets, we have sometimes long life intimated, The child
shall die an hundred years old; as the days of a tree, are the days of my
people. Sometimes building houses, planting Vineyards etc. as if the great
glory were to lie in such things, which is not so; but as Ezekiels Temple has
in his description a great deal of outward bravery, suitable to such a Temple,
as their thoughts to whom he spoke were most taken up with, yet is in a word
interpreted in the Revelations to be another manner of thing, viz. the Lamb,
and his Throne, so these things are spoken rather by way of condescension to
their weakness, who standing under an outward Covenant, in which such things
were promised, were exceedingly pleased with things of this nature, looking
much at them, making a greater account of them, than as the things in
themselves are, or will appear to be; when this day shall come.

2 RULE, That the coming of Gods people out of Babylon, building the second
Temple, and Jerusalem, being all an eminent Type of the thing I am speaking of,
therefore in some Scriptures where we read of this glory, under that
deliverance as a Type, we are to look upon some things to have their fulfilling
then in the Type, some others to be fulfilled for time to come in the Antitype.

To this Rule appertain not a few places in the Prophets, especially in Haggai,
and Zechary, who prophesied upon the coming out of Babylon, and at the time the
second Temple was building, as Hag. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. the Prophet has reference to
the second Temple as a Type, which he calls the latter house, v. 9. but whilst
he speaks of shaking Heaven and Earth, the desire of all Nations coming, and
thereupon the glory of the latter house to surpass the glory of the former
built by Solomon, in all these things it has relation (as in our former
Discourse has been proved) to the time of Christ's second coming, and the state
of the new Jerusalem.

So also in Zechary, where we have several Prophesies concerning Jerusalems
being built, Chap. 1. chap. 2. chap. 8. some things had their fulfilling then,
in that Jerusalem, which was afterward built by Nehemiah; as when it is said;
Jerusalem should again be inhabited as a Town without walls, for the multitude
of men and cattle therein, Chap. 2.4. There should be yet old men, and old
women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and the streets of the City should be
full of Boys, and Girls, playing in the streets thereof, chap. 8.4.5. which
things were afterward fulfilled. Jerusalem betwixt Nehemiahs time, and the
time of Christ's coming being inhabited again, and grown populous, which when
Zechary Prophesied was but a ruinous heap; or in case these things are to be
extended further, to the time of the New Jerusalem, we are to interpret them
according to our first Rule; but now there are other things, as many Nations
being joined to the Lord in that day, becoming his people, and the Lord himself
dwelling in the midst of them, chap. 2.11. The coming of many people, and the
inhabitants of many Cities, and the Inhabitants of one City saying to another,
Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts; yea,
many people, and strong nations coming to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem,
and to pray before the Lord, chap. 8.20, 21, 22. These things relate to the
time of the New Jerusalem, yet so as we must also interpret the Prophets manner
of speaking, and setting forth these things according to our first Rule.

3 RULE, That as the Gospel Administration (which was when the Prophets wrote
to come) was to be a very considerable step toward the glory of the new
Jerusalem, things being under it to make a great advance in Spirituals, in
comparison of what then they were; by reason whereof a beginning, or a peeping
forth of new Ierusalems glory, should be held forth in that Administration;
Hence we are to look upon some places in the Prophets where this glory is
spoken of, as relating in part, and in some things to the state of the Church
under the Gospel Administration that now is, but to have a more special
relation in regard of the Prophets scope, to the state of the New Jerusalem,
which is yet to come.

This is clear from the Scriptures before mentioned, Isa. 54.13. All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, Jer. 31.34. They shall no more teach
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; which
places (as I have said) have an accomplishment in part at present, but for
their fullness, they look to the time of the New Jerusalem, which is yet to come.

So Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Those that are ashamed of their abominations shall have
the form and fashion of Gods house showed to them; and chap 44.10, 11. The
Levites that went astray when Israel went astray, are laid by in the special
acts of Gods worship; but v. 15, 16. they that kept their charge when the rest
went astray, are employed in the service of Gods Sanctuary and Table; which
things (in a spiritual way) God has fulfilled, and is daily fulfilling to his
people, under the present Administration, though yet the general scope of this
Propliecy (as before) looks to the time of the New Jerusalem.

By these few examples under each rule, we may be able to judge of many others
of a like nature, which will in reading offer themselves to us.

4 The Effects.
1 Effect.
Terror.
Verse. 18. And there were voices, and Thunders and Lightnings, and there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake, and so great.

The great voice from the Throne upon the seventh Angel pouring his Vial forth
fills the whole world with terror. In the Air are heard most dreadful
astonishing thundrings and lightnings, fearful affrighting voices, through the
sound of the Trumpet, ( Mat. 24.31. 1 Cor. 15.52.) houlings, screechings,
lamentings of Devils, whose torments now begin; the time being come. The Earth
is terribly moved, and ready to be rent in pieces, with a horrible shaking,
upon the appearing of the Lord, as Mount Sinai shook and quaked greatly, when
the Lord descended upon it, Exodus 19.16, 17, 18. hereby the whole world is
filled with trembling; now do the Tribes of the earth mourn, men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on
the earth, for the powers of Heaven are shaken.

2 Effect.
Ruin.
Wherein we have,

1 A particular List of the things ruined, which are; 1 The Great City. 2 The
Cities of the Nations. 3 Great Babylon.


Verse. 19. And the Great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of
the Nations fell; and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give
unto her the cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

Setting aside the Dragon, who was the principal stickler in encouraging and
gathering together that Rout and Multitude, who from all parts of the world
come up to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, whose punishment is
passed over here, but particular mention is made thereof, Chapter 20. there
seems to be three sorts of enemies, who shall gather together at this day.

1 The Popish Crew. 2 Mahumetans. 3 Some Kings of the Earth, neither Papists,
nor Mahumetans.
The first stand under the Banner of the Beast, The two last being one in this,
that neither pretends to stand up for Christ, as does the Beast (who shall at
this day by the subtlety, Miracles and counterfeit holiness of the false
Prophet, be marvellously blinded, being made to believe his cause to be quite
contrary to what indeed it is) but coming forth upon the account of some carnal
respects, or worldly interests, yet mixed with malice (which is natural to all
that are of the Serpentine seed) against the Saints, are both comprehended
under that of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 19.19. I saw the Beast, and the
Kings of the earth.

Daniel, Chap. 7. describes them otherwise (though not much differing) calling
the first (as here) the Beast, which I have showed to be the Roman Monarchy, as
governed by Antichrist, the little Horn; the other, the rest of the Beasts,
verse 12. noting other worldly powers, who shall join hands at this day with
Antichrist, or the fourth Beast.

Now that Antichrist, with other Kings of the earth, as his adherents, shall at
this day make one Head, to oppose the Saints, is without question, but yet
perhaps it may be thought sufficient proof has not (from what has been said)
appeared to evidence that the great Turk, or the Mahumetan party shall join
with the rest, or should be comprehended under that of the Kings of the earth.

Now although no less can be thought, when the Holy Ghost speaks in such
general terms, verse. 14. The Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, then
that the Turk, who possesses a great part of the world, should be included,
yet (that the sense of the words may be more clear) I shall from other
Scriptures prove that the great Turk shall have a hand, yea a deep one too, in
this desperate engagement.

Not much to insist upon (because I would not be prolix) the gathering
together of Gog and Magog, spoken of in Ezekiel. 38.39. which diverse worthy men,
and not without giving good reasons for it) interpret the Pope and the Turk
which gathering together that it is the same with that at this day, the several
circumstances of the place do evidence, as will appear to him who shall compare
the battle of Gog and Magog, with this of Armageddon; and not (as some) that
spoken of, Rev. 20.8, 9. which mentions no battle, as does Ezekiel; nor will
that agree to the time of the Jews delivery (which Ezekiel is clear in) but
rather should be a thousand years after; neither can there (the General
Judgment immediately ensuing thereupon) be any allowance of time, either to
bury Gog's dead, or for a glorious state of the Church here on earth; both
which Ezekiel speaks punctually unto; yet well may those, Rev. 20. being such
of the seed of old Gog and Magog as shall survive the thousand years, and shall
at the end thereof (upon the Devils letting loose) act against the Saints, as
their Forefathers did, retain the names of their Ancestors Gog and Magog
still. But to pass this, I take it, those places (which are not a few) in the
Old Testament, where mention is made of the rage of the Assyrian against
Israel, have a special reference to the thing I am now in proving, for whereas
the Turk does at this day possess Chaldea, Mesopotamia, with such other
Countries, as did anciently belong to the Assyrian Monarchy; so do I conceive
what the Prophets often hint at, as touching the Assyrians invading Israel with
his Armies, to be rather Typical of what should be in the last days, acted by
his Successor the Turk, than a plenary fulfilling of those Prophesies by any
Invasions of the Assyrian, in, or about those times, Isa. 30.31. For through
the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down; Which Text, although I
deny not, but it had a typical accomplishment in the days of Senacherib, yet
does not that answer the scope of the Chapter, which it is manifest looks to
the last days, and how the 30, 31, 32, 33 verses agrees to what we have
formerly spoken, as touching Christ's coming at the battle of Armageddon, will
be clear to him who shall but compare sundry places which upon that occasion I
have opened before with this.

As for that of Micha, Chap. 5.5. This man shall be the peace when the
Assyrian shall come into our Land; It cannot be interpreted as having reference
to any other but Gospel Times, long before which the ancient Assyrian Monarchy
was ruined. And would you know what time of the Gospel it has reference unto?
why the last time of all, viz. The time of Christ's coming, and second
appearing, verse. 4, 5, 6.

The like we have, Isa. 7.8. Zach. 10.10, 11. with many other places, which
would be too tedious to insist upon.

Having thus found the parties who shall at this day be gather together to
oppose the Saints which march under three distinct Banners. 1 The Banner of the
Beast, or Roman power governed by Antichrist. 2 The Banner of the Turk, or
those of the Mahumetan Religion. 3 The Banner of some earthly Kings and
Potentates, Adherents to the other two, yet neither Papists, nor Mahumetans.

I come now to make application hereof to the words, which notably set forth,
and that distinctly the ruin of either party.

1 The great City is divided into three parts. By Great City, we are not to
understand the City Rome, which fell before under Vial 5. But the whole power
of the Beast, or Antichrists Kingdom, for so is the word used, Rev. 11.13. The
same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell,
i.e. One of the ten Horns, or the tenth part of Antichrists Kingdom fell upon
the Witnesses rise. Now the dividing of the Great City, notes the downfall and
ruin of his whole Kingdom; for a City divided, or rent piece from piece, by
some terrible shaking, or earthquake cannot stand; And this division being into
three parts, notes a full and perfect ruin, three being a number of
perfection. Now is the Beast slain, his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame, Dan. 7. Now the Beast and false Prophet, both are cast into the
Lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev. 19. Now those who worship the Beast,
and his Image, and receive his mark in their foreheads, or in their hands,
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation, and are tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of
their torment ascends up for ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name,
Rev. 14.

2 The Cities of the Nations fall, i.e. such Nations as come in to the help of
the Pope and Turk at this day, their Royal Cities, Regal Seats, Fortresses and
places of strength are overthrown. Now are the Thrones of Kingdoms overturned,
and the strength of Kingdoms of the Heathen destroyed, Hag. 2.22. This is the
day of Gods controversy with all Nations, when the slain of the Lord shall be
from one end of the earth, unto the other, Jer. 25.30, 31, 32, 33.

3 Great Babylon comes up in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup
of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. Now by Great Babylon we may not
understand the City Rome, which fell under the Fifth Vial; nor is it weight
enough against our Reasons there laid down, to say that the City Rome is
spiritually called by the name of Great Babylon, in this Book, unless it could
be proved that the name in a spiritual sense is appliable to no other City, or
thing, but Rome only.

Nor may we secondly, understand Antichrists Kingdom in general, for that is
set forth by the Great City; and it is not a thing probable, having once
expressed it, and being gone to another Head namely, The Cities of the Nations,
that the Holy Ghost should yet afterward come over with it again. Yea how
improper would it be to say of the Kingdom of the Beast, that it came now in
remembrance before God, which piece by piece had been pulling down, and
destroying throughout all the Vials.

As therefore three sorts of Enemies combine together at this day, the doom and
downfall of two of which, we have seen already; so is the ruin of the third,
namely, the Great Turk, with Constantinople his Royal City, or Seat of
Residence here set forth by Great Babylons coming up in remembrance before God:
And in this opinion I am not alone, (Brightman) a man of no little worth and
esteem, having asserted it before me.

And truly the Turk, being, as has been made appear, so considerable an Enemy
in this last engagement, it is not probable that his punishment should either
be passed over in silence, or named in the general only, which if it be not
contained in these words, is so.

Withal there will be the same reason at this day, when the Turkish Seat shall
be as infamously famous for opposing, and oppressing the Jews, as Antichrists
has been, or now is, for persecuting the Christians, that in a figurative
sense the name of Babylon (the oppressing City of Gods people of old) should be
applied to it, as now it is to the Seat of the Beast; yea if of the two one may
claim a greater title to the name than the other, the claim of this day will
fall to the Turk, who by possessing the cruel and persecuting qualities of
Babylon of old, toward Gods people shall make his claim equal with Antichrist;
and by how much he has not the qualities only, but the Lands and Territories
of the Babylonian Monarchy that was now in his clutches, his claim will be the
greater.

And indeed to me it is evident that those things that concern the destruction
of Babylon, mentioned so often in the Prophets, which in the ruin of Babylon of
old (the Type) neither had, nor could have their accomplishment, though they
have a respect to the Turk and Antichrist both, yet more especially to the
Turk, as the principal Antitype of that Type, as is clear, Isa. 14. for the
Babylon there spoken of, is that Babylon which shall be an oppressing City to
the Jews (for which reason they triumph over it in its destruction, verse. 4, 5,
etc. and this at the time of their last restoration, which is yet to come, as
is manifest in the three first verses, which can be meant of none so properly,
as the Great Turk sitting in Constantinople.

And as a further Restoration seems to be promised, and foretold, Jer. 50.4 5.
then merely the coming out of Babylon of Old, when Judah only, and not (as
here) Israel and Judah together, came up to seek the Lord; so by the same
reason we are to look after the ruin of some other Babylon, then merely
Babylon in the Letter, which Babylon must be such too, as shall at this day
stand in the way of the Jews return, and be an enemy to them; and this can be
more fitly applied to none than to the Turk.

And notwithstanding the Turk received a notable blow under the former Vial, by
means of which a door was set open to the Jews to recover their own land; yet
because Constantinople, his chief City was not thereby destroyed, therefore in
respect of the wrath of God, poured out upon that at this day, it is here said,
Great Babylon came now in remembrance before God; which words very fitly agree
to the ruin of Constantinople, but are not appliable either to the ruin of
Rome, or the Kingdom of the Beast in general, both which came up into
remembrance, and had been actually punished before this day.

2 The Inevitableness of this Ruin.
Verse. 20. And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

Islands and Mountains are places of refuge. Men in times of commotion, fly to
these for shelter, as being safer in them than they can be elsewhere. Now that
which tome is a notable confirmation that the words are in this sense to be
understood; I find the Prophets in other places (which relating to this very
time, serve as a Comment upon the Text) intimating that men should at this day
either be secure by reason of such shelters, or fly to such places for
shelter, Ezekiel. 39.6. speaking of the Effects of the Battle of Gog and Magog
says, I will send a fire in Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the
Isles, as noting, that some should at this day think themselves secure by being
in Isles, places of refuge and shelter. The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 2.21.
speaking of the day wherein God will arise to shake terribly the earth (the
same with that shaking, Joel 3.16. Hag. 2.6, 7. 21, 22. tells us that some at
that day for fear of the Lord, shall fly to the clefts of the Rocks, and to
the tops of the ragged Rocks; noting men shall seek shelter from such places of
refuge as the Rocks of Mountains are. But so inevitable shall their ruin be,
that notwithstanding men may fly for shelter to their outward Refuges,
thinking themselves secure by reason of them, yet shall all their refuges and
shelters prove no shelter against this storm, for every Island shall fly away,
and the Mountains shall not be found.

3 The Greatness of it.
Verse. 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a Talent.

The Hail from Heaven denotes the more immediate judgments of God, which shall
fall on his enemies at this day; and there may be an allusion to the
destruction of the Canaanites by great Hailstones from Heaven, Josh. 10.11. The
greatness of the Hailstones, each being about the weight of a Talent, notes the
judgments God will inflict at this day, to be the heaviest and most dreadful
that can be, a Talent of all weights being the greatest.

3 Effect.
Blaspheming of God.
And men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the Hail, for the plague
thereof was exceeding great.

The Eeast lived a Blasphemer, now he dies a Blasphemer, and goes blaspheming
to the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, whither the just judgments of God
(which when they cannot reform sinners on earth, cast them to Hell) have now
brought him.

And this is the conclusion of this great day, as it respects Gods Enemies,
which to their woe they shall find and feel to be a black, dismal, and fatal
day, though but the beginning of it, as it respects the Saints and people of
God, to whom it shall be the most glorious, joyful, and lightsome day that ever
they beheld; When God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there
shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and the Lamb, and his Servants
shall serve him. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads. And this is that New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven;
the hope of which, let it purify our hearts even as he is pure. Let us always
have our loins girded about, our lamps burning, and we our selves like unto men
that wait for the Lord, looking earnestly unto, and breathing after that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who once was offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that
look for him will he appear the second time without sin to salvation. When be
that now overcomes shall be made a Pillar in the Temple of his God, and he
shall go no more out; And Christ will write upon him the Name of his God, and
the Name of the City of his God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out
of Heaven from his God, and he will write upon him his new name. And those that
do his Commandments shall have right to the Tree of Life, and enter in through
the Gates into the City, when without shall be Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves, and makes a
lie. Which things he has sent his Angel to testify in the Churches, who is
the Root and Offspring of David, and the bright and morning Star; Who also
himself says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

The Reason of the Order observed in pouring forth the VIALS.
THe Beast having now for a long time trampled under foot the holy City,
blasphemed God, his Name, and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; and
exercised his utmost rage and cruelties, against all those who holding the
testimony of Jesus, could not be brought to worship him, his Image, or receive
his Mark in their foreheads, or in their hands; and being in all these his
insolent and outrageous practces animated, yea assisted by the Kings of the
earth, subjecting themselves to him, and giving their strength, power, and
Kingdom to the Beast, Christ (as able no longer to hear the Blasphemies, and
behold the rage and cruelties of the Beast, with all the determined time of
redeeming Sion, avenging the blood of his Elect on those that dwell on the
earth, judging the Beast, casting down his Thrones, and taking the Kingdom to
himself, being come) without delay now rouseth up himself, and in his wondrous
zeal, his power, and greatness marches forth, to judge the great Whore,
destroy the Thrones of Kingdoms, take possession of the Kingdoms of this world,
and subject them to his own righteous Scepter.

But finding upon his first Rise, that two of his ancient and principal Rights
had been long invaded, and laid waste by the Enemy, namely, The glory of his
Priesthood upon earth, and the exercise of his Kingly Power and Prerogative in
his Churches; the first by the putrified and filthy stinking puddle of Romish
Doctrine, which instead of exalting that Righteousness alone in Justification,
which is pure, perfect, heavenly, did establish a righteousness which was
earthly, impure, full of filthy dregs, out of which one poisonous root, were
grown up innumerable Idolatries, viz. the Mass, Purgatory, Indulgences,
Invocation of Saints, Penance, Pilgrimages, Monkish life, etc. by which the
glory of Christ's Priestly Office was veyled, the precious truth of the Gospel
perverted, and Souls instead of bread of Life, fed continually with nothing but
poison. The second, by that Tyrannical power of Antichristian Discipline, which
to satisf^^ the pride, and accomplish the designs of an ambitious aspiring
Hierarchy and Clergy, is established in such a way, that all, both small and
great, must submit to ^t, its Decrees, and Impositions, and in token of
subjection ^eceive some mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, which
in case of refusal, they are thereupon Ex^ommunicates, who must neither buy nor
sell, hereby ^rampling under foot the Kingly power of Christ, snatching his
Scepter of love and meekness out of his hands, and instead thereof lifting up a
rod of Iron.

Christ seeing this, that through the rage and insolency of the Enemy, the
ancient bounds were broken down, and Sion lay plowed as a field, he makes it
his first attempt, being risen, to recover his own again; and because it was of
greatest concernment (being that Salvation depended upon) to pluck off the veil
from his Priestly Office, and to confound that Doctrine which had set up an
Idol-god for a Savior, and an Idol-worship instead of the worship of the true
God; Christ therefore as his first work, shakes to pieces that rotten earthly
Doctrine, with the several Idolatries growing upon it, which had justed him out
of his Priestly Office, openly hereupon proclaiming himself to be only High
Priest and Mediator, and salvation to be had in him alone; and this is done by
the first Vial, which is poured out upon the Antichristian earth, i.e. the
groffer parts of Popery.

Yet because the Kingly Office of Christ was still invaded by an Antichristian
Lording Discipline, who under pretense of ruling for Christ, and exercising his
Kingly power, did in all places make havoc of the Saints, persecuting them as
evil doers; Christ therefore makes it his next work to recover his abused
Scepter into his own hands again, which to do, the second Vial is poured out
upon the Sea, namely, the Antichristian Discipline.

Christ having now regained his own (as a puissant and noble Conqueror, who
being first unjustly invaded, contents not himself to recover his Rights, but
takes this opportunity to invade his enemies) makes an invasion upon the
Dominions of his enemies; and because the Kings of the earth had lent their aid
and assistance to the Feast, by whose power and strength given up to the Beast,
the blood of his Saints had been spilt in every place, therefore to avenge the
blood of his Saints, he begins the Quarrel with them; and so the third Vial is
poured out upon the Rivers and Fountains of Waters, that is, upon some
particular States and Kingdoms, and upon the Heads of these, namely, Kings and
Statesmen.

And here, with the pouring forth of this third Vial, the Stone cut out of the
Mountain spoken of, Dan. 2. (which breaks in pieces the Great Image) begins to
smite, the design of Christ in the two first Vials, being not so much to break
the great Image, as first to recover his own in order thereunto.

Here also the Ancient of days, Dan. 7. begins to sit, and to cast down the
Thrones of the fourth Beast.

Christ having now won the Out-shifts and Suburbs of his grand Enemy, he next
(that the blow might come closer, and fall yet heavier) invades him in his
principal street, which for many Ages together was the strength and glory of
the Beasts Kingdom; this is the work of the fourth Vial, which therefore is
poured out upon the Sun, that is, the German Empire, or House of Austria.

The Thrones of the Beast being cast down, his Sun darkened, and Christ going
onward upon his march, his heart filled with Vengeance for the sake of his
people; the remembrance of the blood of his Saints poured out like water in
every place, through the continual Instigations, Commissions, and authority of
the Roman Beast comes now so fresh into his mind; and the cry thereof is so
loud in his ears, that he can no longer forbear, giving her in requital, blood
to drink, who has made it her delight to drink her self drunken with the blood
of his Saints and Martyrs; he therefore next with a swift and high hand bends
his march to the Seat of the Beast, the City Rome, upon which the Fifth Vial is
poured out.

Rome being destroyed, and made a ruinous heap, and the appointed time being
now come, in which Gods ancient people the Jews are to come up to their own
Land; which being at the present in the hands of the Great Turk, who with all
his power will oppose their claim, and endeavor to keep them out of
possession, that therefore a door might be set open for them, the Sixth Vial is
poured out upon the great River Euphrates, i.e. the power and multitude of the
Turk.

Christ having hitherto been breaking his enemies by parts, and nothing being
wanting but the crowning victory, to make him absolute King and Monarch of the
world; in order therefore unto the pouring forth of the Seventh and last Vial
(when Christ is to take possession of the Kingdom given to him by his Father,
and to be exalted as the great and only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords) we have two things as principal.

First, A General Rendezvous of all the enemies of Christ into one Body, fit to
be cut off.

Secondly, The Personal coming and appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, to make
dispatch of his enemies, and to set up his own Kingdom.

Things being thus in a readiness, we have the pouring forth of the Seventh and
last Vial into the Air, a universal subject, which ushers in with it the
subversion of all Christ's enemies; the Beast (Antichrist) being hereupon slain,
his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame; The rest of the Beast, i.e.
all other worldly powers, have their Dominion taken away, and the Great Dragon
the Devil, is bound, and cast into the bottomless Pit, and there shut up for a
thousand years; And now are the Kingdoms of this world become the Kingdom of
the Lord, and of his Christ, who shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.

A Table of the chief things contained in this TREATISE.
The First Part.
THe Coherence of the words, with the explication of the Text, P. 1. to 4 Doct.
It is an especial duty lying upon the Saints to attend unto, and be active in
the work or works of their Generation. Page 4 Showed, 1 What Generation-work
is, and how the same is different from those common duties which lie upon
Saints as Saints, and the special duties of a Saints calling, station relation,
or present condition, p. 5, 6, 7, 8 2 That Saints in their several Generations
have ever had their peculiar works, as is proved by a line drawn through the
several generations from the beginning downwards unto our times, p. 9, to 14 3
That it is a matter of great concernment for a Saint to attend to the work of
his Generation, as appears. 1 God by his dispensations calls aloud for it, p.
14 2 Generation work is of all others the greatest work, and a neglect herein
the greatest sin, p. 15. to 20 3 In doing the work of our Generation, we are
most serviceable to the design of God that is on foot in the age we live in, p.
20 4 God has choice distinguishing mercy for that man that follows him in the
work of his Generation, as, 1. God will overlook many failings in that man, p.
21 2. God will stand by that man and never leave him, ibid. 3. God will own
that man in case he live thereto in the work of the next Generation, ib. 4. God
will provide a hiding place for that man against those storms which may fall
upon the Generation he lives in, that is active in the work of his Generation,
p. 22 5. God will reveal his secrets to such, ib. 6. God has peculiar honor
wherewith he will crown such, p. 23 5. Neglect of Generation work exposes a
man to many danger, as, 1. Danger of losing Gifts and Talents, ib. 2. Danger of
losing communion with God p. 24 3. Of being laid aside by God. p. 25 4. Of
stumbling at the work of the Generation, and all the dispensations of God about
it, p. 27 5. Of being blinded in or shut out of the work of the next generation
in case he should live to see it. ib. 6. Of becoming an Apostate, and an open
enemy to the truths of God, p. 29 4 Wherein lies the work of the present
Generation? which is resolved 1 By laying down of some general Rule, serving to
discover what the work of the Generation is, in whatsoever age or generation a
Saint may be supposed to live in; which Rules are these, 1. Be inquisitive to
find out (according to Scripture account) the particular age or generation it
self, that it is fallen to thy lot to live in, p. 30 2. Add to this, a narrow
and impartial search for discovery of those glorious and remarkable things, the
accomplishment of which God in his word has promised and foretold, in and
about this age. ibid, 3. observe Gods visible dispensations toward the age,
and the various transactions of things therein, how they answer to what is
foretold and promised, p. 31 4. Observe what work that is which is most opposed
and raged against by Satan and wicked men in the Generation. ib. 5. Observe
what the most spiritual enlightened Saints have upon their hearts, as the work
of the Generation, ib. 6. And lastly, Be much in prayer to God for light
herein, p. 32 2 By application of these general Rules unto the present age p.
ib. to 48 5 How may each one find out that part of the work which is properly
his work, and God calls upon him to be active in. 1 Observe what part of
Generation-work that is, that thou art in a capacity to do. p. 51 2. Observe
what work that is amongst those things thou art in a capacity to do in thy
Generation, which the dispensations of God without, and the bent or inclination
of thy spirit within, at such time as the same is most spiritual, or thou have
most intimate communion with God, calls for the present doing thereof, p. 52 3.
Observe what piece of Generation-work that is, which when thou have ventured on
it, thou have found God most eminently appearing to thee for thy encouragement;
and also with thee for assistance in doing of it. p. 53 4. Observe what piece
of Generation-work that is, which thou being in a capacity to do, in doing of
art likely to meet with greatest opposition, and that from all hands. p. 54 5.
Observe what piece of Generation-work that is, which when thou have had a Call,
an opportunity, and an inclination to do it, and have not set about the same,
God has presently withdrawn himself, ib. 6. Observe what piece of
Generation-work that is, which put case thou were to die, would make most for
thy comfort if done, and most for thy discomfort if neglected, p. 55 6 And
lastly, How may Generation-work be so carried on, so as that God may be served
in the Generation? 1. Labor to find out what the work of thy Generation is, and
in what things chiefly it consists, ib. 2. Be humbled for it in case thou have
failed in the work of the former Generation, p. 56 3. Convert private cares
which only concern thine own particular condition, into cares for the public,
and the cause of Christ on foot, p. 57 4. Stand loose and disingaged from
private interests, p. 58 5. Favor and own the Saints of the Generation, p. 59
6. Keep Justice alive against wilful offenders in the work, p. 60 7. Commit
the managing of public Affairs into the hands of faithful and holy men, ib.
8. Take heed of such things as will obstruct and hinder the work of the
Generation. as, 1. Take heed of being offended, p. 61 1. At the new light of
the Generation, p 62 2. At those stumbling blocks which are usually laid in the
work of the Generation, p. 63 3. At the declared dissents the private
discontents or murmurings of a religious party against the work of the
Generation. p. 65 4. At the after miscarriages and errors of those who have
been the only active Instruments and lights at first in the work of the
Generation, p. 66 5 At the ghastly looks, and untrodden footsteps of some
particular dispensations and actings attending the work of the Generation, p 67
2 Take heed of being discouraged 1. At the littleness and lowness of
beginnings, p. 68 2. At the powerfulness and successfulness of opposition
against the work, p. 70 3. At great ones holding off, and withdrawing their
hands from the work, p. 71 4. At the perfidious and treacherous dealing of some
particular person employed in the work, p 72 5. At the meeting with
disappointments, ib. 6. At unkindnesses received from those whose good and
welfare we have ever closely pursued in the work, ib. 7. At multiplied
sentences of death put upon the work, p. 73 3 Take heed of envy against such
whom God imployeth in the work, p. 74 4 Take heed of procrastinating that work
which is the business of the present Generation, under a pretense that the time
of doing it, is not yet come, neither are things ripe for it, p. 75 5. Take
heed of limiting God to Ordinaries, ibid. 6. Take heed of neglecting the nick
of opportunity that God puts into thy hands to do the work of thy Generation
in, p. 76 7 Take heed of forecasting events, ib. 8 Take heed of settling thy
self upon seeming godly and righteous principles when these clash with the work
of the Generation, ib. 9 Take heed of lending an ear unto such friendly
respectful offers, which carry in the bowels of them (though gilded over with
outward respect and friendship) a crafty design against the work of the
Generation, p. 77 10 Take heed of making reason of State the rule of public
actings, p. 79 11 Take heed of setting up humane Laws above the work of the
generation, ib. 12 And lastly, Take heed of conjunction with such who are not
real-hearted to the cause of God, and the work of the generation, p. 89
The Table of the Second Part.
The Introduction containing six general Propositions in order to the whole.
Proposition 1. THat we are there to begin the pouring forth of the Vials,
where Antichrist first began to go off the Stage, p. 1, 2 Prop. 2. That the
Vials are all to be poured forth by such Angels only as come out of the Temple,
p. 2 Prop. 3. That Gods call to the Angels to pour out their Vials is to be
looked for out of the Temple, p. 3 Prop. 4. That the subjects of each Vial, are
things standing in ppsition to Christ's Kingdom, chiefly things pertaining to
Antichrist, p. 4 Prop. 5. That the effects of one Vial do oft-times run into
another Vial, p. 5 Prop. 6. That the Terms and Phrases relating to the Vials
are to be understood not in a litteral, but a metaphorical sense, p. 6
VIAL 1.
1 The subject of it, the Popish earth, or the corrupt Doctrine of Antichrist,
p. 7 2 The effect; An infectious stinking sore, (causing in others a loathing,
and withdrawing) upon the Assertors of Popish principles, p. 8 It began to be
poured out about Luthers time, ib.
VIAL 2.
1. The subject of it, the Sea; 1. Not meant of Nations in general, p. 9 2 Nor
of the corrupt Doctrines of Antichrist concluded upon in the Council of Trent
ib. 3 Nor of the Political State of the Roman Empire, p. 10 But, The Romish
Discipline, or the Hierarchy and Clergy of Rome, upon whom this Vial was poured
out in England, Anno Dom. 1641. p. 10, 11, 12 Two Objections answered, 1 Obj.
The Hierarchy and Clergy of England, but an inferior part of the Romish
Hierarchy and Clergy, answered, ibid. 2 Obj England but one of the ten Horus
answered, ib. 2 The Effects. 1 Effect; The Antichristian Discipline appears
cruel, corrupt, and becomes loathsome, p. 13. 2 Effect; All those that live and
breath in this corrupted sea, die a civil death. ibid. Some remaining drops of
this Vial yet to come, p. 14
VIAL 3.
1. The Subject of it; the Rivers and Fountains of waters. 1. Not to be
understood of the Romish Bishops and Doctors, p. 14 2 Nor particularly of the
Jesuits, ib. But of Some particular States and Kingdoms subjected to the Beast,
with their heads and Rulers, p. 15, 16 2 The Effect; Bloody Wars arise in those
Nations, by which their Heads and chief Rulers are cut off, ib. 3 An Adjunct; A
justification of God in the execution of his wrath upon those Nations and their
Heads, 1 By the instruments used to do the work, p. 17 2 By suffering Saints
from some more remote place, p. 18 A reason given why this Vial has a double
testimony of the righteousness of it, which none of the other Vials have, p. 19
A reason also given why only the Instruments Christ uses, and suffering Saints
give this testimony, ib. Two reasons given why Saints that have suffered in
Scotland, do at present in Holland, do not with their fellow Brethren join in
this testimony, p. 20 The particular Nations this Vial falls upon, are England,
the Low Countries, and France, and the reason why, ibid. An Objection answered;
How it can be just with God to punish these Nations, and their present Heads,
for what was done formerly, seeing they cannot help what their Forefathers did,
yea, are reformed and do disclaim it? p. 21 This third Vial is the Vial we
stand under, it has for the greatest part passed over England already, is now
passing upon Holland, and will shortly upon France, p. 22, 23
VIAL 4.
1. The Subject of it the Sun; 1. Not Christ, 2 Nor the Scriptures, p. 23 But
the German Empire, yet not the war past, wrath suddenly to come, p. 24, 25 2.
An Adjunct, A power given to the Angels to scorch with fire, interpreted of the
Call the Angels of this Vial shall give to the Witnesses now lying dead in
Germany, to arise, p. 26, 27, 28 3 The Effects; 1. Rage and vexation upon the
Popish party, ibid. 2. Blaspheming God, ib.
VIAL 5.
1 The subject, the seat of the Beast; 1 Not Antichrists Kingdom in general, p.
29 2. Not the Popes Supremacy, ibid. 3. Not Episcopacy, p. 30 But the City of
Rome, p. 30, 31 Two Objections answered, ibid. 2 The Effects; 1. Effect, An
eclipse of the glory of the Papal Kingdom, p. 32 2 Effect, Rage and madness
upon the Papals, ib. 3. Effect, Blaspheming God, p. 33 3 The time when this
Vial shall be poured forth, about the year 1656, ib. Two Reasons given why the
Fourth and Fifth Vials have so little time allowed them for pouring forth, when
the former have taken up much more, p. ib. 34
VIAL 6.
1 The Subject; The great River Euphrates; first not literally to be
understood, p. 35 2 Not meant of the riches and revenues of Antichrist, ib. 3
Not of the streams of Popish corruption, p. 36 But, The Turkish Empire, p. 37
Here is showed why the Turkish Empire is called the Great River, and why the
Great River Euphrates. 2 The effect, a wasting the Turks power and multitude.
p. 38 3 The moving cause; To prepare a way for the Jews, both to their
possession of their Land again, and also their receiving of Christ, p. 38, 39,
Here is showed why the Jews are called Kings, why Kings of the East, That the
Jews con version shall be before the pouring out of the seventh Vial, proved p.
40, 41 Three Objections answered. Obj. 1. The words speak not of conversion,
but preparing a way thereto, answered. p. 42 Obj. 2. The Jews cannot be
converted till after all the Vials, because no man could enter into the Temple
till all the Vials were poured forth answered ib. Obj 3. The 21 and 22 Chapters
of the Revelation (which follow upon the seventh Vial) hold forth the Jews
conversion, answered, p. 43 4 The Angel of this Vial. 1 Not the Jews themselves
p 44 2 Not the Turk performing it 1. Either by civil broils, ibid. 2. Nor by a
diversion of his forces to some other place, making way thereby for the Jews to
rise, p. 45 3 Not Christ by any immediate hand from heaven, ib. But The Gentile
Churches. Proved, p. 45. to 52. where also is showed, the cause of this attempt
made by the Gentile Saints upon the Turk, and the manner how they shall carry
it on. Here also the Prophecies of the Stone, Dan. 2. and of the four
Carpenters, Zach. 1. are opened; in doing which, both are showed to be one,
both are applied to the Gentile-Saints; the Reason given why the Gentile-Saints
are by Daniel called a Stone, by Zachary, four Carpenters. Quest, Who among
the Gentile-Saints shall undertake this enterprise. Answ. 1. The same
Instruments that shall ruin Rome, p. 52, 53. Here is showed who they are that
in all likelihood shall ruin Rome. 2 Four Characters taken out of the Prophets,
and applied to that people who shall have the principal hand in this great work
p. 53, 54 The Question propounded, Whether the Jews first stirring shall be
upon a bare Civil account, or not? Resolved at large, p. 54. to 62
The Interval betwixt the sixth and seventh VIALS.
Four remarkable things falling within this Interval. 1 Agents and Ambassadors
are sent forth from the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet unto the Kings of the
earth, p. 63 Here, 1 The terms are opened, and it is showed 1. Who meant by
Dragon ibid. 2. What we are to understand by Beast, and false Prophet,
Explained. 1 Beast in the Revelation is sometimes spoken of without
distinction, as though he were but one; When so, Beast denotes Antichrists
twofold power, Civil and Ecclesiastical, p. 64. to 68. Here is showed, what is
meant by Beast ascending out of the bottomless pit, Chap. 11.7. why called,
Chap. 17.8. the Beast that was, is not, yet is, shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit. What meant by the seven Heads of the Beast. In what sense this
Beast is called the Eighth, yet said to be of the Seven. 2 Beast is sometimes
spoken of with distinction, as though he were two; when so, one part denotes
Antichrists Civil power, the other his Ecclesiastical, p. 68 to 69. 1 In this
sense we read of two Beasts, Chap. 13. One Beast arising out of the Sea; this
showed to be Antichrist in his pure Civil State, why the seven Heads of the
Beast are interpreted, first of the seven Mountains of Rome, and secondly, of
the seven distinct Governments in the Roman Empire. Another Beast arising out
of the Earth, this showed to be Antichrist in his Ecclesiastical State. That
the first Beast cannot be the whole body of the Roman Empire, p. 69 These two
Beasts did both rise together, p. 72 And how ib. These Beasts, though two, are
really one, and make up but one Antichrist ib. 2 In this sense, we also read of
a Beast and a Woman, Chap. 17. What meant by Beast, and Woman. Why the second
Beast is here called a Woman? In what sense the Woman is interpreted the Great
City, p. 72 3 In this sense we have in the Text a Beast, and a false Prophet
mentioned. The false Prophets showed to be the same with the second Beast, p.
110 Why the second Beast in his third estate is called a false Prophet, p. 73,
74 2 The manner of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophets sending forth their
Agents; namely by a general Convention of the Popish party. Two things debated
in this General Assembly; from whence this result of sending forth Agents and
Ambassadors all over the world does arise, p. 75 3 Their grand design in this
Ambassy, p. 76 4 The Agents employed in this Ambassy, why said to be three. Why
said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet. Five
Characters given of them, p. 77, 78 The second thing within this Interval, viz.
The Personal coming of Christ. 1 Proved to be within the Interval betwixt the
sixth and and seventh Vials. 1 Argument, Christ shall Personally come at the
battle of Armageddon, grounded upon eight Prophecies, which are opened, p. 79
to 88 2 Argument, Christ's Personal coming shall be at the time of the Kingdoms
restoring to Israel, proved from sundry Scriptures, Here is showed that the
time of restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. cannot be the General Judgment,
p. 88, to 97 Two Arguments to prove the former Position urged from the words
themselves, p. 97 98 Two Arguments more laid down in the General, tending to
prove Christ's Personal coming cannot be far off, ib. This coming we speak of is
showed to be the same ^th that coming common^^ called a coming to Judge^ent, p.
101 to 111. Where (...) showed that there are but ^o Personal comings; ^ut not
Martyrs only, but ^l the Saints shall come ^ith Christ at this day. The ^ace
Rev. 20.4, 5. answe^d. The difference of this ^inciple from the common ^ceived
opinion, is showed (...) be only this; that af^ms the General Judge^ent to be
instantly upon ^hrists coming: this main^ins that the thousand ^ars, Revel. 20.
are to ^sue first, and after that ^e General Judgment. Here is discussed the
^ousand years, concern^g which it is assert^^, 1 That the thousand ^ars, six
times repeated ^ap. 20. are one and the ^ins thousand years in all, p. 111 2
That the thousand years are a definite time, p. 111, 112 3 That they are yet to
come, and to take their beginning from the Battle of Armageddon, p. 112, 113,
114 1 Proved by three Arguments. 2 Answer is given to their Arguments, who
reckon them past, and the grounds of them showed to be mistakes p. 114, to 119
The whole time from Christ's appearing to the end of the world may be called in
a large sense a day of Judgment, p. 119 Two special differences betwixt the
Judgment passed in the time of the thousand years, and that which shall be at
the last day, p. 119, to 122. Where the manner of Saints ruling, and reigning,
and judging the world is opened. Two Objections answered. 1 Objection, How can
this be, seeing the world is to be destroyed by fire at Christ's coming,
Answered, p. 122, to 124 2 Objection, How can this agree to the state of
glorified souls, or how will it stand with Saints glory and spirituality,
answered, p. 124, to 127
The whole concluded, with three Rules laid down to judge of such Scriptures as
speak of Christ's Second coming, p. 127 to 129 3 Christ's Watel word to his
people. Five Reasons given of it, why the duty of watchfulness is by Christ
annexed to the Dictrine of his second coming, p. 129, to 138. Inhandling these
the steep of the ten Virgins spoken of Mat 25. is opened. 4 Christ's
providential disposing of his enemies, p. 139, to 142. Here is showed what is
meant by Armageddon.
VIAL 7.
1 The Angel pouring it forth, Christ himself, p, 142 2 The Subject of it, the
Air, nothing the pouring forth of this Vial to be universal, upon 1 The whole
Kingdom of the Dragon. 2 The whole Kingdom of Antichrist. 3 The Kingdom of the
Great Turk. 4 The Kingdoms of this world, p. 142, 143, 144. Here is showed why
a change of speech is used in this Vial, different from all the rest. 3 The
Adjunct. A great voice showed, 1 Whose voice this is, p. 144 2 The meaning of
the voice, p. 145 3 Why said to come from the Throne, p. 146 4 Why the Throne
the voice comes from, is said to be in the Temple of Heaven, p. 148 Here is
showed that the New Jerusalem spoken of Rev. 21. Chap. 22. cannot be meant of
Heavenly glory, but must be a glorious state of the Church on Earth proved by
seven Arguments, p. 148, to 152 No outward Ordinances to be in the New
Jerusalem p. 152, to 157 An Objection answered, where is showed what is meant
by the going up to Jerusalem Zach. 14. to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, p. 157
The reason given why a particular description of New Jerusalems glory is
forborne, p. 158 Three Rules laid down to judge of such Prophecies as concern
the New Jerusalem, p. 160, to 166. Here is showed under our first Rule, That
Ezekiel in his eight last Chapters treats of the same thing that John does in
his two last and that Ezekiels Temple is no other but that Throne of God, and
of the Lamb spoken of by John. 4 The Effects. 1 Effect, Terror, p. 166 2
Effect, Ruin, wherein we have 1 A particular List of the things ruined, which
are, 1 The Great City which cannot be meant of the City Rome, but of the whole
power of the Beast p. 170 2 The Cities of the Nations, showed what meant by
them, p. 171 3 Great Babylon, ib. 1 Not the City Rome, ib. 2 Not Antichrists
Kingdom in general, ib. But, The Turkish power, or Constantinople his Royal
Seat p. 172 A reason given for this Interpretation, ibid. A reason also given
why at this time the Furkish Seat should be called Great Babylon, together with
some Scriptures that carry in them a probability of the thing esserted, p. 173
In order to the discussing the things spoken of, in opening this second Effect,
it is premised and proved, That the Turk shall be one principal Enemy in the
battle of Armageddon, p. 167, to 169. Here Gog and Magog is treated of, and the
gathering together of Gog and Magog, mentioned Rev. 20. showed to be not that
gathering together of Gog and Magog spoken of by Ezekiel, but another. Here
also is showed that many of those places in the Prophets where mention is made
of the Assyrians rage, have reference to the Great Turk, and are to be
understood of him. 2 The inevitableness of this ruin, p. 173 What meant by
Mountains and Islands, and by their flying away. 3 The greatness of this ruin,
p. 174 Why hailstones said to weigh a talent, ib. 3 Effect, Blaspheming God, p.
175 The Conclusion of the whole, The Reason added of the Order observed in
pouring forth the VIALS. p. 176
The end of the second Table.
THE CONTENTS OF The Third Part.
CHAP. I. WHerein is set forth the state or condition of the two Witnesses
within their Prophesying time, and the time of their being killed, from Rev. 11.
Divided into ten Sections. SECT. 1. That the two Witnesses are the Magistracy
and the Ministry. Where is showed why Zachery sees two Olivetrees, and but one
Candlestick, John two Olive Trees, and two Candlesticks, Page 1, 2 SECT. 2. Why
they are called Witnesses, p. 3 A distinction made betwixt that general witness
bearing, common to Saints in all ages; and that special witness-bearing
peculiar to these two Witnesses, and this time of 1260 years. Here is also
showed that the peculiar work of these two Witnesses is to bear witness against
the Beast: in clearing whereof, the 42 months of the Beast, and the 1260 days
of the Witnesses, are proved to be one and the same, p. 3, 4, 5, 6
SECT. 3. Why these Witnesses are said to be two? why clothed in s^ckcloth?
what is meant by their destroying their enemies by fire, shutting Heaven that
it rain not, turning waters into blood, smitting the earth with plagues p. 6, 7
SECT. 4. That the three days and a half of the Witnesses lying ^ead are to be
understood, not of 1260 years, but of three years and a half only: and these
to be the last three years and a half, of the 1260, p. 8, 9, 10, 11 SECT. 5.
The time of the Witnesses slaughter discussed in the general only. Three
Conclusions concerning it laid down. 1 Concl. That the killing of the Witnesses
shall be within that very three years and a half, which shall precede the Jews
first stirring, proved, p. 12 2 Concl: That the killing of the Witnesses shall
be but a little before the downfall of Rome, proved, p. 13 3 Concl: That the
killing of the Witnesses shall be at the latter end of the third Vial. In order
to the proving whereof is showed, That some Vials are poured forth before the
slaughter of the Witnesses, p. 15, 16 Here is showed that the Angel, Chap. 17
1. that shows John the judgment of the great Whore, was the Angel of the third
Vial, Also, why the Holy Ghost in the explication of the Vials, begins with the
thirds leaving out the two first. A ground to expect great discoveries under
the third Vial; and a reason given why God makes such discoveries under that
Vial. The thing it self, that the killing of the Witnesses is to be under the
third Vial, at the latter and thereof, proved by three Arguments, p. 16 to 20.
Here is opened the war between the Lamb and the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.14.
which is proved to be a Civil War, or a war by a civil sword: and for the time
of it to fall within the Vials, and in particular under the third Vial, at the
beginning of it, immediately before the slaughter of the Witnesses. Object. All
the Vials come under the seventh Trumpet, answered, p. 20, 21. where is showed
that the seventh Trumpet is contemporary with the seventh Vial only. A
Conclusion from the whole, That the day of the Witnesses killing is in all
likelihood already begun, and not much more than begun, ib.
SECT. 6. The Beast killing the Witnesses, is the Antichristian Magistracy and
Ministry, p. 32. Why the Antichristian Magistracy and Ministry are spoken of
as but one Beast, when the Witnesses, viz. Christ's Magistracy and Ministry, are
ever spoken of as two, p. 23 SECT. 7. The nature of the witnesses death proved,
1 Not to be a corporal death, ib. But a death partly civil, partly spiritual,
p. 24 25 Here is showed wherein the blackness of this day will lie.
SECT. 8. The place in which the witnesses lie dead. 1 Not the whole Papal
Kingdom, but only one of the ten Horns. p. 25 2 Particularly, to be Germany,
p. 26, 27, 28 Yet Christ's Witnesses in other places must expect a cloud in some
measure upon them, and Gods work within this day, ibid.
SECT. 9. How things shall be agitated in the world in the time the Witnesses
lie dead, 1 They of the People, Kindreds, Nations and Tongues shall see their
dead bodies, and not suffer them to be put into graves. Here is showed, 1 What
this putting their dead bodies into graves, notes, p. 29 2 Who are meant by
those of the People, and Kindreds and Nations and Tongues, ib. 2 The dwellers
on earth shall rejoice, make merry. Here is showed also who these are p. 31 3
There shall be in all likelihood within this time a general peace, betwixt
those Nations which are the horns of the Beast, yet so, as that this peace
shall not be wholly effected till toward the end of this time, p. 34
SECT. 10. The Witnesses rise after three days and a half; The thing setting
them upon their feet, is a spirit of boldness, courage, and noble resolution
put into them by God. Quest. Whether this spirit shall be mediate, or
immediate? p. 34 Ans. Partly mediate, partly immediate; The mediate cause of
this work shall be a loud Call given to the dead Witnesses from Saints out of
another place, p. 35 This noted in the voice from Heaven, Come up hither. Two
Reasons given why this voice is mentioned after their standing upon their feet,
not before, p ib. Who shall give them this Call, p. 36

CHAP. II. Wherein is farther set forth the state of the two Witnesses, within
their Prophesying time, and the time of their being killed, from Rev. 12.
Divided into seven Sections. SECT. 1. Examining the common Opinion, which
makes application of the things foretold, Chap. 12. to the first Period, or the
time of the Dragons Rule, before yet the Beast arose; which upon examination is
found too light. Here the general method of the 11, 12, 13, 14 Chapters of the
Revelations is laid down, page 37, to 43 SECT. 2. Confirming the truth of the
former, by proving that the time, times, and a half, cannot signify 1260
years, but three years and a half only, p. 43, to 45 SECT. 3. An Objection
answered, viz. That the War made by the Dragon, Chap. 12. is different from
that made by the Beast, Chap. 11.7. p. 45 Here inquiry is made into the War of
Michael and the Dragon, and its proved to be the late German War, p. 46, to 49
Object. It may be the English War, answered, and the Reasons given of the
contrary, p. ib. Here also is showed that a twofold visible Dragon is spoken
of in this 12. Chap. 1 The Old Dragon, viz. the ancient Roman Empire. 2 The New
Dragon, viz. the present German Empire, p. ib.
Two Reasons given why the Dragon who governs the whole Papal Kingdom, does at
this day choose Germany as his seat, p. 50 A Reason also given why the Holy
Ghost, Chap. 12. glides so quick over all the 1260 days, descending presently
to the latter end of them, p. ib. What of the Prophecy of this 12 Chap. is yet
to be fulfilled, p. ib.
SECT. 4. Another Objection, That our opinion necessarily supposes the Woman
to be come out of the Wilderness, and yet afterward to go in again, answered,
p. 52 SECT. 5: A third Objection, That this opinion is repugnant to Daniels
time, times, and a half, answered, p 53, to 55. Here Daniels time, times, and a
half, are opened at large, and proved from the Texts themselves in Daniel,
Chap. 7.25. Chap. 12.7. to signify only three years and a half. SECT. 6. What
useful truths arise from this method; and what a harmony of truth (following
it) we have in the 11 and 12 Chapters, p. 62 SECT. 7. Making inquiry after that
remnant of the Woman's Seed, that the Dragon within the time, times, and a half
(the term of the Witnesses lying dead) makes War upon. Quest. 1. What people
are meant by this Remnant? Answer is given in opening two notable Characters of
them lying in the words, p. 63 Quest. 2. What War that is, which is, or shall
be raised against them? Five things propounded in order to an Answer, p. 64, 65
Ans. A twofold War, 1 A War raised against them by the invisible Dragon. How
that shall be, and why such a War must be, p. 66 2 A War raised against them by
the visible Dragon; How, and why such a War shall be, p. ib. Yet
notwithstanding this twofold War, the remnant of the Woman's Seed shall not
suffer much, p. 67

CHAP. III. Wherein is showed the state of the Witnesses about, and in the
time of their Rise, from Rev. 14. opened.
Divided into six Sections. SECT. 1. The common Opinion which applies the
Prophecy of the 144000 to the time of the Beasts reign disproved, and the time
stated, where this Prophecy takes beginning, p. 68, to 73 SECT. 2. Proving two
things. 1 That the Head of this Prophecy is to be placed lower than the Head
of the Vials, p. 73, to 76 Here is showed why the Head of the Vials is placed
somewhat upwards in the Beasts Kingdom, and the Head of this Chapter about the
end of it. 2 That this 144000 differ from the sealed 144000, Chap. 7. p. ib.
The scaled company scaled before any of the Trumpets sounded. ib. To say,
because the one are scaled in their foreheads. the other bear the Fathers name
in the forehead, therefore they are one, can be no Argument, p. 78 Two Reasons
given why these are set frth by the same number with the Scaled ones. ib. No
Mystery in the number it self, ib.
SECT. 3. Proving, This 144000 to be the Gentile Saints, p. 79, to 83 SECT. 4.
Handling three things. 1 The Cause of this glorious Rendezvous, p. 83 2 The
manner of it, p. 84 3 The state and condition they shall be in hereupon, set
forth in two things. 1 They shall be owned by some eminent Head raised up by
Christ, p. ib. 2 They shall set forth with praises, p. 85 Here is also showed
where the beginning of this blessed company will be, p. 86 Occasionally also
here is discoursed of Daniels stone, and it is showed, 1 What time we are to
pitch upon for the first Rise of that stone. 2 What shall befall the stone
suddenly after it begins to smite, ib. 87
SECT. 5. The Characters of this 144000. Eight choice Characters of this
blessed company observed from the text, p. 89, to 92 SECT. 6. How the work
shall go from the time of their standing up, until the beginning of the
thousand years? What Prophesies those are in the Revelations that afford us
light to this Question, p. 92 For answer, 1 More generally, the work shall go
on with a more swift and irresistible hand than ever formerly, p. ib. 2 More
particularly, 1 The Everlasting Gospel is preached, p. 93 Five things very
observable concerning the preaching of the Gospel at this day, p. 93, 94, 95 2
Romes ruin comes unavoidably upon her, p. ib. 3 A serious warning to the
Papals. Why are they warned at this day, p. ib. 96 Here the Angel standing in
the Sun, Rev. 19.17, 18. is interpreted, p. 139, 140 4 A sweet word from Christ
of Heavenly Consolation to his people, the day of their Redemption being now
come, p. 97 5 Christ's Personal coming, this the thing noted, v. 14. proved by
four Reasons, p. 98, 99, 100 The Resurrection of the dead intimated in those
words, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, verse 13. p 99 Why the
Resurrection of the dead is mentioned before Christ's coming, p. ib. Not Martyrs
only, but all Saints shall come with Christ, p. 102 What the Harvest and
Vintage signify, p. ib. Christ himself the Angel of the Vintage, p. 103 A
Conjecture as touching the two Angels that cry with a loud voice to have the
work of the Harvest and Vintage performed, p 104 Why one of these two is said
to come out of the Temple the other from the Altar, p. ib. Why the Angel
coming from the Altar is said to have power over flee, p. 105 The signification
of the one thousand six hundred furlongs, ib. The Conclusion of all.

Generation-work: OR, ANEXPOSITION Of the Prophecies of the Two Witnesses, From
the 11, 12, and 14 Chapters of the Revelations.

Showing yet farther, what the designs of God abroad in the world, may in all
likelihood be at this present day, and in the days near approaching.

To which is added, A Key to unlock the Mystical Numbers of Daniel and the
Revelations; tending to resolve this Great Question, How long shall it be to
the end of Wonders?

The Third and last Part.

By John Tillinghast, Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be over-past.

21. For behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of
the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and
shall no more cover her slain.

LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope^-head-Alley, 1655.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
MY LORD,
IT is an Apocryphal saying, but yet a true one, Truth is greatest of all:
those who have others in Subjection unto them, are themselves to become Subject
to it. We yield up our outward man to men, and they can command no more, but
Truth commands our inwards.

This glorious Truth dwells not in the wisdom of the wise, nor in the godliness
of the godly, nor in any creature-impulsions, though ever so forc^ble, which
have no rule but their own; but in the blessed word alone; where truth has
pitched its Tabernacle; and the way to be acquainted with it, is through the
help of the Spirit of Truth, unsealing the Book, opening our understandings to
understand the Scriptures.

The knowledge of this Truth, The great Revealer of secrets has thought good
to impart to his people, not all at once, but by degrees: and so the several
ages of the Church have had their several manifestations of truth; a piece of
truth coming forth in one age, a piece more in the age following, a piece more
in the age following that: God thus by degrees enlightening his people, as they
are able to bear it; who, should the Sun rise upon them all at once, would be
dazzled, not enlightened.

As the workings of the mystery of iniquity on the one hand, or Gods,
dispensations of providence on the other, have risen higher in any age, so have
also Gods dispensations of truth, to the end, his in every age might from
principles of truth, be led up to renounce the one, and own) and embrace the
other.

Hence, those things which later ages look upon as low and poor things, not
worth contending for, were great things in former ages, because the Truths of
that age: And contrariwise, those things which former ages could not have born
with, had they been revealed, may be the necessary discoveries of ages since,
because the Truths of these times,

Hence likewise it is a marifest with holding the truth in unrighteousness, and
a declaration to the world of a compliance with Antichrist, to confine, either
by penal Laws, threats, or practices, the people of God in this age, to the
Truth or Truths of the former age. Yea those that love the Truth ought not to
suffer themselves f^r love or fear of men in this case to be confined. Had the
people of God in the age before us contented themselves to have preached the
precious truths of Christ's Priestly Office, and out of obedience to the Wills
and Commands of the then Ruling Powers surceased any farther enquiry, how had
the blessed Truths of Christ, as King in his Churches, been discovered? If
Christ has yet farther and higher Truths to make known, and the dispensers of
truth shall suffer Bonds to be laid upon them, how shall the will of God at
this day in the revelation of truth be performed?

The wisdom of a Christian man who would serve God in his Generation is to
enquire into the particular Truth of the age he lives in; for it is a thing
much more acceptable to a Friend, when he ha^h some great design in hand, to
serve him in that, than to serve him in another thing; but he that neither
knows his friends mind, nor his design, cannot serve him in it.

The Truth of the age, although the matter of it is to, be looked for in the
Word, and no new thing contrary thereunto to be admitted, (the word without any
additions being complete in all knowledge, able to make the man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works; and if there appear to us to be a
defect in this thing or that, the defect is in our understandings, not in the
word) yet in regard the word has no where told us that the revelation of this
truth, belongs to this age, the revelation of that, to that; We are therefore
by some other Rules to make up a judgment, which amongst the manifold truths
of the word, is the Truth of the age we live in. Now among many I could name,
those which I judge the safest are,

1 An observation of the time, and a comparing therewith the Prophecies
relating to that time.

2 The dispensations of the age, Gods truth, and his workings going together.

3 The general opposition that is made by men of the world, carnal Professors,
yea Saints themselves (so far as they have espoused a sinful or worldly
interest) against this or that truth: for it is a thing of universal
observation, that the most opposed truth in any age, has ever been the truth
of that age.

Neglect of looking into this Truth of the Generation, is that fatal Rock upon
which many worthy Instruments in all ages have split themselves; and should
search be made after instances of this kind, the names of not a few might be
produced, who did run well at first, and were lights and helps to others; yet
after all, have concluded, like the bright Sun setting in a cloud.

That the great truth of Christ's Kingdom over the world, judging the Beast,
etc. is the truth of this Generation, is so manifestly clear, (the former
Rules, with others of a like nature being seriously considered) as that it
would be but an adding light to the Sun, here to give demonstration of it.

It being so; I shall take the boldness (craving leave a while not to know your
power or greatness, nor any private or personal engagements, (which yet I
remember with thankfulness) having begged it of the Lord, and it is still my
request, that neither fear nor favor might make me unfaithful in the
dispensation of truth according to my talent) to be plain with your Highness,
not in mine own behalf, nor in the behalf of any party at this day in England,
whom to gratify in a case of this nature, is a thing my soul desires to abhor,
for he that pleases men, cannot be the servant of Christ; but in the behalf of
that cause, which my heart is inwardly persuaded is Jesus Christ's, to whom I
could not be faithful, should I now be silent; having this hope, that that
heart which once had in it such a flame of love to the cause of Christ, and was
so zealous of the work of God in the world, and against the Beast, as that
thereby many were provoked, cannot but yet have some sparks of this holy fire
alive in it; and that there is yet in your Highness an ear to hear what the
Holy Spirit says in the word, if so be the sound be certain and distinct, tho
but a Child blow the Trumpet Or if not, yet that herein I shall discharge a
duty, in my own apprehension incumbent upon me, and every of Gods people, so
far as they have light, namely, to inform your Highness what Christ at this day
expects from you, according to which he will account with you: and if what is
written be truth it is you duty to hear it; yea, where is but an appearance of
truth, if you shall without diligent trial either neglect or reject it, though
the grounds upon which you may perhaps so do, may serve to answer Conscience a
while, yet will they not answer the Lord another day; who will account with
you, not as with others, but according to that Talent of light you have had,
and is held forth unto you; the professions you have made before many of his
people, and the opportunities you have. And therefore, my Lord, as it is now no
time for those, who either love the Lord Jesus, or your Highness, to flatter
you, or speak their fears mincingly; So let me here say, what not long fince I
told your Highness in a more private way, That I do verily believe the thing is
already manifest to the Lord, and the day is not far off, in which it shall be
to your Highness also, who are your most faithful Friends, whether those that
now hang up their Harps, (though they may be but as one Micaiah to 400 false
Prophets) or those that are singing their Songs, of which latter sort (I mean,
for the greater part of them) I may for the truth of the thing, I am sure,
without offense say, in the Apostles phrase, only adding a word. They (who
never yet loved you truly, now) zealously affect you, but not well, yea they
would exclude you that you might affect them, and serve their designs. I would
to God I could speak otherwise, and that private cries might have prevented
this public bearing witness, which though I had no other motive, yet
ingenuity, did I not consider that when it tends to hinder in the Lords work,
it is no longer a virtue, but a vice to be mortified, would have dissuaded me
from. The love of the meanest Saint is precious to me, the favor of your
Highness much more; but in these divided times, offering many temptations of
this nature, I have often remembered the case as it stood betwixt Christ and
Peter, Mat^h. 16.21, 22, 23. who, when Peter by his love and affection would
have put him by his Fathers work, Christ grew offended even at Peter's love, and
did abandon it.

My Lord, if ever the Mystery of Iniquity wrought spiritually, it does at this
day; And no wonder, for a fear and dread of the Witnesses is fallen upon the
Beast, whose blow that he may escape, he would now (if that will do it) enter
into a high form of Saintship; and indeed who looks for Antichrist (take him
either as he is the whole Body, or as he is this o^ that part) in his last
state in any other Garb, than the form of a gloribus ^aint, though he may have
read the Book of the Revelations, yet is he still to learn the Mystery of the
Beast there revealed. Now is the man of sin struggling for his Kingdom, which
he will uphold as long as he can; but though the Dragon, Beast, and False
Prophet join heads and hands together, yet shall they not be able to keep it
up long, no, not half so many years, as some dream of Ages; for God has
numbered Babylons Kingdom, and in a manner finished it; the Beast and the
Whore^s or the Beast and the False Prophet, are already weighed in the
Balances, and found wanting; the Kingdom shall (as most certainly, so)
suddenly be divided, broken, and given to another.

And as a clear ev^dence hereof, we have the signs of the times grounded upon
the wo^d, which Christ did refer the Generation of the Pharisees and Sadduces
to, when they would know of him a sign, Matthew. 16.3. O ye Hypocrites, can ye
not discern the signs of the times? What signs of the times had they? Answ. Two
evident signs founded upon Scripture. 1. The departure of the Scepter from
Judah, in Herod's then swaying it, who was an Idumean. 2. The expirations of
Daniels seventy weeks, the limited time of the Messiahs appearance; By either
of these they might have concluded that truth they opposed, and received him
for their Messiah, whom they rejected: but this they did not, but must have
farther sign^ yet, for which cause Christ calls them Hypocrites, a wicked and
an adulterous Generation.

My Lord, Let me here say, The Lord in his Word has left signs of this time. I
am now speaking of, no less clear and demonstrative than were the signs of
tha^; and although I am of all the most unworthy to be acquainted with them, or
any thing of the mind of the Lord, yet is it my persuasion, that some of them
are discovered in the following discourse; and he that shall without prejudice
read what in the close is written of the time, and compare it with the things
themselves specified throughout the Book, may possibly be of my mind, at least
not censure me for thinking so. And if now (My Lord) as persons willing to be
blinded, we shall shut our eyes to those signs of the times God has left us in
the word and ask for other signs to know his work by, and when we are called to
do it, it is an evident token, even from our Saviors own words, of an
Adulterous and Apostatizing generation; I had almost said, and if I had, his
words would have born me out, of an hypocritical heart.

My Lord, Let me not be made an offender for this plain dealing; if I am, so
long as the Lord shall keep my feet in the way of my duty, it shall not trouble
me, and I have hope that in this I have had his merciful guidance, and have not
as yet stepped out of that way: For if in the day when Christ is going up to
his Kingdom, the stones would not hold their peace, should not the Children cry
Hosanna, then surely it is a duty very incumbent upon the Saints at this day
(there being nothing more obvious than that Christ is well onwards upon his
march to his Kingdom) not to be silent, but although they may be rebuked, yea,
dealt worse by, for so doing, yet to follow their King with acclamations, which
is all that such poor creatures as we are can do for him. Nay, if it be a duty
to expect from God returns of our prayers, then it is also a duty to have
inspection even into public affairs so far as the managing of these may have a
tendency to the furtherance or hinderance of those good things, which we hope
we have been graciously helped by the Lord, and also had some favorable smiles
of his acceptance in seeking his face for. Nay, if it be a duty to observe and
follow God in the way of his visible dispensations; or on the contrary, a sin
to be of a sluggish temper, not regarding the works of the Lord, nor
considering the operation of his hands, then of necessity must there be a
reflection upon the public actings of instruments, either in a way of owning
or disowning, without which no observation can be made of Gods dispensations,
or our duty in this respect. Nay lastly; If it be a duty to mourn for the sins
of Rulers, to mourn when Christ's cause lies bleeding, then certainly it cannot
be evil to have inspection into the one, and the other.

And notwithstanding it is a more precious thing in a Christian to be found
watching in his own heart and ways, than to be prying into the ways and
actings of others, for which cause so far as this is neglected, the common
accusation laid to the charge of those who contend for the Kingdom of Christ
without, as if they did neglect the Kingdom of Christ within, is a thing most
just: Yet let it withal be considered, that the doing of the one, lays no
necessity upon a man of a neglect of the other; for if there be but any thing
of truth in that opinion, it will be hard to say, God has laid a necessity
upon us to neglect our hearts, whilst (which yet is a thing he wills us to do)
we are seeking after his truth: And if through that corruption that is within,
any man should so do, does not this evil attend him, as well in other studies
as this? by consequence therefore from this principle, no truth must be
inquired into. But I have observed in this day a close design of the Devil,
driven on under this vizard, and no wonder, for Satan himself is now
transformed into an Angel of light; and I can the better speak it, having felt,
when time was, this temptation, and thereby learned these who Lessons.

1 To discern somewhat of the depths of Satan, viz. That he perceiving the work
that God is about to do in the world, and knowing full well how acceptable a
thing i^ is to God (as well as advantageous to the work it self) to have his
Children following him in his great designs; and how provoking the thing will
be if by any slight he can but make them like Peter, cross the Lord in his
way, and thwart God in his work; (God (as a man in like case would do)
resenting one error of this nature worse than forty of another kind) and
knowing also that to say to them in plain language, neglect this, or oppose
that, without some very specious and glorious pretense, would be no boot; he
therefore now comes forth as the most glorious Saint that ever came into the
world, and tells them, that they must look to their own hearts, for this is a
blessed thing; and therefore they must beware of such and such things, for if
they once meddle with them, then farewell their hearts; and to set a better face
upon the business, whilst he disswades these, he sets on work some that are
marked in their foreheads for his children, giddily and furiously to broach,
and set on foot those very things and designs, he disswades the other from, and
then says he, now see whether this generation of men go, and where you had
been had you followed them.

2 I have learned likewise to discern somewhat of the depths of the heart,
which would exercise the highest pride, under a pretext of great holiness and
humility: for it being indeed a most blessed thing to attend to inward purity
and mortification, wherein lies the glory of a Christian, now says the heart,
how strangely do such and such contend for this outward thing and the other?
well, I will follow none of them, but I will attend to the mortification of the
inward man, I am sure in that I shall be right. Now with this conceit the man
goes on secretly, blessing, and lifting up himself, and he turns him and looks
him round, and lo all are out of the way but he. Pride, as it quickly grows
upon such a root, so is it more abominable to God, by how much it is more
spiritual, then that which may ye discover it self more outwardly. Yet let me
say thus does the Devil, and man's heart at this day marvellously deceive many
precious Saints in this thing, who are apt to think, that they cannot mind
these things and as they should study and look to their hearts too. Whereas
indeed, it argues a Childish temper in a man, to think that he cannot learn the
things of his heart, or keep the same up for God, any longer then it is
exercised in those truths which more immediately concern the heart and life,
and have their foundation in Christian experience; as if those truths which lie
out of the reach of my experience as a Christian, and more imediately concern
Gods Cause and Glory without, had not in them as natural a tendency to give a
soul a sight of God, and as great an efficacy to cause the heart to cleave to
God, and walk humbly with him, as truths that lie within the r^ach of my
experience. Nay, I will here be bold to say, that that soul who faithfully
follows God in those things wherein his glory is more immediately concerned,
shall learn more of his heart as it were by the by, and have the same better
ordered, then shall that man, who neglecting this, makes that his continual
study; for it is not by our poring that we come to know our hearts, nor by our
struggling to mend them, so much, as indeed by laying them in that path, where
Christ in this or that day more commonly goes, and waiting there to receive
life and strength from him.

And farther (My Lord) as for contenting themselves with their own liberty,
(which is the great thing objected to us, our enjoyment whereof as yet, is
indeed a mercy beyond what the people of God far more deserving in former ages
have had) the people of God could at this day do it, were it not but that the
sufferings of Christ's cause (their prayers having been long going forth, and
their hopes raised) are now more unto them than any sufferings of their own.
And as Daniel first, and Nehemiah afterward, though they for their own
particulars were well in the Court of the King of Persia, yet could not be well
because it went not well with Gods cause at that day; so notwithstanding Gods
people have their li^erty, and in that respect, as to their particulars are
well, yet if they see the work of the time at a stand, let it not be grievous,
or be imputed to discontent, in case they mourn as did Daniel look sad, as did
Nehemiah, groan and complain they are sick. And sometimes I have thought, that
when Daniel did mourn and afflict himself before God the second time, three
full weeks, Chap. 10.2. upon the account that the work of God in that age was
put to a stand, by the power (as is by good men judged) of Cambyses, Cyrus Son,
reigning while his Father was abroad in the wars, that had Cambyses been a good
man, or a man likely to have been prevailed with, Daniel undoubtedty would (as
did the Prophets before him, frequently to the good Kings of Israel) have made
other applications in that case, (and accounted the doing thereof his duty)
than barely to the Lord alone. Nay, it is a mercy to Governors themselves to
have applications in things of this nature made unto them; for, Woe be to those
Governors, to whom Gods people fearing, or being without hopes in making
address, when they so^esee sufferings coming upon his cause, retire themselves
and spread the affliction of their souls before the Lord alone.

Yet let me also say, it is a thing most certain, and that which is a prejudice
to the very cause in the hearts of many, and ought to be matter of grief to
all, that Saints in most places at this day, whilst they are crying that their
Fathers work might go on, do act too much like men, and show too much of their
own spirits; yea, are very consused as to the making out the things themselves
would have; and moreover, have many falling into their party, that injure the
very cause they stand up in: But I earnestly wish it might be considered, that
although the child when it cries, cannot always give a rational account of the
cause of its so doing, yea possibly may oftentimes discover much peevishness
and passion in crying, yet does it not ever cry without a cause; and the
wisdom of the Father is not so intent upon the weaknesses of the child in
crying, as to find out the cause why it cries.

And farther, should not many and great weaknesses appear in those who stand up
for Christ's Kingdom, how should his Kingdom come without observation? no
greater observation than of holiness, if so be the appearance of that in them
were to be eminently visible. John came with much outward Holiness, and he
came with great observation. Yea whether when the strife rose first betwixt the
Brethren of the Presbyterian and Congregational way in England, did not many
who yet had truth, and Christ did afterward own before the world, strive in
many things like foolish peevish Children? and whether in the times of the
Apostles, throughout the Primitive ages, and almost ever since, have not the
crowd of errors always run into that side where truth has been? the reason
is, because the grand enemies design is to sow his tares in his enemies filed,
his own, where as yet his title is not questioned, nor shaken, he will not
meddle with.

These things therefore (with others of a like nature) are not to be made
definitive Conclusions as to a cause, which oftentimes God permits for the
trial of Rulers patience, his peoples faith, and the carrying on of his own
cause in a cloud, which is the way he goes in, in most of his works of wonder.
Governors because of these miscarriages may inflict civil penalties if they
will, yet let it be considered, that the great King is now coming to his
Throne, and there is not a Ruler in the world, but has his standing only
protempore, to whom as all must give an account, so must they shortly surrender
their Crowns, or they shall be taken from them; and if any of the subjects of
this mighty King, whilst they see their King upon his march, and are followed
with hourly intelligence that he is near, and such and such things must be done
in order to his entertainment, by speaking some words for their King, that
things may be in a readiness, and by giving abroad what intelligence they have
to that end, shall offend, and suffer any thing for it, let it be remembered,
that when the righteous King is sat upon his Throne, these things will not be
hushed up, but it shall then be known, whether such as shall so do, exceeded
their Commission, or not, did their own, or the Lord Christ's will.

My Lord, That through multitude of words, I may neither tire your patience,
nor incur the censure of being one that loves to hear himself speak, I shall
wave some things, which otherwise I would yet have added, and draw to a
Conclusion, only leaving with your Highness three or four plain, sober, and in
my opinion necessary words.

1 Let your Highness often remember, and set before you the example of that good
man Asa, who though he were a man of much zeal for God, and his Worship,
destroying the Altars of the strange gods, and the High places, breaking down
the Images, cutting down the Groves, etc. a man of a tender conscience,
therefore removed his Mother from being Queen, because she made an Idol in a
Grove; a man of much faith in the field, by which faith of his, he vanquished
the huge host of Zerah the Ethiopian; yet having made one eminent turn from God
(as one turn from God makes way for another) he is afterward in a rage at
reproof, and casts the Prophet into prison that reproved him, and at the very
same time oppresses the people of the LAND; and after all (what will Sin bring
even a good man to?) When Gods hand is upon him for this, he seems as a man
stubborn, and seeks not to the Lord, but to the Physicians; which that it may
never be your Highness case, is my prayer.

2 Let your hand be no way lifted up against any of the Saints in this Nation
It was a good Position laid down by Dr. Goodwin (in a Sermon preached upon
Psalm. 105 14, 15. before the Parliament that was, at the time when the Brethren
of the Presbyterian way had the turning of the Wheel) and as well proved, viz.
That the dealing well or ill with the Saints, is, and has ever been, the great
interest of States and Kingdoms, that on which their welfare, or ruin depends.
All Sodom made not the hands of those four Kings Abraham routed, Genesis 14. so
weak, as their fingring one Lot.

3 Pursue not too hotly every righteous principle. It is an Observation of Dr.
Owens, worthy never to be forgotten (preached (when time was) in a Sermon of
his upon Ezekiel. 17.24. to the aforesaid powers) concerning principles that men
take up, his words are these page 21.22. The most tremendous judgment of God
in this world is the hardening the hearts of men. Now, says he, first, Look on
Pharaoh, of whom it is most signally spoken, that God hardened his heart: How
did the Lord accomplish this? Pharaoh settles himself upon as righteous
principles as ever any of the Sons of men could do: One is, that it belongs to
the chief Ruler of a Nation to see to the profit and glory of that Nation. What
more righteous principle is there in the world? Hence he concludes, that if i^
be incumbent on him to see that the Realm receive no detriment, he must not let
the people go by whom they received so many great advantages: God confirms his
heart in these principles, which are good in themselves but (says the Doctor)
abominable when taken up against the mind and providence of God; Hence he, and
his, perished in their principles, acting against the appearance of God.
Secondly, It is also said of Sihon the King of the Amorites, that his heart was
hardened, that he would not let the people go through his Land. How I pray? even
by adhering to that wise principle. That it is not meet to let a potent Enemy
into the bowels of a people; and this made way for his ruin: Thus (says he)
it is with many; they fix on principles, good in general, and in their season.
Old bounds must not be broken up; Order must not be disturbed: Let God appear
never so eminently, so mightily, they will keep to their principle, what is
this, but judicial hardness? And this is one reason why the actings of God in
such a day as this, are so unsuited to the expectations of men; they square his
works to the interests and principles, which it will not answer. Hitherto Dr.
Owen.

4 Take heed of that ungodly principle sprung up of late (the contrary to which
some call a State-Herene, though I am sure the principle is a
Scripture-Herefie) viz. That godliness in a Magistrate or Civil Officer, is but
a secondary qualification; natural accomplishments and endowments being the
primary, for which therefore a man is to be entrusted with this power, rather
than the other. I cannot but wonder how any who profess the Name of Christ,
much more who profess themselves to have been faithful to his cause, should
together therewith profess such an unchrist an, yea Machiavilian principle,
which,

First, Lies point blank against the promises made to the last days, which
assure, 1 That God will restore his peoples Judges as at the first, Isa. 1.26.
But were Judges at the first, Moses, Joshua, etc. such? 2 That their Governors
should be of themselves, Jer. 30.21. But may we call such of themselves?

Secondly, Leaves out (as of little worth comparatively) the main
qualifications of that divine pattern, by which the first Rulers that ever were
so made by men amongsh Gods own people were made, Exodus 18.21.

Thirdly, Makes null that Divine Maxim, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of God; for how can such rule in the fear of
God, who have no fear of God before their eyes? which is one character of every
natural man, Romans 3.18.

Fourthly, Lays an unavoidable necessity of a continued judgment upon a
people: For if it be a judgment to have Rulers that know not God, because such
make the people to err, Isa. 3.12. chap. 9.16. then if such for their natural
endowments are to be chosen, of necessity must a judgment lie upon that
people, over, or amongst whom they are set.

Fifthly, Opens a door to all persecution, by putting the Civil Sword into the
hands of the Seed of the Serpent (for better cannot be said of a mere moral
man) which from the beginning has had a natural enmity to the Seed of the
Woman. My Lord, Bear with the boldness of it, if I say, That in case your
Highness be found steering your course, and laying out your power by this
crooked rule, know assuredly, that Christ will suddenly take (though how I know
not) your power from you, and give it to one that shall lay it out otherwise.

I shall not multiply many more words, save to add, that in case any
expression, either in this, or the following Discourse, savor of the spirit of
man (which my self allows not, have kept a watch against, yet may be guilty of)
I do in that humbly crave your Highness pardon; but as for the matter and
substance of those things I have written, I ask none, my Conscience bearing me
witness that I have afferted nothing, but what according to my present
persuasions (not grounded upon this or that particular Text (which is a
deceiving way) but by comparing the whole of Prophecies together) is the truth
of Christ, yea the truth of the time; though yet (through mercy) I have drunk
in no such conceit of my own knowledge, as though it were more than in part;
not do I impose upon your Highness conscience, or the consciences of any, a
belief of my principles, any farther then Scripture and right reason does
approve them; yet would have none on the other side condemn them (as this age
is apt to do) upon the account of this, or that single Text, till he has
compared the whole of Prophecies together, in doing which, he may perhaps see
my reason of stating things as I have done, which upon every occasion I could
not bring forth, and therewith a full answer to his own doubt. And farther, I
have not in this work knowingly stretched any one Text, beyond what I have
judged its due bounds, or forced an interpretation to reach any Party a blow:
Nor have I on the other side withheld any piece of the truth (so judged by me)
lying in any Text; nor minced any Interpretation to spare any party a blow: As
I would be loath to strike any my self, for my blows can do me no good, and
them little hurt; so would I not have a hand in keeping off that blow that
truth will strike, whosoever it fall upon.

And although a Discourse of this nature would better have become a graver Pen
than mine, and possibly from such a one been sooner hearkened to (pride,
rashness, and headiness, having been the coutinual accusation laid against
young men, and not always groundless) yet seeing the Aged silent, and
perceiving through the light the Lord of his grace has larely given me to see,
by a clear opening sundry Prophecies, which not long since were mysteries to
me, the cause of Christ in sore travel, either through an ignorance of what
Gods Designs are at this day, or somewhat worse in those that should manage it;
I conceived my self (though others might better do it, yet at this time) called
to speak, and to speak plainly. Elihu, though a young man, went, and that with
success, over the head of such a temptation, in a less case. That a like
success and blessing from above may accompany this, is his Prayer who is,

Your Highness humble Servant, Mournful for You, hold with You, for Sions sake,
JOHN TILLINGHAST.

To the several Churches of Christ within this Commonwealth; Together with all
those that have fellowship with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ;
The Church of Christ at Northwalsham in Norfolk, walking in fellowship with
the Churches of Christ in this Country, sends Greeting.
Dearly beloved in the Lord:
AS the Lord, the mighty God, has done great things and unsearchable,
marvelous things without number, for his great Name, and peoples sake, within
the space of a few years, so certainly there shall not be an end of Wonders,
until his peoples full Redemption be accomplished. And although the wicked of
the earth regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider what he has
already done, or shall do hereafter, yet they are observed, and diligently
sought out of the Saints that have pleasure therein.

And they shall speak of the might of his terrible Acts, and shall declare his
greatness, they shall abundantly utter the memory of his goodness, and sing of
his righteousness, they shall speak of the glory of his Kingdom, and talk of
his Power, and make known to the sons of men, his mighty Acts, and the glorious
Majesty of his Kingdom.

When we consider what a company of poor, weak, and unprofitable creatures we
are, having such dead, dark, and unsuitable hearts and spirits to the
extraordinary appearances and dispensations of God toward us, we might think
it most meet, that we (above all others) should sit down in silence and shame,
at such a time as this; but while we are musing of the former ways and
dealings of God with his people, and of those glorious things which must
shortly come to pass, our hearts do burn within us, and having this
opportunity, we cannot but speak, and declare a few things which are upon our
spirits.

As touching our dear, and worthy Brother (the Author) it may be expected
something by us should be spoken, but his desire as concerning himself, has
laid silence upon us; Yet this we shall say, As we conceive him to be one who
has received much light from the Lord, and esteems it a choice and special
mercy to be taught of God the things of Christ's Kingdom so we are his
witnesses, how holily, and justly, and unblameably he has, and does behave
himself amongst us (and many others) that believe.

As for the Treatise it self, it needs not man's commendation, because Truth
commends it self: Yet this we say, It has been a great refreshment to our
spirits, and we hope will be to the spirits of Gods people elsewhere.

It is the Authors desire that things may not be received on your parts without
trial, yet in case any who fear the Lord, be in this matter otherwise minded,
it is our desire they would not rashly condemn that, which was neither rashly
undertaken, nor published. But to come to what we have further to say.

It is an undeniable truth, confirmed by long experience, that the Devil has
ever had a great design against the Kingdom of Christ, that holy City, and has
so far prevailed, as by his instruments to tread it underfoot for a long time,
though not able to destroy it. So that those that have appeared, and witnessed
for Christ, have been forced to do it in sackcleath, in a very mean and low
condition, yet however they do it, they will do it, though in sackcloath. And
this has been such a trouble, and torment to the Beast, and the dwellers on
the earth, that like men, or rather Devils, full of rage and fury against them,
they make War against them, overcome them, pull off even their sackcloath,
strip them, kill them. And whether this has been already done, or is yet to
do, is the great Question, which this Treatise will give some light into, and a
little time will more fully determine.

And that those that dwell upon the earth, Christ's enemies, should rejoice, and
make merry when they see Christ's Witnesses (who tormented them by witnessing)
lie dead, is not to be thought strange. But that the Lord should be so tender,
and mindful of those that appear and witness for him, as after a little while
to give life unto them, and not only to set them upon their feet, but to raise
them up to an high, and glorious condition, and that in the sight of their
enemies (greatly fearing, and trembling to behold it) is very affecting, and
comfortable to our hearts to consider.

And, Dear Brethren, having had some serious thoughts both of the spirits and
ways of Gods professing people, at this time, we cannot apprehend that the
LORD has yet performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, but that he has yet
much to do, yea, though the Lord has been a long time purging his people, and
has cut off two parts, and left only a third, yet there is so much filth and
dross in that, that surely he will bring the third part through the fire, and
will refine them, as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried. And
what condition the Lord has yet to bring his people into (to take away their
dross in) is best known to himself. And may not the people of the Lord, even
after he has done much for them, and in them (yet polluted with several
abominations) expect some hour of temptation, to be tried, and purged in, which
may also be at hand?

And seeing we are speaking, and speaking to Brethren that know how to bear
with our weaknesses, though we be poor stammering creatures, we shall take
liberty and boldness to speak a few things to you as plainly as we can, it
being now high time to deal faithfully and plainly with one another, and to
tell you more particularly what we fear.

And indeed, Brethren, we are afraid, from a sad experience of the coldness and
remisness of our own hearts, that the charge of Christ against Ephesus will not
fall upon us only, but upon other of the Churches, and Saints of Christ, that
they have left their first Love.

We are afraid, because we are so earthly minded our selves, that some of you
may be tempted also to seek other things before the Kingdom of God, and to take
too much thought what you shall eat, and what you shall put on, what profits,
preferments, and encouragements you shall have in the world (which are the
things the men of the world seek after) for the obtaining of which you may be
prone to seek to please and serve men, rather than Christ.

We are afraid, because we have so little our selves, that a spirit of
self-denial should be wanting among you, and that you should not have hearts to
rejoice when Christ does increase, if you should decrease, and so lie open to
that great, (and common evil) of neglecting, at least, Christ's interest, to
uphold and maintain your own.

We are afraid because of the drowsiness of our own bearts, lest a spirit of
slumber should fall upon you, and you become mindless, and regardless (in
comparison of what you formerly were, and now ought to be) of the voice, and
works, and coming of Christ.

We are afraid, because we our selves are not Virgins, chaste, and faithful to
the person and interest of the Lord Christ, lest your hearts should be
ensnared, and polluted by any, through the least compliance with, or liking of
the great Whore, that has deceived and defiled so many with her abeminations.

We are afraid, because we have neglected it so much, and so long, lest you
should forget to study, and enquire into the great and mavelous things that
God is doing, for exaltation of his own name and Son. And what the Saints ought
to do for God at such a time as this. Unlike to the Children of Issachar, which
were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do.

We are afraid, because we are so carnal, and walk so much by sense our selves,
that there should not be such a living by faith amongst you, as the word and
dispensations of God require, especially when we hear so many of those, who
formerly hoped, and quietly waited for the Redemption of Gods chosen, now
(being fearful, and unbeleeving) speak like Mary, How shall this thing be,
seeing we know not how it should be brought to pass?

We are afraid likewise, because our own hands are so heavy, and we unable, of
our selves, to keep them steady, lest your hands of prayer should be let down
at this time, and Amaleck should prevail against Israel.

And if these things should be found amongst you (of which we must confess our
selves to be very guilty) how ought you, and we to fear and tremble, and lie
low before the Lord, being very unworthy of, and unthankful for all those great
and terrible things which his hand has wrought for us?

And if we have not had, nor yet have hearts, holy, and heavenly, and spiritual
enough to walk before him with, under his former, and present dispensations
toward us, how shall we be able to stand before the Son of Man, when he shall
appear in far greater power, and glory? And to follow him in those strange, and
untrodden Paths that he has yet to lead his people in, and through?

Surely it is now time for us (having been hitherto so much wanting in it) to
consider our hearts and ways, and those ways that the Lord calls us to wait
upon him in.

Surely it is now time for us, who have left our first Jove to the Lord Jesus
(for which we have cause to be ashamed before the Lord) not only to remember
from whence we are fallen, and to do our first works, to love him as much we
have done formerly, but having tasted more of his goodness, and seen more of
his glory (and hoping to behold much more of it) to love him more than ever we
did; and oh that we had hearts to do it at this time.

Surely it is now time for those Saints, that have had, and have their hearts
espoused to carnal and worldly interests, as outward glory, honor, riches, etc.
to look up to the Lord, and to get their hearts dis-ingaged, and set loose from
the world, and the things of the world, and to be for ever hereafter without so
much as a thought of seeking great things for themselves, as becomes Saints.

Surely it is now time for the Spouse, and all the professed friends of Christ,
to cast off, and abandon all acquaintance, and compliance with Antichrist, and
to keep themselves so pure, and to approve themselves so true to Christ, that
if the Devil should tempt them (as he did their Lord) by profering them all the
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them, yet never to fall down, and any
way worship that Beast. It argued a very chaste and faithful heart, in that
worthy Man, Master John Knox, unto Jesus Christ, that when Edward the Sixth,
King of England, offered him a Bishopric, he refused it, as having Aliquid
commune cum Antichristo, something of Antichristianism in it.

Surely it is now time for us, not only to believe in Christ (which many think
is all they need to do) but also to own him in this hour of his patience
(wherein he looks to beowned by his Saints) lest he frown upon us in the day of
his great power, and glory, which draws near. And Brethren, let us make it
our chief, even our only Design, and count it our greatest Privilege (though
we shall be men wondered at for it) to follow, and serve the Lord Christ in
faithfulness, and like Luther, in the cause of Christ, be content (though our
low and carnal hearts may tremble at the very thoughts of it) to undergo the
hatred, and violence of the whole world.

Neither let us be too much troubled, nor offended at those changes,
alterations, and desolations, which do, and may, and as Christ has said, will
attend the going on, and advancement of his Kingdom in the world; which was
that which some, may be, wel-meaning people objected to Luther, That that
doctrine could not be of God, that was attended with such troubles, and
desolations; who replied thus, Ego nisrtumultus istos viderem, Christum in
mundo esse non crederem, Unless I should see those troubles and tumults, I
should not believe Christ to be in the world. So Brethren, if we should hear of
Wars, and Commotions, and upon the earth distress of Nations, with perplexity,
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth, let us not be terrified, nor offended, but (as our Savior
has bidden us) look up, and lift up our heads, for our redemption draws nigh.

And because it is high time, awake, Awake oh Saints, lift up your hearts, and
cry mightily unto the Lord, and never hold your peace day nor night, and give
him no rest (for it will not be long) till he establish and make Jerusalem a
praise in the Earth. Stand therefore with your loins girded about, and your
lights burning; And ye your selves like men that wait for their Lord, who
comes (as he has said) as a Thief in the night, who may be upon you before
you are aware, in an hour that you think not of. And however you may be hardly
used, and beaten of your Fellow Servants, and Brethren too, who say their Lord
delayeth his coming: Yet be not wearied, nor faint in your minds because of
these things, but be ye patient, Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold
the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the early, and latter rain: Be ye also
patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Grudge not one against another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned, behold the
Judge stands before the door. For he comes, he comes to judge the earth, He
shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

And you that are of a fearful heart, be strong, and fear not, behold your God
will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come, and save
you, and will perform all his good word toward you, and give you an expected
end.

Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith, but if any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

That you, and we, continuing in all well-doing, and suffering, may be found
unto praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, is the
prayer of

Your poor, unprofitable Brethren, and Companions, in the tribulation, and
Kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ.

Signed in the name, and by the appointment of the Church, RICHARD BREVITER,
Pastor,

Generation-Work. The Third and last part.
Wherein is yet further showed what the designs of God abroad in the World may
in all likelihood be at this present day, and in the days near approaching:
Being an Exposition of the Prophecies of the Two Witnesses.
THE PREFACE.
TWo Prophecies there are which above all others do cast a look upon our times:
First, the Prophecy of the Vials; Secondly, The Prophecy of the Witnesses.
The first of these, according to that measure of light given me, I have lately
written my thoughts upon. The pleasure I found in that journey, and the
refreshment I had from the matter of those discoveries, together with a leading
Providence to such a work, attending my finishing that part, did put me
presently upon another enquiry, viz. Concerning the time when those things
should be? or, How long it should be unto the end of those wonders? Being upon
this enquiry, and called by it to make a more through search than ever before I
had done into the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Revelations, first to find
undoubted Principles for a foundation, and then fit matter to build upon them;
I had upon the way many hints of truth in reference to the Witnesses presented
to my thoughts; which after a while, seeing truth daily to come in at that
door, I turning to view, saw (as I thought) a method laid before me, which did
seem to me to take off, and that in a great measure, the veil from many of the
principal Apocalyptical visions. Which observing and perceiving the same would
be very conducible (could the thing it self be made out) to the clearing up of
many mysteries, chiefly relating to the Witnesses; and also be a good
foundation for many other Truths; which where a right order is not found, must
needs lie buried; seeing there can be no sound interpretation of the Apocalypse,
nor any certain conclusion drawn from the whole or any part of it, till first
the true order and proper place of each Vision is found out; Crder being the
foundation of all Interpretation, and not Interpretation of it; I did therefore
examine the thing it self, comparing such grounds as I had in my eye, for my
own, with the grounds of others laid down in their writings, for theirs. Having
done this (I speak it not in the least to my own commendation, nor the
disparagement of such good and worthy men, whose labors are extant on this
Prophecy, of whose grace and abilities I have a far greater esteem, than either
I have, or would have of my own) I found my self much more confirmed in my
conceptions, than when I began, finding in most no other Argument, besides what
lay in their bare Interpretations, which (as I have said before) being
themselves to be founded upon Order, can be no Argument of Order. And as for
the Arguments of others, which seemed at first to carry weight, I found them
upon examination, either too weak to conclude the thing, or else to be
misapplied: And indeed such, as that the method and order rightly stated, there
would be little need of giving particular answers to them, for they would fall
of themselves. Hereupon I began to put my thoughts into such an order, as
seemed to me most to conduce to the making clear something appertaining to this
great mystery of the witnesses which I have done in three Chapters: Whereof,
the first Chapter represents the state and condition of the Witnesses, chiefly
as to their prophesying and killing time; and that from part of the Eleventh
Chapter of the Revelations, the undoubted (and as is generally conceived, the
only) Prophecy of the Witnesses. The second Chapter confirms many of the
Pofitions laid down in the former, by opening of the Twelfth Chapter, and
proving it to run parallel with so much of the eleventh, as relates to the
Witnesses prophesying, and killing time. The third Chapter is a representation
of the happy condition the Church of Christ shall be in, about the time of the
Witnesses resurrection; showing also how the work shall go on from that time
until the Day of Christ's Appearance; and this from opening the fourteenth
Chapter, which is proved to be a Prophecy of the state of the Church, and that
from about the time of the Witnesses rise, until the Second coming of Christ.

Now although the subject it self leads me to treat of many things in a
prophetical manner, the accomplishment of which I conceive to be near at hand;
yet do I not in the least assume to my self the title or thought of such a
thing as being a Prophet; only by weighing Scriptures, and comparing one place
with another, I draw up conjectural grounds that in all likelihood such and
such things will shortly be done. And although I judge my self, that I may be
deceived, so far as it is a thing possible that the discovering time may not be
come, or that there may be after the most diligent and impartial inquiry, yet a
missing of the time to which a Prophecy relates, which if missed, the mistake
must needs be total, and all Interpretations false; Or if not a nussing of the
time (which it is hoped in this little piece is not, my care having been above
all to attain a right principle herein, it being the only foundation stone)
yet an ignorance of the time, or a falling short of the true mind of the Holy
Ghost, in such or such a particular phrase, or in such or such terms it uses,
which though it cause not a total, yet may occasion a partial mistake; Or if
neither of these, yet an adding, or mixing even in the Interpretation somewhat
of man's with the mind of God, which kind of deception attends as well the
interpretation of other Scriptures, as those which are Prophetical; yet have I
published nothing without such grounds as I suppose will, even in the eye of an
Adversary (if thoroughly weighed) be judged sufficient to build a conjecture
upon: And possibly, another upon the like grounds, might be as incident to a
mistake of this nature, should the event so prove it, as my self.

Yet that I may not any way for the sake of my own name, disown, or expose to
disadvantage the blessed Truth of Christ, which must and shall live, when the
names of men shall rot; I shall be bold concerning this Discourse humbly to
say, That I am verily persuaded, that as to the substance hereof, there is more
in it than barely my private conjecture: And although this bui^ding may have in
it much Wood, Hay, and Stubble, which shall be burnt up; yet is there also in
it some Mines of Gold and precious Stones (not hitherto found out) which will
abide the fire, and the day is not far off which will make experiment of both:
And if in that day it shall appear that to a pound of dross but a grain of
truth (which before lay hid and buried) is here dug up, and brought to light; I
shall judge (Truth is of so great worth) the Lord in this Dispensation to have
been gracious to me, and my labor, notwithstanding many mis-apprehensions, to
be well bestowed. Gold at first digging never comes forth without its dross.

And truly since I composed the same, and saw that a very little time waiting
would either prove the things asserted to be false; Or if true, bring them
forth with a more general acceptance, and conviction of the Truth thereof,
than I either now do, or can expect it should meet with, I judged it a point of
prudence to forbear a while this enterprise: But two considerations at present
are upon me, which overbalance my resolutions the contrary way.

First, A persuasion (some part of my grounds for which are offered in the
Discourse it self) that a very cloudy day is to befall the Church of Christ
under the Vial we at this day stand under; some shadowings of which cloud
(though not the dismal storm it sends forth) will even reach us here in
England, either in one way, or another: to which persuasion I have likewise,
and that from some ground, this consideration added, That God has a special
design (to the end the faith of his people might not wholly fail them in this
day) upon the brink or beginning of it, to let out such a light, as to the
great things he is doing in the world, as shall wonderfully support the hearts
of a remnant of his people, and that quite through it.

Secondly, That the very thing which shall set on foot that glorious work of
Christ against Antichrist (which is the principal part or the subject of this
discourse) shall be a letting out of light into the world, a little before the
time comes that the work is to be set on foot. Hence Revel. 18.1. immediately
before the ruin of Rome, as the principal leading cause thereto, the Earth
which before was covered with darkness as to the glorious designs of God, as
touching his work in the world, is upon the sudden enlightened, and what is the
issue hereof? why, a speedy and irresistible judgment upon Babylon, as the
whole Chapter shows us.

These Considerations have made me think, that as the people of God cannot in
any way perform a more acceptable piece of service to the Lord Jesus in this
day, than by giving forth that light, the Lord either does or shall give them;
so likewise can they not in any work they shall put their hand unto, do
Antichrist a greater mischief (next to his destruction it self) than they may
in this.

The Author acknowledges himself altogether unworthy of the first, unfit and
unable every way in himself to the second; yet willingly would, to the measure
of his Talent, be found in both. He confesses, that neither in this, nor any
thing else that he does, has he, or can he attain thereto, to have his heart
and aims so pure and spiritual a^ it is fit they should, and as he would they
were; yet resolves, that through grace assisting him, neither the Devil, no
no^ his sin shall make him throw aside that work, in which he may do Christ's
cause or people any service, Antichrist any mischief: Which that it may be the
fruit of this little piece, is, and shall be his prayer.

CHAP. I. Wherein is set forth the state or condition of the Two Witnesses
within their Prophesying time, and the time of their being killed, and that
from Rev. 11. ver. 3. to 13.
SECT. 1.
HAving in the foregoing Preface delivered so much, as I judged meet by way of
Preamble unto this our Discourse: I shall here, without spinning out the time,
or tiring the Readers patience, whilst I detain him upon the way, about things
of lesser concernment, enter strait way upon the thing it self.

That the Two Witnesses are the Magistracy and the Ministry, appears to me a
thing without dispute, the allusion is so clear to Zerubbabel and Joshua,
compare Rev. 11 4. with Zech. 4 11, 14. of which two, one was chief Magistrate,
the other chief Priest: and both these, Prince and Priest, were Sons of Oil,
i.e. anointed in times of old, therefore by Zechary and John both, called two
Olive trees: Only there is (as Mr. Woodcock in his Treatise of the Two
Witnesses has observed) this twofold difference betwixt the Type and the
Antitipe.

1 Ze^hary sees two Olive Trees, but no Temple; But John sees first a Temple,
ver 1. and then two Olive trees. The reason is, they in Zecharies time had as
yet no Temple built, but were to begin the world anew; But now the work of
John's two Witnesses, is not to build a Temple anew, so much as to preserve and
keep that they had.

2 Zechary sees two Olive trees, and but one Candlestick: John two Olive Trees
and two Candlesticks; the reason is this Zechary wrote in the time of the Law,
whilst the Church was National, and so the two did belong to one Church, John
in Gospel Times when Churches were Congregational, and so the two might be of
several Churches.

Now the thing which does yet further persuade me to hold to this Exposition,
is, That excellent Analogy it carries with it to that of the two Beasts, Chap.
13. which two Beasts (as I have made appear upon the Vials, p. 101, to 108.)
are no other, but Antichrist in his Civil and Ecclesiastical State, or the
Magistracy and Ministry of Antichrist. Now observe it, as Antichrist by a
twofold power, a power Magisterial and Ministerial, does all the time of the
Two and forty months oppress the Woman, drive her into the Wilderness, tread
under foot the Holy City, i.e. the People, Truths, and Worship of Christ: so
does Christ all this time, by the very same twofold power, comfort and nourish
the woman, bear witness unto, and maintain his own truth and worship alive in
the world. So that in short, Christ raises up his Two Witnesses in opposition
to Antichrists two Beasts: Antichrist for Forty two months, or One thousand
two hundred and sixty days, stands up with two Beasts to blaspheme God,
persecute the Saints, tread under foot the Holy City; Christ against him stands
up with Two Witnesses to maintain his name and honor, cherish his people,
uphold his cause and worship in the world. And as Antichrists two Beasts are no
other but the false Magistracy, and Ministry: so contrariwise Christ's two
Witnesses, are his true Magistracy, and Ministry.

SECT. II.
THey are called Witnesses, their name being given them from their work,
because their work is to bear witness for Christ against the Beast; and that
each in his place all the Forty two months that the Beast does Tyrannize, and
the Holy City is trodden underfoot.

The Magistrate, as a Magistrate bearing public witness against the unjust
oppressions of the Beast, and his lawless Tyranny over the Estates and bodies
of men, yea and consciences too. The Minister, as a Minister against the cursed
institutions of Antichrist, either in Doctrine or Discipline.

Here its necessary we distinguish betwixt that general witness-bearing that is
common to all ages; and that special witness-bearing which is peculiar to these
Witnesses, and to this time, viz. of the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days.

There is a general Testimony which the people of God in all ages give for
Christ against the World, Sin, Satan, Oppression, Error, etc. But that
testimony barely does not bring him who bears it within the number of these two
Witnesses. A Magistrate in his place, may oppose Tyranny, Oppression, etc. a
Minister in his, error, and false Doctrine, and yet neither of them Christ's two
Witnesses, if there be not in both an opposing themselves to that special
evil, whether it be in things Civil or Ecclesiastical that was at first
brought in, or being brought in is upheld by the Beast; for the peculiar work
of these witnesses, and the thing wherein lies the specifical difference
betwixt these witnesses and others, is, That these bear witness for Christ
against the Beast. Which is most evident,

1 Because Christ has paired his Witnesses in the same manner as the Beast
has his. The Beast (as but now I observed) stands up with two witnesses, viz,
an Antichristian Magistracy and Ministry, to maintain his cause. On the
contrary, Christ stands up with two witness, (or a pair of Witnesses) viz. a
true Magistracy and Ministry, to oppose the Beast, and maintain his cause.

2 Because Its for this Reason Christ entitles them my Witnesses -- because in
Christ's behalf they shall stand up against Antichrist; as those are said to be
such a man's witnesses, that bear witness for him against his Adversary. All
that time the Beast stands up, and would persuade the world that he is in the
truth, and his cause the right; these two Witnesses on the contrary stand up,
and profess before the world, that he is the Beast, and his cause the cause of
Antichrist, and not of Christ.

3 Which is the principal Reason, because the time that these Witnesses bear
their witness, is the very time of the Beasts reign. The time of the Beasts
reign, and treading under foot the Holy City, is Forty two months, Rev. 13.5,
Chap. 11.2. The time of these two Witnesses is One thousand two hundred and
sixty days, Verse. 3. And I will give power to my two Witnesses, and they shall
Prophecy one thousand two hundred and sixty days --

Now that the Forty two months, and the One thousand two hundred and sixty days
are one and the same, I prove, not only from the general consent of
Expositors, who acknowledge the thing, giving this reason for it, Because (say
they) forty two mouths reduced into days, and reckoning thirty days to each
month, which is the Grecian account, which John writing to the Church of GOD
then resident among the Greeks did observe, make up the full sum of One
thousand two hundred and sixty days, not a day over or under. But I prove it
hence, that indeed this thing must needs be so; for let it be considered what
is the very cause that these two Witnesses wear sackcloth this long term of one
thousand two hundred and sixty years, the cause is, not the sufferings of the
Saints thoughout this time, for had that been the cause, then should these
Witnesses have put on their sackeloth more early, viz. with the time of the ten
first Persecutions, which was a day of as sore sufferings as ever any has been
since, but then these two Witnesses here mentioned were not in their sackcloth;
but contrariwise, the Woman all that time was clothed with the Sun, Chap.
12.1. the two Witnesses in Sackcloth therefore were not then up: But the cause,
yea, the very cause why the Witnesses wear mourning attire, is, because they
hear the continual Blasphemies of the Beast against God, his name and
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven: They see the Holy City, the Truths
and Worship of Christ trodden under foot by the Beast, and they not able to
rescue them out of his hands, this makes them put on sackcloth, and mourn
before the Lord. Now consider, the term of time that is given to the Beast to
continue to do these things, is forty two months; this being so, it will
follow, that in case this forty two months were a time either longer or shorter
than the one thousand two hundred and sixty days; then must also the witnesses
wearing sackcloth be by so much longer or shorter then 1260 days: for continue
the cause, and we continue the effect also; and contrariwise, take away the
cause, and the effect cease.

Upon this Principle, it being a thing manifestly clear that the 42 months, the
1260 days, make up but one and the same number of years, which also must of
necessity begin and end together; Hence it is evident, that that very act,
which I may call the constitutive act, i. e. the act which makes these
Witnesses to be such, is bearing witness against the Beast; take this away,
though they may stand up against all the evil that is in the world besides,
yet are they not Christ's Witnesses, if they do not in particular appear against
the evil of the Beast; for if this be not the meaning, what reason is or can be
given, why their witness-Bearing should be thus restrained only to the time of
the Beast; seeing in the other sense its a duty in all ages to bear witness,
and those Instruments the Lord has raised up in all ages have done it.

1 Hence a man may be a godly man, and in a more general way bear witness for
Christ, and yet none of Christ's Two Witnesses.

2 Hence its of more concernment than many are aware of, to be inquiring into,
and publicly appearing against whatsoever is of the Beast, though the thing be
never so small. A man in public place may cease to be a witness of Christ, if
publicly he do not bear witness against these things.

3 Hence, such Laws, Principles, and Practices as tend to suppress this
witness-bearing against the Beast, are themselves expressly Antichristian, and
of the Beast,

SECT. III.
THese Witnesses are called two, because of the fewness of them, say some;
Because two is a number sufficient to bear a witness, and without two a witness
is invalid, say others. I no way disapprove these conjectures, but I must
confess, I judge it most agreeable to the Text to say, they are therefore
called two, because they consist of two sorts, or two ranks of men, viz.
Christ's Magistates and Ministers that he has raised up to maintain his cause
against Antichrists Magistrates and Ministers.

They are said to be clothed in sackcloth, to note thus much, That all the time
of the 1260 days their condition shall be outwardly low, they being trampled
upon, and tr^den under foot by the Beast: But more especially to fignifie how
that these Two Witnesses should all this time be inwardly law, wearing
sackcloth (the mourning attite in times of old) mourning before God, because
(as I have said) they hear his glorious Name blasphemed, behold the Holy City
trodden under foot, and the whole world deceived by the Beast.

They are said by fire to destroy their Enemies, ver. 5. To shut Heaven that it
rain not in the days of their Prophecy, ver. 6. both which things are taken out
of the History of Elijah, 1 King. 1.10. 1 King. 17.1. Farther, they are said to
have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the earth with
plagues as often as they will, ver. 6. which is taken out of the Story of Moses
and Aaron in Egypt.

The whole (as I conceive) sets forth this, the great damage that the
Antichristian party shall sustain all the time of the 1260 days, by means of
these two Witnesses: who shall have such power with God, as oftentimes to bring
down his heavy wrath upon the persons of their persecutors, which is the thing
noted ver. 5. by their devouring and killing their enemies by fire: and also
upon their principal interests, which I take to be the thing specially
intended, ver. 7. by their shutting Heaven, turning waters into blood, smiting
the earth with plagues, i.e. The Popish Heaven, waters, earth, shall all suffer
by means of these two Witnesses in the time of their prophecy.

By the whole description of the two Witnesses (as says our German Author in
his Cl. p. 66, 67.) God does declare that what mercies in times of old he has
showed unto his people, the Children of Israel, the same he will also show in
the New Testament unto them that believe. He will give them Joshuahs and
Zerubbabels, saithful Teachers, and religious Rulers and Governors, who shall
fit and edify them unto the Temple of God, and as Candlesticks give light unto
them with their pure doctrine, and as Olive trees assist them with powerful
consolation. He will give them zealous Elija's, and Elisha's, who shall fight
against the whore Jezabel, the Priests of Baal and other persecutors.

He will also at length send them his Moses's and Aarons, who shall deliver
them, and bring them forth out of Antichristian bondage.

SECT. IV.
THe Witnesses, their testimony finished, are to be killed, v. 7. And when they
shall have finished their testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the
bottomless p^t shall make war against them, and shall overcome them and kill
them. In this state they are to continue three days and a half, ver. 9, 11.
Though our discourse of the three days and a half according to the strictness
of order should come in afterward, yet in regard the opening hereof will
afford us light into some things that follow, I have chosen to place it before.

That these three days and a half cannot be (as is the opinion of many worthy
men, who look upon the death of the Witnesses to be a corporal death) a time
equivalent to the 1260 is evident;

1 Bec. then there should be no distinction at all betwixt the time of their
Prophesying and their being killed, if through all the 1 260 days, which is
the time of their Prophecy, we should suppose them to be killed, Now the Text
has made a manifest distinction betwixt these two times.

2 Becanse its improper to say that Christ's witnesses against Antichrist should
prophecy all the 1260 days and yet be killed too; For put case the Beast all
this time did put some to death, yet so long as Christ at the same time, and in
the same place had always others in their room, his witnesses were not killed.
A man is not without witness, though some witnesses are taken away, in case
others stand up and appear in their room. Nay those witnesses which all the
1260 days were put to death by the Beast, did most ominently in dying bear
witness for Christ, for to dis for the truth, is a living standing testimony to
it. That killing therefore could not be a killing as witnesses, he who for
truths sake loves not his life to the death, is even in dying a most glorious
witness of the truth.

3 Its said ver. 10. that when the two witnesses lie dead, the dwellers on the
earth rejoice, for this reason, because they are dead who tormented them. Now
did the dwellers on the earth thus rejoice all the ^260 days? when were they
then tormented? Will the Text bear it to say, they were tormented all this
time, and yet rejoiced too? This the Authors or upholders of this opinion must
necessarily assert. Nay why do they rejoice at their death? why, because being
dead they fear no hurt from them, which whilst they prophesied they did, for
they felt of them, as ver. 5 6. therefore their prophesying and killing must be
as two distinct things, and so at two distinct times.

4 Because, How could they be witnesses all this time if dead? Does a man when
he has a cause to be tried go to dead men that they would stand witnesses for
him, or to living? Or how did they Prophecy if dead? Can dead men prophecy, or
are prophesying men dead?

5 Why are they said to be killed only in the street (or one street) of the
great City, ver. 8. and not in the whole City? seeing in this sense they have
been within the 1260 days more or less killed all over the great City, i.e.
throughout the whole Papal Jurisdiction?

6 What difference will there be (according to this opinion) betwixt their
being killed and put into graves, if we take both for a bodily death, which
this opinion does?

7 And lastly, How (according to this opinion) are they all the three days and
a half kept unburied? or how at the end of these three days and a half shall
those Witnesses which were killed rise again? for shall we think thus, that the
bodies of Saints martyred by diverse means, and in sundry places, for the space
of 1260 years together, shall all that time lie unburied, be kept out of
graves? And then 2. This time expired, life enters into these bodies, and they
rise again. The Text according to this interpretation does strongly enforce
both, for if we conceive their killing to be corporal, by the same reason must
their burial and their resurrection also.

We are necessitated therefore from the clear Text, and reason it self, to
reject this opinion, and seek another. That therefore which is more consonant
to the words, and does not wrap us up in such a labyrinth of Intricacies, is to
interpret the three days and a half (which is the time of their being killed)
of ordinary Prophetical days, noting three years and a half, which three years
and a half are not to be added to the 1260. as a lesser period, which takes
beginning where the greater ends, because then (as one says well) the Beast
should Tyrannize above 42. months, the woman be in the Wilderness above 1260
days, namely 1263 and a half, whereas the utmost tyranny of the Beast is but 42
months, the utmost period of the woman's being in the wilderness but 1260 days;
but we are to look upon them as a smaller period comprehended within the
greater; or to speak plainly, we are to understand them of the very last three
days and a half of the 1260. and therefore M. Mede in his Cl and our German
Author in his, both translate those words, (...), when they shall have finished
their testimony, Chap. 11. thus, Cum finituri sint testimonium suum, When they
are about to finish their testimony, the 1260 days now drawing to an end, then
shall the Beast make war against them, overcome them, and kill them.

As for that urged by a late Author, who calls in reason to be Umpire or Judge
in this business, how the Beast now ready to die (as our Author supposes he
will at the end of the 1260 days) should be so magnanimous and warlike as to
kill the Witnesses? how (the Sea being at this time tempestnous, the earth
terribly shaken) can it be imagined that the Sont of the Sea and Earth, i. e.
wordly men, should be so jocund, and to banquet it, sport it, make merry, send
gifts one to another, etc. as they shall do in the day the witnesses lie dead.
I say no more but this, that all time upon a mistake, viz. That the rise of the
Witnesses shall not be till the Empire of the ten-horned Beast ( i.e. Civil
power of Antichrist) is in a manner destroyed: and this upon another, that the
subject of the fifth Vial is the political state of the present Roman Empire
(or Antichrists Civil State.) But as I have in my discourse upon the Vials
proved the Subject of that Vial to be another thing: so let me say here to the
first, it cannot be, because the Whore but a little before Romes fall is so
high and proud, as that she fears no danger, but says, I sit as a Queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no sorrow, which were her political State (where
lies her outward strength, and as for inward she has none) destroyed, she
should have little cause thus to brag and brave. Nay what do the witnesses
after their rise, if the Beasts power were destroyed before? only kill him,
whose sword was taken away before they came at him? Or how falls the tenth part
of the City, upon their rise, if it were fallen before?

SECT. V.
AS for the particular time of the Witnesses slaughter, the most certain and
convincing demonstration that can be given thereof, is, that which must be
fetched from a right supputation of the 1260 days, which is the term of their
Prophecy, their killing time being (as has been faid) the very last three days
and a half of the 1260. But because the doing hereof, to free the truth from
the mists men have raised about it, will require in a manner a Treatise of it
self; and also because no Mystical number, by reason of that glorious harmony
that is in all, can carry with it that forcible demonstration going alone, as
will appear to be in it, when accompanied with others; I shall therefore (that
I may not make this single Section to become a Book) wave this enquiry in this
place, contenting my self to lay down two or three more general Conclusions,
concerning this Grand Question, What time we are to pitch upon as the killing
time of the Witnesses?

The Conclusions themselves are these:

1 CONCLUSION, That the killing of the Witnesses shall be in that very three
years and a half, which shall immediately precede the Jews first stirring,
which is manifestly clear hence, because Daniels 1290 days which point us to
the time of the Jews first stirring, are concurrent in their end, with the end
of he time, times, and a half, which is the time of the Witnesses rising, as
shall be made appear in our following Discourse.

2 To this agrees what I have formerly written upon the Vials. The rise of the
Witnesses I have there stated under the fourth Vial. The drying up of the
Turkish Powers, thereby to instate the Jews in their own Land under the Sixth.
Now as the first stirring of the Jews must needs be some little time before the
sixth Vial is poured out, because their stirring is (as I have showed) the
chief moving cause to the Gentile Saints to engage in this War against the
Turk: So also it is observable, that the time from the Witnesses rise until the
pouring out of the sixth Vial, shall be but a very little time, the fourth and
fifth Vials being both to be poured out in an instant upon the resurrection of
the Witnesses, as may be seen with the reasons thereof in our Discourse upon
the fifth Vial. Hence, in regard the first stirring of the Jews must of
necessity be before the pouring out of the sixth Vial, as the cause is before
the effect, and the time betwixt the Witnesses rise, and the sixth Vial is so
short, we may very well conclude, that the first workings among the Jews
themselves in a way of stirring, will be upwards, even as high as the time of
the Witnesses resurrection.

And for this reason, because the Jews shall about the time of Romes ruin
(which falls in the middle time betwixt the fourth and sixth Vials) be
stirring, are the praises rendered for Romes fall (as is Mr. Cottons conjecture)
expressed by an Hebrew word, Hallelujah, Revel. 19.1, 2, 3, 4.

2 CONCLUSION, That the killing of the Witnesses shall be but a little before
the downfall of Rome, which therefore presently falls upon their rise.

First, The Order of the Vials proves this, for under the fourth Vial the
Witnesses rise, as upon the Vials I have showed. This Vial is poured out in an
instant, and therefore said to be in an hour; In the same hour the tenth part
of the City fell, Rev. 11.13. that is, Germany, one of the ten Horns, and the
very place (as shall appear by and by) where the Witnesses lie dead, is upon
their resurrection, in an instant broken off, from being any longer a Horn in
Antichrists Kingdom; and then as the next thing, and that in an instant too,
is Rome ruined, by the pouring out of the fifth Vial. So that Romes ruin
succeeding presently upon the rise of the Witnesses, their killing must be but
a little before it.

Secondly, This is further clear, Rev. 18.7. where we have the proud Whore
instantly before her downfall glorying, I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, and
shall see no sorrow. What is the cause hereof? Ans. Undoubtedly the very same
with the cause of that joy and triumph of the Papals, which is expressed by
making merry, sending gifts one to another, Rev. 11.10. And what was that, but
the death of the Witnesses? as the Text tells us. Upon this Victory over the
Witnesses, that had been but a little before struggling with her, and like to
have ruined her, the Whore is now so imperiously proud, that as Nebuchad^ezzar
of old, a little before his fall speaks out, Is not this great Babel that I
have built; so she also in her pride cries out, I sit as a Queen, am no widow,
and shall see no sorrow; as to say, I was lately afraid I should have been
spoiled of my glory, been made a widow, and seen forrow, but now it is
otherwise, my enemies are under my feet, I am Mistress and Ruler, therefore I
sit as a Queen, etc.

And that the killing of the Witnesses should be here noted, is yet more clear,
if we consider, how that as those words are spoken in the present tense, and
therefore cannot relate to former past boastings, so do they admirably agree in
point of time to the killing of the Witnesses; for that (as I have said) is to
be in the very last three days and a half of the Beasts Tyranny, and the
Witnesses wearing Sackcloth, which time is no sooner expired, but, as one of
the first things, Rome is ruined; accordingly this boast is immediately before
Romes ruin. And therefore observe the words themselves, and you shall find,
that even whilst the Whore is in this jolly fit, instantly and unexpectedly
comes her ruin upon her, and the downfall of Rome her chief City, Rev. 18.8.
Therefore shall her plagues come upon her in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God
who judges her; Verse. 10. For in one hour is thy judgment come. So Verse.
17.19. One day, one hour, that is from the time of her glorying, whilst she is
thus glorying over the dead Winesses, up start the Witnesses, down falls Rome.

3 CONCLUSION, That the killing of the Witnesses shall be in the latter end of
the third Vial.

Two things proved make this Conclusion firm.

1 That some Vials shall be poured out before the slaughter of the Witnesses.

2 That the Vials poured out, shall be only the three first.

The first of these is sufficiently proved by Mr. Woodcock in his Treatise of
the two Witnesses, p. 20 21, 22, 23. I shall not here repeat his Arguments, but
refer the Roader to the Author himself, with adding this farther word, that
John being, by one of the seven Angels which had the 7 Vials, carried away into
the Wilderness, there to have the interpretation of the Vials, is to me a
manifest Argument, that some of the Vials are poured out whilst yet the Woman
remains in the wilderness; why else should the Angel of one of the Vials carry
John into the wilderness, there to learn the meaning of this mystery, if the
true Spouse of Christ, to whom he reveals these secrets, were not, and that
even in the time of some of the Vials, abiding there? Yea let me add (which
will something more help us) that I conceive this Angel to be no other but the
Angel of the third Vial; my reason is, because the interpretation of the Vials,
which is the thing revealed to John, Chap. 17. Chap. 18. etc. begins with the
third Vial, for the first thing after the description of the Whore her self,
which is to be judged, that relates to her judgment, is the Lambs overcoming
some of the Horns, verse. 14. which act is to be referred to the third Vial, as
I shall show presently. And indeed the reason why in the explication of the
Vials, the two first are left out, and the Angel begins with the third, is,
because (as I have observed upon the Viols, p. 260, 261, 262.) Christ in the
two first Vials is but regaining his own, not yet invading his Enemies
Dominions, till the third: Now because all that John in the explication has
showed him, is only the judgment of the Beast and Whore, which (as I have
said) are first described, then their judgment piece by piece declared;
therefore the two first Vials are omitted, as being another thing, rather (I
say) Christ's getting his own, then as yet judging his Enemy, and he begins with
the third, where the judgemens of the Where, the work of breaking the Great
Image, casting down the Thrones of the Fourth Beast begins.

This being so, as it teaches us that the discovering-time of the Great Whore
in her true Colors, and the judgments o^ God to be executed on her, and the
glorious Kingdom of Christ to follow thereupon, is to be looked for under the
third Vial, the Angel of that Vial showing John these things; So also it
teaches us, that under the third Vial, the Church is to be in the wilderness,
therefore John is carried thither to learn these things: But beyond this Vial
she is not to be there, as also I shall show by and by: The term therefore of
the Woman's being in the wilderness expiring under the third Vial, it hence
follows, That the death of the witnesses, which is the concluding time of that
long term, should likewise fall under the third Vial.

And indeed, because the blackest day, one of them that ever the Church of
Christ met with, is to befall her under the third Vial, in the latter part of
it, therefore (as I conceive) are the glorious discoveries of the judgment of
the Great Whore, and the Beast her Enemy, and of the Kingdom of Christ,
following thereupon, made known to the Saints under the third Vial, to bear up
their spirits in this day; it being the way of God with his people, when he
brings any fore sufferings on them to forelay them with somewhat which may make
them able to bear it. This I add in the general only.

I come now more particularly to prove the thing, viz. That the killing of the
Witnesses is to be under the third Vial, at the latter end thereof.

My Reasons are these;

1 Because the Angel of the fourth Vial has this work committed to him by
special dispensation, over and besides the pouring forth of his Vial (though he
performs it together with that) viz. To give call to, and assist the Witnesses
rising. (See my Discourse upon the fourth Vial.) By consequence therefore, the
Witnesses must lie dead in the latter end of the third, because the Angel of
the fourth Vial, no sooner begins to pour out his Vial, but immediatel, they
are rising.

2 Because the particular acts of the Witnesses immediately preceding their
killing (which killing therefore is recorded in the next verse after these
acts, Rev. 11.6, 7.) seem to me to have a peculiar look unto the three first
Vials, agreeing with them most exactly (according to that interpretation I gave
of them, whilst yet I had no such thing in mine eye) both in their subjects and
effects also. As let us compare each with other.

1 The subject of the first Vial is the Popish Earth; the effect, an infectious
sore; accordingly the Witnesses are said to smite the Earth, and that with
plagues, or infectious sores, as often as they will.

2 The subject of the second Vial is the Popish Sea, i.e. the Romish
Ecclesiastical, or Church State: The effect of it, a discovery of the same to
be corrupt and mortal; accordingly the witnesses have a power to shut Heaven
that it rain not, that is, they shall make it appear, that the Antichristian
Heaven, or Church State (so much boasted of as being the only Church) is a dry
barren Heaven, affording no rain, to give life or nourishment to those that
live under it.

3 The subject of the third Vial is the Rivers and fountains of waters; the
effect, they become blood; accordingly, the witnesses have a power to turn
waters into blood. Now these acts performed by the witnesses immediately before
their killing, agreeing so fully to the three first Vials in their subjects and
effects both; undoubtedly we are not to look upon this admirable Harmony, to be
a thing falling by accident (especially considering too, that by these acts the
witnesses are said to torment the Papals, ver. 10. which to do by Saints and
Witnesses, is the proper work of the Vials,) but rather to have its rise in the
allwise Counsel of God, who hereby would give his to understand, that the three
first Vials are to be poured out before the fourth, then the death of the
Witnesses to be expected.

This Observation confirms me in two things.

1 That in stating our selves (in my discourse on the Vials) to be at this
persent time under the third Vial, I was led to state the thing aright.

2 That the judgment there made of the subjects and effects of the three first
Vials is truth, by reason of the answerableness of the Vials, according to that
interpretation, to the acts of the witnesses immediately preceding the time of
their slaughter.

3 Reason, Because the slaughter of the witnesses is to fall in the interval
betwixt the War of the Lamb with the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.14. and the
ruin of Rome. This war of the Lamb is a Civil war, a war made by a Civil sword,
because it is a war made with the Beasts civil Power, namely, his horns; And
secondly, It is a Civil Power, namely, some of the ten Kings, that are
vanquished by this war, He shall overcome them -- that is, such of the ten
horns, or Kings, as shall war against him, (the whole, or all the ten horns
being here put for a part) and for this reason. I conceive, does the Lamb at
this day go under that Title, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, because in this
war he shall vanquish and tread under foot Kings, Lords, etc.

Now this war must by all circumstances be a war within the Vials.

1 Because Its the Angel of one of the Vials that shows it unto John, ver. 1.

2 Because Christ has so many chosen ones accompanying him in this war, which
is an Argument that Christ had many in the world at this day who had got the
victory over the Beast, and could stand and face him in a warlike way, which
was not till the work of the Vials was begun.

3 Because Its the immediate forerunner of Romes ruin, the story of which
therefore comes in, in the next Chapter.

It being so, this war can belong to no other but the Third Vial, the subject
of which, I have showed upon the Vials is some particular States and Kingdoms
subjected to the Beast, i.e. some of the ten horns, whose Heads, Rulers, etc,
fall by the pouring forth of that Vial. Nay it must be so, because (as I have
said before) this is the first thing revealed to John as touching the judgment
of the Beast, whose judgment (in the explication of the Vials) begins with the
Third Vial.

Now observe in the interval betwixt this war and Romes destruction, we have
the proud Whore brought in glorying Chap. 18.7. I sit as a Queen, etc. and
what is the cause hereof, but only the Victory obtained now, in the concluding
time of her Kingdom, over the witnesses, as we have already noted. I therefore
conclude, the slaughter of the witnesses must fall in this interval. If in this
interval, then must it be in the latter end of the Third Vial; for upon the
pouring out of the Fourth they rise; yea, the Fourth Vial being to fall upon
Germany (as in opening the Vials I have showed) and Germany being (as shall
appear) the place in which the witnesses lie dead, it cannot be thought that
the death of the witnesses should or can come under the fourth Vial; for how
improper, yea absurd would it be to say, Christ's witnesses by the power of the
Beast lie dead in Germany, even whilst Christ by his people is pouring out a
Vial of wrath upon it? It must therefore of necessity be, seeing we are to
place their killing betwivt the war of the Lamb with the Kings of the Earth,
and Romes ruin, that we should place it toward the end of the third Vial.

Obj. But it may be said, That the Vials are all to come under the seventh
Trumpet; for upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, it is said, Thy wrath is
come, Rev. 11.18. and what wrath should this be, but the Vials of wrath? if so,
then must the killing of the Witnesses, which appertains to the woe of the
sixth Trumpet, be past and over, and that before any one of the Vials are
poured forth.

Ans. 1. For the matter of the Objection, it cannot be, that all the V^als
should come under the seventh Trumpet,

1 Because Its expesly said of the seventh Trumpet, that in the days when the
seventh Angel should begin to sound, time should be no longer, Chap. 10.7. But
if after his sounding all the Vials were to be poured forth, which already in
pouring forth have taken up above 100 years, time (even after his sounding)
should be a great while.

2 Because Its also said in the same verse, That when the seventh Angel should
begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished: but if all the Vialls,
which comprehend within them the whole mystery of judging the Beast, conversion
of the Jews, etc. were to be poured out afterward, then could not the time of
the seventh Angels sounding be the finishing time of mysteries, but rather the
beginning time. It cannot therefore be that the seventh Trumpet should
comprehend within it all the Vials; it is therefore better to say that the
seventh Trumpet is contemporary with the seventh and last Vial only; and indeed
they very patly answer the one to the other, for

1 Upon the seventh Trumpets sounding, its said, The mystery of God is
finished. So upon the seventh Angels pouring out his Vial, It is done, What is
that? but the same with the other, it is finished.

2 Upon the seventh Angels sounding, the Kingdom of this world are all subject
to Christ, Rev. 11.15. now the doing of this is the proper and peculiar work of
the seventh Vial, as our discourse on that Vial proves.

3 The seventh Angels sounding, is the time of rewarding Saints, not some
only, but all of them, small and great, ver: 18. this comes under none of the
Vials but the seventh only, which comprehends within it the time of the New
Jerusalem, the time of rewarding the dead and living Saints.

4 Upon the seventh Angels sounding there are lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hail, ver. 19. This is peculiar to the
seventh and last Vial, and answers to the plague of it almost verbatim, Revel.
16.18, 21. Therefore I say the seventh Trumpet is contemporary with the seventh
Vial, and no other. The matter of the Objection is therefore a mistake.

2 For the ground of it, which lies in these words, Thy wrath is come.

Ans. This wrath is not to be understood of the wrath of all the Vials, but
only of the last, which because it shall be the greatest wrath, has an
emphasis put upon it, Thy wrath, as if Christ had never been angry till now,
that is, comparatively the former wrath was but a Flea-bite to this. Hence
(which confirms our sense) the day of the seventh Vial (which is all one with
the Battle of Armageddon) is called the day of Christ's wrath, Psalm. 110.5. The
fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God, Revel. 19.15. The day of vengeance,
Isa. 63.4. Of indignation, chap. 66.14. The great and terrible day of the Lord,
Joel. 2.31. Mal. 4.5. all confirming this, that this dreadful time of the Lambs
wrath does more properly relate to the last Vial only, than to all the Vials
in general.

From all the three former Conclusions put together, I make up this, viz. That
the day of the Witnesses killing must in all likelihood be already begun, and
not much more than begun. For since from our first Conclusion, their rise must
be concurrent with the end of Daniels 1290 days, which beginning from Julians
time, expire A.D. 1656. as see Generation work, part 1. p. 51, 52, 53, 54. And
since from our second Conclusion, their killing must be a little before Romes
ruin, which (for what I have said under our first) does in a manner
contemporise with the other. And since from our third Conclusion, their killing
must be under the Third Vial, which is manifest from our discourse upon the
Vials, to be the Vial we stand under at present. I therefore from the whole
conclude, That this black day is in all probability begun, and the Witnesses do
at this present time lie dead.

Hence it is a thing we must expect, that yet a little while, until this cloud
is toward blowing over, the work of Christ in the world will go on but heavily,
for there is reason for it (as I shall show anon) that within the day the
Witnesses lie dead, though their killing be a particular act, an act restrained
to one place only, yet that the work and cause of Christ in general, should
the greatest part of that day labor under a Cloud.

SECT. VI.
THe Beast killing the Witnesses, the Text tells us is the Beast ascending out
of the bottomless pit, ver. 7. of which Beast I have discoursed upon the Vials,
p. 97, 98, 99, 100. where this Beast is proved to be the Roman Civil and
Ecclesiastical State, or the Antichristian Magistracy and Ministry, both laying
heads together, and joining hands to kill the two Witnesses of Christ, viz. The
true Magistracy and Ministry.

And here it is observable, that Antichrists Magistracy and Ministry, though
two, yet are called but one Beast, as also Rev. 13. last. One number is
assigned to both the Beasts; whereas the Magistracy and Ministry of Christ,
take them in the time of their Prophecy, when they are killed, or when they
rise, they are still two, and spoken of in the plural number. What may be the
reason hereof? Ans. Christ's Magistracy and Ministry keep their powers distinct
and therefore they are two; Antichrists mix their powers, and therefore they
are one. That Magistracy and Ministry therefore, which weave and intermixe
their powers, making and using in a manner but one sword, whereas they should
do two, are neither of them Christ's, but both the Limbs of Antichrist; nor are
they in the account of the Holy Ghost witnesses, but beasts, who calls them so,
Rev. 13. yea lays down this as the principal character of the two Beasts, that
notwithstanding they were two, yet did the one exercise the others power, for
the second Beast exercises all the power of the first, verse. 12. Now though
the power of a Beast is ordinarily stronger then the power of a rational
witness, yet by how much the rational creature is more honorable then the
sensitive, by so much are those in whom the witnessing power remains, more
honorable then those, whose power is only the power of Beasts.

SECT. VII.
AS touching the Nature of the Witnesses death; we are not to conceive thereof
as though the same were to be a corporal killing, which no way agrees with this
Prophecy, for,

1 Such as is their resurrection and ascension, such their death; but their
resurrection and ascension is not corporal, therefore not their death.

2 This Killing must be such a Killing as that they may in the time of their
being Killed, lie dead as witnesses; for otherwise we cannot distinguish their
killing, from their Prophesying, if we suppose them in both to give testimony,
and bear witness for Christ against the Beast; But a corporal killing of
witnesses does not make them cease to bear witness, but rather to bear witness
in a more eminent manner, as has been before observed. It is not a corporal
killing therefore which is here meant.

Quest. What manner of Death then is it?

Answ. A Death (as I conceive) partly Civil, and partly Spiritual.

1 Partly Civil, which shall be a deprival of the witnesses, in a very great
measure, if not totally, of their Civil Liberties, and the free exercise of
their Religion. The godly Magistracy shall be put out of office, and so be in
no capacity as Magistrates to bear witness; the godly Ministry, by penal Laws
have their mouths stopped, and not suffered as Ministers of Christ to bear
witness. This shall be their death, as to the Civil part of it.

2 This death shall be partly spiritual, and herein (as I conceive) the
blackness of the day shall principally lie, and not in Bloodshedding; for
observe, though the Beast has a will to this latter, viz. to kill the
witnesses outright, yet is he not permitted to do it, verse. 9. Now this
spiritual death shall consist chiefly in this, viz. That the witnesses shall
all this three years and a half be so left of God, as that they shall not have
that courage that was in the people of God, all the time of the witnesses
Prophecy; who then did not love their lives to the death, but mantained the
truth, and opposed the Beast with their blood: But I say, now they shall want
this courage, choosing rather cowardly to lie down (though stripped of Liberty
and Religion both) as men quite bereaved of spirit and life, then boldly, as
did their famous Predecessors, stand up for Christ, and protest against the
Beast. And such a day as this, is by far a worse day, then to see Saints killed
with the sword, for whilst it is thus with them, they are honoring their Lord
and Master, by bearing testimony, though with their bloods, but now they are
shaming of him, yea Religion it self, by deserting their Colors.

And the Reasons why I conceive of the thing after this manner, are,

1 Because they cannot in any other way be said to lie dead as witnesses, which
must be, because otherwise (as I have said) there is no distinction at all
betwixt their Prophesying and their Killing.

2 Because their resurrection at the end of the three days and a half, is by a
spirit of life from God entering into them, verse. 11. i.e. a spirit of courage
and boldness now to stand up for Christ, and Protest against the Beast, put
into them by God, which before was wanting. Therefore, I say, the death here
spoken of is not a corporal, but another manner of death, and the we of the
day shall lie more in being forsaken of God within this time, then in being
tormented or martyred by man.

SECT. VIII.
THe place in which the Witnesses lie dead, is not the whole Papal Kingdom, but
some particular Nation, or some one of the ten Horns.

The Reasons are,

1 Because (as our German Author in his Cl. p. 73. has well observed) they are
said to lie dead, not in the streets of the Great City, in the plural number,
but in the street, in the singular, Rev. 11.8. And their dead bodies shall lie
in the street ((...)) of the Great City. Noting, that their killing shall be in
one street, not in all the Papal Kingdom.

2 Because upon their resurrection, the whole City, i.e. all the Papal Kingdom
is not overthrown, but only a tenth part, verse. 13 And the same hour -- the
tenth part of the City fell. Now observe. There where the witnesses lie dead
three days and a half, there this time expired they arise; where they rise, in
that place does the Papal power fall before them, upon their rise, or otherwise
they could not rise, for that power would keep them down; so that look how far
we extend the killing and rising again of the witnesses, so far must we extend
the ruin of the Papal power, and that in the very same hour they rise. But now
the Great City or Papal power is not wholly destroyed upon the witnesses rise,
but a tenth part only falls; therefore the rise of the witnesses, and so
consequently their lying dead, which goes before it, is not to be looked for
all over the Papal Kingdom, but in a tenth part only. Or thus, we are not to
conceive that all the witnesses Christ has within any of the ten Horns, shall
at this time lie dead; But Christ's witnesses only in one of the ten Horns, the
death of a part, being here put for the death of the whole, and well may it,
considering how remarkable this death shall be for the nature of it.

It would therefore be inquired into, seeing that this is to be but in one
tenth part, what part or place that is.

Answ. I have in my Discourse upon the Vials, Vial 4. affirmed the place to be
Germany; and I may truly say, that what I then affirmed more doubtfully, I am
by looking more intently upon this subject of the witnesses, much persuaded of,
and confirmed in. One reason which swayes with me is, because the Holy Ghost
seems to speak of the place by way of eminency, as being the most noted place
of the whole Papal Kingdom, verse. 8. The street of the great City, i.e. the
noted street, the Market-street, or (as I may say) the Thorow-fare, so verse.
10. The tenth part of the City fell, the Original reads the words with an
Article, (...) That tenth part of the City, i.e. the most eminent, noted part
of all the Ten.

Now the place being spoken of by way of eminency, it must be understood either
in relation to the witnesses, or the Beast that kills them, that is, it must be
either the most eminent place for witnesses, or the most eminent Kingdom
belonging to the beast, one of the two. Now take either of these, and it does
not so properly agree to any place in all Europe, as Germany; for,

1 In respect of Witnesses: Our Question now is not, where at this present day
are most Witnesses; but the thing we must look after is, what place that is,
which through all the time of the Beasts reign, has been the most noted place
for Witnesses, and there must we fix our Standard. Now that is Germany, which
in this respect (until at this present day) has ever excelled all the Nations
in Europe. The Witnesses there began to appear for Christ openly against the
Beast, before the year 900, against whom suddenly after was raised a most
bloody persecution by the Beast; which per secution is the highest I can find
in any History, that was made (to speak properly) by the Beast. Notwithstanding
this persecution, the witnesses (as Ecclesiastical Writers affirm) grew and
increased, and, like fire in a thatch, spread themselves over Germany, and
neighboring Countries. Yea from that day to this, there ever have been more or
less witnesses standing up, and sacrificing their lives for the cause of
Christ, against the Beast, in Germany, so that Germany it has been in a manner
the Seed-plot of truth, and the very Nursery of witnesses, throughout all ages.

2 Look upon it in respect of the Beast, and it is also the most noted place,
and above all, deserves to be called the street, that tenth part by way of
eminency, being indeed the principal street of the great City, the first horn
of the Beast, the chief Kingdom of the fourth Monarchy, as under Antichrist, as
says my worthy German Author, in his Cl. p. 78. giving these three Reasons for
it.

1 Because It is called the Roman Empire.

2 Because It is, as it were, a figure and Image of the old Roman Empire,
having seven Heads, in regard of the seven Princes Electors, and ten Provinces,
in respect of the ten Circles into which it is distributed.

3 Because The Head of the German Empire has still the name of a Roman
Emperor, and has the preeminence above all other Kings adhering to the Papal
State.

And truly, when I cast mine eye upon what has about half a year, or three
quarters of a year ago been done in Germany; and also how the Saints there
seem, at present, bereaved of life, lying down and couching under their burden,
it appears to me, the time, place, and thing compared together, to be more than
an ordinary dispensation.

And farther let me say, Though the Saints there at this day seem to have lost
that noble spirit that was in their Ancestors, who for Christ's sake loved not
their lives unto death; yet surely, this consideration, That they are the
Children and Offspring of those famous blessed Witnesses, who with undaunted
resolution appeared for Christ, when our Forefathers, yea, and the whole world
wondered after the Beast, should not a little draw out the Bowels of our
compassion toward them.

Notwithstanding what I have said of Germany as the place, yet let me add this
in the conclusion, that I conceive withal, that the condition of the people of
God in other places, will not be so prosperous, but a cloud will be upon them,
their comforts and expectations, a great part, if not the greatest of this
time; for though the thickness and blackness of this cloud is to hang over
Germany, yet may it not be thought, but that so great a cloud will cast a
shadow further, and thereby afflict, at the same time, though not in the same
measure, the people of God elsewhere.

And indeed, it is very reasonable to think it should be so; for if when but a
member suffers in the natural body, all the members suffer with it; then
surely, when not a member only but a principal part of the mystical Body lies
under so fore a pressure as the body of Christ never before lay under, cannot
we think the other members should at that time have such cause of rejoicing, as
those who feel no smart at all. How could there then be a sympathy in the
mystical body?

Nay, it is not only reasonable, but a thing of great concernment, and special
use it should be so; to the end, the other members by feeling smart and
anguish, from a few only of the scattered drops lighting upon them, might
hereby be made the more sensible of the condition of their fellow brethren, who
lie under the furious rage of the tempest; and also might from hence be stirred
up to cry aloud to the Father of Mercies, for their poor Brethren, who now
being thunderstruck, have for the present neither sense, nor life in a manner,
and so cannot cry for themselves.

SECT. IX.
TWo things we have in an especial manner noted by the Holy Ghost, both which
concern the Witnesses, and are to have their fulfilling within the three days
and a half of their lying dead.

First, They of the People, Kindreds, Nations and Tongues, see their dead
bodies three days and a half, and will not suffer their dead bodies to be put
into graves, verse. 9. The putting of the dead bodies of the Witnesses into
graves, notes a corporal death, it being Scripture phrase to put the grave for
bodily death, 1 Cor. 15.55. 1 King. 14.13. 2 King. 22.20. This would the Beast
do, but he is hindered.

Here a Controversy arises, Who those People, Kindreds, Nations and Tongues
should be. Some will have them to be the Popish party, some, a reformed people;
if the one, the act is an act of dis-favor, if the other, of favor.

Both these opinions you may see, with the reasons of either, laid down by Mr.
Woodcock in his Treatise of the Two Witnesses; who himself is for the first,
that they are the Popish party. To bring here the Arguments on both hands to
the Touchstone, would be more tedious than profitable, in regard the thing it
self is not a matter of so great moment, but that without any prejudice to all
my other Principles, there may be an allowance of different conjectures; and
therefore, to make a great contention for a little gain, I shall not do it, for
it will not quit time and cost.

I shall therefore only offer to consideration my own thoughts hereof, viz.
That neither the Popish party, nor a reformed people, properly so called, or so
esteemed by Christ, are here meant; but indeed, a third party; a party that
cannot properly be said to worship the Beast, because him they disown; Nor a
party that may properly be called a reformed people, because Reformation is a
thing they have little regard unto: But if you would see them in their proper
Character, They shall be persons of a worldly interest, or to speak plainly,
pure Statists, who walking by the rules of State Policy, shall neither
professedly own the Cause of Antichrist, nor Christ, beyond these principles.
And therefore very emphatically has the Scripture (as seems to me) set them
forth by people, and Kindreds, and Nations, and Tongues, which as it is a
middle name, neither so odious as the name of the worshippers of the Beast, nor
so honorable, as that of the Witnesses; so does it excellently agree to such
persons, whose main design is a mere worldly interest; for of such, the great
thing in their eye is the good of Commonwealths, the regulating and ordering
the affairs of People, and Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and though they
may own and favor the cause of Christ, yet will they not appear for it a step
farther than will stand with National interests, the good of People, and
Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues. Now such there shall be in the world, in
the time the Witnesses lie dead, who shall take notice of the Witnesses
slaughter, and have a cast of their eye that way, and by their power so far awe
the Beast, as that he shall not satisfy his lusts upon the Witnesses.

Secondly, Besides these, we have another sort of people spoken of, who
formerly being such as were tormented by the Witnesses in the time of their
prophecy, shall now upon their death be jovial, make merry, send gifts one to
another, as hoping they are now delivered from that danger they feared they
should sustain by these Witnesses. These are called the dwellers on the Earth,
ver. 10. And they that dwell on the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. The phrase needs no other
interpretation than what we have, Chap. 13.8. And all that dwell upon the Earth
shall worship him, i.e. the Beast. Ver. 14. And deceives them that dwell on the
Earth; clearly showing, that the dwellers on the Earth, are the Popish party,
such as worship the Beast, and are deceived by him.

These, as well as the other, see the Witnesses lie dead; The difference is the
other see them with an eye of care, and some kind of pity; these, with an eye
of scorn, and triumph. Hence it is said, that at the Witnesses rise great fear
fell on them that saw them, verse. 11. which words relate to these latter sort
of beholders, who therefore verse. 12. are called enemies; these at the
Witnesses rise shall fear, Why? Because having been tormented by them before,
they shall now expect the same again.

The demeanor and carriage of this latter sort of beholders, set forth by their
rejoicing, making merry, sending gifts one to another. etc. has sometimes made
me conceive that there should be within these three days and a half, a great
calm upon the Nations, i.e. they should lay aside war and strife, at least, in
a great measure, in comparison of what was in the days immediately before; For
a time of tempest and war, when every man sees his interest going to wrack, is
not a time of rejoicing and feasting, especially with the dwellers on the
Earth, who serve no other God, nor mind nothing else, but their lusts and
interests, but a time of howling and mourning. Withal, the boast of the proud
Whore, Revel. 18.7. (Of which I have spoken before) seems somewhat to
countenance this, for grant her to have killed the Witnesses, yet if when this
is done, her followers were killing one another, and her outward strength
tearing it self it pieces, she should have but little cause to boast. But she
boasts and that in such manner, as seems to me to argue, that she has her
enemies, that before she feared, under her feet; and her own strength also,
which before was broken and divided, united: which two things do wonderously
lift her up, and make her conceit her self (as indeed she is in an outward way)
stronger, and more fast in her seat than ever. And as her boasting seems to
argue, this general peace should not be till toward the end of the three days
and a half, for this boasting of hers is the immediate forerunner of her ruin,
which comes in upon her inevitably, upon the witnesses rise.

And to this its not improper to add the opinion of that eminent Servant of
Christ, Mr. Archer, in his Personal Reign, Printed A.D. 1642. who speaking of
the ten horns giving up their power to the Beast, Rev. 17.12, 13, 17. says
thus, Here is a double giving up of their power to the Beast spoken of, though
yet they may seem both one, but will be found of him who ponders them, at two
diverse and several times. For in the former its only said they had one mind
to give their power to the Beast; i.e. (says he) they were at that time, all
alike ignorant and superstitious, and so the Papacy easily devoured them: But
in the latter place its said, God put it into their minds to agree, and do it,
i.e. at this time they were not all alike, some of the Kingdoms had light and
reformation, and had withdrawn from Rome; yet by some special overruling
Providence (in respect of which its said, God put it into their hearts, they
who had departed from Popery, shall revolt and by some agreement or Covenant
with the rest, all jointly shall again give up their power to the Beast. So that
(says he) this act differs much from the former, and seems to be a second act
of the ten Kings that is, of so many of them as were revolted from the Papacy;
and it also appears to be so, because it is made the forerunner, and the
immediate fore-goer of Romes ruin, but the former giving up was at the
beginning of the Papacy. Hitherto the very words of Mr. Archer that eminent
Witness of Christ, who for the testimony of Jesus, dyed in Exile fourteen or
fifteen years ago, Pers. Reign, p. 50, 51.

Now this testimony is the more remarkable, as to us at this day, by how much
the giving-up, verse. 17. (which he comments upon) follows that remarkable war
betwixt the Lamb and the Kings of the Earth, which our eyes have seen, but the
worthy Author lived not to see it. Yet let me add this, that I do not conceive
with the Author, that this giving up of power to the Beast, shall be a
revolting of all the ten Horns to Popish Religion, for the power here spoken
of, that is given up to the Beast, is civil power only (that being properly the
power of the horns) which by way of League or Covenant with the Beast, or those
who are consederate with him, may be given up to him, and yet no receiving nor
embracing Romish Religion.

From these grounds it is a thing conjectural, that a general peace shall be in
that part of the world, commonly called Christendom, within the time of the
three days and an half.

My first thoughts hereof were, whilst I considered this 11 Chapter only, that
this peace should be so general, as to take in all those Nations that were
formerly under the power of the Beast; but since the time I weighed, and
compared with the truth of this Chapter, the truth laid down in the 12, and 14
Chapt. it has been a Question with me, whether that people whom the Holy Ghost
sets forth by that Title of the remnant of the woman's seed, Revel. 12.17. shall
not be excluded from this agreement. One of these two (I suppose) we may
conclude upon, that either they shall be excluded, or shall renounce this
Covenant with Hell, before the three days and a half are completely expired;
for the Dragon at the end of the three days and a half makes war upon them.
Which of these two will be, time will determine; but being more and more
persuaded every day, that Christ is coming on upon his people apace, I shall
not cause this little Book to wait to see the issue.

SECT. X.
THe three days and a half fully expired, the dead Witnesses rise again. The
thing that sets them upon their feet, is said to be a Spirit of Life from God
entering into them, verse. 11. And after three days and an half, the Spirit of
Life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, i.e. a Spirit
of boldness, and courage, zeal, and undaunted resolution to appear for Christ
against Antichrist, whatsoever it cost them shall now fall upon them, so that
live or dye, having so good a Cause, they will no longer be Cowards, and lurch
their Colors; but in the name of the Lord into the field they will go, and
see whether the Beast dare appear against them.

Quest. It will be here worth our inquiry, Whether this Noble Heroic Spirit
shall come upon them from God immediately, or whether it shall be wrought in
them mediately by some means.

Answ. I conceive, that look as the killing of the Witnesses is partly mediate,
being caused by the Beast, partly immediate, being deserted by God: so shall
their resurrection also, that it may answer to their death, be; i.e. this
Spirit of Life which sets them upon their feet shall be wrought in them, partly
mediately, by some means that shall be used to that end, and partly
immediately, by Gods accompanying those means with a more than ordinary power
and efficacy, for the effecting this glorious work. So that Gods hand shall be
much more visible in the thing, than the means it self, though yet means shall
be used.

Now as for the means, I apprehend it shall be some loud call that shall be
given to the Witnesses from some Saints, from out of some other place, who shall
be very sensible of their condition, and shall have it strongly set home upon
their hearts, that the time is comein which they are to arise. This Call seems
to me, to be that great voice from Heaven, which bids the witnesses come up
hither, ver. 12.

Now the reasons why this voice from Heaven is brought in after their standing
upon their feet, and not before, may be these.

1 Because the immediate hand of God in putting life and courage into the
witnesses to answer their Call, shall be a thing (as I have said) much more
remarkable and visible than the Call; and therefore is that named first, and
the whole of their resurrection seemingly attributed thereunto.

Or 2 Because (which I rather judge) it is very likely that the call given them
shall be a continued call, not a call to rise only, but a call to some higher
work, which work is here set forth by the phrase of ascending up to Heaven;
which notes thus much to me, that the instruments who shall give the Witnesses
this call, being themselves a more refined people, in which respect their voice
is called a voice from Heaven, they shall not only call upon the Witnesses to
arise, but when they are up, follow them still with their call to come up
higher, into that state they themselves are in, therefore they say, Come up
higher, i.e. shake off all Antichristian defilements, worldly interests, as you
have seen us do: and now let us be no longer two, but join as one to ruin the
Where, and carry on the work of Christ in the world. Now because this Call
shall be a continued Call, therefore mention is made of it, only in the last
and more glorious act, which indeed follows the witnesses standing upon their
feet, and the first is omitted.

If you ask me, Who these Instruments shall be? I answer, The same with the
Angel of the fourth Vial, for what I have said in opening that Vial. And
farther, they shall be that Remnant of the Woman's Seed, that the Holy Ghost
has characterized, chap. 12.17. Of whom I shall discourse more fully in the
two following Chapters.

CHAP. II. Setting forth yet further the state of the Two Witnesses, within
their Prophesying time, and the time of their being Killed, from Rev. 12.
SECT. I.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter treated briefly of the Two Witnesses, by way
of opening part of the 11 Chap. of the Revelations, it will not be impertinent
in this, for the farther clearing up of this great truth, to add my own
thoughts concerning the 12. Chapter likewise.

This 12. Chapter is on all hands interpreted to be a Prophecy of the state of
the Church, within the time of the Dragons rule, or the time before the rise of
the Beast, and accordingly the things here foretold, are judged to have their
complete accomplishment within the first 400 years after Christ.

I must confess, when I consider how handsomely, following this opinion, we
have the whole Prophecy of the Revelations, from the time John wrote, even unto
the time of Christ's second coming, consisting of three distinct periods,
comprised within three Chapters, viz.

1 The state of the Church within the first period, under the Dragons rule,
Chap. 12.

2 The state of the Church within the second period, under the Government of
the Beast, Chap. 13.

3 The state of the Church, under the witnesses risen, from the end of the
Beasts reign, until the time of Christ's Second coming (where begins a fourth
Period, viz. of the 1000 years) Chap. 14.

I am by this single consideration more inclined to be of the common opinion,
as to this 12 Chapter, then by any thing that hitherto I have found laid down
for the same, by the Authors and Assertors of it, who urge not this as an
Argument, not indeed can they, because (as I shall hereafter show) they make
application of the 14 Chapter, not to the third Period, but another time; and
as for what is commonly urged, there is nothing in it that I can observe, that
has the force of an Argument, but what is founded upon begged principles.

Yet must I also acknowledge, that although this consideration I have now
hinted, could I make it out to my self, would sway very much with me, yet has
it the less weight, by how much I cannot satisfy my self, that such a
Tripartite dovision of this Prophecy should be here intended. And my reason is,
because I find something in this 12 Chapter (which is the Prophecy of the
Dragon) running down even into the time of the Beast; for the time of the Beast
does, yea must begin with the beginning of the 1260 days, as has been before
proved, Cha. 1. Sect. 2. Now supposing the time times, and a half, to be
equivalent to the 1260 days, yet it is clear from the Prophecy it self, that
some attempts are made by the Dragon, after the time, times, and a half are
begun; As,

1 The casting water out of his mouth as a flood after the Woman, verse. 15.

2 The attempting a war after this upon the remnant of her seed, verse. 17.

Both these things (I say) are done after the Beast was come into the world,
and therefore may not be applied to the time of the Dragons rule, which ceased
upon the Beasts coming in, he then resigning his power, seat, and great
Authority to the Beast, Chap. 13.2. If therefore we may extend this Prophecy a
little time downwards into the Beasts Kingdom, after the Dragon had surrendered
to him, I see no reason why we may not as well extend it quite through the
Beasts Kingdom, for the former order, yea and the common method too, is as
much broken by the one, as by the other. Nor indeed can I see, unless we come
downwards to the expiring time of the Beasts Kingdom, where a people, after the
1260 days were begun, will be found, that had (rightly interpreted) these two
Characters upon them, that the remnant of the Woman's seed, which the Dragon
makes war upon, are described by.

And as these Considerations have gravelled me as to that opinion which makes
application of the things here foretold to the time of the Dragons rule: So by
other Considerations I am induced to think that the Prophecy of this Chapter
does bring us down to the very end of the Beasts Kingdom, the expiring time of
the 42 months; and that indeed the last verse of this Chapter, being joined to
the first of the fourteeenth, and so descending, we have in these two Chapters
alone (the thirteenth being cut off) all the aforesaid three Periods. 1 That of
the Dragon and the state of the Church within that Period, set forth in the
five first verses of this 12 Chap. 2 That of the Beasts 42 months, or 1260
days, and the state of the Church within that time, from verse. 6. to the end.
3 That of the Witnesses risen, or the state of the Gentile Churches from about
the time of the Witnesses rise, until Christ's second coming, Chap. 14.

And according to this method, as this 12 Chapter, and the 14 linked together,
do run parallel with the whole of the 11, which treats of the Witnesses; so
this 12 Chapter alone runs parallel with so much of the 11, as brings us to the
end of the 1260 days, only some things handled there, are omitted here; and
some things omitted there are handled here; both together making the Prophecy
of the Winesses Prophesying and Killing-time counpleat.

And farther, as so much of the Prophecy of the 11 Chapter, as refers to the
1260 days, joined to, and compared with this 12, makes the Prophecy of the
1260 days, or second period, so far as the same respects the Witnesses,
complete; so that which follows in the 11 Chap. after the 1260 days are
expired, joined to, and compared with Chap. 14. makes the Prophecy of the third
Period, or the time from the Witnesses rise till Christ's coming, full and
complete also. But now because the things done throughout the second Period,
have a special relation as well to the Beast, as the Witnesses; which Beast,
though named, Chap. 11.7. and his time of continuance also spoken of, verse. 2.
had not been as yet particularly described (the Holy Ghost hitherto having been
chiefly intent to set forth the condition of the Witnesses and Woman) that
therefore the things concerning this Beast might neither be passed over in
silence, nor brought in promiscuously with the other, which would have bred
confusion, the Holy Ghost passing over this ground again, and being come to the
end of the 1260 days, makes a breach, by dis-joyning the 12 and 14 Chapters,
to make way hereby for a description of that Beast, which in a more secret
manner acted by the Dragon, should rage and make war against the Saints,
causing them hereby to continue in the Wilderness all the 1260 days; telling
us what manner of Beast this Beast should be, whence he should receive his
power at first, what he should do with it, and how long. That the Dragon who
was openly worshipped before, should in a more secret way be worshipped still
under him, etc. These things, with many other particulars relating to this
Beast, being handled, as it were, in the nature of a digression, Chap. 13.
there is a returning again Chap. 14.1. to that point where the discourse was
broken off, which now is carried on without interruption, to the end, and the
time of Christ's coming.

The result of all in brief is this; That the 12 and the 14 Chapters, are but a
more full repetition of the 11, and that in these two Chapters joined together
(leaving out the 13.) we have all the three Periods from John's time until
Christ's second coming, viz. The Period of the Dragons rule; the Period of the
Witnesses in fackcloth, or the Woman in the Wilderness; the Period of the
Witnesses risen, completely and orderly handled. And that the 13 Chapter is no
other, but a going over again (for the clearing up another subject referring to
this time) the second Period, beinging us down the third time to that point,
which twice before, once Chap. 11. and again in the repetition Chapter 12. we are
come unto. In a word, that the last verse of the 12 Chapter, and the first of
the 14, are in time and order immediately to follow each other; and therefore
the appearing of the Lamb upon Mount Sion with the 144000 to be the immediate
consequent of, and indeed a thing caused by the Dragons attempting a war, at
the very end of the 42 months, or 1260 days upon that holy remiant of the
Woman's seed.

And indeed, according to this method (leaving out the 13 Chapter, which is a
Prophecy more relating to the Beast, than the Woman) we have in the 12 and 14
Chapters excellently set forth the threefold state of the Woman, or true
Church, according to that threefold Period she passes through, from the time
John wrote this Prophecy, until Christ's second coming. 1 We have the Woman
walking in her Primitive purity, dothed with the Sun, having the Moon
underfoot, on her head a Crown of twelve Stars, Chap. 12.1. This was the state
of the Church within the first Period before Antichrist crept in. In this
estate, she is persecuted by a Great Rod Dragon, verse. 3. i.e. by the Pagan
power of the Roman Empire. 2 We have the Woman in the Wilderness, verse. 6. to
the end. This is her second state, after Antichrist was come forth, and had
placed himself in the Temple of God, then the Woman, the true Church withdraws,
retires her self into a corner. In this estate she suffers by the Beast, and
toward the end of it is persecuted again by the Dragon. What this Dragon is,
and how different from the former, I may show hereafter. 3 We have the Woman
come out of the Wilderness again, and triumphing, being now delivered from the
Beast and Dragon both, treading these her enemies under feet: This is her third
state, and is set forth Chap. 14. which (as I have said) is but a continuation
of the Woman's History, from the point of time where the 12 Chapter ends, until
Christ's coming.

This Method, as it does not, so far as I am able to discern, infer any
absurdity; so does it not a little conduce to the clearing up the whole of
these four Chapters (which appear to me to be the most knotty piece to carry a
right Method through in this Book) yea, and many other Apocalyptical Mysteries
depending upon these; and farther does help us to the knowledge of some useful
truths, which lie obscured and buried through a mistaken order.

And indeed when I consider, That as Chap. 11. presents us with two mystical
numbers, one of 1260 days, the other of three days and a half; so also does
Chap. 12. with 1260 days, verse. 6. and a time, times, and a half, verse. 14.
how that in either Chapters betwixt these two times, mention is made of a War;
and farther, how that as the Witnesses, Chap. 11.9. within the three days and
a half, have the People, Kindreds, Nations, and Tongues befriending them; so
likewise the Woman, Chap. 12.16. within the time, times, and a half, has the
earth befriending her; I say, when I have considered this, I have sometimes
wondered that none should attempt a way, to make these two, which carry so great
a likelihood, to run parallel, but should without any farther inquiry, conclude
the 11 Chapter to bring us down to the end of the Beasts reign, yea lower, and
yet the 12 Chap. to bring us but to the beginning.

SECT. II.
BEsides our grounds laid down in the former Section, that which yet further
prevails with me to decline the common-road, is, that I cannot upon a rational
account satisfy my self, that the time, times, and a half, should be the same
with the 1260 days; and in case a flaw be found here, all that is or can be
said for the general Tenent will amount to nothing; for if the time, times, and
a half, be a distinct number, and not to be interpreted of the 1260 days; then
of necessity cannot the things spoken of in this Chapter, be appliable to the
time of the Dragons rule, or any time before the Beast arose; but must be
brought down much lower, into the time of the Beasts Kingdom.

Now that the time, times, and a half, should be a number distinct from the
1260 days, appears to me upon these Reasons.

1 Because the different expressions used of the woman's abode in the wilderness
the first and the second time, argue them not to be one and the same, but two
distinct numbers; for,

1 Of her first going into the wilderness, the 1260 days, it is said, v. 6. The
woman fled into the wilderness where she has a place prepared of God. Of the
second, the time, times, and a half, it is said, She fled into her place, v.
14. as seeming to intimate her having been there before.

2 Of the first, it is said, They should feed her, ver. 6. noting a feeding by
instruments and means; she should have the enjoyment of Instruments, Means, and
Ordinances, though in a low and mournful condition all this time. Of the
second, it is said, She is nourished, ver. 14. noting that God by some
immediate way of working would all this time keep a principle of grace alive in
his, though they should lie as dead, taking little or no food outwardly, by
Instruments, Means, or Ordinances.

2 Because the Dragon by the war in Heaven being cast down to the earth, is
said to have great rage, ver. 12. because he knows he has but a short time:
But if this war in Heaven were at the beginning of the 1260 days, as holds the
common opinion, which makes application of this to Constantines war, he should
then have a long time: if after they were begun, then must the time, times, and
a half which are the consequent of this war, be a distinct number from the 1260
days, which is the thing I am proving.

And certainly the calling of the time, times and an half, a short time, must
be with respect to the forementioned time of 1260 years, which was a long
time; and if so, then will it follow, they cannot be one and the same number.

3 Because the first going into the Wilderness, is leisurely, by degrees, as
the Beast by little and little crept in, being not so much a forced act, by
outward violence offered to her, as a voluntary act, the woman retiring her
self into a corner, that so by a separation she might be kept pure, and free
from the defilements of that Beast she saw now rising. But the second is on the
sudden, and she is forced to it by the exasperated rage of the Dragon; and
therefore she has given to her two wings of a great Eagle, v. 14. to note her
quick and speedy slight, lest she should be destroyed by the serpent.

4 Because upon the woman's first going into the wilderness the earth was no
friend to the woman; but rather the Barbarous Nations, invading the Roman
Empire, did prove her Enemy, by aiding the Beast, and giving their strength to
him. But now upon this second going into the wilderness, the turth is the
woman's friend, and swallows up the flood the Serpent casts out of his mouth, to
cause the woman to be carried away therewith, verse. 15.16. agreeing to that
chap. 11.9.

These things added to the former grounds and method, persuade me to think,
that the time, times, and an half, ver. 14. are not the same with the 1260
days, ver 6. but a distinct number, and in a word, the very same with the three
days and a half, Chap. 11.9. signifying three years and a half, a time notes
one year, times, in the plural number, two years, half a time, half a year; in
all three years and a half; and to put a time for a year, is as well Scripture
phrase as a day for a year, as Dan. 4.25. it is said of Nebuchadnezzar, he
should eat grass like Oxen till seven times should pass over him, i.e. seven
years.

SECT III.
AGainst this it may be objected. This cannot be, because, the war spoken of
here which precedes the time, times and a half; and that war Chap. 11. which
precedes the three days and a half, are vastly different.

1 That war against the Saints is headed by the Beast, but this by the Dragon.

Answ. This difference will be none at all, let but this be considered, that
Chap. 11. speaks of the state or power acted by the Devil, but Chap. 12. of the
Devil as acting that state or power. If this Answer be not sufficient, he that
shall observe our future discourse, may find a farther, and more full.

2 I^ that war, chap. 11. the Beast evercomes, but in this, is overcome, and
the Dragon cast down.

Answ. True, the immediate success and issue of the war, chap. 12. is the
vanquishing of the Dragon, and casting of him out; but yet the conclusion of
the day is, the subtle Dragon, though cast out to the Earth, finds a way and
means to persecute the Woman, and to drive her into the wilderness,
notwithstanding immediately before she had vanquished him, and cast him out,
verse. 13, And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the manchild. Verse. 14. And to the
woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the
wilderness -- In conclusion therefore, the Dragon (or the Beast acted by the
Dragon) overcomes, and so, as to drive the woman upon this War into the
wilderness, and that for a time, times, and a half; which is no contradiction
at all: but rather a more full opening of that war, which is hinted chap. 11.7.
as the immediate forerunner of the three days and a half. Only the Witnesses
victory at first over the Beast, is passed over in silence, chap. 11. and the
Beasts overcoming and killing them, the thing expressed; but chap. 12. their
victory over the Beast is recorded first, and yet afterward his persecuting of
them, and driving them into the wilderness, for a time, times, and a half, or
three days and a half.

If now the Question be put, What war I conceive this to be?

Ans. I judge it to be the war made by Gustavus Adolphus in Germany, which war
for the remarkableness of it, has been by many accounted the pouring forth of
a Vial; but though (for some Reasons I have given in opening the Subject of the
Second Vial) it could not be so: yet was it as remarkable under another
consideration, namely, as it was a forerunner of the Witnesses being killed.
The Reasons of this my conjecture are,

1 Because the time of this War agrees exactly to the time of that War, which
is the forerunner of the death of the Witnesses; that War is a war in the
finishing time of their testimony, that is in the last 60 days or years of the
1260. which properly is the concluding time of their testimony; Accordingly
this War made by Gustavus Adolphus fell out within that time.

2 Because this War must be supposed to be such a War as shall be headed by
some eminent Christian Head on the one side, raised up, and acted by Christ;
which Head is therefore represented by Michael, i. e. Christ himself who acts
him; and the principal Head of the Beast on the other, set on, and acted by the
Devil, and therefore represented by the Dragon. Now this can be applied to no
other War, so aptly as to the German War; for where has there ever been, since
the first rise of the Beast, the like, viz. of a War betwixt him, and the
Professors of the true Religion, headed by the Beast himself of the one side,
and a religious godly Prince of the other?

3 Because this War which precedes the killing of the Witnesses, must be such a
War, as shall have great acclamations of Saints going along with it, and great
expectations founded upon it, and that both as touching their deliverance from
Antichristian bondage, and also concerning the setting up of Christ's Kingdom by
it: Therefore they cry, verse. 10. Now is come salvation and strength, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of Christ, i.e. Now the day of our
deliverance, of Babylons downfall, is come. Now the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus
shall be exalted in the world. O now is the power of Christ manifested indeed.
Such was the Swedish War in Germany. It is not yet out of the memory of many of
Gods people, what high expectations were raised upon that War, in all the
Protestant Churches; How did every eye almost then look for the downfall of Rome
presently, conceiving no other than that that most worthy Prince would be the
ruin of the Antichristian Where? What wonderful triumphs and rejoycings were,
there upon the reports of his Victories, by all the godly party within our
Gates? And how heavy a load did the news of his being cut off, lay upon the
hearts of Gods people every where? Though the Author cannot testify these
things of his own knowledge, his age not serving him to remember things of this
nature beyond the sadding news of his death; yet from what he has read of this
good Prince, and the reports he has had from persons aged and faithful, he
supposes he may assert the thing, and doubts not but many this day alive will
witness it.

4 Because the effect and issue of this War in Heaven, is, the casting down of
the Dragon from Heaven to Earth, who yet by this, and partly for rage to see
himself cast down, finds out a way to persecute the Woman anew. Accordingly the
issue of the Swedish War was this, The proud German Emperor, who before in his
pride was lifted up to Heaven, would stoop and buckle to none, is now glad by
means of this War, to come down from his greatness, to condescend and stoop to
such terms as he can for himself make with the Swede; by which agreement
notwithstanding, and partly for madness to see himself made to creep on the
earth, i.e. condescend to terms, who thought ever to have sat in Heaven, i. e.
rule as absolute Lord over Christ's heritage, doing to them what he list, he
finds out a way to persecute the Woman, drive her into the Wilderness for a
time, times, and a half, i.e. kill the Witnesses for three days and a half. So
that the Swedish War agrees exactly and fully to this War here mentioned, as
the forerunner of the killing of the Witnesses.

And because the Witnesses were by this War to be killed, and every death has
some struglings and girdings that attend it, answerable to that life and
strength in the thing killed, that therefore the Beast might feel what life and
strength is in the Witnesses, he himself is almost broken to pieces, at first
by this War, i.e. by the very struglings and girdings of the Witnesses, whilst
he is going about to kill them

Object. But it may be said, more likely our late War in England should be this
War.

Answ. I have sometimes thought that this War in Heaven might comprehend the
whole War within the last 60 years of the Beast; and so take in the Swedish
War, and our English War too; And this I confess, that in most things this War
does carry a likelihood as well to the English, as the Swedish War: And
farther, I find my self much inclining to make this War, and the War betwixt
the Lamb and the Kings of the Earth, Chap. 17.14. (which War (as I conceive)
points at our English War, and no other) one and the same; but this I must also
say, that I am more satisfied to look upon them as two Wars, both within the 60
years, and the one following the other; And so this War to be the German War
only, and the other betwixt the Lamb and the Kings of the Earth to be the
English War, yet both to fall within the last 60 years, and to be forerunners
of the killing of the Witnesses.

And the Reasons why I conceive this War to be the German War only, and not the
English also, are,

1 Because the English War has been betwixt Protestants only, but this War is
a War betwixt some eminent Protestant Head on the one side, and some eminent
and professed Popish Head on the other, as has been before observed.

2 Because this War being made by the Dragon, is not so fitly appliable to any
one Nation under Heaven, as the German Empire, which is (as I may say) the very
Picture of the Old Dragon, for the Dragon is set forth as having seven heads
and ten horns, v. 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a
great red Dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns. Accordingly the German
Empire (as upon another occasion has been before observed) consists of seven
Electoral heads, and ten horns, i.e. so many Provinces. The Prophecy therefore
of this Chapter, may without any forcing be applied in part to the Old Roman
Empire, and also in part to the present German Empire, both of them bearing and
giving the arms of the Dragon. So that by the ruin of the old Roman Empire,
the Dragon only changed his Seat, forsook Rome his old Seat, leaving that to
the Beast, and betakes himself to Germany, where the Beast, for his willingness
to surrender his old Seat to him, provides him a new. And indeed there may be
these two Reasons given of it, why the Dragon, who governs the whole Papal
Kingdom, does yet betake himself to Germany, rather then any other place,
choosing that for his Seat; 1 Because of all the Nations subjected to the
Beast, none was found so like his old Seat, the Pagan Empire, as the new
erected German Empire. 2 Because the Woman had in a manner for many ages
together, taken up her dwelling there, bringing forth children, and sending
them abroad from thence into other parts, therefore this old Persecutor of the
Woman, that he might the more trouble her peace, places his Throne there.

What I have said, is a good confirmation of our method before laid down, that
this Chapter brings us to the end of the Beasts Kingdom, and is not to be
limited within the first four hundred years after Christ; for having spoken of
the Old Dragon (or Roman Empire) in the beginning of the Chapter, and the
attempts that he made against the Woman, verse. 3.4. and then gliding over
almost all the time of the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, because
that time, as in reference to the Witnesses or Woman had been spoken to
already, Chapter 11. in reference to the Beast, was to be spoken to Chap. 13. the
Holy Ghost comes to speak of the new Dragon (or German Empire) and the attempts
that he in the end of this time should make against the Woman, and also what
should follow thereupon, and so indeed this second attempt against the Woman,
specially relates to him, as the first did to the old Dragon. And further
observe, as the old Dragon about the beginning of the 1260 days is vanquished
by the Woman, and yet afterward politickly surrendering to the Beast is too
hard for the Woman, and makes her fly for the Wilderness, for 1260 days; So in
like manner, the New Dragon about the end of the 1260 days is vanquished by
the Woman, and yet afterward by policy (like the old Dragon) finds a way to
get the mastery of the Woman, and make her fly for the Wilderness for a time,
times, and a half; or three years and a half.

Now according to this interpretation of this Prophecy, referring this second
attempt of the Dragon to the German Empire, we see already the whole of this
Prophecy fulfilled to two things.

1 The Dragons attempt to swallow up the Woman, by casting a flood out of his
mouth, and the earth preventing him, verse. 15, 16. being the same with that
endeavor, Chap. 11.9. to put the dead bodies of the Witnesses into graves, and
the Peoples, Kindreds, Nations and Tongues, preventing him. This attempt is
clear from each place, to be within the three years and a half. Whether some
attempts that have been made against the Protestants in Germany not long since
to extirpate them; and the applications that in their behalf have been made by
some to the ruling powers of Germany, be a fulfilling of this Prophecy, or
whether we are yet to expect some more eminent, and noted action than any we
have hitherto seen, I cannot determine.

2 Another attempt which shall be after this, and most probably toward the end
of the three days and a half, viz. to make war with a remnant of the Woman's
seed, that shall within this time stand up for Christ in some other corner of
the world: But of this more anon.

SECT. IV.
OBjection 2. Against our former method it may be objected. That this our
opinion supposes the Woman to be come out of the Wilderness, and afterward to
go in again; and if so, then must the Woman's continuance in the Wilderness the
first, and the second time, be upwards of one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, for so long she was the first time only, verse. 6. and if so, then must
the time of the Beasts reign, his treading underfoot the Holy City, the
Witnesses wearing sackcloth, (which for time are the same with this) be
likewise upwards of One thousand two hundred and sixty days.

Answ. The first Supposition granted, the other indeed will necessarily follow;
but that we deny, affirming, that the Woman is here spoken of, as if come out
of the Wilderness at this time of the War in Heaven (though indeed in it) and
that for one, or both these reasons, either,

First, Because by her great victories, and successes against her enemy, the
Dragon, under the noble Swedish King, she seemed in a manner to be got out of
the Wilderness, and to have put off her sackcloth, and therefore is spoken of,
as if come out, because in appearance for a while she was so, giving check to
the proud Dragon.

Secondly, Because the time of her being in the Wilderness after this (though
short) yet was to be a more black and dismal time, than all the time before,
and she was to meet with sufferings of another kind than ever yet she had; and
therefore it is spoken of, as though it were another, and a new time; though
yet indeed but a part of the other.

SECT. V.
OBjection 3. But it may be further objected, That the former Position and
method makes the Apocalyptical time, times, and a half, repugnant to, and
irreconcilable with Daniels time, times, and a half.

Answ. 1. It is a known maxim, that Scriptures more dark, are to be interpreted
by Scriptures more clear. Now it being confessed on all hands, that John's light
is the more clear, we are therefore to make John interpretative of Daniel, and
not Daniel of John.

Secondly, Compare Daniel with Daniel, and follow this rule, to ^nterpret that
which is more dark, by that which is more clear, and Daniel himself speaks
positively to our Assertion. Thrice in Daniel we have the word time or times
used in a mystical sense, Dan. 4.32. Seven times shall pass over thee. Chap.
7.25. Until a time, times, and the dividing of time. Chap. 12.7. It shall be
for a time, times, and a half. In the first of these we have little mystery,
but the two last have in them much mystery. Now consider, whether it is most
likely that we should interpret the two last places in a sense different from
the first; or whether are we to interpret them by the first; surely, it is most
safe to say that we are to interpret them by the first, not only because the
first is the more clear, but also because the first seems to me to be therefore
laid down before the other, that it might be a Standard of light to guide us
into the mind of the Holy Ghost in the other. If so, then the seven times that
were to pass over Nebuchadnezzar, whilst he was to eat grass like Oxen, being
no other but seven years, must we also understand the time, times, and a half,
or the time, times, and dividing of time, of three years and a half, only, as
I have formerly noted,

But thirdly, To come to the places themselves, where the bottom of this
scruple lies, which are Dan. 7.25. chap. 12.7. I suppose, let them be thoroughly
weighed, and it will appear, that the time, times, and a half, will as well, if
not better, bear our sense of three years and a half, then the other which
interprets them one thousand two hundred and sixty years.

I shall begin with Chap. 12.7. and the rather, because the words there opened
will help us to the mind of the Holy Ghost in the other.

Now the Question is, Whether are we to understand the time, times, and a half
in that place, of one thousand two hundred and sixty years, or only of three
years and a half?

I answer, of three years and a half, and that appears upon this account. In
verse. 6. we have a Question put in Daniels hearing, How long it should be unto
the end of Wonders? To this Question we have a twofold answer given; First, A
more dark Answer, verse. 7. Secondly, A more clear Answer, verse. 11, 12. And
observe, either Answer consists of two branches, suitable to the Wonders
themselves spoken of, which were to have a double end, or fulfilling time.
First, A partial. Secondly, A total, accordingly either answer has (I say) two
Branches. The first Answer, verse. 7. has first, The time, times, and a half,
as one Branch. Secondly, The scattering the power of the holy people, as
another. The second, verse. 11, 12. has, First, 1290 days, as one Branch.
Secondly, 1335 days, as another.

Now that the same thing, and not things of a diverse nature is pointed at in
both these Answers, is clear.

1 Because each Answer consists (as I have said) of two distinct Branches.

2 Because Daniel (as is clear) puts the Question the second time, concerning
that very thing that the first Question was moved about, and the very reason of
his putting the Question the second time, is for more light into that answer,
which he heard given, but did not understand, therefore says he, verse. 8. And
I heard, but I understood not; and therefore puts the Question again. The
intent of the Question therefore in both being the same, the Answer is to be
looked upon as the same also.

3 Because the very words of the Lord to Daniel before he gives him a second
answer, import as much, for says he, verse. 9. The words are closed and sealed
up till the time of the end. What words? why, those words Daniel asked after,
the words of the former answer more especially, for the sealing the words of
the Prophecy in general, we had before, verse. 4. showing plainly, that as the
Querist, so the respondent was still upon one and the same thing, as to say,
The thing, O Daniel, thou inquirest after is not to be revealed until the time
of the end; yet because thou art so desirous to know, thou shall have it in a
plainer, and more familiar Dialect, and what that is, the second answer tells
us, Verse. 11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away,
shall be 1290 days, verse. 12. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the
1335 days.

The answer then being one and the same in both, the thing now to be inquired
into is, How or in what sense can we make the time, times, and a half, to be
one and the same with the 1290 days?

Answ. We cannot make them one and the same in duration, for the time, times,
and a half, stretched out at that length Expositors would have them, make but
1260 days, which falls short by thirty days or years of 1290; they must
therefore be one and the same in termination, either terminating and ending at
one and the same point; If so, then suppose we take the time, times, and a
half, for three years and a half only, namely, the last three years and a
half, of Daniels 1290, will the time, times, and a half concur with the 1290 in
their end, as well as if by time, times, and a half, we should understand 1260
years; for reckon three years and a half only, or 1260 years complete, and
make either but to end at the same point, with Daniels 1290, it amounts all to
one, and the one is as good, and as firm as the other.

Nay, that the time, times, and a half, is rather to be understood in our
sense, viz. for three years and a half only, than in the other, for 1260
years, seems to me upon this account; because the intent of the Holy Ghost in
the first answer is, not to measure the length of the time, how long it should
be until the performance of those things enquiry was made after, which is done
in the second answer; but rather to give some knowledge of the thing, by
hinting two wonderful remarkable actions, as marks, of which two, the first
should fall out at the beginning time, the last at the completing time of the
work. The first mark is the time, times, and a half, i.e. The black day of
killing the Witnesses, which God in his all-wise Providence had so ordered, and
would in his time so bring about, as that, that black day, and the 1290 days
should expire together; Or thus, That the rise of the Witnesses at the end of
the time, times, and a half, and the first stirring of the Jews at the end of
1290 years, should both concur, as it were, in the same point, fall out much
about one and the same time.

The second mark (which relates to the latter number, viz. of 1335. days) is
the accomplishing to scatter the power of the holy people; And when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the Holy people, all these things
shall be fulfilled. Two things ere we can make application of this mark to the
number it relates to, are necessary to be cleared up; 1. Who are meant by this
holy people? 2. What that scattering is which is here spoken of, and by whom?

To the first, By the holy people, we are undoubtedly to understand the Jews,
and no other in this place, for the people whose deliverance Daniel is here so
inquisitive after, are that people of whose deliverance Daniel had had a
promise made to him, verse. 1. At that time shall thy people be delivered -- but
they were the Jews, therefore called thy people, i.e. Daniels people, the
people of Daniels Nation.

To the second, This scattering is not to be understood of their present
dispersed condition, in which they are a people dispersed and scattered by the
Lord himself into all the corners of the earth, for in this state they are not
the holy people, but a people for the present rejected of God, therefore called
by God himself in this state Loammi, Not my people, Hos. 1.9. but in the
scattering here spoken of, they are considered as the holy people, and
therefore the scattering of them is called the scattering of the holy people;
intimating, that this scattering is not their scattering by God, whilst they
continue in their rejected state; but a scattering by some other, after they
come out of that state, and are again the chosen people of God; and indeed,
were we to interpret this scattering to be the act of God, then surely
(considering the person here speaking, is the Lord himself, as compare ver. 7.
with Rev. 10.5, 6.) he would rather have spoken in the first person, when I
shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, than in the
third, when he shall.

Quest. But who then is this he?

Answ. That proud raging He, viz. the King of the North, spoken of Chap, 11,
40, 41, 42. who at the time of Michaels standing up, which is the time called
in the words, the fulfilling time, or rather the concluding time, when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things
shall be fulfilled, shall come raging mad into the Land of Judea, where the
newly come in Jews shall have seated themselves again, Chap. 11.45. which day
shall be a time of such trouble (to that people more especially) as never was
upon earth, Chap. 1^.1. At that time (that is, when this raging King of the
North, spoken of in the close of the former Chapter shall have so distressed
the Jews) shall Michael stand up, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a Nation; by which trouble they shall be scattered,
and in a manner broken to pieces, as appears by Zacharies description of this
day, Zach. 14.1, 2, 3.

In a word therefore, as the time, times, and a half, which sets forth the most
black day of the Gentiles is ordered by God so to fall out, as that it is here
laid down in the more dark answer, as a mark of the first, viz. 1290 days,
which notes the beginning time; so the scattering the power of the holy people,
or the Jews black day, is laid down as a mark of the second, viz. the 1335
days, or the completing time of Wonders, when (as says the Text) all these
things shall be fulfilled.

Now besides that reason that the thing it self carries with it as I have
opened it, that what has been said, viz. That the intent of the Holy Ghost in
the first answer, is not to lay down any way, or rule for us to calculate the
times by, but rather to give us evident marks, and signs of either time,
appears to me for these Reasons.

1 Because as to the first branch of the Answer, namely, the time, times, and a
half, we have no head of account laid down where to begin them, if we begin
them with the beginning of John's 1260, they fall (as we have said) thirty years
too short; if from the time Daniel saw the Vision, above a thousand years too
short; where therefore shall we begin them, or how shall we account if we
cannot find a Head to begin our account upon? The Holy Ghost wheresoever he
intends an account of times should be made up by us, does either lay down some
express Head for us to begin upon, as in the following verses. And also Dan.
9.24, 25. or else leaves us to begin from the time of the Vision, but here we
have not the one, nor may we do the other.

2 Because the second branch, viz. the scattering of the power of the holy
people, is no number, and therefore can be no other thing but a mark, ergo,
must the first likewise.

3 Because if the intent of the first answer be to give us any account of the
time how long; then considering that this is the main drift of the second
answer, it will follow, that either we have two diverse accounts laid down in
the two several answers, or but one; if two diverse, how then are the answers
the same, which we have before proved; if one and the same, then is there
Tautologie in the Text.

4 And lastly, This seems to me to be the very reason why the answer was so
dark to Daniel, that he heard, but understood not, because the force of the
answer lay in signs, which being not as then things visible, or in being,
Daniel is confounded within himself, and knows not what to make of the answer.

This being so, that the time, times, and a half, are here laid down only by
way of mark, it will much better agree to our sense, to take the time, times,
and a half, for three years and a half, than to the other which interprets
them, 1260 years; for that which is laid down purely as a mark, must not be
drawn out at length, for then it cease to be a mark, and becomes a rule to
measure by, but must ever be held and accounted for some noted point, some
remarkable action, by observing which we may learn something else.

This Text being opened, there needs not much to be said to that other, Chap.
7.25. save only, that as the time, times, and a half, are here laid down by way
of mark; so likewise are the time, times, and dividing of time there. The thing
they point at is not the duration of the little Horns Kingdom, how long it
should continue from the time of its first rise, but rather to show (which who
observes it shall find to be the very scope of the place) when this
blasphemous, raging little Horn, who for a long time together had worn out the
Saints, changed times and Laws, should have a period put to his boundless rage
and tyranny, which (I say) is set forth, not by measuring the time of his
Kingdom, but by hinting (as a mark) a most remarkable action which should be in
the very concluding time of it, and indeed prove the break-neck of his Kingdom,
and that is the black day of the witnesses killing, the end of which day should
put a period to his Kingdom, the time of his rage and tyranny; which thing,
though a great mystery in Daniel, therefore when Daniel heard this the second
time, Chap. 12. he confesses that he understood it not, yet it is a thing
clearly revealed in John (as we have formerly noted) viz. that the end of
Antichrists Kingdom, and the end of the three days and a half (the limited
time of the Witnesses lying dead) shall fall at one and the same point; and
therefore well may the time, time, and dividing of time, he laid down as a mark
to show when a Period should be put to the Kingdom of the little Horn.

Thus we see that Daniels time, times, and a half, is so far from being
repugnant to that Exposition I have given of John's time, times, and a half,
that indeed rightly opened, we have hence a strong confirmation of it, yea of
our whole meth^d; for (as I said at first) if John's time, times, and a half, be
not to be understood of 1260 years, but of three years and a half only, then of
necessity must the method of this 12 Chapter be, as I have stated it.

If notwithstanding all, any should yet say, That surely it cannot be without
something of the mind of God, that a time, times, and a half, that is, three
years and a half reduced into days, and these days into years again, should
make the very sum of 1260 days, or years.

Ans. Yes, I am verily persuaded that there is much of the mind and wisdom of
God in it; but if I may nakedly speak what I think is the mind of God herein, I
take it to be this, That men when they will be curious (which is a thing the
best are prone unto, and as soon taken with as any one snare I know) shall even
in the word it self find something to feed their curiosity, whereby the
simplicity of truth shall be hidden to them. And indeed whether to go from a
certain Prophetical style, a time for a year, to a new style, no where clearly
found in all the Word, namely, a time or year put for a year of years, only
upon this account, because a time, times, and a half, i. e. three years and a
half, will by this reduction amount to 1260 years; I say, whether it seem not
to savor more of curiosity than truth, and might not possibly be by the
wonderful wisdom of God so left in the Word on purpose, that truth till the
discovering time should come, might be the more veiled; I leave to the
Spiritual and understanding Reader to judge.

The result of the whole is, that the Prophecy of the twefth Chapter is not to
be limited to the first period; but brings us down even to the end of the
second period, namely of the 1260 years, and consequently the time, times, and
a half; mentioned verse. 14. is the same with the three days and a half, Chap.
11.9.

SECT. VI.
FRom what has been said, many useful truths arise, which confirm us in the
things before asserted, upon Chap. 11. and also are a good confirmation by
reason of that sweet harmony of truth it carries with it, of the method laid
down in this Chapter; as,

1 That the three days and a half, Chap. 11.9. are not the some with the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, because we have a manifest difference here
made betwixt the time, times, and a half (which answers to the three days and a
half) and the 1260 days.

2 That the killing of the Witnesses shall not be a general act, an act in all
places at once, because within the time, times, and a half, which is the term
of the Witnesses lying dead, there is elsewhere a remnant of the Woman's Seed
standing up for Christ, verse. 17.

3 That the particular place in which the Witnesses are to lie dead, is
Germany, because the War leading to their killing, is in that Land.

4 That the Witnesses in their killing time shall be deprived (if not totally,
yet in a great measure) of such outward Means and Ordinances as they enjoyed,
though in a mournful and suffering condition all the time of their Prophecy,
yet notwithstanding shall have a principle of life kept alive in them, by the
way of Christ's more secret working; therefore it is said of the Woman the 1260
days they fed her, v. 6. but in the time, times, and a half she is non-rished,
verse. 14.

5 That the People, and Kindreds, and Nations, and Tongues, Chap. 11.9. are
such persons who drive on a worldly and earthly interest, for they are here
called the earth, verse. 16. And the earth helped the woman.

6 And last, That the people of God elsewhere, within the time that the
Witnesses lie dead, shall have a cloud upon them, and be brought into some
straits, for a War is attempted within the time, times, and a half, by the
Dragon, upon the remnant of the Woman's seed, verse. 17.

SECT. VII.
I Shall conclude this Chapter with a word or two of enquiry, as touching this
remnant of the Woman's seed. Two things concerning them are worthy a search
after.

1 What people are here meant by this remnant of the Woman's seed, that the
Dragon within the three days and a half makes war upon.

2 How, or in what fense we are to conceive of this War made upon this remnant
of the Woman's seed by the Dragon.

Concerning the first, I shall not presume to determine any thing of this
people, any further than the Holy Ghost has, who describes them by two notable
distinguishing Characters, as willing thereby to mark them out from all the
people, that within the time of the three days and a half, should be found in
the world besides.

First, They are such who keep the Commandments of God. By Commandments we
are to understand those Gospel-Institutions Christ gave to his people in
command upon his Resurrection, so called, Act. 1.2. After that he through the
Holy Ghost had given Commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen.

Secondly, They shall be such who have the restimony of Christ. What is that?

Answ. A Spirit of Prophecy amongst them, Revel. 19.10. the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of Prophecy, i.e. they shall be a people much looking into the
Prophe^ies of the last times, having a great in-sight into what God is about to
do in the world, and abundance of faith in behalf of the cause of Christ, so as
not to fear it, though the same be opposed by all the world, yea, and all the
Devils in Hell.

Such a People, who shall be eminent above all others for these Characters,
shall be found in the world, at the time the Witnesses lie dead; these shall be
as an eyesore to the Dragon, who shall dread some mischief to arise to his
Kingdom from them; and therefore he shall wonderously desire, and lay about
him, if it may be to rid these out of the way, as fearing he shall not be
secure in his seat whilst they are in the world, and therefore having killed
the Witnesses, his next attempt is upon these.

But now as to the second, How does he attempt them, or what manner of wat is
it that he makes upon them?

In order to my answer I premise;

1 That that Dragon which is the grand Persecutor of the Woman throughout this
Chapter, from whom all her sufferings originally arise, is (according to the
Holy Ghosts interpretation, verse. 9.) that old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan;
He stands ready to devour the Child as soon as born, verse. 4. He wars with
Michael, verse. 7. He drives the Woman into the Wilderness, verse. 13, 14. He
casts a flood after her to drown her, verse. 15. He makes war after this with
the remnant of her seed, verse. 17.

2 That this Dragon, Satan, being a spiritual and an invisible enemy, and all
the sufferings of the Woman until this day, having been ever caused by some
outward and visible means; We may not therefore conclude that it is by any
immediate hand or act of the Dragon that the Woman suffers, but by some mediate
hand; that is, some thing or power acted by this Dragon, and made an instrument
to serve his design against the Woman; therefore is the Dragon said in his
fighting to make use of Angels, or Instruments, verse. 7. and also in his fall
has Angels, or Instruments, falling with him, verse. 9.

3 This thing, or power acted by the Dragon to afflict the Woman, is sometimes
one thing, sometimes another; sometimes one thing only, sometimes more than
one; accordingly as he has permission to act this or that thing, and finds
that by the acting of one thing, or of diverse, he may best effect his own
design of distressing, and if it might be, destroying the Woman, therefore
before the Beast comes in, he acts the power of the Pagan Empire; after the
Beast is come in, the power of the Beast more in general, but more
particularly, the power of the German Empire.

4 That thing or power which is most commonly or properly governed by him, is
in a distinct consideration from all other things, or Powers, called by the
name of the Dragon. So of all the Powers in the world, the Roman Power in the
Primitive Ages goes under the name of the Dragon, verse. 3. of all the Powers
subjected to the Beast, the Power of the German Empire, is called the Dragon,
verse. 7.13.

5 Hence it follows, That those attempts made against the Woman, or any of her
seed, by that power which the Dragon properly governs and rules, and which in
the phrase of the Holy Ghost, used in this Chapter, takes denomination from
him, are to be called the attempt or war of the visible Dragon against the
Woman; but those attempts which through the subtilty of the old Serpent,
secretly creeping into, and acting other powers than those, which he properly
and commonly rules and governs, and which do not take denomination from him,
are made against the Woman, or any of her seed, it is more proper to call them
the War of the invisible Dragon.

This ground gained from the manifest truth of the Text, I come now to give in
my answer, which is;

That I conceive, That as the Dragon throughout his Chapter goes under a
twofold Notion, or conndera^^on.

1 The invisible Dragon, Satan, which is the Dragon governing.

2 The visible Dragon (in ancient times the Roman Empire, in latter times the
German) which is the Dragon governed; so shall there be a double War raised
against this remnant of the Woman's seed.

First, The invisible Dragon, who acts the visible, and therefore is before
him, shall in the first place attempt a War upon this remnant.

Quest. But how shall he do it?

Answ. Look how the invisible Dragon acts in killing of the Witnesses, so shall
he act in this. The invisible Dragon kills the Witnesses, by acting the power
of the visible Dragon, or the German Empire, to do it; accordingly the
invisible Dragon shall attempt a War upon this remnant of the Woman's seed, by
acting in an invisible way those powers under whom this remnant of the Woman's
seed shall be.

Now that such a War within this time shall be made upon this remnant by the
invisible Dragon, is clear, because (as I have formerly said) it is a thing
both rational and of great use, That the whole mystical body should come under
some measure of sufferings in that time wherein the Witnesses lie dead. Now
because this remnant shall not come into the mouth of the visible Dragon, for
therefore (as I conceive) are they called a remnant, because kept and reserved
by God from the mouth of the visible Dragon, at the time their Fellow-Brethren
are in it; it is therefore necessary, to the end there might be in this
remnant a sympathy with their Brethren in their afflictions, that they should
within this time have some attempt made upon them by the invisible Dragon.

Secondly, The visible Dragon shall also toward the end of this time make an
attempt upon this remnant, which is clear, because that Dragen that kills the
Witnesses, does afterward make an attempt upon this remnant; but the Dragon
killing the Witnesses, was not the invisible only, but the visible also;
therefore the visible Dragon, as well as the invisible, shall attempt a War
upon this remnant.

Quest. But how shall he do it?

Answ. By drawing together the whole, or a principal part of the Papal power,
whereof the visible Dragon, or German Empire, shall be chief, to engage in an
open War against this remnant, if it may be, to cut them off; but what the
issue of this attempt shall be, we shall see presently, in opening the
fourteenth Chapter, which (as I have said) follows as the next thing in order
after this. I only say here, That this remnant of the Woman's Seed, shall not
suffer greatly, either by the attempt of the invisible Dragon, or the visible;
for observe, it is not said, He made War, but went to make War ((...)) i.e.
endeavored the thing, but ere the invisible Dragon, or the visible can do this
remnant much hurt, Christ steps in, and prevents.

Thus much concerning the twelfth Chapter.

CHAP. III. Wherein is showed the state of the Witnesses about, and in the time
of their rise, from Rev. 14. opened.
SECT. I.
THE stream of Expositors, as they make application of the things Prophesied of
in the 12 Chapter to the first period, or the time before the Beast arose; so
also do they of this Prophecy that concerns the 144000 to the second period, or
the 42 months of the Beast, judging these 144000 to be those Saints that should
in several places within this time bear witness against the Beast; and
accordingly they look upon the fulfilling of this Prophecy to be a thing past.

For my own part, as I saw my self constrained (not out of any desire of
singularity, but for truths sake) to baulk the common road, and seek a new way
upon the 12 Chapter: So have I the same constraint lying upon me here, to
dissent from the common opinion, and seek another. My Reasons are,

1 Reason, because this 144000 have their station upon Mount Sion, which notes
a fixed state, Psalm. 125.1. Those which trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. But the abode of the
Church all the 1260 days is in the Wilderness, noting a moveable uncertain
condition, which at that (...) in.

(...) the Church and people of God in time of old (to whose state doubtless we
have here an Allusion) could not be said to be footed upon Mount Sion, whilst
they were wandering in the Wilderness; no more is it proper to say, that these
144000 in the Churches Wilderness-state, should yet stand upon Mount Sion, yea
it seems to me, that this Character is given the 144000, and that in opposition
to the Woman's former state, which was, and for a long time together had been in
the Wilderness.

In a word, it notes thus much to me, that this 144000 are a People whose
condition, after once they are gotten upon their legs, shall be fixed and
stable, and not subject to such motions and mutations, as was the Woman's former
state in the time of her Wilderness-condition.

2 Reason, because all the time of the 42 months, the waters were subjected to
the Whore, who sits upon them, Rev. 17.1. Come hither, I will show thee the
judgment of the great Whore, that sits upon many waters; but at this time
there is a voice of many waters crying against her, verse. 2. And I heard a
voice from Heaven, as the voice of many waters.

3 Because the condition of the Church all the 42 months, the 1260 days, is a
sad mournful condition, they wear Sackcloth, they are under the power of
Babylon, and therefore hang up their harps, as did Israel of old, whilst in
Babylon, Psalm. 137.1, 2. But the condition of the Church at this time is
wonderously joyful, they play with their Harps, Sing a new Song, verse. 2, 3.

4 Because all the time of the 42 months, Christ has no Throne visible in the
world, but the Beast has the Throne. But at this day Christ has a Throne,
verse. 3. They sung as it were a new Song before the Throne, verse. 5. They are
without fault before the Throne of God.

5 Because the Characterising this 144000 by this, these follow the Lamb
whither soever he goes, is to me a clear intimation that the Lamb was now upon
his march to his Kingdom in the time of their standing up, yea had gone a good
step, so far as many of his first followers had left him, and these only clave
to him, which is not appliable to the state of the Church in the Wilderness,
and that many hundreds of years ago.

6 Because that preaching of the Gospel, which immediately succeeds their
standing up, cannot without a manifest forcing of the Text, be applied to the
time of Waldus, Wickliffe, or any time already past, as will plainly appear
when I come to open those words.

7 Because their standing up is not until the very hour of Gods judgment upon
Babylon is come, verse. 7. Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
judgment is come; What hour is this?

Ans. The hour of Babylons downfall, whose judgment comes upon her in an hour,
Rev. 18.10. For in one hour is thy judgment come; and therefore to show this
to be the meaning, we have a Herald in the next verse proclaiming the news of
it, verse. 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen.

For these Reasons, and some others, I could urge, I cannot look upon this
Prophecy as contemporising with the 42 months of the Beast, the 1260 days of
the Witnesses and Woman, but rather as a Prophecy there to take beginning,
where the 12 Chapter leaves us, which is about the end of the time, times, and
a half, with the attempt of the Dragon against the remnant of the Woman's Seed.

And so in an orderly manner things succeed thus. The Dragon having killed the
Witnesses, endeavors to rid the world of that remnant of the Woman's seed, that
stand up for Christ in some other place.

Now the Lord Jesus seeing this, that the Dragons rage is such, that he cannot
content himself with that unpara^eld injury offered to him, namely to kill his
Witnesses, hereby endeavoring to leave him without witness in the world; but
because there is yet a little remnant in a corner of the world that stand up
for him to bear forth his name and glory in the world, therefore the malicious
raging Dragon must design upon them, and labor to root them out: Christ
hereupon is so mightily provoked, and full of wrath and fury, and so jealous
for his name, and his bowels do so work for his remnant, that he cannot now any
longer forbear to behold the cruel rage and insolency of the enemy, but
instantly appears (by a more glorious manifestation of himself than ever
before) upon Mount Sion, i. e. in the midst of his people now come thither,
calling together his remnant about him, by his presence encouraging them not to
fear this great and dismal attempt, and assuring them that the Dragon, ere he
shall have his will upon them, shall beat him out of the field. And here will
be the first glorious Rendezvous in Canaan, all done before this day is to be
reckoned but the War on the other side Jordan; that War was with a part, the
Lamb with his followers encountering such only as stood in his way, and hindered
his march toward the borders of the Promised Land, but this will be with the
whole body of the Canaanites under conduct of the Dragon, who shall fall before
the Lamb, and his 144000.

So that I say, we are to begin the Prophecy of the 14 Chapter, with the
Dragons attempt against the remnant of the Woman's seed, in the very concluding
time of the 1260 days.

Should I say, That we we are to begin this Prophecy of the 14 Chapter from
about the end of the Beasts 42 months, Chap. 13. and that John after he had
seen the Beast acting his part upon the Stage, and now going off, beheld
presently the Lamb coming up with his 14400, it amounts to the same with the
other; so that whether we begin from the end of the 12 Chapter, or of the 13.
the beginning is stated aright, either falling to be in the very concluding
time of the 42 months, the 1260 days. But I rather choose to begin from the
Dragons attempt.

1 Because by that beginning we have (as before we have showed) in the 12 and
14 Chapters, the Prophecy of the Woman complete.

2 Because that attempt seems to be the reason of the Lambs appearance.

3 Because (as I have also said) the 13 Chapter comes in by way of digression,
and the Prophecy as to the point of time and order, is complete without it.

Object. Babylons downfall is spoken of after this Rendezvous, verse. 8. And the
Beasts followers are afterward threatened for worshipping the Beast, his Image,
receiving his Marks, verse. 9, 10, 11. Therefore this Prophecy must
contemporise with the time of the Beast.

Answ. This stands upon a supposition, which I deny, viz. That 42 months, is
the utmost term of the Beasts continuance, and therefore Romes downfall must be
within that time; whereas I affirm (but shall here wave the proof of it) that
the 42 months is only the time allotted the Beast to continue a Tyrant, raging
and tyrannizing over the holy City, the Saints, and the Nations, and not the
time of his continuance, which shall be for some time after this term is run
out, within which time Rome shall be ruined, and therefore is its destruction
mentioned after this Rendezvous of the 144000, and also the Beast still, even
within this time to his last, shall have many cleaving and adhering to him, who
are the persons here warned.

I know not any other Objection against this our method, that deserves a
particular Answer. Something else there is by some said for the common method,
but he that shall observe our following Discourse, will find, that either it
falls of it self, as I have stated the thing; or if not, may if he please,
gather up that which will be a particular Answer to the thing (possibly) where
his scruple lies.

SECT II.
TWo things from our Discourse in the former Section are evident,

First, That the Head of this Propheey, is to be placed above a hundred years
lower than the Head of the Vials; And indeed were there nothing else to be
urged, yet he that shall but compare the persons and time when the Vials began
to be poured forth, with the persons here spoken of, and this time, will find
that to be the more early, this the latter; for,

1 Those that pour out the Vials have a mixture of fire with their Sea of
glass, verse. 3. And I saw as it were a Sea of glass mingled with fire, noting
(as Mr. Brightman observes) that though they had attained some degrees of
purity, yet was it not such, but still there was a mixture of fire, hot jars,
contentions, divisions, making of parties even amongst the Reformers
themselves. But these here have all their Fathers name written in their
foreheads, verse. 1. signifying (as I shall show anon) a high pitch of union.

2 Those that begin the work of the Vials, their chief eminency lies in this,
that they were got clear of the more gross defilements, and idolatries of
Antichrist, set forth under the expressions of the Beast, his Image, Mark, the
number of his name. I saw them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and
over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his name. But these
have attained a higher pitch to renounce as well the more secret defilements by
worldly selfish interests, as the more gross pollutions of Antichrist, which is
the thing noted (as I have elsewhere observed) by their being redeemed from
the earth, verse. 3.

3 Those that begin the work of the Vials, were a party redeemed and picked
from among the Idolatrous rabble of the Beasts worshippers; But these are a
party picked and redeemed from amongst men, verse. 4. that is, from amongst the
Reformers themselves. Hence the Song these sing is a new Song, that none else
can learn, verse. 3. i.e. it is a Song that goes in a higher, and more
self-denying note, than the Song that was sung when the Vials began to be
poured forth; and if we may say there is an alteration in the matter, I
conceive it lies in this, the Song sung at this day shall be more purely
Evangelical than that was; the Song of the Vials is a mixed Song, partly of
Moses, partly of the Lamb, something was in that, as well of Moses more dark
administration, as of the Lambs more clear; But this shall be purely of the
Lamb, nothing of Moses, no legality in this Song; but all is of the Lamb.

4 That Character of these, verse. 4. These are they that follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, does (as I have said before) clearly intimate to me,
that this time is not the Lambs first setting forth, he had been marching
before, viz. from the first day the Vials began to be poured forth, yea
fighting before, for the fight between Michael and the Dragon, chap. 12. and
that betwixt the Lamb and the Kings of the Earth, Chap. 17. do both precede
this time; by consequence therefore this must be below the Head of the Vials,
for the Lamb began not his march till the Vials began to be poured forth.

5 John sees no Throne as yet when the Vials began to be poured out, because
Christ, as then, was but breaking in upon the world; but now (as we observed
before) John sees a Throne, noting, that at this day Christ has gotten some
footing in the world, so much, as in despite of them he can, and does erect a
Throne. And this consideration will save us an answer to that which seems to he
as an Objection in the words, against the thing we are speaking; viz. That this
one hundred sorty four thousand, at their first Rendezvous, have no Temple, but
those who pour out the Vials had, it seems therefore that they should be the
lower, and these the higher.

Answ. Though true, no particular mention is made of a Temple, but these are
only said to stand upon Mount Sion, yet have they that which is more, namely,
a Throne, and this those who began the work of the Vials had not, nor indeed
could they then, because Christ erects himself a Throne, by casting down the
Thrones of the Beast; but this work is done by the Vials, and therefore there
could not be a Throne before.

From the whole it is clear, That the Head of the Vials is to be placed higher
than the Head of this Prophecy.

1 Hence we have done well to place the beginning of the Vials, as we have done
in our Discourse upon the Vials.

2 Hence that opinion which makes this Prophecy to contemporise with the time
of the Witnesses, and the Beast, is disproved, and our former method confirmed.

Should any here ask me a reason why the Head of the Vials is placed somewhat
upwards in the Beasts Kingdom, and the head of this Chapter about the end of it.

I Answer, Because the principal work of this Chapter, to do which, this 144000
are raised up, is to smite Antichrist in his Civil Inonarchical power, thereby
to take his Kingdom from him, and to bring the Kingdoms of this world under the
Scepter of Christ; but now before Christ comes to deal with the Beast in his
Civil Power, he deals with him upon another account, namely, of his
encroachments upon Christ's spiritual rights, to recover them out of his hands,
as I have observed upon the Vials, p. 260, 261, 262.

Now because the Vials set forth the whole of Christ's dealing with Antichrist
in a way of wrath; as well his dealing with him upon a Spiritual account, as a
Civil, therefore is the head of the Vials seated more upwards in Antichrists
Kingdom, than the Head of this Chapter which is placed at the end of it. This
further confirms me, that in my Discourse upon the Vials, I have been guided
to place the beginning of the Vials aright, and in its proper place.

Secondly, Another thing following from our Discourse in the foregoing
Section, is, That this 144000 which stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, are
not the same with the sealed 144000, Chap. 7. which also farther appears.

1 Reason, Because the sealed one hundred forty four thousand, are sealed by
way of preservation against some evil approaching; but this one hundred forty
four thousand are gathered together to do some work for Christ.

2 The sealed 144000. are sealed before any of the Trumpets sound; but this one
hundred forty four thousand are not congregated till about the time of the
Witnesses rise, which is not till the latter end of the sixth Trumpet, Rev.
11.13, 14, 15. That the sealed One hundred forty four thousand are sealed
before any of the Trumpets sound, is clear;

1 Because the very plagues that they are sealed for preservation against, are
no other but the plagues of the Trumpets; The plagues themselves are mentioned
Chap. 7.3. Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees, till we have
sealed the Servants of our God in the fore head. Three sorts of plagues here
are: 1 A plague upon the earth; this is expressly the plague of the first
Trumpet, Chap. 8.7. The first Angel sounded, and there followed hail, and fire
mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth. 2. A plague upon the
Sea; this is the plague of the second Trumpet, v. 8. And the second Angel
sounded, and as it were a great Mountain burning with fire was cast into the
Sea, and the third part of the Sea became blood, verse. 9. And the third part of
the creatures that were in the Sea, and had life, dyed, and the third part of
ships were destroyed. 3. A plague upon the Trees; this is a part of the plague
of the first Trumpet, verse. 7. The third part of Trees were burnt up, and all
green grass was burnt up. Now the plagues being the very plagues of the two
first Trumpets, it necessarily follows, that this sealing is, in time and
order, before any of the Trumpets.

2 Because an express command is given to the Locusts under the fifth Trumpet,
that they should hurt none but those only, which had not the seal of God in
their foreheads, Chap. 9.4. A clear Argument the sealing was higher, for the
seal was then set upon Gods Servants, and not a thing to be set for future, and
undoubtedly the words point us back to that very sealing, Chap. 7. which was
before; yet the seventh Seal, which ushers in all the Trumpets, was opened.

The result is, That the One hundred forty four thousand, which stand with the
Lamb upon Mount Sion, are not the same persons, neither do they belong to the
same time, with the One hundred forty four thousand sealed ones, the one belong
to the first times of the Beast, the other to his last; the one are a company
sealed at the time of the Beasts coming in the other are a company congregated
at the time of his going out.

To say, because the one are said to be sealed in their foreheads, Chap. 7.3.
the other to have the Fathers name written in their foreheads, Chap. 14.1.
therefore they must be the same persons, and either Prophecy relate to the same
time, would have some color of reason, in case the thing it self, by other
substantial Arguments, were first proved, but till that is done, to urge this
alone, is to beg the Question.

Nay, could the thing be proved, it would yet be a question, Whether the Seal,
and the Fathers Name, are one and the same thing? and put case they are,
another question will arise, Whether the end of sealing be not one thing, and
the end of writing the Fathers name another? and if the ends be distinct, then
may the times also. All this must be thoroughly cleared, before any Argument can
be drawn hence.

Now the Reasons why the Congregated ones are set forth by the number of 144000
which is the number of the sealed ones, I take to be,

1 Because the number of 144000. were the Lambs chosen number formerly, and
therefore they are the chosen number still.

2 Because One hundred forty four thousand were the number he went off the
stage with, when for a time he gave way to the Beast; and therefore they are
the number which now (the Beasts time being out) he comes on with again.

As for any Mystery in the Number it self, it does not appear to me that there
is any, the use of this number, Chap. 14. being with allusion to the same
Number, Chap. 7. and as for any Mystery there, I cann see none, save only that
Twelve times twelve (that being the way of numbering there, twelve, which is a
definite number being put for an indefinite) makes up One hundred forty four,
and therefore so many twelve thousands are called one hundred forty four
thousand.

SECT. III.
THe former things premised, to the end we may know where we are, I now come
to the matter of this Prophecy, which sets forth the state of the Church,
within the third period; i. e. from the ending of the Forty two Months, the
One thousand two hundred and sixty days, until the beginning of the One
thousand years.

My intent as touching it, is not to carry an exposition through the whole,
examining as I go each particular passage, with the minds of Writers upon it,
that being a work which would prove tedious to my self, and possibly to the
Reader, but only to give my own thoughts, as touching some things that are of
more general concernment, and will be of more special use.

I shall sum up all within the compass of these four things;

1 Who these one hundred forty four thousand shall be.

2 The cause and manner of this glorious Rendezvous, and the state or condition
this 144000 upon their first congregating shall be in.

3 The excellent distinguishing Characters of them.

4 How the work shall go on, after once it is put into their hands.

As touching the first, Who this one hundred forty four thousand shall be; I
answer, They shall be the Gentile-Saints; My Reasons are,

1 Because they are the renmnant of that Woman's seed, that within the first
period was persecuted by the Pagan Roman Dragon, and afterward in the second
period by the Antichristian Dragon; but these are no other but the Gentile
Saints.

2 Because they are such as the Antichristian German Dragon in the expiring
time of the 1260 days shall raise a war against; but they are the Gentile
Saints.

3 Because they are such, who within the time that the Witnesses lie dead,
before the 1260 years are fully expired, are eminent for keeping the
Commandments of God, and having amongst them the testimony of Christ: But this
cannot agree to the Jews, whose coming in is not till afterward; therefore
must be the Gentile Saints.

4 Because they are gathered to a Rendezvous, and have glorious Characters upon
them, and that before the downful of Rome, as will appear, compare verse. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. with verse. 8. therefore cannot be the Jews, whose receiving Christ is
not till afterward, but must be the Gentile Saints.

Lastly, I say no more, there is nothing in all this Chapter, save a single
clause toward the end, that relates to the Jews, but the whole has relation
to the risen Witnesses, or Genti^e Saints, declaring how it shall be with them,
and what shall be done by them against Antichrist, from the time of their rise,
until Christ's appearance.

As for the 144000 sealed ones, Chap. 7. I spoke my thoughts of them but now,
which cannot be applied to any conversion of the natural Jews, unless we should
suppose some conversion past many ages since; indeed the Text affords some
probabilities for this Opinion, the Angel that has the Seal coming from the
East, verse. 2. the mentioning the Jewish Tribe, by name, together with the
following description of the new Jerusalem. As for that Argument urged by some,
from the multitude of all Nations, Kindreds, People, and Tongues, ver. 9. whom
they conceive are spoken of by way of distinction from the sealed company, it
proves not; because, should we suppose the Sealed company to be Jews, yet it is
clear to me, that the Sealed company relate to one time, the great multitude of
all Nations, Kindreds, People, and Tongues to another, and thereby the ground
of distinction as to persons is taken away; for if these two relate to two
times, then may we by the one understand the Jews, by the other, the Gentiles
only, or Jews and Gentiles both. But to pass this, as for the probabilities
the Text does afford us, though I could as much as another incline to the
opinion, yet must I say, I am convinced of it, they are but weak, and will in
no wise counterpoise our former Arguments laid down to the contrary; yet if a
way might be found out to reconcile both, that is, to make this sealing to have
a respect to Natural and Spiritual Jews too, to the Spiritual Jews, about the
time that Antichrist came into the World, to the Natural, upon the time of his
going out; which latter, though their coming in unto Christ be long after the
other, yet because they are the elder Sister, are chiefly spoken of, and their
Tribes mentioned by name, and the other comprehended under them, it would be a
thing very desirable. The doing of this may seem a thing impossible, but yet
possibly it is not so, Something looking this way I have very lately had in
mine eye, that it will do the thing I cannot say, if it would, I conceive it
not meet here to insert it.

Yet for truths sake, to the end the thing in hand may be the more clear, and
free from all exception, let us notwithstanding our former Arguments, suppose
at present the one hundred forty four thousand sealed ones to be only the
Jews, the sealing to note a conversion of that people yet to come; yet will it
not therefore follow, that the one hundred forty four thousand standing with
the Lamb upon Mount Sion, should be the Jews also; for there seems to be good
reason for it, why in case the other should be the Jews, yet that the Gentiles
here should be set forth by the very same number.

1 The 144000 of the Jews are so called, because the picked and sealed ones of
that people; but these being the picked and sealed ones of the Gentiles, may
well be set forth by the very same number of 144000.

2 The day in which the 144000 of the sealed Jews are so numbered, is the first
day that that People, as a Nation, shall be delivered from their bondage, and
enter into Christ's rest. This Rendezvous, we read of Chap. 11. is the very
first day of the Gentile Saints deliverance from Antichristian bondage, and
entering the Spiritual Canaan of rest, after that long Wilderness-condition, and
therefore well may these be set forth by the same number of 144000, with the
other.

3 The Jews in the day of that Nations coming in unto Christ, shall come in a
great multitude, in which respect it is said of them, Isa. 66.8. Shall a Nation
be born at once? therefore set forth by a greas number of sealed ones, viz.
144000; so likewise the Gentiles at the time of the Witnesses rise shall stand
up a great multitude, set forth therefore verse. 2. by the voice of many waters,
and at the time of Romes ruin, which shall be suddenly upon their rise; John
heats a voice of much people, Rev. 19, 1. Of a great multitude, of many waters,
and mighty thundrings (arguing abundance of Gentiles now come in) singing
Hallelujah, praises for Romes ruin, verse. 6. therefore well may these also be
set forth by a great number, yea the same of 144000.

4 The Jews and Gentiles, two Nations, whereof one only had the privilege to
be Gods people under the Law, the other has this privilege under the Gospel,
being now both by this great confluence of either to Christ to be united under
him as Head and King, and thence forward to have equal Privileges, may
therefore (either of them, being but as two several Bands marching to Christ)
one from one corner of the world, the other from the other) be both set forth
by the very same number of 144000.

To say no more, the sum of all is, That the 144000, here spoken of, are the
Gentile Saints.

SECT. IV.
OUr second Particular is to inquire into the cause and manner of this
Rendezvous, and the condition this 144000 shall be in thereupon.

1 For the Cause, the accidental cause shall be the Dragons attempt upon the
remnant of the Woman's seed, who by making war upon them to do them a mischief,
shall do them the greatest good, and himself the greatest mischief that can be.

But the efficient cause shall be the Lambs standing upon Mount Sion, verse. 1.
And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood upon the Mount Sion, and with him 144000 --
This standing upon Mount Sion, we are to understand of Christ's more glorious
manifestation of himself, in his meekness, grace, and love, the precious virtue
of his Death and Sacrifice (in which respect he is called a Lamb) to his
Churches and People, where this remn^nt shall be, and that more generally at
this time. He shall make his people generally and wondrously sensible of the
greatness of his pardoning love, and how he has engaged so far as to become
himself a Sacrifice for them; withal assuring their hearts, That the day is
come, that he is to take his Kingdom, and now all they can do for him in way of
requital, is to gather about him and help him, to stand by him in his great
work of taking vengeance on the Beast, overturning the Thrones of Kingdoms;
and therefore he calls upon them now to quit all earthly respects, and
interests, and straightway to arise, list under his Banner, and if they will
but stand to him, though they may have their failings and haltings, yet will
not he use martial Law, but lead them, and march before them, with meekness,
gentleness, and love. Here is the principal efficient cause.

2 The manner of their Rendezvous, we have verse. 2. And I heard a voice from
Heaven, as the voice of many waters -- the phrase seems to intimate, as if the
thing should be by some general tumult, a mighty rushing of waters, a voice and
cry amongst the waters. Now Waters in Apocalyptical phrase, and elsewhere, (as
I have observed in opening the subject of the third Vial) denote the common
people, and in this place it is necessary we so interpret it, because the voice
of Waters is distinguished from the voice of Thunder, which John hears
afterward.

And further observe, these waters are not the common waters, but they are the
waters of Heaven, i.e. of the true Church, and its members, therefore the voice
of waters is heard from Heaven.

Yea further observe, the voice of waters from Heaven is a great voice, for it
is a voice not of a few, but many waters, noting, that the Spirit now acting
shall be general, the cry to arise, general.

There had been a little rushing of waters before, a cry of one here, another
there; but now, what was before set home upon some particular hearts, is upon
the hearts of Gods people in general, and the voice of waters is a great and
general voice, the cry runs on the sudden throughout the Churches and Saints,
and all are instantly upon their legs.

3 The state and condition they shall be in upon this their Rendezvous, is set
forth in two things.

1 They shall be owned by some eminent Head whom God will either raise up among
them, or make to appear for them. This Head is noted by the voice of the great
Thunder, it being the phrase of the Holy Ghost in this Book to call the common
people Waters, the Heads and great ones Thundrings, Rev. 19.6. I heard the
voice of many Waters, and the voice of mighty Thundrings, saying, Hallelujah.
It teaches us thus much, That Christ will raise up some such faithful
Instrument to be his Lieutenant General to lead on this his 144000, whose name
shall be as a great Thunder in the world, dreadful and terrible to the
Antichristian party.

And whereas it is the voice of but one Thunder, it intimates, that at this
first Rendezvous, there shall appear but some one noted Head for Christ, but a
while after, when the work is gotten a little forwarder, we hear of many
Thundrings, Rev. 19.6. i.e. many great One, Heads, Rulers, who either wanted
opportunity or courage at first, shall now come in, and join with this party.

2 They shall begin their march with praises. The Lamb being now upon Mount
Sion, his remnant gathered about him, an eminent Head by Christ raised up, and
set over them, the first work they do is to sing praises. I heard the voice of
Harpers, harping with their Harps. The Holy Ghost in these words alludes to the
way of praising God in time of Old, when Gods people in their praises made use
of Instruments of Music, and particularly, and as that which was in most
common use, of the Harp, Psalm. 33.2. Psalm. 43.4. Psalm. 71.22.

And methinks the first setting forth of the 144000. seems to be much like
Jehoshaphats march against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, 2 Chronicles. 20. An infinite multitude of people, and Nations like the sand of the
Sea, come up together against Jehoshaphat and Judah. The noise and rumor of
their coming, does (...) ^istress the people, but seeking God, the Lord setting
it home upon the heart of Jehoshaphat and his people, that the morrow should be
the day of his power, he would do the work for them, they should not need so
much as to fight, only stand and behold the salvation of the Lord; fear and
faint-heartedness now flies away; they do not consult, whether are we strong,
or whether are we weak; how is it possible we should deal with this multitude?
But being assured of the Victory, and that the day should be theirs, they begin
a March with pr^^^es, singing, and rejoicing, before ever a stroke is struck,
as if they had carried the Field already. So will it be with this remnant at
this day, the raging Dragon in his wrath and fury comes on gaping upon them; It
is a miracle in reason, if ever they escape his mouth, but against this, to bear
up their spirits, they have the glorious presence of the Lamb in the midst of
them, this does so wondrously animate them, that in the mouth of danger they
fear none, but march o^ in the very face of the Dragon, harping with their
Harps, i. e. praising and rejoicing, as knowing assuredly* the Lamb will
manifest his power, they shall tread the Dragon under their feet.

Thus much as touching our second particular; from the whole note, That
notwithstanding the Witnesses themselves are undoubtedly, after their rise, to
be esteemed a part of this 144000, yet shall the beginning of this glorious
company be not with them, but there where that remnant of the Woman's seed shall
be found, the the Dragon wars against.

I shall here in the close of this Section add a word or two as touching
Daniels Stone, the looking upon this Rendezvous presenting that to mine eye.
The first rise of this Stone we are doubtless to place with the beginn^^^ of
the third Vial. My Reasons are,

1 Because it being the Stone alone that breaks the Great Image by smiting him
on the Feer and Toes, we are there to place the rise of it, where the Civil
power of Antichrist, in any of the ten Horns (represented by the ten Toes) is
irrecoverably broken to pieces. But the doing of this is begun with the third
Vial, therefore with the beginning of that are we to place the beginning of the
Stone.

2 Because Daniels Stone that smites, Chap. 2. and his Ancient of days that
sits, Chap. 7. being one and the same, we are to reckon the rise of the Stone
from the first day that the Ancient of days began to sit, and to cast down any
of the Thrones of the fourth Beast. But this work was begun with the beginning
of the third Vial, therefore there are we to begin the Stone.

Now let us look upon the work done of late years under either of these
notions, either as it is a breaking of the great Image, or as it is casting
down the Thrones of the fourth Beast, for both are substantially the same, and
instrumentally wrought by the Stone, and has it not been done by a despised
handful, which worldly powers would not have raised up at first, could they
have helped it, nor continued when raised, could they have had their will; but
as the raising, so the continuing has been from God more immediately, than by
the endeavor of hands, i.e. humane means.

But now observe, as God never does any wonderful work, but in the beginning of
it, he puts some death upon it; so the most remarkable work that ever yet was
in the world, viz. the Stone smiting the great Image, is no sooner on foot, but
presently, even within that very Vial that the Stone begins to smite, comes the
saddest blow, the blackest cloud over the work of God, that ever one of them,
the world saw, namely, the death of the Witnesses, this stops the work a while,
the Stone lies still, by lying still it seems to moulder; In this extremity God
arises, ^^kes the Scone into his hands again, forms it more strongly, by
casting out the loose earthly matter, and firmly uniting and cementing the
rest, adding withal more matter to it, that so upon its next smiting, it may
break in pieces whatsoever stands in its way. This is done in this glorious
Rendezvous, of which we have spoken.

SECT. V.
OUr third Particular comes now into consideration, namely, to consider of the
Characters of this 144000.

As for the several Characters, we have verse. 3.4. I have given my thoughts of
them already in the Epistle Dedicatory to my late Discourse upon the Vials; But
what I then wrote being but as the first daybreak of light into this
Prophecy, and hoping (through grace) that I do now begin to see those things a
little more clearly, distinctly, and fully than at that time I did, I shall
notwithstanding go over the whole again.

The first Character of them, viz. That they stand with the Lamb upon Mount
Sion, relating more to their condition, than their qualification, I shall be
silent as touching it; and the rather, because I have opened it already, Sect.
1. That omitted, we have besides it eight Characters in the Text.

I CHARACTER. They have their Fathers Name written in their foreheads, verse.
1. i.e. they shall be such who shall know one another by no mark, but only the
Image of the Father, the Fathers Name written in their-fore-heads. And I take
it that this is spoken of the 144000 followers of the Lamb, in opposition to
the Beasts followers, of whom we read a little before, Chap. 13.16. That they
have a mark written in their forebeads, i.e. they make up a judgment of
persons by some mark given to them, one has this mark, another that mark, and
men (as well good men as others) all the time of the Beasts Kingdom, know one
another by marks, and such marks as are of the Beasts devising. But now when
the Beast goes off the Stage, and the Lamb comes up, all marks that formerly
men were known by are laid aside, and now there is no mark to know Saints by,
but only this, The Fathers Name written in their foreheads; There shall be no
knowledge of Persons, as Presbyters, as Independents, as Anabaptists, etc. any
longer, but the mark, the only mark that Saints shall know one another by,
shall be the Image of the Father, The Fathers Name written in their foreheads.

This shall be the mark by which Saints in the time of the New Jerusalem, when
the Lord shall be one, and his Name one, shall know one another by, Rev. 22.4.
His Name shall be in their foreheads, i.e. Grace and Holiness, the Image of
the Father, shall be so visible in them, that there shall be no need of any
other mark to know one another by, but all shall be known unto each other by
this. The beginnings of this shall be very eminent in this One hundred forty
four thousand, and therefore we have this laid down as the great Character of
them.

II CHARACTER. They sing a new Song which none can learn, but only this One
hundred forty four thousand, ver. 3. The meaning is, This One hundred forty
four thousand shall go a strain higher in their actings and praises, then the
Saints before them did; and for this reason many of the old Singers that sung
the first Song, Rev. 15.3. shall not be able to sing this, it shall go in a
note too high and spiritual for them.

III CHARACTER. They are such as are redeemed from the Farth, i.e. (as I
conceive) such only as have obtained to stand loose from earthly interest,
being persons d^ad, and delivered from the evil of the honors, preferments,
pleasures, profits, of this present evil world, which not the Sons of Adam
only, but too many of the Sons of Sion are plunged in, and overtaken with.

IV. CHARACTER. They are Virgin-Saints, not defiled with women, verse. 4. I take
this Character to be a Character distinct from the former, though not long
since I judged either the same. And yet withal, the difference is no great
matter, the former noting redemption from earthly interests and engagements in
the general, i.e. earthly interests of all sorts, by which men, yea Saints
themselves are oftentimes mis-lead, and drawn aside from following Christ; but
this latter denotes redemption in a more special kind, viz. from Antichristian
interests, the particular defilements of the whorish Woman; the meaning is,
this One hundred forty four thousand shall be a select number of such persons,
who notwithstanding for a great part of their time they lived within the verge
of that Idolatrous superstitious age, in which the whole world went a whoring
after the Beast, yet did in that adulterous generation keep themselves Virgins,
not committing fornication with the Whore of Babylon, by having any hand in her
Superstitions and Idolatries.

V. CHARACTER. They follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, i.e. They shall be
such who from the day they began to follow the Lamb, have ever kept him company
in his most difficult paths, through rockie, craggie, thorny ways; In
dangerous paths, where they have been necessitated to put their lives in their
hands to follow him; in desolate wilderness-paths, where they have been in a
manner stripped bare of all outward comforts and enjoyments, yet willing to
quit all, rather than leave his company, in paths contrary to reason, flesh,
and blood, to their own preferments, interests, etc. such shall these be. And
this Character (I take it) is given to them in opposition to those who did
follow the Lamb sometime, so long as it stood with their safety, pleasure,
honor, preferment, profits, etc. but when in following him they could have
these no longer, they will follow him no further, the Lamb may march alone for
them.

VI. CHARACTER. They are redeemed from among men; i.e. (as before I have noted)
a picked party, not so much from the Antichristian crow of Idolaters, as the
more pure party of the Reformers themselves, they shall be (as I have said) the
very cream, the flower of the Reformed party.

VII. CHARACTER, They are the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, i.e.
Either those that God makes more account of, as being more precious in his
sight, than of other of his people; for the first fruits under the Law were
accounted the most precious, and therefore were set apart, and consecrated to
God; or else, (which I rather incline to) these shall be the beginnings of that
large Harvest to Christ among the Gentiles, which he is to have after the
Beasts time is out; For the first fruits were the beginnings of the Jewish
Harvest; Or they shall be in a manner the beginnings of that glorious Kingdom
of Christ in the world, which shall break in pieces all other Kingdoms, and
stand for ever.

VIII. CHARACTER. In their mouth is found no guile, verse. 5. that is, (as I
conceive) They shall in a very naked and plain-hearted way manage their whole
work, without driving on self-designs, under a vizzard and pretense of serving
and setting up Christ, or without acting by the RVLES OF STATE POLICY, which
exposes men to falsehood, dissimulation and guile; no such thing shall be found
in this One hundred forty four thousand, or their actings; but they shall
without fear or favor let the world know what they intend and design, they are
for Christ's Kingdom, and that the Crown may be set upon his Head; if the Kings
of the earth will submit to it, and lay down their Crowns and Scepters at his
feet, so it is, if not, they will endeavor to make them. And this I take to be
the very meaning of the words, for the reason given in those that follow, For
they are without fault before the Throne of God, i.e. they shall not dissemble
in the business of Christ's Throne and Kingdom, or they shall not seek
themselves in the setting up of this Kingdom.

SECT. VI.
THe fourth and last thing comes now to be handled, viz. How things shall go
on, or what shall be done in the world, from the time that this One hundred
forty four thousand stand up, until the beginning of the Thousand years.

There are but two clear Prophecies in all the Revelations, that afford us
matter for an answer to this Question; 1. That of the Vials, Chap. 16. taking
in also its explication in the following Chapters. 2. That of the Witnesses
risen, hinted Chap. 11. verse. 11, 12, 13. enlarged in this 14 Chapter. As for
so much as concerns our Question comprised in the first, I have handled that in
opening the Vials, and shall not here repeat it. What may be collected from
Chap. 11. I have given some general hints of it likewise in our first Chapter.
All therefore I intend to do at present shall be to take up some few
Observations, as lie couched in this Chapter, and will add some little further
light than what has been already brought forth, to the Question in hand.

1 More generally, The work shall go on with a more swift and irresistible hand
than ever formerly. Now shall not all the means and endeavors that can by the
world or hell it self be used, be able to hinder, but the wrath of God as a
mighty overflowing deluge shall irresistably come in upon the Antichristian
ungodly world. This seems to me to be noted in that running and posting of
Angels one after another, so soon as ever the work is set upon this Basis,
verse. 6. I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel, ver. 8. And there followed another Angel saying, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, Verse. 9. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a
loud voice, If any man worship the Beast, and his Image, or receive his mark in
his forehead, or in his hand; The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God. Verse. 15. And another Angel came out of the Temple --. Verse. 17. And
another Angel came out of the Temple --. Verse. 18. And another Angel came out
from the Altar, which had power over fire. The posting of Angels argues the
work now to be hot, it runs like fire in a Thatch, every Angel or Instrument
makes a quick and speedy dispatch of his work.

2 More particularly, we have these things noted in the following part of this
Chapter.

First, The everlasting Gospel is preached, verse. 6, 7. And I saw another
Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and
People, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour
of his judgment is come, and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the
Sea, and the Fountains of waters. Five things we have here observable
concerning this preaching of the Gospel, which shall be at this day.

1 The wonderful purity, and simplicity of the Doctrine of the Gospel as now
held forth it shall be purged from those Antichristian mixtures and devices of
man, which tend to nothing else but to corrupt and darken the pure word of the
Gospel, and lead souls from the simplicity of the Gospel. Hence it is called
the everlasting Gospel, because it shall be now preached as it was at first; or
all that dross that has been, and is in the Doctrine of the best Preachers
hitherto, shall now be purged out, and that only which will abide the fire,
and shall be everlasting, shall remain.

2 The matter it self, that shall be held forth as one principal part of this
everlasting Gospel, shall be those things which concern Christ, judging the
great Whore, and all his enemies, and the setting up of his own Kingdon^,
calling upon the Rulers of this world to worship the Lamb, throw down their
Crowns, and Scepter at his feet; and therefore observe the matter of the Sermon
is, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, and
worship him that made Heaven, Earth, etc. as to say, the time is come that the
Lamb will judge the Whore, destroy the Beast, tremble all ye Nations before
him, ye Kings and Princes of the earth be wise, give glory to him, Kiss the
Son, worship before him who made Heaven, Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of
waters, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, as he is in his march to
his Kingdom.

3 The universal spreading of this Doctrine abroad, and that as it were in a
moment; therefore the Angel, to note the swiftness of carrying it, is said to
fly, and to show the universal spreading of it, it is said to be preached, to
every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People.

4 The public, and boldholding of it forth; such a spirit shall be upon the
Preachers, that they shall not whisper these things, and speak them in private
corners; but openly and boldly in the Market-street; yea, in the very faces of
the Kings and Princes of the Earth. Hence to note the publickness of it, the
Angel is said to fly in the midst of Heaven, i.e. openly, in the view of all,
and to note the publickness and boldness both, is said to proclaim it with a
loud voice.

5 The great measure of faith that shall be upon the Preachers, as to this
particular business, that the very time is come in which God will judge the
Whore, therefore they cry out, The hour of his judgment is come. As to say,
Flatter your selves no longer, O ye Papists, sit still no longer, O ye
Protestants, with this in your mouths, the time is not come, the time is not
come, for assure your selves Christ will now delay no longer, The hour of his
judgment is come.

Secondly, Romes destruction now comes unavoidably upon her, verse. 8. And there
followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. The words Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, are not (as I conceive) to be looked upon as words of
faith concerning a work to be done, but rather a Proclamation of a work already
done. This Angel is but the Messenger and Herald of those glad tidings, who
spreads this news over the Churches and Nations; which what with the greatness
of it, the suddenness, and unexpectedness of it, begets such wonderment, and
joy, that the whole World in a manner is filled with Hallelujah's, Rev. 19.

Thirdly, A serious and solemn warning to all those who shall yet adhere to the
Beast, Verse. 9. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If
any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead,
and in his hand. Verse. 10 The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb. Verse. 11. And the smock of their torment
ascends up for ever and over, And they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name.

But why are the Papals warned by pronouncing against them so dreadful a
threatening at this day?

Answ. The reason hereof I take to be this, because the day of Christ's coming,
and the fatal ruin of the Beast and his followers, is now at hand, therefore
the coming of Christ, and the treading of the Wine Press, follows immediately
upon this.

Now Gods way is, ever before his fatal blow, to give his enemies such a
warning, as may both leave them inexcusable, and clear his justice before all
men in their destruction. Hence in regard the dreadful day of the Lords wrath
is immediately to approach, in which the Beast is to be slain, his body
destroyed, and given to the burning flame, the Beast and false Prophet both to
be cast into the Lake of fire burning with Brimstone; that therefore the
Justice of God in this most terrible execution of his wrath might be apparent
unto Men and Angels, God, before he will strike, stirs up some in a more
special manner to make discovery among the Nations of the terror of the Day
approaching, warning all, not to side, or have any thing to do with the Beast,
whose final destruction and torment is at hand, and in case, notwithstanding
this warning they shall, this is that they must certainly and suddenly expect,
to drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture
into the Cup of his indignation, and to be tormented with fire and brimstone in
the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, the smoke of
which torment of theirs, shall ascend up for ever and ever.

I have sometimes thought this Angel may be the same with that Chapter 19.17, 18.
for both are immediately before the Great Day of God Almighty; both seem to
have very clear light into that thing, of the destruction of Gods enemies;
therefore as the one paints out the very nature and manner of their torments,
so the other is said (as to this parsicular, viz. of the certain ruin of Gods
enemies) to stand in the Sun, i.e. in clear light; both speak with abundance of
says, the one to the Papal power, assuring them of ruin; the other to the
Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, i.e. the neutral party, who would
willingly join with the Conquering side, could they tell which that side would
be, therefore are most fi^^y described by such Fowls, whose chief desire is
prey, and said to fly in the midst of Heaven, because they keep themselves as
it were in the middle betwixt. Heaven and Earth, the Saints party, and the
party of the Beast, not knowing which to fall in with, yet would willingly be of
the winning side, and where they might have prey. Now these the Angel assures
that if they will join with the people of God they shall have victory and
spoil, be both of the winning side, and have prey to boot, as to say, You that
waver, and are doubtful which side to take, would you be of the prospering
side? take this then, for assuredly the Victory shall fall to this party.

Now whether or no these Angels are two, or but one, I shall not be curious to
determine, nor is it a thing so material for us to know; Only such a thing may
be, and it is not improper to say, That one and the same Angel may do both
these works, and that in a manner together, viz. inform and invite the one,
whilst he threatens and warns the other.

4 A sweet word of Heavenly consolation to the Saints and people of Christ, the
blessed day of their redemption being now come.

Verse. 12. Here is the patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus; That is, in effect, to say. Here
is the end and fruit of the Saints patience, here is the blessed reward of
keeping the Commandments of God, and holding the faith of Jesus; Now, now the
day is come, in which it shall appear that the Saints have lost nothing by
waiting patiently upon God for the fulfilling of his word, by keeping the
Commandments of God, holding the faith of Jesus. The world have looked upon
them as fools, and counted their life a very prison; but here, here are they
that keep the Commandments of God; here is the day of making up a right
judgment of them; here is their condition visible from under a veil. Now, now,
O ye world, look upon them, see what you think of them now, and of all their
patience, obedience, and faith; whether were they fools, as you esteemed them,
or no?

5 And last, We have Christ's Personal coming, verse. 14. And I looked, and
behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man,
having on his Head a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. That Christ's
Personal coming is the thing held forth in these words appears,

1 Because the coming here is a coming of Christ, as he is the Son of man,
which phrase does ever point at Christ's Personal coming.

2 Because he comes in the Clouds, which is the manner of his Personal coming,
Matthew. 24.30. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then
shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn and they shall see the Son of man coming
in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory, Rev. 1.7. Behold, he
comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. The Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, Matthew. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see
the Son of man fitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
Heaven, Luke 21.27. Then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with
power, and great glory.

3 Because Christ comes with a golden Crown on his Head, which agrees to no
coming so properly as his last, when he comes to receive his Kingdom, and when
upon his coming, the Kingdoms of this world are to be given to him. Of this
Daniel speaking, says, Chap. 7.13, 14. I saw in the night Visions, and behold
one like the Son of man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient
of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given Dominion,
and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve
him; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and
his Kindom, that which shall not be destroyed.

4 Because the Battle of Armageddon follows immediately upon this coming. This
is noted by the treading of the Winepress, verse. last. The phrase of treading
the Winepress, is the very phrase used by the Holy Ghost in other places to set
forth the terror of that day, Rev. 19.15. He treads the Winepress of the
fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God, Isa. 63.3. I have trodden the
Winepress alone, Joel 3.13. All which places I have proved upon the Viais to
have their fulfilling immediately upon Christ's coming in that terrible day of
the battle of Armageddon. So that by all circumstances this coming is the same,
and can be no other, than the coming mentioned Rev. 16.15. Of which we have
treated at large, and proved in opening those words, that it can be no other
coming, but Christ's Personal.

Now because at the time of Christ's personal coming the dead Saints are so to
be raised up, as that they may be ready to come with Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Zech. 14.5. Therefore we have the resurrection of the dead
intimated in the verse before Christ's coming, verse. 13. And I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord,
from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors,
and their works do follow them. The Emphasis of the Text lies in those words,
from henceforth, about which I find Expositors, not applying this to the time
of Christ's coming, and the resurrection, but to a time past, to be much puzzled.
And indeed there is cause, for as it is a forced Translation, and besides the
Etymology of the word, to translate (...) otherwise than from henceforth, or
from this time; so cannot any solid reason be given for it, without a supposal
of the resurrection to be here intimated, why the dead from this time should be
pronounced Blessed, more than from any other time; why from this time they
should rest from their labors, and have their works following them, more than
from any other time. To say they go to Heaven by Death, and there rest from
their labors. Answ. But why from this time rather than any other are they
blessed, seeing all that dye in the Lord throughout all Ages are equally made
partakers of the blessing, in this sense? To say, the reason of the special
blessing arises from the Cause they dye in, they dye in Christ's Cause, and
suffer as Martyrs. Ans. But why is the speciality of the Blessing annexed to
this time, seeing as Martyrs many had suffered for Christ long before? To say
(as do some others) because the Gospel began now to be preached in the world,
which only makes men dye happily. Answ. But why from this time, seeing a Soul
cannot dye happily, or in the Lord, at any time, without some knowledge of
Christ, and the Gospel? To restrain this (as do some others) to the pains of
Purgatory, which (they say) till about this time did cause fear even in good
people at their deaths; but now the Gospel being preached clearly, and the
vanity of that opinion laid open, the people of God dye comfortably, with
assurance of going straightway into Paradise, will not help us with an
interpretation; for who can think otherwise, but that the vanity of this most
gross opinion was laid open before, even when the everlasting Gospel was
preached, verse. 6.7. and if so, why then are they said to be blessed from this
time, and not rather from that time, when the everlasting Gospel began to be
preached? To say yet (as do others) because great Persecutions were now to
arise, so that it was a blessing to be dead before they came. Ans. 1. Whether
is it a greater blessing to die in the Lord a Martyr, or to die of a man's
natural death? 2. Let it be considered, Whether the time of the Waldenses,
Albigenses, which time Expositors place higher, making application of the thing
spoken of, verse. 6, 7. to them, were not a time of as sore, yea sorer
Persecutions, than the time to which they make application of these words; and
if so, that this be the only reason, why then should not the blessing be
placed there, rather than here, or as well there as here?

For my own part, I do conceive that the thing here intimated is the
Resurrection, which opinion, as it cuts off a multitude of uncertainties, so
does it agree most fitly to the circumstance of time, according to the method I
have observed, and is clear also from the Context, consent of other Scriptures,
and the words themselves taken in their natural sense, without straining or
forcing of them, being in effect thus much, as if the Holy Ghost should say;
The children of God until this day have been ever accounted the worlds Fools,
who have counted their life a burden and toil, their death a loss of their
expectations; but now at this day of the Resurrection, when the fruit of Gods
peoples patience, their faith and obedience (of which was spoken in the
foregoing verse, which has a necessary dependence on this, and had we
conjoined them in our exposition, as they are in the Text, it might possibly
have been better) shall be manifested before all men; it shall then be seen
that those who in former ages, from the very beginning of the world, did live
to the Lord, and dye in the Lord, are the only blessed men, who from this day
in Soul and Body both are made partakers, and that in recompense of their
former toil and labors, of the glorious rest of Christ, having now their good
works following them, i. e. the reward of all their former good works (which
the world looked upon as things lost, and cast away) given to them.

Hence, (which serves to expound these words) the time of the seventh Angels
sounding, (which is contemporary with this, both looking to the time of Christ's
coming) is called the time of Gods giving a reward unto his Servants the
Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear his name small and great,
Rev. 11.18. which answers punctually to this of their works, i.e. the reward of
their works following them.

By these two Scriptures I am further confirmed in what I have written upon the
Vials, viz. That not Martyrs only, but all the Saints shall rise in the first
Resurrection, and come with Christ; for the blessing here pronounced is common
to all that dye in the Lord, yea, to all that have kept the patience, faith,
and commandments of Christ, and not peculiar to Martyrs only; the rewarding
Saints in the time of the new Jerusalem, is not a rewarding Martyrs only, but
all that fear Gods Name (a qualification common to Saints) small and great.

As for the double similitude in the following words, 1. Of a Harvest, verse.
15, 16. 2. Of a Vintage, verse. 18 19, 20. whether the Harvest signify Christ's
gathering his Elect in the world (which are his Corn) together to him, 1 These.
4, 17. 2 These. 2.1. Mat. 24.31. And the Vintage Christ's destruction of those of
his Enemies that he finds gathered together upon his appearing; or whether one
thing, viz. The ruin of his enemies be intended in both, which seems best to
agree to Joel 3.13. Put ye in the Sickle, for the Harvest is ripe; come get you
down, for the Press is full, the Fats overflow; (which Prophecy, as it is the
same for time with this, so this seems to be taken thence) I shall not
undertake possitively to determine. Further, whether the Angel with a Sickle,
who gathers the Vintage, ver. 19. be any Angel that Christ makes use of at his
coming, to destroy his enemies, as God by an Angel destroyed the Host of
Senacherib, or whether this Angel be Christ himself, who before is called the
Son of Man, here an Angel (which name is also given him, Rev. 10.1, 2, 3, 5, 6.
Rev. 20.1. Chap. 16.17. which in my discourse on the seventh Vial, I have
showed is to be understood of Christ) I shall not much insist on, only adding,
that I rather incline to the latter, that it is Christ himself.

1 Because this work is done by the pouring out of the seventh Vial, and the
seventh Vial is poured out by Christ alone.

2 Because this work is the treading of the Wine Press, and the treading of the
Wine Press is Christ's work alone, Isa. 63.3. Rev. 19.15.

3 Because it carrying greatest probability with it, that the Harvest and
Vintage should be but one and the same thing, set forth for ampleness sake
under two Similitudes, it should also seem most probable to conclude, the Angel
of either to be the same. Now the work of the Harvest is in express terms
appropriated to Christ, the Son of Man, therefore the Vintage is his work too.

4 Because supplication seems to be made in the same manner to this Angel, as
is to Christ himself. An Angel coming out of the Temple cries with a loud voice
to him that fate on the Cloud, i.e. Christ the Son of Man, to thrust in his
Sickle and reap, verse. 15. In like manner an Angel coming from the Altar, cries
with a loud voice to this Angel to thrust in his Sickle, and gather the
clusters of the earth, verse. 18. therefore they seem to be one and the same,
and Christ himself the person pointed at in both.

If here I may add my conjecture concerning these two Angels that cry with a
loud voice, to have this work of the Harvest and Vintage performed, I have a
conceit, that the first may signify, the Gentile Churches, the second the
Jews; who both about the instant time of Christ's appearance are provoked, by
seeing the whole world gathering together to swallow them up, to cry mightily
to the Lord, to manifest his power for their preservation; for which cause
either are said to cry with a loud voice; and both by seeing the rage and
height of the enemy, have says to believe their destruction to be at hand;
therefore either are brought in, pleading great words of faith. The first
pleads, Reap O Lord, for the time is come to reap, the Harvest of the Earth is
ripe, verse. 15. The second pleads, Gather the clusters of the Vine, for her
Grapes are fully ripe, verse. 18. and for this reason also may (as I conceive)
the same thing be set forth under two Parables, that so hereby a clear way
might be made for either of these two, first Gentiles, than Jews, to be brought
in pleading with Christ, to show forth his power and greatness at this day.

Now of these two, the Angel of the Gentile Churches is said to come out of the
Temple; (yet not the Temple of Heaven, which the Angel of the Vintage, i.e.
Christ, comes forth of, ver. 17.) because the Gentile-Saints had long before
this time, even from the first day the Vials began to be poured forth, had a
Temple among them, Rev. 15.5, 6. this being the most remarkable thing
concerning them, that they had a Temple, therefore are they described as coming
thence. The Angel of the Jews comes from the Altar, verse. 18.

Quest. Why is he so described?

Answ. To note the wonderful sufferings that people shall be in, and that in
that very nick of time wherein Christ shall appear, which is spoken of, Daniel
12.1. Zoch. 14.1, 2, 3. and of which we have discoursed before, this being the
most remarkable thing concerning them, and that which makes them to cry so
loud, therefore are they described as coming from the Altar; yet as touching
this Angel it is added, that he has power over fire, verse. 18. noting the
great prevalency that the cry of this Angel from the Altar should have, to
bring down the Wrath of God upon the Heads of the enemies; as Elijah commanded
fire from Heaven, and the Witnesses in the time of their Prophecy are said to
devour their enemies by fire, Rev. 11.5, so the cry of these poor Jews, who at
this present are to be exercised under an hour of such sharp trouble, as never
was until this day, since there was a Nation, shall be so prevalent with
Christ, that it shall in a manner constrain him out of Heaven, and command down
his sore and heaviest wrath upon the heads of their enemies, which is here set
forth by this Angels having power over fire.

As touching the 1600 Furlongs, verse. 20. conjectures are diverse.

Napiers opinion is, That it respects the date of this terrible day; who reads
the words thus; Blood came out of the Wine Press unto the Horse Bridles, by the
space of 1600 stades of courses; as if (says he) appearingly he should mean
Metaphorically as Wine may be thought to flow from the Press, or the blood of
slain men in a Field to ascend to the Horse Bridles, so eternally shall the
torment of the wicked ascend after that 1600 years be accomplished; for (says
our Author) these stades agree well to mean years, seeing a stade is that race
or course that one may be thought to run with one breath, before he begin to
renew his breath again; as one year is that race or course that the Sun makes
in a Circuit, before he begin to renew his Circuit again. Now counting 1600
years from the time that this was written, which was about the 97 year of
Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicle says, or in the end of the reign of
Domitian, as Irenaeus says, which was An. Dom. 99. the end of the account
shall fall out about the year of Christ, 1697. or 1699. Thus Napier.

This agrees well to the time of Christ's coming, as the same is held forth in
other Scriptures, only falls two or three years sooner. Now whether Christ,
who tells us, that for the Elects sake the days shall be shortened, Matthew. 24.22.
may not by reason of that sharp trouble that precedes his coming, shorten by so
much as this comes to, that determined time of his coming, which we have in
Daniel, I will not say, yet a seeming probability of some such thing there is
in our Saviors words.

Mayer has an opinion, that this may relate to the place; quoting Rabbi
Menahen upon Genesis fol. 60. who affirms, that the Land of Canaan was 1600.
Furlongs in length. Now (says our Author) for so much as all things are
carried here on in an Allegory to the Temple, the Altar, and the Holy City
which were of the Jews, I doubt not but in this space without the City it is
also alluded unto that Country, such an innumerable multitude are destroyed, as
if such a slaughter of men were made, as would overflow in this depth, all the
whole land of Canaan.

This opinion the Prophets favor, in that general concurrence that is amongst
them, that the battle of Armageddon (which is that treading of the Wine Press
here mentioned) shall be in the land of Canaan, near Jerusalem.

Hence that opinion falls to the ground, which would have this 1600 Furlongs to
be a designation of Peter's Patrimony, which (says the Author of it) in the
longest extent thereof, from the walls of Rome to the River Po, is exactly 1600
Furlongs, whence (says he) its probable that the Popes own Territories, may
prove the Cockpit of this execution, whither Christ as into a Wine Press, will
from all parts gather the bloody grapes, when he means to tread them.

Another opinion I find hereof, which applies 1600 Furlongs to the greatness of
the punishment, which shall befall the enemies of Christ at this day, and that
in respect both of the multitude of those who shall be punished, and the length
of their torment. Blood flowing so great a depth as to the Horse Bridles, and
this, for 1600 Furlongs, is an Argument both of abundance of blood, and a long
time of pressing.

This conjecture also agrees well to the Prophets, who speaking of this day,
make mention of multitudes that shall be destroyed, Joel 3.14, Ezekiel. 38. and
39. Rev. 16.14, 16. and 19.19, 20, 21. and also of length of torment, Isa.
66.24.

Now seeing that either of these opinions will, and do agree to the mind of the
Holy Ghost in other places, where mention is made of this day, I judge it most
safe not to restrain the interpretation of so great a mystery to any one, but
as the wisdom of God in Scriptures more plain, much more in places so mystical,
is manifold, so to conceive that either, viz. the time, place, and greatness of
the punishment also may be here intended.

Thus once more we are come unto the day of Christ's appearing, which though
looked for but by a few, yet doubtless hastens upon us. By how much this
blessed time is nearer, by so much the more does it call upon us to have our
eyes fixed thereupon; to awake, arise, put on our beautiful garments, and shake
our selves of our dust; gather up our courage, our zeal, our life, our love to
Christ, his cause and people; resolving within our selves for Sions sake not to
hold our peace, and for Jerusalems sake to give him no rest, till the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a
Lamp that burns; till she who now is termed forsaken, and her land called
desolate, shall become a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
Diadem in the hand of our God, and be no more called Hephzibab, nor her land
Beulah, but the Lords delight, married unto him, the praise of the whole earth,
an eternal excellency, a joy of many Generations, a City of solemnities, a
Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the stakes be for ever
removed, where the glorious Lord will be unto his a place of broad Rivers and
Streams, to water the City of our God, to replenish and make fat the Mountain
of his Holiness: Which things, as he has foretold them in his Word, and will
surely fulfill them in their season; So let me say, THIS GENERATION SHALL NOT
PASS TIL ALL THESE THINGS BE FULFILLED; for the time is at hand. He will finish
the work, and cut it short in righteousness; Verily a short work will the Lord
make upon the earth. Warch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape those things, that shall come upon the world, and to
stand before the Son of Man; For he that does these things says, Behold I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according at his work
shall be. I come as a Thees^ Bl^ssed is he that watches and keeps his
G^rments, lest be walk ^^ked, and they see his shame: Even so, Come Lord Jesus,
Come quickly. Amen.

Isa. 14.32. What shall o^^ now duswer the Messongers of the Nation? That the;
Lord bath founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

From my S^^dy in Trunch the 23. day of the first Month, in the year of our
Lord 1654.

FINIS.
A MOTIVE TO Generation-work: OR A Key to unlock the Mystical Numbers of
Daniel and the Revelations, tending to resolve the great Question of the Age we
live in, viz. How long shall it be unto the end of Wonders?

By J.T. A waiter for the Redemption of Sion.

Dan. 8.13. Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that
certain Saint which spoke; How long shall be the Vision concerning the daily
Sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the Sanctuary, and
the Host, to be trodden under foot?

Verse. 14. And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days, then
shall the Sanctuary be cleansed.

Exodus 12.41. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the self same day, all the Hosts of the Lord went out from the land
of Egypt.

LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT has been oftentimes in my thoughts, that there is hardly any controversy
in this age (which is fruitful in little else) but there are in that thing
wherein the controversy lies, some more general principles of truth, which, as
in their own nature they do carry a light round about them, so could they be
found our, would in a few words inlighten a man more than all those tedious
Volumes, which, about things controverted, are daily sent forth into the world,
which ordinarily do but beat about the Bush, never coming at the place where
these principles lie.

The care of that man who would make discovery of Truth, should be in the first
place, and above all, to search these out, and having found them, to place them
rightly; for these being to be his foundation, if but a stone in this
foundation, be either not of the true metal, or displaced, it necessarily
follows, that so much of the building, as has it for its Basis, must be weak
or carried awry.

The best outward means to attain these principles, is to give attendance to
the reading of the word, and diligently to compare one place with another; but
yet this may be done, and a man no whit the nearer, if with this endeavor
there do not concur the inward supply and assistance of the Spirit. And truly I
have many times thought with my self, that as the great thing our faith is to
have in its eye, when it goes to the Promise for teaching, is, That the Lord
would lead us to these; so the principal thing in the Spirits teaching, when it
teaches any soul, is by its inward hints to point it unto these.

The most certain Character to know these principles by, when they are attained
and when not, is an universal harmony of Truth; for these principles are as the
Center, in which all the lines of Truth, which are separated in the
Circumserence, do weet together, and become one point. But now, as the wider
any Circumference is, the farther will a man be, who walks there, from the
Center; So those who travel in the large Circumference of men's Writings are
farther from these principles, than those, who shunning this broad way, betake
themselves to the narrow path of the Word alone. And it stands with reason it
should so be (though we had it not to say, This way is the way of the Promise)
for the bringing forth of a Harmony, being by comparing one thing with another,
a man may much better compare, where he has much laid down in a little, as in
the Word, than where he has little in much, as in the Writings of men; for as
Judgment, Memory, etc. are greatly helped by the one so are they confounded by
the other.

Those principles are not without cause to be suspected, which will not produce
this Harmony: for Truth being one, and but one, so far as the creature cannot
make it one, its a manifest Argument of his falling short of the knowledge of
Truth.

As it is ordinary for Gods people by inward hints to have first the light of
th^se principles, which followed up, will produce this outward Harmony, so must
they in case they would walk safely, and make right conclusions, by this
outward Harmony; judge of their inward hints. Hence inward hints are no^ to the
fleighted, nor rably rejected, for of entimes they carry that with them, which
were they followed up by those that have them, would produce a glorious Harmony
of Truth; Nor contrariwise are they to be credited, or received any further,
than by this out ward Harmony, a testimony is given to them; for it is most
certain, if the Spirit within be Teacher, he will make manifest the hidden
mysteries of his voice without, but never contradict them.

These principles I am speaking of, could they be found out, and brought to
light, the way to Truth would be shorter, the mystery of Truth cleerer, the
force of Truth to batter down Error, by how much it would be more united,
greater, and a close among the spirits of good men, sooner attained, than is
like to be in any other way. Withal, whosoever would examine other men's
principles upon any particular subject, walking by this Rule, shall find that
work easy, which might otherwise prove very difficult.

That I my self have attained this knowledge, I cannot say, nor is it likely,
seeing I am but uewly come unto this Lesson; yet having made a discovery of
such a way, I am pressing after it, and what I have attained, I offer to thee,
Sober Reader, Read, and judge, and try if thou please.

A Key to the Mystical Numbers of Daniel, and the Revelations: Or. certain
Theses, tending to resolve the great Question of the present time, How long
shall it be unto the end of Wonders? Added as a Motive to the several parts of
Generation-Work.
THESIS I.
THere is a certain definite and determined time, that God in his Word has
set, how long the Captivity and Sufferings of the Church of the New Testament
shall continue, beyond which they shall not be extended. That such a determined
time should be, is a thing of special use, both for the comfort of Gods Church
under suffering, the firengthning of their faith, and the helping them in
prayer; and it cannot be thought that God who was so careful to measure out the
time of his Churches sufferings under the Old Testament, and that to a year,
yea a day seventy years in Babylon, 430 in Egypt, and in the self-same day the
determined time was expired, God brings them out, Exodus 12.41, 51. should be
altogether careless (as if his grace in Gospel Times were less) of measuring
out, and determining the time of the Captivity and Sufferings of the Church of
the New Testament.

THESIS II.
The knowledge of this time, is a thing attainable, or otherwise there could be
no advantage arising hence; Yea the former ends should be fruitless, and of no
use; yea otherwise why is there a promise left us of attaining knowledge as to
this thing, by running to and fro, Dan. 12.4. if by running to and fro
knowledge were not attainable? Yea to what end are the mystical Numbers in the
time of the end to be unsealed, Dan. 12.9. if notwithstanding their unsealing
no certain conclusion, as to the things they hold forth, were deducible?

THESIS III.
This knowledge, though attainable, is not a discovery intended for all Ages but
for the last only, or those Saints which shall live immediately before the
expiration of this time. Therefore is the revealing time always particulatly
noted by this express Character, The time of the end. Dan. 12.4. But thou, O
Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the Book, even to the time of the end. Verse
9. Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up, and sealed till the time of
the end. Chap. 8.17. Understand, O Son of man, for at the time of the end shall
be the Vision; which last words cannot respect the time of the Vision, which
was many Ages since, in the third year of Belshazzar, verse. 1. nor the matter
of the Vision, as if the same did relate only to things done in the time of the
end; for the matter of the Vision is a Prophecy of the three last Monarchies,
First, Medes and Persians. Secondly, Grecians. Thirdly, Romans (the Babylonian
Monatchy being omitted, because it was in the expiration of that Daniel had the
Vision) and therefore the matter of it runs through all of them, and may not be
limited to the time of the end; but they respect the revelation of the Vision,
which Daniel himself has light into at present, but with this Proviso, that he
shut it up, Verse. 26. Shut thou up the Vision; for others must wait for the
understanding of these things until the time of the end.

THESIS IV.
The Persons in a capacity, and that when the Book is opened, to attain this
knowledge, are such only as make inquiry after it. Therefore the determinative
answer concerning the times is given forth to the inquiring Saints, Dan. 8.13,
14. Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Sain: said unto that certain
Saint which spoke; How long shall be the Vision concerning the daily Sacrifice,
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the Sanctuary, and the host
to be trodden underfoot? And he said unto me, Unto 2300 days, then shall the
Sanctuary be cleansed And also the promise of increase of this knowledge, and
that in the time when the Book is to be unsealed, is not to all (though persons
otherwise qualified with abundance of grace and knowledge) but to such only as
are runners to and fro, Dan. 12.4. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words and
seal the Book, even to the time of the end; many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.

THESIS V.
The time it self is held forth in those Mystical Numbers that we find in the
Prophecy of Daniel, and the Book of the Revelation; which must be, because no
determination of the time can be found in all the Scripture, in case it be not
in those Numbers.

THESIS VI.
That interpretation of these Numbers is doubtless to be sought for, and, when
found, followed, that brings them to an Harmony within themselves, for truth is
never found but in a Harmony. No Prophecy is of a private interpretation. Out
of the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.

THESIS VII.
The best way to attain this Harmony, is to consult with the naked testimony of
Scripture, History, and Chronology.

THESIS VIII.
The voice of Scripture is to be attended in the first place, History and
Chronology in the second. The reason is, because the reports of Historians
being various and perplexed, oftentimes as to actions themselves, oftentimes as
to the time of them, they will but confound the Enquirer, if in dubitable
principles and conclusions from Scripture be not first laid as a foundation.

THESIS IX.
If it may be supposed (which must, or otherwise no certain determination of
the time is attainable, and so this, and every enquiry is but a running in
vain, and laboring in vain) that indubitable principles, which may serve us as
a basis for such an undertaking, are left us in the word; and also if it be a
thing supposable, that amongst the variety of Historians, any one of them, in
recording such Acts, which are to be as Heads to this, or that Mystical Number,
has neither given false reports of the Acts themselves, nor missed the time;
it is a thing then not impossible by virtue of the light first received from
the most certain principles of holy Scripture, to pass a definitive Sentence
upon the reports of Historians; And to conclude this, in this or that
particular report, to be in the truth, these in the error.

THESIS X.
If among many, any one, or more Historians be found in the truth, as touching
such and such acts, and their time, then also by the indubitable principles of
Scripture, and their reports laid together, a certain determination of the time
may be made.

THESIS XI.
The Numbers themselves which point us to the end of the Churches Captivity and
sufferings in New Testament-times, are 2300 days, Dan. 8.14. 1290, and 1335
days, Chap. 12.11, 12. 1260 days, Rev. 11.3, Chap. 12.6. and 42. months, Rev.
11.2. Chap. 13.5. both which last I have before proved, Chap. 1. Sect. 2. to be
one and the same.

THESIS XII.
A day put for a year, is a Scriptural, and a Prophetical way of speaking, Number.
14.33, 34. And your children shall wander in the Wilderness forty years, after
the number of the days in which ye searched the Land, even forty days, each
day for a year, Ezekiel 4 4 5 6- Thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of
Judah forty days; I have appointed thee each day for a year. Thus we are to
interpret days in the foregoing Numbers, of otherwise the Numbers will be of
no use at all, as to measure out the time of the Captivity, and sufferings of
Gods people under the New Testament; for how little time, should we understand
these days of natural days, does the greatest of these Numbers contain?

THESIS XIII.
As Daniel wrote in Old Testament-times, when the Jews were the only people of
God, and John in New Testament times, when the Jews were a people rejected, and
the Gentiles Gods chosen people; so are we to look upon the thing principally
pointed at in the foregoing Numbers of Daniel, to be the time of the Jews
delivery from their long Captivity; the thing chiefly intended in John's to be
the utmost period of the Gentile Churches Bondage, and Captivity under
Antichrist.

THESIS XIV.
Now because the Gentile-Churches deliverance from Antichristian Bondage, which
began with the beginning of the Vials, shall be complete at the end of the 1260
days, or the two and forty Months, i.e. Antichrist, this time expired, shall
never so far prevail against them more, as to bring them into bondage to him
again; therefore the utmost period of the Churches sufferings, that we have in
John, is the end of the 1260 days, the forty two months, nofarther number
beyond this being assigned. But now because the delivery of the Jews is to be
begun at the time of their coming up to their Land, and not completed till
forty five years after, therefore have we in Daniel, Chap. 12. two numbers laid
down, the one 1290 days, the other 1335. which carry us forty five years
farther than the other.

THESIS XV.
All the aforesaid Prophetical and Apocalyptical numbers may be divided into
two Ranks; those of the first Rank point us to the time of the Jews first
stirring, the rise of the Christian Witnesses, the end of the Beasts reign, and
treading under foot the Holy City. Those of the second, to the time of Christ's
second coming, the final destruction of the Beast, the full deliverance of the
Jews.

Here it is a thing most necessary, that we mind, and diligently observe this
distinction; for the not distinguishing betwixt the ending time of Antichrists
reign and Tyranny, and his final destruction, which is in the destruction of
the Fourth Monarchy; the beginning time of the Jews delivery, and their
complete deliverance; the standing up of Christ in his Witnesses, i.e. by a
more glorious manifestation of his power and presence, with, and among his
people, and his standing up in person, is a fundamental mistake in an enquiry
of this nature; yea, confounds and darkens the whole truth (in a manner) of
Daniel and the Revelations; and indeed is the very reason why some contend for
a Spiritual appearance of Christ only, viz. an appearance with his in a way of
power, and others contrariwise for a Personal; whereas in both there is a
glorious truth, and a set and an appointed time for both; only the first falls
so many years sooner, and so is nearer to us; the second so many later, and so
is farther off; and possibly this may be one reason, why good people at this
day harp so much upon the first, because it is nearest to them, and so most
upon their hearts. Now by observing this distinction, and carrying it with us
through the Prophets, either, and the time of either, will be clear.

Numbers of the first Rank.
THESIS XVI.
The Numbers that belong to the first Rank, are the 1290 days, the 1260. and
the forty two Months, the same with the 1260.

THESIS XVII.
The 1290 days, and the 1260 (alias forty two months) are both to end at one
and the same point; that is, the Jews delivery from their long Captivity, which
is the thing set forth by the 1290 days, is to begin at that point where the
Gentile Churches delivery from the tyranny of Antichrist, set forth by the
forty two month, the 1260 days is to end, and so consequently either number
concenter in their end, and terminate at the same point, which is clear.

1 Because the time, times, and a half, Dan. 12.7. Rev. 12.14. which ends at
the same point with the 1260. ends also at the same point with the 1290, as I
have proved at large in my foregoing Discourse, Chap. 2. Sect. 5.

2 Because our Savior, Luke 21.24. foretelling the time how long the Jews
Captivity should continue, and Jerusalem should be trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, tells us, that the same should be until the times of the Gentiles
should be fulfilled. And they shall fall by the edge of the Sword; and shall be
led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled; the meaning whereof is
not, that the Jewish Captivity should continue, until such time as the
Gentiles should cease to be Gods people any longer, for the stream of the
Prophets run against such a conjecture, they every where foretelling of a
wonderful access of Gentiles to the Lord, about the time of the Jews coming in,
from which day the Gentiles are not to be rejected, but Jew and Gentile
together to be the people of God. But the meaning I conceive to be this, until
the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, that is, until the time of the Gentiles
Captivity, and sufferings under Antichrist is at an end, so long shall the Jews
Captivity remain, but with the end of the one, shall the other also have end.
Now the Gentiles Captivity ending at the end of the forty two months, the 1260
days, which is the term of the Beasts Tyranny, and the Woman's being in the
Wilderness, therefore must the Jews also, and so consequently the 1260 days,
and the 1290. end together.

3 Because Daniel, chap. 9.26. telling us how long desolations are determined
upon the Jewish Nation, makes their desolations to end with the end of the War,
Unto the end of the War desolations are determined.

Quest. What War is this?

Answ. Doubtless the War he had spoken of before, chap. 7.21. viz. the War of
the little Horn against the Saints; I beheld, and the same Horn made War with
the Saints, and prevailed against them; the continuance of which War is but
until the end of the time, times, and a half, where the time of the little
Horns reign and Tyranny expires, verse. 25. He shall wear out the Saints of the
most High, and think to change times and Laws, and they shall be given into his
hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of time.

Now observe, with the end of this War the Jewish desolations end, and their
restoration begins; now this War ending with the end of the time, times, and a
half, and the end of the time, times, and a half, and the 1260 days being one
and the same, it necessarily follows, that the 1260 days, and the 1290 should
end together.

THESIS XVIII.
The point of time where either ends is in the year of our Lord, 1656.

THESIS XIX.
The true beginnings of either number do necessarily infer this to be the end.

THESIS XX.
The 1290 days are to be begun Anno Dom. 366, with that noted act of Julian, of
setting the Jews about reedifying the Temple, and furnishing them out of the
public Treasury with all necessaries for this work, when by a terrible Earth
quake all they built was thrown up, yea, the very foundation-stones of the
Temple, which never till that day were moved, thrown out of their places, and
by terrible Thunder and Lightning, and Fire falling from Heaven, all their
tools and instruments were burnt up. So that as Socrates (in his third Book,
cap. 20. according to the Greek, the 17. according to the Translation) says,
That there a man might have beheld Hammers, Graving-Irons, Saws, Axes,
Hatchets, etc. consumed with fire; which fire (says he) ceased not to burn the
space of a whole day, and the Jews themselves being amazed hereat, confessed
Christ to be the omnipotent God.

Yea farther (says the aforesaid Author) Cyril, then Bishop of Jerusalem when
they began the work, remembered this Prophecy of Daniel, and urging Christ's
words with it, Matthew. 24.2. did prophecy unto many, that now the time was come
that our Saviors words should be fulfilled, which he spoke of the Temple, that
not one stone should be left upon another. Thus much out of the very words of
Socrates, who wrote above 1200 years ago.

The truth of this act is also testified by many other ancient Writers; as

Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived in the very time of Julian, and was a Soldier
under him, lib. 23.

Theodoret (who wrote his Ecclesiastical History, Anno Dom. 430.) Lib. 3. cap.
17.

Sozomene (who was contemporary with Socrates) lib. 5. cap. 21, yea by most
Chronologers and Historians, both Ancient and Modern, that have written any
thing of this time.

Yea, which is also a thing very observable, and noted by Socrates, and most of
the aforesaid Authors, viz. That as wicked Julian did set the Jews upon
re-edifying the Temple, so did he also about the same time send his Legates to
offer Sacrifice in the chief Heathen Temple of the Gentiles in Delphos, and
there to consult with the Oracle of Apollo; and as God by Earthquake, Thunder
and Lightning did over-turn the one, so did he also in the same manner, and
about that very time, the other; thereby overwhelming at once both the chief
Temples, the one of the Jews he other of the Gentiles, putting an end to the
Jewish daily Sacrifice, and the Gentile Superstitions, at one and the same
time; and therefore no time may so fitly be called a time of Desolation, and
that because of abomination, as this.

Now the Reasons why we are to fix the Head of our Account upon this act,
rather than any other before it, or since it, are.

1 Because if we begin with any act before it, the time is expired, and the
Jews not yet delivered, experience therefore proves such beginnings false.

2 Because we may not begin lower for these Reasons;

First, Because if we begin lower, the 1290 days cannot be made concurrent in
their end with John's 1260. which for the foregoing grounds must be.

Secondly, Because Daniel being a Prophet of the Jews, and the things he
foretold having a more especial respect to that Nation, there cannot in any
History of any time since Christ be found an act so famous, and that with a
relation to that Nation, as was this act of Julians, with which therefore we
must begin, or none.

Thirdly, Because no beginning lower (that will agree to Daniels words) either
can be found, or is stated by any that ever yet I have met with; and it is a
thing that I have much observed, how that all those, who because the time is
near, and so little likelihood of any such thing appears as yet, have not faith
enough to believe this beginning, have also not light enough to make out
another, but are silent, laying down no Head to begin this account upon, which
yet the Holy Ghost has marked out, by as eminent and noted Characters, to show
us where we are to begin it, as any account in all the Scripture, verse. 11.
From the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination
that makes desolate set up, shall be 1290 days.

And these Characters do most exactly agree to the act of Julian, as I have
proved in my first part, page 52, 53. and indeed are not so fitly appliable to
any act that ever was before or since it; I judge my self therefore to have
much reason still to hold to that opinion, I then more doubtfully laid down,
viz. That we are with Julians act of setting the Jews about re-edifying of the
Temple, to begin the 1290 days.

The reason why I pitch upon the year three hundred sixty fix, to be the year
in which this was done (when as there is amongst Historians three or four years
variance in stating the year) is not this only, because Historians of best
account report this to be the year, and Authors of no little esteem adhere
rather to this report than any of the other; but my reason is, because the one
thousand three hundred thirty five days, verse. 12. (whose Head is the same with
the one thousand two hundred and ninety) cannot be made, as they must (as shall
straightway appear) concurrent in their end with the two thousand three
hundred days, in case we fix this act of Julian upon any other year than the
aforesaid year three hundred sixty six; that therefore I conclude (as formerly)
to be the year; To three hundred sixty six, add one thousand two hundred and
ninety, the whole is one thousand six hundred fitly six.

THESIS XXI.
The 1260 days are to be begun, A.D. 396. for to that year are the Characters,
the Scripture gives us both of the time in which the Beast was to rise, and the
Characters of the Beast himself, most fitly appliable.

THESIS XXII.
Two clear Characters we have laid down by the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2. of the
time in which the man of sin was to be midwifed into the world.

First, In the time of the Churches first most eminent Apostasy from Primitive
purity. This we have, verse. 3. That day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of perdition; as
if he had said, the revelation of the man of sin, i.e the bringing him forth
into the world, is then to be expected, when you shall see some eminent falling
away; for he thrusts himself forth into the world, in, or with this falling
away. Now this defection though it began and was in part more early, because
the mystery of iniquity did work and endeavor to thrust it self in, even from
the Apostles days, as ver. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work;
yet did it not become eminent, so as that corruption began to have the Major
Vote in Councils, and to be confirmed by their Decrees, till in and near about
this year. What Canons that never passed Councils before the second Council of
Carthage, and other Council sin and about this year did produce, I shall show
presently.

Secondly, The rise of the Antichristian Beast is there to be placed, where the
ancient Roman Empire (which is that the Apostle tells us did then withold and
let) began to fall to decay, and to be taken away, Verse. 6, 7, 8. And now ye
know what withholds, that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery
of iniquity does already work; only he who now lets will let until he be
taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked be revealed -- But this was
A.D. 396 for the Emperor Theodosius dying A.D. 395. as says Helvicus in
Theatro Historico, Alsted. in Chronologia Monarch. Romans the Empire was
thereupon divided betwixt Arcadius and Honorius, his two Sons; so that the year
396. was the very first year of the division of the Roman Empire. Now division
being the beginning of ruin, we may say there began the ruin of the Roman
Empire, where it began so to be divided as never to be united more. Hence Dan.
Pareus calls this the consummate Division, which did so distract the Empire now
broken into two, as that it never afterward became united under one Emperor
again. Par. in Medulla Historiae profanae.

About this very time also, by the general consent of Historians, did the Goths
and Vandals invade the Empire, in such sort, as that, A.D. 410. Alaricus King
of the Goths takes Rome it self. Alsted. in Chronologia Regnorum Veterum,
Helvicus in Theat. Hist. Ross in his Chronology at the end of his Worlds
History. And so mightily was the Roman Empire weakened by the former division,
and this invasion falling out together, that Rome never recovered its former
strength and beauty since.

THESIS XXIII.
The Characters of the Beast himself do also agree most punctually to this time
of any: Or take it thus, Those very things which gave breath and being (as I
may so say) to the man of sin, came forth in, or near about this very year, as,

1 Idolatry, in worshipping Images, the Virgin Mary, Saints, the Relics of
Saints, etc. is the principal Character of the Beast. All these things had
beginning near about, if not in this very year, as may be seen at large in
Wolfius his Centinaries, Cent. 4. in treating upon the particular year 396.

2 Prohibition of Marriage, this the Apostle makes an express badge of
Antichrist, 1 Timothy 4.3. Forbidding to marry. This began about this very time.
The second Council of Carthage was the first Council that ever made it a Law
that Ministers should not marry, as may be seen in Alsted. in Chronol.
Conciliorum, Simson, History of the Church, lib. 4. Cent. 4. This Council was
held (says Helvicus) in the very year 396.

Also in the first Council held at Toledo in Spain, a little after, viz. A. D.
400. (as says Helvieus) was the same Decree confirmed, as may be seen in
Ecclesiastial Chronology at the end of the Tirpartite History. Yea (which was
worse) in this Council was not only prohibition of Marriage, but allowance given
therewithal to have Concubines. Simson Hist. of the Church, lib. 4. Cent. 5.

Siricius who was made Bishop of Rome, A.D. 385. and so continued until the
year 398. (as says Alsted. in Chronologia Paparum. Helvicus in Theatro
Historico, Joan. Wolfius Cent. 4. Prideaux in his Introduction to the reading
of Ecclesiastical History, p. 78.) was the first (as the aforesaid Authors,
with many others, affirm) that imposed single life upon the Clergy. Yea this
rage of Siricius was such (as says Melancthon upon Carrion, lib. 3.) as that he
removed from their office all such as being unmaried did marry; forbad such as
were married to company with their wives, and in case of disobedience, removed
them from their places and functions; and in an unsavory manner cites that of
Paul, in his Decree, They that are in the flesh cannot please God.

3 Exalting himself above the Civil Magistrate. This is another badge of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God. -- This began presently after this time, for Pope Innocent the
first, who was made Pope A.D. 402. says Alstede, 403. says Helvicus, did so
take upon him, as to excomunicate the Emperor Arcadius (though Emperor not of
Rome, but Constantinople, another place) as says Dan. Pareus in Medulla Hist.
Eccles. universali. Yea at the same time together with the Emperor he
excommunicated the Eastern Churches also, as faith Ross, History of the world,
lib. 3. cap. 3.

4 Humane Traditions is another badge of Antichrist. These began about this
very time. Ross in his Chronology, at the end of his History of the World
says, That betwixt the years 390. and 400. It was first Ordained that the
Gospel should be heard standing, also Canonical hours for prayer were first
instituted; Also that the third Council of Carthage which was held within this
time ( viz. A.D. 398. says Alsted.) ordained that the Eucharist should be
received fasting. My Author pitcheth upon no particular year, but affirms all
these things to have their first rise within this Decad.

The same Author also presently after says, That about the year 400. began
first the rights of Patronages in the Council of Mela. Joan. Wolfius in his
Centenaries, Cent. 4. upon the year 393. says, About this time began
Traditions, Monkish life, etc. Alstede says, That A.D. 398. the Order of
Regular Priests was first instituted. In Chronologia Ordinum inter Monachos.
This is also testified by Wolfius, who treats more largely of the thing, Cent.
4.

5 Abstinence from meats is another badge of Antichrist. 1 Timothy 4.3. --
commanding to abstain from meats. Socrates who wrote the Ecclesiastical History
of the Church, from Constantines time until the time of Theodosius junior,
discoursing in his fifth Book of the state the Church was in, the year before,
or this very year 396. tells us, of the great strise that was made by some at
this time about Holy Days; what diverse sorts of Fasts were now instituted and
kept; and what Laws were laid upon men, and men laid upon themselves, about
meats, some refusing all living Creatures, some feeding upon Fish only, etc.
which things the aforesaid Author zealously disclames against, calling them
Jewish Rites, and the Assertors of them favorers of Jewish Customs, and
proves these things to be contrary to Scripture, quoting many Texts out of
Paul to that end.

THESIS XXIV.
The foregoing Characters, although they do as well, yea better (take them in
the general) agree to the year 396. then any other year, yet do they not all
jump with that particular year; the reason is, because the coming forth of the
Beast was by degrees, not all at once, for then the knowledge of the time of
his rise would have been no Mystery; Its necessary therefore that some other
reason be given, why I fix on this year rather than any other within the Decad.

THESIS XXV.
The most substantial reason that can be given hereof, is, The Head of the 1260
days must so be placed, as that the 1260 may concur in their end with the
1290. Now the 1290 beginning from Julian A.D. 366, the 1260 (which has in it
thirty years less) to the end either may terminate at the same point, must
necessarily have its Head fixed thirty years lower, viz. with the year 396, the
year I have before stated.

THESIS XXVI.
Here I cannot but observe a very signal hand of Providence in fixing such a
Standard as this is, to give us light into this great Mystery, where we are to
begin the time of the Beast; for the Beast coming forth by degrees, it is a
thing most difficult from bare Histories only, to fix upon any particular
year, within the number of many, so as thence positively to conclude, here, and
no where else are we topitch our Standard: But now Julians act being a more
particular thing, and restrained to a particular time, the very time of that
may be found. This found, our Standard is fixed already, it is now but coming
thirty years lower, and we have the rise of the Beast.

THESIS XXVII.
The thing I am speaking of affords us a notable confirmation of the truth of
either beginning; for they must be so placed as that both Numbers may end
together: by consequence therefore the heads of either Number must be set at
thirty years distance from each other; and in this distance too, the head of
the 1290 must be by so many years the higher, and the head of the one thousand
two hundred and sixty the lower, or else they cannot end together. Now is it
not a thing very observable, that two things so remarkable, and made famous by
so many Histories, the one a thing so like the setting up of the Abomination of
Desolation, that no particular act recorded in any History former or latter,
does more patly agree to Daniels words than this of Julian does: The other a
thing so like the rise of the Beast, that we cannot, should we search Histories
over and over, find a time, which in all things will afford us more proper
Characters than this does, should fall out at thirty years distance each from
other? And also which is very observable in this distance too, that that which
looks most like the 1290 days, the greater number by thirty years, should be
the highest, and that which looks most like the 1260 the lowest? Certainly this
Harmony is not a thing accidental, but so ordered by the All-wise Disposer of
times and seasons, who through all the actions of the sons of men carries on
his own Designs, and performs his own eternal Will.

If either of these beginnings be disallowed by any, let it by them be
considered where they will find Heads, if not here, to begin these two Numbers
upon, so as that the Harmony may not be broken, but either made from such
beginnings as they shall state, to Terminate at the same point.

Now compute the years from either beginning, as we have before stated them,
and the concluding time of each number will be A.D. 1656.

THESIS XXVIII.
The neerness of the time to the fulfilling of these things, is no more an
impediment to our believing and looking for them at this day, then it would be
to the people of God at any other time, supposing them to live as near the time
as we.

Nay, what if I say, Our faith may hence take encouragement the rather to
believe these things, and expect them; seeing Gods ordinary way with his people
in former ages has been, whenever he has had any special deliverance to
work for them, to conceal the time of it from his people, till the work was
ripe, and now ready to be put in execution. To give instance in two only, both
famous Types of the Deliverance I am now treating of.

First, Isreal's deliverance from Egypt. Moses is sent of God to do the work
before any of them dream of deliverance, or once think, that the four hundred
and thirty years were so near run out, as indeed they were.

Secondly, The deliverance from Babylon. Holy Daniel, although he was the only
man of that age that knew the times and seasons, yet does not he know the
deliverance of Gods people to be so nigh, as indeed it was, until (as I may
say) the very day before their deliverance, or until that very year was come
in which they were delivered, D^niel 9.1, 2. compared with Ezra 1.1, 2, 3, etc.

THESIS XXIX.
The great unlikelihood in an eye of reason of bringing such great and
wonderful things about, within so short a time, to which as yet we see so
little visible preparation, may well be a block in the way of carnal reason;
but why should it be so to Faith? Seeing God has assured us again, again, and
again, Rev. 18. that from that time wherein the proud Whore shall be glorying,
boasting, triumphing, conceiting her self far enough from danger, it shall be
but an hour ( i. e. a very little time) to Gods passing judgment upon her, in
the overthrow and ruin of Rome, the glory of her Kingdom.

THESIS XXX.
The sentence of death, that is, upon this work at present, is matter of
encouragement to faith, no matter of discouragement; seeing that from what I
have laid down in many places of my foregoing Discourse, it is a thing
manifestly clear, that a very black cloud (to the end the work may come forth
upon the sudden from under it with the greater glory and brightness) is to come
upon the work and cause of Christ among the Gentiles, at the very ending time
of the 42 Months, the 1260 days; as a like dismal cloud is to befall the Jews,
and Gods work among them, at the very ending time of the 2300, the 1335 days.
If no such cloud did begin to appear, there would be cause of questioning our
former principles, but that it does, is a confirmation of them.

THESIS XXXI.
The fixedness of the time, and certainty of the thing when the time is
expired, is no more an Argument for us at this day to sit still and do nothing
in order to the effecting these glorious things, than it would be to say in
another case, did I know the time of a mercy, I may now sit still, be idle,
sleep, do what I will, for I cannot have my mercy before, and I shall have it
at such a time.

THESIS XXXII.
The end of the 1290 days, the 1260, the 42 months, being so near,

1 Hence the several Discourses and hints laid down in our first Part, our
second, and third, tending to persuade, That the day of the resurrection of the
dry bones, or the Jews stirring, is near, are confirmed, and made good.

2 Hence, what I have written, Vial 5. p. 52. appears to be a truth, viz. That
the suffering of the Gentile Churches will shortly be at an end; for the 42
Months of the Beasts tyranny, and treading underfoot the holy City, the 1260
Days of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, the Woman's being in the
Wilderness, will shortly expire. Now the Beasts Tyranny and treading under foot
the holy City, the Woman's being in the Wilderness, the Witnesses wearing
sackcloth, being the original cause of all the sufferings of the Gentile
Churches, their sufferings shall therefore end with the end of these; for the
Beasts limited time being once cut, he shall have no new Lease of time to
persecute the Woman, tread the holy City underfoot; the Woman once out of the
Wilderness shall not return thither again, the Witnesses having once put off
their sackcloth shall not put it on again.

3 Hence that which I have said Chap. 1. Sect. 5. viz. That the Witnesses do in
all likelihood at this present day lie dead, appears a truth, for their killing
is to be (as I have proved Chap. 1 sect. 4.) in the last three years and a half
of the 1260; and according to this our computation there are not at the utmost
above three years of the 1260 to expire.

4 Hence, the glorious Rendezvous of the 144000 (of which our third Chapter
treats) cannot be full three years off: for that is to be some little time
before the complete expiration of the 1260 days. Thus much as touching the
Numbers of the first Rank.

Numbers of the Second Rank.
THESIS XXXIII.
The Numbers of the Second Rank are, the 2300 days, the 1335.

THESIS XXXIV.
The 2300 days, and the 1335 days, are likewise both to end at one and the
same point. Which is clear.

1 Because the Prophecy of the eighth Chapter, which lays us down the first
number, and the Prophecy of the 11 and 12 Chapters, which gives us the second,
are one and the same, the subject matter of either, being the three last
Monarchies, viz. Medes and Persians, Grecians, Romans; and also either Prophecy
terminates at one and the same point, viz. the final destruction of the Fourth
and last Monarchy; which thing needs no farther proof, save only diligently to
compare the one with the other; therefore the 2300 days, which bring us to the
shutting up of the one Prophecy, and the 1335, which bring us to the shutting
up of the other, must of necessity end at one and the same point.

2 Because as the 1335 days bring us to that time in which Daniel was to stand
in his Lot, i. e. to rise again, chap. 12.13. But go thou thy way till the end
be, for thou shall rest, and stand up in thy lot (as our old translation reads
it) at the end of the days ( i.e. at the end of the 1335 days mentioned in the
foregoing Verse, Daniel should rise) So the 2300 days brings us to the last end
of indignation, Chapter 8.19. Behold I will make thee know what shall be in the
last end of indignation. And what is this last end of indignation, but only the
last Vial of Gods wrath? Rev. 16. the pouring out of which is at the time of
Christ's coming, and the Resurrection, as I have elsewhere proved at large.
Therefore the 2300 days, and the 1335. do, yea, must terminate at one and the
same point.

3 Because the Personal appearance of Christ, is the concluding point of both.
The last King, Chap. 8.25. (or the fourth Monarchy) comes to his final end by
standing up against the Prince of Princes, i. e. Christ. Now this standing up,
is not a standing up against Christ in his Members, for that he did it before,
verse. 24. He shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practice, and
shall destroy the mighty, and the holy people. But this standing up is brought
in with an also, he shall also stand up against the Prince of Princes, as
noting it to be another, and a distinct standing up from the former; that was
against Christ and his members only; but this standing up shall be a higher
act of boldness, and wickedness in him, viz. a standing up against Christ
himself in person, who now appears as the Prince of Princes (the very name
written on his vesture, and thigh, at the day of his personal appearance to
destroy the Beast, Rev. 19.16. King of Kings, and Lord of Lord,) to vindicate
the cause of his people; against him shall the power of this fourth Monarchy
stand up, and by him, without the help of any Creature, shall it be destroyed,
therefore said in the following words, to be broken without hand, i.e. without
man's hand, by Christ alone, agreeing to other places, which speak of the same
time, Isa. 63.3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there
was none with me, Chap. 66.16. The slain of the Lord shall be many, Rev. 19.21.
the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat on the Horse, with many
others.

The final destruction also of that proud King spoken of, chap. 11. viz. the
fourth Monarchy, is by the personal appearance of Christ, as compare chap. 11.
ult. He shall come to his end, and none shall help him, with chap. 12.1, And at
that time shall Michael (or Christ) stand up.

So that the utmost point of either Prophecy, or the concluding act of that
long Tragedy, which we have, First, Rehearsed in brief, chap. 8. Secondly, More
fully declared, in that last, and great Prophecy, chapters 10, 11, 12. is the
standing up of Michael, therefore the 2300 days, which bring us to the end of
the first, and the 1335, which bring us to the end of the second, must both
expire at one and the same point, viz. with Christ's personal appearance.

THESIS XXXV.
The point of time at which either ends, is A.D. 1701.

THESIS XXXVI.
The true beginnings of either number do necessarily infer this year to be the
end.

THESIS XXXVII.
The 1335 days are to be begun at the same Head, with the 1290; therefore but
one Head of account is laid down to both, which is the taking away of the daily
Sacrifice, and setting up that abomination that makes desolate, verse. 11.
Only it is to be extended so many years farther, as there are more days in the
1335. then we have in the 1290, which is 45 years; now 45 years being added to
the year 1656, where (as has been proved) ends the 1290, the 1335 will expire
with the aforesaid year 1701.

THESIS XXXVIII.
The 2300 days are to be begun with the beginning of the Persian Monarchy,
namely, with the first year of Cyrus. The reason is, because, the eighth
Chapter of Daniel is (as I have said) a Prophecy of the three last Monarchies
only, viz. Medes and Persians, Grecians, Romans, therefore may we not go
upward into the Babylonish Monarchy for a beginning, because in so doing we
exceed the bounds and limits of the Prophecy, but we are to begin with the
first year of Cyrus, with which year begins the Prophecy it self.

THESIS XXXIX.
That the Heads of either number, (which yet both end at one and the same
point) are so stated, as that the greater begins with the beginning of the
Persian Monarchy, and so with the Head of the Vision it self, running down
quite through it; the lesser not till near a 1000 years after, about the midst
of the Vision, a little before the coming forth of the Beast; is no less than
the most glorious result of the wonderful wisdom of the All-wise disposer of
all things, who for diverse reasons has thought good so to order it.

1 That hereby the Mysteries of these two Prophecies, yea, all Daniels
Prophecies, might be the greater; for observe, there being not above three
years betwixt either Vision, Daniel having the first of these two, in the third
of Belshazzar, chap. 8.1. which year was the last of the Babylonian Monarchy;
his second, in the third of Cyrus, chap. 10.1. the third year of the Persian,
had both been to be begun from the time of the Visions, then would the number
of days in either, have been equal to about three days, which little time
too, the Text has clearly determined to pass betwixt Vision and Vision; and if
so, this one thing alone would have been so great a Standard of light into both
these Prophecies; yea, all the Prophecies of Daniel (his 70 weeks excepted) all
the rest having dependence on these, as could no way stand with the design of
the Holy Ghost, which was to have the Book sealed up, until the time of the
end; for, hence it would have been obvious, and evident to every eye,

1 That either Prophecy were the same, and had one and the same beginning, and
ending.

2 That the thing spoken of the little horn, chap. 8. and of the vile person,
chap. 11. were not to be applied to the time of Antiochus rage, (which very
opinion has been a cloud upon the Prophecies of Daniel for a long time) for as
Mr. Parker, in his Daniels Prophecies expounded, page 37. has well proved, the
2300 days are no way appliable to the time of Antiochus persecutions.

3 That all Daniels Visions, and Prophecies, viz. That of the great Image,
chap. 2. That of the four Beasts, and the little Horn, chap. 7. together with
these, chap. 8, and chap. 10, 11, 12. do terminate at one and the same point;
and this point to be no other but the end of the 2300, the 1335 days; for if
these two be the same, and terminate at one point, then by a parallel of
reason, the other two also, viz. that of the great Image, and that of the four
Beasts, for either of those conclude with work of a like nature, and glory of a
like kind with these. And if so, then is that other clouding opinion which
darkens all Daniels Prophecies at this day, viz. That the little Horn, chap. 7.
is to be understood either of the whole Norman Race here in England from
William the Conqueror, the first of that Race, as some conceive; or of the late
King Charles only, the last of that Race, as others, shaken off; for that Race
has been extirpated root and branch these five years already, whereas to the
end of the 2300 days, the 1335, it is near 50 years yet to come; and therefore
we must of necessity (unless we deny, that which from the scope of each
Prophecy is so clear, as that it is undeniable, viz, that Daniels Prophecies
have but one and the same end) conclude, that either the little Horn, Chap. 7.
is no such thing, as many now adays suppose; or affirm, that the final
destruction of this little Horn is come upon him upwards of fifty years, before
the determined time. Now this one beam of light followed being such, as that it
discovers most of those by-ways that men have gone in, and thereby darkened the
truth of Daniel, it could not, I say, stand with Gods design of sealing this
Book, to make Revelation of so great and clear light, as would have come in,
had the heads of each number been placed with the time of each Vision.

2 Reason. Because hereby the latter Prophecy which is the clearer, and
intended by the Lord as a farther, and more particular light into those things,
that in the general had been revealed before; should have been as dark as the
other, in regard of making up any account of time, had the same began (as the
other) from the time of the Vision, for what is it that makes the 2300 days to
be so hard to compute, but this, the ground we go upon to make up a right
supputation of the years from the beginning of the Persian Monarchy until
Christ, is more dark, perplexed, and uncertain; and therefore to find the vein
of truth here, is a thing more hard; but now the 1335 days being begun (as
before) with Julian, the very beginning it self is below all the most difficult
knots, and therefore the computation made thence more easy.

Hence many have found the vein of truth, that runs from the Head of the 1335;
but the vein of truth that runs from the Head of the 2300, I may truly and
modestly say, has not yet been found. And indeed, therefore God left that more
clear, this more dark, because the way of God, is to give his people first a
little light, afterward more; and also, because that in the revelation of this
light, that, after discovery might appear to be the greater light, which before
discovery, was the thing most dark, and obscure.

3 Reason. The Head of the 1335 is placed as it is, because God in laying down
that, had a special design at another thing, viz. To set up a light, to show us
thereby the rising Beast, (as I observed before) and therefore it was most
necessary it should not be counted from the time of the Vision, for then it
could no way have served such an end; but rather should be fixed as it is.
Which fixation is such, and so wonderful, that deny it, and no other fixation
can be, which will, first make the 1290 days end with the 1260. And secondly,
the 1335, with the 2300; both which must be for our foregoing reasons, and by
virtue of this fixation both are exactly performed, as in part we have seen
already, and shall fully streightway; And the number it self also, has as
famous a Head for it self, as any one number in Scripture. What admirable
wisdom therefore is there in appointing, and disposing these heads as they are,
viz. That the 2300 days should begin where it does, and the 1335 where it does?

And indeed, were not the placing of the Head of the 1335 designed in the
wonderful wisdom of God, to be a Torch to give light to the time of the rise of
the Beast, we should have no Scripture ground, but the bare report of History
(which leaves it so dubious as to many years, that we cannot, were we left to
it alone, know certainly which to choose) to build upon for the time of the
Beasts rise, and so consequently of his ruin, though yet this is the great
thing, and (as it were) the very hinge of all the principal Apocalyptical
Visions.

THESIS XL.
The 2300 days, as they end at the same point with the 1335, so also they
determine the duration of all the three last Monarchies; for they begin with
the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, and end with the end of the Roman. This
being therefore a divine determination, the voices of all humane Historians
must here be laid aside, and the reports of those only, how many or few soever,
be acknowledged to be truth, whose reports laid together, will bring the 2300
days, and the 1335 to end at the same point, and also give to the three last
Monarchies, neither more nor less of years than 1300, which is the number of
the years determined upon them.

THESIS XLI.
The calculation of this great number cannot be performed together, but must be
done by parts, or by dividing it into several periods.

THESIS XLII.
The first part or period contains the number of years from the first of Cyrus,
to the 20. of that Artaxerxes, whom the Greeks call Artaxerxes Mnemon, with
which year we are to begin Daniels 70 weeks, or 490 years, Chap. 9.24.

THESIS XLIII.
That Daniels 70 weeks are to be begun from the 20 of Mnemon, is clear from the
Head of account, that we have laid down in the Text, verse. 25. Know therefore
and understand, that the going forth of the Commandment, to restore, and to
build Jerusalem, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks unto the
Messiah, the Prince, i.e. 69 weeks of the 70, the other week we have, ver. 27.
he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week, which added to the 69
makes up the 70 complete.

Now observe, the Head we are to begin upon, is a command expressly for the
building of Jerusalem, but neither Cyrus command, nor any command before this,
had relation to the building of Jerusalem, for they concerned the Temple only,
as the plain words of Cyrus Decree, Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. do show: and again, chap.
6.3, 4, 5. the copy of it, which was kept in the Court Rolls, and found many
years after, had not a word in it that concerned Jerusalem, but the Temple
only, nor had any following Decree until the 20 of Artaxerxes, so much as a
tittle in it that concerned the building of Jerusalem, but all still had
reference to the building and beautifying of the Temple. But now the Decree of
Artaxerxes Mnemon, granted to Nehemiah in the 20 year of his Reign, did
particularly concern the building of Jerusalem, and indeed nothing else, Nehem.
1.3, 4. compare with chap. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses.

THESIS XLIV.
The Objections from Ezr. 4.12, 13, Isa. 44.28. which at the first view seem to
have in them weight against the thing I am speaking of, may with ease and
clearness be answered; But I shall transmit the answer to a more full discourse.

THESIS XLV.
The number of years betwixt Cyrus first, and the 20 of Artaxerxes Mnemon,
according to the account of the ancient Greeks, who wrote the State, and
affairs of the Persian Monarchy, are computable 147, which they reckon thus,

Cyrus -- 30, whereof we are to account upon but -- 3

Cambyses with the Magi -- 8

Darius Histaspes -- 36

Xerxes -- 21

Artaxerxes Longimanus -- 40

Darius Nothus -- 19

Artaxerxes Mnemon -- 43, of which we are to account upon but -- 20

THESIS XLVI.
This to be the account of the ancient Greeks, is testified by Sir Walter
Rawleigh, History of the World Lib. 3. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. Carrion in his Book of
the four Monarchies, in treating upon the second Monarchy, Simpson Chronic.
Catholic. pars quarta, p. 179. Only Carrion in his report differs from the
other one year (which falls within the number of those we are to account upon)
which is, he gives to Xerxes but 20 years, whereas the other give him 21.

THESIS XLVII.
This account is followed by the best Chronologers, namely, Alsted. in
Chronologia Monarchiae Persarum, Helvicus, in Theater Historico, Sims. Chron.
Cath. Sir Walter Rawleigh in his History of the World; who all of them with the
limitation laid down in the next, conclude upon the very same number of 147.
years.

THESIS XLVIII.
The Greek Historians not accounting the first year of Cyrus, from the time of
his taking Babylon, which they only reckon amongst his noble explo^ts, but
from the time he began to Reign in Persia, do give to Cyrus 30 years, whereas
we are to give him but three only, because the Scripture account is from his
taking of Babylon, after which but three years are to be allowed to him, as is
excellently observed, by the worthy Doctor Lightfoot, in his Harmony of the Old
Testament, upon Ezra 4. page 190. this consideration allowing to Cyrus but
three years only, makes the number of years, as they are laid down by the
Greeks, neither more nor less than 147, as will appear to him that shall count
them up. An^ by this also, all that seeming difference that is between
Chronologers is taken away, the ground of it lying here, some give to Cyrus
more years after his taking of Babylon, some less.

THESIS XLIX.
That so many years as 147 did pass betwixt Cyrus first and Artaxerxes
twentyeth, there seems to be conj^ctural ground for it in Scripture, because
from the time of Je^hua who was High Priest, and contemporary with Zerub^abel,
both coming out of Babylon in that very year the Scripture calls Cyrus first,
Ezra 2.2. Chap. 3.2. until the ^^me of Nehemiah are reckoned three Generations;
for in Nehemiahs time Eliashib was High Priest, N^hem 31. verse. 20, 21. Now
Eliashib was Grandchild to Jeshua, as appears, Nehem. 12.10. And Jeshua begat
Jojakim, Jejakim also begat Eliashib; And further consider, that Joshua the
Grandfather did live to a very great age, for he lived till the work of the
second Temple was set on foot the second time by Darius, Ezra 5.1, 2. and in
all likelihood till it was finished, (which as is easy to be made appear) was
many years after the coming out of Babylon; and also Eliashib the Grandchild at
the time of Ezraes coming up to Jerusalem, which was in the seventh of
Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.7. and so thirteen years before Nehemiahs, was so aged, as
that he had a Son a Priest, Ezra 10.6. which according to the Law none might be
till they were thirty years of age, so that here was the fourth Generation come
to maturity. The whole laid together, it will appear no absurd conclusion to
say, that as many years as 147 did pass, betwixt Cyrus first, and Artaxerxes
twentieth.

THESIS L.
The Grounds of some late Writers who have cut this time much shorter, the
strength of all which lies in these Texts, Ezra 7.1, 2. etc. Ezra 2.2. compared
with Neh. 13.6 and Zecharies seventy years, chap. 1.12. chap. 7.5. will no way
annoy our opinion, but be indeed found themselves too weak, and to have
manifest flaws in their foundations, and that upon a Scripture and rational
account, when they shall be thoroughly weighed, but the doing hereof requiring
more room than here is fit to allow it, I must transmit this also to my more
full discourse.

THESIS LI.
If yet it should be a Question, Whether Artaxerxes Mnemon were that
Artaxerxes, in the 20 of whose reign, Nehemiah had commission to build
Jerusalem; it is answered, that considering the long time Nehemiah's Artaxerxes
reigned, two and thirty years of his reign being mentioned, Nehem. 13.6. and
also considering that this Artaxerxes lived near the expiration of the Persian
Monarchy; for Nehemiah in his book makes mention of Jaddua who wa High Priest
(as Josephus testifies) when Alexander the Great came to Jerusalem, and also of
Darius, the last from whom Alexander did take the Persian Monarchy, Nehem.
12.22. it will appear, that the story of Nehemiah, is not appliable to any of
the Persian Monarchs, but Artaxerxes Mnemon.

THESIS LII.
Our second part or period runs upon Daniels seventy weeks, which are a divine
Chronology from the time of Nehemiah, where the Old Testament leaves us, until
the time of Christ's passion.

THESIS LIII.
It is a strange and wonderful forcing of the Text, and a palpable
misapplication of this Prophecy, to apply it (as do some) to the times of the
New Testament, which opinion leaves us destitute of any ground, save only the
reports of humane Historians, to build upon, as touching the years of the
world, for upwards of four hundred years together; and that too, in a time
wherein the voice of Historians is least to be regarded, viz. through all the
Grecian Monarchy which I may call the age of the worlds confusion, it being in
a manner torn to pieces by Alexanders Captains after his death; so that it was
most hard to know, whilst every one was catching the Crown, who Reigned, or how
long; And therefore as it is no breach of charity to question the truth of
Historians reports as to this time; so is it to be esteemed a special token of
Gods love to his Church, and care of his people in all Ages, that he should
leave his a divine Chronology, to lead them through that dark and shady
Wilderness, where most Travelers have lost their way, until they come again
into the open field, i.e. to the light of Scripture, and more certain
Chronology.

THESIS LIVE.
These seventy weeks reduced into days, and these days into years, make up the
sum of four hundred and ninety years.

THESIS LV.
We are not to extend these seventy weeks beyond the passion of Christ, that
opinion being contrary to the express characters of the 24 verse, which
characters are therefore laid down to give us light, how far the 70 weeks are
to be extended.

THESIS LVI.
Those expressions of the people of the Prince that shall come destroying the
City and Sanctuary, verse. 26. and the making desolate until the consummation,
ver. 27. are not to be comprehended within the 70 weeks, though they are
comprehended within those four verses, which lay us down the Prophecy of the 70
weeks.

THESIS LVII.
Four years of the 490 are in our account to be deducted, the reason is because
Christ's death, or the cutting off of the Messiah, was not at the end, but in
the midst of the 70 or last week; for in the beginning of the 70 week Christ is
anointed, therefore this is one Character of the 70 week, verse. 24. Seventy
weeks are determined to anoint the most holy. Christ being anointed goes forth
preaching, and submitting to the Law about half of the week, and then is cut
off, and therefore it is said, verse. 27. He shall confirm the Covenant with
many for one week, and in the midst of the week ( i e. of that one week, which
is the 70 and last) he shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease; that
is, Christ the Messiah being baptized at the very beginning of the 70 week,
went about preaching and performing active obedience to the Law part of that
week, and then about the midst of that week (which words (I take it) are
therefore added, lest otherwise we should think his Death to be not till the
very end of the 70 or last week) he is put to death, by which death of his, he
causes the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, that is, puts an end to the Jewish
worship, which lay in Sacrifices, and Oblations; and hence likewise it is said
verse. 26. after 62 weeks, that is, 62 added to the other seven spoken of, verse.
25. which make 69, shall the Messiah be cut off, and not after 70 weeks shall
the Messiah be cut off, because indeed Christ's sufferings came before the 70
week was fully and completely expired. These four deducted, there remains to be
accounted upon, only 486 years, which passed from the 20 of Artaxerxes Mnemon,
until Christ's Passion.

THESIS LVIII.
Our third part or period comprehends the number of years from the year of
Christ's Passion, until the end of the year 1655, or (which is all one) the
beginning of that noted year 1656.

THESIS LIX.
Within this Period we are to account upon 1622 years, thus, Christ was thirty
years old when he began to preach, Luke 3.23. from the time he began to preach
until his Passion, the common opinion holds three years and a half, but we are
to account three years only, as is clear from Christ's own words, Luke 13.32. Go
ye, and tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and I do cures to day, and to
morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected, verse. 33. Nevertheless I must
walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following; Showing us, that Christ in
preaching spent three full years, and yet but three; for as he is baptized at
the very beginning of the seventieth week, i.e. at the beginning of the first
day, or year of that week, so he is perfected at the end of the third day of
that week, or the third year from the time he began to preach. Christ then at
the day of his Passion was three and thirty years old, which three and thirty
years, because our common account begins from the year of Christ's Nativity, we
are to deduct; these deducted of 1655, there remains only 1622, which we are to
account upon.

THESIS LX.
Let us now reckon up the three last periods that we have gone through, and
see what number of years of the 2300 we have already gained, those yet behind,
will fall in of themselves.

The first period from the first of Cyrus to the twentieth of Artaxerxes
Mnemon, contains 147 years.

The second, from thence to Christ's Passion, 486 years.

Both together makes up 633

The third period from Christ's Passion to the year 1656, contains 1622

The total Sum is, 2255

It follows then that with the beginning of the year 1656, there are 2255 of
Daniels 2300 years expired; the remaining years are only 45, which will expire,
A.D. 1701, the very year in which Daniels 1335 days does also expire.

THESIS LXI.
The 2300 days of Daniel are the best and surest Chronology of the Number of
the worlds years that have passed, since the first of Cyrus, or the beginning
of the Persian Monarchy, until this present day.

THESIS LXII.
The 2300 years ending (according to our former Computation) at the same point
with the 1335, is a good Argument to prove that our course by a good hand of
Providence has been steered aright, both as to the beginning of either number,
and also the carrying on of this great number, for should we seek after any
other beginning of the 1335 days, then what we have before stated, the 1335
days could never be brought to end with the 2300. Or, in case the head of the
2300 days, were to be placed either higher or lower, or the Computation to be
made otherwise than what has been laid down, then would not the 2300 days
concur in their end with the 1335. And such a Computation it is necessary
should be made, as may bring both these to end together.

THESIS LXIII.
The Harmony that is betwixt all those Mystical Numbers we have passed through,
is a thing very glorious and admirable to behold; for there is not any one of
them, but affords a beam of light to the other. The 1290 days affords a great
beam of light to the 1260, and contrariwise the 1260 to that again: The 1335
days affords a glorious beam of light to the 2300, and contrariwise, the 2300
to that again.

Finally, as the beginning of the 1260, proves our beginning of the 1335 to be
true, so our beginning of the 1335, proves the beginning of the 2300 to be
true. And contrariwise, as the beginning of the 2300 proves the beginning of
the 1335 to be true; so the beginning of the 1335, the beginning of the 1260 to
be true. So that (which is glorious to consider) the Mystical Numbers of Daniel
and the Revelations, though diverse, and having diverse beginnings, yet have
within themselves such an universal Harmony, that each one serves to inlighten
the other, and the other him again.

THESIS LXIV.
The final Conclusion is, That the rise of the Witnesses, the end of the Beasts
reign, and treading underfoot the Holy City, and the first stirring of the
Jews, will in greatest likelihood be in the year 1656, with which year ends the
1290 days, the 1260, the 42 months. The Personal coming of Christ, the final
destruction of the four Beasts, or Monarchy, and the complete deliverance of
the Jews, in the year 1701, with which year ends Daniels 2300 days, and his
1335.

Matthew. 24.48. But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming;

49. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with
the Drunken:

50. The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not aware of,

51. And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
Hypocrites, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

A Concluding Word.
WHen Daniel understood by Books the number of the years whereof the Lord had
said, He would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem, he set
himself to seek the Lord by fasting, weeping, and mourning.

When Moses understood the time of the delivery of Gods people out of Egypt to
be at hand, he not only strengthened his Brethren, but took courage, and went in
unto Pharaoh.

Though it is far from entering into my thoughts to compare my self with these,
yet is it my duty, and desire, to imitate them in their grace.

As to the first, my hearts desire, and prayer to the Father of mercies is,
That a Daniels praying Spirit might abound in my self, and all the people of
God at this day.

As for the second, my intents and purposes were to have closed up this
discovery, with a solemn Exhortation; First, To the Higher Powers of this
Commonwealth. Secondly, To all those who have fellowship with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, within it. But considering how poor and vain a thing
the words of the Creature are, and how little, where much is spoken, reaches
the heart, if the Holy Spirit apply it not, in my after thoughts I judged it
better to leave it to the Spirit of God to set home these truths, than to
undertake to do it my self; and therefore resting in these thoughts, I shall
only in a word or two deliver a Message, and I hope not my own.

First, To the Higher Powers, the Message is this, THIS PEOPLE SAY, THE TIME IS
NOT COME, the time that the Lords work should be carried on: Is it time for you
(O ye) to dwell in your cieled houses, and this work of Christ lie waste? Now
therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways; Yea, thus says
the Lord, Consider your ways: For if at this time you lay aside that work
wherein the cause and glory of our dear and blessed Redeemer is so nearly, and
immediately concerned, and attend to work of another nature, which
comparatively he calls you not to, he will assuredly, in sore displeasure, with
shame and contempt, lay you aside; ruin shall come to Babylon, salvation and
deliverance unto Mount Sion another way.

Secondly, To the people of God in this Commonwealth, the Message is this, That
although you are verily as unworthy a generation of Saints (considering how
formal the profession of some is, how loose the Principles of others, how
unlike Saints of old, yea Saints but of yesterday we are all) of this so great
Grace, now ready to be revealed, as ever the earth bore: Yet that the whole
world may see and know the exceeding riches of his grace, and that by the
sheddings abroad of his love (which is a way more suitable to Gospel
administrations) your overgrown corruptions may be rooted out, and the
breaches of Sion made up, and you made to remember your own evil ways and
doings that were not good, and to loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities and abominations, his grace shall with a notwithstanding triumph
over all this your unworthiness, and he will yet redeem his cause from the
Grave, carry on his work among you, before you and by you, as Instruments,
gloriously and speedily, yea with a high hand for his Name sake.

Thirdly, in particular to the Imprisoned Saints, together with all those who
in this day suffer the reproaches of men, the scorn, and censures of Brethren,
for the testimony of Jesus, and upon the account of his Kingdom, my Message is,
Your Brethren that hated you, and cast you out for Christ's name sake, said, LET
THE LORD BE GLORIFIED, but he shall appear unto your joy, and they shall be
ashamed.

Lastly, To all Sions Children wheresoever they may be, that take pleasure in
her stones, and favor the dust thereof; let me say, Lift up your heads with
joy, for your redemption draws nigh: For yet a little while, and behold the
Lord comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their
Iniquity; when (as he has purposed) he will stain the pride of all glory, and
bring into contempt the honorable of the earth; For it is the day of the Lords
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Sion. And though
the scarlet Whore begins now to say in her heart, I sit as a Queen, am no
Widow, and shall see no sorrow, yet shall her plagues come upon her in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord our God, that judges her.

FINIS.

