A True and Exact COPY OF A TREASONABLE and BLOODY-PAPER, CALLED, THE Fanatics
New Covenant: Which was taken from Mr. Donald Cargill at Queens-Ferry, the
third day of June, Anno Dom^: 1680.

One of their FIELD-PREACHERS, a declared Rebel and Traitor.

TOGETHER With their Execrable DECLARATION, published at the Cross of
Sanquhair, upon the Twenty two day of the said Month of June; After a Solemn
Procession, and Singing of Psalms, by Cameron, the Notorious Ringleader of,
and Preacher at, their Field-Conventicles, accompanied with Twenty of that
Wretched Crew.

Printed and Published by order of His Majesty's Privy Council, in obedience to
His Majesty's Commands, in His Letter dated at Windsor-Castle, the 5th. day of
July, 1680.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, Anno Domini. 1680.

A True and Exact Copy of a Treasonable Paper, called, The Fanatics
New Covenant.
WE Under-Subscribers, for our selves, and all that join with us, and adhere to
us, being put to it by God, our Consciences, and Men; Do bind our Souls with a
solemn and sacred Bond, lest on the one hand weshould be carried away with the
stream of the Apostasy and defection of the Church in this time, and on the
other hand, lest we should (not being so engaged) evanish in Vanity, and be
without a right rule in good Designs: We have judged it our duty again to
covenant with God, and one another, and to publish this DECLARATION to the
World of our Purposes, that Men may know our most inward-thoughts, the rules
that we walk by, and the outmost ends that we have before our eyes for this
intent, that these who are lovers of God, zealous of His reigning in Glory, and
desirous of Reformation, and the propagation of His Kingdom, may have occasion
no more to be jealous of our Intentions, and others may have no ground to load
us with odious and foul Aspersions; but, that all knowing the truth of us, if
they shall strive against us, and Truth with us, shall do it without excuse,
and against conviction; and that these who shall join with us, may do it upon
solid and undoubted-grounds, and both they and we may expect Grace from Him,
Faithfully to persevere, and happily to be successful in so good Purposes.

It is true, We are not ignorant of the great unmindfulness, failing,
counteracting, and mocking that has been in our former Vows and Covenants with
God, and of the great Judgments that has, and are like to follow such impious
and sinful dealing with God in such weighty Matters, (for which we both ought
and desire to be humbled before Him,) which cannot but make us with great
trembling of Heart enter into new ones, knowing both our own weakness and
readiness to relapse, and the great hazard and danger of such relapses; Yet,
the desire of recovering and preserving a remnant, and the conviction of this,
as the most convenient mean, the zeal to Gods glory, and Christ's reigning,
(which is the highest and most acceptable duty Man can perform to God,) hoping
for His Mercies, (who is witness to the integrity of our Hearts and rightness
of our Intentions,) that he will instruct, direct, accept, and prosper us, we
go forward, declaring, that nothing else but what we here express is our Design.

I. We covenant and swear, that we take the only true and living God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, to be our God, and betakes our selves to the Merits and
Righteousness of His Son, as the alone Righteousness that can justify us before
God; and that we take His Scriptures and Word to be the Object of our Faith,
and rule of our Conversation in all things; and that we shall give up our
selves to Him, to be renewed, instructed, and in all things ruled by His
Spirit, according to that Word; and shall earnestly endeavor by His Grace, to
render to Him that Love, Worship, and Obedience, that His Word requires, and
His Goodness engages us to.

II. That we shall to the outmost of our Power, advance the Kingdom of Christ
established throughout the Land, (if at any time hereafter God shall give us
this opportunity) Righteousness and the true reformed Religion, in the truth of
its Doctrine, in the purity and power of its Worship and Ordinances, and in its
Discipline and Government, and free the Church of God from the thraldom,
tyranny, incroachment, and corruption of Prelacy on the one hand, and
Erastianism on the other. And that we shall to our Power, relieve the Church
and Subjects of this Kingdom, (we being called thereto, by His giving of us
Power, Power being Gods-Call to do good,) of that Oppression that has been
exercised upon their Consciences, civil Rights and Liberties, that Men may
serve Him holily, without fear, and possess their civil Rights in quietness,
without disturbance.

III. That we shall endeavor to our outmost, the extirpation of the kingdom of
Darkness, and whatsoever is contrair to the kingdom of Christ, and especially
Idolatry, and Popery in all the Articles of it, as we are bound in our National
Covenant; and Superstition, Will Worship, and Prelacy, with its Hierarchy, as
we are bound in our Solemn League and Covenant; And that we shall with the same
sincerity, endeavor (God giving us assistance) the overthrow of that Power
that has established that Prelacy and Erastianism over the Church, and
exercises such a lustful and arbitrary Tyranny over the Subjects, seeking again
to introduce Idolatry and Superstition in these Lands, contrair to our
Covenants: And in a word, that we shall endeavor the extirpation of all the
works of Darkness, and the Relicts of Idolatry and Superstition, (which are
both much enlarged and revived in our times,) and execute righteous Judgment
impartially (according to the Word of God, and degree of Wickedness) upon the
Committeis of these things, but especially Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism,
Sorcery, Perjury, Uncleanness, profanation of the Lord's Day, Oppression and
Malignancy, that being thus zealous for God, he may delight to dwell among us.

IV. Seriously considering, that the hand of our Kings has been against the
Throne of the Lord, and that now for a long time, the succession of our Kings,
and the most part of our Rulers with him, has been against the purity and
power of Religion and Godliness, and freedom of the Church of God, and has
degenerate from the virtue and good Government of their Predecessors into
Tyranny, and has of late so manifestly rejected God, His Service and
Reformation, as a Slavery, as they themselves call it in their public Papers,
(especially in these last Letters to the King, and Duke of Lauderdale)
disclaiming their Covenant with God, and blasphemously inacting it to be burnt
by the hand of a Hangman, governed contrary to all right Laws divine and
humane, exercised such tyranny and arbitrary Government, oppressed men in their
Consciences and Civil Rights, used free Subjects (christian and reasonable men)
with less discretion and justice then their beasts; and so not only frustrate
the great end of Government, (which is, that men may live godly, holily and
peaceably under them, and might be maintained in their Rights and Liberties
from injury and wrong) but has also walked contrary to it, So that it can no
more be called a Government, but a lustful Rage, exercised with as little right
reason, and with more cruelty then in Beasts, and they themselves can be no
more called Governors, but public Grassators, and public Judgments, which
all Men ought as earnestly to labor to be free of, as of Sword, Famine, or
Pestilence raging amongst us; and besides, has stopped (instead of punishing)
the course of Law and Justice against Idolaters, Blasphemers, Atheists,
Murderers, Incestuous and Adulterous, and other Malefactors; and instead of
rewarding the Good, has made Butcheries and Murders on the Lords People, sold
them as Slaves, Imprisoned, Forfaulted, Banished and Fined them, upon no other
account, but for maintaining the Lords Right to rule Consciences, against the
usurpations of Men, for fulfilling their Vows, and repelling unjust Violence,
which innocent Nature allows to all; of all which, and more particulars, we can
give (we speak as before God) innumerable and sure Instances: Neither can it be
thought that there is hope of their returning from these Courses, having so
often showed their Natures and Enmities against God and all Righteousness, and
so often declared and renewed their Purposes and Promises of persevering in
these Courses. And, suppose they should dissemble a Repentance of these Evils,
and profess to return to better Courses, being put to Straits, or for their own
Ends, (for upon no other account can we reasonably expect it;) and though it
might be thought, that there might be Pardon for what is done, (which we cannot
yet see to be, without the violation of the Law of God, and a great guiltiness
on the Land, from which guiltiness the Land can never be free, but by executing
of Gods righteous Judgments upon them for omitting of so greatly deserved, and
so necessarily requisite a Justice;) yet they cannot be believed, after they
have violated all Ties that Humane Wisdom can devise to bind Men; and beside,
there will be something of folly found, to think to bind a King that pretends
to absoluteness: and our Fathers, or rather our selves, at first judged it not
warrantable to receive Him, without consenting to, and swearing of the
Covenant: And if so, the renouncing and disclaiming thereof, we ought at
present to judge to be a just and reasonable ground of rejecting Him upon these
Grounds, being assured of Gods approbation, and Men's, whose Hearts are not
utterly biased, and their Consciences altogether corrupted, and knowing
assuredly, that the upholding of such, is to uphold Men, to bear down Christ's
Kingdom, and to uphold Sattans, and the depriving of Men of right Government
and good Governors, to the ruining of Religion, and undoing of Humane Society.
We then seeing the innumerable Sins and Snares that are in giving obedience to
their Acts, on the other hand, seeing if we shall acknowledge their Authority,
and refuse obedience to their sinful Commands, the endless Miseries that will
follow, and siding with God (who we hope will accept and help us to a
liberation from their Tyranny) against his stated and declared Enemies; do
reject that King, and these associate with Him, from being our Rulers, because
standing in the way of our Right, free and peaceable serving of God,
propagating His Kingdom and Reformation, and overthrowing Satan's kingdom,
according to our Covenant; And declares them henceforth to be no lawful Rulers,
as they have declared us to be no lawful Subjects, upon a ground far less
warrantable, as Men unbyassed may see; and that after this, we neither owe, nor
shall yield any willing obedience to them, but shall rather suffer the outmost
of their Cruelties and Injustice, until God shall plead our Cause, and that
upon these Accounts; because, they have altered and destroyed the Lords
established Religion, overturned the fundamental and established Laws of the
Kingdom, taken altogether away Christ's Church and Government, and changed the
Civil Government of this Land (which was by King and free Parliaments) into
Tyranny, where none are associat to be partakers of the Government, but only
those who will be found by Justice to be guilty of Criminals, and all others
excluded, even those who by the Laws of the Land by Birth had a right to, and a
share in that Government, and that only, because not of the same guiltiness and
mischievous Purposes with themselves: And also, all free elections of
Commissioners for Parliaments, and Officers for Government, are made void by
their making those the Qualifications of admission to these Places, which by
the Word of God, and the Laws of this Land, were the cause of their exclusion
before, so that none can look upon us, or judge us bound in Alledgeance to
them, unless they say also we are bound in Alledgeance to Devils, they being
his Vicegerents, and not Gods.

V. We then being made free, by God and their own doings, He giving the Law,
and they giving the Transgression of that Law, which is the cause that we are
loosed now from all Obligations, both Divine and Civil to them, and knowing
that no Society of Men that has corruption in them, (which always is ready to
beget disorders and do injuries, unless restrained and punished by Laws and
Government) can be without Laws and Government, and withal desiring to be
governed in the best way that is least liable to Inconveniences and Tyranny:
We do declare, that we shall set up over our selves, and over all that God
shall give us Power, Government, and Governors, according to the Word of God,
and especially according to that word, Exodus 18. v. 21. Moreover, thou shall
provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, men of Truth, hating
G^vetousness; and that we shall no more commit the Government of our selves,
and the making of Laws for us, to any one single Person, and lineal Successor,
we not being tied as the Jews were by God, to one Family, Government not being
an Inheritance, but an Office, which must be squared, not to the interest and
lust of a Man, but to the good of the Commonwealth, and this kind of Government
by a single Person, etc. being most liable to Inconveniences, (as sad and long
experience may now teach us,) and aptest to degenerate into Tyranny. Moreover,
we declare that these Men whom we shall set over us, shall be engaged to govern
us principally by that Civil or Judicial Law given by God to His People of
Israel, especially in matters of Life and Death, and in all other things also,
so far as they teach, excepting only that Law, (viz. anent Slaves,) which does
not agree with that Christian Liberty established in all Christendom, (only
violated by our Tyrants, and some others of late,) and that of Divorces and
Poligamy; the one being not a Law, but a Permission granted upon the account of
the hardness of their Hearts, the other being a sinful custom contrair to the
first institution of Marriage, crept in into the Church: We know that Men of
Malignant and perverse Spirits, that has not a higher God than a wicked King,
which suits only with their lustful licentiousness, and it may be others with
them that seemed to be of better Principles, will raise an ignorant clamor
upon this, that it is a Fifth-Monarchy, and we Fifth-Monarchy-men, and will
labor to amuse the People with strange terms, and put odious names on good
things to make them hateful, as their way is; but if this be their
Fifth-Monarchy, we both are, and ought to be such, and that according to His
Word.

VI. It being the work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to preach, propagate,
and defend the Kingdom of God, and to preserve the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, Government, Liberties and Privileges of the same, from all
corruptions and encroachments of Rulers, and all others. And seeing, that the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, (at least the greatest part of them
before) not only were defective in preaching and testifying against the Acts of
these Rulers, for overthrowing Religion and Reformation, abjuring our Covenant
made with God, establishing a Government in the Church, which that King calls
His own Government, (and so not Gods,) contrair to our Covenant; Against
inacting of that blaspemous (so Calvin calls that Supremacy of Henry the Eight,
upon which this Prerogative is founded, and from which it is derived, and is no
less, if not more injurious to Christ, and inslaving to His Church,) and
sacrilegious Prerogative given to a King over the Church of God, and against
the other Acts and Encroachments of His Church, and hindered others also who
were willing, and would have testified against them, and censured some that did
it, (for which, together with the other Causes in their trust and
administration, we may say, God has left them to do worse things;) but also
has voted in that Meeting, (which they are pleased to call an Assembly of
Ministers, but how justly, let Men judge,) an acceptance of that Liberty,
founded upon, and given by virtue of that blasphemously arrogated and usurped
Power; and has appeared before their Courts to accept of that Liberty, and to
be enacted and authorized there as Ministers, and so has willingly (for this
is an elicit act of the Will, and not an act of Force and Constraint)
translated the Power of sending out, ordering, censuring, (for as they accept
of their Liberty from them, so they submit to their Censures and Restaints, at
least all of them who were yet tried with it, and others of them appeared and
acknowledged before their Courts, that they would not have done these things
that they were charged with, if they had thought it would have offended them,)
Ministers departing from the Court of Christ, and subjection to the Ministry,
to the Courts of Men, and subjection to the Magistrate, (which had been impious
and injurious to Christ and His Church, though they had been righteous and
lawful Rulers,) and by their changing of Courts, (according to Common Law) has
changed their Masters, and of the Ministers of Christ are become the Ministers
of Men, and bound to answer to them as often as they will; and as by the
acceptance of this Liberty in such manner, they have translated the Power, so
they have given up and utterly quit the Government, and a succession of a
Presbyterian Ministry; for as these were not granted them of their Masters, so
they exercise their Ministry without them, and so by this, as the Ecclesiastic
Government is swallowed up in the Civil, (if the rest had followed them) the
Ministry should have also been extinct with themselves, and the whole Work of
Reformation had been buried in Oblivion, not so much as the remembrance of it
kept up: These, together with the other of their Commissions in Preaching, the
lawfulness of paying that Tribute declared to be imposed for the bearing down
of the true Worship of God, (which they falsely termed Seditions Conventicles,)
and their advising these poor Prisoners to subscribe the Bond, and consequently
could not but so advise all others, if put to it, (for the hazard that Men were
in, will not make a real change of the morality of that Action,) and beside,
the rest may be put to it upon the same hazard, and so if the one should
advise, (which consequently they must do,) and the other should subscribe, this
would altogether close that door which the Lord has made use of in all the
Churches of Europe, for casting off the Yoke of the Whore, and restoring the
truth and purity of Religion and Reformation, and freedom of the Churches, and
should have stopped all ingress for Men, when once brought under Tyranny, to
recover their Liberty again. These Ministers then, not being followers of
Christ, who before Pontius Pilate, gave a good Confession, which was, that he
was a King, and no King, if he have not power to order his House and Subjects,
and they not following him, nor his Ministers, if not asserting and maintaining
of this his kingly Power, against all Incroachers and Usurpers of it; and
besides, we being commanded, If any Brother walk disorderly, from such to
withdraw; and although in the capacity we now are in, we neither have, nor
assumes to our selves Authority to give out definite and authoritative
sentences of Deposition and Supension against these Ministers; yet we declare,
which is proper for us to do, that we neither can, nor will hear Preaching, nor
receive Sacraments from these Ministers that has accepted of, and voted for
that Liberty; and declares all who have encouraged and strengthened their
Hands, by hearing and pleading for them, all those who have traffiqued for an
union with them, without their renouncing and repenting of these things, all
those that do not testify faithfully against them, and after do not deport
themselves suitably to their testimonies, and all who join not in public with
their Brethren, who are testifying against them; we declare, that we shall not
hear them Preach, nor receive Sacraments from them, at least, till they stand
in Judgment before these Ministers, and be judged by them who have followed the
Lord, and kept themselves free of these Defections: And as our Hearts has
cleaved to these Ministers, while they were on the Lords side, and subjected
our selves to them, so we shall still cleave to those that abide following Him,
and shall be subject to them in the Lord.

VII. Then we do declare and acknowledge, that a Gospel Ministry, is a standing
Ordinance of God, appointed by Christ, to continue in the Church, until the end
of the World; and that none of us shall take upon him the preaching of the
Word, or administering the Sacraments, unless called, and ordained thereto, by
the Ministers of the Gospel: And as we declare that we are for a standing
Gospel Ministry, rightly chosen, and rightly ordained, so we declare, that we
shall go about this Work in time to come, with more Fasting and Praying, and
more careful Inspection into the conversation and holiness of these Men that
shall be chosen and ordained, the want of which formerly, has been a great
sin, both in Ministers and People, which has not been the least cause of this
Defection.

THE DECLARATION and TESTIMONY OF THE True-Presbyterian, Anti-prelatick, AND
ANTI-ERASTIAN, PERSECUTED-PARTY IN SCOTLAND.
IT is not amongst the smallest of the Lords Mercies to this poor Land, that
there has aways been some who has given a Testimony of every course of
Defection which we were guilty of, which is a token for Good, that he does not
as yet intend to cast us off altogether, but that He will leave a remnant, in
whom he will be glorious, if they (through His Grace) keep themselves clean
still, and walk in His Way and Method, as it has been walked in, and owned by
Him in our Predecessors (of truly worthy Memory) their time, in their carrying
out of our noble Work of Reformation, in the several steps thereof, from Popery
and Prelacy, and likewise from Erastian-Supremacy, so much usurped by him, who
it is true (so far as we know) is descended from the Race of our Kings; yet he
has so far deborded from what be ought to have been, by his Perjury and
Usurpation in Church Matters, and Tyranny in matters Civil, as is known by the
whole Land, that we have just reason to believe, that one of the Lords great
Contraversies against us is, that we have not disowned him, and the Men of his
Practices, whether inferior Magistrates, or any others, as Enemies to our Lord
and His Crown, and the true Protestant and Presbyterian-Interest in their
hands, our Lords espoused Bride and Church. Therefore, although we be for
Government, and Governors, such as the Word of God, and our Covenants allows,
yet we for our selves, and all that will adhere to us, as the Representatives
of the true Presbyterian-Church, and covenanted Nation of Scotland, considering
the great hazard of lying under such a sin, do by these presents, disown
Charles Stuart, who has been reigning, or rather (we may say) tyrannizing on
the Throne of Scotland, or Government thereof, (forfaulted several years since
by his Perjury and breach of Covenant with God and His Church,) and usurpation
of his Crown and Royal Prerogatives therein, and many other breaches in matters
Ecclesiastic, and by his Tyranny and breach of the very Leges Regnandi in
matters Civil; for which Reasons, we declare, that several years since he
should have been denuded of being King, Ruler, or Magistrate, or having any
Power to act, or to be obeyed as such: As also, (...) of Christ, Captain of
Salvation, we declare War against such a Tyrant and Usurper, and all the Men of
his Practices, as Enemies to our Lord Jesus Christ, His Cause and Covenants,
and against all such as have strengthened him, sided with him, or any ways
acknowledged him in his Usurpation and Tyranny, Civil and Ecclesiastic, yea,
and against all such as shall strengthen, side with, or any ways acknowledge
any other in the like Usurpation and Tyranny, far more against such as would be
tray or deliver up our free reformed Mother Church, into the Bondage of
Antichrist, the Pope of Rome.

By this we Homologat the Testimony given at Rutherglen, the twenty ninth of
May, 1679. and all the faithful Testimonies of these that have gone before us,
as of these also that have suffered of late; and we do disclaim that
Declaration published at Hamiltoun, June 1679. chiefly, because it takes in the
Kings, Interest, which we are several years since loosed from, because of the
foresaid Reasons, and others, which may after this (if the Lord will) be
published. As also, we disown, and by this resente the reception of the Duke of
York, a professed Papist, as repugeant to our Principles and Vows to the most
High God, and as that which is the great (though alace too just) reproach of
our Church and Nation: We also, by this, protest against his succeeding to the
Crown, and whatever has been done, or any are essaying to do in this Land
(given to the Lord) in prejudice to our Work of Reformation.

And to conclude, We hope none will blame us for, or offend at, our rewarding
these that are against us, as they have done to us, as the Lord gives the
opportunity. This is not to exclude any that has declined, if they be willing
to give satisfaction to the degree of their offense.

Given at Sanqhuair, the 22. of June, 1680. These are the True and Exact Copies
of the Fanatics New Covenant, and Declaration; Collationed with the Originals,
which are kept amongst the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council; and attested
by ALL. GIBSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij. And WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

FINIS.

