Twenty New QVERIES Proposed to all true ENGLISHMEN, CONCERNING The
Unreasonable and Insupportable Burden, lying heavy upon the Shoulders of this
Groaning Nation; Occasioned by the Illegal and Traitorous Usurpation of a late
Deceased Tyrant, who Jehu-like carried both Law, Religion, and Tyranny in His
SCABBARD.

Likewise, the Epidemical Disease of this Rolling and Schismatical Age,
unmasked; And all Weather-Cocks, King-fishers, Newfangled Usurpers,
Upstart-Law-destroyers, and Abominable Parliament-Breakers, discovered;

In the Case and Recital of such devouring Caterpillars, who thirst after
nothing more then the swallowing up of the Peoples ancient Rights and
Liberties, to perpetuate the Nations still in Misery and Oppressions.

By One of the few Englishmen that are left in England.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

Twenty New QUERIES BETWEEN Jest and Earnest, etc. OR, Democritus turned
Statesman.
I. WHether it be not convenient, that the doctrine of Copernicus, who held,
That the World turns round, should be established by Act of Parliament, which
our late Changes, Alterations, and Revolutions, in part have verified; and that
Tycho Brache, with the Gang of the contrary Opinion be adjudged Heterodoxal;
and that from henceforth it be enacted, That what persons soever do profess,
publish, or hold forth any other Tenent contrary thereunto, be adjudged
Anathema, Maranatha, and that public thanks be given to Vincent Wing, for the
great pains he took in the composure of that excellent piece called Harmonicon
Coeleste?

II. Whereas it is humbly conceived fit by Machiavil and his Pupils, That all
the Gangrened Members of the body Politic be cut off, lest putrefaction of the
whole should ensue. It is therefore worthy the consideration, Whether it be not
expedient to employ an Ambassador to the man in the Moon, to procure
habitations for our new Courtiers, (greater Antipodes to the present
Government, than the old constant Cavaliers:) And for the better effecting
thereof, it is deemed necessary, that the great Clerk Doctor Wilkins, Warden of
Wadham College in Oxon, in regard he has the greatest knowledge in that new
Plantation, be desired with all speed, to provide his winged Chariot for their
convenient carriage, and that he undertake the employment of a Coachman to
conduct them thither?

III. But if that design fail, Whether it be not expedient to ship them all
Oceana, and that Mr. Harrington our famous modern Columbus discoverer of that
floting Terra incognita, be desired to be the Pilot to conduct them thither,
who for his pains deserves to be made Knight of the Sun, and that in a
grateful remembrance of his good service, it should always be called after his
name, (viz.) Harringtonia?

IV. Whether it be not convenient, or rather necessary, to call all persons to
an account that have any way contributed their assistance for the establishing
of ^^e late deceased Tyrant as chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth? And
whether any person, or persons, who have any way abetted him, and endeavored
to confirm him in his Tyranny, or Acted under him in any places of Trust,
Power, or sat in any Parliament, or Convention summoned by his Writ; be fit to
be entrusted with any Office in the Commonwealth as it is now settled?

V. Whether it be not a great Contempt of the Law enacted by this Parliament,
that made it Treason for any one person to aim at the sole Government of this
Commonwealth, to suffer such person to go unp^ished, in despite of the said
Law; and whether it be not prudonce to have such person brought to condign
punishment, that has transgressed that Law, to terrify others for the future,
for making the like attempt?

VI. Whether those Apostate Officers of the Army, that were Active, and grand
Instruments in suspending and disturbing this Session of Parliament, as well as
secluding, imprisoning, and injustly detracting several Members of the same
Parliament before, that were eminent Assertors of the Peoples Liberties,
against Tyranny and Oppression, conscientious propagators of the Gospel, and
establishers of the Fundamental, municipal Law of the Land, and valiant
Champions of the [true Old Cause;] And by their Declaration of Aug. 22. Anno
Dom. 1653, as also by a Pasquil called the true state o^ the Commonwealth,
Anno 1654. declared this Session of Parliament to be actually and finally
dissolved from being any more a Parliament, (by an extraordinary providence)
but also branded the members thereof ignominiously for a corrupt party, carrying
on their own ends, ^o perpetuate themselves as Supreme Authority, never
answering the ends which God and his People expected from them, exercising
Arbitrary power, and swallowing up the ancient Liberties of the people, and to
perpetuate their miseries, vexations, and oppressions, through the multitude of
unnecessary Laws, and Ordinances, concerning their own particular interest, as
they there at large remonstrated, be fit persons to have any employment either
Military or Civil within this Commonwealth?

VII. Whether a Weathercock, a King-fisher, a plyant Willow, a piece of Wax
capable of all Impressions, a Time-Server, a Persian still sacrificing to the
Rising Sun, a Lord President under the late Tyrant, of his High Court of
Injustice, a man that has made Justice quick sighted, and redeemed it from
blindness, be a fit keeper of the Commonwealths consc^ence?

VIII. Whether a hot brained Parrot, that multiplies words without matter, a
new Courtier, an Apostate from his first Principles, and the Good Old Cause, as
appears by a Speech he made in the last Parliament, in the behalf of R. C. be
fit to be restored to his place of Attorney General for South Wales.

IX. Whether Pride and arrogance, one who is of yesterday, and knows nothing,
a Clark, or Barrister of nine years standing, in his heart a Quaker, yesterday
a Protectorian, this day a Republican, to morrow what you please; a favourer of
levelisme, and one that is not constant in any thing but inconstancy (save
only in the opinion that there are no witches, nor can deserve death, though
an Act of Parliament be made to that end) be fit to be a Judge in Wales.

X. Whether a Debaucher of both the Protectors, an oppressor of his Country, a
persecutor of the Godly, one that sacreligiously robbed Gods House, to build
himself sumptuous Palaces, and has purchased 5000 l. per annum, who never
fought nor drew a Sword in anger, be fit to sit in that venerable assembly of
the Commonwealths representatives; or whether it be not fitter for him to be
rejected, and his estate sold to pay just public debts?

XI. Whether it be lawful for an ignorant Scribler to vent his pettish humor,
malice, and reproaches against those persons, who in the Seat of Judicature
have behaved themselves upright, just, and honest, and done the Commonwealth
singular good service during both the late Protectors Government?

XII. Whether, Levellers, Dippers, Independants, Presbyterians, Jesuits,
Donatists, Manachees, Pelagians, Enthusiasts, Schismatics, Heretics,
Hypocrites, Devils incarnate; yea, whatever the present power will have them to
be, of any Religion, of all Religions, of none at all; the true Orthodox and
learned Divines Ordaels; Knaves, fools, yea favorers of their brethren,
learned in the same faculties; and Telenus house of Correction in a Mercurial
new found Land; Befit persons to be entrusted with the power over the
Consciences of honest and religious men; And whether some of them, that are so
well acquainted with the mysterious Art of Bribery and Symony; And such Simon
Magus, as by the knack of Registry has increased his estate from a Parsonage
of 100 l. per annum, to 1200 l. per annum, land of inheritance, ought not in
justice and prudence be called to an account, and their Estates acquired by the
ruins of the Church, and several poor Ministers, be sold toward the payment of
arrears due to the poor banckrupted common Soldiers, that suffer hunger and
want, while such enjoy the streams of Tagus in their Coffers.

XIII. Whether it be not a matter of dangerous consequence to permit, a
crop-Eard Pettifogger, a reviler of the Saints, a constant opposer of powers,
an unwearied Scribler, a Demoniack, possessed with a legion of hellish Fiends,
the Spirit of contradiction to publish a scandalous libel against the Good Old
Cause, and the defenders thereof in such a juncture of time, wherein most
Spirits are factious, and apt to take fire? like tinder at the least spark of
encouragement dropping from a fiery pen.

XIV. Whether a Plagiarius, a Demetrius, a Jailer of our liberties, and one who
in the last assembly was in a probability to suffer for his unparalled
Crimes, be fit to be trusted with the command of the most important place of
the Nation, and whether it be not necessary to expose him to the sword of
Justice, who has so much abused the sword of the Commonwealth.

XV. Whether it will not be wisdom to look back to the occasion of the late
bloody and unhappy War, and gradually to the prosecutions thereof, and the end
that was proposed at the beginning: and when the continuance of the medium
enduring to that end was everted? And then to return to the place where passion
captivated Reason, and there to build a happy Government upon the Basis of the
true Old Cause, according to the first Principles that were owned by all good
People?

XVI. Whether it be not the purest and safest kind of Free State, to have a
Free Parliament erected annually, or twice a year as it was before the
Conquest, and after many years; without restraint on the wills of the free
People of the Nation; which Parliament may constitute and erect a Senate that
shall act according, and subject to the Law of the Land, in the interval of
Parliament, and so to be elected from year to year by each Parliament; which
Parliament being the free people of Englands Representatives, ought not to be
restrained, or curbed by any sort of Court-Convention, or Council enjoying
Coordinate power; for that will be, to abolish the grand inconvenience of one
negative voice so much braid against, and to set up a monstrous Hydra of
Negatives, (for great care ought to be taken to preserve unity in a Republic,
which lies most obnoxious to popular commotions, and factions) [the Epidemical
Disease of this Schismatical Age;] And further, that such men may be elected
for Representatives in Parliament Councils, and Senats, as be wise, honest,
prudent, and Religious; and not Factious Sectaries, or such as wear both Law,
Equity, Reason, and Religion in their Scabards, and Father all their prodigious
wilful and exorbirant actions on Providence?

XVII. Whether the Armies Declaration, and Seclusion of the Parliament in 1653.
were an absolute Dissolution of that Session, and whether the people making new
Elections by virtue of O. P. his Writ, and also most of the Members of the said
Parliament owning the said Elections to be legal by their endeavors to be
elected, and sitting by virtue of such Election, was a Confirmation thereof,
And moreover whether they can be remitted to their ancient Right, by getting
possession without the concurrence of an ancient Remediable Right, which is
absolutely necessary to work a Remitter.

XVIII. Whether it consists with Policy and National prudence to keep such a
lawless Army on foot, who are carried away with a Whirlwind or Tempest of
Ambition, and walk Antipodes to all settled and peaceable Government, and are
ready Instruments for any insolent Apostate, or tyrannical Dictator, that will
equal them in pretenses of Religion (yet denying the power thereof,) and like
Pompey, will make it his design by secret Engines, to cast the State into an
absolute Anarchy and confusion, that the State might cast it self into his
Armies, in necessity for a Protection, and so the Sovereign power be east on
him, who probably has neither Reason nor Law on his side, save only to make
good the saying of Solon, who when Croesus showed him his Treasury of Gold,
said to him, (that if another came that had better Iron) he would be quickly
master of his Gold.

XIX. Whether it be not safer and more agreeable to the present Government of
this Commonwealth; and all other free States, where due course of Law is
admitted for recovery of Rights, or deciding of meum and tuum, and liberty of
Subjects favored, which we have with great expense of blood so long fought
for, to raise the Militia in each County, under the command of prudent and
religious men, that have interest in their Country, and are concerned in the
welfare of the Commonwealth, and not mere hirelings, that will be apt to take
any impression, to the disturbance of the public peace, for their own private
ends, and will make their swords Patronize intolerable rapine?

XX. Since the Apostles call Religion (out reasonable service to God) insommch
as the very ceremonies, and figures of the old Law were full of reason and
signification, but more especially the Christian Faith under the Gospel; as in
all things, so in this, deserves to be highly magnified; holding forth the
Golden Mediocrity in this point, between the Law of the Heathen, and the Law of
Mahumet, which have embraced the two extremes, (for the first had no constant
belief or confession, but left altogether to the liberty of professors; and
the last on the other side interdicteth all arguments about the matter, and
enjoyneth unity in the manner of the profession of Religion, the one having the
very face of error, the other, of imposture, whereas the faith does both
admit, and reject Disputations and professions with difference;) Whether then
it be not requisite to settle such a Religion in this Nation, as may consist
with the Apostles words, and such a Mediocrity that we be neither tied on the
one hand to Mahumetan unity of accidental Discipline, or manner of worship, nor
on the other hand be left to a Heathenish Liberty both in the Articles and
Principles of Religion, and also in the substantial matter of belief, and
decent manner of discipline and confession, since such boundless liberty is the
mother of all Sects, Heresies, and Atheism (which this Age abounds with, though
veiled under the specious garments of tender conscience, who are enemies to all
settled Government, whether Monarchy or Oligarchy) except their heretical
opinions be favored, and themselves mounted to the Zenith of Preferment, and
Stem of Government, which is hoped will never be, though highly at present
endeavored.

FINIS.

