A TRUE RELATION OF A LATE BARBAROUS ASSAULT Committed upon Robert Pie Esquire

One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of HEREFORD.

Who Died thereof 30 JAN. 1680.

BY John Bodnam Esquire A Notorious Papist: Whom he went about to apprehend, for
Refusing to Obey the ORDERS of the QVARTER SESSIONS; Whereby he was Summoned to
take the OATHS of ALLEGIANCE, etc. As it was Certified, etc.

LONDON: Printed by THO. JAMES. M.DC.LXXXI.

A True RELATION Of a Late Barbarous ASSAULT Committed upon ROBERT PIE Esquire
WHether it be Folly or Madness for the Papists to give such bloody Experiments
of their Cruelty, is a thing which one would think might be easily determined
among Christians. And yet they have their witty as well as their crafty
Defenders of all their Villainies. Certainly at length Men will take the Measure
of Hercules by his Foot, and guess at their Sanguine Designs of General
Massacres, by their Violent Outrages upon particular persons. One would think
that it were an Article of the Roman Catholic Faith to murder Protestant
Justices of the Peace. Ever since the Discovery of the Plot, they have been
committing some Villainy or other. They began with Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey; the
next Object of their revenge was Mr. Arnold, and now we are to give you the
Relation of another Exploit no less wicked then either; God, as we have great
Reason to believe, still hardening their hearts, to open the eyes of those that
blindly defend their Cause, and labor to extenuate their Crimes.

Since the Discovery of the late Plot, it is well known what care has been
taken to give orders to several Justices of the Peace in their several Stations
to watch the Designs and Proceedings of the Papists, and to take care of the
Public Tranquillity in their several Counties. In Pursuance of which Orders
several Warrants were granted at the Quarter Sessions for the County of
Hereford against one John Bodnam of Brunguin in the said County Esquire as being
known to be an obstinate and violent Papist, and one that still refused to take
the Oaths which the Law required, or to Obey any Warrant either of any single
Justice of the Peace, or jointly Signed at the Sessions, but keeping close in
his House as his Garrison, defended himself against the Constables, and their
Assistants, some of whom he has shot and wounded. This Mr. Rodnam living near
to a Place called the Meene, the Mansion House of Robert Pie Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the same County, an Eminent and Worthy
Protestant, and a Gentleman of great Honor and Value in his Country, and now
to be lamented with an equal sorrow to that which bewaild the fall of Sir
Edmond-bury Godsrey, so like to his; the said Mr. Pie, could not but think it a
Scandal to the Government, and a great neglect of his Duty, in regard of his
Office, that so notorious a Papist should live as it were under his Nose, so
openly refractory, and in a rebellious defiance of the Law. For which reason he
gave out a Warrant for his Apprehension, which the Constable being afraid to
Execute alone, he therefore sent some of his own servants to Aid and Assist
him. But Mr. Bodnam, keeping his doors fast, defended himself so well, or
rather so ill, that the Constable and his Assistance were forced to retire and
leave him, for the safety of their lives, then which a Tore, or an Outlaw
could have done no more.

Sometime after this, that is to say, on the 12 th of January last, it was Mr.
Pyes misfortune to spy his unruly Neighbor Bodnam, walking in his own
grounds; whereupon, having at the same time an Order of Sessions for the said
Mr. Bodnam's Apprehension about him, and bethinking with himself, that his Oath
and the Duty of his Place, in Honor obliged him to apprehend an Offender who
had so often offended; he went to him, and commanded him to surrender himself
as a Prisoner to the Law. Mr. Bodnam, having a Hedg-Bill in his hand, replied
according to the usual Language of his Popish Litany, (Dam me) Stand off, or
I Will cleave you down. The Justice made answer, Mr. Bodnam, You know I am too
much a Man to sear you. For it seems he had formerly hand to hand taken him
Prisoner, and let him go upon his parole, which he afterward perfidiously and
dishonourably broke; and for his justification sent him word, That no Faith was
to be kept with Heretics. Mr. Pie, having therefore given him to understand,
as before, that he did not fear him, told him further in these words, I came
not now as a single person to fight you, but as a Magistrate, according to Law,
to apprehend you; and therefore I require you to surrender your self peaceably:
Which Mr. Bodnam refusing to do, Mr. Pie bravely and vigorously pressed in upon
him, which this same Papistical Butcher perceiving, stepped back, and in good
earnest let sly at his head with his Hedg-Bill (no bad Argument for the truth
of the Black Bills prepared for the Papists in Ireland) and having stunned the
valiant Magistrate with the first, with the second blow sell'd him to the
ground; presently company coming in prevented the immediate Murder of the
Gentleman and seized upon the Criminal Bodnam. The Wounded Mr. Pie recovered
his Senses sometime after, but it was only to increase his Pain: For after he
had continued ill about Eighteen days in a lingering condition, upon the 30 th
of January last he departed this lifer, the Sacrifice of Papistical
Disobedience and Rebellion, not only to the unspeakable Grief of his Family and
Relations, but of all who had the Honor to be acquainted with him. Nor is he
less lamented by all the true Protestants as well in the same, as in the
Adjacent Counties. It Is true the Murderer will be doubtsess hanged; but here
is the severity of the Exchange, We have lost an Industrious and Valiant
Magistrate; the Papists only a loose base Butcherly Villain.

This is now the Second Prank that has been played in Hereford shire, or by men
of that County, the worst of Contagions, should it from thence spread any
farther. Here are fair warnings and fair discoveries of the very bottoms of the
Papists hearts, but they cost too dear. Here is a petty Kingdom, that is to
say, a whole Family, put into a fatal Confusion at two blows, to show their
Designs were real against, the Great Master of the Universal Family of the
Nation. And these are the barbarous Effects of Popish Zeal, from which Good
Lord deliver us.

Now it is a hundred to one, but that as soon as this same Caitiff shall be
hanged, the Papists will deny that ever there were any such Persons as Mr. Pie
or Bodnam, and perhaps that there is any such County of Hereford. But such
Blots in their Scutcheons as these, will not be so easily wiped away. But they
will find the English Inquisition after Blood, to be as resplute as their own
Spanish Inquisition after Heresy; and therefore his Holiness would do well to
admonish his Creatures to proceed with less passion, and to be more Submissive
to the Commands and Orders of their Temporal Princes.

FINIS.

